ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE Medicinal Observations, OF THE Heidelberg, Palatinate,
Dorchester Practitioner of Physic, Mr. FREDERICK LOSS.

Non omnes falls, scit te proserpina Canum,
Personam capit^ detrahet illa tuo.
Mart. Responsum non dictum est, quia laesit prius.
Ter. (...).

Socrat. By ALIUS MEDICUS.

LONDON, Printed for William Willis next door to the Goat, in Kingstreet
Westminster. 1674.

Frederico Lossio Heidelbergensi, Palatino, Dorchestrensi Medico, salutem and
sanam mentem.
INiquissimus fores in me judex, Frederice mi, si non aequi bonique feceris
meam hanc professionem publicam, contra Alium Medicum, (...), and sine ratione
practicantem. Nulla re magis inquit Crato, quam exemplo docemur atque
confirmamur: praesertim cum rationibus instructi actionum causas intelligimus,
and aliorum factis, nobis quod ex usu sit, admonemur. De te igitur exemplum
capiens, and ad eandem oculos collimans metam; seu virtutis ea, seu veritatis,
sive etiam Artis nostrae ergo fuerit: in hasce quidem ingenii exercitationes
quales quales, me, a mea tandem indignatione abr^ptum, permisi. Si quidquam in
iis fuerit, quod te urat, (urent autem plurima) non est propterea ut mihi
merito succenseas, quando id omne culpa factum est tua: -- Pudet haec opprobria
nobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
Ovid.

Impresentiarum quidem, ob rations alibi memoratas, paginas aliquot genti
publicae conscripturus, eas and meo, and suo idiomate implevi. Noli tamen
subirasci, bone Vir, neque hoc animo nimis iracundo f^ras, dehinc enim, si
quidquam rescripseris, quod opera and oleo dignum fuerit, Lingua etiam Latina
quam calls sane, quamque in deliciis plurimis habes, non defuturum tibi
aliquando responsum fovet.

MEDICVS ALIVS.

TO THE Religious, Virtuous, and Discreet LADY, Mrs. ELIZABETH MOORE Of
Spargrave.
Madam.
SOme Authors call their Books their Children, all sure must own them for their
Conceptions. This of mine is but a Daughter, begotten then, when yours lay sick
at Dorchester; and born, by the help and Midwifery of your obliging and
Testimonial Letter, from Spargrave. But, having been sick almost as long as
yours has been well, she is but slenderly grown, and none other but a plain
English Girl. But I hope what she wants in learning, she will make up with
commendable simplicity; and that although her worth may come short, yet her
honesty will hold out. I know very well, Madam, that you need neither her* nor
my service. It Is both of us that want your Testimony, or rather, that give you
our humble thanks that we want it not. My Daughter is now going abroad to
service, and she most gratefully acknowledges, that nothing could have more
encouraged her, to seek her fortune, than the hope she has, of her being the
better accepted wherever she comes, because so Grave a Matron, and so
Honorable a Lady, as you, Madam, have passed your Word, that hitherto she has
been just and true in her dealing. The Hebrews, Madam, do express the Female
Sex by a word whose root signifies to forget, and the Male by Memory. And
(whatsoever Mr. Loss his judgment of me may be) I was willing so far to have
approved my self Masculine, as remembering that I also am a Man, and do err, to
have devoted my Daughter (though she speaks of wrong, and injuries done to
myself, and their just vindication) unto oblivion and forgetfulness, and hence
(which would have been monstrous in Naturals, but is frequent enough in
Artificials) this Child stuck at the Birth above twelve months; and if my
threatening to be out against him in print, if my showing unto my Adversary
himself what it was that I had against him; if my leaving my Papers with him
three or four weeks together, many months since, and that before any body had
perused them; if my answering of his Latin Letter, in Latin, as they are both
appended at the end of this Book; if my employing others to speak with him* and
to demand satisfaction; if my sending for himself, but to no purpose; if my
speaking with his own Son, and making him sensible, but in vain; if my offering
to refer it to whom he pleased; if my naming his nearest and best friends; if
my readiness to appeal to four Physicians, my naming them, the time, the place,
and giving him notice of it, but he would not come: If any, if all of these
could have prevailed to have made him sensible of a public shame like to befall
him, or could have awakened his Conscience, and made him sensible, that in
justice he ought to have given me all the satisfaction he could for my wounded
credit; this Daughter of mine had proved abortive, and had never seen light:
But when my patience and forbearance could work nothing, not so much as a visit
from him, or once speaking to me about the business, when I perceived that he
still justified himself, and that my not-coming out against him, was
interpreted as proceeding rather from the consciousness of my own impotency and
guilt, than of his. At this throw at last the Child was born; and whether she
will prove a plague to her Parent, and a dishonor; or may serve to cherish,
and nurse up his wounded Reputation and Credit, Time will show. Mr. Loss is
angry with her, that she is not a Scholar, and does not speak Latin, perhaps
it is because she speaks too plain English: but I have promised him a Son
hereafter, that has been at School and can write Latin. In the interim, I
tell him, that in my opiniom, one Mother Tongue is enough for a Daughter;
besides, she is to wait upon you, Madam, and therefore she must not speak an
unknown Tongue, she pleads more for Truth than Learning; and appeals rather to
your Virtues, than the abilities of some great Scholar. She designs not any
Feast unto the Learned, nor to visit the Universities, as Mr. Loss his Latin
Observations, who himself yet never was there, at least as a member of either
of them, but determines to make out Matters, Fact, and to prove by witness,
that he has not truly stated your Daughter's case. To contend with him whether
He or I can write best Latin, would be pedantick, and too much like himself,
for he has the wit to tell us that formerly he was a petty Schoolmaster at
Dantzik; and he wisely relates this himself, upon as wise an occasion, in his
26th Obs. and 1st Book; that the world may know, that he cannot only write
Latin, but teach it for a need; and that Physicians may see the reason, why he
is so Magisterial in consultations. To vie with him, whether He or I be the
abler Physician, would be as unworthy Me as Him; for this is a query too
particular, and very unhandsome between any two, and is not wont to be agitated
but between envious and proud persons: for Scholars disputes should be about
things, and not about persons. Yea, and although in the case of a particular
person, Physicians may differ in their opinion, and perhaps each think he has
all reason on his side; yet it is very base, for either of these to begin to
print this case, and to condemn the other, were he never so guilty. For
Example, This Gentleman, without giving me the least Item thereof, calls me to
a public account, for a private Consultation, and says of me, that in the
particular case of your Daughter, my Practice had neither Method nor Reason in
it. For, though it be against the Laws of Logic, to infer a general
conclusion, for a particular instance. Yet how prone are people, and apt to
conclude that all my Practice is such? until I some ways vindicate my self from
this aspersion? Answering his Objections, and chastising his Insolency, by
canvasing his Art and Method, in my Animadversions: and divulging either his,
or my own ignorance therein. The Matters of Art, which I have touched on in this
Book, they are not very intricate or disputable: I am confident, Madam, you
your self can easily understand, and judge of them, as they are presented to you
in English, much more Scholars, if any of them think them worthy of their
perusal, though they be not here in Latin. For, the Matters of Fact which I am
to prove, by your self, your Daughter, and all that were with her in her
sickness, to Country People in a Country Town, these of necessity were to be
put in English; and to have put the other in Latin, would have made the Book a
Linsey-Woolsey piece of work. Any one that reads, may judge, though he
understand no Latin, whether Mr. Loss has writ truth or falsehood; whether he
does not often mistake, and sometimes contradict himself; whether he understood
some of those Authors himself quotes; whether he has done prudently, or so
much as honestly, so to divulge all his Patients names, as he has done;
courting and flattering some, shaming others, and grossly abusing some others:
whether he loves and always honored Medicus Alius, that has privately so many
times slandered him, and at length publicly put him (as far as in him lay) to
an open shame. These things, Madam, are as plain, and as easy to be understood
here, as the English Tongue; they need not be judged by a Conclave of the
Learned, or a College of Physicians. Alas, our private concerns put together,
are not worthy of their taking notice of, and therefore I have not Dedicated my
Book to any of them, but to you, Madam; whose Testimony will be most prevalent
before a Jury of good Men and Women in and about Dorchester: The very same,
that but a little while since, when that most worthy Gentleman your Husband
Thomas Moore Esquire was High Sheriff of our County, were witnesses of both your
Magnificence and Bounty, and how handsomely ye managed and carried off with
applause that public solemnity, with what Nobleness and Grandeur it was acted,
and yet with what Courteous Affability likewise, and Prudence. To you, Madam,
that are a Gentlewoman of no ordinary Abilities, and that have a Ladies skill
in Physic also, and that make use of better Physicians than either of us; To
you, who have done nothing else toward our Controversy, but given me a civil
answer unto a Letter which I sent unto you, touching particulars in your
Daughter's sickness; To you, that by better parts, and a greater reach, can
pierce deeper, and see farther into the depth of a Physicians parts and
honesty, than many others, who are easily imposed upon, with the formality of
some self-willed and self-conceited Gentleman, who must be adored and bowed
unto, whether he be right or wrong; To you, that are in your self alone a
Complication of Witnesses; for many that were then about you, when your
Daughter lay sick, both friends and servants can witness, if there were need
thereof, that what you have writ in your Letter to me, is truth; To you, that
being the tender and very affectionate Mother of our Patient, made it your
business to look after your Daughter, and to attend unto what we said or did:
you were present therefore, and would be so to all our Consultations and
Discourses; and heard both parties, and considered them well. To you, that when
I begged of you, rather to follow Mr. Loss his advice, than mine; urging, that
he was an Elder Physician, and your older Acquaintance of many years standing,
whereas until that day wherein you sent for me, you had never seen my face;
answered that you would side with me because you thought I spoke most Reason;
which was probably the foundation of Mr. Loss his writing this Observation of
your Daughter's case against me: To you Madam, whom the whole Country round
about do honor and respect; To you, of whom Mr. Loss himself has given this
Character in print, in his 25th Observe. and 3d Book: That you are a Lady not
only of great Birth, but of greater Virtue, being fully accomplished and
adorned with all the comeliness of Virtues: in which he has spoken so much
commendation of you, that he has left nothing for me to add, but that I
believe you highly deserve it. Lastly, To you Madam, whom while every body
honors, I am much more bound so to do, and whilst I live, readily to
acknowledge my self,

Madam, Your most highly obliged, and very Humble Servant, T. B.

The Preface to the Reader.
READER:
WELL may Physic be acknowledged by all, a most pleasant and delightful study,
because it opens the door and gives us entrance into one half of that Celestial
Knowledge, (...) the understanding of our bodies, whose matter was indeed but
earth, yet materiam superavit opus, and none but an Heavenly Artist could of it
have made so wonderful a Fabric. Many have almost grown mad with the
bewitching pleasantness of the outside only, which they call Beauty, but how
great are their raptures, that can pass beyond the Shell, and come unto the
Kernel? that can open this Cabinet, and look in upon the Jewel? that can wind
up this Watch when it is almost down; and when it is foul, can make it clean
and set it again in order? that know all the Wheels of this sort of Automaton,
and how it comes about that they move each other, what ballanceth their motion,
what regulates it, and what is the spring and Original of all? And, as Physic
gratifies our inquisitive Knowledge with these Rarities, that are no impertinent
Curiosities, but highly necessary, as well as inviting and pleasing Objects:
so, by preserving and continuing of our health, and sometimes restoring it when
lost, it gives us the more time to enjoy them; and leads us further on, and
further into the inward recesses, and secret laboratory of operating Nature,
there showing us her Utensils, and how strangely and wonderfully we were made:
And besides all this, Physic is more or less the Foundation and Cause of all
other Arts and Sciences whatsoever: for if the Body be distempered, the Soul
can no more find out or work these, than an Artist can show his skill without
his Instruments.

And yet for all this, it is a truth I think, ( and pity it is it should be
so, but there is no help for it) that there is no Profession of any Art
whatsoever, that in its practice is more uncomfortable, than Physic it self
is, to some ingenuous and modest Physicians; not that any one need to regret or
nauseat, more nicely than wisely, these first entertainments which we commonly
meet with when we are sent for to a sick Patient; for who knows not, that his
own Body was cast in the same mould, Homo, sum humani nihil a me alienum puto,
may every man say. Nor that we ought to be so voluptuous, or self-delighting,
as to be unwilling at any time, when we are called thereunto, to sit down and
stay by a sick or dying Patient, and to compassionate in the house of mourning,
his sighs and groans, and many sad complaints: neither need we be much
concerned, that the Astrologer and Fortune Tellers, the cunning cheat or
suspected Wizard, the Surgeon, the Apothecary, the hold confident, whether
Farmer, Groom, Shepherd, or Cobbler, the Mountebank, or the Cordial or
Pill-Doctors, that are always to be spoken with all most ever-ywhere at some
Book-seller's Shop, in any part of the Kingdom, and do practice without seeing
their Patients, or feeling their Pulse, or knowing their Disease, or Age, or
Sex or Strength, or any thing: that the Midwife, the Nurse, the Neighbor
Gossip, Persons of all sorts, and of both sexes do turn Doctors, and find a
nearer way to Physic than going about to the Universities, and many times far
more profitable, but at no time so honorable, nor yet so satisfactory unto
their Consciences, if they have any: for I would ask any of these Intruders
into our faculty (I do not mean such charitable Gentlewomen or Ministers of a
Parish, as do bestow their skill gratis upon their poor Neighbors, when no
better help is to be had, but those that make gain of Physic, and upon
boasting their skill, do prevent Patients from sending for others that have
more understanding in the Art) I say, I ask these, how they satisfy themselves
from being guilty of their Patients Blood, when they happen to dye under their
Cure? and how they can approve themselves for humble Persons, yea, or excuse
themselves from the height of Pride and Impudence; that, condemning the modesty
and Practice of these men, that being bred Scholars from their youth, study
first many years in the Universities, and afterward go not forth to Practice,
before they have submitted themselves unto the Trial of the Learned, and by
them are approved and sent forth as fit for the employment, in a year or two,
perhaps as few months, do take up to Practice Physic, and do out- hector the
other, who know more, than to be so able as they are, to bluster and brag, as
if they were the only knowing persons and skilful in the Art; though they have
no other Testimony thereof, than their own, and yet the People believe them,
and so let them.

But this would grieve one indeed, but its helpless also, that when an honest,
and perhaps able Physician, has done all he can for his Patient, has
discharged his Conscience, his Friendship, his Kindness, his good Nature, and
all his Art; he should yet miserably be obnoxious, and lie open unto the
obloquies and slanders of all sorts of people; censured many times, and
slighted when he cannot so much as study what his fault was; and condemned
without being permitted first to answer for himself; neither indeed can he, for
who can talk and reason his own case, with the hundredth part of the people,
that will censure and condemn him?

Physicians when they once go forth to Practice and leave the University, they
seldom or never meet with any opportunity in the places where they dwell, of
making any public proof that they understand their Art. If a Divine be a
deserving Gentleman, and one eminent for Learning, he need none other help than
his own to publish this unto the World; for every Sermon he delivers, is not
only an exercise of his Function, but a Demonstration of his Abilities, whilst
his Auditors that are always numerous, even every one of them that understands
him, is at once a witness both of his Piety and of his Parts. If a Lawyer
speaks handsomely and pertinently unto a Case, it is done in the audience of
those Learned in the Law, and commonly before a Judge; and although the Clients
Case goes against him, yet the Counselors credit goes nothing the less, for
the whole Court witnesses, that he spoke as much to the purpose as could be
said, and pleaded like himself. But the Physician is exposed naked unto every
ones lash, and be he never so good, if the success proves bad, he hears
generally ill, and there seldom wants some unhappy pickthanks or other, who
perhaps to bring in a Friend of their own, into a Family that may be
advantageous, can easily disparage and blast a Man's Reputation, with
groundless surmises and suggestions. We have not only to do with the Apothecary
and Surgeon, and both their Boys (for Patients will sometimes ask even
these, of what value the Physician is); but with the Nurse likewise, and the
Midwife, with the Tender upon, and the Hanger-on, the twatling Gossip, and the
skilless busie-Body; in effect, every one is Judge in our Case, and most
commonly those that have the least knowledge have the greatest confidence if not
impudence in their verdicts. Let but any such an one say, this was too much, or
that too little, this strangely neglected, or that venturously acted; though it
be but a Fool that finds the fault, yet he is the Wise man, and the Physician
condemned for the fool; and notwithstanding the Proverb says, Every one is
either a Fool or a Physician, the latter alone must be both. Yea, good success
will not always ward a Physician from others bad opinions, and I do not
remember that I ever succeeded worse than when I succeeded best, and that by
this Stratagem, which is the fundus nostrae calamitatis, and the worst of all
that has yet been said, other Physicians, that either do or should understand
the Art, and be best able to vindicate both the Profession and its Professors,
some of them are so self-conceited, envious, and covetous, that when they are
called into a Consultation, they are often the first that fling the stone at
their fellow-Physicians; and if the Patient dye, they slanderously and
privately suggest, that he took a wrong course, and killed him; if beyond their
prognostic he recovers and lives, that he was so dangerous and venturous, he
would have killed him, but that Nature was so strong as to contemn all the
effort of his immethodical and irrational Practice.

For my own part, I could never hitherto so highly flatter my self into so good
an opinion of my parts or proficiency in learning, as to harbor any thoughts,
much less resolve upon any means of coming forth into print: Alas! I am hardly
so learned, as to know that the whole of what I know, is not the tenth of what
I am ignorant of; and if I should come abroad as standing upon my own Legs, my
stature is but low and my abilities lower, and I might justly be afraid, that I
should be so far from appearing like a Saul among his Brethren, taller by the
head than other Physicians (as me thinks all those should be that voluntarily
put themselves in print) that rather I should seem like a Pigmey among the
Giants. And, if in any thing I should pretend, Dwarf though I am, to stand upon
the great ones shoulders, and by that means to see farther than they, so as to
enlarge the Horizon of our Art, by making discovery of some Terra incognita,
some new things in Physic not treated of before; Alas! there are many things
new to me, which may be old to othe^^, and well enough known long before I was
born; for I cannot boast to have read over, much less fully and deliberately
digested all things, which all Authors both Ancient and Modern have already
treated of in our faculty; neither can I demonstrate that there is anything new
under the Sun, though there are many things that seem so to me. Besides, this
Age is fertile of great Wits, by whom Truths as well as Persons, have got their
changes of attire; and indeed, what else are new Books generally but old
verities new dressed up, and set forth to sale; with such ornaments and
embroyderies, such spangling trimmings, and such sparkling Jewels, as the best
Language, Fancy, and Wit of each Author could put upon them, to make them of
the mode, and so acceptable; for the sceleton of common Notions, which they
thus fill up and flesh, which they thus smooth and skin over, which they thus
paint and beautify, is like the Earth we live on, through all our Generations
the same.

Upon these Considerations I have hitherto passed my days in a recluse, being
much of his opinion, that a Man lives not the more unhappy, for being the less
taken notice of; judging that it was enough for me, for one of so mean
endowments, to sit still and be quiet, to live and learn, to read others books,
and to leave it to the great Masters of our Art for to write and teach.

But a kind of spiteful hap, has disturbed my quiet peace, and a sort of
Hurricane has driven my poor Bark out of a calm Harbor into a Tossing and
Tempestuous Ocean, a Sea of strife, and quarrelsome Contention, which I neither
love nor like; for to put forth a Book, is in some sort to put forth to sea,
and to commit ones self to the rude waves, for what else are the moveable and
uncertain Censures of the People? I thought often upon the beginning of that
Ode in Hor. O Navis referent in Mare te novi
Fluctus, O quid agis? fortiter occupa
Portum, nonne vides ut -- etc.


Applying what he speaks upon another occasion, unto my sending forth this
small Bark my Book; and surely nothing but a bare necessity, could have forced
me out in such hard Weather: stay I would, but stay I cannot, without I would
be content to be ship-wrackt in the Haven. The reasons of this undertaking are
elsewhere mentioned, and must be passed by here, lest the Porch should grow so
big, that the little house might run out at it: thus much only shall suffice to
be here added; That private and public Slanders were the occasion, and that
the vindication of others as well as of myself, is my Apology for what I have
written: for though I bear the brunt, yet there is scarce any one neighbor
Physician or Apothecary, which has not suffered by the same Slanderer.

And if this Gentleman, that would not Privately be convinced of his fault, nor
answer or satisfy me, until I published my Papers, as one told me from him, be
made truly sensible of the evil of his old wont, so as to mend it; and if
others receive a small check, whose Consciences do tell them, they are guilty
of this bad Practice, in that they see, the Backbiter may chance some time or
other to pay for it, I have my end: for I should have been ashamed, to have
given myself, much more my Reader, the trouble of these Sheets, if, besides my
private concern, some public good, designed at least, had not been wrapped up
in them.

ANIMADVERSIONS On Mr. Loss, and on his Medicinal Observations in General.
MR. LOSS is a Gentleman of ingenious parts, but not ingenuous; a good Scholar,
but not so good as he esteems himself; one that writes smooth Latin, and knows
it too, and has made good use of it, and for it has been highly esteemed for
a great Physician by these that understand his Latin better than his Art; in
which yet, he might have done much better, had his Modesty been equal with his
Skill: but he is best understood in the parts where he lives, and is there
diversely accounted of. If some of his Neighbors were to draw his Portraiture,
it would be with a Black coal, others with a white, reputing him for a very
honest man, and mighty able in his Art: whether he best deserves this, or that
character, let the Reader judge.

He styles himself the Heidelbergh, Palatinate, Dorchester Physician, being
hard put to it for an honorable Title, because he is neither Doctor of
Physic, nor yet a Licentiat that I know of, other than by the Bishop's Officer
of the Diocese; and yet how he comes forth in print and in pomp too, with an
affected bombast Title, full indeed in the Mouth, but in the Ear empty; it
makes a loud noise, but to little purpose, much like the hard words of some
outlandish Prince's Titles of Honor, and yet belonging to none other, than an
Alien Practitioner of Physic in England. What I pray are we, or he, the wiser
that he was born at Heidelberg, or that Heidelbergh is a City in the
Palatinate, or that he now lives in the Town of Dorchester. 2dly. It is more to
the point, that he was formerly a petty Schoolmaster at Dantzick. That
afterward, because of the German Wars, he fled over into England for safety and
subsistence, and applied himself to one Mr. Olivian of Blandford, famous in his
time for Surgery and Physic, who took him into his house, as Mr. Loss
himself tells us Lib. 1. Obs. 2. and upon what terms any one may easily
conjecture, and some do know. That afterward, he was recommended to an honest
Apothecary of Dorchester; one whom he has required since his death, by
publishing him by Name, Lib. 1. Obs. 22. for one debauched in his youth, and
therefore Melancholy in his old Age, and pursued with impious and blasphemous
thoughts against God. Taking up his quarter in this Town, and with this
Apothecary, after a few Market-days, as many before him, and since have done,
at an easy labor and price, indeed none at all, and without any trouble of
performing any University Exercises, the Country Market-people, do by and by
dub him, and he commenceth Doctor in the no-University of Dorchester; where he
has reigned as a Dominus fac totum these many years, adding to the repute of
his Art, as great a Profession of Religion, and yet unworthily slighting and
slandering all English Physicians that have lived by him, or have been joined
with him; I could name their Names, but its needless. Pass we on from our Grave
Author, but he is not e Coo senex, to his worshipful Medicinal Observations;
and if they be not likewise as empty almost as his Title, excepting the Latin
only, let any one judge.

That I may not seem to cavil with him, or to be more willing to make faults in
his Book than find them, I desire the Reader to take notice, that whosoever he
be that puts forth Medicinal Observations, he does witness unto the World the
truth of these three things.

1. That his Observations are Medicinal, that is, such as do belong to Physic,
and of which a Physician ought to take cognizance in his Patient, or to use
this Gentleman's one words, in his Epistle dedicatory, In dignoscendis and
curandis Morbis.

2. That they are choice, and Observatione dignissima, as himself also says;
Things that highly deserve to be taken notice of, as being no rubbish, but
finely searced and selected out of the mass of common and ordinary Medicinal
matters.

3. That they are true, not taken up upon trust from others, credulously, and
by too easy a belief, much less mere forgeries in the Author's brains, but such
as he has had experience and proof of. Relictis enim (says he again) inani
logomachia, and sutilibus disputatiunculis, in quibus multi consenescunt,
maximi semper feci experientiam, tantum enim novit medicus quantum aut vidit
aut probavit.

And yet notwithstanding all this, either I am grossly mistaken, or our
Observator is culpable in all these three particulars.

His Forgeries I shall prove in my Animadversions on the 15 th Observe. and 2 d
Book.

His Trivial Remarks, and inobservable Observations, do fill up his Book almost
every where; a taste whereof I shall give the Reader in my Animadversions on
his 1 Observe. and 1 Book.

His non-Medicinal Medicinals, I shall now give an account of; and that the
ordinary Reader may be able to judge better of what I say, and to determine
whether I deal fairly with mine Adversary, I shall first set down, what those
Medicinal things are, of which Medicinal Observations ought to consist: and
afterward, I shall present the Reader with a Catalogue of our Observator's
non-Medicinal impertinencies.

What things are Medicinal.

All things that are medicinal seem to me compendiously reducible unto these
two general Heads.

1. Who. 2. What.
To the first. Who the Patient is, I refer all such accounts of him, as may
contain whatsoever is in him observable, and may give light, either to the
knowledge of his Disease, or to its Cure. Not, that all the particulars which I
shall mention, need to be taken into consideration in all Patients; but that
every one of them may be observable in some one or other. Not again, that they
will give light to every one, but that they may give light to any Physician,
that has read Natural Philosophy, Anatomy, and the Institutions of Physic,
and understands them.

In the Patient there are these three sorts of Observables.

1. His Naturals. 2. His non-Naturals. 3. His former praeter-Naturals.
To his Naturals, belong;

1. His Parentage, what the stock is he comes of. I do not intend by this his
Pedigree or Gentility, but whether his Parents were wholesome or not, healthy or
unhealthy: for such as the Tree is, such is the Fruit. Yet my meaning is not
again that if the Patient has an Hereditary Disease, because the Physician
ought to take notice of it himself, that therefore it is fit for him to publish
so much to all the World.

2. His Age; for our Temperament changes much with our Age. Youth is hot and
moist. Manhood hot and dry; Middle-age cold and dry, and Old Age cold and
moist. And by the Temperament we in part come to know what humor abounds most
in the Body. There are also Diseases proper to some Ages, and there are other
considerations proper to this Head. But my purpose is not, that a Physician
should publish a Register of all his Patients ages: for neither do the old
Ladies desire to be told that they are so, nor yet the very young, that they
are Ladies yet too young; or if at present they do not concern themselves that
their age is spoken of, because they are young, yet ten or twenty years hence,
when the printing in this Gentleman's Book, will be as legible as now it is,
they will not be overpleased, especially if they have not yet got Husbands, to
have their age so easily looked into, at every Booksellers shop.

3. The Sex: for Males ordinarily are hotter and dryer, Females colder and
moister. Males are more active generally, and their manner of life is more
laborious and abroad, more exposed to dangers, and to company. Females are more
sedentary and retired, and adapt to melancholy. There are also many diseases
that are appropriated to each Sex. But I do not persuade any Physician to lay
aside the modesty due to each Sex, and to publish the names of Persons that are
yet alive, troubled with this or that disease, proper to their Sex; but not
proper to be taken notice of by all of the other Sex.

4. His Natural Constitution; To which I refer,

1. His Complexion, which is wont to show it self principally in the
countenance, whether that be fair, black, ruddy, or yellow. And this helps also
to discover what humor is most predominant in the Body.

2. His Temperament; whether that of his whole body, or more observable in any
of the particular parts of it, as the Head, Stomach, Lungs, Liver, Spleen etc.
that of the whole Body may be much guessed at by the Complexion.

3. His Disposition; whether he be morose, or affable, weak, or pettish and
angry. Hitherto also may belong what his other passions are, how he moans and
how he dreams.

4. His Habit of Body, by which I understand not his Bulk only, whether he be
fat or lean, fleshy or thin, but also whether the vessels appear in the skin
large and conspicuous, or little and small; whether the contextures of the skin
it self be with wide and open pores, or with narrow and close; whether the skin
feels soft or hard, rough or smooth; whether the Hair be of this color or of
that, much or little, harsh or soft, curled or straight, quick of growth or
slow, long-lasting or that soon falls off, and decays.

By these his Naturals, as by so many helps, the Physician may understand what
humor is most predominant naturally in his Patient's Body, and whether the
present peccant humor, and the disease be nearer or farther off from his
natural constitution, and what measure of health is to be aimed at in his
recovery, and what probability there is of it.

To his non-Naturals, belong these queries.

1. What is the Air he breaths in?

To this belongs the Country he dwells in, the situation of his habitation, the
time and seasons of the year, the wind, and weather, the influences of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, and the neighborhood of any thing that is contagious or
noxious.

2. What Diet has he kept?

To this belong the substance, quantity, quality, manner of preparing, order of
using, and the time of taking either his Meat or Drink. But it is not
convenient, though the Patient should be a Drunkard, or Glutton, or great
Tobacconist, to follow this Gentleman's example, and publish them for such in
print.

3. What Exercise does he use?

To this belongs whether he uses any exercise or none; what its kind is; when
the time, before dinner, or presently after, and upon a full stomach; as also
how long it is continued, whether only until the body begin to swell a little
and grow florid, or until it sweats and is weary.

4. What has been his sleeping and waking?

To this belongs the posture he sleeps in, the time how long, the time when he
begins, as also the benefit or hurt which is received thereby.

5. What are his Excretions or Retentions?

To this belongs very many things, even all the particular sensible evacuations
of the Body, or non-evacuations, and above all the insensible transpiration,
which as Sanctorius observes in his Medicina Statica, by many degrees exceeds
all the sensible.

6. What are the Passions of his Mind? his Love, or Joy, or Grief, etc.

To his former praeter-naturals, belong an enquiry after such sicknesses as at
any time heretofore he has suffered in any remarkable manner, what they were,
by what causes extraordinary they came about, what symptoms did follow them,
and what did formerly do him either good or hurt. For these things many times
will much contribute to the understanding of the present case, and its desired
cure. And thus much briefly of the first General, Who the Patient is.

To the second What, in the stating of cases already past, of which Medicinal
Observations are made, do belong these two parts.

1. What the Patients Complaints were?

2. What the Physician did foresee or prognosticate, what he did do, and what
was the effect of all?

To the first of these belong the Patient's praeter-naturals in the case
proposed, and they can be none other, than either his disease, or its causes,
or symptoms, and because these are accidents, quae adesse vel abesse possunt
sine interitu subjecti; but which cannot subsist without their subject,
therefore hereunto likewise belong the disquisition of the part or parts
affected.

I shall not reckon up all diseases and what belong to them, their causes, or
the parts affected; that would be to transcribe Physic and Anatomy, but
forasmuch as the Patients complaints are generally symptoms, and by symptoms
principally are found out the disease, the causes, and the parts affected, it
will be no great digression to such as I write unto, if I set them down here
the heads of Symptoms.

All the Symptomatical complaints which any Patient can make, they must belong
to one of these three Heads.

To his injured Actions or Functions, whether such as are diminished, or
depraved, or totally abolished: and whether again they be,

1. Animal: whether 1. Principal, as Reason, Imagination, etc. or 2.
Less-Principal, as Sense and Motion.


To Sense belong all a Patients Complaints of Pain, whether heavy, pricking,
shooting, corroding, beating, etc.

To Motion belong all Gestures and Postures of the Body, as also Tremblings,
Shiverings, Convulsions, etc.

2. Vital, whether belonging to his 1. Respiration, be it weak or strong, free
or stopped, short or long; or 2. Pulse, be it strong or weak, quick or slow, etc.


Upon the Respiration of the Pulse do depend the Circulation of the Blood.

3. Natural, whether belonging to 1. The Formation of the Faetus in the Womb,
done wonderfully and strangely, when neither We, nor our Parents think on it; a
Meditation, which alone methinks is enough to convince an Atheist. 2. His
Nutrition and Accretion, subservient whereunto are vulgarly reputed,
Attraction, Retention, Concoction, and Expulsion.


I am not ignorant of some men's finding fault with this ancient Division, who
do reduce it unto the Dichotomy of Animal and Vital, because the Natural is
supposed to be nothing else but involuntary Animal: But, as far as I can yet
understand, there seems then to me no necessity at all of any Division in us,
for all our Actions may be accounted Animal, since I cannot conceive what Vital
is, if I abstract from it Sense and Motion, which belong to Animal: and if the
Formation of us in the Womb, be Involuntary Animal, as also our Nutrition and
Accretion, why may not all our Actions be Animal Voluntary, Involuntary, or
Mixed?

2. To his Excretions or Retentions, whether

1. Universal, by the Pores of the skin, or

2. Particular, by the Eyes, Ears, Nose, Mouth, Bladder, Belly, Womb, etc. The
things which belong to this Head are very large.

3. To his Altered Qualities, whether

1. Of the First Sort, as Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, and their Compounds; or

2. Of the Second Sort, as Hard, Soft, Rare, Dense, Light, Weighty, Subtle,
Crass, Arid, Slippery, Friable, Glutinous, Rough, Smooth, etc.

3. Of the Third Sort, as belonging to Color, Smell, Taste, or Sound. And thus
much of the First Part of the Second General, What.

To the Second belong the Physician's Judgment on the Case, what is the Part
affected; what the Disease; and what the Cause is of the Disease. His
Prognostics touching the Event; His Method of Cure, and all his Instruments
for the satisfying his Indications by a right use of Remedies Dietetick,
Chirurgick, and Pharmaceutick.

These and all things belonging to these, are the Limits and Boundaries of all
such Medicinal things, of which Medicinal Observations ought to consist.

A Catalogue of Mr. Loss his Impertinencies.
IF I should go about to mention all the particulars of his Non-Medicinals in
his Book of Medicinal Observations, I doubt whether I should not transcribe a
great share of it; I shall therefore content my self with mentioning some of
the chief Heads, to which they all seem reducible. As,

1. Divine or Moral Meditations are not Medicinal, I do not say they are not
good, yea most willingly I do acknowledge that Divinity and Morality do treat of
the most Excellent things; such as so far exceed matters of Physic, as the
Soul is in worth above the Body. And forasmuch as the World are generally apt
to brand Physicians more than other Men, with the abominable sin of Atheism, I
do heartily wish, that every Physician would vindicate his Profession and
himself, as much as may be, from that most Ignominious slander, by
demonstrating his Piety toward God, his Charity toward his Neighbor, and his
Sobriety in his Life and Conversation; that the World may see that although his
Studies lead him further than others, into the inward Recesses and dark secret
Operations of Nature, yet even therefore is the God of Nature by him much the
more admired, and most worthily Adored. But what has a Physician to do with
these things in a Book of Physic? The Cure of Souls does belong unto an other
Faculty, the Cure of Bodies is sufficient for ours; and although many Parsons
turn Physicians, yet I would have no Physician turn Parson, except it be then,
when there is none other to be had, to Comfort or pray with a sick or dying
Patient. But to mix matters of the Soul, in a Book of Medicines for the Body,
is Fanaticism; and what wise man will condemn Medicinal Observations in print,
for not being Larded with Divine Meditations?

2. Geography is no part of Medicine. Indeed the Region or Country a Patient
dwells in, the Situation of his habitation, its being exposed to injurious Winds
and Weather, or too much shut up from the access of free and open Air: the
having in its Neighborhood the Sea, or some Lake, Ponds, or Fens, or any thing
else that may be noisome or infectious. These things do belong to Air, one of
the six Non-Naturals; but I pray to what part of Physic belong these
Observations following, gravely set down by our Author in his Book?

That Dewlish is six miles from Dorchester.

That Frampton is a small Town four miles from Dorchester.

That Milburn is six miles from Dorchester, in the Road to Blandford.

That Haw-Church is three miles from Lime.

That Athethamston is four miles from Dorchester. And to put an end unto this
sorry stuff,

That Winston is three miles from Dorchester.

One would think that in these and suchlike Observations, our Author were
ambitious of showing himself a petite Geographer, one very well skilled in the
Situation and distance of the places about Dorchester; not a Village there, or
Gentleman's Seat, but as he has occasion he mentions them, and tells you more
exactly than any Map, which way these lie, and how far they are from his
Citadel or Metropolis of the Town of Dorchester, where he has lain as it were
Perdiu, like a Spider in the Center of his Web, for near forty years; and I
believe when he is sent for there abroad, he is able to instruct the Messenger
himself, which is the best way, and how far it is unto his Patient, for in all
this time, he has been all about the Country, even over and over; and he seems
emulous in his Book, in those matters, to outvie the Post-boy and the Carrier.

3. Heraldry is no part of Physic, and yet how many lines does this Gentleman
employ to tell us who are the Gentry of Dorsetshire, whose true Worths and
Qualities needed none of his Blazoning. How busy is he to tell us who are
Knights, and who are Esquires, which of these are in his account Heroes, and
what Gentlewomen are his Heroinae; of what honored stock and Pedigree they
are, what their most Illustrious Descent is, who their Fathers were, and who
their Ancestors, and of what Noble Family came their Mothers. He seems in those
to have had a small Design or Plot upon them, by a sort of fawning flattery, to
win them over to make use of him, or else, to buttress up his falling
Reputation amongst them; Compensating unto himself their now neglect, by
publishing what a great Physician he has already been, by having been
interested in so many great Families, as his Book makes mention of.

4. Encomiums and Commendations of People is no Medicinal Observation, and yet
how industrious in this particular also is our Gentleman? He tells us this is
an honest Man, and skilful in his Art, that a most Reverend Minister and
vigilant Pastor. And in his Commendations he spends the best part of the
Observation, which it self contains in it little remarkable, and less that is
praiseworthy; for he seems to have written it only, that thereby he might have
occasion to name the Patient, and commend him. Such a Gentleman says he, was as
eminent for Virtue, as high by Birth, and he dyed Piously. Such a Youngman
played excellently upon the Lute. Such a Gentlewoman was Pious, and accomplished
with the gracefulness of all sorts of Virtues. Another was much given to read
the Bible, a third was Fair and Beautiful, a fourth an extraordinary good
Housewife. I do not in the least either envy or deny any of these worthy
Persons their deserved praise, but buying the Book for Medicinal Observations,
amongst all those Commendations which this Author bestows upon others, me
thinks I find little or none at all owing unto himself, for having in part thus
deceived me, by putting into my hands a sort of Academy of Complements.

5. Publishing and divulging of other men's faults, errors, or sins, ought to be
no part of a Physic Book, and yet how the same Man that commends some to the
height, condemns others no less, ventilating their Actions, censuring them, and
making his own Patients examples of God's vindictive Justice; but I will not
name them in English, it is too much that he has named them in Latin.

6. Men's Trades or way of Livelihood, when they contribute nothing to the
Knowledge or Cure of a Disease, it is impertinent to mention them in a Physical
case. And yet with what a Catalogue of the victum quaeritantium in and about
Dorchester, does this Gentleman furnish us; telling us who is a Carter, a
Brewer, a Grocer, a Glover; and what not? So that if any one has a Child to
put forth to Apprentice thereabouts, or some occasion for himself to make use
of any of these Trades, no Register-Book that had been kept in an Office for
the purpose could better inform him in this matter, than this Gentleman's Book
of Medicinal Observations: there he may find the several ways of getting ones
Living; and who the persons are that have applied themselves unto each Trade;
what their Christian and Sirnames be, where the place of their abode: if out of
Dorchester, how far from it; as also how they are to pass in the world: some he
tells us are Rich, some Poor, and some indifferently accommodated with the
goods of Fortune.

Lastly, not to be tedious. It is impertinent to Physic, that in all cases,
the Names of Patients, especially such as are yet alive, should be affixed unto
the Narratives of their Diseases. Some good Authors have indeed sometimes set
down their Patients Name, and it is fit it should be so, if they be no ways
injured thereby, and the case be so strange and rare, that otherwise it will
not easily be believed. But this Gent. spares none, neither Male nor Female, be
the Disease what it will; and be the persons liable or not liable, to be shamed
or wronged; as if he had purposed to give the World a Catalogue of his
Patients, more consulting his own Credit, in having the Repute of a Physician
of so great Practice, than the Reputation of his Patients whom thereby he has
diversely injured. For,

There are many Diseases which prudent persons do not desire that every one
should know that they are taken with. Because, although we have all the same
Comely and Uncomely parts, so that no man can reasonably mock another, for what
is incident unto himself; yet it is too often seen that people in a pet, or
passion, or to gratify some unreasonable fantasy or humor, do many times
scoff and laugh at, or otherwise abuse their Neighbors; even upon such slight
accounts: and therefore wise men what they can, prevent this, by concealing
some Diseases; and surely they cannot but think otherwise of them that publish
them. Besides,

The Infirmity of the Body, is not always the only concern of the Patient when
he is named. For sometimes his credit and reputation is likewise brought upon
the stage, perhaps his imprudence and follies are examined: yea, his very sins
and wickednesses raked into. I will not quote these Observations, yet I say
thus much; Suppose our Author himself were guilty of some such things as are
not fit to be named, and should fall into the Gout, or some other Disease that
might give occasion of a seeming just defamation, and of making him an example
of God's just Judgment upon him, in punishing him in his Age, for the sins of
his Youth; I am persuaded he could not take it well; and yet for reasons best
known unto himself, thus, even just thus, does he serve some, who certainly
never sent for him, or gave him a Fee, thus to defame them.

What though some men have Palsies and weakness in their Nerves, who did in
their youthful time drink strong Ale and generous Wines, more perhaps than
enough; is it therefore a necessary and undeniable consequence that from thence
only, or principally, they contracted their Palsy? Are there not hundreds that
have drank as much, and yet were never so Paralitick? Or what if a Physician
privately and with himself alone should conclude that this were the only or
chief cause, must he needs therefore tell all the World his Patient's name;
both his Christian and Surname, his Trade, and the Place where he dwells, that
nothing might be doubtful in the stigmatizing of the man? Alas! We are all of
us more sinners than we desire publicly to be told of; and this sort of open
reproof, especially without first trying private, is likelier to increase sin,
by stirring up strife, than to work the sinner unto a true Repentance; and will
sooner harden him with Impudence, than soften and melt him into Tears. And at
length, this is the business rather of a Divine, than of a Physician; and its a
piece of charity much fitter for a Closet than a Printing-Press. And lastly, he
that undertakes it also, must be sure not to be guilty of the same himself, or
of as bad.

What if any one has got an unseemly Disease? though it be with never so much
innocence contracted, may not his modesty yet oblige him perhaps to be ashamed
of it? And may he not be unwilling that his Neighbors, his Servants, yea so
much as his own Children should know it? And can such an one take it well, when
he finds it put forth in print, with his name appended, and the witness of his
Physician to attest it?

There are many Women so modest, that unwisely and incautelously, they do
sometimes sacrifice their lives to that mistaken virtue: concealing so long
their Feminine Diseases from their Physician, until it is too late to discover
them. Would not some such bless themselves and blush, when having told them to
him, they should hear that he has told them again unto all the World, and here
put both their Diseases and their Names in print? These, and some such as these
have been the effects of this Gentleman's publishing all his Patients Names; a
thing not only Impertinent, but Injurious, proving a discomfort, if not a
discredit to several of them: and before he printed his Book, he was advised of
the Imprudence of the action, but in vain.

Having thus reckoned up some heads of Impertinencies, I cannot easily imagine
any other cause why our Author should patch up Hippocrates his sleeve, with
pieces and patterns of all sorts of stuff, unless he had been ambitious of a
Party-colored Coat, to have something of every thing in his Book, with this
Motto, Omne tulit punctum. But he may call to mind these two Verses;
Grammaticus, Rhetor, Geometres, Pictor, Aliptes:
Dum dubitas quid sis, jam potis esse nihil.


And I do seriously question whether his Book, which by these and other
stuffings he has swelled up to the bulk and price of half a Crown, if all this
Garbish were out, and with it all his vulgar Medicinals and Trivial Remarks,
might not be sold at near its worth, for half a Shilling.

Observatio Prima. Contra-Fissura.
VIta Humana non tantum angusto circumscripta termino, sed and plurimis
miseriis and periculis obnoxia, and est quidam calamitatum Oceanus, non tamen
idem omnibus. Quocunque te vertas, quae circa te sunt omnia non modo ambiguae
fidei sunt, sed aperte fere minantur and praesentem mortem videntur intentare;
ut nescias quid serus vesper vehat. Conscende Navem, uno distas a morte pede;
incede per Vrbis vias, quot sunt in tectis tegulae, tot discriminibus es
obnoxious; equo inside, in unius pedis lapsu vita tua periclitatur. Exemplo sit
Vir hic, sexagenario proximus cui nomen erat Michaeli, in rheda quadrigis
gubernanda and promorenda a multis annis egregie versatus; and hoc ipso opere
victum quaeritans. Hic nullo lethi imminentis metu, a caballo sternaci, cui
aquatum ituro insidebat excussus, frontem pavimento, durissimis lapidibus
constrato, allisit; acceptoque eo loci ex lapsu vulnere, aliorum subsidio
elevatus, semianimis domum suam defertur. Mox bilem eructat, and Nares ei
cruentae; certo si Hippocrati fides habenda cerebri concussi, and venulae
alicujus ruptae indicio. Accersitur mecum Chirurgus in Art sua peritus, and
vir probus; instituto diligenti scrutinio, vulnus vix cutem penetrasse
invenimus. Chirurgus itaque sine ulteriori examine vulnus ex artis lege
obligat; Interim, elota alvo enemate, sanguinis aliquid in corpore plethorico a
Chirurgo de cephalica detractum. Sequenti die omnia deprehendimus graviora, and
prorsus lethalia. Corpus e Febri incaluit cum obstupescentia and desipientia,
atque ad interrogata omnimoda obmutescentia, quae summus noster in Medicina
dictator 1. Aphor. 14. in Capite laeso mala pronunciat. Vnde pessime de eo
sperare coepimus; Nihilominus manum tanquam deplorato admovimus, and Chirurgus,
ne quicquam eorum, quae in his casibus ars praescribere solet, omisisse
videretur, quo certius pateret si quae noxa frontis ossi inflicta esset, quod
Hippocratis oraculo moniti verebamur, vulnus in front inflictum, dilatavit;
sed os integrum and noxae expers inventum, neque sedula capitis contrectatione
aegro plane stupido and muto, quicquam animadvertere potuimus, quanquam fracti
cranii multa erat conjectura. Itaque de aperienda per Trepanum Calvaria
consilium initum; sed quid fit? Misellus iste senex, cum per totum fere diem
quasi Comate quodam correptus esset, sub vesperam horrendo spasmo convulsus,
paucarum horarum spatio, mortalitatem exuit. Aperto a morte cranio, in opposita
fronti occipitis part rima, seu contrafissura, quam Graeci (...) vocant,
reperta, and magna cruoris sanie permisti copia, crassae meningi incumbens;
unde mors: ut vere dixerit Celsus, Medicorum ille Cicero, even^e interdum
solere, ut altera part ictus insederit, and altera fiderit.

The First Observation. A Counter-cleft.
THE Life of Man, is not only circumscribed within narrow bounds, but obnoxious
likewise to many miseries and dangers; and it is a certain Ocean of calamities,
but not the same to all. Which way soever you turn your self, all things that
are about you be not only uncertain and not to be trusted unto, but for the
most part, they threaten openly, and do seem to intend a present death: so that
you know not what a night may bring forth. Go a Shipboard, and there is but one
foot between you and death; walk in the streets of a City, and look how many
tyles there are on the houses, so many are the dangers you are obnoxious unto.
Get a horseback, and if but one foot faulters, your life is in danger. Take
this Man for an example, near threescore years old, whose name was Michaeli;
for many years much accustomed to govern and drive forward a Cart with four
Horses, and by this very labor earning his living. This Man, little fearing
that death was so near; being cast from a stumbling Jade, which he rid upon
going to water, dash't his forehead against a stony ground, and receiving there
a wound by the fall, by others help he was taken up and carried home half-dead.
By and by he vomited choler and fell a bleeding at the nose, a sure sign if we
may believe Hippocrates, that the Brain was shaken, and some small Vein was
broke. There was called with me a Surgeon, one skilful in his Art, and an
honest man. Having made diligent search, we find that the wound was hardly
skin-deep. The Surgeon therefore without more ado binds up the wound
according to Art: in the interim, the bowels being first washed with a Glyster,
some blood in his Plethorick Body was taken away by the Surgeon from the
Cephalic Vein. The next day we find all things worse, and plainly deadly; for
his Body was in a Fever with stupidness and deliring, and being mute unto all
that was asked, which our chief Dictator in Medicine, in the 1st of his
Aphorisms, and the 14th tells us are very bad in hurts of the Head: whereupon
we begin wholly to despair of him. Nevertheless, we give him our helping hand
in his deplorable condition. And the Surgeon, that he might not seem to omit
any thing which in such cases Art is wont to prescribe, and that it might more
certainly appear whether the forehead-bone had any hurt, which we were afraid
of, instructed by the Oracle of Hippocrates, dilated the wound inflicted on the
forehead, but that bone was found whole and without hurt: neither could we
observe any thing by our diligent feeling about his head, the Patient himself
being plainly stupid and mute. Yet there was great conjecture of a broken
Skull: and therefore we took counsel about opening it with a Trepan. But what
falls out? This miserable old Man, having been almost all the day seized with a
sleepy Disease, toward evening fell into an horrible Convulsion, and within
few hours died. His Skull being opened after his death, in the hinder-part of
his head opposite to his forehead, there was found a Fissure or Counter-cleft,
which the Greeks call (...); and great store of gore mixed with corruption,
lying upon the dura matter, which was his death. So that Celsus said true, that
Cicero of Physicians, that it is wont sometimes so to fall out, that the blow
lights upon one part, and the Fissure happens in another.

Animadversions on this first Observation.
HAD not Mr. Loss highly incensed me with such vilifying expressions behind my
back, as did not only report me for no Doctor, but no Scholar likewise; I
should never have been so pragmatical or busy as to have concerned my self
with him or his Book. But, since besides his private slanders, he is pleased to
publish an harsh censure of me, in his 15 th Obs. and 2 d Book. Before I answer
what he has Objected against me in that Observation, I think it honest and
fit, a little to examine the depths of his Worship's Learning; taking to task
what comes first to hand, and what, himself being Judge, seems best to deserve
to be the Captain and Leader of these Medicinal Observations, which he has
been forty years a gathering.

I confess I once thought to have followed this Gentleman on, as his
Observations lie, but I found it too fulsom a task. His Learning appears so
full in this Observation, and his Learning and Honesty in the 15 th and 2 d
Book, that for my part, I have enough in these two.

The Life of Man is not only, etc.]

It is indeed a grave and serious Meditation which this Gentleman begins his
Book with, and it takes up the first page thereof, further than which, if one
reads not, he may well suspect that he is mistaken, and instead of Medicinal
Observations, has bought a Book of Divine Meditations. But let him but have
the patience until he comes to the story of the Carter, and then he will find
how ingeniously from his fall, came the rise of this excellent Meditation. The
knock over the Carter's Pate, did very likely beat it into the Physician's
brains; it minds us of being always prepared and in a readiness to dye,
because our life is every way hazardous; some of those hazards the Author has
reckoned up, but amongst his Casualties, he has not named this, which yet
flows naturally from the Observation, that if it should be any of our chances
by a blow in the forehead, to have a Counter-cleft behind, and we happen to
fall into the hands of such an Artist as our Author, that suspects something,
but understands nothing of our Disease, before we are dead, it is not only
hazardous, but certain that we have lost our lives. But to divert us from these
thoughts, he has subtly practiced their craft, who have learnt (...), and
cunningly turns Divine, that he may some-wayes expiate his fault as a
Physician, making his dead Patient, whom for want of skill he could not cure,
to become yet a sort of living example of the Calamities and Casualties of the
life of Man. Thus by a new sort of contrasissura, the Physician receives the
blow, and the Divine sends forth at the fissure, the Meditation.

Near threescore years Old.]

It Is true, the Age of a Patient is so generally mentioned by all that write
Cases of Physic, that it is almost never forgot, and the reason is, because
the knowledge of a Patient's Age, may upon several accounts be very useful to
the Physician; it helps very much to understand the Patient's Temperament,
which varies according to his Age, and withal the predominant humor in his
Body; which will always be some ways answerable to the Temperament. It also
helps to understand the strength of the Patient, when we are to pass our
judgment what the Event will be; it likewise helps to indicate or
contra-indicate Bleeding or strong Purging, and the Rules of diet, and the
right ordering of the six Non-Naturals varies much according unto our Age.
Besides, in this particular case of a Counter-cleft, there is scarce any thing
that deserves so much to be considered of, as the Patient's Old Age; for if by
it the futures of the Skull be obliterated, great reason there is upon such a
knock on the Pate, to expect a Counter-cleft. But this Author of course reckons
up his Patients Age, but who can show in all the Observation, where he makes
any use or advantage of it?

Whose Name was Michaeli.]

I suppose there was some mistake in the Printer, and that his Name was either
Michael, or Michel, but not Michaeli.

This Observator is very punctual in setting down the names of all his
Patients, but I admire that this good man did forget the Christian Name of this
same Michel; he did remember well enough all his four Cart-Horses, and yet that
he should so unluckily forget the Carter's Name, whether it was Dick or Jack,
or Tom, Names that they are more often called by than by their Sir-names. But
I Will say that for our Author, that I do not know of any such another neglect in
all his four Books of Medicinal Observations, where we have Thomas, and Robert,
and William, and John, and Katharine in abundance. But here indeed, the
Christian Name was forgotten, whether out of the abundance of his Divinity, in
his many lines preamble to this Observation, he forgot Christianity; or that
being conscious of his having digressed too long, he would now make the more
haste and speed to the matter in hand: or that because it was but a poor
Carter, there was not any thing to be gotten by these formalities which he
bestows upon the rich. I say, whatever the cause was, the matter is not great,
nor indeed any thing material to the Medicinal Observation. But I see if men
will be wise, they must be wise unto themselves, for on a Deathbed, others
will leave us to our own Christianity, touching this, we alone must answer for
our selves.

Accustomed to govern and drive forward a Cart with four Horses.]

How this Author came so well skilled in the Carters Trade I cannot tell; but
from him I learn, that our English Phrase, To drive a Cart, is in a manner as
preposterous, as to place the Cart before the Horse; the Hind may whip the Cart
long enough before it will drive, but he must first drive the Horses; and
whilst they draw forward the Cart, it is his office to guide and govern it in
its progressive motion.

It is likewise observable that although this Carter fell but from one Horse,
(and it would have been an Observation of Observations, if he had fallen from
more) yet forsooth this Carter had three more which he used to water, for he
had four Horses to his Cart, and yet all four little enough to draw this one
remark into a Medicinal Observation.

A sure sign if we may believe Hippocrates.]

This inference is true, but trivial, and it does not reach the case in hand.
The Carter's Disease was a Fissure in the Skull, a part containing, this speaks
of a concussion of the Brain, and the breaking of a Vein, parts contained, and
yet how formally are these Inductions made; they are verities almost as plain
as the (...), Truths that no Body hears mentioned, but he forthwith grants
them; so evident and beyond all doubt, that methinks it is ridiculous to go
about to prove them by Authority, and yet our grave Author brings in the Name
of the great Hippocrates to confirm their Truth. These sort of consequences,
are much like those which make up a merry Ballad, which serves not to teach,
but to cause laughter. There was a Mouse crept up a wall,
When she fell down, she had a fall, etc.


To which may be added these two somewayes suitable. When as this Carter first
was taken,
His Skull being cracked, his Brains were shaken.


There was called with me a Surgeon, one skilful in his Art and an honest
man.]

I perceive then that every one is not a pitiful Surgeon in this Author's
account, so he be not likewise a Physician, one thought so well of, as to be
joined with him in a Medicinal Consultation. All his spite is at another
Physician; and I think he never gave so honest a character of any Physician
that was his Neighbor, much worse I am sure he has: neither do I believe that
he does deserve it himself; for sure I am, I had never been put to this trouble
of writing Animadversions on him and his Book, if he had quitted himself as one
skilful in his Art, and an honest man.

Having made diligent search.]

What search might have been made with diligence, and to what good purpose I
shall anon declare: and indeed now was the time, now the opportunity for this
so to have been done, as that the poor Patient might have received benefit
thereby, and the neglect of this opportunity was for ought I know, the
miscarriage of the Carter; for had not our Observator been a foreright Artist,
one wholly taken up with the scratch in the forehead, he might easily have
reflected with himself, that it was impossible that these bad Symptoms above
mentioned, which befell this Patient by and by after his fall, could ever have
proceeded from so slight a wound only in the forehead, as was hardly skin-deep;
and if he had considered the Patient's Age, and the probability of a
Counter-cleft, he would never have rested satisfied with so slight a search,
and yet this must pass for a diligent enquiry: What could be more formally
said, what could be less done to the purpose?

Binds up the Wound according to Art.]

Not a scratch in the forehead, which any good Woman might have dressed, but it
is bound up according to Art, if this Observator has the over-looking of it;
so worshipfully formal is he in all things.

In his Plethorick Body.]

Believe it who will, that this poor old Man, that labored hard every day and
fared hard, was yet overcharged with good Blood in his Body; I rather think
that this is another piece of the same formal Gentleman, who knew well that
Plethora indicat venae sectionem, and therefore being to tell the world that he
bled an Old man, whose Age was otherwise a Contra-inditation to Venaesection,
he makes up the reasonableness of his Act, by telling us, that his Body was
Plethorick; whereas good man, whether his Body had been Plethorick or not
Plethorick, the bleeding of him might have been requisite for Revulsion from
the Head; and to prevent as much as might be, the Inflammation of the Brain,
and the coming on of the Fever, and other Symptoms.

From the Cephalic Vein.]

And what more proper in a Disease of the Head, than to bleed the Patient in
the Cephalic Vein? That which indeed carries the name and show of some Art,
but as far as I can yet understand, it is but a show only, and may therefore
pass for another piece of outside skill in our formal Observator; for since the
Head-Vein, the Liver-Vein, and the Median, are all Branches of one and the same
Trunk, what reason can there be given, why one should more respect the Head
than the other?

The next day we find all things worse, and plainly deadly.]

As negligent and ignorant as our Observator was yesterday, when the poor Man's
life was only in hazard, and required some effectual and speedy means for his
recovery; for beyond the binding up the scratch according to Art, and the
exhibiting of a Glyster, and bleeding him in the Cephalick-vein, all which was
but as a Bulrush instead of a Leaver; yet to day, now that his own credit was
in hazard, he desires to appear very diligent and knowing; to salve therefore
his own reputation, when he saw the Patient was going, he is not only content
to acknowledge that all things were worse; for what efficacy could there be in
his inefficacious means? which came far short of the Disease? But he says
plainly the case* was deadly, that the World might think, that it was not want
of skill in him the Physician that the Patient died, but because there was an
impossibility of his recovery; and to prove this, he huddles together as many
bad Symptoms as he thought might serve the turn; though he does it without
either Method or Reason: and to use his own Words against Medicus alius; (...)
and sine ratione.

1. Without Method, for he reckons up this Patient's being Dumb, his obmute
scentiam omnimodam ad interrogata. In the last place; whereas his being
speechless should have been the first thing taken notice of in the first visit.
The Words of Hippocrates in his 58 Aphorism and 7 th Section are these, (...).
Such whose Brain has been shaken by some manifest cause, of necessity they
must forthwith grow speechless. (...) does not signify to morrow, the day
after the fair, but instantly and forthwith, even the first moment the blow is
given. And therefore this ought not in order to have been mentioned last, even
last in the second day's narrative, and after other Symptoms, which were
subsequent to it as the Fever, etc.

2. Without Reason, for in his haste that he might be sure to lay load enough
upon this man of carriage, and thereby take off the burden of reproach from
his own shoulders, for having done so little good in so great a danger; he
inconsiderately packs together (...), and will have it, that this poor man said
never a word, and yet talked idly: because Deliriums are many times fatal
signs, he thought, that to tell this Patient did delire, would add unto the
great dangerousness of his sickness; but he forgot that it was nonsense to say
he did delire, cum obstupescentia and omnimoda obmutescentia. This Gentleman is
wont to say of his Practice, that in it he follows still the Authority of the
best Authors: but, good man, he does not always understand them. Let any one
read the Aphorism which he here quotes, and tell me whether this Gentleman
understands Greek as well as Latin, and whether he cannot put up with Nonsense
as well as Sense, so he does but think he has Authority for it. The Aphorism
is not right quoted in our Author's Book; but that I suppose was the Printer's
fault, but that it was not misunderstood by our Observator, whose fault was it?
The Words are these, sect. 7. Aphor. 14. (...); Upon a blow on the Head,
Stupidity or foolish deliring is bad. It is not (...), as our Author would
unreasonably have it in this his Patient: For, if this Carter was stupid, and
neither did nor spoke any thing, how could he do or speak things incongruous
and without reason? If he did or spoke things that had no reason, how was he
stupid and mute? I presume that one Horn or the other of this Dilemma, will
goad our Observator, and that rather than he will attempt to make good the
truth of contradictions, he will himself be a little infected with his
Patient's Disease, and upon such a blow on his head, he must needs also either
be mute, or talk idly.

Whereupon we begin wholly to despair of him.]

The ground of this utter despair, our Observator takes from the forecited
Aphor. whereby appears a second mistake of his in the meaning of one of
Hippocrates his Aphorisms: for although (...) is many tim^s taken in
Hippocrates for (...), such a Case, upon which death often follows: yet it
cannot be construed in this Aphorism for (...), a Case utterly desperate and
past all Cure, as our Observator seems to intimate this was, for which purpose
he has these various expressions, Omnia deprehendimus gravior a and prorsus
lethalia, and then he reckons up bad Symptoms, and quotes this Aphorism and
says, Vnde pessime de eo sperare coepimus, which yet is a sort of tacit
acknowledgment, that (...) is not deadly; and therefore afterward yet once
again, Manum tanquam deplorato admovimus: thus often, and thus variously does
he labor to possess the Reader with an opinion of almost an impossibility of
this Patients being cured; and yet so simple is he, as to subjoyn in the very
next Observation an Example of one cured in such a Case: which notwithstanding
the blind of a ridiculous Title he puts upon it, is easily discernible to a
judicious eye. Mr. Hawl's Case was not indeed a Counter-cleft, but it was a
Cleft; or else the Gentleman rid a Hunting with an Helmet on his head, and kept
it on, to safeguard his Skull from cracking with so many blows, whilst his
Horse dragged him near a mile knocking his Head against the ground.

We give him our helping hand.]

This was that helping hand, which afterward we find so busy to no purpose,
in feeling about the Carter's head; and exploring whether there was any hurt in
it besides that in the forehead. But one would think it had been better
employed, in scratching the Observator's forehead, and rubbing up his Wits and
Memory; that he might have be thought himself of some more suitable and better
means (such as might have been made use of) for the discovery of the Fissure,
which certainly it was impossible his Fingers alone should do, whilst the
Cleft-bones were yet so close, and the Skin and Coverings of them not at all
wounded.

That he might not seem to omit any thing which in such cases Art is wont to
prescribe.]

There was scarce any thing of Art made use of to find out the place of the
Fracture in this Patient's Skull, and yet what a pretense is here of having
done all that Art is wont to prescribe in such Cases. This vaunt of our
Observator is an imitation of the shaving of Hogs, where there is a loud Cry,
and but little Wool.

Whether the Forehead-bone had any hurt.]

This Observator was so led by sense, that because the blow was there given, he
could not yet forbear puddering again in the poor man's forehead-bone; seeking
for the hurt before, which was in truth behind: an evidence to me, that he no
more dreamt then of a Contrafissura, or understood it probably, than perhaps he
now thinks many do, that first meet with the word in the Title of his
Observation.

Instructed by the Oracle of Hippocrates.]

If all this Gentleman's errors be Oracles, what are his Truths? We have
already seen how simply he understands the Oracles of Hippocrates: but, he is
at it now again, and tells us, that he had not put this old and sick Patient to
the trouble of a second search in his forehead, and a further dilating of the
Wound, but that he had the best Authority for what he did: for Hippocrates had
bid him be afraid of a Fracture there, or some other hurt than he could yet
meet with. But any one may justly admire and wonder, how it is possible for this
Gentleman, be he of never so great parts, thus easily to gather things out of
Authors, that were never in them. Let him name the place in Hippocrates out of
which he was thus advised or instructed; that there was some hurt in the
forehead-bone, for assuredly there was no such matter; Even by his own
confession the forehead-bone was without hurt. One would think that this
Observator did not yet know, that the forehead might be knocked, and yet the
forehead-bone not hurt.

There was great conjecture of a broken Skull.]

Now first does our Observator mention something of a Fractured Skull; but even
now it is only by way of Conjecture, and not absolutely concluded.

Therefore we took counsel about opening it with a Trepan.]

Was not this a wise Consultation? wherein our Observator, upon a Conjecture
alone that there was a Fracture, without examining what sort of Fracture it
was, whether such as requires a Trepan or Raspatories only, without being
satisfied of the place where this Fracture should be? For he had hunted for it
in a manner until he was weary, but could not find it; always like himself, a
safe Physician. He was about, and could have found in his heart to have
Trepan'd this poor old Man, but where, who can tell? Most likely in the
forehead; for that was the place he had been twice so busy about, and so much
concerned and unsatisfied with; whilst yet there was no mention made of any
suspicion of a Cleft behind. This Gentleman, Artist-like, having Mr. Olivian's
Practice in the next Observation for his president, he would let out the Gore,
but where to go to work he knew not; though by a good Chance he might have hit
on it, if he had done it likewise in the same place as Olivian. But this forward
Gentleman could not forget the forehead, Hippocratis Oraculo admonitus. But
what falls out? This poor Patient that had already too much of misery, was in
this only happy, non tam claritate vitae, quam opportunitate mortis. That his
death was so opportune, that it prevented the further Torture of this grave
Consultation held to Trepan him, before ever the Disease was nearer known than
by Conjecture; and not so neither as a Counter-cleft, but only as a Fracture in
the Skull, whose place yet was wholly to seek.

(...)^]

Some indeed do call it so, but more properly others name it (...), and
therefore also is Contrafissura, otherwise called Resonitus.

A Fissure or Counter-cleft.]

A Fissure or Countercleft are not words synominous, the latter being a species
of the former; and there may be a Fissure or chink without a Counter-cleft.

Now at length the great Conjecture was come unto a direct knowledge of the
thing, and not before. After the Patient's death, when the Surgeon had
opened the Skull, and showed unto this knowing Physician, what the matter was
that had so puzzled him, pointing unto him as it were with his finger where the
place of the Contra-fissura was, then at last, first began our most intelligent
Observator, to understand a Counter-cleft, and to light upon the subject of
this first grand Observation, which marches indeed in the front of all the
rest, as having much to do with the forehead of the Carter, but little with the
brain of the Physician, except that with some help thereof, this Gentleman
having the blessing of his Eyesight, did then and there when it was showed
him, behold a Contrafissura.

Having thus given some piecemeal Animadversions on this first Observation, I
shall from the whole draw some Conclusions, and so dismiss it.

1. That Mr. Loss did not understand this Patient's Disease before he was dead.
WE have an English Proverb, that a Disease once known is half cured, but it
turns little to the reputation of that Physician whose Patient is thoroughly
cured of all Diseases, before his Disease be half known: neither will a seeming
hard word, Contrafissura perhaps sought out since, mend the matter much; or
excuse this Gentleman who after so great a blow which an old man, heavy and
helpless, received by a violent fall from his Horse, upon his bare forehead
dash't against a stony place, whereby he became forthwith speechless and almost
lifeless; by and by vomiting up choler, and bleeding at nose, passes none
other judgment upon the Disease, than that the Patient's Brains were shaken,
and some small Vein broke; Certo indicio si Lossio fides adhibenda, that he
knew not yet what the Disease was: and this appears further in that the first
day, the Wound in the forehead being bound up according to Art, there was no
further search made, nor any intimation of a suspicion, as if there were any
where else any hurt done. The second day there is mention made of such
Symptoms, as Hippocrates says are bad when the Head is hurt; and every one that
knew he had the fall, knew also that his Head was hurt. And what more does Mr.
Loss mention yet of the Disease? Yea, so little did he think of the os
occipitis, that it was cleft, that the second time, though he had once
diligently searched it before, he directs his enquiry after the Disease, in the
os frontis. But what need we any further proof of this point, for after this
second search likewise, habemus confitentem reum, and he says plainly, neque
quicquam animadvertere potuimus, quanquam fracti cranei multa erat Conjectura:
so that the nearest that he came unto the Knowledge of his Patient's Disease
before he was dead and his Skull opened, was a general Conjecture only of a
Fracture, but no direct Knowledge of a Counter-cleft.

2. That Mr. Loss might have understood his Patient's Disease before he was
dead, if he had been more an Artist.
FOrasmuch as this Proposition will be more doubted than the former, and some
may be apt to plead an invincible ignorance in vindication of this Gentleman, I
shall therefore take somewhat more pains to prove it, than I did to prove the
former; and I shall do it gradually by these three Assertions.

1. He might have absolutely concluded, that this Carter had some Fracture or
Fissure in his Skull at first.

I know of but three Fountains of signs from whence a Physician may have the
knowledge of a Disease, and they are its Essence, Causes, and Effects. Diseases
are sometimes so plain and evident of themselves, that every one can tell them;
thus any one as well as Mr. Loss might have told that this old man had a Cleft
in his Skull, when they saw it; but then is it, that a Physician's skill is
seen, when by its Causes and Effects he makes discovery of a Disease, whose
Essence by it self does not appear. Therefore,

1. Here were the Causes of a Fracture or Fissure in the Skull, as fully and
clearly set down as if any one had made it his business to describe them: viz.
Here was a sudden violent blow upon the head with some hard thing. Had this
Carter walked only, and tripping fallen with his head upon a stone he might have
broke his Skull, much more then, by a blow more violent at a greater distance
from the ground, and by a fall from a Horse, his feet being wholly from the
ground; so that by them, he was not able to help himself, by stepping forward,
or otherwise bearing up part of his Body, that it might not have fallen with its
whole weight in a lump. His hands likewise, whilst he was in the Air lesser
time than to bethink himself where he should fall, and whilst his eyes could
not direct him, nor but probably so providentially strecth't forth as toward
the blow and keep off the violence of the stroke upon his Head. Besides, he was
an old and therefore impotent man, and being slung off with a force from a
Cart-Horse, he must needs fall heavy; thus the blow was both sudden and
violent, and it was likewise upon his bare forehead; for if he had an Hat on,
its probable that it fell off: and lastly it was with an hard thing, for he
dash't his forehead against the stones.

2. Here were also the Effects of a cracked Skull; which I shall reduce to
these two Heads, Immediate and Subsequent.

1. Here were the Immediate Effects which are wont presently or by and by to
fall out after a Skull is cracked, for presently upon the blow his eyes failed
of their sight, his speech was taken from him, and if he had not fallen before,
he must needs have fallen upon the blow, for he could not rise, but was taken up
by others half dead, and so brought home. By and by also he vomited up choler,
and his Nose fell a bleeding.

These Symptoms are of so great concern in this Disease, that from them we may
not only Conjecture that the Skull is Fractured, but likewise absolutely
conclude it. And because this makes home to my purpose, I shall back it with
the authority of Celsus, an Author not only generally approved of by
Physicians, but particularly quoted by Mr. Loss in this Observation; and (which
is strange, for why then did he not read or understand him?) in the same
Chapter, viz. the 4 th of the 8 th Book, he writes thus; Vbi calvaria percussa,
protinus requirendum est, number bilem is homo vomuerit, number oculi ejus obcaecati
sint, number obmutuerit, number per nares, auresve sanguis ei effluxerit, number
conciderit, number sine sensu quasi dormiens jacuerit, haec enim non nisi osse
fracto eveniunt. If the Skull be cracked, you must forthwith make enquiry,
whether the Patient vomited, whether his eyes failed of their sight, whether he
was dumb, whether blood came from him at his nose or ears, whether he fell with
the blow and lay without sense as one asleep: (all which are plain and evident
in this Carter's case) for these things cannot be, except the bone be broken.
An evident proof that Mr. Loss might at his first visiting this Patient, have
absolutely concluded, that he had some Fracture in his Skull. But,

2. Here were the Subsequent Symptoms, which are wont to follow a Fractured
Skull some time after it is done; and which Authors do make mention of, as a
Fever, a Stupidness, a Sleepiness, and a Convulsion. And thus much for my
first Assertion. That Mr. Loss might at first have absolutely concluded that
this Carter had some Fracture in his Skull.

2. If Mr. Loss had so far wisely understood the Case, as at the first visit,
by the Immediate Effects to have absolutely concluded, that somewhere there was
a Fracture in the Skull; he must of necessity have known before his Patient's
death, that the Disease was a Counter-cleft: for, although the word seems to
intimate a Fracture in a part opposite to that which received the blow, yet it
is a Counter-cleft if it be in any place else besides there where the blow was
given. And Dr. Read in his Treatise of Wounds Lecture 22. writes thus. A
Resonitus or Contrafissura falls out when the Craneum is stricken upon one
part, and Fractured in another; and this happens either in the same bone, or in
diverse; in the same bone either sideways on the right hand, or on the left, or
perpendicularly from the upper to the lower part; in diverse bones, as when the
right side of the head is beaten, and the left Fractured, or when the left side
is beaten and the right Fractured; or, as in the Case in hand, when the
forepart is stricken, and the hinder part cleft. But that there was no Fracture
in this Carter's forehead, the place where the blow was given, Mr. Loss himself
witnesses after a double search; had he therefore known there was a Fracture,
he must necessarily have known likewise that the Disease was a Counter-cleft.

I do not say it had been a very easy business, to have found out positively
where the Fracture was, for whilst the skin is unbroken, the cleft may so ly
lurking under it, especially if it be Capillary or small, as may puzzle a very
good Artist to find it out. And had Mr. Loss showed himself so skilful, as
positively to have declared before his Patient dyed, that it was his Judgment
that this Carter had a Counter-cleft, he had much saved his credit, though in
the shortness of the warning, and hurry of the danger of his life, he could not
have well found where it was: and yet, because this Gentleman boasts that
nothing was omitted which in these cases Art is wont to prescribe, I shall add
this third Assertion.

3. If Mr. Loss had known that there was a Counter-cleft, most probably he
might have also found out the place where, before his Patient's death: if he
had wisely considered his Patient, and made use of all means which Art is wont
to prescribe to find out a Fracture. For,

1. He would have found his Patient a very fit subject in whom he ought to have
reasonably expected an opposite Counter-cleft. For,

This sort of Fracture happens when the party struck, has no sutures at all,
or as good as none, they be so close, and so very obscure.

Herodotus and some others do write, that Skulls have been found in Persia
undistinguished with sutures. Aristotle also speaks of one such found in his
time, at neither of which says Vesalius do I admire, for very old men's Skulls
show nothing of the figure of the sutures, and but very obscurely so much as
the place where they have been. That which we may the more easily believe, if
we know and take notice that even the very backbones of aged people do unite
and grow together, that old men cannot move them as formerly. Whether this
Patient's Skull had sutures or no, I do not know, that Mr. Loss, (curious
enough in impertinencies) did so much as enquire after. This I know, here was
one near threescore years old, and in such a dry Skull, drier yet by hard
labor, and it may be harder fare; what could Mr. Loss upon such a fall, after
a double search in the forehead bone, which both times was found whole, more
reasonably have expected, than a Counter-cleft behind? the force of the blow
strongly forcing the Air and Spirits within the minute parts of his Skull from
his forehead on both sides, by an intestine violent motion to change their
places and pass forward, that is, backward toward the hinder-part of his head.
These little bodies or globuli, like these that from a Gun driven violently by
the blow on each side his Skull, and having little or no vent given them at the
sutures, did pass on unto the farthest place they could recede unto in the os
occipitis, and there meeting each other full-butt, and forcing each other
violently and suddenly back in their Recession or Resilience they cleft the
bone, and with it some Vessels of the dura matter appended to it, some of whose
blood came forth after by the Nose. I say, what less in reason could Mr. Loss
have expected than all this? But,

2. There are several means whereby Art will help us to find out a Fracture,
which will not show it self. Dr. Read in his newly cited Lecture, says thus.

If signs of a fracture do appear (as here they did) and no chink appear in the
wounded part, (as here there did not) then you are to take a view of the
opposite part; if you find any tumor there or softness, you may be sure that
the Fracture is in the Skull subjacent: If you find no tumor, then you must
shave the head, and apply such a plaster, as he there prescribes; spreading it
upon Leather, and applying it to the opposite part to that place where the
knock was given; if when you take it away the cutis musculosa be in any place
more soft than other, moist, or swelled, it is likely that there is the
Fracture. These things ought to have been done in this Case very speedily, but
I question whether any of them were done at all. But besides these, I shall
offer at two things more that might have been done for the discovering of the
Fractured place.

1. There is a slight and familiar way, speedy and easy, known almost to every
Surgeon, though not practiced in this Case by this grave Physician, viz.

A Lute-string might have been fastened to this Patients Teeth in his upper Jaw,
that Jaw which moves not, and is therefore not only contiguous but continuous
with the Skull: if the Surgeon straining this string with one hand, had as
it were played upon it with the other, the continuation of that vibration,
motion, or sound, which the fingers would give the string, and which the string
would communicate to the Teeth, and they to the upper Jaw, and that again per
motum nexus unto the Skull, might at length have arrived unto the Fractured
place, and there jarring by an unpleasant rough and interrupted motion, it
would have given such a disturbance to the weak, yet sensible part; and caused
so much pain, as might have forced the Patient, mute though he was, to have
spoken by signs, and by putting his fingers to the place, Vbi enim dolor ibi
digitus, he might have told or at least himself pointed out where the Fracture
was.

2. If Mr. Loss had been sure there was a Fracture in the os occipitis, and
upon view or feeling could not have found it, because the cutis musculosa was
whole, He might have been so courageous, having a skilful Surgeon by him, to
have commanded him to have made incision unto the os occipitis, about the
middle of it, and the wound as occasion required might have been dilated this
way or that; and the bone laid more open for further search. Such a wound would
not likely have been mortal, nor could any justly have called this cruelty upon
so necessary an account, in so stupid a Patient. And if the Cleft had been
invisible, by being so hair-like and small; it might have yet been made visible
by applying a rag dipped in Ink, or done with Ivory half burnt, and mixed with a
little Vinegar to make it more penetrating, and after a while taking it off,
and gently washing or wiping away the black, for the Cleft part of the skull,
would have yet retained so much black in its chink, as would have discovered
the place. But thus much shall suffice for my second general Conclusion, that
Mr. Loss might have understood this Patient's Disease before his Death.

3. That Mr. Loss did little or nothing material toward the Cure of this
Patient's Disease.
ANd indeed how should he? whilst he had no other knowledge of the Disease, than
that his Brains were shaken, some small Vein broke, his Head hurt, and great
Conjecture of a Fracture; but where it should be he knew not.

All that I read of what he did, was a Glyster, a searching the forehead-bone
twice, a feeling about his Head, the letting him blood in the Cephalic Vein;
and the binding up of the scratch.

I do not deny that a Glyster and Bleeding are good general Remedies for hurts
in the Head, but there was little reason to expect that they should bring away
the Gore and extravasated blood, which lying upon the aura matter, perhaps
penetrating both dura and pia, and obstructing not only the Vessels, but the
very pores of the brains themselves, thus infecting, contaminating, irritating,
and yet stopping the free passages of the Spirits, caused those direful
Symptoms above mentioned, and in short time death it self. Something therefore
Mr. Loss did; Ne nihil fecisse videretur, to use his own words of Alius Medicus
who had yet better success with his Patient. But that something was in effect
nothing, for the next day he was found no whit the better, yea much worse, and
at night died.

4. That it was not impossible for Mr. Loss to have cured this Patient, had he
taken a right course with him.
THis Gentleman is reputed to have a very ready faculty of censuring other
Physicians when their Patients dye, that they took a wrong course with them,
though he was not there, nor knew any thing more than by hearsay of what was
done. What he did for this Patient is by himself put in print; and I have
proved that it was nothing to the purpose: I now add, that he might have done
something to the purpose, if he had taken a right course. If he had first
speedily satisfied himself that he knew the Disease, and the part affected (as
I have proved he might) and had then caused a section to be made through the
soft parts over the middle of the os occipitis, to discover the Cleft, and what
place would be convenient for the Trepan, and had then by opening of the Skull
let forth that extravasated blood and filth, which himself says was his death.

It Is true, the warning was very short, and the opportunity of Cure quickly
gone, but the Cure was not therefore impossible, and the greatness and
fearfulness of the Symptoms should not have discouraged but quickened an
intelligent Physician, to have set about it, and not to have put up the first
day with the binding up according to Art the scratch in the forehead, and the
second day, with a pretense of doing whatsoever Art in such cases is wont to
prescribe, when he did little else but fumble about the head of him, by which
himself confesses he could discover nothing: thus letting slip the opportunity
of action, and deferring the consultation of the Trepan, until the Patient was
a dying. That in which Mr. Loss was the more to blame, because he had before
this seen a Patient so Cured, as appears in his next Observation, where the
Gentleman's case, in the most essential circumstances, is parallel with this of
the Carter's. And this also is a further Argument to prove this fourth
Conclusion, for ab esse ad posse valet consequentia.

5. That after all this ado, a Counter-Cleft is no such news in Physic, as to
have deserved to be the subject of the first of these Observations, which have
been forty years Collecting.
THat a Counter-cleft is no news in Physic, let these Authors witness for me.

Hippocrates in Lib. de Vulneribus Capitis.

Soranus in scriptis de Vulner. Capitis.

Aurelius Corn. Celsus de re Medica, Lib. 8. Cap. 4.

Nicholanus Florentinus Sermon. 7. Sum. 2. Tract. 4. Cap. 1.

Valeriol. Append. Loc. Com. Cap. 5.

Fallop. Comment in Hippocrat. Cap. 14.

Paraeus in his 8th Chapter, and 9th Book.

Doctor Read in his Treatise of Wounds.

James Cook in his Marrow of Surgery.

And in a manner every Surgeon else. Now, after all these, of what moment is
this Chirurgo-Medicinal Observation? which is only an addition and overplus
added unto the scale, sufficiently already weighed down by the gravity of so
many good Authors as have written on it. And although Paulus did oppose
Soranus, and Gorreus in his Medicinal Definitions, does side with Paulus, and
that chiefly, because Galen says that the Skull was not made one solid entire
Body without Sutures, lest being struck on one place, a great portion of the
Skull should be broke, which is prevented by the Intervening Sutures stopping
the violence of the blow from passing over these lines, and doing hurt on the
other side of them; yet probably Gorraeus did not know that some Skulls have
had no Sutures; and that Age many times obliterates them in these that had
them: and perhaps he did not consider, that the same force of a violent blow
upon the Skull, which would quite break it, if it had no Sutures, in some
distant place, may yet instead of a Fracture, make a Fissure there, though
there be Sutures, if by old age those Sutures are more than ordinary united,
and dried up. So that besides the authority of numerous Authors, Reason also
seems so well satisfied with the possibility of a Counter-cleft, that it would
be almost as ridiculous for any one to question or doubt it, as it would be in
me, to doubt whether there be any such place as New Castle, because I never yet
saw it: and indeed, what else does Mr. Loss in all this Observation, but carry
Coals to New Castle, tells us what we knew before, and brings us the proof of
his Testimony, for that which I know no Body doubts of: and this very
discreetly having prepared a Book of Medicinal Observations for a Treat and
Banquet to be set before Physicians, as a Taste of the fare which they are to
expect afterward, he presents them for the first dish of the Feast, with a
Colewort more than twice sodden.

Observatio 15, Lib. 2 d. Pleuritis benigna intra septimanam resoluta.
NObilissima Puella Elizabetha Nobilissimi viri Dni. Thomae Moore Armigeri
Filia natu maxima annos december plus minus nata, gracilis and biliosa ac
rarissimae constitutionis, Dorchestriae in gynaeceo hospitans melioris
educationis gratia, catarrhis obnoxia, autumnali tempore, quo alias eventilatio
minor est, ut ea propter ad internas partium inflammationes suscipiendas
pronius sit corpus, praecedente quodam rigore, corripitur febri, mitiori
quidem, sed continua, and quotidie sub vesperam excandescente, cum dolor
punctorio lateris sinistri, ad jugulum usque extenso, and spirandi
difficultate, cum tussi and sputo cruento. Ad hanc vocatus, consideratis modo
dictis, nobilem hanc Puellam pleuritide laborare judicavi, cujus causae externa
in refrigeratione consisteret, cum tempore frigido, multa vespera, nudo
pectore, pro more nobilium virginum, prodeambulasset. Vt enim calor humores
colliquans; sic etiam frigus eosdem compingens, pleuritidem facile introducere
solet; sanguine scil. propter refrigerationem, circa vasa intercostaliae
collecto, membranaeque costas succingentis, Pleurae dictae, cum vicinis
internis musculis, inflammationem producente. Mox itaque cum vires utcunque
perstarent, de vena secanda cogitavi, ut quae summum in pleuritide commodum
afferre soleat: Cum vero venaesectionem Galenus in pueris ante decimumquartum
annum vix suscipiendam suadeat, praesertim in corpore molli and raro, atque ad
dissolutionem prono, quale erat hujus puellae, siquidem internam habent
copiosam and perpetuam vacuationem ab action sui innati coloris excitatam, qui
substantiam humidiorem facile digerit, and abs^mit, unde timendum ne huic
liberali vacuationi altera addita vires prosternat. Itaq: sanguinis uncias
quinque, sic jubente Doctissimo Sennerto, hirudinibus ex interna sinistri
cubiti vena emungendas curava; praemisso enemate emolliente and refrigerante.
Hoc facto dolorem lateris fotu and unctione lenire studeo. Fovebam autem
malvarum, florum Camomillae, meliloti, anethi, and seminum lini decocto, admota
insuper inunctione ex unguento dialtheae, pectorali and oleo amygdalarum
dulcium; superimposito cataplasmate dolorum lenitivo. Recipe, Malvae, florum
Camomillae, ana M. 1. Meliloti, Anethi, Violariae, ana M. s. Floram Violarum P.
1. Seminum Foenugraeci, Lini, ana unc. s. Decoquantur in aqua, and contusis
add Olei Amygdalarum dulcium unc. i. Pinguedinis Gallinae unc. s. farinae
hordei and fabar. ana q. s. Fiat Cataplasma; quibus continuatis, dolor plurimum
alleviatus. Hinc ad promovendum sputum conversus, mane in jusculis exhibui
Oleum Amygdalarum dulcium, recenter sine igne extractum, quo alvus quoque
fluidior reddita, subsequente promta and facili anacatharsi; interdiu vero
utebatur linctu ex Syrupo Violaceo, capillorum veneris, diatragacantho frigido,
diaireos, and Saccharo Cando, atque penidiis. In principio morbi assumpsit
tincturam florum papaveris erratici cum aqua cardui Mariae and scabiosa, cum
spiritu sulphuris, addito pugillo uno vel altero Florum Violarum, extractam.
Postea etiam Decoctum pectorale officinarum hausit; and pro potu ordinario
bibit decoctum hordei cum passulis, liquoritia, and Seminibus Anisi. His summa
diligentia administratis, aspirante Gratia Divina, and Natura cooperatrice,
intra paucos dies puella haec a lateris dolor and sputo cruento liberata, ut e
lecto surgeret, remanente tussi non admodum molesta, cui removendae phthiseos
vano metu visum est nobilissimae Matri, instigatione avunculi, Alium Medicum in
Concilium adhibere. Hic acta pro more multorum accusans; maxim vero quod
venaesectio neglecta, and quae sanguinis per hirudines detractio instituta
fuisset, nullius sit momenti: venaesectionem instituit sexto morbi die cum
febris and reliqua symptomata cessassent; detractis, ne nihil fecisse
videretur, quatuor circiter unciis sanguinis, ex basilica dextra oppositi scil.
lateris, id quod inter errores Medicorum a doctissimo. Fuchsio numeratur qua
plures rations in contrarium allegat. Die septimo, exhibet pulverem senae, quo
sexties vel septies fuit purgata. Sub vesperam ejusdem diei, incidit in sudorem
spontaneum copiosissimum, a quo omnino convaluit, assumpto tamen aliquandiu
Balsamo Peruviano. Haec licet (...) and sine ratione instituta nullo tamen
aegrae damno; quod vires ubi valentes sunt, quales erant in hac Puella, omnia
contemnant and tolerent; ubi infirmae fuerint, a quovis offendantur.

Observation the 15 th, Book 2 d. A Benign Pleurisy resolved in a Week
THE most Noble Damsel Elizabeth, Eldest Daughter of the most Noble Gentleman,
Mr. Thomas Moore Esquire aged more or less about ten years, thin and choleric, and
of a very rare Constitution, boarding at Dorchester at a School-mistress's
house for her better education, subject to Rheums; in Autumn when eventilation
is less than at other times, for which cause the Body is more prone to admit of
the Internal inflammations of parts, after a precedent rigor was taken in a
Fever mild indeed, but continual, and worse every day toward evening, with a
pricking pain in the left side reaching to the Throat, a difficulty of
breathing, a cough, and spitting of blood. Being called unto her, and
considering what has been said, I judged that this noble Maid was sick of a
Pleurisy, whose external cause was by catching cold, seeing that in a cold
season late in the evening, she had gone forth a walking, with naked breasts,
as is the manner of Noble Virgins. For as heat melting the humors easily
causes a Pleurisy, so does cold likewise by compacting them, the Blood being
gathered by reason of cold about the Intercostal Vessels, and causing an
Inflammation in the Membrane compassing the Ribs called the Pleura, and the
neighboring internal Muscles. Presently therefore, for as much as her strength
was yet pretty good, I was thinking of opening a Vein, as being that which uses
to give great relief in a Pleurisy. But because Galen advises hardly to admit
of bleeding in Children not yet 14 years old, especially in a body soft and
spare, and prone to dissolve, such as this Damsels was; for these bodies have a
continual and plentiful internal evacuation, caused by the action of their
innate heat, which easily digests and consumes their moist Substance; so that
there was reason to be afraid lest her strength should fail, if to this liberal
evacuation an other should be added: Wherefore, following therein the command
of the most learned Sennertus, I took care to evacuate by Leeches five ounces
of Blood from the Internal Vein of the left Arm, having first ordered an
emollient and cooling Glyster. Afterward I made it my business by fomentation
and unction to assuage the pain of her side. My Fomentation was a Decoction of
Mallows, Chamomile-flowers, Line-Seeds, and Dill; after which she was anointed
with Althaea and pectoral Ointments, and oil of sweet Almonds; and this
Cataplasm was applied. Take of Mallows, Camomile-flowers, of each one handful;
of Dill and Violet-Leaves, of each half one handful; of Violet-flowers a pugil,
of Faenugreek and Line-Seed of each half an ounce: boil them in Water, and when
hey are bruised, add to them one ounce of Oil of sweet Almonds, half an ounce
of Hens-grease, and as much Meal of Barley and Beans as is enough. Make a
Pultess. These things being continued the pain was much assuaged, applying my
self therefore to promote expectoration, I gave her in the morning in her
Broth, oil of sweet Almonds fresh-drawn without fire, by which She was also
more soluble; and a ready and easy expectoration followed. But in the day She
used a Linctus of Syrup of Violets, Maidenhair, Diatragacanth, frig. Diaireos,
Sugar Candy and Penidice. In the beginning of the Disease she took a Tincture
of Wild Poppy-flowers extracted with Waters of Card. Marand Scabioso, Spirit of
Sulphur, and a pugil or two of Violet-flowers. Afterward she drank the
pectoral Decoction of the shops, and for her ordinary drink, a decoction of
Barley with Raisins, Loquorice, and Aniseeds. These things being most
diligently made use of by the blessing of God and cooperation of Nature, within
few days this Virgin was freed from the pain of her side and spitting of Blood,
so that she could rise out of her bed; a Cough remaining, but not very
troublesome; to remove which out of a vain fear of a Consumption it seemed good
to the most noble Mother, through the instigation of the Uncle, to call into
Counsel another Physician, who after the manner of many others accusing what
had been done, and especially that a Vein had not been opened, and that her
having been bled by Leeches was of no moment; orders on the sixth day of the
Disease, that a vein should be opened, then when the Fever and other Symptoms
were gone. So taking away some four ounces of Blood that he might not seem to
do nothing, from the Basilick Vein of the opposite side, that which by the most
learned Fuchsius is accounted an error in Physicians, who alleges many
reasons to the contrary. The seventh day he gives her Powder of Sena, by which
she was purged six or seven times. About the Evening of the same day, she fell
into a plentiful voluntary Sweat, by which she grew altogether well, excepting
that for some time afterward she took Balsam of Peru. Though these things were
ordered without method or reason, yet they did the Patient no harm; for
strength when it is good, as it was in this Virgin, it contemns and tolerates
all things, but when it is weak, every thing offends it.

I have already above mentioned what the Medicinal Materials are, with which a
Physician is to build any Medicinal work; I shall now offer at the Method of
ranging these into a Medicinal Observation, which according to what I yet best
understand, ought to consist of these five Parts.

1. A Title, which is to invite the Reader to peruse it, telling him what it is
he may expect in the Observation, and therefore it ought to contain either the
sum of it, or something very remarkable in it, and commonly it speaks the
Patients Disease.

2. A Narrative of the Case, containing its history or the matters of fact,
which the Physician met with in that Case, such as are these three especially.

1. His Natural, viz. His Parentage, Age, Sex, and Natural Constitution, in
which I include his Temperament, Complexion, Predominant Humor, and his habit
of Body. 2. His Non-naturals, which some thus in short express. Aer, Esca
Quies, Repletio, Gaudia, Somnus;
Haec moderata juvant, immoderata nocent.
3. His former Praeternaturals, what Disease he has formerly had, from what
Causes, and with what Symptoms, as likewise the Juvantia and Laedentia, what
did formerly do him good or hurt.
3. The Judgment of the Physician founded upon this Narrative, and this
Judgment ought to be the delivery of his Opinion, touching these three
particulars especially.

1. What the part Affected is, and whether it be Primarily affected, or by
Sympathy.

2. What the Disease is, I mean the Principal Disease, and that in regard of
its Essence, Accidents, or Mutation.

1. In respect of its Essence, whether it be a Similar Disease, a Distemper
only, or an Organical; consisting in some default, of 1. The Conformation of
the Part Affected, respecting its figure, its roughness, or smoothness, or
Cavity, in its being Compressed, Obstructed, or Dilated. 2. The Magnitude of
it, when the Part is either Bigger or Less than it should be. 3. The Number,
when in a greater Organical part, there are more or fewer lesser Organs. 4. The
Connection, when a Part does not Cohere where it should, or Cohere where it
should not; or is otherwise faulty in its site.
2. In respect of its Accidents, of which four are especially considerable; As,
1. Its Magnitude, whether it be a great Disease, such as being very intense,
afflicts the Body with a great force; or a little Disease, that receding but
little from the natural constitution, does but little impair the strength. 2.
Its Motion in respect of its Quantity, in its parts, as being in its beginning,
increase, state, or decrease; or in the whole, whether it be an Acute Disease,
or a Chronical. 3. Its Motion in respect of its Quality or Manner, whether it
be a Benign Disease, or a Malign. 4. Its Event, whether it be likely to be
Salutary or Mortal.

Besides these Accidents taken from the Properties that do accompany the
Essence of a Disease, there are also other accidental differences, that a
Physician may judge of: As 1. Whether in respect of the subject or part
affected, the Disease be Idiopathick or Sympathick, Protopathick or
Deuteropathick. If Sympathick, whether Positive or Privative, whether
Sympathick by reason of Neighborhood, Society of the same kind, Communion of
Office, Site, or Connection. 2. Whether the efficient Cause of the Disease, or
peccant Humor, be Legitimate or Bastard. 3. Whether in respect of the Causa
sine qua non, especially the Region or Place where the Patient lies sick; the
Disease be Endemick, Epidemick, or Sporadick.


3. In respect of its Mutation, whether it will change into another Disease, or
it self terminate either by (...) or (...); in Life or Death.

4. The Practice of the Physician, according unto his Judgment of the Case* his
Method of Cure, and his Remedies made use of, whether Dietetick, Pharmaceutick,
or Chirurgick.

5. The Event and Success of what was done.

I do not undertake to prescribe to any one this Method for his framing of any
Medicinal Observation, but because I think it does contain whatsoever needs to
be taken notice of by any Physician in any particular Patient's Case; according
to it, I shall follow my Examination of the newly mentioned 15 th Observation
of Mr. Loss his Second Book of Medicinal Observations; supposing that my having
premised it, has not been any fruitless digresson, since by it the Reader may
be informed, unto what head each Particular that shall be spoken unto belongs,
and thereby himself become a more competent judge both of Mr. Loss his
Observation, and of my Examination.

This 15 th Observation is more than ordinary remarkable, in that there is a
double case to be taken notice of in it.

The First did belong to young Mrs. Bridget Moore, the Sickness of her Body.

The Second does belong unto my self, her other Physician, who was sent for to
consult with Mr. Loss in her Sickness, and it is the wounding of my Reputation,
by his private whispers, and now public slander.

The first of these Patients, by the blessing of the Almighty, grew well in a
short time, and she may now say to me, Physician cure thy self. To which my
Answer shall be, the very same that when she lay sick it was unto her honored
Mother, upon somewhat the like question. The Case is indeed very dangerous, but
I Will do the best I can for the Cure. And although it is not in my power to
persuade any one, contrary to what they themselves please, yet it shall be my
fault, if what I have writ and proved, be not enough to vindicate me to any
indifferent Reader. And I hope, that the Almighty, who knows the wrongs and
injuries, which for several years last past I have suffered by this Gentleman's
means, will so far favor the innocence of the Cause, now that it must needs
become public, that he will prosper me in this Cure also.

In Mrs. Moore's Case I shall Examine.

1. The Title of the Observation.

2. The Narrative of her Case.

3. Mr. Loss his Judgment both of her Disease, and of the Cause of it.

4. His Method of Curing her.

5. The Event of what he did; which I shall refer unto the Second Case.

1. In my own Case, I shall insist on these particulars.

His Preface thereunto, being a pompous but false Narrative of his wonderful
success in the first Case; and a plotted and studied piece of forgery to
persuade the Reader by a plausible tale, how it came about that notwithstanding
his great Cure, Alius Medicus was sent for.

Here likewise, upon occasion of his naming me Alium Medicum; what I could not
put into the Preface of my Book, for fear of swelling it too much, I shall here
insert, viz. my Answer unto some Objections against it. As, 1. That it is not
seemly for one Physician, to write against another. 2. That Wise Men love
neither to be pattern, nor patron of any Controversy. 3. That Mr. Loss having
not named me, I needed not to have been concerned at his Book. 4. Being his
Book is in Latin, my Answer ought to have been in Latin also. 5. That writing
in English, I needed not to have spoke so plain. 6. That after I have done all,
uncharitableness and envy will be the Censure of my undertaking; and more
strife and trouble the fruit of it.


2. His Narrative of my Case, containing all his charge of Accusations against
me.

3. His Judgment of my Disease, that it was want of Method and Reason in my
Practice; and of its external and moving Cause, I did what I did, that I might
not seem to Mrs. Moore or others to do nothing, being sent for to the Patient.

It is not to be expected that I should here mention in the fourth place his
Method of Cure, for he did not wound me, but on purpose that I might bleed.

4. His Relation of the Event, that by Accident I did the Patient no harm.

5. Instead of his, my Method of curing this Disease.

1. By sufficient Witnesses, proving matter of Fact.

2. By Reason and Authority, vindicating matters of Art; and answering every
particular Observation. And because his first Accusation is, That I Accused
what he had done; I shall there take occasion of aggravating that most unworthy
Trick of some bad Physicians that make it their practice to backbite and
slander others of the same Profession: then I shall give instances of Mr. Loss
his thus dealing with me; and lastly, a direct answer to this and every other
Accusation against me, as it lies in order.

1. Of the Title of the 15th Observation. A Benign Pleurisy resolved within a
Week.]
THere is little in this Title remarkable that should invite the Reader to take
the pains of perusing the Observation, and when examined, let any one judge if
there be not as many errors in it, as there are words. For,

1. This Patient's Disease, to speak properly, was not a Pleurisy, but an
acute Fever; whereupon Symptomatically followed a Pleurisy.

2. That Pleurisy that was, was rather Malign than Benign.

These two Propositions I shall prove, when I come to examine Mr. Loss his
Judgment of the Disease.

3. This Title does not answer the Observation unto which it is prefixed; for
according unto that, it should have been thus.

A Pleurisy and no Pleurisy cured before the sixth day, and yet lasting until
the seventh.

These pretty Contradictions of our off and-on, in-and-out Gentleman, would
have made any Reader admire the Writer; and above all his Book to have pitched
upon this Observation, where (to prove what I have said) in his Judgment on the
Disease, he says, Considering what has been said, I judged that this noble
Maid was sick of a Pleurisy; and his Method of Cure, and Medicaments do all
speak the same thing. But in his Narrative of the Case, he says, After a
precedent rigor, she was taken with a Fever, mild indeed, but continual, and
worse every day toward Evening, with a pricking pain in the Left side, etc. A
plain demonstration that the Disease was not a Pleurisy with a Fever, but a
Fever with a Pleurisy. And yet again, on the sixth day of the Disease, the
Disease was no Pleurisy; no, nor Fever neither: for before Alius Medicus was
sent for, Mr. Loss tells us, These things being most diligently made use of, by
the blessing of God, and Cooperation of Nature, within few days this Virgin was
freed from the pain of her Side, and spitting of Blood; so that she could rise
out of her Bed, a Cough only remaining, but not very troublesome.

This Gentleman had cunningly packt away the Disease before I was sent for, (
that I might have nothing to do, and that if I did any thing, he might say of
me, that I did it, that I might not seem to do nothing) not the Pleurisy only,
but the Fever also and other Symptoms; for so he says: Medicus Alius orders on
the sixth day of the Disease, that a Vein should be opened, then when the Fever
and other Symptoms were gone. This augments the Contradiction, and makes the
Observation still more wonderful; That there should be a Pleurisy and no
Pleurisy, a Fever and no Fever, a Disease and no Disease: for how could there
be a sixth day of the Disease, when the pain of her Side, her spitting of
Blood, the Fever and other Symptoms were gone? But our Observator is still more
wonderful; He says, this Pleurisy was resolved within a Week, if he means that
it did not last a week, but was gone before the sixth Day, he contradicts
himself in saying, About the Evening of the Seventh day she fell into a
plentiful voluntary Sweat, by which she grew altogether well; a proof that she
was not well before. If it be said, that some remains only lasted until the
seventh day at Night, but the Pleurisy it self was gone before the sixth, I
deny this Assertion; for the Pleurisy was not gone on the sixth day, much less
the Fever, which was her principal Disease; and whose conjunct Cause was not
yet discussed until after the Sweat; and whilst the Cause remained, the Effect
did also remain.

If he means, that it did last a Week and no longer, how does he contradict
himself in this again by saying, he had cured this Pleurisy before the sixth
day? This Gentleman, that has been noted for one that almost perpetually
contradicts what another Physician, or his Patient offers to have done, though
many times soon after he prescribes the same thing himself; and in so much,
that some play with him as with a Child, and work him to consent, by urging for
that which is contrary to what they would have. I say this Gentleman, that has
many times uncivilly contradicted others, is so civil, as here and elsewhere to
contradict himself.

4. This Pleurisy was not resolved within a week, for the great Sweat which
did resolve it, befell not the Patient until the Evening of the seventh day, and
the seven days were out before the sweat was off.

5. It is no news nor worthy Observation, That a Benign Pleurisy should be
resolved within a Week; for of all the five ways by which a Tumor may
terminate, Resolution is not only the safest, but the nimblest; for the
Morbisick matter is not probably very great in quantity, if it passes off by
discussion, nor very thick; for then it would rather end in suppuration, or
induration; neither does it make any great stop of the circulation of the Blood
in the part affected; and Nature is still Mistress in this way of Termination,
neither is she wont then to be long about her work.

If he had told us of a Pleurisy that ended by Induration, or Corruption of
the Part, and yet passed off in seven days, he had given us an Observation
indeed, but to tell us of a Benign Pleurisy resolved in seven days, is
trivial. There is scarce any Disease that admits of so speedy a Cure, as this
does sometimes. I have heard a Patient presently upon bleeding, before yet his
Arm was tied up, tell with rejoicing how he plainly felt his pain go off, and
such a discussion of the Disease has followed, that it returned no more: what
then is the great observable, that this Gentleman seems ambitious that the
World should take notice of from him; Is it, that of his certain Knowledge a
Pleurisy was resolved within seven days? Alas! Almost every Body can tell,
that such a thing may sometimes happen in less than seven hours.

2. The Narrative of the Case.
THis begins with the Observation it self, and reaches unto these Words; With
a Cough and Spitting of Blood.

Elizabeth.]

This old Gentleman did forget that his young Patient's Name was Mrs. Bridget:
this would have been a gross mistake in a Law-Case, but in Physic,
notwithstanding all the ado Mr. Loss makes in the Naming of every Patient, it
little concerns him that reads the Observation, to know what the Christian or
the Surname of the Patient was.

In the Autumn.]

This Second mistake is a little more Material, because the time of the year
when a Patient lies sick, is Medicinal; but the third mistake of this Patient's
getting this Sickness by taking cold in her Breast, whereas it was by violent
heating of all her Body, and drinking cold Beer whilst she was hot, was yet
grosser, as we shall by and by see: in the interim, have we not just reason to
admire this Author for a very Trusty Observator? A faithful Historian in
matters of Fact, upon whose authority and verity, the Reader may securely build
his belief and confidence of the things he writes, that they are true and
certain? Such, as (he would make us believe in his Epistle Dedicatory) he
either saw himself, or sufficiently examined? This Patient had but two names,
and he has hit right in one of them; and has some reason why he mistook the
other, for the Mother's Name being Mrs. Elizabeth, who would have thought that
her eldest Daughter's Name should have been Mrs. Bridget? But he recovers
himself a little from this ominous stumbling in the beginning; he tells us
truly, whose Daughter she was, and how she was his eldest Daughter, things very
Medicinal no question: that she was about ten years old, and she might have
been 12, or 20, or almost of any other age, and yet have been taken with a
Pleurisy. That she was thin and choleric, and of a very rare Constitution;
this Disease might have befaln her, had she been full and fat, phlegmatic, and
of a very thick Constitution, as he will have it, taking Constitution for the
Skin. It Is true also that she was at a Boarding-School for her better
education, but little to our better notification; and that this School was in
Dorchester, a place he could not easily forget, for he has lived in it above
thirty years. But as for the time when, and the occasion whereupon this young
Gentlewoman fell Sick, these must be looked upon as less Material than those
above mentioned, and as faults easily pardonable in a Gentleman of his Gravity.
But what! May he mistake the Disease likewise, the Cause of it, the Cure of it,
the Success and Event of it; and all the Forgeries he has invented and vented
against Alius Medicus? Let others think what they will, for my part I shall not
easily confide in such a mistaking Author, but rather think that he did not
begin to write, before he began to dote, giving us a mighty formal account from
the Time of Autumn, of his Patients Disease that lay sick in the Spring.

When Eventilation is less.]

That it is so in Autumn, it is confessed, but this Patient'ts sickness was in
April.

These words make nothing to the Observation, they serve only to convince the
Reader, that this mistake can with no reason be attributed to any fault in the
Printer, since Mr. Loss himself builds upon it, and gives a reason why the
Autumn did contribute unto this Patient's Sickness; imitating in this the
forwardness of some young Philosophers, though himself be old, who will readily
give you a reason of any thing, even before they know whether the thing be so.
But if he had ever read my Lord Herbet's Zetetick Questions in his Book de
Veritate, he would have found that An sit, is the first, neque enim tuto in
reliquarum profundum solvitur, nisi explorata ista.

After a precedent Rigor.]

This cold shrug in the beginning or first onset of a Fever, is one of the
signs that show that it is putrid; for when the Blood begins to boil through
Putrefaction, the sour, crude, and nitrous parts of it, which have not yet
arrived unto maturity and sweetness, the bond of mixtion being much loosned,
naturally they get together as Birds of a Feather, and unite particles, and so
make up a body of Crudity and Sowrness, which at first smothers the fire in the
Blood, and hinder much the Circulation of it; in which yet, those cold sour
particles do associate themselves most willingly to the comparatively cold
Membranous parts of the Body; which Membranes, partly through the absence of
the influential natural heat, which the Heart, all this time oppressed, cannot
send forth vigorously enough; and partly by the overmuch presence of these
cold sharp Particles, do suffer that chill and general vellication, which I
suppose is the Rigor, or cold shrug. But why should Mr. Loss I pray, be so
busy to inform us that this Fever was a Putrid Fever, which in its very
Essence is dangerous, though not always mortal; seeing that in the Title, he
tells us that the Disease was Benign?

With a pricking pain in her Side.]

It is no hard task for any Physician to reckon upon his fingers the five
Pathognomonick signs of a Pleurisy, but then the Spitting of Blood is none of
them; and why the Pulsus durus, which is one of them, should not be here
mentioned, Mr. Loss can tell.

We have seen something of the Narrative of the Case, there is yet one thing
more taken notice of by Mr. Loss, but both mistaken and misplaced; it
appertains unto the Patient's Non-naturals, her Walking late in the Evening in
a cold Time with naked Breasts. This I conceive should have been mentioned in
the Narrative, and before he had come to pass his judgment of the Disease.
There were also other things belonging unto the Narrative, which Mr. Loss has
not mentioned at all, viz. That formerly she had an Issue in the left Arm: to
which humors flowed so fast, that becoming troublesome, by some advice or other
it was shut up.

That not long after the shutting of it up, she began to have a pain in the
left side of her Breast, which had continued more or less some two years time
when she fell sick, with such soreness as would not easily suffer an ordinary
impression of ones hand.

That just before her sickness, she over-heat her Blood at Play, and then drank
cold Beer; Things as material I suppose, as many of these which Mr. Loss has
mentioned.

3. Mr. Loss his Judgment on the Case.
THis Judgment concerns the Disease, or the Cause of it; Touching the Disease
his Judgment is double.

1. That it was a Pleurisy. 2. That it was a Benign Pleurisy.
Touching the External Cause of it; That it was her taking cold in her Breast
by walking forth late.

If I do not mistake, all these three are false.

It seldom happens that any one falls sick, so as to lie by it, and to be in
great danger, but there is a complication of Diseases in the Case; and then the
Physician is not to rest satisfied with the naming of some Disease or other
which may be in the Patient, but his Art requires of him to find out that which
is the Principal, and upon which the other do depend, and from it to name the
Case, Denominatio enim est a potiori; otherwise he will show himself an
Emperick, and must needs make mad work in his Method of Cure.

This Patient's Principal Disease was not a Pleurisy.
IF her Side was neither the first part ill-affected, nor the Principal part
that suffered, then a Pleurisy was not her Principal Disease. I do not see any
reason to go about to prove this major Proposition.

But her Side was neither the first part ill-affected, nor the Principal. Ergo.

I prove the Minor in both its Parts.

1. It was not the first part ill affected; for upon her drinking cold Beer
when she was hot, the Stomach must first suffer before the Side: but because
this was not considered of, nor perhaps known to Mr. Loss, I add that her Heart
and all its Vessels were first ill-affected with a Fever in her Mass of Blood,
before the pricking pain in her Side, and other Symptoms of her Pleurisy; and
this is made out both by the reason of the thing, and by a double authority.

1. I prove it by Mr. Loss himself in this very Observation, who says, She was
taken in a Fever, with a pricking pain in her Side. If he meant that the
Pleurisy was her Principal Disease, he should have said, She was taken in a
pricking pain in her Side with a Fever; for a Fever that went before, though
but some few minutes, could never be the effect and symptom of a Pleurisy that
came after; though Mr. Loss says afterward, that on the sixth day of the
Disease the Fever and other Symptoms were gone, as if the Fever were the
Symptom of a Pleurisy, which followed after it. 2. I prove it by Sennertus,
who in his Chapter de Pleuritide observes, That although the Ancients did call
these Fevers, that do accompany the Inflammations of the Internal parts
Symptomatical; yet of a Truth they are nothing so, Si quis enim rem diligenter
perpendat, animadvertet, non Febres ab hisce inflammationibus, sed potius
inflammationes istas a Febribus originem habere; If any one, says he,
considers the matter well, he shall find that these Fevers have not their
Original from the Inflammations of the Internal parts, but rather that those
Inflammations have their rise from the Fevers. And if so, the Fevers are the
Principal Diseases, that which also the Method of Cure shows plainly, and did
show in this particular Patient.
2. It was not the Principal ill-affected.

Amongst other Rules which Physicians give to know what Part is principally
affected, these three are very considerable.

1 That which suffers most grievous Symptoms, is the part principally affected.
But it is plain that the Effects of this young LADY's putrid Fever, were much
more grievous in her Heart, than these from the Pleurisy in her Side.

2. That Part which is continually affected, and never at ease, is the part
principally affected; but her Side was much at ease: and if you will believe
Mr. Loss, her Pleurisy was gone, then, when Alius Medicus was sent for, and
then, when all the Family where She lay Sick despaired of her Life. And her
Heart was never at ease, but still troubled more or less with a continual
Fever, until at length the Universal Sweat completed the Cure; and the Fever
once gone, there was no news of the Pleurisy.

3. That Part which receives no benefit by these Remedies which do help another
Part, is the Part principally affected; but her heart was but little benefited
by all Mr. Loss his Emperical Cure of her Side.

Therefore.

This Patients Pleurisy was not Benign.

A Benign Disease, is such an one as goes on in a gentle mild manner, not much
troublesome or offensive to Nature, nor yet so dangerous as to hazard Life. And
I do admire that Mr. Loss should title this Disease Benign, for I am sure that
before I was sent for, the good Lady the Patients Mother was sent unto, that
She might make haste to come twenty miles out of the Country, to see her
Daughter that lay very sick in Town; so little belief was there then of the
Benignity of the Disease: and I am sure, that when I propounded to purge her,
after She had been bled; Madam Moore told Mr. Loss, who was against it, that
She would try the Purge; for my Child, said She, is a dead Child in your
account. But afterward, when Mr. Loss saw that the Patient was able to bear
both Bleeding, Purging and Sweating, and in few days was strangely recovered,
to my credit, and his no little disturbance; being to write this Observation,
which I think he put forth on purpose to honor himself, and shame me what he
could in this particular Case, the good Man changes his Note of the great
danger our little Patient was in, and out of a Malignity to the other
Physician, Benigns the Disease. That which is also the more ridiculous, because
this Gentleman in the immediately preceding Observation, viz. the 14 th of his
2 d Book, says thus of a Pleurisy in general; (...) Graece, a loco affecto,
nimirum Pleura, Latinis morbus costalis seu lateralis dicitur, estque
inflammatio Membranae costas succingentis, quae Pleura nominatur; Haec inter
morbos acutos and lethales, vel imprimis numeratur, gravia Symptomata, and
pericula secum adfert, and morbus est gravissimus: A Pleurisy is called in
Greek Pleuritis from the part affected, to wit, the Pleura or Side; In Latin
it is called the Rib, or Side-Disease; and it is an Inflammation of the Membrane
that covers the Ribs within, which is called Pleura; Amongst acute and mortal
Diseases a Pleurisy is especially reckoned, it brings with it grievous and
dangerous Symptoms, and is a most grievous Disease. A Pleurisy then is a most
dangerous Disease when Mr. Loss cures it; but when Alius Medicus cures it, it is
a Benign Pleurisy.

The Nature of an Acute Disease consists in two things, in its being a great
Disease, and in its moving nimbly with vehemence and danger. Young Mrs. Moore's
Fever was peracute, putrid, continual, worse every night, it had joined with it
an Inflammation of an internal Part, next neighbor to the Heart. It was
occasioned by Choler, in a Bilious thin Body, it caused bad Symptoms and
threatened death; and if notwithstanding all this, it must pass for one of Mr.
Loss his Benign Pleurisies, so let it.

Mr. Loss his Judgment of the Cause of this Patient's Pleurisy, Examined.
THE Conjunct Cause of her Pleurisy was Inflamed Blood. The Antecedent-Causes
were of two sorts, some did cause the Blood to be inflamed, as her Plethora
quoad vires, and her Cacochymia: Some did cause her inflamed Blood to fall upon
her left Side, as the the weakness and debility thereof, that Side being
weakened first by an Issue, and afterward by an Afflux of Humors causing a
soreness in her left Breast some years before her sickness. The Procatarctick
Causes were her being obnoxious to Catarrhs, her Choleric Constitution, her
over-heating her Blood by play, and her drinking cold Beer whilst she was hot;
that which Sennertus takes especial notice of for a Cause of a Pleurisy. But
Mr. Loss mentions no other Cause, but an External only, her catching cold by
walking forth late in the Evening, in an Autumnal cold Season, with her Breasts
naked, as is the manner of most Noble Virgins.

This is but a vulgar account, any one that comes in to see such a sick
Patient, can readily suggest that She might get her sickness by taking some
cold, and being too late out in the Evening.

It is too general an account, and although it gives sometimes very good
satisfaction unto ordinary Persons, that understand little of Physic or
Philosophy; yet, how will any wise man acquiesce, if asking after the Cause of
a Particular Disease, his Physician tells him he has got cold, which is in a
manner a general Cause of all Diseases?

It is an illogical Inference; She got cold, therefore She got a Pleurisy: for
we may predicate of an Individual, the Species, and next Genus, and so upwards;
For example, Peter is a Man, A Man is an Animal, an Animal is a Corporeal
Substance, etc. But we cannot invert this order, and go downwards, saying, A
Corporeal Substance is an Animal, An Animal is a Man, A Man is Peter. Thus we
may say, That a Pleurisy may be caused by catching of cold, but we cannot say,
catching of cold is the cause of a Pleurisy; because a Genus cannot be
confined to one Species, and catching of cold might as well have caused other
Diseases, as a Pleurisy.

The Consideration of such a Cause, is useless to a Physician, he can make no
benefit of it: for, Causa transiens non indicat, because it is one of the
conditions of an Indicans, that it be Manens in corpore, for how else can it
indicate its ablation from thence? What though this young Lady did catch cold?
that was past before Mr. Loss was sent for; and the need a Patient has of a
Physician is to find out and remove the Cause that does actually cause the
sickness, not to talk of that which is already gone.

If Mr. Loss had understood, that the division of Causes of Diseases into
External and Internal, is an error among some Physicians; because it may so
fall out, that against the Rules of Logic, both Members of the division may be
predicated* of one and the same thing; as when a Dagger is stuck into the
flesh, He would not have called the cold Air an External, but a Procatarctick
Cause of her Disease.

Besides all that has been said, this only account which Mr. Loss gives of
this Patient's Sickness, is also false; either this young Lady was too hard for
this old Gentleman, by concealing her over-heating her self at play, and then
drinking cold Beer; or else our trusty Observator, according unto his manner of
seeing and proving things in his Observations, never troubles himself to
examine the business, but easily takes upon trust, what as easily he puts forth
in Print.

But suppose we that what he says were true, let us a little dive into his
profound Philosophy.

I know this old Gentleman is no friend to the new Philosophers, he had rather
that those that went before him should be accounted wiser, than any that come
after him. Antiquity he reverenceth, but he does not consider that the younger
generation of Men is the older World; and that as all things else here below,
so Knowledge and Learning cannot but grow and increase by time and the daily
experiments and inventions by which it is improved and advanced; or else (for
which I see no reason) he must conclude that Learning is past its Zenith, and
upon the decline. I shall not therefore trouble him with questioning whether
Heat be an Accident or a Substance: I mean that Heat, which he says so easily
causes a Pleurisy, by melting the Humors; but I ask him in what Subject it
is? It Is plain that he means by Cold, the cold Air, that which caused as he
says this Gentlewoman's sickness; and therefore I presume he means by Heat the
hot Air. But how hot Air can insinuate it self into, and single out the Pleura,
a membranous and colder part, and yet there by melting the Humors easily cause
a Pleurisy, I cannot easily understand; I acknowledge it may help to increase
Choler in the Body, which abounding may take fire and inflame the Blood: and I
can easily imagine that some of this inflamed Blood may strike to the Pleura
and inflame that; but then this is contrary to what Mr. Loss would have, for
thus the Fever must needs precede the Pleurisy, whereas he says positively
that the Fever is a Symptom of the Pleurisy, as appears by these words; Sexto
morbi die, cum Febris and reliqua Symptomata cessassent.

If the Humors be melted by the hot Air, then they were not melted before, and
if not, how were they fluid and Humors?

One would think that heat should rather dry up and consume moisture, than make
it more fluid; and that if it did make humors more fluid, they should therefore
the rather pass more easily within their own Vessels, than break forth into the
Pleura: why should hot Air cause a Pleurisy so easily, and not as well a
Phrensy or any other hot Disease? If it causes any other hot Disease as easily
as a Pleurisy, Mr. Loss is but a pittyful Philosopher, that can, or does give,
none other but a general Cause for a particular Effect.

If he means by melting of the Humors, nothing else but their rarefying by the
ingress of hot Air, whereby they cannot now be contained within their former
bounds, what directs them to break forth in the Pleura? and what Philosophy
calls the rarefaction of humors, their Colliquation? Frigus humores compingens,
Pleuritidem facile introducere solet. Cold (says he) easily causes a
Pleurisy by compacting the Humors.

Who can imagine that the cold ambient Air can compact and congeal the Humors
in a living Body, especially in the Breast or Side, parts so neighboring unto
the Heart? Why did not the extreme parts grow rigid and stiff with cold at the
same time? how can the Humors be supposed to be an Ice, and the solid parts yet
be warm and move? How can such a cold do less than quite stifle the insensible
transpiration, especially in the part most exposed thereunto? and if so, why
did not her naked Breasts gangrene, the natural heat being wholly suffocated?
And besides, who can imagine that a freezing cold should cause a melting
inflammation, especially in a cold Membranous part? His meaning sure was, that
the cold by constipation of the pores, by accident caused heat. But this falls
out then only, when the pores of the Skin are lessened, but not quite shut with
the cold; but such a cold as can congeal the Humors within, must needs quite
shut the pores without, and so stifle and put out the innate heat, not raise it
into a flame.

Lastly, Who can understand the reason of this Antithesis? As Heat, says Mr.
Loss, makes the Humors get out of their Vessels into the Pleura, by
Colliquation, and so inflames it; so Cold makes them get thither also (for so
they must if they cause a Pleurisy) by Congelation, and also inflames it?

Mr. Loss his Method of Curing her.
IN the Cure of a Disease are two things Considerable.

1. The Method. 2. The Means or Instruments.
The Method is, by attending unto the Indicantia, to find out the Indicata;
what it is that must be intended or designed to be done.

The Means are all those Remedies which will help to bring these things to
pass, whether they belong to Diet, Surgery, or Physic.

Mr. Loss seems to have been a mere Emperick, in respect of the Method he made
use of for this Patient's Cure; as will appear in these three things.

1. He did not concern himself what Part was principally affected, or what was
the principal Disease, it was enough to him She had a Pleurisy.

2. He did nothing material toward the removing of the antecedent Causes, for
he was wholly against bleeding of her by Lancet, and Purging her.

3. All his applications were to a Symptomatical Disease, and without
satisfying first the Indications from the Cause, his first and whole business
was after a few Leeches applied to the Arm, which did not remove the Cause, to
cure the Disease, by his Fomentation and Unction of her Side, his Cataplasm,
Linctus, Tincture, Barley-water, Oil of Sweet-Almonds, Pectoral Decoction, etc.
of all which Medicines he has given us not only a Narrative, but their
Recipes. I do not blame his Medicines, had they been with Art applied; neither
yet do I know any thing extraordinary in them, for which they deserved to have
been printed: But I do blame his playing the Emperick, and his labor in vain,
attempting to cure a Disease, without first removing the Cause; and I do say,
that for ought I know, if no other Method had been made use of for her Cure,
this Patient must have perished.

The Event of what he did; I shall refer unto the now following Preface of the
Second Case.

The Preface Mr. Loss makes unto the Second Case.
THese things being most diligently administered, by the blessing of God, and
the cooperation of Nature, this Damsel was freed from the pain in her Side and
spitting of Blood.

One would almost laugh at this Gentleman, to see with how much gravity and
formality, he sets forth at large, his doing of little, or not much to the
purpose, for this his Patient. But I dare not make sport of, or laugh at his
mockery, in calling as it were God and Nature to witness an untruth, that She
was freed from the pain in her Side; whereas Mrs. Moore says positively, the
pain in her Side continued very violent.

Some one may think perhaps that this untruth was some mistake, or came
some-ways inconsiderately from him; but it would be strange that he should
light by accident upon that, than which nothing though designed and plotted,
could make more for his purpose: for if She was freed from the pain in her
Side, the Reader takes it easily for granted, that her Pleurisy, her Disease,
was gone; and then he easily consents that the sending for Alius Medicus might
be upon such an account as Mr. Loss tells him; and that Alius Medicus was
guilty of the faults are laid to his charge, and that he did nothing to the
Cure, for that was done before he was sent for; and that what he did was
without Method or Reason, and done only because he would seem to do something.
Thus the Relation of the Event in the first Case, is a very convenient Preface
to the second; for it argues the great Art and Skill made use of, besides the
blessing of God upon it, to the honor of Mr. Loss who so speedily and safely
had wroughte Cure; and e contra, the ignorance and madness of Alius Medicus,
that should bleed and purge a Patient that had no need of either, but was
recovered before.

The main business Mr. Loss had to do in this Preface, was, how he should so
handsomely and conveniently bring Alius Medicus upon the stage, as to rob him of
the credit he had got of this Cure, and to take it to himself, and cast dirt
upon him. First therefore, he gives the Reader a plausible story of what he had
done, and for the better credit of the business, he tells him what intentions
he followed to cure this Pleurisy, and sets down also the Recipes of his
Medicines; both which, an indifferent Physician might have easily translated
from many Books, that write the Praxis of a Pleurisy, into his own. Then he
boldly and positively says, that by these means She was in effect cured: but
thinking with himself that it might be objected, Why then was another Physician
sent for? Surely so discreet a Lady as this Patient's Mother is, and held so by
me that know her, will not easily be thought one so empty in the brain, though
full in the purse, as to take hastily a Journey from Spargrave to Dorchester, and
after She comes there, to send for another Physician, when her Daughter was
recovered.

To Obviate this, he is forced to recede a little from his first brag; and to
acknowledge that notwithstanding all that he had done, there remained yet a
Cough, but this must not be thought to argue any substance of the Disease in
being, which should make this shadow or Symptom; and therefore, lest this
should take from his Cure, he takes from it, and says, Though there was a
Cough, yet it was not very troublesome. And yet to remove this forsooth, it
pleased the Mother, who might do what She pleased in this Case, to send for
another Physician. But he seems to fear and doubt that this motive was yet too
weak by it self, and therefore he strengthens it with a double prop: on the one
side he suggests, that the Mother was afraid of a Consumption, but he tells the
Reader, this was a needless fear; and indeed the Mother says plainly that at
that time She had no fear of a Consumption: on the other side, he says, that
the Mothers sending for another Physician, was because of the Instigation of
her Uncle. Now what else can be the meaning of all this winding and turning,
this studied and forged preamble, but only to ward off and fence himself from
having the Imposture discovered of his pretended Cure, as also the
dissatisfaction of the Mother in what he had done; which might reflect either
want of Care, or Art in him: and lastly, to bring in with advantage the scroll
of Accusations against Alius Medicus, who yet (say some) must not answer them.

Objections Answered against my writing this Book.
Obj. 1.
IT is not seemly for one Physician to write against another.

Resp. Let the blame therefore lie at his door that began first; se defendendo,
self-preservation is the other's sufficient excuse. It was very unseemly in
him, especially without any warning, or just provocation, to publish me in
print for one that had neither Skill in a Disease, nor did understand the
Method of Cure; but is it unseemly for me to show my skill and method, if I
have any? No man can deny, but that it was very unhandsom in him, to throw dirt
upon me, either privately, or publicly; and is it any unhandsomness in me to
wipe it off? He ought not to have vented slanders; but will any one say, that I
ought not to vindicate my Reputation, or that it is unseemly, because by doing
it I write against another Physician? which of necessity I must do, if I will
write for my self. I confess, it is with much regret that I come forth at all,
and I have given my Adversary the advantage of some seeming reproach, though it
deserves rather commendation, that my Answer was not out sooner; it might have
been, but my unwillingness to write against him that I knew was obnoxious, made
me wait many months, to see if he would use any means to prevent me, but in
vain; and therefore now at last that I do write against him, it is the less
unseemly. And since there is no Profession whatsoever, that can boast of all
its Professors, that they are good, I hope no man will think the worse of
Physic if by this Book I make discovery, that even amongst Physicians
themselves, there are some sometimes sick of this Epidemick Disease; whose
cause yet does not belong unto the Art they study, but unto the corrupt and
depraved nature of mankind in general.

Obj. 2. Wise Men love neither to be Pattern, nor Patron of any Controversy.
Resp. As I need not fear my being at any time Patron, so, all things seriously
considered, I hope I am not yet a Pattern of any Controversy; for, if I had not
thought, that what I have writ is so home and plain, and so fully proved, as
probably to end our Controversy, I would not have printed it.

Though of necessity I have touched upon some points controverted in Physic,
(or else I could not have answered his Accusations) yet matters of Fact are
that which I contend for with Mr. Loss; whether he or I speak Truth in what we
have writ; Matters of Dispute are endless and foolish: and I have so little
pleasure in beating the Air, and so small confidence of my opinion being better
than his, or any others, that I should hardly have shript Cross or Pile for the
Mastery in a wrangling dispute; much less should I have taken these pains
merely to have spun out a fine thread, wherewith to make a Cob-web to catch
Flies.

Obj. 3. Mr. Loss having not named me, I needed not to have been concerned at
his Book.
Resp. He neither does, nor can deny he meant me, if therefore I should shufle
off my Answer, upon this frivolous pretense, Prudens Sciens vivus vidensque
pereo, I see the Snare, and go into it, and am willingly taken in the very Gin
that he has set for me. This is it that he would be at: he would have me
beholden, to him forsooth, to save my credit, who seems to me the only
Adversary that has made it his business to ruin it. Alius Medicus is a
Vizard-Mask of his making, and he wishes none other than that I should be so
much a Fool, as to wear it, for when he please he can look under it, and when
he lists he can pull it off, and discover who this Alius Medicus is.

But because Mr. Loss himself has made this Objection, and several of his
Friends at Dorchester; I shall be somewhat large in my Answer thereunto.

Had Mr. Loss named Truth, and not named Me, I should have had good reason to
have acknowledged his great civility, in suffering my guiltiness to have passed
incognito; but if any one commends his charity, for thinking thus to conceal my
reproach; let him if he can, excuse his folly in so doing. He names the
Patient, and her Parentage, the Town, yea the House where She lay sick; and
with what wit could he imagine to cover me with this Net, which every one could
look through? He should not have meddled with me at all; for, faintly to shadow
me over, was the only way to make the people the more inquisitive, and the
discovery the more acceptable; for public slanders, as well as private
whisperings, never spread more, than when they are delivered by way of secret.

If this Alius Medicus were as much a stranger to me, as is he whom I never saw
or heard of, yet being I am able to prove, that the Matters of Fact whereof he
is accused, are false, and that the errors laid against him in his Art, are
false likewise; I ought in charity to him, and out of a just indignation
against Mr. Loss, to write against him, if it were but only to defend Truth,
and to be virtuously angry with Falsehood, and with so base an act and injury,
as is not sufferable to be offered, no not to the shadow of another Physician,
though he had in him no substance to defend himself. But I find that Alius
Medicus is very near me, and my very good friend; one that I am confident would
have scorned to have dealt thus with Mr. Loss; and therefore I have no reason
to see him injured, neither ought I to desert his Cause.

If Mr. Loss was so civil to name me Alius Medicus, I have likewise been as
civil to put forth my Book under the same Name, and I think the Courtesy of
each is much alike.

There are many reasons why, out of respects unto himself, Mr. Loss would not
name me.

It would have been too gross and palpable, and have smelt over-rankly of his
own malice, if he should have told the World by Name which of his Neighbors
was so ignorant in his Art.

It would have some-ways necessitated him to have named my Degree also, with
which probably he did not care to honor me; because himself had never taken
any; and formerly said so of me also.

It would have been too high a provocation, not to have been suffered without a
Reply. It puts courage even into a very Coward to fight, when there is no way
to escape; lest therefore I should be forced to answer, and might discover his
falsehood and dishonesty, having done my work for me as he thought, that he
might hear no more of me nor be troubled with me, he craftily leaves open a
Rat-hole, for me and my credit dishonourably to creep out at, and this was in
not-naming me.

It would have made his Accusations, which probably he knew too weak to bide a
Test, more strictly examined, and enquired into; whereas laying them against an
ignotum Caput, they are better passed over, and easier consented unto.

It might have disobliged others as well as me; worthy Gentlemen, Justices of
the Peace, and Persons of good Repute and Estate, many of them in and about
Dorchester, to whom I have had the honor to be related by the Marriage of my
Wife, and for whose sakes, ( not leaving the City, before that first left me no
house or home) I have been contented with a retired life. I say, some of these,
upon such an open and bare-fac't affront, might not only have been angry with
him, but have sit upon his skirts for the abuse.

But besides all this, I ask any one that would not have me answer Mr. Loss,
whether then, my silence will not more condemn me with most, that have or may
take notice of it, than his speech? for notwithstanding his Accusations, I may
yet answer for my self and be heard; but if I do not appear to answer, I
therein bear witness for him, against my self; either that his Accusations are
true, or that I am as pitiful as he represents me, if having Truth on my side,
I cannot yet answer for my self: for who will not say I would, if that I could?

Obj. 4. Being his Book is in Latin, my Answer ought to be in Latin also.
Resp. This I confess has been objected unto me not only by Mr. Loss (in his
Latin Epistle to me, which I have printed, where he sticks not to tell me in a
manner to my face (as he has also vapored over others) that I cannot write
Latin) but by others also: To whom I reply; besides what I have said in my
Epistle Dedicatory, That I had rather that any one who please, should think me
not able to write Latin, (because I know I could have done it when I was but
yet a Kings-Scholar at Westminster,) than that any Englishman should so much
as hear of such Accusations against me in print, for my ignorance in the
faculty I profess, and not be able to read a full answer unto him in English.

It Is true, to write Latin well is an accomplishment very desirable and
commendable, and that by which Mr. Loss I think has principally got the credit
of being a Scholar, sending abroad upon all occasions his Latin Epistles, to
such as he thought might understand better than answer them; and hereby
publishing himself, for no low hedg-Doctor, or pitiful pretender to Physic,
that knows not well perhaps how to write true English; but for an Highdutch-Man
rather, that can write true Latin. But for all this, I say, that it is not the
Sibboleth or Shibboleth, of a Scholar or no Scholar, to be able to write Latin,
witness any one that please to read this Gentleman's Latin Medicinal
Observations. Depth of Learning has not always, yea, it seldom has readiness
of utterance, and (...) and Eloquence, are often wanting to the profoundest
Clarks.

A grave Professor of Physic, that was my Tutor beyond Sea, told me, That he
had once a Patient which in her Sickness when the heat of her Fever had
elevated her Spirits, talked so elegantly and learnedly about various subjects,
as they came into her fantasy, that he went many times on purpose to sit by*
and hear her, who when she grew well again, was a very Dolt. And which is yet
stranger, I am told of one in Dorset-shire, that in a Fever spoke a Language
never understood before, nor since, nor then I think: and look, as I am not
able to give a full and rational account of these instances, no more can I
describe that particular Crasis or Temperament of Brain, whereby Germans do
generally more naturally as it were write and speak Latin. And look as Poeta
nascitur non fit, so I am prone to think some are born more adapt to this or
that Language than others. But when all is done, Language is the Shell only,
and not the Kernel of Learning, from which it differs as much, as speaking from
doing. And since Mr. Loss has as it were sent me a challenge by scandalizing
me in print, for one ignorant in my faculty, and guilty of several errors; I
think it is of right due to me to make choice of my Weapon; and why should I
choose that which he should be most skilful at, and contend with a
Schoolmaster about a piece of Latin? it will serve my turn, if in any Language
I can be too hard for him. Yet even in Latin also I have promised to him an
Answer to his Reply, if it does deserve it; for these things I write in
English, deserve not to be told in Latin to Scholars, they are so ordinary: In
the mean time, whilst the Innocence of my Cause makes me not ashamed to plead
it before all, even any one that can but understand English; let Mr. Loss brag,
that he has covered the guiltiness of his, by writing only unto some English,
in Latin.

Obj. 5. Writing English, I needed not to have spoke so plain
Resp. If I do it not to the purpose, it is to no purpose what I do: The
Dorchester-World will not believe any thing amiss in their Saint and Oracle,
who had his Tripos near forty years amongst them, unless it be spoken so
plain, that neither he nor they can excuse it, and perhaps not then neither.
And Mr. Loss, if fair means would have brought him to a private Treaty, and a
giving me satisfaction for the wrongs he had done me, I should never have
attempted it by storm, and to take what satisfaction I could my self, by coming
forth in Print.

Some Men when they err, they do but nod a little and forget themselves, such
are easily awaked with a word or two, and they come to themselves quietly and
without noise: but others, like this Gentleman, are Lethargick and Apoplectical
in sin; and there is no making of such sensible of their faults, without
Incisions and Causticks; ad ignem enim and ferrum confugiendum est: When such a
Viper stings a man in his credit and reputation, I know no better Cure, than to
catch him if one can, and pound him, and clap him to the sore, until he has
sucked back and reimbibed the Poison, which himself first spit forth.

Obj. 6. After I have done, Incharitableness and Envy will be the Censure of my
undertaking; and more strife and trouble the fruit of it.
Resp. If it proves so, I shall be sorry, though it is not my fault, that
People will censure as they please: But let me Instance a little against such
censure of my being uncharitable in this undertaking.

Is an honest Traveller uncharitable, that pursuing a dishonest Thief that
robbed him of the best of his goods, such as he had no mind to lose; brings him
to open shame and condign punishment?

Is a Defendent uncharitable, if by telling his Story, and producing his
witness to clear himself, the injurious Plaintiff, that perhaps has passed many
years for a very honest and godly Man, be proved to be quite another in open
Court?

Is a Surgeon uncharitable, that finding an Imposthume ripe, Lanceth it;
because forsooth by this means the corruption comes forth, appears, and shows
it self, even to the nauseousness of the Beholders?

If any of these be uncharitable, then am I. But if this Gentleman suffers no
more than his guilt deserves, if he falls into that very Pit which he dug
for another; if with his own hands he has pulled down upon his own head, that
mischief which no man intended him, and which no man could have brought upon
him, but with his own assistance; if climbing higher than his reach, he has
missed his footing and got a fall; if talking too eagerly and too open-mouthed
against another, he has let slip the bead and his Vizard-Mask be fallen off:
If by robbing the neigbouring Bees of their Credit, sweeter unto them than
Honey, he has got a Swarm about his Ears, and whilst some others buz only and
strike at him, some one perchance Stings him; Whom has he to thank for all
this but himself? For my part, I do not think that Charity unto my Neighbor
does in all cases oblige me to be uncharitable unto my self, and suffer my own
Reputation unvindicated; what Charity requires of me, to sacrifice my Credit
and my Practice, as an Offa unto Cerberus, as a morsel to be devoured, and
eaten up by the envy of an ill-natured Person?

Charity says I must not vaunt my self, but must I not therefore vindicate my
self?

I must think no evil, what, not when I see it in legible characters and in
print? When I hear it, and know it, and feel it?

I must be without dissimulation; therefore as real Love needs no Counterfeit,
so real Hatred of evil Practices needs no cover, and I publicly own it.

I must not seek my own, not by a huckstering kind of way projecting for gain,
without love to virtue; but may I not seek my own when it is lost, or keep my
Credit from his ravishing, that would unworthily wrest it from me, and deflour
it?

I must bear all things, that ought to be born, not that can be born; Charity
is not an (...), a sottish insensibility, but a meek and well-grounded
suffering of such things as are an exercise of virtue: but what virtue is it I
pray, to let another stab me, or rob me, or defame me, if it be in my power to
help my self?

I must not revenge -- quippe minuti
Semper and infirmi animi est exiguique voluptas,
Vltio.
Juv.

But I suppose such a Revenge is only spoken against, when I do another hurt,
and my self none other good than that which results from the poor and low
satisfaction, of having done another hurt. But had it not been to have
vindicated my self, I would never have ventured my credit to have hazarded his.

I must not envy. But here I presume ought to be remembered, that there is a
double Envy, the one a Virtue, the other a Vice, and yet both are compounded of
sorrow and hatred.

The Verruous Envy is a Natural Passion implanted in us by the God of Nature,
whereby we condole the undeserved sufferings of a good Man, or the immerited
prosperity of a wicked Man; and this is a Branch of Justice, for whatsoever is
undeserved is unjust; this is properly that which is called indignation, and
this sort of Envy I own.

The Wicked Envy is a sorrow at, and a hatred of another man's happiness, be it
never so much deserved, or honestly acquired. And from this let Mr. Loss quit
himself if he can, in what he has writ in this Observation concerning me.

Touching the further strife and trouble which my writing this Book may
occasion, it will be I hope only between Mr. Loss and Me; and as he likes of
it, so am I likewise resolved to comport with it.

2. His Narrative of the Second Case
THE charge that he brings in against Alius Medicus, is either for 1. What he
said; or for 2. What he did.


The Particulars against what he said are three.

1. That he accused all that had been done.

2. That he blamed in particulrr the neglect of bleeding her by Lancet.

3. That he should say, the bleeding of her by Leeches was of no moment.

The Particulars against what he did, are these that do relate either to his
Bleeding or Purging of her.

In his Bleeding of her, he is condemned in no less than all the four
Requisites unto the right administration of that noble Remedy. As;

1. That the Time was not seasonable; for he did it on the sixth day of the
Disease, when the Fever and other Symptoms were gone.

2. That the Place was mistaken, it should have been in the Left Arm, but he
did it on the Right.

3. That the Manner was Erroneous; it ought to have been done by Leeches, and
he did it by Lancet.

4. That the Quantity of the Blood taken away, was either too much or too
little.

In his Purging of her were these faults.

1. That he did Purge her at all; for he was against it.

2. That he Purged her on the seventh day.

3. That the Purge was so slight a business, as is Powder of Sena.

3. His Judgment on the Second Case.
HAving seriously considered, gravely and judiciously weighed all those bad
Symptoms abovementioned in the Narrative, Mr. Loss passes a double Judgment
upon Alius Medicus.

1. That the Disease he was sick of, was the Simples; for he had neither Method
nor Reason for what he did.

2. That the External Cause, was, Ne nihil fecisse videretur. The Motive was,
that he might not seem to do nothing.

The Truth is, This Gentleman lost the reputation of curing this Patient, both
in the Family where She lay sick, and with her Mother and other Relations; and
therefore to heal himself, he makes Alius Medicus to be sick, and this he does
in Latin, which he wot well few or none of them that knew my Innocence could
understand. His design seems to have been to make out to Scholars, the
unreasonableness of their opinion who attributed the Cure to Alius Medicus, and
did not side with him in his Judgment; for this purpose he patcheth up a
Relation according to his fantasy, concealing some things, and forging
others, that it might pass plausibly with Persons that knew no more of the
Case, than what he has set down: and I must confess ingenuously, that if I
were my self a stranger to these matters, and had known no more than what Mr.
Loss has told, I could not deny, but that Alius Medicus must pass for an Ass;
for what less can he be, that practices (...), and sine ratione. But what an
Ass Mr. Loss has found him, let him hereafter publish at large. In the Interim
let him read over that of the Wise Man: He that is first in his own Cause
seems just, but his Neighbor comes and searches him out.

Touching the Procatarctick Cause of the ilness of Alius Medicus, Mr. Loss
fetches it from one of the six Non-naturals, his passionate desire to appear
to do something, and his great unwillingness to seem to do nothing.

Ne nihil fecisse videretur, has in the belly of it the spawn of many other
accusations; as if Alius Medicus was so covetous, that rather than not let in a
Fee into his own Purse, he would let out his Patient's Blood, though the Fever
and other Symptoms, and Pleurisy were gone; and rather hazard her Life, than
her Money: As if Alius Medicus had such base and low thoughts of this Patient's
Friends, who were nobly generous, that he feared being sent for, that if he did
nothing he should have nothing: As if he were in a manner Knavishly cunning;
some slying report or other had encouraged Mrs. Moore to send for him, and lest
she should repent herself, by finding that he was a Person that could neither
say nor do, craftily he resolves upon both, and says this and that against Mr.
Loss, and does this and that, and tampers with the Patient when there was no
need, for she was cured before: As if, as cunning as he would seem, he was in
truth but a simple fool that would venture Gold against Counters, his Patient's
Life and his own Credit, to have the Reputation of a Cure which was wrought
before he was sent for: As if he were cross-grained and self-willed, and loved
to be opposite; Galen and Mr. Loss said, she must not be bled by Lancet; but
therefore he will have her bleed by Lancet, and put her to the trouble and
smart of it, without any need: As if he were very unhandsome, if not right-down
dishonest toward Mr. Loss. He good Man, with great diligence and lucky success
upon his industry, had upon the matter cured this Patient; the Mother indeed,
out of a mistaken fear of a Consumption, and to gratify the importunity and
instigation of her Uncle, did send for another Physician; but there was nothing
for him to do, and yet to lessen Mr. Loss his reputation, and cunningly to to
share in the Cure, if not also to run away with all the credit of it; Alius
Medicus under a pretense of doing something, unworthily undoes what Mr. Loss
had done, and no question had injured the Patient as well as the Physician; but
that her strength of Body, and his strength of Wit and Parts, scorned it.

I do not doubt but Mr. Schoolmaster thought that this was a Rod made up of
many Twigs, a Whip of several Cords, and that with it he has lashed and paid
off Alius Medicus to the purpose. But the best is he does not feel it smart
yet, for in these Mr. Loss has only beaten the Air and himself. Ne nihil
fecisse videretur, in all these senses is still senseless by being false. -- has
Lossie Culpas,
Emendare omnes una litura potest.
Mauger these many faults, with ease a Pen,
By one cross dash, sets all to rights again.
And I know, that when Alius Medicus was sent for, there was great necessity of
doing something, and that all that Mr. Loss had done before was in effect
nothing.

4. His Relation of the Event.
HE could not help it, he was forced to pass this favorable report of what
Alius Medicus had done, that it did the Patient no harm: for he could not well
invent what harm to name it; and he thought he could not easily be believed,
because in less than a Week, the Patient that was thought dying when Alius
Medicus was sent for, was so well as to come down into the dauncing-School, and
her Mother carried her home in the Country, where for ought I know she has
been well ever since.

But Mr, Loss is by no means willing that the Reader should mistake this Event,
as if it were caused by any thing that Alius Medicus did; and therefore he has
provided a treble Bolt and double Lock to shut him out from any such
Interpretation, as is observable in these five particulars following.

1. He Benigns the Disease, and is content rather to abate a little of the brag
of his own Cure than that this Patient's recovery should be an occasion whereby
Alius Medicus should by any body be thought worthy of being taken notice of.
The Nature, says he, of this Disease was Benign, and it was so mild and
gentle, that in a manner it went off of it self.

2. He attributes the main of that Cure which was unto himself, and that before
he makes any mention of Alius Medicus.

3. He will have the great Sweat, which indeed perfected the Cure, to be
spontaneous; forgetting that it was occasioned by his allowing her to drink
Beer after her purging, against my order, and that there-upon she fell sick
again, and that by Bleeding and Purging a great portion of the burden which she
groaned under being removed, Nature became Mistress of the Disease, and drove
the remains forth by Sweat.

4. He passes a direct sentence against Alius Medicus, that all his
proceedings were Immethodical and Irrational, enough to satisfy the Reader
fully, that he had no share in the Cure.

5. He magnifies the strength of Nature in this young Lady; had it not been for
this, Alius Medicus was so far from doing good, that he had done her hurt. It
seems he would have hurt her but she would not be hurt. It seems also that by
continuation of her sickness, whereas others grow weaker and weaker, until they
be upon recovery; she wonderfully grew stronger and stronger: for in the
beginning of her sickness Mr. Loss says she was too weak to bear bleeding by
Lancet; and yet on the sixth day, though it was done Irrationally, her strength
was greater than to prize it. On the seventh by no means would he admit, if he
could have helped it, that she should be purged; no question he thought it very
dangerous for so weak a Body, and in such a Disease, and at such a time; but
afterward, notwithstanding such mad bleeding, and purging, and such voluntary
large sweating, enough one would think to have made a well body sick; she was
so strong, she contemned all, and of sick grew well. If here be not
Contradictions, let the Reader judge.

5. Alius Medicus his Method of Cure.
HE knows but of two ways of Answering his Adversary.

1. To produce sufficient Witness to prove Matters of Fact.

2. To Answer unto every particular Accusation with Reason and Art.

It has been a custom with me, especially in Patients or Diseases of more than
ordinary remark, to keep a Diary of my Practice, partly for my Patients sake,
that I may the better understand what should be done for them, or what at any
time I have done that they found good in; partly for my own sake, that I might
have the surer foundation to build my experience upon in Physic. But I little
dreamt of making this further advantage in my Journal of this Case of young
Mrs. Moore, as by it to help to prove particulars very material unto my own
Case; and to satisfy both my self and others that what I depose, is not out of
my Memory, whose unfaithfulness might betray me unto mistakes, but out of my
Papers, which I then writ, even the day when I was first called unto this
Patient, which was Thursday the 29 th of April 1669. Examining them and Mr.
Loss his Book, I find our Notes did not agree, and although I do not know why
my Papers produced, should not be as Authentic for me, as is a Shop-book for a
Tradesman; yet in this Case, I thought it more prudent to get some other
Testimony, than to confide in the evidence of my own Papers alone. For I did
not know but Mr. Loss might have taken Notes too, and if so, what stranger
could judge whether his or mine were true? Knowing therefore that it would be to
no purpose to go about to build without a foundation, and to vindicate my self
from his slanders, without I could produce sufficient witness for matters of
Fact; I bethought my self of writing this Letter to Mrs. Moore to whom I have
Dedicated my Book, because she is a witness not to be excepted against, as
appears by what I have said of her in my Epistle Dedicatory.

Madam,
I Humbly beg your pardon, if for my satisfaction I give you the trouble of
returning me a particular Answer unto these few Queries concerning your
Daughter's being Sick at Dorchester.

Is her Name Elizabeth?

Was she sick in Autumn?

Was her pain in her Side and her Cough in a manner gone when I was sent for?

Was your sending for me, for fear of a Consumption, and at the instance of
your Uncle?

Did I accuse what Mr. Loss had done?

Was her Fever and other Symptoms gone when I Bled her?

Was the Purge I gave her Powder of Sena?

Your Resolves unto these Questions will highly oblige

Madam, Your very humble Servant.


THE ANSWER.
SIR,
YOU may well think me very ungrateful, that I have so long been silent; had I
received your Letter sooner than last night, I should have before this time
answered your reasonable desire.

My Daughter's Name, which the Lord made you an Instrument of preserving from
the Grave, is Bridget.

Her Sickness to my best remembrance, was either in March or April.

The pain in her Side continued extremely violent, her Cough as those that have
a touch of a Pleurisy continued very much, in so much as I was highly
displeased that She had never had any Pectoral drinks; and I ordered the
Apothecary's Servant to make some and bring it me, before I got any rest my
self.

My sending for you, was not to satisfy my Uncle; but to discharge my duty: not
being satisfied with what had been done before your coming.

I did not at all at that time fear a Consumption.

I must profess you never to my knowledge Censured Mr. Loss, or accused him of
any thing: but did very modestly desire me not to employ you, telling me you
feared what would happen.

I know you met with some discouragements by language, but you granted my
request in taking no notice of it.

The day when you Bled her, She was so ill, as I and all the Family despaired
of her Life; and I remember I asked both your self and Mr. Loss, if no more
were to be done? you told me, that unless a Purge relieved her, you could not
tell what to say; only you had hopes that the Scurvy was much of her Distemper,
and that gave you hopes that she might do very well again, if Mr. Loss would
consent unto a gentle one, that you might try her. He was very stiffly against
it, and I remember I thus said, I will try it, my Child is a dead Child in your
account, and I will do my utmost for her.

The Purge was a small quantity of Holland powder, with half an ounce of Manna
(in a draught of Pectoral Decoction) Mr. Loss was so angry that he went from me
and left her when she had taken it, which was no small trouble to me; you
stayed with me. Within half an hour she fell into a quiet sleep, and slept one
hour and a half; she then awoke, and vomited and purged, and then slept again;
and so after that she had two or three stools more: she presently revived, but
being admitted to drink a draught of Beer with a Toast, (this she has told me
since her Letter, was by Mr. Loss his order) grew ill again for two or three
hours, then fell into a very great Sweat, and did never burn after, or had any
light speeches; and her Vrin was much better. I bless the Lord I brought her
home with me in one Week: She has confessed since, that she got her Distemper,
by an extraordinary overmuch heating of her Blood at Play, and drinking cold
Beer. She is yet alive, and with my self gives you her thankful service for
your very great Care of her.

Your very Humble Servant, Elizabeth Moore.


Alius Medicus his Answer unto all Mr. Loss his Accusations. To the First.
HE After the manner of many others, Accusing all that had been done.

I conceive that there may be two Reasons, why he has set this in the front of
all his other Accusations.

1. That he might imitate the craft of some Females, who cry Whore first, and
thereby make me the Aggressor and first beginner of the quarrel; which is a
matter of no small consequence in the Case.

2. That disarming me of my Innocence, he might usher in a more easy belief of
my being guilty of what he had to say against one that was so undeserving a
Person.

Forasmuch as Backbiting and Slander, were the true impulsive Cause that drove
me with indignation to write this Book; not only against this Gentleman, but
all other high, and yet low-spirited false and selfish Physicians, that are
guilty of this uncharitable and base Practice. Before I give my direct Answer
to this first Accusation, I shall take leave;

1. To Aggravate the fault, and show a little its unhandsomness and
unworthiness.

2. To give some Instances of Mr. Loss his thus dealing with me; whom yet he
thus accuses.

The unhandsomness of any one Physician's Backbiting or Slandering another
Physician.
It was but a little since urged, that it is unseemly for one Physician to
write against another; but how great is the unseemliness when they Backbite and
slander one another?

To speak ill of another behind his back;

It is a cowardly trick, it comes behind a man and strikes him, as those do
that are fuller of malice than manhood; with this advantage, a Coward may
conquer the stoutest Champion, and be sole Victor when he thus fights alone;
though indeed this is not to fight but to destroy.

It is a Treacherous perfidious Trick, this Gentleman tells me in his Latin
Letter, that he loves me, and honors me, and what not? and yet behind my back,
he not only slights, but slanders me.

An open and barefaced hostility, is like it self, always held commendable,
for its fortitude and valor, strength and prowess; but whisperings and
backbitings are a Treacherous Poison, deadly, but not seen; felt to the purpose
in the evil effects, but not easily found out; for what is delivered as a
secret, must be kept as such; and those that are willing to entertain evil
thoughts of any one, will never go and tell him out of Love, who suggested
them; and if by bandying, it comes about to the ears of him that is slandered,
they that tell it him, probably cannot, at least commonly will not, prove it,
and produce witness for what they hear say: for who will be so faithful as to
give himself the trouble or inconvenience of making the slanderer his Enemy, by
discovering and proving him such to his Face for another's good; for few I
think are so conscientious as to think themselves concerned in their
neighbor's Credit; and that in Charity they are bound when they can, as much
to vindicate his Reputation as their own.

It Is below a Gentleman of any Parts or Abilities. He that can work out his own
Fortune and raise himself, what need he take the advantage-ground to stand upon
another's Ruin?

It Is below a Physician that has but common honesty and ingenuity; his
business is to do what he can toward the saving of his Patient's Life, not to
do what he can toward the stabbing of another Physician's Credit; his Practice
should lead him to the Charity of curing Sick Bodies, not to the
uncharitableness of making Sick Minds, by wounding Men in their Reputation.

It Is infinitely below a Christian, and gives that man the lie, notwithstanding
all his loud noise and Profession of Godliness and Piety, that thus wants
Charity to his Neighbor. It is unreasonable; for why should one condemn
another before he has answered for himself? And what does the Censurer know
what worth may be in the Censured? If he be sure he be ignorant, is it
reasonable therefore to divulg it, and to shame him for that which perhaps he
cannot help? No; Let him rather pity him, and help him up, than stamp upon him
because he is already on the ground; let him commend him in what is
commendable, and let the other alone; he wants buoying up of his Reputation,
which of it self without loading will sink fast enough. If one does not well,
well is it for the other if he can do better in the Profession; let him mend
the others faults what he can, not make them worse: If he be so able, let him
rectify the other in his judgment, that he may do more good in his Calling, not
vilify him that he may be able to do none at all, neither to himself nor
others. And why should it not be as well one man's due to live by his Profession
as another? why should not either, have as good a repute in the World as he
can get? And he that will Labor does he not deserve his Bread? and why should
he not eat it? If either be the better deserving, it should be so in others
opinion, not in their own; and he that has received most should be most
humble, as being most endebted, and as sitting higher than those that deserve
as well. (...). Every sin is an act of Ignorance: and it is pity, but it
cannot be helped, that any Physician should be esteemed of as the better
Physician for being the worser Man; for bragging and vapouring of himself, and
vilifying others; whereby he plainly manifests that he is more wickedly
ignorant.

It is a Villainous Trick. Private Slander is a sort of Civil Gunpowder, that
blows up whole Families at once; He that thus robs a Man of his Practice,
(though I thank God it is not my Case) may sometimes with him famish his Wife
and Children; and he deserves their curses against him, as well as their cries.

Lastly, It is a dangerous Trick both to the Slandered and to the Slanderer.

To the Slandered, because it strikes at his Credit, which is precious, easily
lost, and hardly if ever recovered.

1. It Is Precious; Life is Precious, but a good Name is better than Life,
especially if Livly-hood also goes away with it, as it is many times seen, when
a slander falls upon a Man in a Profession, and for it: for external repute is
many times of far greater consequence than internal worth. How many are there
that with small parts make a great bustle in the World; if their reputation
stands but fair, and they themselves be but industrious in their way, affable
and obliging in their carriage; whereas great parts if they be once cried down
by slanders, they can hardly hold Boat to Wind, or keep their Heads above Water.

2. It Is easily lost. Credit is indeed of great worth, but it is very delicate.
It is like a Flower, delightful to look on, pleasant to smell to, and it may be
of excellent Medicinal use, but it is easily sullied and deflowred, and when
once whithered, for

3. The most part it is gone, and lives no more: It is like a Venice-Glass,
bright and clear; but withal fragile, and if once cracked, though it may be
sodred or plaistred and serve for some use, yet it is despised, undervalued,
and in a manner fit for nothing. Credit to men in a Profession, is like
Virginity to Women; it enhanseth their price and just esteem mightily; but if
it once be lost, how shall it be retrieved?

People are as ready to catch at slanders, as slies are to light upon a gal'd
place; and they have their impudence to come again, be they never so often
beaten off.

When a Slander has once taken Air, (...), who is able to stop or stay its
wildfire from doing mischief? It Is like a poisoned Arrow, if it once fetches
blood, who can keep it from infecting or tainting the Heart? A Man can never
therefore be too careful of his credit, he must keep it as the apple of his
Eye, many times guarding it when there is no hurt near, but always defending it
when it is in danger.

To the Slanderer; for it is forty to one, but sometime or other Murder will
out, and Slander also.

I cannot easily sit down and imagine with my self any Person so impregnable,
so next to impossible to be discovered and convicted, as was Mr. Loss: for
being near forty years a Practiser of Physic in one place, he has had the
opportunity of doing Courtesies and Kindnesses to most about him, and has
thereby gained their good will, and being all along a great Professor of
Religion amongst those that are perhaps really good, and apt to think others so
likewise, he has gained an easy belief, that whatsoever he says is true; And
yet this Oracle of Physic, this piece of starch't Honesty and Religion, to
speak against whom one told me, was all one as to set my shoulders to heave an
house-end, will probably in any place besides Dorchester, and possibly there
also be reputed for another Person than he was taken for; for if I mistake not,
his passions have so at length befooled him, that his (...), his meash of
denying things being now stopped, quia litera scripta manet, what no man else
possibly could have done, he himself I think has effected, in the discovering
of his own slanders, not of me only, but of many other Physicians also, and
Apothecaries.

Instances of Mr. Loss his Slandering of Alius Medicus.
Some six years since I was sent for to a Person of quality not far from
Dorchester, Mr. Loss his Patient; who notwithstanding all that was done for
her, continued many days under the torturing pains of a Scorbutic Colic; I
then told him, that in my opinion it was high time to give her some ease by an
Opiate Medicin, for which she was not yet too weak: he opposed my advice, for
fear forsooth that any thing which had Opium in it should further impact the
Morbifick Matter. I argued that Symptoma urgens did indicate as a Cause
impairing her strength, which without ease given could not well hold out, until
the conjunct cause of the Disease should be removed; and besides, that whilst
Nature was thus on the rack and in a rage, no Physic that should remove the
Peccant Humor, could work or have its due operation; for Nature must first work
on it, and she was at present otherwise employed: but to take off all doubt, I
told him that my purpose was to have respect at once both to her strength and
the Morbifick matter, for I purposed that she should take the Laudanum in a
Purging Bolus; with some reluctance he at last consented; the Event was, that
it calmed the enraged Archaeus, as the Chemists love to speak, and stopped the
violent fermentation of the humors, and having first given her great ease, it
afterward gently carried off good part of the Morbifick Matter, but not all;
for within a small time, the remains, and what was new generated, began again
to ferment afresh, and her Torments did return, insomuch, that early in the
morning whilst we were both of us in bed together, she sent up her servant to
acquaint us with the sadness of her condition; Mr. Loss that had intimated unto
me a little before, that I need not be too diligent, my pay would not be
answerable, speaking thus of a Family he has got many a score Pounds by,
begins now to give me himself for an example of that Rule he would needs
instruct mein; let the Lady therefore toss and tumble and cry out for pain, I
saw he could lie q^ietly and at his ease in bed and let me get up in a cold
Winter-Morning, though it was to mind our Patient's ease more than my own. I
found her very ill, and by such means as were at hand in her Closet next her
Chamber, reposited there I suppose chiefly for charitable uses, she her self by
the blessing of God received such help and so great benefit in this her
extremity, as pleased her so well, that she bade me write down her Name in my
Book for the best Patient I ever had, being a sort of promise that she would be
so: and some hours after, when Mr. Loss was got up and come into her Chamber,
in my hearing, she bade him get out of her sight, she could not endure him; If
this Gentleman, said she, had not arose and come to me, I might have perished
for all you. And this I think was the foundation and first beginning of his
quarrelling with me: For finding how things went, and what an interest I had
gained in this Patient, he begins to think it high time to look about him; and
reflecting with himself that some of her nearest Relations were still his fast
Friends as well as old Acquaintance, for he had been about twenty years a
Physician to the Family, and I never there before; he takes the opportunity of
the next returning of her pains, for neither yet was the Disease wholly
extirpated, and then when grief and sadness had again seized the Family, whilst
I was yet in the house, behind my back he makes his complaint to the Husband
and Mother-in-Law, of my irrational proceedings; insinuating, as if what I had
done that Morning when he kept his bed, was the repeating of some Opiate which
had impacted the Morbifick Matter, and was the cause of these her returning
torments, adding more expressly words to this purpose, that I had already done
more than I could answer, and that if they did not set a spy upon me, I would
kill her, I was so venturous: and accordingly forthwith a spy was set to see
that I meddled not, or mixed any thing for the Patient. No question but this
good man saw in his Bed, if not in his sleep, what Medicines I took down in the
Ladies Closet, and how I ordered them; or else the Nurse guessed at them, and
told him. But a Gentleman of good Credit, whom I can Name, told me, that he
heard him speak to the Husband and Mother, these things he said of me behind my
back. Whereupon I went to her Mother, and told her, that I understood what Mr.
Loss had said of me, and that as her Daughters Life was in hazard, which was
dear to her, so was my Credit also which was dear to me; upon both accounts I
desired her to send for a third Physician. He when he came approved of what I
had done, but the Husband would not believe him, so much had Mr. Loss frighted
him with my venturousness, until that third Physician brought with him the next
day Dr. Willis his Book de Scorbuto then newly come forth, and showed therein
the Medicine in effect which I had given, with this commendation, that nothing
was like it in such a case as this was, to preserve Life; and then the Husband
told me I was in the right, but still my spy was continued upon me, though it is
like the young Lady knew it not, so much I think were her Relations afraid,
lest the Physician, whom yet probably for the Patients sake who applauded me,
they would not let go, should yet hurt her by his stay. But although Mr. Loss
had thus manacled my hands, yet I was not so disingenuous toward him, but
helped to contrive a way how to give him his liberty of acting what he had a
mind to, which otherwise he could not have had. Nothing was so proper in his
Judgment, as Fomenting of the Part; I asked him, in what time he thought this
would give her ease? In four or six hours replied he, if she will lie quiet,
who yet, alas, would hardly lie still so many minutes. But to further his
satisfaction, and to help forward the use of his Fomentation, I used this
Stratagem. The young Lady had found so much ease by the Opiate Medicine, that
nothing now would satisfy her, but she must have Opium. I asked therefore her
Mother, if she had no Pills in the house, and she brought me some
Mastich-Pills, of some whereof I made very little Pills, supposing with my self
that the young Lady would take them for Laudanum; as soon therefore as the
Fomentation was laid on, I gave her a Pill, enjoining her to lie as quiet as
possibly she could, and compose her self to sleep, promising her another Pill,
if within one hour she slept not. Thus beyond all expectation we kept her
tolerably quiet, but not finding the effects of Laudanum, she did find out I
presume the honest cheat, and afterward was disgusted with me also, as I then
thought. Not long after, the Fomentations were again prepared, and that night
Mr. Loss watch't; the next morning very early, her servant comes up and awakes
me, and tells me positively that her Mistress was dead, but however I must rise
and come to her Master, and finding him not in his own Chamber, I went unto his
Ladies, where I find the Mother staying her Daughter's Head, which was quite
limber, with one hand, and with the other rubbing her Temples. Mr. Loss
standing at the bedsfoot, and dooming that this was not Syncope but Mors. I
that was prepossessed with her being dead, though I saw some little life; yet
looking upon it as the glimmering only of the Sun going down: I took her
Husband aside into the next Chamber, using such discourses as I thought I had
been called unto: after a good while returning, and finding all things in their
postures as before; I began to think with my self that the Case was not
altogether desperate, and therefore went about to the other side of the bed and
felt her Pulse, and called up Mr. Loss and told him, if this were the pulse of
a dying Lady, I would never trust pulse more. He owned that it was not so very
bad, but yet this was Mors. I then asked leave, to lay my hand where her pain
use to be, and she started; calling therefore for two Silver-Spoons and the
Glass of Cordial, I got some of it into her Mouth, and by degrees she revived
and is yet alive; but neither She nor her Husband did ever make use of me
afterward, though they had several times occasion for two Physicians.

Not long after, I was called to a young Maid in Dorchester, not quite ten
years old: when I came there, I learned that she was Mr. Loss his Patient, but
the Mother would fain have had me undertaken her cure alone, but I would not do
any thing before he was first sent for. Her Disease was a Pleurisy, and I was
for Bleeding her, to which he would not give consent because she was not
fourteen years old, perhaps because it was his fault it had not been done
already. I modestly urged my reasons, but he uncivilly broke from me, and left
me with this threat; That I should take it upon my own Shoulders. She did
bleed, and did recover, but when he could not fasten any ill Event upon me in
the Case, he yet possesses the Parents with the unreasonableness of my
Practice, and how that their Daughter would hardly ever recover my bleeding of
her; and I was never made use of more in that Family.

Within a short time happened this Case of young Mrs. Moore, in which I met with
some Discouragements by Language from Mr. Loss, but I passed them by; yet after
this Patient was recovered, in which still he could not fasten any unluckiness
of success behind my back again, he tells Mrs. Moore, (for she her self told it
me again, and will witness it,) that she had great reason to give God thanks
that her Daughter fell into her great Sweat, ( mark the Piety of the Man) for
otherwise I had killed her, ( mark his Charity unto his Neighbor, in one and
the same breath): but she, better like a Christian and a Physician too, made
this answer; Nay Doctor I am not of your opinion, for if my Daughter had not
been Bled and Furg'd, how should Nature have been able to have discharged the
remains by Sweat?

These Cases, and another of a young Gentleman, whom he had given over, that
was afterward my Patient, and is yet alive, following one the other so
successfully, made Mr. Loss so heartily angry with me, that a while after, Mr.
Baynard of Cliff being ill, and not finding so much benefit as he wished for by
what Mr. Loss had done for him, told him, (for Mr. Baynard himself told it to
me again) that upon a settlement of but one piece of Land, he used to have the
advice of two or three Lawyers; and his Life being more dear to him than his
Estate, he did desire, having heard a good report of me, that I might be joined
in Consultation with him: He answered, that he would not join with me any more,
I had so abused him in the Case of Mrs. Moore's Daughter; he added also such
vilifying words as Mr. Baynard cannot deny, and which I do not think fit to
print, having by this Book I hope sufficiently proved them false: But they
prevailed then so, as to make me lose my Patient.

I could add other instances, but these are sufficient to prove Mr. Loss his
slanderings of me, and the damage I sustained by them in my Practice, though I
do not much matter that, for else I would never have lived thus retired; and in
my reputation also, but this I will not so easily part with, except I lose it
in my Vindication.

And now after all this, to Answer directly to this first Accusation, I say;

I am not conscious of any unworthy slandering of this Gentleman, and I have
now owned in print more against him, than ever I related to any one in private,
and I am ready to answer unto any particular wherein he shall say I have
wronged him. Touching this Case, I knew his temper by those experiences above
mentioned, which were before this young Gentlewoman was sick, and therefore was
so far from provoking him, that I desired Mrs. Moore to have me excused from
meddling in the Case, for I was rather willing to have lost the profit of so
generous a Patient, than to have to do with her first Physician: but it being
the Mother's earnest desire we should consult, I modestly proposed, and not
Magisterially, what I thought best, and told Mrs. Moore that I should not be
honest, if being sent for to consult, I should not freely deliver what my
judgment was; but having so done, I did not desire that my opinion should
out-ballance his, yea I pressed her not to follow my Advice, but rather his;
urging that he was both an elder Physician, and her old Acquaintance: but she
protesting before us both that in her Judgment, I spoke more reason than he,
sided with me against him whether I would or no, telling him then unto his
face, that he must lay aside his prejudice; which angered him I believe the
more, and put him upon falling thus upon me in print.

But this first Accusation is evidently and plainly proved to be false, by
witness, for it is matter of Fact; and who can better tell, whether I accused
all that Mr. Loss had done than Mrs. Moore her self, who was present, and would
be so to all our Consultations; and who says in her Letter which I have yet to
show: I must profess, that you never to my knowledge censured Mr. Loss, or
accused him of any thing; that is, of what had been done.

To his Second Accusation. Especially that Bleeding by Lancet was neglected.
THough I did not accuse what was done, yet I could not advise bleeding of her
by Lancet, without tacitly blaming what was left undone. Turning therefore this
Accusation of Mr. Loss from me upon himself, what I did not uncivilly before, I
do now directly accuse him for, even that bleeding by Lancet was neglected; and
the reasonableness hereof will appear in these three Propositions well
understood and proved.

1. A Child under fourteen years old may be bled by Lancet.

2. This Gentlewoman, young Mrs. Moore, might have been bled by Lancet.

3. Mr. Loss was to blame that she was not bled by Lancet before the sixth day.

1. That a Child under fourteen years old may be bled by Lancet.
This I prove three ways, by Reason, by Authority, and by Experience.

By Reason.

Where there may be a Plethora, be it quoad vasa, or quoad vires, there
bleeding by Lancet may be appointed, if weakness of strength do not
contraindicate:

But there may be a Plethora, whether ad vasa or vires, in a Child under
fourteen years old, and yet no weakness of strength to contraindicate;

Therefore a Child under fourteen years old may be bled by Lancet.

If the strength do not contraindicate by being too weak, the Age cannot, for
that is a consideration subservient to strength, and it never prohibits
bleeding but upon this account, that a person of such an Age, is not able to
bear so noble a Remedy as bleeding by Lancet. Now some Persons of ten, are as
strong as others at fifteen; and some at sixty as others at fifty. Although
therefore the consideration of tender Age, and of evacuating much by insensible
transpiration, ought to take place in a Physicians enquiry after the strength
of his Patient; yet if the strength be still good, the Age is inconsiderable.
Sicut enim unum tantum ab una indicatur, it a unum uni tantum contraindicat;
and since, virium imbecillitas is the one Contraindicans to Venaesection, the
Age cannot be another Contraindicans.

By Authority.

Riverius in his Institutions Lib. 5. Part 1. Sect. 3. Cap. 3. answers directly
unto Mr. Loss his Quotation of Galen touching this point, viz. Vires in pueris
sunt it a debiles, ut vix far queant Venaesectionem, Pueri enim corpus habent
molle, tenerum, and patens, quod sponte sua assidu^ digeritur, and diffluit.
Ideo Hippocr. 4. de Victus Ratione in morbis acutis, aetatem florentem cum
magnitudine morbi and virium robore, ad sanguinis missionem requiri praecipit,
quem sequutus Galenus 11. Meth. Cap. 14. ante annum decimumquartum venam secare
vetat. Quod de pleniori illa veteribus consueta vacuatione audiendum est, nam
moderatam quae viribus and plenitudini aut par aut inferior sit omnis fere
aetas far potest: si vegeta and robusta sit aetas enim non tam annorum
numero, quam habitus and virium robere metienda est, quod eleganter Celsus
confirmavit Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Antiqui, inquit, primam aetatem sustinere non
posse hoc auxilii genus, judicabant, postea vero usus ostendit, potiores
observationes adhibendas esse, ad quas dirigi curantis Consilium debeat,
interest enim non quae aetas sit, sed quae vires sint; ideo firmus puer tuto
curatur; sic Avenzoar Filio suo trino se utiliter venam secuisse commemorat and
nos plerunque experimur pueros 4to aut 5to anno aetatis a gravissimis morbis
venaesectione liberari.

Strength in Children is so weak that they can hardly bear opening of a Vein:
for Children have a soft, tender, and patent Body; which daily and of it self
digests and dissolves: Therefore Hippocrates in his 4 th of Diet in acute
Diseases, commands that there be required to the opening of a vein a
flourishing Age with the greatness of the Disease and the strength of Nature:
and Galen following him in his 11 th of Meth. the 14 th Chapter, forbids such
bleeding before fourteen years of age. But says Riverius this is to be
understood of that large bleeding so much in use amongst the Ancients. For
almost every Age can bear that moderate bleeding, which is equal if not
inferior to the strength and Plethora in the Patient, if he be strong and
lusty of his Age. For Age is not so much to be reckoned by the number of the
years, as by the habit of Body, and its strength. That which Celsus elegantly
confirms in Chap. 10. Book 2. The Ancients ( says he) were of opinion, that the
first Age of Man could not bear this sort of Remedy, but use afterward showed,
that there were other considerations more eligible, according unto which the
advice of the Physician ought to be directed. For the concern is not what a
Patient's Age is, but what his strength is: Therefore a strong Child is safely
Cured. Thus Avenzoar makes mention of his successful bleeding his own Son at
three years old; and we find by experience, that Children of four or five years
old do by bleeding most commonly escape dangerous Diseases.

The same Author likewise, in his Praxis and Chapter of a Pleurisy, says thus:
Adeo necessaria est Venaesectio in principio, ut nunquam omitti debeat, nedum
in seen, puero, gravida puerpera, and menstruas purgationes Patienti, docuit
enim Experientia, hisce omnibus utilissimam fuisse Venaesectionem present hoc
morbo.

So necessary is opening of a Vein in the beginning of a Pleurisy, that it
must never be omitted, no not in an old Man, or Child, or Woman with Child, or
that has her Terms: for Experience does teach us, that in all these in this
Disease, opening of a Vein has been most profitable.

By Experience.

It is not long since that I knew a Girl not five years old, that fell into an
Atrophy, a mere wasting and pining away, without any Symptoms of a Consumption
or Phthisis; she was too young forsooth to be bled, and all other means were to
no purpose, for she died, and upon the opening of her Body, her Liver was found
so largely grown, as to outweigh the Spleen seventeen times. Now whether the
Liver be the Fons Sanguinis, or the Heart, or neither, but that every Bowel
contributes its office toward the making of the Blood, yet since the Liver by
separating the Choler into the Gall, sweetens the Blood much, and that
sweetness helps to increase both Liver and Blood, as also does the absence of
the acid ferment from the Spleen; and I am prone to think, that the Helluo the
Blood eat her up, and caused such an over-fast growing of the Liver, as starved
the Spleen and other parts. Should another such a Case offer it self of such a
Plethora, would any rational man forbid bleeding until the Child were fourteen
years old, of which there is no likelihood it should live until seven? I am
sure I did not in a Brother to this Sister, about seven years old, that not
long after was treading in her steps, and making haste apace unto the same end;
but being forwarned, I bled him, and I never saw more advantage by bleeding
befall a Man, than happened unto this Child; his recovery was so speedy and his
health so good ever since, as those then about him can witness.

I might instance also in the two abovementioned Experiences, wherein Mr. Loss
himself can bear me witness of successfulness of bleeding under fourteen years
of Age.

Yet by all this which I have said, I do not mean that I would encourage any
Physician to be rash and venturous, one that should hand-over-head pell-mell
bleed all younger Patients as readily as Men, without due consideration of
their tender Age: but I only urge from what I have written, That there may be a
time, wherein it may be necessary to bleed a Child by Lancet under fourteen
years old.

2. That this Gentlewoman, young Mrs. Moore might be bled by Lancet.
Here were several Indications for Bleeding, and Co-Indications, and there were
no Contraindicantia nor Correpugnantia.

The Indications.

Here was Plethora quoad vires, such a fullness of Humors in the Mass of her
Blood, as Nature could not rule well or manage, so as to preserve them in their
due Temperament and Mixture, from separating and corrupting, and therefore to
remove this Morbifick Cause, and to disburden the Body of a good share of that
load it was pressed under, that so Nature might the better comport with the
remainder, and by degrees master and subdue the Disease; opening of a Vein was
requisite.

Here was also need of Revulsion from a weak Part, and Revulsion did Indicate
Bleeding: for this Patient was represented to me when I first visited her, as a
Child always Sickly, Splenetick, and Scorbutic; and having her left Side weak
by being Splenetick, and pained in her left Breast more or less for two years
before she fell sick. Formerly she was obnoxious to Catarrhs, and now also
there was a flux of Humors in the mass of Blood flowing to her left Side, part
of the inflamed Blood had already got thither, and lodging it self within the
Pleura and Vicine Muscles, caused in her a Symptomatical Pleurisy, and there
was great fear lest that inflammation should increase farther, and therefore as
bleeding was principally Indicated by the Plethora, so was it likewise
accidentally Indicated by Revulsion.

Here was Heat likewise, that did Indicate accidentally the opening of a Vein,
in order unto the cooling her whole Body which was in a flame, she having a
putrid Scorbutic Fever for her principal Disease. Now this Preternatural Heat
and Fire was to be put out, and bleeding would help upon two accounts.

1. By it, part of the Fire, even part of the Inflamed Blood might be taken
away.

2. By it, Insensible Transpiration (whose Evacuation alone, is greater far
than all the sensible together, as Sanctorius observes in his Medicina Statica)
might be promoted, the Pores of the skin opened, whereby the Heat might breath
forth, and perhaps the cold Air get some ways in. These Pores were before as it
were wedged up with the plenty of Humors, as is sometimes a Church-door by a
throng of People, each hindering another from getting forth; but bleeding might
unwedg them, by letting some out another way, and giving Nature room to drive
forth what was superfluous by an open and free Transpiration, as was also
effectually done in this Patient, who not long after fell into a great
universal Sweat, which completed her Cure.

The Coindications.

Some were taken from her Naturals, and some from her Non-Naturals.

To her Naturals did belong her

1. Strength: This was good even Mr. Loss himself being Judge: so good, as
nothing could hurt.

2. Habit of Body: For lean people are generally fuller of Blood, and have
larger vessels than those that are fat and gross; their Blood also wants more
sweetning: and

3. Her Age: Though it was not fourteen, yet was it about four.

It seems noways unagreeable to Reason, to assert that one and the same thing,
may both Contraindicate and Coindicate bleeding, as it is diversely considered.
For example; He that considers of age under fourteen years that it is tender,
and wastes very much by the pores, or habit of Body, may so far look upon it as
a Contraindicans, as not to bleed in such an age, except there be great need
and good strength, for fear the Patient should not be able to bear two large
Evacuations at once. And thus Mr. Loss seems to have considered this Patient's
Age: but notwithstanding this, if need requires and strength will bear bleeding
in a Patient not fourteen years old; this Age as it intimates predominancy of
Blood, it may coindicate bleeding; and this Mr. Loss seems not to have
considered of at all; though it be evident, that this Age is one sign of the
Predominancy of Blood, for Riverius in Cap. de Signis Sanguinis in Corpore
Predominantis, amongst the efficient Causes of it, reckons this Age for one,
Aetatem a Pueritia usque ad pubertatem. Now Childhood in a large sense is one
of the four stages of the Life of Man, Youth, middle-Age, and Old Age being the
other three. And this stage of Childhood is subdivided into four parts: Infancy
lasts till four years old, some say until seven: Pueritia or Boy-hood lasts
from seven to fourteen: Puberty from fourteen to eighteen, and Adolescency from
eighteen to twentyfive. Pueritia therefore from seven to fourteen years old, is
an efficient Cause of the bloods Predominancy in the Body, for the Temperament
now is hot and moist, and so is the Bloods; Children also do eat much, and
being full of play and exercise, they generally digest well, and they have
neither cares nor fears nor any inordinate passions to waste or drink up their
Blood, at least its Life and Spirits; so that this Patient's not being fourteen
years old, at which Mr. Loss has ignorantly made all this stir, did in truth
more Coindicate than Contraindicate her bleeding.

4. Her Part Affected, which besides her Heart, was her Pleura or Side; which
being a Membranous part, in its Substance and Temperament Spermatick, not
Sanguifick, having exquisite Sense, and in its situation being neighbor unto
the Heart, a part that upon all these accounts was very unfit to have any
Blood, much less inflamed Blood poured out upon it, did also Coindicate
Bleeding; partly that it might be relieved from what it already suffered, by
having strength to discuss or concoct it whilst it was not much; partly that it
might be delivered from the imminent danger of new hot Blood flowing unto it,
by a Revulsion of it with bleeding.

To her Non-Naturals did belong;

1. The Air to which belongs the time of the year when she lay sick, It was in
the Spring, a Season most seasonable for bleeding; for like the Sap rising in
the Trees, our Blood also Ferments afresh; the Time it self being hot and
moist, and the return of the Sun toward us gives us a sort of new Life and
Spirits. Besides, The approaching Summer gives something of encouragement to
venture bleeding, because in it we may the better hope for a fit Time to
recover in, if we should lose a little strength by bleeding.

2. Eating and Drinking.

This young Lady drank cold Beer when she was hot, by which sudden alteration,
that motion which Nature was then in, a centro ad Circumferentiam, her Body
being in a Sweat, was inverted a Circumferentia ad Centrum, the Spirits
retiring upon this Alarm inwards, whither also by this means were carried all,
or most of those Superfluities, which before were reaking forth and passing per
habitum Corporis: hereupon she fell into a Fever, and because her left Side was
weak, by default in her Spleen by Catarrhs falling on her left Breast, and by
use and Custom of Humors falling formerly to the Issue in her left Arm: with
the Fever she fell into a Pleurisy in that side, which does Coindicate
bleeding, as the Cure of it.

3. Motion and Rest.

To her Motion did belong her over-heating of her Blood at play by too violent
exercise: This also as a cause of her Fever and Pleurisy, did Coindicate the
Remedy of them, bleeding.

4. Passions of the Mind.

Her being merry and cheerly and full of play, did contribute also unto the
increase of her Blood, and in some small measure coindicate bleeding.

Contraindicantia, here were none.

The Reader may please to take notice, that Indicantia and Contraindicantia, do
belong to things Preternatural, which can be none other than these three; The
Cause of the Disease, the Disease, and the Symptoms.

I have already above showed, that the Disease, and the Cause of the Disease
did Indicate bleeding by Lancet; let Mr. Loss show how either of them did
Contraindicate bleeding by Lancet in this Patient. What concerns the Symptoms
they do never Indicate or Contraindicate as such; indeed when they urge, they
are considered of as a Cause; and so weak strength, as a Cause of increasing
the Disease, does many times Contraindicate bleeding, but that cannot be
pleaded here.

Coindicantia and Correpugnantia, do belong to things Natural or Non-natural,
even unto all such as are either Causes or Signs of a Patient's Strength. I
have showed above, that there were Coindicantia of bleeding this Patient; let
Mr. Loss again produce the Correpugnantia.

Juvantia and Ledentia, are very good Topics, by which may be proved in a good
measure, the agreeableness or unagreeableness of any Remedy made use of, and
the success in this Case is not to be disputed.

And by this time I hope I have sufficiently proved my second Proposition, that
this young Gentlewoman might be bled by Lancet.

3. That Mr. Loss was to blame that she was not bled by Lancet before the sixth
day.
To quit himself I think from this fault, was I suppose, the main reason he
opposed my bleeding her. The sooner one bleeds in a Disease that does require
it, the better; for why should a Disease be suffered to take rooting, or to
grow to an height and hazard a Patient's Life, if it may be prevented?

But this Patient's Disease did require opening a Vein. Therefore Mr. Loss was
to blame, it was not done before the sixth day.

I do not know that the Major needs any Proof.

The Minor has been proved already. And Mr. Loss does confess that he did
think of bleeding this Patient in the beginning (if we may believe him) for,
says he, Venaesectio summum in Pleuritide commodum afferre solet; Bleeding in
a Pleurisy, uses to be very advantageous. His only obstacle was, that the
Patient was not fourteen years old: but that was in truth no obstacle, as has
been proved.

In the beginning of this young Lady's sickness, there was none other
Physician but Mr. Loss: there was then no animosity or prejudice against any
other Physician, for to his Cure alone her Life was recommended, and no body
disturbed or hindered him from doing what he thought best; that he did not
therefore bleed her by Lancet, cannot be well attributed unto any thing else,
but to his ignorance; he did not know that a Vein might be opened in a Child
under fourteen years old, or if he did, he was yet more to blame. And thus much
for his Second Accusation.

To his Third Accusation. That the bleeding of her by Leeches, which had been
appointed, was of no moment.
WE have an English Proverb, Better is half a Loaf than no Bread; and it is
true also, if we cannot do as we would, we must do as we can: Where the Lancet
may not be had, I never said bleeding by Leeches was of no moment; but I do say
in this Case it was but of little moment. For it was not a Salve large enough
for the Sore, nor a Remedy answerable and proportionable to the Disease, whose
greatness and nimbleness did not require bleeding for simple Evacuation only,
but for speedy Revulsion also; which could not so answerably be performed by
the faint droppings of a Leech, as by the full stream of a Lancet. The inflamed
Blood was in a carreir, flowing on apace with a full tide, to this Patient's
weak Side; some had got already into the Pleura, and there caused a Pleurisy,
and more was following, called thither by the anguish of a pricking pain in a
very sensible Membrane, sent thither by the opening of a vent that way; would
any one think that the fleabite of a Leech in the Arm, would turn such a course
of Blood? or that Nature (though in a mistake) being in her haste upon an
errand of life and death, would probably stay to take notice of the little
barkings or bitings of the small Curs the Leeches. No, but if by a Lancet such
a breach be made, or so wide a door opened, that within a small time the blood,
and with it the life, might quickly run out; upon such an Alarm indeed it may
be reasonably supposed, that by letting forth but four or five ounces, the
stream may turn, and Nature be so highly concerned, as to neglect a lesser
danger, the relieving of the side, to prevent a greater, the losing of life; or
qua data porta ruit; the Blood running out faster by the Arm, than into the
Side, the stream must needs go that way where there is most vent: whereas by
Leeches, a man's life may leisurely and insensibly drop away without any notice
almost. And I pray of what great benefit could be Mr. Loss his bleeding of this
Patient by Leeches, when as notwithstanding she continued so ill, that all the
Family despaired of her Life?

To his Seventh Accusation. Taking away, that he might not seem to do nothing,
about four ounces of Blood.
IT is evident that he condemns me for not observing that requisite in
bleeding, a due Quantity; but it is not so evident whether he finds fault that
it was too much or too little.

If the Fever and other Symptoms were gone the sixth day before I bled her,
there was no need of bleeding at all, and then four ounces was too much; but it
lies upon Mr. Loss to prove that the Fever and other Symptoms were then gone.

I ^^ther think he means it was too little, because he adds that it was done
merely to appear to do something: and to this I answer three things;

1. That Mr. Loss himself the day before did acquiesce in so small a quantity
as five ounces, taken away by the Leeches which he applied to the left Arm. And
the having lost five ounces then, I think according unto his own proportion,
abating but one ounce of as many more, the day following four ounces were
enough.

2. For the same Reasons for which Mr. Loss durst not bleed her at all by
Lancet, it was reasonable that I should not by bleeding take any great quantity
from one that was not yet fourteen years old.

3. As little as four ounces seems to be, being let out by Lancet in the right
Arm, it is reasonable to believe they might make some Revulsion from the left
Pleura, which was the very Intention for which they were, there, and so let out.

To his Sixth Accusation That the Manner of bleeding was amiss. It ought to
have been done by Leeches, but it was done by Lancet.
THere needs none other Answer to this, than what is already given to the Third
Accusation: for if his bleeding by Leeches, neither in Reason could, nor in
Fact did do much good, the Lancet was evidently more eligible and preferable.

To his Fourth Accusation. That the time of bleeding her was not seasonable, it
was on the sixth day of the Disease, when the Fever and other Symptoms were
gone.
THE time of Bleeding a Patient, ought to be determined by the presence of the
Indicantia, and by the absence of the Prohibentia; for one may then bleed a
Patient, when bleeding is requisite and indicated, when strength will bear it,
and when nothing forbids it, so as to threaten a likelihood of more hurt than
good by it.

It Is true, nearer the beginning of the sickness, had been the best time to
have bled this Patient upon several accounts, and Mr. Loss might have done it,
but I was not called before this sixth day; and therefore could not do it
earlier. But bleeding in a Pleurisy is not forbidden after the first five
days, as if it might not be done so late as the sixth day: for says Riverius
in his Chapter of a Pleurisy.

Venaesectio in principio morbi praecipue confert, si tamen omissa fuerit, aut
insufficienter celebrata, etiam post septimum, novem, aut undecimum diem venam
secare licet.

Bleeding especially profits in the beginning of the Disease, but if it be then
omitted, or not enough performed, you may bleed after the seventh, ninth, or
eleventh day: that is, if the Patient be able to bear it.

Now this sixth day she had not at all been bled by Lancet, and Mr. Loss his
bleeding her by Leeches was not sufficient, the Indicantia and Coindicantia did
still remain, and there was no such decay in her strength as to forbid
bleeding; therefore even now the sixth day she might be bled, unless a Crisis
had been toward health expected the next day, but there was no reason to hope
for any such thing, the dies Indices did not forwarn, nor Mr. Loss mention,
that he expected a Crisis, for indeed Nature still groaned under the burden of
the Disease, so far she was from being Mistress of it; for the Disease was
likely to grow stronger every day, and more and more to threaten the hazard of
the Patient's Life. And why I pray did I do amiss to bleed her on the sixth
day, since I could not do it sooner, and durst not put it off longer?

Touching the other part of this Accusation, That I bled her then when the
Disease was gone. It is an egregious untruth: Mrs. Moore, and all the Family
where she lay sick, can witness, that all that time she was so sick that they
all despaired of her life. And let Mr. Loss blush when he reads this, That a
Gentleman of his Age and Gravity, so great a Professor of Religion and
companion of good men, so Ancient a Practitioner of Physic, so curious and
formal in punctilioes and trifles; should be so wicked as to invent, so foolish
as well as impudent, as to put sorth in print such a material forgery to honor
himself and dishonor Alius Medicus, as can be contradicted and proved a ly, in
the Town where he has lived near forty years, by several Persons that were
then with this sick Patient: and that he should be so simple, as to contradict
himself in the delivering of it: for, If this Patient had now no Disease, how
was this the sixth day of the Disease?

To his Fifth Accusation. That this Patient was not bled in the Right Place.
From the right Basilick Vein of the opposite side, that which Fuchsius says is
an Error.
THat I bled this Patient in the right Arm, I do not deny, nor yet that Mr.
Loss opposed me; in the Consultation I told him, that to satisfy Revulsion,
(meaning proper Revulsion, not that which is a sort of derivation) it ought to
be in the contrary Arm, but he told me, that whether it were for Revulsion or
Derivation, it must be in the same Side where the Pleurisy is. And because I
was not of his opinion, he urged against me the Authority of Sennertus, at
which I wondered, and told him, if I understood Latin, Sennertus was against
him; and the next day, Mr. Hern a Divine, at whose House the Patient lay sick,
coming to my study to ask if she might drink Beer with a Toast after her
Physic: I then showed him Sennertus, and in him the Figure engraven on purpose
to show the difference of bleeding for Revulsion and for Derivation, and we did
both admire that he should so mistake an Author which himself quoted. But it
seems, having since studied upon the point, though he quoted Sennertus, his
meaning was the most Learned Fuchsius.

For my part, I do not intend to trouble my self or the Reader, with a dispute
so well and so largely handled by Sennertus, who has taken the pains to relate
the opinions of near thirty several Authors touching this point, and amongst
them Fuchsius is one, and yet Sennertus holds for me.

I shall only tell the Reader what Reason I had to bleed this Patient in the
contrary Arm.

I took my Indication for bleeding her, from the Putrid Fever which was her
principal Disease, and not principally from her Pleurisy which was
Symptomatical.

Now the Putrid Fever did not Indicate bleeding, either for Revulsion or
Derivation, but Evacuation only; That part of the putrid and corrupt Blood
might be carried off, which did burden Nature, and make her unable to manage
the mass of Humors in the Vessels: and this Evacuation might be performed as
well in the right Arm as in the left. But beside the Putrid Fever, I had to
consider of in this Patient a Symptomatical Pleurisy in her left Side, and
that which made Mr. Loss so fierce for bleeding on that Side was in my judgment
a main reason for the contrary: for seeing bleeding for the Fever, might be
indifferently done in either Arm, who would have chosen to have done it in the
left, thereby drawing the Humors more to the weaker side, weak formerly as has
been mentioned, and now much more so, by the inflammation of the Pleura on that
Side, and not rather in the right Arm, by which at once Revulsion was made from
the Pleura inflamed, and Evacuation of the putrid and inflamed Blood fully as
well, if not better performed, than in the left Side: so that what Mr. Loss
alleges as my fault that I bled her in the right Arm, would have been my
fault, if following his counsel I had done it in the left.

I know well that bleeding in a Pleurisy is usually in the same Side, and I
have many times so Practiced, when I had no fear of any great Plethora, or of
the flowing of Humors to the part especially weak before, and when the
Pleurisy was more urgent than the Fever. But at this time, here was no
Pleurisy at all, if we may believe Mr. Loss, and yet angry he is, that I would
not help to bring it again, by drawing the Humors what I could to her weak Side,

I could fill up much Paper upon this subject, but I am not willing to
anticipate Mr. Loss his Reply, he may perhaps pick much meat out of this
Goose-Eye: yet My comfort is, that although I am for the opposite Side,
hitherto, as luck would have it, it has been for the right.

To his Eighth Accusation, That I Purged her.
He gave her powder of Sena, by which she was six or seven times Purged.
THis is the first of those faults he finds concerning Purging of her. That I
did Purge her.

In the Consultation he would by no means give way that this Patient should be
purged, for fear a Diarrhaea should happen; and he was so angry when the Purge
was given, that he went from Mrs. Moore and left her to her great discomfort.

There can be no greater reasons to be given that I know of, why a Physician
should purge his Patient than these. Here were Indications, Coindications, and
there were non-considerable Contraindicantia or Correpugnantia.

As Plethora quoad vires did indicate her bleeding, so did Cacochymia her
purging, that the foulness of the first region, and her abundance of Choler
might not still add fuel to her inflamed Blood, but be removed; her strength
and bilious Temperament did coindicate. I need not be so punctual in this
particular of her purging; because I have been so above in that of her bleeding.

Mr. Loss seems to oppose two Contraindicantia unto this which I did.

Obj 1. The Disease it self inasmuch as he judged that it was a Pleurisy, did
forbid purging.
Resp. I do readily acknowledge that a Pleurisy as such does forbid purging;
for that is not the immediate way to remove the inflamed Blood from the Pleura,
nor yet any corruption that is there gathered. The Conjunct Cause of a
Pleurisy must be either evacuated by bleeding, dispersed or expectorated, and
purging seems a contrary motion. But yet I say, That in the Cure of all
Diseases, the first Indication that is to be satisfied by them that understand
the Art, though sillily neglected here by Mr. Loss, is the removing of the
Antecedent Cause. He spent all his shot at the conjunct cause, the asswaging of
the pain in her Side, and the helping of her expectoration, and was so far from
bleeding her by Lancet and purging her, that he did not only neglect them
himself; but was so ignorant, as to find fault with another in print for doing
them; and thereby discover his own want of skill. Had he understood himself
aright, he would not have been so mad, as to have hazarded his Patient's Life,
by acquiescing in his safe Medicines; his Emollient and cooling Glyster,
Fomentation, Cataplasm, Linctus, etc. and in the interim to suffer the
opportunity of Cure, and the strength of his Patient worn out by sickness, to
pass away. But this is his safe way of Practice for which he has been long
famous; storing his Patient with Juleps, Almond-Milks, Pearle-Water, that is, a
little Cordial-water with a little Cinnamon Water, and sweetened with Manus
Christi perlata: and let these that thus admire him, use him still. But with
what reason can any Physician approve his this way curing of a Pleurisy,
whilst the Fever was yet permitted to rage? or who besides him, could have been
so confident of success in expectorating the Conjunct Matter, whilst yet the
Antecedent Cause was so busy? When Nature concocts, she is at leisure, and is
Mistress of the Disease, that which I cannot understand imaginable, until the
burden of Humors be first taken off by purging. And therefore it is, that they
which please to read the Practice of Physicians in the Cure of a Pleurisy,
will find that in it they many times prescribe purging as well as bleeding,
though it be not the principal Remedy, and respect not the Conjunct Cause but
the Antecedent.

Obj. A Diarrhaea might happen.
Resp. I am yet to learn what great reason Mr. Loss had to be afraid of a
Diarrhaea; there was here no real fear of a Consumption, Mr. Loss says so, and
blames the Patient's Mother for it; neither was the Patient so weak, as if a
looseness, if it did befall her, should make an end of her, alas, she was able to
bear any thing, and contemn it. And why I pray should possibile contingens,
that is both future and uncertain, weigh-down the Indication of a present
Morbifick Cause, that does actually endanger the Patient's Life? This is all
one, as to leave a Patient whilst an enemy is upon him, and stabbing him, and
to run forth to meet forsooth another enemy that is afar off, who if he comes,
may possibly do him some mischief; -- Furor est ne moriare mori. And it is not
reason, but madness, to let a Patient die of this Disease without rescue, for
fear he should die by a future contingent Symptom.

To his Ninth Accusation. The Seventh day he Purged her.
IT is confessed Purging is forbid on a Critical day. When Nature is both busy
and able about her own work, she ought not to be interrupted and disturbed by
Art, which like an handmaid ought to wait upon her motions, and not to
prescribe her which way she shall walk. But it is not confessed that the
seventh day of every Disease is Critical; for in many Diseases there is no
Crisis at all; and although the seventh day of a Fever is many times Critical,
it is not therefore always such a Sabbath that it is a profaning of it, if a
Physician gives then his Patient working Physic; for if Nature on a seventh
day be not able but impotent, and the Disease prevails, what disturbance I pray
is it to help her off with her burden, especially whilst she is able to comport
with the trouble of removing it? otherwise indeed a Physician ought not to
defame so noble a Remedy, but to leave that Patient to his Destiny, whom to
help it is as much in vain, as it is to pull-up a snuff in a Lamp that will go
out if you touch it. But that was not the case here, for here was excellent and
invincible strength; only the number of the Enemies that were upon the Patient
were too many. But we must not forsooth help Nature, no not on her own day when
she would willingly help her self if that she could, but then, when she most
needs, treacherously leave her unto her self, and the enemies with all their
force upon her and against her.

Had Nature had the better of the Disease, so that this seventh day I was to
have expected a Crisis, Mr. Loss should have told me, that on the fourth ^ay,
(for I was not there) which is dies index septimi, there were signs of
concoction, and a forewarning of a Crisis, and that therefore I must not purge
her: but not a word of any such thing in the Consultation; and had there been,
the bleeding of her the day before, might have altered the case; only he had a
mind to publish me for so ignorant a Practicant, as on the seventh day to give
a Purge, as if Critical or not Critical, all days were alike to me, that had
neither Method nor Reason in my Practice, as Mr. Loss observes.

To his Tenth Accusation. He gave her Powder of Sena.
THE precedent Accusation respected the Time when, this Medicine wherewith; all
whose fault is, that I know of, that it is so simple: for this Gentleman seems
to have designed to have set me forth every way for a most pitiful Physician,
one that had neither method nor reason in his Practice, and as to the Materia
Medica, the height of his skill was to arrive unto no more knowledge, than that
a little Powder of Sena would purge; which weighed with the many Recipes, which
himself has set down at large in his Book, and which particularly he
prescribed for this Patient, are in no ways comparable. My Answer is, that how
mean soever it was, it did the work, and the slighter the means, I think the
greater was the Art. Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. And
in my opinion, that Physician is most judicious and best understands himself,
and learns more experience by his own Practice, that confines himself
ordinarily to a few Medicines, and that never makes use of a compound, where a
simple will serve turn. It Is true, People are apt to slight all things which
they know, and to admire those things only which they do not understand, and
this fills the Apothecarie's Shops; but were there more honesty in some
Physicians, and less simplicity in some Patients, a less pompous way of
prescribing would serve turn. (...). It is not great that is always good, but
good is always great. And Mr. Loss has no great reason over much to slight so
simple a Medicine as Sena; for besides that it has helped him to get many a
Fee from others, he may also chance to want it to purge away his own Melancholy.

If this Answer of Alius Medicus does not satisfy Mr. Loss or others, he cannot
help it, and must rest content, that for the present it satisfies himself, who
resolves yet to conclude very amicably with his Adversary to whose person he
bears no ill will, and in his own words, the Tables changed; Haec licet (...),
and sine ratione instituta, nullo tamen alterius Medici damno, quod vires ubi
valentes sunt; quales oportet sint in Alio Medico, omnia contemnunt and
tolerant; ubi infirmae fuerint, a quovis facile offenduntur?

FINIS.
Mr. Loss his Letter to Alius Medicus.
Clarissime Dne. Doctor.
CErtis Autoribus non semel ad me perlatum est, Te conscripto contra me
vernacula lingua nescio quo libello, Stomachum in me erumpere, quod obliquo te
in observatiunculis meis, ut putas, calamo perstringam. Mirantur mecum omnes,
quotquot libellum istum viderunt, and ne unus quidem probat praeceps hoc
consilium tuum, summopere tibi obfuturum, and nomini tuo, si recte
consideraveris, plurimum detracturum. Tibi enim respondere and reponere mihi
necesse erit. Ut ut sit, Immodici amoris argumentum est, temere de amico
suspicari. Equidem te amo, and honorifice de te semper sensi and locutus sum,
rerumque tuarum studiosissimus famam and existimationem tuam pro virili sum
tuitus; nemo sane est omnium, in quem magis, quam in te, mea sit and semper
fuerit propensa benevolenti^. Utinam eodem modio mihi responderes, qui nescio
quo malevolo and depravato in me affectu, vehementer semper conatus es, famae
meae, quantum in te est, detrectare, clientes meos alieno in me animo reddere,
meque si fieri possit praxi mea medica, exigua quidem and admodum frigida,
totum exuere, dum operam meam desiderantibus persuades, me cum aliis Medicis in
consultationem venire penitus recusare. Inique sane. Etsi enim quandoque
praestet unico saltem Medico uti, nunquam tamen cuiquam, quod sciam, multa
minus tibi, imo nec aliis teipso Doctrina and judicio vel inferioribus, vel
superioribus etiam, hoc ipsum quo me immerentem accusas, denegavi. Opinionem
saepe aliorum, fateor, magisterie obtrusam, illotis manibus sine debito examine
recipere, recusavi, consultationes nunquam. Forsan ex tuo ingenio me judicas.
Tantum sane abest ut eas averser, ut eas non tantum necessarias, sed and tum
Medicis, tum aegris semper sum utiles judicarim. His docti ab indoctis
discernuntur. Siquidem venerandus noster e Coo senex, primo acutorum dicit,
quod materiis iisdem, ad victus rationem pertinentibus, tam boni, quam mali
Medici utantur, sanguinem quoque mittant, purgent, cordialia exhibeant, and
alia; ob id quis melior sit, vulgus discernere nequit, neque novit, quinam
tempestive and debito modo praesidiorum materias aegris adminis^re^t, and
quinam citra haec. Imo, quod magis est, observant nullum esse Medicum in cujus
manu non sanentur aut moriantur aegrotantes. Qui vero vel Medici diligentia
sanatus fuerit, vel ejusdem culpa perierit, discernere nesciunt idiotae.
Consultationes itaque necessariae, ut appareat, qui sint artis periti, qui
imperiti. His add, quod cum consultationes fiant de rebus illis, quae ut
plurimum eveniunt, incertae tamen sunt, quomodo evadant, qualia sunt remedia,
quae licet ut plurimum prodesse consueverint, saepe tamen ob materiae medicae
varietatem, morborumque conditiones, quae saepe multiplices sunt, graves,
obscurae, confusae, quandoque novae, imprimis vero individuorum proprietates,
quis non videt consultoribus opus esse, ut in aliis magni momenti rebus, in
quibus nobis ipsis diffidemus. Plures prudentes simul convocati long melius
percipiunt, quae agenda sunt, quam unus, juxta tritum illud, plus vident oculi,
quam oculus and poeta inquit, quod tu nescis, fortassis novit ocellus. Sic
Medicus sese internecionis crimine purgabit, aegri vero obtemperando facilius
convalescent. Palmarium sane est omnium Medicorum, praesertim vero summos in
salutis humanae praeside art Medicinae honores adeptorum munus, ut aegros
communi consilio adjuvent. Unde and in ipso inaugurationis actu pileo capiti
imposito donantur, intus quidem, qua part caput ambit, rotundo, quod ea figura
capiti conveniat, ut scil. in eam capsulam non solum immensos doctrinarum
Thesauros reconditos habeant, sed and opibus nunquam perituris indies
adaugeant; Extra vero quadrata figura conspicuo, ut a quatuor Angulis in idem
centrum convenientibus, tanquam symbolo admoneantur: ut quando opus plures
Medici convocentur, and convocati been invicem conveniant, quodque in aegri
salutem cedat, concordes citra livorem cogitent and sedulo exequantur. Certe,
quod multi collegia hujusmodi aversentur, id inter alia evenit, quod in artis
operibus minus sunt exercitati, nec faciendae Medicinae habitum perfect sunt
adepti. Non enim facile est, nisi sis solid doctus, de aegra part, morbi
natura and vero schemate, causis morbificis, signis, corporibusque aegris, nec
non aptis remediis disserere, idque serie, ut decet, certa, and validissimis
rationibus de his suam munire sententiam, hisque adversa labefactare;
melioribusque semper cedere. Quotusquisque est, qui hoc aevo his par sit? Sed
de hac re satis superque, ad alia propero; Siquidem ad omnia, quae ad aures
meas pervenerunt, breviter respondere, tibique, si fieri possit, satisfacere
constitui. Ut acrius me oppugnes and famae meae maculam inuras, astute admodum
Anglicana lingua contra me calamum stringis, ut cum doctis nequeas, vulgo me
odiosum reddas, qui quaevis facile credunt; and insuper etiam nescio quas a
Domina Moor obtinuisti literas, Libello tuo praefigendas, omnibus viribus
utens, ut existimationi meae deroges, meque quantum fieri potest, abjectissimum
reddas. Equidem ejus in scribendo, tuam vero in producendo eam in scenam
imprudentiam and temeritatem satis mirari nequeo. Nec enim vel minimum
contumeliae and injuriae aculeum patiar, sed nomen meum ad aras usque defendam.
Sed qui animi magnitudine prestant, prudentia ut plurimum minus valere solent.
Quid illa quaeso de Medicis judicet, colo and rei domesticae administrandae
assueta? Quid illa de pleuritide, cujus essentiam ignorant, de qua saepe Medici
ipsi contendant, non quod signa sint incerta and conjecturalia, sed quia illi
falluntur, neq, convenient circa exactam eorum cognitionem? Multa sunt in
literis illis, si vera audivi, insignem erga me animositatem redolentia,
quaedam etiam veritati injuria, id quod accidit, quia filiae non adstitit nisi
quarto a prima morbi invasione effluxo die. Possem facile ad singula respondere
and tela ejus adeo facile evitare ut Priami telum Pyrrhus, Rauco quod protinus
aere repulsum, E summo clypei, nequicquam umbone pependit. Sed nolo cum
faeminino sexu in arenam descendere, quem si vicero vincar. Hoc saltem dico,
nullum sub Lunae concavo odiosius esse crimen ingrati animi culpa. Huic ego
matronae and toti familiae medicinam faciendo fidelem operam per plures annos
locavi, idque fausto Apolline and felici successu, ut mirer animum ejus per te
adeo alienatum esse, ut ab eo tempore omnem meam operam neglexerit, imo and
contra me scriptitare ausit, nulla alia de causa, quam quod acriter pro salute
filiae ejus contendi. Haec scil. sunt industriae meae and laborum praemia, hi
fructus. Sed quid ego? Varius fuit omni aevo and mutabilis semper Sexus hic,
hodie amans cras odio habens. Eo itaque valere jusso ad te me converto, qui
vitio mihi vertere videris, quod sim peregrinus and advena, quasi ideo non
debeam praxin Medicam exercere, aut Medicinam facere. Vix credo hoc ulli unquam
a quoquam objectum. Sum peregrinus fateor. At non sine autoritate a Serenissimo
Rege derivata praxin sum aggressus, in qua per quadraginta annos, and quod
excedit ultra, medicinam faciendo subditis ejus, sine invidia aut remorsu
cujusquam, singularem fidem operamque meam indefessam omnibus probavi. An non
Deus ipse in Sacra Pagina peregrinos and advenas amari, beneficiis ornari,
suscipi and nutriri jubet? An tu panem invidebis, quorum Deus ipse singularem
curam gerit and victu atque amictu providet? Adi, si lubet, pentateuchum, and
plura in hanc rem invenies praecepta. Ut unum e multis producam, vide, quaeso,
Levit. Cap. XIX. Si peregrinus fuerit tecum, in terra tua inquit non opprimes
illum, sed erit tibi instar indigenae, amabis eum ut teipsum, quia and vos
peregrini fuitis in Egypto. Sic and Deuteronomy. X. and aliis in locis. His add,
quod, si non Lauream Apollineam and Doctoratus insignia, quibus ornatus es,
maximam saltem eruditionis and Doctrinae tuae partem peregrinis debes, ut
iniqua sit ista tua obtrectatio quemadmodum and aliae. Imprimis vero te mihi
iratum esse and aegerrime far intelligo, quod te Medicum saltem in
Observationibus meis, non vero Doctorem nominem. Ecquis quaeso novit, quis sit
Medicus iste, cum nulla fiat nominis tui mentio, aut quis otio suo abutens
inquiret facile, quisnam sit, imo quis rem ipsam observabit? Vix unus e mill.
Multi summo Doctoris titulo insigniti reperiuntur, qui non sunt Medici, and
multi inveniuntur Medici, qui Doctoris axi^ma non retulerunt; Medicus est, qui
Medicinam facit, cumque hanc Artem exerceas, non est, ut Medici nomen
dedigneris. Hic omni semper aevo omni honor dignus fuit judicatus, utpote ab
altissimo creatus. Unde Graeci olim Hippocrati, ut Medico, eosdem honores, quos
Herculi, decreverunt. Hunc omnes velut praesidium aliquod and numen tutelare
vitae, salutisq, suae omni aevo coluerunt, and venerati sunt. Idem divini
Hippocratis judicio (...) and (...) aestimatus, ut sine causa vitio mihi
vertas, quod te Medicum, non Doctorem vocarim. Multo minus sum culpandus, quod
aegram puellam nobilissimae titulo insigniam, quasi hic titulus sit altior quam
ei competat. Civilitatis est honoribus blandiri, quos amamus and in quibus
virtutis aliquod specimen apparet. Sed ut tibi satisfaciam in hoc etiam,
sciendum tibi; vocem hanc aliter apud Anglos, aliter apud Latinos accipi, in
quorum lingua scripsi. His ex nosco notum, nobilis, quasi noscibilis, vel
notabilis dicitur, and Graecis eodem plane sensu (...) appellatur, id est,
notus, cognitus, praeclarus, (...), illustris, excellens, clarus, qui scil. in
hominum notitiam ex aliquo seu turpi seu illustri facinore venerit. Saepius
tamen accipitur in meliorem partem. Ita Nimerodus, consceleratorum manu
stipatus, nobilitatem sibi scelere paravit. Marius vero and Tullius, Arpinas
uterque magistratus adeptione and rebus been gestis nobilitatem acquisiverunt.
Apud Classicos sumitur vel pro generis claritate, vel quacunque alia
celebritate, imprimis vero virtutis, unde Euripides, (...); Bonus Vir mihi
quidem nobilis, improbus vero etiamsi Jove ipso meliore patre editus sit,
ignobilis tamen videtur. Et certe nobilitas atque decus non tam proavorum
stemmate and imaginibus, quibus tamen aliquid dandum, quam virtute, quam vitae
integritate, quam morum probitate metienda. Unde and Democritus olim
interrogatus, in quibus nobilitas consisteret, respondit, pecudum nobilitatem
in bono validoque corporis habitu sitam esse, hominum vero in morum probitate.
Cum itaque virtutis and proborum morum plurima specimina in puella hac
appareant, eam non sine causa nobilitatis honor ornavi, siquidem virtutem
possidere est vere nobilem esse. Sed and aliud quid his accedit. Romani, a
quibus hic nobilitatis honor ad nos derivatur, illum definiebant nobilem, ut
Asconius Orat. in toga candida observat, qui novi hominis filius esset. Novum
autem qui primus in sua gente magistratum curulem adeptus statuae sibi
erigendae jus habebat. Et cur non liberi, qui hujus comitatus vicecomitis
munere perfunctus est, nobiles vocari non deb^ant, nullus video. Possem plura
in hanc rem in medium proferre, sed nolo in his minutulis contra me
objectionibus tempus conterere. Ad rem ipsam accedo, unde omnis inter nos
contentio oborta. Ac primo quidem mirari subit inconstantiam tuam, dum a
sententia tua de aegrae puellae morbo omnino desciscis, ut quam, cum convocati
essemus ut aegrae communi consilio opem ferremus, pro pleuritica habebas, jam
non pleurisi, sed febri saltem cum lateris dolor laborasse affirms. Revoca
quaeso in mentem disceptationem nostram de vena in pleuritide secanda acriter
inter nos agitatam, qua contra me contendebas, non tantum Phlebotomiam esse
instituendam, sed and quoad locum sanguinem e dextro cubito, Sennerti de
pleuritide authoritate, detrahendum esse. Imo ut aegrae puellae matrem in tuam
sententiam adduceres, digito ex Sennerti figura in pectore ejus depinxisti
trun^um venae cavae cum utriusque brachii venis, and surculis inde oriundis;
ita ut tui oblitus in aliam sententiam abeas, and quae membranae costas
succingentis inflammatione laborabat, febri cum lateris dolor affligi perperam
judices. Dolor lateris punctorius, membranis proprius, ad jugulum usque
extensus; Febris continua acuta, sanguine in venis ebulliente in membranam
costas succingentem effuso and inflammationem pariente; Respiratio difficilis
and crebra, partim ob usum auctum, calorem scil. febrilem, partim ob impeditam
sufficientem partium inflammatarum ad magnam aeris copiam attrahendam
distensionem; Tussis, pleuritidis inseparabilis comes, Natura, quod molestum
est, expellere nitente, commota etiam a materia in pulmones residente facultate
expultrice; Pulsus durus ob membranae tensionem, qua arteriae etiam
distenduntur: omnia haec ab ipsa pleuritide ortum ducunt and sunt essentialia
and scientifica ejus signa. Quae quidem cum in aegra puella concurrerint,
necessario pleuritica erit judicanda. His add sputamen cruentum ab ea
excretum, quod etsi neque in omnibus pleuriticis, neque in omnibus morbi
temporibus appareat, ideoque inter signa pathognomonica non recenseatur,
attamen ubi cum dictis conspirat, pleuritidem indubie indicat, eamque
legitimam, a sanguine bilioso in membranam costas succingentem effuso. Erras
itaque qui aegram nescio quam febri cum lateris dolor conflictasse dicis.
Possem hoc pluribus probare, siquidem in notha pleurisi, ab inflammatione
musculorum intercostalium and externa thoracis part pronata, vt and in aliis
pectoris doloribus, febris vel nulla adest, vel saltem non acuta; Tussis, nisi
catarrhus coincidat, est nulla, and nihil, praesertim cruenti, excernitur,
dolores sunt mitiores nec pungitivi and ejus generis alia. Sed cum supra
probaverim aegram pleuritidis tyrannidi succubuisse, idque per signa ideam ejus
complectentia, non est opus, ut his pluribus insistam. Caeterum absurdum tibi
videtur, quod puellam aegram benigna pleuritide laborasse dicam, cum pleuritis
sit morbus acutus; quasi vero acuties and benignitas sint (...) aut contraria.
Sed plurimum erras. Acutus enim morbus est, qui cum brevitate junctam habet
magnitudinem. Ideo celeriter movetur cum vehementia and periculo. Huic vulgo
non benignus, sed chronicus opponitur. Ut hoc tibi manifestum faciam, sciendum
quod variae sint pleuritidis differentiae, quae desumuntur ab idea ejus, a
causis efficientibus, a magnitudine seu vehementia, a more, and partibus
affectis, and tandem ab eo, quod est per essentiam vel per consensum. Quae a
more ejus desumitur, vel est maligna vel benigna, vel inter utramque media. Et
moris ratione non tantum pleuritis, sed and alii morbi dicuntur vel maligni vel
benigni, hoc est mites and nulla inferentes saeva symptomata. Ut vero morem
cognoscas, supervenientia symptomata sunt cognoscenda, quae a Galeno Medicorum
praeceptore, desumuntur ab exeuntibus per sputum in pleuritide and a modo
exeundi. Si igitur sputamina sint nigro aut viridi color praedita, si non
exeant omnino vel cum difficultate excernantur, corpus jactetur, cibum
aversetur patiens, male se habeat ad oblata, deliret, saepe in animi deliquium
incidat, haec omnia malignam arguunt pleuritidem. E contra si anacatharsis sit
facilis, si quae expuuntur rubicunda sint aut flavo color tincta, nec prava
appareant symptom ata, benigna judicatur, Quae cum in aegra contigerint, non
sum culpandus, qui eam pleuritude benigna laborasse affirmo, idque non mea, sed
Saxoniae, Cortesii, Foresti and aliorum autoritate innixus, apud quos hanc
ipsam pleuritidis in malignam and benignam differentiam invenies. Sed his
missis, de quibus nemo vel mediocriter saltem in medicina versatus ambigit, ad
alia progredior inter nos maxim controversa. Imprimis vero doleo quod ob
bimula verbula, dum te in casu aegrae (...) and sine ratione egisse dico, adeo
mihi succenses, ut and Librum contra me intendas. Quodsi rem pacato animo
consideraveris, res non est tanti, ut adeo graviter annotetur. Ordinariae sunt
hujusmodi inter disputantes, and doctos quoque in omnibus Universitatibus,
locutiones, huic etiam duriores, quae tamen a nemine observantur aut a quoquam
sinistre interpretantur. Quis quaeso Medicorum est, qui non saepius relicta
vera curandi ratione and methodo experientiam saltem ducem sequatur, ut mirer
te offendi, praesertim cum nominis tui nullam mentionem faciam. Si rem aequo
animo ruminaveris, invenies me nihil aliud egisse aut intendisse, quam ut
methodum meam in curanda aegra susceptam, a te vero oppugnatam, pro virili
probem and defendam. Justitui in aegra, pleuritidis carnificina efflictim
emacerata, sanguinis detractionem per hirudines, internae cubiti venae in eodem
latere, in morbi principio, dum humores fluerent, applicatas, idque fausto
Apollinis numine, magno aegrae commodo. Qua in re imitatus sum Clarissimi
Sennerti consilium, qui in pueris ex Galeno ante decimum quartum aetatis annum
vix tentandam esse venaesectionem monet, cum vires ea aetate debiles sint and
ob mollitiem ac raritatem dissolutionem alias insignem patiantur. Quodsi vero
morbus urgeat, praesente plethora circa annum nonum, aut decimum aetatis,
hirudinibus sanguinem elicere jubet. Hanc methodum tanquam praeposteram,
inutilem and nullius momenti coram puellae Matre accusasti, and suasisti cubiti
Phlebotomiam, quam ea consentiente mox instituisti, quicquid in contrarium
afferebam, idque in cubito contrario, non vero ejusdem lateris, Sennerti
autoritate, ut dicebas, fretus, quem hac occasion eadem hora perlustraveris.
Sed non videris mentem ejus assecutus. Probat ille quidem, Arabum Doctrinam
secutus, venae sectionem in contrario latere institutam, ut sanguis affluxurus
a part inflammata, quam longissime revellatur, sed hoc in plethoricis and
principio tantum morbi, dum fluxus humorum durat, faciendum consulit. Si vero
inquit, paulo post, Medicus in primo morbi principio non fuerit vocatus, and
sanguis, qui morbi vehementia, febrili calore and inedia minui solet, non
abundet, nec magnus amplius sit affluxus, aut si pleuritis sit mitior, statim
in loci affecti latere venam aperire licet, ut humores divertantur. Vide n' ut
Sennertus nihil pro te faciat, qui progresso morbo, sexto scil. a prima
invasione dic, sedata inflammatione and dolor punctorio^ inde orto, nullo
amplius sputo cruento apparente, nulla praesente plethora aut affluxu, venam in
contrario lateris affecti cubito aperuisti. Certe ubi nulla est venae sectionis
indicatio, nulla etiam instituenda, praesertim in pueris and puellis, quibus
alias non convenit venae secti^, Galeno test Lib 2. Method Med. Cap. 14. Si in
puerum, inquit, febris incidat, qui decimum quartum aetatis annum hactenus non
attigit, mitti illi sanguis non debebit, propterea quod tantillis, cum
praesertim calidi and humidi sint, plurimum corporis substantiae quotidie
defluat, ac digeratur. Ita quod ex incidenda vena moliendum nobis fuerat, id
ultro nobis ex curati corporis natura praestatur. His de causis venaesectioni
opposui, ut and purgationi, die critico instituendae, corpore etiam cacochymo
existente. Galenus enim Lib. quos and quando etc. inquit, observandos optime
esse dies criticos in exhibendo pharmaco praesertim subductorio, quia nescimus,
an Natura, morborum medicatrix, sit factura crisin necne, nec per quam partem
and ad quam viam vergat materia. Ut plurimum tamen natura and facilius facit
crises bonas per superiora, licet and per inferiora interdum faciat bonas. Ne
igitur impediamus Naturam, crisin per hanc aut illam viam intendentem,
abstinendum est a pharmaco in die critico, tum subductorio, tum vomitorio, sed
usque ad finem diei decretorii spectatoris persona induenda. Quodsi tunc Natura
nihil egerit praesentibus signis concoctionis, pharmacum exhiberi poterit. Sed
de his docta Medicorum cohors judicet. Possem plura adjicere, sed haec spero
tibi fatisfactura. Tu in me aequo sis animo, and quae a me facta sunt in
meliorem partem interpreteris, qui nullo animi morbo aut livoris aliquo
stimulo, sed nudae veritatis amore scripsi, quae scripsi, meque in favorem tuum
recipe and in amicorum numero habe, qui tibi omnia opto and auguror felicissima.

E. T. Sudiosiss. FRED. LOSS.
Dorchestr. XVI. Call. Nov. MDCLXXIII.
Alius Medicus his Answer to Mr. Loss.
Clarissime Observator.
DIE Saturni ultimo, multa vespera literas tuas accepi, Scriptas and a tergo
nec dum finitas, imo, quod mirandum, neque adhuc etiam, rem ipsam attingentes.
Authors vestri verba non dederunt, sic est profecto ut dicunt. Tu vero verba
dedisti plurima, and ad rhombum nihil facientia. Festinans Canis coecos parit
catulos, and Responsio tua, part inaudita, aut saltem non recte intellecta,
altera; praecox nimis and praepropera est. Descendis quidem in arenam, verum
tota haec tua digladiatio Epistolaris, verbo dicam* (...) est. Minutiarum enim
quas memoras, isto in libello, cujus scribendi satago, nihil fero quidquam
invenietur. Non meus rumor est, sed vox Populi, Te, a consultationibus semper
alienum fuisse, ea propter inique culpam in me unum confers, praesertim vero,
quasi ex meo Te ingenio in ea re judicem, in qua falsus es non minus quam in
figura pilei quo donantur Doctores in ipso inaugurationis actu, qui non est
extra quadrata, uti refers, sed rotunda figura conspicuus. Quantum valeam tam
doctis quam indoctis, Te, ob multa merito odiosum reddere, maculasque plurimas
Tuae Famae inurere, brevi forte, plus satis experiere. Interim, totus gaudeo
quod hac in re tuaque hac Epistola, me omni culpa de Libelli mei futuro eventu,
quantum spectat ad famam tuam, evolvis; quandoquidem Te murum aheneum
praedicas, neque uspiam Telis meis penetrabilem, literatis praesertim, and
viris edoctis coram. Quis te audacior and confidentior? qui, cum Libellum meum
nondum videris, quia tamen vernacula Lingua conscriptum audis, quam docti
aeque, atque indocti intelligunt, praelium ante de victoria gloriaris, quod cum
doctis nequeam, vulgo Te odiosum redderem. Age vero, and perge inquam, neque
amittas tuam banc confidentiam, nomenque, si potis es* ad aras defendas; recte
enim tenes, tibi respondere, and reponere necesse fore; atque ostentare quantis
sis viribus, quantisque virtutibus. De mea vero imprudentia, Temeritate, aut
Nominis alius jactura, in oculum uirumvis conquiescito. Interim tamen ex iis
omnibus qui tecum mirantur, and quorum ne unus quidem probat meum hoc praeceps
consilium, siste si placet, unum, aut plures, permagni enim nostra interest,
illos paucis velle, and lubentissime aurium operam illis dicerem. De Domina
Moore, si quicquam ulterius mussitare ausis, perlegas suadeo tuam ipsius
Observationem Medicinalem 25. Lib. 3. and Te pudeat: eam ibi omni virtutum
decore cumulatam praedicasse, de qua, in hisce literis, ingratam cum dixeris,
omnia dix'ti. Quis vero, Te obsecro, hoc tibi commentum in animum tuum induxit;
me vitio tibi vertere, quod sis Advena? aut ille certe, aut tu egregie fingis,
quando (...) ego maximo semper in honor habuerim. Neque ignobilem quampiam,
contra nobilitatem virginis, controversiam faciam. Quod attinet vero ad Medicum
Alium, pleuritidem aegrae puellae benignitatem morbi, venaesectionem sexto
morbi die institutam* in puella nondum quatuordecem annos nata, purgationem
exhibitam die septimo; and instituta mea (...) and sine ratione: quod attinet
ad professionem vestram, quantum me amas, quam honorifice de me semper locutus
sis, quam pro virili tuitus sis famam meam and existimationem; quam propensa in
me, prae omnibus aliis, tua semper fuit benevolentia; de his omnibus in Libello
meo. Cujus institutum si desideras; rursum adeas (si placet Pentateuchum
((...), dixit Socrates, and licet id ad rem meam faciat, maxim tamen faciet
autoritas Divina, quam legere est) Cap. 19. v. 16. Deuteronomi, his verbis; Si
quis in quenquam iniquus Testis extiterit, and falsum contra illum protulerit;
Ambo homines, quos inter controversia est, apud Jovam stanto, coram
Sacerdotibus and Judicibus, qui tunc temporis erunt, Judices autem sedulo
inquirunto. Quod si falsum illum Testem esse deprehenderint, and falsum contra
alterum dixisse: Facitote ei quod ipse in alterum commentus erat, malumque de
medio vestrum tollitote. Quod cum reliqui audiverint, timeant deinceps ejusmodi
facinus apud vos suscipere, neve miserescitote: vitam pro vita, oculum pro
oculo, dentem pro dente, manum pro manu, pedem pro pede.

Quid opus est multis, Te paenitentem, non defensorem agere expectassem; verum
rem multo aliter evenire intelligo; ut ut sit, vestram secutus humanitatem, ea
omnia quae tu mihi, ego etiam and tibi, opto atque auguror felicissima:

Observationum tuarum Studiosissimus, ALIUS MEDICUS.
Datae Frampton, die Lunae; XI. Call. Nov. MDCLXXIII.
ERRATA.
WHereas several Errors have crept into the Impression of this Book, which the
Author saw not, until it was too late to mend them in their proper places; the
Reader is desired for what he will there meet amiss, to read here as follows.

In the Title Page, read Practitioner in Physic -- Proserpina canum --
Personam capiti detrahet.

In the Epistle Dedicatory, r. to make out matters of fact. -- it is very base
for either of them to print the Case. -- to infer a general Conclusion from a
particular Instance. -- to Country People. -- though he understands no Latin.

In the Preface, read (...) -- nauseat those first entertainments, stercus and
Vrina Medicinae fercula prima, which we commonly meet with -- Homo sum, humani
nihil a me alienum puto -- condemning the Modesty and Practice of those men --
fling the stone at their fellow-Physician.

In the Book it self, Page 1. line 11. read by those that understand his Latin
better than his Art. lin. 23. a Licentiate. P. 2. l. 7. blot out 2dly. l. 31.
slandering almost all -- P. 3. l. 8. own words. P. 5. l. 35. meek or pettish.
l. 36. he moves. P. 11. l. 12. for Winston r. Muston. P. 12. l. 1. r. seems in
these. P. 13. l. 28. f. Name, r. Names. P. 14. l. 26. he could not take it well
that any one should publish this, and yet -- P. 15. l. 32. and has put both
their Diseases and their Names in print. P. 16. l. 6. unless he had been
ambitious of a party-colored Coat, and, by having something of every thing in
his Book, of this Motto -- P. 18. l. 32. a Surgeon. P. 23. l. 24. r. (...).
P. 25. l. 31. far beyond the binding up -- P. 26. l. 16. r. (...). l. 17. (...)
-- P. 27. l. 10. but that it was misunderstood. l. 13. blot out foolish. P. 28.
l. 36. r. shearing of Hogs. P. 29. l. 12. he understood the Oracle of
Hippocrates. P. 30. l. 33. words synonymous. P. 33. l. 23. His hands were not
probably so providentially stretched forth as to ward off the blow. P. 36. l.
36. like those shot from a Gun. P. 41. l. 30. Gorraeus -- P. 42. l. 24. and
thus very discreetly. P. 47. l. 14. Scabious. P. 48. l. 23. His Naturals. P.
55. l. 17. leave out and. P. 62. l. 2. the principal part ill-affected. l. 9.
than those from the Pleurisy in her Side. l. 21. by those Remedies. P. 63. l.
12. blot out and. P. 70. l. 32. held so by all that know her. P. 73. l. I
should hardly thrip cross or pile. P. 76. l. 16. a full Answer unto them. P.
78. l. 5. and if fair means would have brought Mr. Loss to a private Treaty. l.
33. Is a Defendant uncharitable. P. 80. l. 14. such a Revenge is spoken
against, as does another hurt. l. 23. The virtuous Envy is -- P. 84. l. 14. in
all those senses is still senseless by being false. l. 30. into the
dancing-School; l. 31. carried her home into the Country. P. 86. l. 24. this
further advantage of my Journal in this Case -- l. 32. I found our Notes did
not agree --. P. 90. l. 21. high-spirited, and yet low; selfish, and yet
self-abasing Physicians -- P. 92. l. 20. he wants buoying up -- P. 93. l. 3.
that he is wickedly ignorant; l. 33. blot out 3. The, and put at l. 38 before
Credit to men in a Profession -- P. 96. l. 6. mind my Patients ease more than
mine own -- P. 99. l. 13. Her Disease was with a Pleurisy -- P. 102. l. 34.
unum tantum ab uno indicatur -- P. 112. l. 27. for qua port a ruit -- P. 113.
l. 3. Here and elsewhere the number of the Accusations are misplaced, but their
order may be seen p. 81* -- P. 113. l. 21. she having lost five ounces then --
l. 32. the intention for which they were let out. P. 115. l. 30. at that time
she was so sick. P. 120. l. 30. die of his disease. P. 122. l. 14. this the
Medicine, wherewith. l. 23. is no ways comparable.

FINIS.

