AN ANSWER TO THE Dissenters Pleas FOR SEPARATION, OR AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE
LONDON CASES; WHEREIN The Substance of those Books is digested into one Short
and Plain Discourse.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed at the University Press, for Alexander Bosvile at the Sign
of the Dial over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. 1700.

Imprimatur.

GUL. DAWES, Procan. HUMF. GOWER, SS. Theol. pro Dna Margareta Prof. GUL.
SAYWELL, Coll. Jes. Prefect. JA. JOHNSON, Coll. Sid. S. Magist.


THE PREFACE.
THAT Collection of Cases and other Discourses, which was lately written by the
most Eminent of the Conforming Clergy, to recover Dissenters to the Communion
of the Church of England, has met with such an Universal Approbation, that I
need not speak any thing in commendation of it. Therefore I shall wave all
discourse of that nature, and only give a short account of this Abridgment.

The Collection it self being large and dear, it was thought convenient to
reduce it to a less Bulk and smaller Price; that those Persons who have not
either Money to buy, or Time to peruse so big a Volume, may reap the benefit of
it upon easier terms. This, I presume, will justify my Design, if I have not
failed in the prosecution of it.

I have used my best endeavors to avoid obscurity, and all those other faults
which are often charged upon Abridgments; and I hope I may venture to say, I
have omitted nothing that is material; though the Number of these sheets is not
the Sixth part of those that contain the Original. For the Learned Authors of
the Collection do frequently glance, and sometimes Discourse largely, upon the
same Subject: so that by avoiding Repetitions and blending all the Substance
together, I have much lessened the Expense of Money and Time. This and some
other advantages arise from the Digestion into Chapters; which could not have
been gained, if I had made a distinct Abridgment of every single Discourse.

I hope, I have fairly Represented the Sense of my Authors; but if I have
mistaken or injured it in any particular, I am sorry for it, and do heartily
beg Pardon of Them and the Reader.

The 11th and 12th Chapters, I am sure, are exact; for they have received the
A. Bp. of York's own Corrections, for which I am obliged to return his Grace my
humblest Thanks. Other parts I have submitted to the Censure of other worthy
Persons, to whose Judgment I shall ever pay the greatest Deference: but I have
reason to suspect my self for what I have received no Assistance in; and
therefore I desire the Reader to Correct me, when he finds occasion.

I have followed not only my own Opinion, but the Directions of several very
judicious Persons, in the omission of A. Bishop Tillotson's Discourse of
Frequent Communion; which is wholly foreign to the Design of the Collection.

The Quotations in the London Edit. School. which I follow, are very badly
Printed; and therefore, if any mistakes of that Nature have crept into this
Book, I hope they will not be charged upon me. Many of them appeared false at
first View; and many I knew not what to make of: but some of them I have
ventured to Correct.

God Almighty grant, that this weak endeavor may be of some Service at least
toward the Cure of those Divisions, which have endangered the Ruin of the Best
Church in the World.

St. John's Coll. in Cambridge, October. 2d. 1699. Tho. Bennet.

A Catalogue of those Books, the Substance of which is contained in this
Abridgment.
1. ARchbishop Tennison's Argument for Union, taken from the true Interest of
those Dissenters in England, who profess and call themselves Protestants. 2.
Archbishop Sharp's Discourse concerning Conscience. In two parts. 3. Bishop
Grove's Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 4. Bishop Patrick's
Discourse of Profiting by Sermons. 5. Bishop Fowler's Resolution of this Case
of Conscience, whether the Church of England's Symbolizing, so far as it does,
with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to hold Communion with the Church of
England. 6. His Defense of the Resolution, etc. 7. Bishop Williams's Case of
Lay-Communion with the Church of England. 8. His Case of Indifferent things
used in the Worship of God. 9. His Vindication of the Case of Indifferent
things, etc. 10. Dr. Hooper's Church of England free from the Imputation of
Popery. 11. Dr. Sherlock's Resolution of some Cases of Conscience, which
respect Church Communion. 12. His Letter to Anonymus, in Answer to his Three
Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 13. Dr. Hicks's Case of
Infant Baptism. 14. Dr. Freeman's Case of Mixt-Communion. 15. Dr. Hascard's
Discourse about Edification. 16. Dr. Calamy's Discourse about a Scrupulous
Conscience. 17. His Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving offense
to Weak Brethren. 18. Dr. Scott's Cases of Conscience resolved, concerning the
Lawfulness of joining with Forms of Prayer in Public Worship. In two parts. 19.
Dr. Claget's Answer to the Dissenters Objections against the Common Prayers,
etc. 20. Dr. Resbury's Case of the Cross in Baptism. 21. Dr. Cave's Serious
Exhortation, with some Important Advices relating to the late Cases about
Conformity. 22. Mr. Evans's Case of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament.
The CONTENTS.
THe Introduction, containing an Argument for Union, taken from the true
Interest of those Dissenters in England, who profess and call themselves
Protestants. page 1 CHAP. I. Of the Necessity of living in constant Communion
with the Church of England. page 15 CHAP. II. The use of Indifferent things in
the Worship of God, no objection against our Communion. page 31 CHAP. III. Of
the Lawfulness and Expediency of Forms of Prayer. page 48 CHAP. IV. Objections
against our Morning and Evening Service and Litany, Answered. page 90 CHAP. V.
Of Infant Baptism. page 103 CHAP. VI. Objections against our Form of Baptism,
and particularly that of the Sign of the Cross, Answered. page 126 CHAP. VII.
Objections against our Communion-Office, and particularly that of Kneeling at
the Sacrament, Answered. page 135 CHAP. VIII. The Objection of our Symbolizing
or Agreeing with the Church of Rome, Answered. page 171 CHAP. IX. The Objection
of Mixt-Communion Answered. page 194 CHAP. X. The Pretenses of Purer
Ordinances, and Better Edification among the Dissenters, Answered. page 210
CHAP. XI. The Pretense of it is being against one's Conscience to join with the
Church of England, Answered. page 228 CHAP. XII. The Pretense of a doubting
Conscience Answered. page 249 CHAP. XIII. The Pretense of a scrupulous
Conscience Answered. page 277 CHAP. XIV. The Pretense of Scandal, or giving
Offense to Weak Brethren, Answered. page 292 The Conclusion, containing an
earnest Persuasive to Communion with the Established Church of England. page
309
THE INTRODUCTION, Containing An ARGUMENT for UNION, Taken from the true
Interest of those Dissenters in ENGLAND, who Profess and call themselves
PROTESTANTS.
IT IS plain, that the ready way to overthrow a Church, is first to divide it;
and that our Dissentions are Divisions properly so called. How mortal these
breaches may at last prove, any man may easily foretell; and therefore it is the
business of every good man to dissuade from them. One way of doing this is to
show Dissenters calmly and plainly, that their ends are not likely to be
obtained; and that by the means they use, they will bring upon themselves those
very evils, which they fear, and hope to remove.

This Argument I design to handle by way of Introduction to the following
Discourse; and in the Management of it I intend to show, First what those ends
are, which are proposed by the Wiser and better Dissenters; and Secondly, that
the ends which they propose, can never be procured by the dissettlement of the
Church of England.

The Dissenters ends are two; First, the establishing of themselves, either as
a National Church or as several distinct Churches; Secondly and chiefly, the
farther advancement of the Reformed Religion, by the removal of Popery and
making the Protestant Religion more pure and perfect, than it is or can be
under the present constitution of the Church of England.

First then, as for the establishing of themselves as a National Church, it is
impossible that all of them should be United. For what Communion can the
Presbyterians have with Arians, Socinians, Anabaptists, Fifth-Monarchy-Men,
Sensual Millenaries, Behmenists, Familists, Seekers, Antinomians, Ranters,
Sabbatarians, Quakers, Muggletonians, Sweet-Singers? Such a medly of Religions
cannot frame amongst them any common Scheme, in which their assents can be
United.

Nor can any Prevalent Party hope to establish themselves as a National Church;
because they want Episcopacy, which has obtained in England since it is first
Conversion, and is so agreeable to the Scheme of the Monarchy, and will not
easily be exchanged for a newer model by the general consent of the English,
who are naturally tenacious of their ancient Customs. Again, all the Parties
amongst us have of late declared for mutual forbearance; and therefore they
cannot be consistent with themselves, if they frame such a National
Constitution, by which any man who dissents from it shall be otherwise dealt
with, than by personal conference; which also he must have liberty not to
admit, if he be persuaded it is not fit or safe for him. Now such a Body
without any other Nerves for its Strength and Motion; for the encouragement of
those who are Members of it, and the discouragement of those who refuse its
Communion, will not long hold together; nor has it means in it sufficient for
the ends to which it is designed. And indeed by this means the Spiritual Power
of Excommunication will be rendered of none effect. For what Punishment, what
Shame, what Check will it be to cross and perverse men; if being shut out of
the National Church, they may with open arms and with an applause due to real
Converts, be received into this or the other particular Congregation, as it
best suits with their good liking?

Some persons Think, that since they gathered Churches out of Churches, there
are not many true and proper Presbyterians in England; and if this be true,
Independency is the prevalent side: but I know not how a National Church can be
made up of separate Independent Churches. For each Independent Congregation is
a Church by its self, and has besides the general Covenant of Baptism, a
particular Church Covenant; and therefore it is difficult to imagine, how all of
them can be United into one entire Society.

But be it supposed, that the Presbyterians are the most Numerous and prevalent
Party; yet experience shows how hard a work it is for all of them to form
themselves into a Church of England. In the late times of public disquiet, though
they had great power and fair opportunities, and seemed nigh the gaining of
their point, yet they widely missed of it. There were in the Assembly of
Divines, some for an Independent, others for an Erastian Interest. Vid.
Whitlock's Memoirs, p. 116. and 189. Harm. Consent. p. 20.
There were a Party in the Nation, who were then called Dissenting Brethren;
who hated the Directory, and Printed a Remonstrance against Presbytery, and
reproached the Presbyterians in the same Phrases, which they had used against
the Church-Liturgy. Testim. to the Truth of J. C. p. 31.
Some Presbyterians did openly confess that their hopes were not answered, and
that instead of a Reformation they had a Deformation in Religion.

Those Independents, who adhered to that part of the House which joined with
the Army, prevailed for a season; but they also were disturbed by the
Lilburnists, Levellers, and Agitators. Mist of Godlin. Anno 1649. Wynstanl. in
Sts. Paradise. c. 5. p. 54, etc. Whitlock's Memoirs, p. 430. Salmon's Rout. in
Pref. and p. 10, 11, etc. Hist. of Indep. part 2. p. 153. View of the late
Troubles. p. 366.
Then Wynstanly published the Principles of Quakerism, and Enthusiasm brake
forth. Joseph Salmon a Member of the Army published his Blasphemies and
defended his Immoralities; and Printed a Book in which he set forth himself as
the Christ of God. Cromwell favored Enthusiasm, and together with Six Soldiers
Preached and Prayed at Whitehall; and confessed to a person of condition (from
whom I received it, as did others yet living) that he Prayed according to
extraordinary impulse; and that not feeling such impulse (which he called
supernatural) he did forbear to Pray, oftentimes for several days together. At
last he and his House of Commons were publicly Whitlock's Memoirs, p. 592, 606,
624. Burroughs's Trumpet of the Lord. p. 2.
disturbed by Quakers, bespattered in their books, his Preachers interrupted by
them in his own Chapel before his face; and himself conspired against by those
who called themselves the free and well affected People of England. Other
Memorials might be produced relating to the hopeful Rise, mighty progress and
equal declension of the Presbyterian Party: but in short, the longer the Church
of England was dissetled, the greater daily grew the Confusion; so that those
very distractions prepared the Way for the Restitution of the King and the
Church.

Now if Dissenters could not settle themselves when they had such fair
opportunities, much less can they do it now; because, First the platform of
Discipline so much applauded and contended for in the Reigns of Q. Elizabeth
and K. James, has been partly tried, and lost some of that Reverence which
several had for it. Secondly, there is not now such an Union amongst Dissenters
as appeared at the beginning of the late Troubles. Thirdly, those who then
favored the Discipline, do now incline to Independency and plead for
Toleration. Fourthly, the sincere Zeal and Power of many Pious Men of Quality,
who favored the Discipline in the simplicity of their hearts, could not then
settle it; much less will it now succeed, since these Men have seen such
Revolutions, and discovered the Vile interests of many under pretense of Pure
Religion. These have seen their error, and will not be a second time engaged.
Lastly, by reason of the gross Hypocrisies, numberless Parties and Opinions,
Irreligious Books and Laxation of Discipline in those Wars, Atheism has much
increased; and they say that some undisguised Skeptics and Atheists have, since
the King's return, been much used in the Cause of our Dissenters; and surely
such hands cannot do, what well meaning zeal could not effect.

Nor can they settle themselves as several distinct Parties by a general
Toleration. For First, some Dissenters believe some of the Parties to be
incapable of forbearance, as maintaining Principles destructive of Christian
Faith and Piety. This Opinion they still have of Antinomians, Quakers and
Muggletonians; and they formerly declaimed against the Toleration of Erastians
and Independents. Harmon. Consent. p. 12.
Nay many Ministers declared a Toleration to be an appointing a City of Refuge
in Men's Consciences for the Devil to fly to -- a Toleration of Soul-murther,
the greatest murder of all others, etc. Secondly, there is no firmness in this
Union; for the Union that lasts, is that of the Concord of Members in an
Uniform Body. Thirdly, Parties cannot be kept equal in number and interest, but
one will always prevail and be favored as the Religion of the State. And it is
natural for the strongest to attempt to subdue all the rest; so that they will
not be at peace, but in perpetual discord.

Some indeed think, this inclination to the swallowing up of all other Parties
is to be found almost only in the Romish Church: But there is something of it
to be discerned (I will not say in all Churches, for our own suffered Bonner
himself to live, yet) in all Factions and Parties; though the inequality of Power
makes it not seem to be alike in all of them. Parties, who are not (otherwise
than in show) concerned for Religion, will perpetually covet after Power; and
Parties that are conscientious in their way, will do the same. For they
withdraw from others, because they think Communion with them to be unlawful;
and if they think those of another way (without Repentance) to be lost
eternally, Charity will urge them to reduce them; and they will think, that
suffering them to wander declares them to be contented with their condition.

Besides, experience shows that where there is Power there is little
forbearance; and the same men, as their conditions alter, speak of Mercy or
Justice. Thus did the Vid. August. Cont. Petil. Lib. 2.
Donatists of old, and the Mr. Calamy's great dang. of Cov. Ref. p. 3.
Heads of the Discipline in the late Times. Those that removed to New England
for Liberty of Conscience, when they had gotten footing there, refused
Indulgence to Anabaptists and Quakers, and use them to this day with great
severity. The Whitlock's Memoirs. p. 276.
Commons in 47 gave Indulgence to all, but those that used the Common Prayer.
The Dutch suffer none to speak against those Doctrines, which the State has
Authorized; and the Remonstrant Party contend for Superiority, whenever they
have any encouragement. The Popish Orders mortally hate, and (were they not
restrained) would soon devour one another. And Gittichius his behavior toward
Ruari Epist. par. 1. p. 415, 416.
Ruarus a Socinian of better temper, shows the spirit of the Socinians, those
great asserters of Liberty in Religion. The Quakers themselves, when formed
into a society, began to Excommunicate and Domineer; and G. Fox Spirit of the
Heart. p. 41.
declared, he never liked the word Liberty of Conscience, and would have no
Liberty given to Presbyterians, Papists, Independents and Baptists.

I proceed now to the Second and Chief end of the Dissenters, the removal of
Popery and perfecting the Protestant Religion. As for the removal of Popery,
it is plain that the ruin of our Church, called by Diodati the Eye of the
Reformed Churches, will rather advantage it both at home and abroad. For she
being more like the Primitive Pattern than some others of the Reformation, can
better answer the Papists Objections, than those that are cramped in a few
points; and therefore if Dissentions ruin her, Popery will the sooner spread
over Foreign Reformed Countries. And since the Romanists are so powerful,
diligent and cunning; have so much Learning and interest; and pretend to
antiquity, miracles, etc. nothing can secure us from them at home, but the
Christian constitution and strong nature of the Primitive, Learned, Pure, Loyal
and Pious Church of England; which is a National Body already formed, that is
able to detect the Forgeries of Rome, and has not given advantage to her by
running from her into any extreme.

Monsieur Daille, who was not likely to be partial in this matter, and was at
that time engaged in a Controversy with one of our Divines, De Confess. adv.
Hammond. c. 1. p. 97, 98.
says, As to the Church of England, purged from Foreign wicked superstitious
Worships and Errors, either impious or dangerous, by the rule of the Divine
Scriptures, approved by so many and such illustrious Martyrs, abounding with
Piety toward God and Charity toward Men, and with most frequent examples of
good works, flourishing with an increase of most Learned and wise Men from the
beginning of the Reformation to this time; I have always had it in just esteem,
and till I die I shall continue in the same due veneration of it. And indeed it
is strange, that any who know other Churches and States, should be displeased
at ours, which so much excels them. Now is it probable, that such a Church
should have less strength in it for the resisting of Popery, than a number of
divided Parties, the best of which is not so Primitive, Learned, United,
Numerous or Legal; and is but of yesterday?

These Parties have scarce any formed way of keeping out Popery; for what
hinders a crafty Jesuit from gathering and modelling a particular Congregation?
And what a gap do they leave open for Seducers, who take away all legal Tests,
and admit strangers to officiate upon bare pretense of spiritual illumination!

The Romanists have more powerful ways of drawing men from the Dissenting
Parties, than from the Church of England. For Men separate (too frequently)
through weakness of imagination, for which the Church of Rome has variety of
gratifications. They will offer strictnesses to the severe, and mental Prayer
to those who contemn or scruple Forms. They have Mystical Phrases for such, who
think they have a new notion when they darken understanding with words; and
accordingly the third part of a very mystical Book, written by Father Benet a
Capuchin, was reprinted in London in 46, with a A Bright Star centring in
Christ our Perfection. Printed for H. Overton, in Pope's Head Alley.
new Title and without the Author's Name, and it passed amongst some of the
Parties for a Book of very sublime Evangelical Truths. They use much gesture
and great show of Zeal in Preaching. They have rough cords and mean garments,
bare feet and many other great shows of Self-denial. They have Processions and
other Rites to humor the soppishness of others. But our Church is sufficient
for this encounter. She designs to make Men good by making them first
judicious; but some others desire to bring them to their side by catching of
their imaginations; and so some new device shall, in time, bring them over to a
new Party.

Dissension it self amongst Protestants weakens their interest; and that which
weakens one side strengthens another. Many that are wearied with endless
wrangling, are too apt for quiet sake to run to infallibility. Some Dissenters
prepare the way for Popery by running into another extreme to avoid it. By
decrying Episcopacy, Liturgy, Festivals, etc. as Popish, they condemn that as
Popish which is decent and Christian, and so bring Popery into reputation. For
men will be apt to say, if such good things be Popish, surely that which is
Popish, is also Primitive and Evangelical. What we have examined is good, and
probably the rest may be of the same kind.

It appears also from the History of our late Wars, that Popery gains ground by
the ruin of our Church. For it made such a progress in those times, that the
Dissenters charge the Jesuits with the King's murder; thereby tacitly owning,
that they had so great a power over some of them, as to make them their
instruments in it. It Is evident to any man that Popery was not then rooted out;
Vid. Rob. Mentit de Salmonet, Hist. des troubles de la grand Bret. lib. 3. p.
165. Short view of the troub. p. 564. Arbit. gov. p. 28. Whitl. Mem. p. 279,
280, 282. Exact. Coll. p. 647.
it is notorious, that many Priests and other Papists fought and acted for the
Parliament against the King; Nay, in 49, there was a design to ibid. p. 405.
settle the Popish Discipline in England and Scotland. The Papists generally
sheltred themselves under the Vizor of Edwards's Gangr. par. 2, p. 10.
Independency. A College of Jesuits was settled at B. of Heref. Narrat. to the
Lds. p. 7.
Come in 52; and 155 were reconciled to Rome that year^ Cromwell Cromwell's
Declar. Oct. 31. 1655.
said, that he had some proof that Jesuits had been found amongst the
Discontented Parties; and Dr. Bailey the Papist Dr. Bayly's Life of Bp. Fisher.
p. 260, 261.
courted him as the hopes of Rome. One of his Physicians Elen. mot. Par. 2. p.
347.
says, he was Treating with the Papists for Toleration, but brake off, because
they came not up to his Price, and because he feared it would be offensive. We
are Hist. Indep. Part 2. p. 245, etc.
told also that an agreement was made in 49 even with Owen Oneal that bloody
Romanist; and that he in pursuance of the Interest of the State, raised the
Siege of Londonderry. A great door was opened to Romish Emissaries, when the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were by public order taken away; and the
Doctrine of the unlawfulness of an Oath, revived in those days by Cotton's Lr.
Exam. p. 4, 5. Simplicit. defense. p. 22. Min. of Land. Test. p. 18.
Williams, Gorton, etc. helped equivocating Papists to an Evasion; as I fear it
may the Quakers at this day. It was the Church of England that kept out Popery
in those times. The patient sufferings of her Members proved that they were not
Popish or earthly-minded; and the Writings of Laud, Chillingworth, Bramhal,
Cosins, Hammond, etc. kept men steadfast in the Protestant Religion.

To this we may add, that the Papists themselves think their Cause is promoted
by our Divisions, as appears from 2 Jesuits, viz. Campanella in his discourse
of the Spanish Mon. cap. 25. p. 157. Printed at Land. in English in 54. and
Contzen's Polit. Lib. 2. Cap. 18. Sect. 9. And they act accordingly; for they
widen our breaches that themselves may enter, and hope that we shall be
dissolved at last by our distempers. They expose Protestants as a Disunited
People; and ask men how they can in prudence join with those, who are at
Variance among themselves?

As for the design of advancing the Protestant Religion to greater Purity and
Perfection by dissetling the Church, it is not likely to be effected for six
reasons. First, the dissetling that which is well settled, corrupts Religion
by removing Charity, which is the Spirit of it. It lets men loose that cannot
govern themselves; it moves men to Atheism, Idolatry and contempt of the
Church, and confirms them in sin. It exposes the Church for a prey to the
Enemy, as it did formerly in Africa and Egypt. Those that dissent from a
National Church, generally move for alterations in it, when there is a ferment
in the State; and in such seasons a Church may be pulled in sunder, but there
is not temper enough to set it together to advantage. State-dissenters
generally begin Revolutions with the pretense of Reforming Religion; and
well-meaning Dissenters (when in such hands) can establish nothing, but what
pleases their secular Leaders. A change in the Church naturally produces some
change in the State; and who can secure the event for the better? None can
foresee all the ill consequences of disturbances. When the vessel is stirred,
the lees come up; and Religion is made less pure by commotions. Politicians
promise fair, and use conscientious men to serve a turn; but afterward they
take other measures. Men may intend well, but by using the illegal Arm, they
frequently render that which was well settled, much worse by their unhinging of
it.

Secondly, in the Times of Usurpation, which began with pretense of a more Pure
Religion, our Dissentions caused great Corruptions both in Faith and Manners.
The War was Preached up as the Christian Cause; and many believed that God
would not lay the greatest villainies to the charge of an elect person. The
instances of their extravagancies are endless; and the Lords and Commons, as
well as the Ministers, were Vid. Ordin. Feb. 4. 1646. Min. Testim. p. 31.
highly sensible of them.

Thirdly, if by Purity of Religion be meant such Doctrine, Discipline and Life,
as the Gospel teaches, and a removal of human inventions; that Purity is in our
Church already: and as for her Injunctions, they are (like those of the
Primitive Church) Rules of Ecclesiastical Wisdom in pursuance of the general
Canons in Holy Writ. But if by Purity of Religion be meant a fewness of parts;
as the Quakers believe their way is purer, because they have taken away
Sacraments and outward Forms; by the same reason the Papists may say, that
their Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is more pure than that of the Protestants,
because they have taken the Cup from it. But it must be considered, that that
which makes a Pure Church, is like that which makes a pure Medicine; not the
fewness of the ingredients, but the goodness of them, how many soever they be,
and the aptness of them for the procuring of health. Therefore our Church being
already Pure, the ruin of it will not tend to the purity and advancement of the
Protestant Religion.

Fourthly, the establishing of contrary parties by a Toleration is not the way
to perfect Religion, any more than the suffering of diverse Errors would be the
means of reforming them. One principle only can be true; and a mixture of
Sacred and Profane is the greatest impurity.

Fifthly, Many Dissenters are not like to improve Christianity, because they
lay aside the Rules of discretion, and rely not on God's assistance in the use
of good means; but depend wholly upon immediate illumination without the aids
of prudence.

Sixthly, Our Church has already better means to promote Pure Religion, than
any the Dissenters have proposed. Any Church may be improved in small matters;
but 'twere very imprudent to change the present model for any that has yet been
offered. We have all the necessaries to Faith and Godliness; Primitive
discipline, decency and order are preserved; We have as many truly pious
Members as any Nation under Heaven, and such excellent Writers and Preachers as
God ought to be praised for: whereas amongst the Parties the folly and weakness
of Preachers is delivered solemnly as the dictate of God's Holy Spirit.

I may add also, that the Dissenters Doctrine of God's secret Decrees, their
Ordination by Presbyters without a Bishop, their long unstudy'd effusions,
their leaving the Creed out of the Directory for public Worship, their sitting
at the Lord's Supper (and that sometimes with the Hat on) their alteration of
the Form of giving the holy Elements, and their forbidding the observation of
Festivals, were not so conducive to the edifying of the Body of Christ, as
those things which were in the late Times illegally removed by them.

It is easy enough to alter a Constitution; but it is extreme difficult to make
a true and lasting improvement.

To conclude, since it appears that Dissenters are not like to obtain their
ends of establishing themselves, of rooting out Popery, and promoting Pure
Religion, by overthrowing the Church of England; therefore they ought both in
Prudence and Charity to endeavor after Union with it.

CHAP. I. Of the Necessity of living in constant Communion with the Established
Church of England.
THAT I may discourse with all possible clearness, it will be necessary before
I proceed, to explain a few things. 1. What is meant by a Christian Church. 2.
What Church Communion is. 3. What is meant by Fixed Communion and by Occasinal
Communion.

I. Then a Church is a Body or Society of Men separated from the rest of the
World, and united to God and to themselves by a Divine Covenant. It is a Body
or Society in opposition to particular Men and to a confused multitude. For
though it does consist of particular men, yet those men are considered not in a
private capacity, but as united into a regular Society. For God is not the
Author of confusion. And if the meanest Societies cannot subsist without
order, much less the Church of God, which is a Society instituted for the most
spiritual and supernatural ends. The Jewish Church had exact order; and the
Christian Church with respect to the Union and Order of it is parts is not only
called a Body, but a spiritual building, Holy Temple, and the House of God.

But then the Church is One body in opposition to many bodies. The Jewish
Church was but One, and therefore the Christian, which is grafted into the
Jewish, is but One. The Church is called the Temple of God, and the Temple was
but One by the command of God. Christ also tells us, that there should be but
one fold under one shepherd, Joh. 10.16. And indeed it is extremely absurd to
say, that the Christian Church, which has the same Foundation, the same Faith,
the same Promises, the same Privileges; should be divided into separate Bodies
of the same kind. For certainly where everything is common, there is One
Community. It Is true, distinct men, though of the same common nature, have
distinct Essences, and this makes them distinct persons; but where the very
essence of a Body or Society consists in having all things common, there can be
but one Body. And therefore if one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and
Father of all, be common to the whole Christian Church; and if no Christian has
any peculiar privileges; then there is but one Church.

I add, that the Church is a Body or Society of Men separated from the rest of
the World; upon which account Christians are called the Chosen or Elect People
of God, having a peculiar Faith, Laws, Rites, etc. which are not common to the
whole World. It is also a Society of Men united to God and to themselves by a
Divine Covenant. It is united to God, because it is a Religious Society; and
the Men are united to themselves, because they are one Society. But the chief
thing to be observed is, that the Union is made by a Divine Covenant. Thus God
made a Covenant with Abraham, of which Circumcision was the Seal; and the
Christian Church is nothing else, but such a Society of Men, as are in Covenant
with God through Christ. I suppose all Men will grant, that God only can make a
Church; and that the only visible way he has of forming a Church is by granting
a Church Covenant, which is the Divine Charter whereon the Church is founded;
and by authorizing some persons to receive others into this Covenant by such a
form of admission as he shall institute, which form under the Gospel is
Baptism. So that to be taken into Covenant with God, and to be received into
the Church is the same thing; and he is no Member of the Church, who is not
visibly admitted into God's Covenant.

From what has been said it plainly follows, 1. That a Covenant-State and a
Church State are the same thing. 2. That every professed Christian, who is
received into Covenant, as such, is a Churchmember. 3. That nothing else is
necessary to make us Members of the Christian Church, but only Baptism, which
gives us right to all the privileges of the Covenant. 4. That no Church State
can depend upon human Contracts and Covenants, and therefore the Independent
Church Covenant between Pastor and People is no part of the Christian
Church Covenant; because it is no part of the Baptismal vow, which is one and
the same for all Mankind, and the only Covenant which Christ has made. And why
then do the Independents exact such a Covenant of Baptized persons, before they
admit them to their Communion? 5. That it is absurd to gather Churches out of
Churches, which already consist of Baptized persons. For there is but one
Church, which is founded upon a Divine Covenant, and this we are made Members
of by Baptism; if therefore an Independent Church Covenant be necessary, then
the Baptismal Covenant is of no value, till it be confirmed by entering into a
particular Church Covenant. 6. That if the Church be founded on one Covenant,
then the Church is but one. For those that have an interest in the same
Covenant are Members of the same Church; and though the Universal Church, for
Man's convenience, be divided into several parts or Congregations, yet it
cannot be divided into two or more Churches. So that two Churches which are not
Members of each other, cannot partake in the same Covenant, but the divider
forfeits his interest in it. A Prince indeed may grant the same Charter to
several Corporations; but if he confine his Charter to the Members of one
Corporation, those who separate from the Corporation, forfeit their interest in
the Charter. Thus has God granted a Charter or Covenant, and declares that by
this one Covenant he Unites all Christians into one Church, into which we are
admitted by Baptism; and therefore if we separate from this one Church, we
forfeit our interest in it. God has not made a particular Covenant with the
Church of Geneva, France, or England, but with the one Catholic Church; and
therefore if we do not live in unity with the Catholic Church, we have no right
to the blessings promised to it.

II. By Church Communion I mean Church-Society. To be in Communion with the
Church, is to be a Member of it. And this is called Communion, because all
Church Members have a common right to Church-privileges, and a common
obligation to the duties of Church Members. It Is true, this word Communion is
commonly used to signify Praying, hearing and receiving the Sacrament together;
but strictly speaking those Offices are not Communion, but an exercise of
Communion. Church Communion is Church-Union; for as a member must be united to
the Body, before it can perform the natural action of a member: so a man must
be in Communion with the Church, before he has a right to Pray, etc. And
therefore, though a man that is not in Union or Communion with the Church, should
perform those Offices; yet the performance of them does not make him a Member
of the Church, but an Intruder. Such Offices are acts of Communion, if
performed by Church Members; but not otherwise. So that to be in communion with
the Church is to be a Member of it; and by being a Member a man has a right to
the blessings promised to it, and an obligation to perform the Offices of
Church-Society, viz. obedience to the Churches authority, joining in Prayers,
etc. and he that acts otherwise, renounces his Communion with it.

From what has been said I observe, 1. That Church Communion principally
respects not a particular, but the Universal Church, which is but one all the
World over. For Membership may extend to the remotest parts of the World, if
the body, whereof we are Members, reach so far: and Baptism makes us members of
the Universal Church, because it admits us into the Covenant, which God made
with the Universal Church. 2. That every act of Christian Communion, such as
praying, etc. is an act of Communion with the whole Catholic Church, though it
must be performed in a particular Congregation, because all Christians cannot
meet in one place. Thus do we as Fellow Members Pray to God the Common Father
of Christians, in the Name of Christ the Common Savior of Christians, for the
same Common blessings, for our selves and all other Christians. Thus also the
Supper of the Lord is not a private Supper, but the Common Feast of Christians,
and an act of Catholic Communion. 3. That the only reason, why I am bound to
live in Communion with any particular Church, is because I am a Member of the
whole Christian Church. For I must live in Communion with the whole Christian
Church; and this cannot be done without actual Communion with some part of it.
So that I have nothing else to do but to consider, whether that part of the
Catholic Church wherein I live, be so sound that I may lawfully live in
Communion with it; and if it be, I am bound to do so under peril of Schism from
the Catholic Church. 4. That those Churches which are not Members of each
other, are separate Churches; because the Catholic Church being but one, all
particular Churches ought to be Members of it. To make this plain, I shall lay
down some few Rules, whereby we may certainly know what Churches are in
Communion with each other, and which are Schismatical Conventicles.

1. There must be but one Church in one place; because private Christians ought
to join with those Christians with whom they live; and to withdraw our selves
from ordinary Communion with the Church in which we live into separate
Societies, is to renounce its Communion; and when there is not a necessary
cause for it, is a Schismatical separation. Every particular Church must have
its limits, as every Member in the Body has its proper place: but when there is
one Church within the bowels of another, it is a notorious Schism. This is the
case of our Dissenters, who refuse to worship God in the same assemblies with
us. Distinct Churches at a distance may be of the same Communion: but distinct
Churches in the same place can never be of the same Communion; for then they
would naturally unite. So that all separation from a Church wherein we live,
unless there be necessary reasons for it, is Schism.

It Is true, a Nation may permit those Foreigners that are among them, to model
their Congregations according to the Rules of those Churches, to which they
originally belong; and that without any danger of Schism. For a bare variety of
Ceremonies makes no Schism between Churches, while they live in Communion with
each other. Now every particular National Church has Authority over her own
Members to prescribe the rules of Worship: but as she does not impose upon
other Churches, at a distance; so she may allow the same liberty to the Members
of such Foreign Churches, when they live within her jurisdiction. For though all
true Churches are Members of each other, yet each Church has a peculiar
jurisdiction; and therefore for the Church of England to allow Foreigners to
observe their own Rules, is not to allow separate Communions, but to leave them
to the Government of that Church, to which they belong. So that distinct
Congregations of Foreigners, who own the Communion of our Church, though they
observe the customs of their own, are not Schismatical, as the separate
Conventicles of our Dissenters are.

2. Those are separate Churches, which divide from the Communion of any Church,
from any dislike of its Doctrine, Government or Worship. For in this case they
leave the Church, because they think it unsafe to continue one body with it.
Two Churches may be in Communion with each other, and yet not actually
Communicate together, because distance of place will not permit it: but it is
impossible that two Churches, which renounce each others Communion, or at least
withdraw ordinary Communion from each other from a professed dislike, should
still continue in Communion with each other. Because they are opposite
Societies, sounded upon contrary Principles, and acting by contrary Rules, and
pursuing contrary ends, to the ruin and subversion of each other.

3. Those are separate Churches which do not own each others Members as their
own. The Christian Church is but one Household and Family and whoever makes two
Families of it, is a Schismatic. If Christians in the same Kingdom hold
separate Assemblies under distinct kinds of Government and different Governors,
and condemn each others constitution and modes of Worship, and endeavor to
draw away Members from each other; they cannot be thought to be one Church. And
indeed we may as well say, that several sorts of Government in the same Nation,
with distinct Governors, distinct Subjects and distinct Laws, that are always
at Enmity and War with each other, are but one Kingdom; as we may say, that
such Congregations are but one Church.

III. I am to explain what is meant by Fixed and by Occasional Communion. By
fixed Communion the Dissenters understand an actual and constant Communicating
with some one particular Church, as fixed Members of it. By occasional Communion
they mean praying, hearing and receiving the Sacrament at some other Church (of
which they do not own themselves to be Members) as occasion serves; that is,
either to gratify their own curiosity, or to serve some secular end, or to
avoid the imputation of Schism. Now fixed Communion is the only true notion of
Communion, for occasional Communion does not deserve the name of Communion. For
I have proved that he, who is not a Member, cannot perform an act of Communion;
and therefore it is as plain a contradiction to talk of an occasional act of
Communion, as of an Occasional Membership. Since every act of Communion is an
act of Communion with every sound part of the Catholic Church, therefore the
exercise of Christian Communion is equally fixed and constant, or equally
occasional with the whole Catholic Church.

It Is true, in one sense we may be Members of a particular Church, that is, we
may live under the Government of a particular Bishop in a particular National
Church; but yet every act of Communion performed in this particular Church is
an act of Communion with every sound part of the Catholic Church. So that
wherever I Communicate, whether in that Church in which I usually live, or in
any other particular Church, where I am accidentally present, my Communion is
of the same nature. Now our ordinary Communion with those Churches where our
constant abode is, may be called fixed Communion; and our Communion with those
Churches where we are accidentally present, may be called occasional Communion;
and all this may be done without Schism, because all these Churches are Members
of each other: but we cannot lawfully join sometimes with the established
Church and sometimes with a separate Congregation; because the case is vastly
different. For the established Church and the Dissenters Congregations are not
Members of each other, but separate Churches. Now it is impossible for any man
to be a Member of two separate Churches; and whatever acts of worship we join
in with other Churches, of which we are no Members, they are not properly acts
of Communion.

Having thus explained the Three foregoing particulars, I proceed to the main
business, which was to show, that it is the indispensable duty of all English
men to live in constant Communion with the established Church of England. This
I shall do by showing,

First, That Communion with some Church or other is a necessary duty.

Secondly, That constant Communion with that Church, with which occasional
Communion is lawful, is a necessary duty; from whence I shall make it appear,

Thirdly, That it is necessary to continue in constant Communion with the
established Church of England.

I. Then, it is plain, that Communion with some Church or other is a necessary
Duty. Because to be in Communion is to be a Member of Christ; and he that is a
Member, has a right to the Privileges and an obligation to the duties of a
Member; and it is certain that Communion in Prayers, etc. is none of the least
Privileges of Christianity, and that it is the duty of a Member to Communicate
in Religious Offices. But to put the matter out of all doubt, I shall offer
Five things, to prove that external and actual Communion is a necessary duty.

1. Baptism makes us Members of the visible Church of Christ; but there can be
no visible Church without visible Communion, and therefore every visible Member
is bound to visible Communion, when it may be had. 2. This is Essential to the
notion of a Church, as it is a Society of Christians. For since all Societies
are instituted for the sake of some common Duties and Offices, therefore some
duties and offices must be performed by the Society of Christians; especially
since the Church consists of different Offices and Officers, as Pastors, etc.
Ephesians. 4.11. which are of no use, if private Christians are not bound to maintain
Communion with them in all Religious Offices. 3. The nature of Christian
worship obliges us to Church Communion. For we are bound to worship God
according to Christ's institution, that is, by the hands of the Ministry
authorized for that purpose, Acts 2.42. and therefore though the private Prayers
of Church Members are acceptable, yet none but public Prayers offered up by the
Ministers are properly the Prayers of the Church and acts of Church Communion.
Nay the Lord's Supper, which is the principal part of God's worship, is a
Common Supper or Communion-Feast, and cannot possibly be celebrated but in
actual Communion. 4. The exercise of Church Authority, which consists in
admitting men to, or excluding them from the external acts of Communion,
supposes that Church Members are obliged to visible Communion. 5. If Separation
from Religious Assemblies be to break Communion, as it plainly appears to be
from 2 Cor. 6.17. 1 John 2.19. Heb. 10.25. then to live in Communion with the
Church, requires our actual Communicating with the Church in all Religious
duties. Accordingly to have Communion with any, is to partake with them in
their Religious Mysteries, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. so that though we must first be in a
state of Communion, before we have a right to Communicate; yet we cannot
preserve our Church State without actual Communion. And a right to Communicate
without actual Communion, which is an exercise of that right, is worth nothing;
because all the blessings of the Gospel are conveyed to us by actual Communion.

This is sufficient to prove the necessity of actual Communion with the Church,
when it may be had; for when it cannot be had, we are not obliged to it. But
then the greater difficulty is, whether it be lawful to suspend Communion with
all, because the Church is divided into Parties. Now a man may as well be of no
Religion, because there are different Opinions in Religion; as Communicate with
no Church, because the Church is divided into Parties. For it is possible to
know which is a true and sound part of the Catholic Church; and when we know
that, we are bound to maintain Communion with it. Indeed if Divisions excuse
from actual Communion with the Church, then Church Communion never was or can
be a duty; for there were Divisions even in the Apostles times. But the rule is
plain; for we are bound to Communicate with the Established Church, if it may
be done without sin. The advantage lies on the side of Authority, and to
separate from such a Church is both disobedience and Schism.

But what is meant by Suspending Communion? These men will not say that it is
lawful never to worship God in any public Assemblies during the divisions in
the Church; and therefore they mean, that in case of such Divisions they may
refuse to enter themselves fixed and settled Members of any Church, but
Communicate occasionally with them all. But I have already shown how absurd
this distinction of fixed and occasional Communion is; and that whoever is a
Member of the Church is a fixed and not an occasional Member; and that every act
of Communion is an act of fixed Communion. So that when men Communicate
occasionally, as they speak, with all the different Parties of Christians in a
divided Church, they either Communicate with none or with all of them. If with
none, then they maintain Communion with no Church, which I have proved it to be
their duty to do: but if they Communicate with all, then they are Members of
separate and opposite Parties; that is, they are contrary to themselves, and on
one side or other are certain to be Schismatics.

II. I am now to show in the 2d. place, That Constant Communion is a necessary
duty, where occasional Communion is lawful. Every true Christian is in
Communion with the whole Christian Church, that is, is a Member of the whole
Church; and therefore he must constantly perform the acts of Communion in that
part of the Church in which he lives. So that he cannot without sin Communicate
only occasionally with that Church, with which he may and ought to Communicate
constantly, as being constantly present there. There cannot be two distinct
Churches in the same place, one for constant, and another for occasional
Communion, without Schism; and therefore where my constant abode is, there my
constant Communion must be, if there be a true and sincere part of the Catholic
Church in that place. For it is not lawful to Communicate with two distinct and
separate Churches in the same place, as for instance, sometimes with the Church
of England, sometimes with the Presbyterians; because this is directly contrary
to all the principles of Church Communion. For to be in Communion with the
Church is to be a Member of it; and to be a Member of two separate and opposite
Churches, is to be as contrary to our selves as those separate Churches are to
each other; and whoever Communicates with both those Churches, on one side or
other Communicates in a Schism. So that if Schism be a very great sin, and that
which will damn us as soon as Adultery or Murder, then it must needs be
unlawful and dangerous to Communicate with Schismatics.

Nothing less than sinful terms of Communion can justify our separation from
the established Church wherein we live; for otherwise there could be no end of
Divisions, but men might new model Churches as often as their fancies alter.
That is a sound and Orthodox part of the Catholic Church, which has nothing
sinful in its Communion; otherwise no Church can be sound and Orthodox. Now
that Man that separates from such a sound part of the Church, separates from
the whole Church, because the Communion of the Church is but one. Since
therefore those who Communicate occasionally with the established Church, do
thereby own that there are no sinful terms of Communion with it; and since he
who separates from that established Church where there are no sinful terms of
Communion, is guilty of Schism; therefore a Man is obliged to join constantly
with that Church, with which he owns it lawful to Communicate occasionally.

III. Now if these things be true, which I have so plainly proved, then it will
easily be made appear in the Third place, that it is necessary to continue in
constant Communion with the established Church of England. For since a Man is
obliged to join constantly with that Church, with which he owns it lawful to
join occasionally; therefore it is plain, that all English Men are obliged to
join constantly with the established Church of England, because they may
lawfully Communicate with it Occasionally. But if any Man say that it is not
lawful to Communicate occasionally with the established Church of England, I
doubt not to make it appear in the following discourse, that he is greatly
mistaken.

It Is not my present business to prove, that the Pastors of Dissenting
Congregations ought to subscribe to the Articles, etc. For though that matter may
be easily made out, yet it is Foreign to my purpose; my design being only to
satisfy Lay-Dissenters, and to show that they may lawfully join with our
Church, because then it will appear to be their duty to do so constantly. And
certainly if the Case of Lay-Communion were truly stated and understood, the
People would not be far more averse to Communion with the Parish-Churches, than
the Nonconforming Ministers, who have often joined with us. And as the
Ministers by bringing their Case to the Peoples, may see Communion then to be
lawful, and find themselves obliged to maintain it in a private capacity: so
the People by perceiving their Case not to be that of the Ministers, but widely
different from it, would be induced to hold Communion with the Church.

It appears therefore from what I have already said, that if that part of the
Church in which we live be a true and sound part of the Catholic Church, then
we are obliged to maintain constant Communion with it. And that the Established
Church of England is such a true and sound part of the Catholic Church, even
our Dissenters themselves have fully proved. For all or most of those, with
whom I am to Treat, have joined in our solemn Offices of Devotion; which they
could not lawfully do, if our Church were not a true and sound part of the
Catholic Church of Christ. But I shall not insist upon that personal argument;
because I design to descend to particulars, and to show First, that our Church
is a true and sound part of the Christian Church, and Secondly, that those
Pleas which the Dissenters make use of to excuse their separation from her, are
vain and frivolous.

First, Then, the Established Church of England is a true and sound part of the
Catholic Church. That it is a true Church, appears from the Confession of the
most Eminent and Sober Bayly's Dissuasive, c. 2. p. 21. Corbet's Discourse of
the Religion of England, p. 33. Non-Conformists no Schismatics, p. 13. See
Ball's Friendly Trial, c. 13. p. 306. Letter of Ministers in Old England to
Ministers in New England, p. 24.
Non-Conformists; nay the Old Non-Conformists undertake to A Grave and Sober
Confut. p. 1. etc. p. 57.
prove it, and so does the Jerubbaal, or the Pleader impleaded, p. 18. and 27.
Author of Jerubbaal; and if I should proceed to particulars, I might fill a
Volume with Concerning her Doctrine, See the Opinion of the Presbyt. in Corbet's
Discourse.. 21. p. 43. Baxter's 5 Disp. Pref, p. 6. of the Independents in the
Peace Offering, p. 12. See also Baxter's Def. of his Cure, part 1. p. 64. part
2. p. 3. Wadsworth's Separ. yet no Schism, p. 60, 62. Throughton's Apology, c.
3. p. 106. and of the Brownists in their Apol. p. 7. Anno 1604. See also
Bayly's Dissuasive, c. 2. p. 20, 33. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separ.
part 1.. 9. p. 31. for Opinions concerning her Worship, See Hildersham's Lect.
26. on Joh. p. 121. Contin. of Morn. Exercise, Sermon. 4. p. 91. Throughton's
Apology, p. 104. Peace Offering, p. 17. for Opinions concerning the Truth,
sufficiency and ability of her Ministry, See Bradshaw's Unreasonableness of
Separ. p. 16, 27, 37. Grave and Mod. Confut. p. 28. Apologet. Narrat. p. 6.
Cotton's Infant Baptism. p. 181. for the defense of the Ordination of our
Ministry, See Jus Divi. Minist. Evangel. part 2. p. 12, 16, 17, 25, etc. Jus
Div. regim. Eccles. p. 264, etc. Cawdry's Independency a great Schism, p. 116.
and his defense of it, p. 35, 37.
Testimonies. It Is true they own her to be a true Church upon different
Grounds, because some of the Dissenting Writers are for a National, and others
for a Congregational Church; but they Jus div. Min. Evangel. p. 12, etc.
Brinsly's Church-Remedy, p. 41, 42. Cawdry's Independency a great Schism, p.
60, 89, 132, 172. Tombes's Theodulia,. 15, 16. pref. etc. 9.. 3. Crofton's
Reformation not Separation p. 10. and Bethshemesh Clouded, p. 101, etc. Church
Refor. p. 42. Corbet's account of the Principles, etc, p. 26. Throughton's
Apology, p. 103. Baxter's defense of his Cure, part 2. p. 178. Cotton's way
cleared, p. 8. his Letter, p. 3. Hooker's Survey, pref. and part 1. p. 47.
Goodwin on the Ephesians. p. 447, 448, 449.
all agree in this that the Church of England is a true Church, though they say
she is a corrupted one. Nay our Grave and Mod. Confut. p. 6. Goodwin's Sion
Coll. visited. Bradshaw's Unreasonableness of the Separation, p. 97.
Brethren do not only grant her to be a true Church, but also declare her to be
one of the most valuable, if not the very best in the world. But I shall say no
more of this matter, only I refer the Reader to Mr. Baxter's Cure of Chapter divis.
dir. 56. p. 263.

That the Established Church is also a sound, as well as a true part of the
Catholic Church might easily appear by an examination of it; but I shall not
enter upon so large a work, because it is not necessary: for I conceive that
our Dissenters will be not only willing but forward to acknowledge it, when I
shall have answered those objections which they are pleased to make against our
Communion, and shown that those Pleas which they raise from them, are by no
means sufficient to make Separation lawful. I proceed therefore to the several
Pleas, and design to examine them in their natural order.

CHAP. II. The use of indifferent things in the Worship of God, no objection
against our Communion.
THE First Objection against our Communion is drawn from the use of indifferent
things. Our Adversaries say, that indifferent things may not lawfully be used
in the worship of God, and that our Communion is therefore unlawful, because we
require men to use such indifferent things. Now that this objection may be
fully answered, I shall do four things; viz.

First, I shall show what is meant by indifferent things.

Secondly, I shall show that indifferent things may be lawfully used in divine
Worship.

Thirdly, I shall consider how we may know, what things are indifferent in the
worship of God.

Fourthly, I shall show, how we are to determine our selves in the use of
indifferent things with respect to the worship of God.

I. Then, I shall show what is meant by indifferent things. All actions are
either duties or sins, or indifferent, that is, such as are neither duties nor
sins. Duties or sins are so, either in their own nature or by Divine Law. That
which is commanded is a duty; that which is forbidden is a sin; but that, which
is neither commanded nor forbidden, is indifferent; because it is neither duty
nor sin; and we may either choose or refuse it without sin. For where no law is,
there is no transgression; Romans 4.15. Duty is duty, because it is commanded; and
sin is sin, because it is forbidden; and indifferent is indifferent, because
it is neither commanded nor forbidden. So that we may as well know by the
silence of the Law what is indifferent, as we may know by its Authority what is
a duty or a sin. For where there is no Law for or against, the matter is
indifferent. As for instance, suppose there should be a dispute concerning
days set apart for the service of God; how must this be determined, but by the
Law of Nature or Revelation? Now if neither the Law of Nature nor the Law of
Revelation say any thing of the observation of such days, then we are at
liberty to observe or not to observe them.

II. Indifferent things may be used in the Divine worship; as appears, 1. From
the consideration of the Gospel-rules of worship, which (except what relate to
the two Sacraments) are taken from the Nature of the thing, and were the same
in all Ages; viz. such as respect Order, Decency and Edification. 1 Cor. 14.26,
40. So that we are no otherwise bound, than all the world ever was; and
therefore, since others have always determined the outward circumstances of
worship, we have also the same liberty. The Rules themselves are general, and
the Apostles rarely descend to particulars; but whenever they do, they show how
far Custom, Charity and the reason of the thing ought to govern us; (as in the
case of a Man's being uncovered in God's worship, 1 Cor. 11.4, 7.) for they
thought it impossible or not worth their while, to tie all Nations to the same
Modes, since God may be honored by one as well as the other. If it be said,
that when things are determined in general, the particulars are therein
Virtually determined, and so are not indifferent; I answer, that then nothing
is indifferent, since there are general rules about every thing. As for
example, all Meats are now lawful to Christians; but yet there are general
rules, by which we are determined in the use of them, such as our own
constitution, etc. but those rules do not make the Meats to be other than
indifferent. So there are general rules for God's worship; but yet the
particulars are indifferent, and prudence is to regulate them. The general
rules of Order, Decency and Edification depend upon variable circumstances, and
may be different according to those circumstances. That thing may tend to
Order, Decency and Edification in one Country or Age, which in another may tend
to the contrary. Thus being covered in the Church, and the Custom of
Love Feasts, etc. were once thought decent; but afterward the opinions of Men
altered. So that Order, Decency and Edification being changeable things as
circumstances vary, only general rules can be prescribed; but the particulars
must be left to Authority to determine.

2. Our Savior and his Apostles did use indifferent things, which were not
prescribed, in Divine Worship. Thus he joined in the Synagogal Worship, John
18.20, etc. though (if the place it self were at all prescribed) the manner of
that Service was not so much as hinted at. Thus he used the Cup of Charity in
the Passover, though it was not instituted; Luke 22.16. The Feast of Dedication
was an human institution, yet he vouchsafed to be present at it. Nay he
complied with the Jews in the very posture of the Passover, which they changed
to Sitting, though God had prescribed Standing. The Apostles also observed the
hours of Prayer, which were of human institution, Acts 3.1. Now if Christ and
his Apostles did thus under the Jewish Law, which was so exact in prescribing
outward Ceremonies; certainly we may do the same under the Gospel. I may add,
that the Primitive Christians not only complied with the Jews in such Rites as
were not forbidden, but also had some ritual observations taken up by
themselves. Thus they 1 Timothy 5.10. Ambros. De Sacram. lib. 3. cap. 1.
washed the Disciples feet in imitation of Christ, and Tertull. De Orat. cap.
14.
used Love Feasts; till they thought it convenient to lay them aside. From
whence it appears that prescription is not necessary to make a Rite lawful;
it is enough if it be not forbidden.

If it be said, that these usages of the Christian Church were civil
observances, and used as well out of God's worship as in it; and therefore what
there needed no institution for, might be lawfully used without it; I answer,
1. That this justifies most of our usages; for a white Garment was used in
civil cases as a sign of Royalty and Dignity, etc. 2. A civil observance, when
used in Religious worship, either remains civil, when so applied; or is
religious, when so applied. If it be civil, then kneeling in God's worship is
not religious, because it is a posture used in civil matters. If it be
religious, then a rite that is not prescribed, may be used in worship to a
religious end. 3. It Is evident, that Buxtorf. Exere. Hist. S^c. Caen.
neither the washing of feet nor the holy Kiss were used as civil rites; and
that the latter is called by the Fathers the Seal of Prayer and the Seal of
Reconciliation. 4. If a rite's being civil makes it lawful in Divine worship,
then any civil rite may be used in worship, and consequently all the ridiculous
practices of the Church of Rome would be warrantable. 5. If a rite's being
civil makes it lawful in worship, then how can our Adversaries say, that
nothing is to be used in worship, but what is prescribed by GOD, except the
Natural circumstances of action? For there are many civil Rites which are not
natural circumstances of action. Feasting and Salutation are civil usages; but
Divine worship can be performed without them. And if these and the like were
anciently used in worship, then we have the same liberty to introduce such
customs.

3. If things indifferent, though not prescribed, may not be lawfully used in
God's worship, then we cannot lawfully join with any Church in the World. For
all Churches do in some instances or other take the liberty of using, what the
Scripture has no where required. Thus the Vid. August. Epist. 118, 119. Basil.
De Sp. S. cap. 27. Ambros. De Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 7. and lib. 3. cap. 1.
ancients observed the Feasts of the Passion, Resurrection, etc. Stood in their
devotions on the Lord's Day, etc. These things they all agreed in, and thought
it unlawful to act against an universal practice. Besides, some Churches had
peculiar customs within the bounds of their own Communion. The Church of Rome
fasted on Saturdays, others indifferently on any Day. That of Milan washed the
feet of persons to be Baptized, but that of Rome did not. Thus in our days
some receive the Lord's Supper kneeling, others standing, etc. So that if we
must have an Institution for every thing done in the worship of God, and if we
must join in nothing which has it not, then we cannot be members of any Church
in the World. Nor indeed can I learn how a Christian can, with a good
conscience, perform any part of God's worship, if this principle be admitted
for true. For habits and gestures are not determined in Scripture, and God's
worship cannot be performed without them; and if they are unlawful, for not
being commanded, then a man must sin every time he Prays or receives the
Sacrament.

Nay those that condemn the use of such things as are not commanded, do in
their practice confute their opinion. For where, I pray, are they commanded to
sprinkle the Children that are Baptized? or to receive the Lord's Supper
sitting? or to use conceived Prayers? or to touch and kiss the Book in
Swearing? Or to enter into a particular Church Covenant? Nay where do they find
that the Scripture says, that there is nothing lawful in divine worship, but
what is prescribed; or that what is not commanded is forbidden? Where are we
told, that God will be angry with us for doing that, which he has not
forbidden? Our brethren themselves will allow, that the time and place of God's
worship may be prescribed by Authority; and why then may not necessary
circumstances, such as gestures and habits, be thus determined, though they be
not commanded? Certainly the command of a lawful power does not make that
unlawful, which was not forbidden, and by consequence was lawful before.

They say indeed, that Nadab and Abihu sinned, because they offered strange
fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not, etc. Lev. 10.1, etc. and
therefore there must be a command to make any thing lawful in divine worship.
But to this I answer, that the phrase not commanded is constantly applied to
such things as are absolutely forbidden. The fire also is called strange; which
phrase when applied to matters of worship, signifies as much as forbidden. Thus
strange incense, Exodus 30.9, 24. is such as was forbidden, because it was not
rightly made; strange vanities is but another word for strange Gods, Jer. 8.19.
and thus the fire of these Men was strange, that is forbidden fire. For there
was scarce any thing belonging to the Altar, of which more is said than of the
fire burning upon it. Lev. 9.24. and 6.12. and 16.12. 'Twas lighted from
Heaven, and was to be always burning. When atonement was to be made by incense,
the coals were to be taken from thence, and therefore surely 'twas peculiar to
those offices. Nay just after the account of the extraordinary way of lighting
the fire, follows this relation of Nadab and Abihu, to show wherein they
offended. For before it was the office of Aaron's Sons to put fire upon the
Altar; and now they suffered for attempting to do as formerly, because Heaven
had declared to the contrary. There was also a Conformity between the
punishment and the sin; for as fire from the Lord consumed the burnt-offering,
so fire from the Lord consumed them. So that their case seems like that of
Vzzah, 1 Chronicles. 13.7, 10, and 15.2. for they acted contrary to God's command. I
may add that in other places also the phrase not commanded is applied to things
forbidden; such as are called abominations, that is, idolatrous worship, false
Prophets, etc. Deuteronomy. 17.3, 4. Jer. 7.31. and 19.5. and 32.35. so that since the
phrase is always spoken of things plainly forbidden, it is a sign, that it is
rather God's forbidding that made them unlawful, than his not commanding.

But, say they, why should the phrase be used at all in such matters, if not
commanded is not the same as forbidden? To this I answer, that not commanded is
only a softer way of speaking, which is usual in all languages, and frequently
to be met with in Scripture. Thus God says, that hypocrites choose that in
which I delighted not, Is. 66.4. that is, their abominations, as we read, v. 3.
So the Apostle says, the Gentiles did things not convenient, Rom, 1.28, 29.
that is, envy, murder, etc. And the phrase not commanded is of the like kind,
when the things it is applied to, are alike abominable. Besides, if not
commanded be the same as forbidden, then the very notion of indifferent things
is destroyed, and there is no indifferent thing in the world; because a thing
indifferent is, as I said before, that which is neither commanded nor forbidden.

But it is said, that all things not commanded in God's Word are additions to
it; and that such additions are unlawful, because God says, Ye shall not add
unto the Word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it,
Deuteronomy. 4.2. and the Scribes are condemned, Matthew. 15.9. because they taught for
doctrines the Commandments of Men. Now to this I reply, that if by adding to
the Word they mean doing what the Word forbids; or appointing somewhat else
instead of what God has appointed; or expounding away the design of the Word;
or making that which is not the Word of God, to be of equal authority with it,
as the Scribes did; or giving the same efficacy to human institutions as God
does to his; if I say by adding to the Word they mean any of these things, we
think that adding to the Word is unlawful. And if by diminishing they mean
neglecting what the Word requires, or thinking God's institutions not complete,
we think that diminishing from the Word is unlawful. But if they say, that
doing any thing not commanded in the worship of God, though it have none of the
ingredients before spoken of, is a sinful adding to the Word; we therein differ
from them. 1. Because Christ and his Apostles and all Churches have done things
not commanded. 2. Because this destroys the nature of indifferent things; which
cannot be indifferent, if they be sinful additions to God's Word. Besides,
adding is adding to the Substance, and diminishing is diminishing from the
Substance; so that when the Substance remains entire without debasement or
corruption, it cannot be called an addition or diminution in the
Scripture-sence. However our Adversaries themselves are really guilty of what
they charge upon us; for they forbid, as absolutely unlawful, to use any thing
in the worship of God, which is not prescribed; and certainly he that forbids
what the Scripture does not forbid, does as much add to it, as he that commands
what the Gospel does not command.

As for the Words of the 2d Commandment, Thou shall not make unto thee any
graven image, etc. they do by no means prove, that we must worship God by no
other Religious rites, than what he has prescribed. It Is true, we are there
commanded to worship none besides God, and to worship God in a manner suitable
to his Nature and agreeable to his Will: but surely rites instituted by Men for
the Solemnity of God's Service are not there forbidden. It has been said
indeed, that Ceremonies, being invented by Man, are of the same nature with
images; but we must observe, 1. That Images are expressly forbidden, and
Ceremonies are not. 2. That Images tend to debase God in the thoughts of those
that worship him after that Manner, but Ceremonies do not; and therefore
Ceremonies are not a breach of the 2d. Commandment. Ceremonies are not
Essential parts of Divine Worship, but only circumstances of it; and certainly
our Brethren cannot find fault, that such circumstances are used to further
Devotion. For they themselves do plead for sitting at the Lord's Supper, etc.
upon this very account, because they think such external circumstances do
further Devotion.

But, say they, if there be not a Rule for all things belonging to the Worship
of God, the Gospel would be less perfect than the Law; and Christ would not be
so faithful in the care of his Church, as Moses, who was faithful in all his
house, Heb. 3.2. Therefore as Moses laid down all the particular Rules for
God's Worship under the Law, so has Christ under the Gospel; and it is as
dangerous to add, as to detract from them. Now to this I answer, that the
design of the Epistle to the Hebrews is to compare Moses and Christ, or the Law
and the Gospel, and to show the exact Correspondence between the Type and the
Antitype; and not to show that our Savior had as particularly prescribed the
Order of Christian Worship, as Moses had that of the Jewish. The Gospel is not
so particular in the Circumstantials of Worship as the Law was; and we must not
affirm that it is, because we would have it so. We cannot prove, that Christ
has actually done this, because we imagine that he should have done it. We may
better argue, that since these things are not expressly determined under the
Gospel, as they were under the Law; therefore they are left to the
determination of our Superiors, whom we are commanded to obey. Nor are the
sufficiency of Scripture and faithfulness of Christ, to be judged of by what we
fancy they should have determined, but by what they have. Since we do not find
in the Scriptures such particular prescriptions in Baptism as in Circumcision,
nor in the Lord's Supper as in the Passover, nor in our Prayers as in the
Jewish Sacrifices; therefore it is plain, that the sufficiency of Scripture and
faithfulness of Christ do respect somewhat else, and that they are not the less
for want of them. Christ was faithful as Moses to him that appointed him, in
performing what belonged to him as a Mediator, and discovering to Mankind in
Scripture the Method and Means, by which they may be saved; and the sufficiency
of Scripture appears in its being a sufficient means to that end, and it is
putting Men into such a State, as will render them capable of attaining to it.

III. I am next to consider, how we may know, what things are indifferent in
the worship of God. To this I might answer briefly, that in things forbidden by
human Authority, the not being required in Scripture; and in things required by
human Authority, the not being forbidden in Scripture, is a Rule, whereby we
may know, what things are indifferent in the worship of God. But because things
in their nature indifferent, may become unlawful in their use and application,
therefore I shall add the following particulars.

1. Things are called indifferent from their general Nature, and not as if they
were never unlawful; for they are lawful or unlawful, as they are used and
applied. 2. A thing may not be required or forbidden by one Law, which is by
another; and that may be indifferent in one state which is not in another; and
therefore when we say a thing is indifferent, we must consider the Case and Law
which it respects. Thus to discourse about common affairs is a thing
indifferent; but it is unlawful, when practiced in the Church, and in the midst
of Religious Solemnities. 3. As there are certain Rules, which we are to
respect in common conversation, and which even in that case ought to tie us up
in the use of things (otherwise) indifferent: so there are some Rules, which we
must have a regard to in the administration of Divine worship. And as in common
matters the nature of the thing, in actions the end, in conversation the
circumstances are to be heeded, viz. time, place, persons; as when, where,
before whom we are covered and uncovered, etc. so in sacred matters, the nature
of the thing, in the decency and solemnity of the worship; the end for which it
was appointed, in the Edification of the Church; and the Peace, Glory and
Security of that, are to be respected. By these Rules we are to judge of the
indifferency of things in God's service. But because these Rules are general;
and Decency, Edification and Order are variable according as circumstances
alter; and because different men have different opinions of them; therefore I
shall give more particular Directions.

1. Some things are so notoriously agreeable or opposite to Decency,
Edification and Order, that common reason will be able to judge of them. Thus
it is plain, that a tumultuous speaking of many together is less for
Edification, and has more of confusion, than the orderly speaking of one by
one; and service in an unknown Tongue does less conduce to Edification, than
when it is in a Language commonly understood. But, 2. There are other things
which are not so evident; and therefore for the clearing of them we may observe;

1. That Decency, Order and Edification depend upon each other, and must not be
considered asunder. And therefore we must not throw down the bounds of public
Order, and bring all things into confusion, for the sake of Edification, or
because we think any matter indecent. What is against public Order and
Practice, is for that reason indecent, were there no other reason to make it
so. So that if we would judge aright of either of these, we must judge of them
together; and as Order alone is not enough to make a thing Decent, which is in
it self indecent; so Decency or particular Edification is not enough to
recommend that, which cannot be introduced without the disturbance of public
Order.

2. That when the case is not apparent, we should rather judge by what is
contrary, than by what is agreeable to these rules. We know better, what things
are not, than what they are; and therefore, since we better know what is
indecent than decent, disorderly than orderly, against Edification than for it,
it is best to take this course in judging about it. As for instance, if we would
inquire into the decency of the posture to be used in the Lord's Supper, or the
Edification that may arise from it; it may not perhaps be so easy for a Man to
judge of the greater Decency and Edification of kneeling or sitting; but if he
find that the posture enjoined is not indecent or destructive of Piety, and of
the ends for which the ordinance was instituted, he is therewith to satisfy
himself. If, says St. Austin, Epist. 118. what is enjoined be not against Faith
or good manners, it is to be accounted indifferent; and I may add, if it be not
indecent, disorderly and destructive of Piety, it is lawful.

3. That if the case be not apparent, and we cannot easily find out how the
things enjoined are decent, etc. we are obliged to be cautious how we condemn
an action, which those men practice whom for other things we cannot condemn.
When we find that they argue, and produce Experience and Reason for it, and we
have a whole Church against our Opinion, we should be apt to think the fault
may be in our selves; and that it is for want of understanding and insight, for
want of use and Trial, and by reason of some prejudices, that we thus differ in
our judgment from them. We see what little things do determine men ordinarily
in these matters, how addicted they are to their own ways and customs; and
therefore we should think again. So may we be reconciled to the rites of a
Church, as we are to the customs and habits of a Nation, which at first seem as
indecent, as the Ceremonies of a Church can do. In short, we have reason to
suspect, it is a Zeal without Knowledge, when we presume to set our Judgment,
Reason and Experience against the Judgment, Reason and Experience of the
Christian World.

IV. I am now to show in the last place, how we are to determine our selves in
the use of indifferent things, with respect to the worship of GOD.

1. Then as particular Persons, solitary and alone, we may forbear to use what
is indifferent, when no Law of Man requires it; and we may freely use it, when
no Law of Man forbids it. 2. In our conversation with others we must so use our
Liberty, as shall be less to the prejudice and more to the benefit of those we
converse with. We may act or forbear in compliance with Persons of weaker
Judgment. But 3. as we are Members of a Church, we are to obey the commands of
it. For if the not grieving a Brother or endangering his Soul obliges us to
restrain the exercise of our Liberty, much more does the Peace of the Church
oblige us to the same. Let every one please his neighbor, for his good to
Edification, Romans 15.2. that is, to his improvement in Knowledge, Grace, or
Piety, and the promoting of Concord and Charity. Now Edification is chiefly so
with respect to the whole, as the Church is the House of God, 1 Pet. 2.5. and
every Christian is a Stone of it, and therefore ought to study what may be for
the Edification of the whole. And how is that, but by promoting Love, Peace and
Order, and taking care to preserve it? For so we 1 Cor. 14.26. 2 Cor. 10.8. 1 Timothy 1.4. Romans 14.19. 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Ephesians. 4.12, 16.
find Peace and Edifying, Comfort and Edification, Union and Edification joined
together, as the one promotes the other. And therefore as the good and
Edification of the Church is to be always in our Eye; so it is the Rule by which
we ought to act in all things lawful; and to that end we should comply with its
customs, observe its directions, and obey its orders, without reluctance and
opposition.

If any Man seem, or have a mind to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God; 1 Cor. 11.16. Whatever might be urged, the Apostle
concludes, we have no such Custom, etc. The Peace of the Church is to a
peaceable mind sufficient to put an end to all disputes about it; and since the
Peace of the Church depends upon the observation of its customs, that is
infinitely to be preferred before scrupulosity and niceness, or a mere
inclination to a contrary practice. There must be somewhat established; and the
very change of a custom, though it may happen to profit, yet does disturb by its
Novelty, says St. Austin, Epist. 118. Infirmity in a Church is better than
confusion; and in things which neither we nor the worship are the worse for,
but the Church the better for observing, Peace and Order are to be preferred
far before niceties; and certainly neither we nor the service of God can be the
worse for what God has concluded nothing in. In a word, what St. Austin and his
Mother received from St. Ambrose is worthy to be recommended to all; That in
all things not contrary to Truth and good Manners, it becomes a good and
prudent Christian to practice according to the custom of the Church where he
comes, if he will not be a scandal to them, nor have them to be a scandal to
him. Epist. 118, and 86.

And if the custom and practice of a Church must oblige a good Man; much more
ought it so to do, when it is Established by Law, and backed by Authority. For
then to stand in opposition, is not only an Offense but an Affront; it is to
contend, whether we or our Superiors shall Govern; and what can be the issue
of such a temper, but distraction? It Is pleaded, that there should be a Liberty
left to Christians in things undetermined in Scripture; but there are things
which they must agree in, or else there can be nothing but confusion. For
instance, what Order can there be, if Superiors may not determine, whether
Prayers shall be long or short, and the like? To conclude, when the Scripture
does neither require nor forbid an action, we ought to obey the Orders of the
Church in the performance or omission of it.

But it is said, That if we be restrained in the use of indifferent things, we
are also restrained in our Christian Liberty, which the Apostle exhorts us to
stand fast in, Gal. 5.1. Now to this I answer; 1. This is no argument to those
that say, there is nothing indifferent in the worship of God; for then there is
no matter of Christian Liberty in it. 2. A restraint of our Liberty, or
receding from it, is of it self no violation of it. The most scrupulous Persons
plead, that the strong ought to bear with the weak, and give them no offense by
indulging that Liberty, which others are afraid to take; and why, I pray, is a
Man's Liberty more damaged, when restrained by Superiors, than when it is
restrained by another's Conscience? If it be said, that the Superiour's command
restrains it perpetually; I answer, that the case is still the same; for the
Apostle who knew his own Liberty, supposes that it would not be damnify'd, though
it were restrained for his whole life. For, says he, if Meat make my Brother
to offend, I will eat no Flesh while the World stands; 1 Cor. 8.13. and this
he would not have said, had he not thought it consistent with standing fast in
that Liberty, etc. 3. Christian Liberty is indeed nothing else, but freedom
from the restraints, which the Jewish Law laid upon men. This is that Liberty
which we are exhorted to stand fast in; and I think, that in obeying the orders
of our Church, there is no danger of Judaism. But we must note that Christian
Liberty consists, not in our being freed from the act of observing the Jewish
Law; but in being freed from the necessity of observing it. For the Apostles
and first Christians did observe it for some time upon prudential
considerations; but they did so, not out of necessity, but in condescension to
their weak Converts. And if they could observe some Judaical Rites without
infringing their Christian Liberty; certainly we may safely use a few
indifferent Ceremonies.

From what has been said it plainly appears, that the use of indifferent things
is no objection against living in Communion with our Established Church; and
this is enough to satisfy those Persons, who upon no other account, than that
of a few harmless impositions, are guilty of separation from her. But because
they have some particular objections against some particular things imposed by
her, therefore I shall not satisfy my self with proving the lawfulness of using
indifferent things in general, but endeavor to satisfy all their scruples
which relate to single instances, as I shall have occasion to treat of them in
the following Chapters.

CHAP. III. Of the Lawfulness and Expediency of Forms of Prayer.
THE next objection against our Communion is the use of Forms of Prayer. This
the Dissenters judge to be unlawful, or at least not expedient; and they think
it a sufficient excuse for their separation from us. I shall therefore in this
Chapter endeavor to rectify their mistakes; 1. By showing that both Scripture
and Antiquity do warrant Forms of Prayer. 2. By answering their objections
against Forms of Prayer. And 3. by proving that the imposition of Forms of
Prayer may be lawfully complied with.

First then I shall show, that both Scripture and Antiquity do warrant Forms of
Prayer. The Dissenters indeed require us to produce some positive command of
Scripture for the use of Forms of Prayer; but this is needless, because I have
shown in the foregoing Chapter, that things not commanded may be lawfully used
in Divine worship. However, for their full satisfaction I shall endeavor to
prove these Two things; 1. That some Forms of Prayer are commanded in Holy
Scripture. 2. That though no Forms were commanded, yet Forms are as Lawful as
extempore Prayers.


I. Then, some Forms of Prayer are commanded in Holy Scripture. I do not say
that God's Word commands us to use none but Forms; but I affirm that several
Forms of Prayer are enjoined in God's Word. Thus Numb. 6.23, etc. the Priest is
commanded to Pray for the People in this very Form of words, The Lord bless
thee, etc. And Deuteronomy. 21.7, 8. the People are enjoined to say, Be merciful, O
Lord, etc. and 26.13, etc. I have brought, etc. Look down from thy Holy, etc.
David also by Divine inspiration appointed the Book of Psalms for the public
service, as appears by the Titles of many of them. And though some of them have
no Titles at all, yet we find they were delivered by David into the hands of
Asaph and his Brethren, for Forms of Praise and Thanksgiving, 1 Chronicles. 16.7.
and accordingly Hezekiah commanded the Levites to make use of them, 2 Chronicles.
29.30. This Liturgy also was renewed by Ezra, Ezr. 3.10, 11. Besides our
Savior says, When ye Pray, say, Our Father, etc. in which he does as plainly
prescribe that very Form, as it is possible. Nay had he said, use this Form, it
could not have been more expressive of his intention to impose it as a Form.

If it be said, that the Lord's Prayer is not a Form, but only a Pattern or
Directory of Prayer; because our Savior, Matt. 6.9. commanded his Disciples to
Pray after this manner, Our Father, etc. I answer, 1. When the same matter is
mentioned ambiguously in one Text, and plainly in another, then the doubtful or
ambiguous Text must be determined by the plain one. Now (...), Matt. 6.9. may
be as well translated Pray in these words, as Pray after this manner; but I
confess, we cannot certainly know from that Text, whether Christ commands us to
use that very Form, or one like it. But then the words, Luke 11.2. When ye
Pray, say, Our Father, etc. are so express a command to use that very Form,
that nothing can be plainer; and therefore the other Text must be determined by
them. 2. Our Savior gave this Prayer not after the manner of a Directory, but
of a Form. Had he designed it for a Directory, he would have bidden them to
call upon God for such and such things: whereas he gives them a Formed Prayer,
and bids them say it; and we may reasonably suppose, that he intended we should
use it as a Form, since he gave it as such. 3. Though the words in St. Matthew
were only a Directory, yet those in St. Luke are a Form of Prayer. For the
former were delivered in the Sermon upon the Mount, in the second year after
his Baptism; but the latter upon another quite different occasion in the third
year after it. Therefore it is probable, that the Disciples understood those in
St. Matthew only as a Directory; and requested our Savior afterward to give
them a Form. For, 4. the occasion of Christ's giving them this Prayer in St.
Luke, was their requesting him to Teach them to pray, as John taught his
Disciples. For 'twas the custom of the Jewish Doctors to Teach their Disciples
a particular Form of Prayer; and St. John had done the same, and the Disciples
desire, that Christ would do so too. For neither St. John's, nor our Savior's
Disciples could be ignorant how to Pray; but their request was, that Christ
would give them his particular Form according to the Jewish custom; and this
Form he gave them, which we call the Lord's Prayer.

But it is objected, that supposing our Savior did prescribe it as a Form, yet
it was only for a time, till they should be more fully instructed and enabled
to Pray by the coming of the Holy Spirit. For, say they, before Christ's
Ascension the Disciples had asked nothing in his Name, Joh. 16.24. but all
Prayers after Christ's Ascension were to be offered in his Name, Joh. 14.13,
14. and 16.23. Now this Prayer has nothing of his Name in it; and therefore was
not designed to be used after his Ascension; and accordingly, say they, in all
the New Testament we have not the least intimation of the Disciples using this
Form. But this objection is of no force, if we consider the following
particulars.

1. That our Savior has not given us the least intimation, that he prescribed
this Form only for a time, and not for continual use. And if we may pronounce
Christ's Institution to be null without his Authority, then Baptism and the
Lord's Supper may be temporary prescriptions, as well as the Lord's Prayer.
Whatever Christ has instituted without limitation of time, does always oblige.

2. That his not inserting his own Name into it, is no Argument at all, that he
never intended it should be used after his Ascension. For to Pray in Christ's
Name is to Pray in his Mediation, depending upon his Merits and Intercession
for the acceptance of our Prayers; and therefore Prayers may be offered up in
Christ's Name, though we do not name him. Thus without doubt the Disciples Prayed
in his Name, Acts 4.24. though his Mediation is not mentioned. It Is true, his
Name is not expressed in the Lord's Prayer; because when he gave it, he was not
yet Ascended, and his Disciples were not to ask in his Name, till after his
Ascension: but now that he is Ascended, we can as well offer it in his Name, as
if it had been expressed in it. Nay it is so framed, that now after his
Ascension, when the Doctrine of his Mediation was to be more fully explained,
we cannot offer it at all, but in and through his Mediation. For God is
peculiarly our Father in and through Jesus Christ. And therefore Christ's not
inserting his own Name, does by no means prove, that he did not design it for a
standing Form.

3. That though the Scriptures do not mention the Apostles and Disciples using
the Lord's Prayer, yet this is no argument either that they did not use it, or
that they did not believe themselves obliged to use it. For we may as well
conclude from the silence of Scripture, that they did not Baptize in the Name
of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, though Christ had commanded
them so to do; as we may conclude, that they did not use the Lord's Prayer,
though Christ commanded them to say, Our Father, etc. Especially if we consider,
that those who lived nearest the Apostolical Ages, and so were the most
competent Judges of what was done in them, where the Scripture is silent, did
always use this Form in their Public Prayers, and believe themselves obliged
to do so. Now that this Prayer was looked upon as a standing Form, to be
perpetually used, appears from Tertull. de Orat. St. Cyprian de Orat. Dom. St.
Cyril, Cat. Mist. 5. St. Jerome. in Pelag. l. 3. St. Austin. Hom. 42.50. Epist.
59. St. Chrysostom. de Simult. St. Gregory Ep. lib. 7. cap. 6. And to be sure,
they who believed the Institution of it to be perpetually obliging, could not
doubt, but that it was constantly used in the Apostolic Age. And methinks it is
very strange, that had the Institution been temporary, the Church of Christ for
Fifteen hundred Years, should never be wise enough to discover it; and it seems
to me a very high presumption for us to determine against the constant belief
and practice of the Church in all Ages, without the least warrant so to do,
either from our Savior or his Apostles.

But it is Objected yet farther, that though Forms of God's appointing may and
ought to be used, yet Forms of Man's composure ought not: and that we may as
well appoint New Scripture for Public instruction, because the inspired persons
did so; as we may appoint new Forms for Public worship, because they did so.
But this objection also will be of no force, if we consider Four things.

1. That this Objection allows the prescribing of Forms to be lawful in its own
nature; for otherwise God must have done that which is unlawful in its own
nature. Nay our Savior's prescribing his Form was a tacit approbation of other
Forms, that were prescribed before, and that not only by God, but by Men too.
For the Jews used several Forms of human composure in their Temple and
Synagogues in our Savior's time, yet he was so far from disapproving them,
that he prescribed a Form to his own Disciples; which Form, as Mr. Gregory has
proved, he collected out of the Jewish Forms, in whose Books the several Parts
and Clauses of it are Extant almost verbatim to this day. And certainly had he
disapproved their Forms as evil and sinful, he would never have Collected his
own Prayer out of them. Since therefore our Savior's giving a Form in such
circumstances signifies his approbation of other Forms, it is plain either that
he approved what is evil, or that Forms are lawful.

2. That this Objection must allow the prescribing of Public Forms to be not
only lawful, but also useful. For otherwise God, who always Acts for wise
Ends, and Uses the most proper means, would never have prescribed any Forms.
And certainly what was once useful, is useful still. For 1. we are now dull and
carnal enough to need Forms; and 2. our Savior has prescribed one to be used
in all Ages, which he would not have done, had it not been useful for the
Gospel-state.

3. That this Objection must also allow, that God's prescribing Forms by
Inspired Persons may be lawfully imitated by us, provided we have the same
reason for it. And therefore Governors may prescribe Forms as long as Forms
are useful.

4. That though Governors may prescribe Forms after God's Example, yet they may
not prescribe them as Scripture, or Divine Inspiration. For as Spiritual
Governors must take care to instruct the People after God's Example, but are
not obliged to do it by Inspired Persons: so they may prescribe Forms of Prayer
after God's Example, but cannot pretend to do it by Inspiration. They have
God's Example for doing the Action; but they cannot pretend to Inspiration in
the doing of it without manifest falsehood and presumtion. And therefore, though
God's Example will warrant for the one; yet it will not warrant them falsely to
pretend to the other. Thus then it appears, that some Forms of Prayer are
commanded in Holy Scripture; and that our Governors are Authorized by God's
Example to prescribe others, when they judge them useful.

II. Therefore, I am to prove, that though no Forms were prescribed, yet Forms
are as lawful as conceived or Extempore Prayers. Certainly there is no command
of God to pray Extempore; and therefore Forms have a better claim to Divine
Authority, than they. It Is said indeed, that wheresoever we are commanded to
Pray Vocally, we are commanded to Pray in our own Conceptions and words; but
this is a great mistake. For certainly when God commanded Men to Pray by his
own Forms, they did pray Vocally, though not in their own words. And here let me
take notice, that Dissenters appropriate the Name of Prayer to Praying in their
own words; and call the using a Form (not Prayer, but) Reading a Prayer. But
surely the Levites did really Pray, when they used the Words of David and
Asaph; and so did the Primitive Christians, when they said the Lord's Prayer;
and if so, then a Form may be truly called a Vocal Prayer. For Vocal Prayer
consists in the speaking of our devout affections to God whether with, or
without a Form.

But they pretend, that whatsoever instances there may be of Forms in Old
Times, God has declared in the New Testament, that it is his Will, we should
Pray by our own gift of utterance for the future. Now methinks, had it been the
Will of God, that we should not Pray by Forms, it is very strange that in all
the New Testament there should be no express prohibition of it. Especially
since I have proved that the Jews had Forms, and Philo de Victim. p. 483. and
the Modern Rabbis own the same; they were also a People most tenacious of
their customs, and therefore needed to be forbidden the use of Forms, had our
Lord designed to exclude them out of his Worship. Nay the Essenes, who of all
the Sects of the Jews, did most readily embrace Christianity, had certain Forms
of Prayer, as Josephus observes, De Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 7. p. 783. Now when
those that were most likely to receive the Christian Faith, were so addicted to
Forms, can we imagine, that had Christ intended they should use them no longer,
he would not have given them express warning of them? But when instead of so
doing, he bids them say, Our Father, etc. how could they think, but that he
designed they should still use a Form, as they did before? Were not that his
design, it is strange, that he took no care to undeceive them.

But that I may fully prove, that the Scripture does not command us to Pray
without a Form; I shall examine the reasons for which the Dissenters think it
does. God, say they, has promised us an ability to utter our minds in Vocal
Prayer, and therefore to Pray by Forms of other Men's composure is contrary to
his intention. But I shall afterward prove, that this ability, which they
pretend is promised for the purpose of Vocal Prayer, is a common gift, which
God has no more appropriated to Prayer, than to any other end of utterance and
elocution; and that therefore to omit the using it in Prayer, is no more
contrary to the intention of God, than to omit the using it upon any other just
and lawful occasion. However, because they urge some places of Scripture to
prove, that it is designed merely for Vocal Prayer, I shall therefore consider
them. 1. They urge Zach. 12.10. I will pour out upon the house of David and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and supplications. The Hebrew
word, translated supplications, does always (say they) denote Vocal Prayer,
and therefore pouring out the Spirit of supplications must imply communicating
an ability to Pray Vocally. To this I answer, that the word is no more
restrained to Vocal Prayer, than any other word that signifies Prayer in
Scripture. It Is true we read, Psalm. 28.2. Hear the voice of my supplication,
when I cry unto thee; but the voice of my supplication does not necessarily
denote Vocal Prayer. For it is a Hebrai^^, and may signify no more than my
Supplication or Prayer. For so Genesis 4.10. it is said, The voice of thy Brother's
blood cries, etc. Now the blood had no real voice to cry with, but cried just
as mental Prayer does. In other places the word signifies both mental and vocal
Prayer indifferently, Psalm. 86.6. and 6.9. or Prayer in general, Jer. 31.9. But
suppose the word were always used for Vocal Prayer, yet surely the Promise of
pouring out the Spirit of supplications intends a much greater good than the
gift of extempore utterance in Prayer, of which bad Men may have a greater
share than the most devout. And what is that greater good, but the gift of
Heavenly affections in Prayer? If it be urged, that God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son, crying, Abba Father. Gal. 4.6. and that we have received the
Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father, Romans 8.15. and that these
Texts prove us to be enabled to Pray Vocally by the Spirit, and that therefore
we ought not to Pray by Forms; I answer, 1. That if these words oblige us to
cry Vocally to God by our own gifts, then we are equally obliged in all our
Vocal Prayers to cry to him in these words, Abba Father; because that is the
cry which the Spirit enables us to make, and the Text is every whit as express
for one as for the other. 2. I deny that crying here does necessarily denote
Vocal Prayer. For how often do we find the word applied to things that have no
Voice at all? Thus the stones would immediately cry out, Luke 19.40. and the
Laborers hire is said to cry to God, James 5.4. And indeed crying to God has
the same latitude with Prayer, which includes both Vocal and Mental. 3. Suppose
that crying, Abba Father, by the Spirit, signifies Vocal Prayer; yet all that
can be gathered from it is only this, that when we Pray Vocally, we are enabled
by the Holy Spirit to address our selves to God with assurance, as to a
merciful Father; and this we may as well do in a Form as otherwise. For if we
never cry Abba Father by the spirit, but when we word our own Prayers, we can
no more be said to do it when we join with a public Extempore Prayer, than when
we join with a public Form, because we word our own Prayers in neither.

It Is true, the Scripture speaks of a gift of utterance, which, say they, was
given for Praying as well as Preaching; but I answer, that the gift of
utterance was miraculous and particular to the Primitive Ages. This gift, says
Saint Chrysostom Hom. 24. ad Ephesians. c. 6. is that which Christ promised, Mark
13.11. by which the Disciples spoke without premeditation, and what they spoke
was the inspired Word of God; and this Gift no sober Dissenter will pretend to.
The Apostles began to speak with tongues, as the spirit gave them utterance,
Act. 2.4. and the Dissenters may as well pretend to the gift of Tongues, as
that of Utterance, they being both extraordinary.

But say they, though all Men have not the Gift of Praying Extempore, yet some
have; and therefore God requires such to Pray by their gift and not by a Form.
For he requires them not to neglect the gift, 1 Timothy 4.14. but to stir up the
gift, 2 Timothy 1.6. and to Minister the gift, 1 Pet. 4.10. and that having gifts,
etc. Romans 12.6. and if Men are obliged to exercise their gifts in general, then
they must exercise their gift of Praying Extempore in particular. Now to these
things, I answer, First, That the gift bestowed upon Timothy was the gift of
Episcopal power, which he is exhorted to exercise diligently. For at the first
plantation of the Gospel, the Holy Ghost Pointed out the Men, that were to be
Bishops, as the Clem. 1 Epist. ad Corinth. Chrysostom. in Act. 13.2.
Fathers testify. For this reason the gift is said to be given him by
Prophesy. 'Twas given also with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery;
and these two circumstances prove, that the gift was not the gift of
Prophesying, but the gift of Episcopal Authority bestowed upon him by
imposition of hands at God's particular Appointment. And now I pray, how does
this Text prove, that we must use a gift of Vocal Prayer in our own words?

As for 1 Pet. 4.10. Romans 12.6. I Answer, 1. That there can be nothing in them
against Praying by a Form; for then they would make as much against using the
Lord's Prayer, as any other Form. 2. That the design of those Texts is to stir
Men up to diligence in the exercise of those several Offices, viz. The Office
of a Bishop, a Priest, a Deacon, and a Rich Man. For it is plain that the word
Gift does oftentimes signify an Office; and though it may be said, that the
relief of the Poor is rather the exercise of an Ability than an Office, yet I
answer, that it is properly the exercise of an Office, because the very having
Ability does as much put a Man into the Office of showing mercy to the Poor, as
if God had appointed him to it by a solemn Ordination. 3. Supposing that by
these gifts were not meant Offices, but only abilities, yet we are obliged so
to exercise them, That all things may be done to Edification; for so the
Apostle declares that those extraordinary Gifts, that were poured out in the
Primitive Times, were to be used, 1 Cor. 14.2, 6, 19, 40. as it is particularly
plain by the instance of the Gift of Tongues, verse. 23, 26, 28. Now if we are
not to exercise our gifts, but as they tend to Edification, then we must not
exercise the gift of Praying Extempore any farther than it tends to
Edification. And since Praying by a Form in Public Worship does (as I shall
afterward prove) tend more to Edification, than Praying Extempore; therefore
it is plain that we ought to suspend the use of the gift of conceived Prayer.
Thus, I hope, I have made it appear that some Forms of Prayer are commanded in
Scripture, and that those Texts which are urged against the use of forms of
Prayer, do prove nothing against them; and therefore I think I may safely
affirm, that the Scripture does warrant Forms of Prayer.

I proceed now to show that Antiquity does the same. This I shall do, 1. by
answering those Authorities, which are objected by the Dissenters against the
use of Forms in the Primitive Ages. 2. By proving that they were used in those
Ages, by a short Historical Account of the matter of Fact.

1. Then it is objected, First that Justin Martyr says, Apol. 2. p. 98. That
the Minister at the Communion Prayed, (...), that is, say they, according to
his ability; from whence they infer, that in his days the Ministers Prayed by
their own gifts and abilities. To this I answer, that the words do signify with
all his might, i. e. with his utmost fervency. For the same words are spoken of
the People in the same Book, p. 60. who did not compose their own Prayer at the
Eucharist; and the same Phrase is used in the same sense by Nazianzen, Orat. 3.
2dly, Because Tertullian in his Apology affirms, that Christians did Pray
without a Monitor or Prompter, because they did Pray from their hearts; they
think he alludes to a custom of the Heathen, who in their public worship had a
Monitor to direct them in what words and to what God they were to Pray. Now
since the Christians Prayed without a Monitor, therefore say they, they Prayed
without any one to direct them what Form of words they were to pray in. To
which I answer, 1. That without a Monitor cannot signify, without any one to
dictate a Form of words. For in their public Prayers the Minister was the Mouth
of the People; and therefore whether he Prayed by Form or extempore, his words
were a Form to the People. Whatever therefore this obscure Phrase means, it is
certain it cannot mean without a Form, unless it means without a Minister too.
2. It seems to me most probable, that by without a Monitor is meant, without
any one to correct them, when either the People repeated or the Minister
recited the public Prayers falsely. For A. Gell. Noct. At. l. 13. c. 21. Rosin.
Antiq. l. 3. c. 33.
the Heathen Priests began their Sacrifices with a Form of Prayer, which began
with an Invocation of Janus and Vesta, and proceeded with the invocations of
all the greater Deities by name. Now that none of the greater God's might be
pretermitted, and Plin. l. 28. c. 2.
none of the Prayers falsely or disorderly recited or repeated, Live, l. 4.
one Priest read out of a Ritual, and another was appointed for a Public
Monitor, to oversee and correct such mistakes as might be made. When therefore
Tertullian says, We Pray without a Monitor, his meaning is not, that we Pray
without a Priest to dictate our Prayers to us, whether out of a Book or
Extempore; but that we Pray without one to oversee, to admonish the Priests or
People, when they dictate or repeat falsely. Because, says he, we Pray from our
hearts; that is, either by joining our affections and desires with the Priest
without repeating the words, or by saying our Prayers by heart; so that we need
none to correct us. For Tertullian affects to express the Greek; and therefore
it is probable his de pectore, or from the heart may be a translation of (...),
which signifies to say by heart. So that Tertullian's words do rather argue for
the use of Forms, than against them. The Third and last testimony against the
Antiquity of Forms of Prayer, is that of Socrates Scholasticus, whose words,
Hist. lib. 5. c. 22. they thus translate; Every where and in all worships of
Prayer, there are not two to be found, that speak the same words. And
therefore, say they, it is very unlikely, they should Pray by Forms. But we must
observe, that he had been speaking of the different ceremonies and customs of
the chief Churches; and then concludes, Every where and among all worships of
Prayer, there are not two to be sound, (not that speak the same words) but that
agree (...), in the same thing. Where by worships of Prayer he means rites of
Prayer, which the Churches differed in. And how does it follow, that because
they did not use the same rites and ceremonies of Prayer, therefore they did
not use Forms of Prayer? For even now we see there are different rites and
ceremonies of Prayer among those Churches, which do yet agree in using Forms of
Prayer.

2. Therefore I am to prove, that Forms were used in the Primitive times, by a
short Historical account of the matter of fact. It Is probable, that in the
first Age there was a gift of Praying Extempore by immediate inspiration; and
while this gift continued, perhaps there might be no other Form in public
Worship, but only that of the Lord's Prayer. But it is probable, that upon the
ceasing or abatement of it, Forms were composed after the method of those
inspired Prayers. For it is most likely, that even from the Apostolical Age some
part at least of the public Worship was performed in Forms of Prayer; because,
so far as we can find, there never was any dispute among Christians concerning
the lawfulness of Praying by a Form. For it is strange that, if Forms were an
innovation, such a remarkable and public innovation should be introduced
without the least contest or opposition. For though some innovations did creep
in; yet every one of that public nature always found powerful adversaries to
withstand it.

But not to insist upon probabilities, we will enquire into matter of fact. The
Liturgies of Saint Peter, St. Mark and St. James, though corrupted by latter
Ages, yet are doubtless of great antiquity, and probably even from the Apostles
times. For besides many things, which have a strong relish of that Age, that of
St. James was of great authority in the Church of Jerusalem in St. Cyril's
time, who wrote a Comment upon it even in his younger years; and it is declared
by Allat. de Lit. Sti. Jac.
Proclus, and the Council. Trull. c. 32.
Sixth general Council to be of St. James's own Composure; and 'twas probably
received in the Church of Jerusalem within 170 years after the Apostolical Age.
And that there are Forms of Worship in it as ancient as the Apostles, seems
highly probable; For First, all the Form Sursum corda is there, and in St.
Cyril's Comment; and the same is in the Liturgies of Rome and Alexandria and
the Constitutions of Clemens, which all agree are of great antiquity; and St.
Cyprian, who was living within an 100 years after the Apostles, De Orat. Dom.
mentions it as a Form then used and received; and St. Austin tells us, that
Form is words derived from the very age of the Apostles. The same is asserted
by Nicephorus of the Trisagium in particular, Hist. lib. 18. c. 53. It Is
evident, that from that Primitive Age there was a Form of questions and answers
prescribed in Baptism, from the questions and answers, which Tertull. De Resur.
Carn. St. Cypr. 76.80. Origin in Numer. Hom. 5. speak of. And if the Minister
may be limited to a Form of question, why not to a Form of Prayer, there being
as great a necessity to prescribe for the latter as for the former?

But that de facto there were Forms of Prayer, as well as Questions and Answers
used in Baptism, Clemens's Constitutions affirm; and some of the Prayers are
there inserted, l. 7. And that Christians did very early use Forms of Prayer in
their public Worship, is evident from the Names given to public Prayers; for
they are called the Justin. Apol. 2. Ignat. Epist. ad Magn.
Common Prayer, Orig. cont. Celf. l. 6.
Constituted Prayers and Cypr. de Laps. sermon. 14.
Solemn Prayers; which last was the Title by which the Heathens distinguished
their Vid. Ovid. de fast. lib. 6. Stat. lib. 4. Senec. in Oedip. act. 2. scen.
2.
public Forms of Prayer, and consequently in the Language of that Age must
signify a public Form. De Spir. S. c. 27. and 29.
St. Basil fetches the Glory be to the Father, etc. from the tradition of the
Apostles, and cites it from St. Clemens the Apostles Scholar, and from
Dionysius of Alexandria, who was living in the year 200; and Clemens of
Alexandria, who was living in the year 160, sets down these words as the
Christian Form of Praising God, Paedag.
Praising the Father and the Son with the Holy Ghost. So that this Form is
older than the time of the Arians; for they are sharply Theod. Hist. l. 2. c.
24.
reproved by the Orthodox Fathers for the alteration of it. And indeed a great
part of the Primitive Worship consisted of Hymns, which must necessarily be
composed into set Forms. Tertull. Apol. cap. 2. and before him Lucian in
Philop. and Justin Martyr also, Epist. ad Zen. and Heren. speak of their
singing such Hymns. They spend whole nights in watching and singing of Psalms,
says Lucian; and Pliny says, that early in the Morning 'twas their manner to
sing by turns a Hymn to Christ as God; which Hymn was doubtless of human
composure, there being no Hymn to Christ in Scripture of that length, as to
take up a considerable part of their public Service. Eusebius tells us, that
very early there were various Psalms and Odes composed by Christians concerning
the Divinity of Christ Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5.
; and that Paulus Samosatenus was condemned for suppressing those Hymns that
were made in the Honor of Christ, as being the composition of Men of late
days ibid. Hist. lib. 7.
; though in all probability those Hymns were composed within much less than an
hundred years after the Apostolical Age. But as for this Hymn which Pliny
speaks of, it was earlier, for it could not be much above ten years after the
death of St. John, that Pliny gave this account of the Christians to Trajan;
and therefore to be sure the Hymn he there speaks of, was used in the Age of
the Apostles. About the same time, Lucian makes mention of a Prayer which they
used in their public Worship, (...), beginning from the Father; which doubtless
was the Lord's Prayer: and of a famous Hymn added to the end of their Service,
Lucian. Philop.
which in all probability was the Hymn that Pliny speaks of. Since therefore
the Primitive Worship, did in a great measure consist of Hymns, which were
Forms of Praise intermixed with Prayer, and some of these of human composure;
this is an evident Testimony of the Primitive use of Forms. And doubtless, they
who made no scruple of praying by Form in verse, could not but think it lawful
to pray by Form in prose. Now that Praying in Meeter or composed Hymns was a
very early practice in the Christian Church, is evident from the Apostolical
Constitutions, where it is enjoined, Let the People sing the verses which
answer adversly to one another Constitut. Apost. l. 2. cap. 5.
: which way of singing was so very ancient, that Eusebius Eusebius. Hist. Eccles.
l. 2. c. 171.
urges it as an Argument to prove the Essenes Christians, because they sung by
turns, answering one another; and how could they thus answer to one another in
their Hymns and Prayers, unless they had constant Forms of Prayer? But that
they had such Responsals in Prayer, is evident, because, when Julian for the
credit of Gentilism would needs dress it up, Soz. Hist. l. 5. c. 15.
after the Order of the Christian Worship; one thing wherein he sought to
imitate it was in their constituted Prayers; that is, not in having constituted
Forms of Prayer, for that the Heathen had before; but in having such
constituted Forms as the Christians had; that is, as Nazianzen Nazian. Orat. 1.
p. 102.
explains it, a Form of Prayer to be said in parts; for this way of Praying in
parts Nicephorus Niceph. l. 13. c. 8.
derives from Ignatius, who was a Scholar of the Apostles. All which to me is a
plain demonstration of the great Antiquity of Forms. And that in Constantine's
time, the Church used public Forms of Prayer, is evident from that often-cited
place of Eusebius, Eusebius. de Laud. Constant.
where he tells us of Constantine's composing Godly Prayers for the use of his
Soldiers; and elsewhere tells us in particular what the Prayer was; We
acknowledge thee, O God, alone, etc. Id. de vit. Constant. c. 20.
which is a plain evidence that it was a set Form of words. But it is objected
that this Form was composed only for the use of his Soldiers, who were a great
part of them Heathens; and that Constantine's composing it, is a plain
evidence, that at that time there were no public Forms in the Church; for if
there had, what need Constantine have composed one? To which I answer, That
this Form indeed was composed only for his Heathen Soldiers; for as for his
Christian Soldiers, the story tells us, that he gave them liberty to go to
Church Ibid. c. 19.
. And therefore all that can be gathered hence is, that the Christian Church
had no Form of Prayers for Heathen Soldiers, which is no great wonder; for if
they had, it is very unlikely that the Heathen Soldiers would have used it. But
that they had Forms is evident, because he calls the Prayers which Constantine
used in his Court, according to the manner of the Church of God;* Ibid. c. 17.
Authorized Prayers; which is the same Title which he Ibid. c. 18.
gave to that Form which he made for his Heathen Soldiers. And therefore if by
the Authorized Prayers which he prescribed to his Soldiers, he meant a Form of
Prayers, as it is evident he did: then by the Authorized Prayers which he used
in his Court after the manner of the Church, he must mean a Form of Prayer
also. And since he had a Form of Prayer in his Court after the manner of the
Church, the Church must have a Form of Prayers too.

It Is plain then, that the three first Centuries had public Forms of Prayer;
after which (not to insist upon the Liturgies of St. Basil, St. Chrysostom and
St. Ambrose) we have undeniable testimonies of the same. See St. Chrysostom. 2.
ad Corinth. Homil. 18. St. Austin de Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 6. and Council.
Carth. 3. c. 12. Council. Milev. c. 12. Justin. Novel. 137. Pref. and 1, 2, 6.
Nazian. Orat. in Basil 20. says, St. Basil composed Orders and Forms of
Prayer: and St. Basil himself, Epist. 63. reciting the Manner of the public
Service, that was used in the Monastical Oratories of his Institution, says,
that nothing was done therein, but what was consonant and agreeable to all the
Churches of God. Nay the Council of Laodicea, holden about the Year 364,
expressly provides, That the same Liturgy, or Form of Prayers, should be always
used both Morning and Evening, Can. 18. and this Canon is taken into the
Collection of the Canons of the Catholic Church; which Collection was
established in the General Council of Chalcedon, in the Year 451, by which
establishment the whole Christian Church was obliged to the use of Liturgies,
so far as the Authority of the General Council extends. And then in the Year
541, these Canons were made Imperial Laws by Justinian, Novel. 131. c. 1. See
Zonar. and Balsam. on can. 18. See also Smectym. Answ. to the Remonst. p. 7.
Grand. deb. p. 11. and Council. Laod. c. 15, 19. Thus for near 600 Years after
Christ we have sufficient testimony of the public use of Forms of Prayer.

And from henceforth, or a little after, down to Mr. Calvin's time, all are
agreed, that no Prayers but established Liturgies were used. Nay Calvin, who
Prayed Extempore after his Lecture, always used a Form before, Pref. ad Calv.
Prael. in Min. Proph. and he composed a Form for the Sunday-Service, which was
afterward established at Geneva. Nay he says, for as much as concerns the
Forms of Prayer, and Ecclesiastical Rites, I highly approve that it be
determined so, as that it may not be lawful for the Ministers in their
administration to vary from it; Ep. 87. Nor is there any one Reformed Church,
but what has some public Form of Prayer; nor was the lawfulness of Forms ever
called in question before. Nay Mr. Ball, Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Norton and
Mr. Tombs do See Ball's Trial, Pref. etc. 1, 2, 3, 8. Baxter's Cure of Chapter
Divis. p. 175. Owen's Work of the Spirit in Prayer* p. 220.222, 235. Norton's
Answer to Apollon. c. 13.
expressly own them to be lawful; and this is said Clark's Lives of 10 Divines,
p. 255.
to be the tenent of all our (Dissenting) best, and most judicious Divines. It
is very well known (says Bradshaw's Life in Clark's Coll. in fol. p. 67.
one) that the flower of our own Divines went on in this way, when they might
have done otherwise, if they had pleased, in their Prayers before Sermons; and
we find Mr. Hildersham's Prayer before Sermon See His Doctrine of Fasting and
Prayer, Anno 1633^
Printed. This was so universally and constantly practiced, that Mr. Clark
Collect. of 10 Lives, 4 to, p. 38.
tells us, that the first Man who brought conceived Prayer into use in those
parts where he lived, was Mr. Sam. Cook, who died but in the Year 1649. Nay the
chief Dissenting writers do not only assert, but they also undertake to prove
the lawfulness of Forms See Ball's Tri l. c. 2. Rogers's Tr. 223. Bryan's
Dwelling with God, p. 307. Egerton's Practice of Christianity, c. 11. p. 691.
Edit. 5.
from the nature, use and ends of Prayer; and charge the contrary opinion with
Enthusiasm Grave Confut. Epist. to the Reader. Contin. Morn. Exerc. p. 1006.
and Novelty Priest, Sermon. on Joh. 1.16.
. They grant also, 1. That Forms are not only lawful, but that there are
Footsteps of this way of Worship both in the Old and New Testament, as Mr.
Tombs and others have showed, Theodulia, p. 221. Baxt. Cure, p. 176. Ball's
Trial. p. 128, 129. Grave confut. p. 12, 13.
and Mr. Ainsworth (that did otherwise argue against them) does confess Annot.
on Ex. 12.8.
. 2. That they are very ancient in the Christian Church. The Christian Churches
of ancient Times, for the space of this 1400 Years at least, if not from the
Apostles Time, had their stinted Liturgies, says Mr. Ball Trial, p. 96, 106,
111, 138. and p. 80.
: and Tombes's Theodulia, p. 222.
they answer Objections to the contrary. 3. That in the best reformed, nay, in
all reformed Churches, they are not only used and tolerated, but also Ball's
Trial, p. 108, etc. Rogers's Treatises, p. 224. Tombes's Theod. p. 234.
useful and expedient. 4. That those amongst us, to whom the use of the
Common Prayer has been most burdensome, have from time to time, professed their
liking and approbation of a stinted Liturgy, as Mr. Ball assures us Trial, p.
96, 106, 12.
. That they thought it altogether unlawful to separate from Churches for the
sake of stinted Forms and Liturgies, is not only frequently affirmed by Mr.
Ball Resp. ad Apol. c. 13.
, but little less even by Mr. Norton, Sacril. desert. p. 102.
who says, It is lawful to embrace Communion with Churches, where such Forms
in public Worship are in use; neither does it lie as a Duty on a Believer, that
he disjoin and separate himself from such a Church. And they give this reason
for it, that then they must separate from all Churches. So Mr. Baxter Defense,
part 2. p. 65. See Ball's Trial, p. 131, Rogers's Tr. p. 224.
, Is it not a high degree of Pride, to conclude, that almost all Christ 's
Churches in the World, for these 13 hundred Years at least to this day, have
offered such worship unto God, as that you are obliged to avoid it? And that
almost all the Catholic Church on Earth this day, is below your Communion for
using Forms? And that even Calvin, and the Presbyterians, Cartwright,
Hildersham, and the Old Non-Conformists were unworthy your Communion?

As for Praying Extempore, 'twas set up in England in opposition to our
Liturgy. For in the Ninth Year of Q. Eliz. to seduce the People from the
Church, and to serve the ends of Popery, one Friar Comin began to Pray
Extempore with such fervor, that he deluded many, and was amply rewarded for it
by the Pope. See Foxes and Firebrands, p. 7, etc. After him Tho. Heath did the
same, p. 17. See also Vnreason. of sep. pref. p. 11, etc. And I hope when the
Dissenters have well considered, whom they join with, and whose cause they
advance, by decrying our Liturgy and extolling Extempore Prayers, they will see
cause to think better of Forms of Prayer.

Secondly, I am now to answer the Dissenters Objections against Forms of Prayer.

1. They pretend, that the Use of public Forms does deaden the Devotion of
Prayer; whereas I doubt not to make it appear, that they do quicken Devotion
much more then Extempore Prayers.

It Is plain that Forms of Prayer do fix the Minister's attention more than
Extempore Prayers. For his matter and words being ready before him, he has
nothing else to do but to attend his inward Devotion, which is the life of
Prayer: whereas Praying Extempore forces him to attend to the Recollection of
Matter, and invention of expressions; which must more or less divert him, it
being impossible to attend to several things, as closely as he may to one. It Is
true, he that uses a Form, may permit his thoughts to wander; but then the
sault is in the Man, and not in the Form; for he converts that which in it self
helps Devotion, into an occasion of indevotion. He that Prays Extempore is
more bound to attend to words; but he that Prays by Form, has better
opportunities of attending to the proper business of Prayer, viz. Contrition,
Sense of our Wants and dependence upon God, etc. And by being an example of
these in his Prayer, the Minister does very much excite the Devotion of the
People.

But it is Objected, that while his thoughts are employed in inventing the
matter and words of his Prayer, they are well employed; because they are
attending to the duty of Prayer, though they be not so fixed upon the inward
Devotion of it, as they might be in the use of a Form. To this I answer, that
to invent the matter and words of Prayer, is not to Pray, but to study a
Prayer, which cannot be proved to be a part of our duty. But we believe, that
when we Pray Devoutly by a Form, we discharge the whole duty of Prayer, though we
do not invent the matter and words our selves; and till we see the contrary
proved, we shall always think so. If it be said, that Praying Extempore will
not suffer the Minister's thoughts to wander; I answer, that if the Minister
have Devout affections, they will keep his thoughts from wandering, when he
Prays by Form, as much as when he Prays Extempore; but if he has not, he
cannot utter his words from his affections either way.

But it is pretended, that Praying Extempore does heighten the Minister's
affections more than a Form. Because, say they, in reading a Form his
affections follow his words, and are raised and excited by them; whereas in
Praying Extempore his words follow his affections. But why may not a Man, who
knows before hand what he is to Pray for, be Devoutly affected with it, before
he expresses it in a Form, as well as before he expresses it Extempore? And why
may not he that Prays Extempore, be as little affected with what he Prays
for, before he has expressed it, as he that uses a Form? May not a Man's tongue
run before his heart either way? But suppose it true, that in Extempore Prayer
the words follow the affections, and that in a Form the affections follow the
words; does it follow that Praying Extempore heightens the affections more than
a Form? Why may not the affections, viz. desire, etc. which follow the words,
be as great as those that go before? Especially since our Dissenters say, that
expressive words do naturally quicken affections.

If it be said, that the Minister cannot so well express his Devout affections
in other Men's words, as in his own; I answer, that he is the Mouth of the
Congregation, and that his business is, not to express his own particular and
extraordinary fervours, as the common case of the Congregation; but so to
speak, as every honest and ordinary Christian may join with him. For it is as
bad for him to express such heights of Devotion, as few or none of them are
arrived to; as to confess in their names such sins, as few or none of them are
guilty of. Now the common sense of the Congregation may be as well expressed in
another Man's words as in his own; unless we suppose that Extempore words can
more fitly express it, than those that are premeditated; which no sober
Dissenter will affirm. But, say they, the Minister's Soul is so busied in
reading a Form, that it cannot be so much affected, as when he Prays
Extempore. Now I leave the Reader to judge, whether being busied about the
Matter, Method and Expressions of Prayer, does not much more employ the
Ministers Soul, than bare reading; that is, whether he that can read a Prayer
without the least trouble, cannot read a Prayer more easily than invent one.

However, they tell us, that Praying always in the same words, does cloy the
Attention of the People; whereas the newness and variety of conceived Prayers
does naturally awaken their Minds and keep them more sixth and intent. But I
answer, that the matter of public Prayer is, and for the main will be, the
same; and therefore if the matter fixed their minds, 'twou'd as well do it in
the same, as in new expressions. But if it be the Phrase, that their minds are
fixed on, there is nothing in it, but an amusement of their fancies, which does
rather unfix them from the inward acts of Prayer, and distract their Devotion.
Forms may be composed and pronounced as affectionately as Extempore Prayers,
and may as well excite the People's Devotion; but novelty of method and
expression does as much deaden the Devotion of those that are fixed upon it, as
worldly business. That seeming Devotion, that is raised by the jingling of
words, is not Devotion but Mechanism; for a Man may be strangely affected with
the words of Prayer, who has not the least spark of true Devotion to the matter
of it: but if the Mind does affect the matter of Prayer for it self, and not
for the sake of the words, I cannot imagine, how new words should any way
advantage its Devotion, unless they were to express new matter.

Thus it appears, that even what is urged in behalf of Extempore Prayers, does
plead much more for Forms; but then there are sundry advantages peculiar to
Forms, which Extempore Prayers cannot pretend to. For 1. People may consider
the matter of a Form, and endeavor to affect their minds with it before hand;
and so they may Pray with greater preparation. 2. People may join in a Form
with more understanding, than in an Extempore Prayer, wherein the Minister is
forced to use such expressions as come first to hand; and sometimes he is
forced to use a hard word, which half of the Congregation do not know, because
an easier does not come to his mind; besides many other inconveniences, which
it is impossible always to avoid. Now in composing public Forms more care will
be taken that the words may be intelligible, than there can be in Extempore
Prayer. And truly, if the words be not intelligible, the People's Prayer must
be as much interrupted as if the Minister spoke in an unknown tongue. 3. Men
may join in a Form with much more Faith, and Hope of being heard, than they can
in Extempore Prayer. For they may be satisfied before hand, that the matter of
a Form is good; but they cannot be so satisfied of an Extempore Prayer;
considering that the Minister is many times a stranger, and may be perhaps
Erroneous, Rash, Ignorant, etc. And even those Ministers whom they know, may
sometimes mistake their Passion for their Zeal, and reake their Anger or their
Faction in their Prayers, or let drop an Error, before they are aware, or
express themselves so, as an honest mind may not be able to join. So that in
joining with an Extempore Prayer a Man must judge what is said, before he can
consent to it: and if he meet with a rub, the Minister goes on in the mean
time, and the Man is left behind at a loss, and perhaps confounded, before he
can join again; and no sooner perhaps is he well fixed, but he is troubled again
with the same inconveniency: all which is easily prevented by the use of Forms.
4. Forms do not divert the affections of the People from the Matter of Prayer,
as Extempore Prayers do, which disturb Devotion, whenever the Minister
hesitates, or blunders, or expresses himself improperly; for then some will be
pitying, others contemning, others carping, etc. And if he perform well, some
will admire his Phrase, Judgment, Readiness, etc. all which things do call off
their minds from the Matter. 5. The Decency and solemnity of public Worship,
which things are highly advantageous to the Devotion of the people are better
secured by Forms, than by Extempore Prayers, where they depend wholly upon the
Minister. For if he happens to be a Man of a bad memory, or apt to blunder, or
be dull, etc. then the Devotion of the Congregation may be turned into scorn
and laughter; and of this I have seen too many sad experiments. But suppose him
to be an able and Pious person, yet he may be liable to indispositions of body,
dullness, inadvertency, etc. with outward cares and accidents; and if he be, he
must many times Pray confusedly, or with broken, indecent expressions, and omit
a great deal of the matter. Sometimes he will be at a loss, and be forced to
use fulsome repetitions; and how is it possible almost, but that a great deal
of flat and empty nonsense, undigested conceptions and unadvised expressions
should escape from his lips, before he is aware? And this, if he has a grain of
modesty, must put him into greater confusion, and so amaze him, that he will be
hardly able to recover himself. Now is it not a hard case that the Devotions of
Five hundred or a thousand Persons must be disturbed by one Man's disorders?
For they must either Pray after him, or not Pray at all. But all these evils
are prevented by set public Forms. 6. Those that join in a Form, may be better
secured of the reality and sincerity of their own Devotion. For they knowing
beforehand the expressions of the Form, are not so much surpised with the
Phrases; and therefore, if they find themselves affected, may more safely
conclude, it is the Matter and not the words, that moves them. Whereas a Man
that is tickled with the words of an Extempore Prayer may fancy himself to be
very devout, when he has nothing of true Devotion in him. I might add more; but
I think these things are enough to convince an unprejudiced person, that Forms
of Prayer are so far from hindering, that they very much help Devotion.

But if any Man shall still object, that he finds by experience, that Forms do
actually deaden his Devotions; because his affections are flat and heavy, when
he uses them, but he is almost transported when he hears a Man Pray Extempore;
I beseech him to consider, whether his experience be not founded in prejudice,
and whether his prejudice ought to prescribe to the whole Church. It Is certain,
other Men find by experience, that joining with a Form does help their
Devotion; so that here is experience against experience. Now since two contrary
experiences cannot proceed from the nature of the thing, therefore one must
proceed from the temper of the Man. Now I have proved, and many Men find by
experience, that Forms do help Devotion; and therefore if he does not find the
same, the fault must be in himself; and I doubt not, but if he will consider
the matter impartially, he will soon be of the same opinion. For we have
Scripture and Reason on our side; but he is led by his passions, which may be
charmed and flattered, and will betray him into strong delusions. It Is plain,
it is not the matter of the Extempore Prayer, that affects him; for that is the
same as in a Form: and if he be taken with the chiming of words, it is but a
sensitive delight; and he must not make a Division in the Church, only to
gratify his fancy. Besides, I desire him strictly to examine his Conscience,
whether he has not often been as dull at a conceived Prayer, as at the public
Forms. If so, then the person is to be blamed, and not the Form; and he is
guilty of a double iniquity, who divides the Church without sufficient cause,
and charges his own formality upon a good and wholesome constitution.

2. They pretend, that Praying in a Form of Words does stint and limit the
Spirit of Prayer. But before I answer this Objection, it will be necessary to
explain, 1. What it is that the Scripture attributes to the Spirit in Prayer.
2. What is meant by stinting or limiting the Spirit in Prayer.

First Then, what is it that the Scripture attributes to the Spirit in Prayer?
I answer, There are some things attributed to him, which were Extraordinary and
Temporary; and others that were Ordinary, fixed and standing. The Extraordinary
and Temporary were the immediate Inspiration of the matter of Prayer, and an
ability to express it in known or unknown Languages. We read in the Old
Testament of Prayers and Praises, which for the matter of them, were
immediately inspired. Thus Prayed Hannah, who, as the Targum paraphrases it,
Prayed by the Spirit of Prophesy, that is, by immediate Inspiration. For
Praying and Praising by immediate Inspiration are frequently called
Prophesying; 1 Samuel 10.5. Numb. 11.25. 1 Chronicles. 25.1. Luc. 1.67. for the matter
of all those Prayers and Praises, together with those in the Book of Psalms,
and sundry others recorded in Scripture, was immediately dictated by the Holy
Ghost. But after the descent of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, wherein the gift
of Tongues was communicated, it is certain, that not only the matter, but the
very Language of their Prayers was immediately Inspired. This gift was peculiar
to the Primitive Ages of Christianity; because the design of it was, not only
to enable the first planters of the Gospel to perform their office in the
Languages of the several Nations they were sent to, but also to be a sign from
God, as other Miracles were, for the confirmation of the Gospel. Tongues were
for a sign -- to them that believe not, 1 Cor. 14.22. and therefore since all
Miracles were Extraordinary, and after a time to cease, certainly this
Miraculous gift of Prayer was so too.

However, because many Dissenters think it (not an extraordinary, but) a
Standing Gift, which the Spirit will communicate to all successive Ages of the
World; I desire them to consider, 1. That there is no promise of such a gift by
virtue of the New Covenant, and therefore no reason to expect the continuance
of it; and it is presumtion to promise our selves, what God has not promised us.
For as for the Spirit of Supplications, Zac. 12.10. it is plain, that it is the
same with the Spirit of Grace, or of inward Piety and devotion. But that there
is no such Promise in the New Covenant, is evident from what is acknowledged on
all hands; viz. That there are many good Christians, who could never pretend to
any such Inspiration. For all good Christians have a Right to the blessings of
the New Covenant; and I am very confident, 'twou'd be looked upon by all sober
Dissenters, as a very rash and unjust censure, to affirm, that a Man cannot be
a good Christian, who does not Pray by immediate Inspiration, but is always
fain to depend either on his own invention, or a Form. 2. That as there is no
Promise, so there is no need of any such immediate Inspiration. It Is true, the
Spirit will assist us in all necessary things, wherein our duty and Spiritual
Life are concerned; but it is an unwarrantable presumtion to expect an immediate
Inspiration in Prayer, because there is no necessity of it. For, 1. As for the
Matter of our Prayers, the Holy Spirit has already sufficiently revealed it to
us in the Gospel, and as plainly instructed us what we are to pray for, as he
can be supposed to do by any immediate Inspiration. And therefore, to suppose
after all, a necessity of immediate Inspiration, is in effect to suppose, that
We have neither reason enough to understand the sense of plain Words, nor
memory enough to retain it. But, say the Dissenters, We know not what to Pray
for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with
groanings which cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26. and therefore we cannot in all
cases know the Matter of our Prayers without immediate Inspiration. But I
answer, that the words relate not to the matter, but to the Manner of our
Prayers. What to Pray for as we ought, we know not; that is, we know not how to
Pray with that fervency and resignation, which we ought, unless the Spirit
assist us. 2. As for the words of Prayer, there is no necessity they should be
immediately dictated to us, since we may use Forms; and those Forms (with small
additions) may be adapted to all particular Cases and Circumstances. 3. If
Prayers are Inspired, they are equal to Scripture, and are infallible and the
Word of God; because whatever God inspires, must needs be so. But this, I am
sure, no sober Dissenter will presume to say. 4. There is no sign of this
immediate Inspiration remaining among us. Heretofore all Inspiration was
attested by Miracles; but the pretended Inspiration of Prayer has no Miracles
to warrant it. Whereas if the Inspiration be continued, it is requisite that
proper signs should be continued, that so we may be able to distinguish that
which is Divine from that which is Natural or Diabolical.

If it be said, that the Scripture is sufficient to distinguish them; I answer,
that though the Scripture may be sufficient to distinguish, whether the Matter of
the Inspiration be true or false: yet it is not sufficient to distinguish the
Inspiration it self, whether it be Divine or Natural, or Diabolical.

For, 1. It Is certain, a Man may Pray agreeably to Scripture by Natural
Inspiration, that is, by a Natural or accidental fervency of temper, as might
be proved by many instances. And in this case how shall he know by Scripture,
whether his present Inspiration be Natural or Divine? 'Twill be said perhaps;
that God Inspires good Men with fervency in Prayer, and yet this fervency
sometimes proceeds from temper of body; and why does not the want of a sign to
distinguish, conclude against the Inspiration of fervency, as well as against
the Inspiration of the Matter and Words of Prayer? I answer, that we have a
Promise of the Spirit's assistance for the fervency of our Prayers, but not for
the Matter or Words of them. Besides, we may easily distinguish, whether the
Inspiration of fervency be Natural or Divine, by our own sense. If it be
accompanied with a fixed and constant Devotion of Soul, it is Divine; but if it
be only a sudden fit, and leaves us habitually indevout, we have just reason to
think it Natural. But we cannot distinguish by Scripture between one and the
other; for both may be agreeable to Scripture. And can it be imagined, that had
God meant to continue the gift of Inspiration to us, he would have left us thus
in the dark concerning it, without any certain sign to distinguish, whether it
be from his Spirit, or from an ill-affected spleen, or a fever? 2. As for
Diabolical Inspirations, we have sundry instances, such as Wier, Hacket, D.
George and John Basilides Duke of Russia, who had such gifts of Prayer, as
ravished the Auditors, and in the opinion of the most impartial seemed to
exceed the power of Nature, and made many think them immediately Inspired by
God. Now since by such Inspirations the Devil may sometimes serve his own ends,
by recommending false Teachers, etc. we may reasonably suppose he does use that
method. And since he may Inspire Men with such Matter of Prayer as is agreeable
to Scripture, we cannot by Scripture certainly distinguish between his
Inspiration and that of the Spirit. But surely it is blasphemy to think, that if
God had continued this gift of Inspiration, he would leave us without a sign to
distinguish it from that which is Diabolical. And since there is no sign, we
have all the reason in the world to think the gift is ceased.

But farther, we have not only no certain sign of the Divine Inspiration of
conceived Prayers, but many very certain ones of the contrary: I will instance
in four. 1. The great impertinence, nonsense, and rudeness (to say no worse)
that are sometimes mingled with these Extempore Prayers, and which we cannot
attribute to the Holy Ghost without blasphemy. 2. That they are so generally
tinctured with the particular Opinions of those that offer them. Whether this
be not so, I appeal to all the world; and if it be so, then surely they are not
Inspired. For either we must suppose this gift of Inspiration to be consigned to
one party, which would be to stint the Spirit with a witness; or else we must
blasphemously say the Spirit Inspires contradictions, and indites contrary
Prayers to Men of opposite Parties. 3. Another plain sign that conceived
Prayers are not Inspired, is, that that which gives them the reputation of
being so, is not so much the Matter, as the manner of expressing them. As for
the Matter, I suppose the Dissenters will not deny, but our Forms may equal at
least, if not excel their conceived Prayers: and therefore all the difference
must be in the Manner. But are conceived Prayers the more Inspired, because the
words are Extempore? Did God continue the gift for no other end, but that Men
might ask those things Extempore, which they might as well have asked in a
Form? Or are they more Inspired, because they do generally more enlarge, and
express the same Matter over again in different words? Was the Spirit continued
only to vary phrases? Our Savior forbids us to use vain repetitions (or as
Munster's Hebrew reads it, to multiply words above what is fit and seasonable)
thinking we shall be heard for our much speaking; and therefore these
enlargements are so far from being signs of their immediate Inspiration, that
supposing the Spirit to be of the same mind with Christ, they are generally
signs of the contrary. 4. That extraordinary manner and way of expressing them,
for which they are thought to be Inspired, ordinarily proceeds from natural
causes, viz. Natural Enthusiasm or present fervor of temper. For, 1. The
Dissenters confess, it comes upon them much oftener in their public, than in
their private Devotions. And the reason is plain, because the passions of the
Congregation do so excite their affections, and the reverence of an Auditory
obliges them so much to wreck their inventions, that their Spirits are many
times transported into raptures. 2. They are not so fluent in the beginning, as
when they have Prayed a while; the reason of which is this, because the Spirits
do not move so briskly, till they are chafed and heated with Labor. Then do
they naturally raise the fancy, and render the invention more copious and easy.
And certainly it is unwarrantable to attribute that to Inspiration, which does
so apparently proceed from natural causes.

Thus have I shown, what the extraordinary operations of the Spirit are, and
that they are not to be pretended to in these Times; I proceed in the next
place to show very briefly, what those ordinary operations are, which he has
Promised to continue to the end of the World. They are therefore the proper
graces and affections of Prayer, such as shame, sorrow, hope, etc. But as for
the expressions of Prayer, they are of no account with God, but as they signify
to him the graces and affections of it. Now can any Man imagine, that those
affections will be the less acceptable to God, because they are presented in a
Form, and not Extempore? Will a Father deny Bread to his Child, because he asked
it to day in the same words, that he did yesterday? Is God more taken with
words, than with affections? Certainly his withdrawing the Inspiration of
words, and continuing the Inspiration of affections, prove the contrary.

Now that God does continue the Inspiration of Devout affections in Prayer, is
manifest from Gal. 4.6. Jude 20. and Romans 8.26. where the Spirit is said to
make intercession for us with groans, which cannot be uttered, that is, with
most flagrant affections. For these words do not, as some persons would
persuade us, prove the Inspiration of the Words of Prayer; because the
Inspiration of those things that are too big for words and cannot be uttered,
cannot mean the Inspiration of words: but this Intercession of the Spirit
signifies his exciting such affections, as make our Prayers acceptable. For as
Christ, who is our Advocate in Heaven, enforces our Prayers with his own
Intercessions: so the Spirit, who is our Advocate upon Earth, begets those
affections, which render our Prayers prevalent. And these are the standing and
ordinary operations, which the Scripture attributes to the Spirit in Prayer.

Secondly, Stinting or limiting the Spirit is a phrase, that is never mentioned
in Scripture or Antiquity; and therefore it is a very new objection against
Forms of Prayer, which I have shown to be warranted both by Scripture and
Antiquity. However, what the Dissenters mean by it is this; viz. that by
confining our selves to a Form of words, we ( stint or limit, that is,)
restrain the Spirit from giving us that assistance, which he ordinarily
vouchsafes in conceived Prayer.

And now having explained the Two forgoing particulars, the answer to this
Objection will be very easy. For if the Spirit be stinted or restrained by
Forms of Prayer, it must be either from Inspiring the words, or from exciting
the affections of Prayer. But I have proved that Forms are so far from
restraining the Devotion of Prayer, that they do very much promote and improve
it; and as for the Words, I have proved, that since the first propagation of
the Gospel the Spirit has withdrawn the immediate and Miraculous Inspiration of
them. And since that cannot be stinted which is not, therefore the Inspiration
of the Words of Prayer is not stinted by Forms.

3. It Is Objected, that public Forms are a sinful neglect of the Ministerial
gift of Prayer. For, the Dissenters say, the gift of Prayer is an ability to
express our minds in Prayer, which God has given to Ministers, as a means of
public Devotion; and therefore they may not omit the exercise of it, by using
Forms of other Men's Composure. Now to this I answer, 1. That supposing that
it is a fault in Ministers to omit the exercise of their ability, yet the People
are not to be charged with it. God will not reject the People's Devotions,
because the Minister is to blame. He only is accountable for that; for the
People do not join with him in his omission, but in that which is acceptable to
God. 2. This gift of Prayer is either natural or acquired. For certainly it is
not Inspired at Ordination; because the Scripture does not promise any such
thing, nor is there any experience of it. Nay the Dissenting Ministers must
own, that just before their Ordination they were as able to express the
Devotions of a Congregation, as they were just after; which shows that they had
no new ability to Pray Inspired in their Ordination. Now since this gift or
ability is nothing more than a quickness of invention and speech, which is
either natural, or acquired by art and practice; therefore it is no otherwise
the gift of God, than our natural strength, or skill in History, or the like.
All that God has Promised his Ministers, is to concur with their honest
endeavors, as far as is necessary to the discharge of their Office: and to
suppose that this cannot be done without Praying Extempore, is to take the
Matter in question for granted. 3. This freedom of utterance is never called
the gift of Prayer in Scripture. Praying in unknown Languages is once called a
gift, but Praying in our own Language is never called so. Therefore it is plain
that the gift of readiness of speech is not appropriated by God to Prayer, but
left in common to all other honest uses, that it can be applied to; and it may
as well be called the Gift of Pleading at the Bar, or of Disputing, or
Conversation, as the gift of Prayer. Accordingly we find, that those who have
this gift in Prayer, have it also upon other occasions; which proves, that it is
not appropriated to Prayer. 4. Since this gift of expressing our minds is not
appropriated to Prayer, it may be as lawfully omitted in Prayer, as in any
other purpose which it is designed for. For if it be unlawful to omit the use of
the gift of Elocution, then he who has the gift, may not lawfully use a Form in
Petitioning his Prince, or in a Court of Justice: but if it be lawful to omit
it in these cases, as a Man sees occasion, then it is equally lawful to omit it
in Prayer. In short, if a Man has two gifts, he may use which he pleases; and
since we have other means of Prayer, none is obliged to use his ability to pray
Extempore. 5. Using a Form is as much a means of public Devotion as praying
Extempore; because the end of public Prayer is at least as effectually served
by a Form, as by a conceived Prayer. Now since there are two means of Prayer,
and both cannot be used at the same time, therefore one may be lawfully
omitted; and consequently the use of a Form, which is one means, is not a
sinful neglect of the other.

4. The last Objection is, that the Common Cases and wants of Christians cannot
be so well expressed in one constant Form, as in conceived Prayers; because the
circumstances of Men are infinitely variable, and require suitable Petitions and
Thanksgivings, which the Minister cannot otherwise provide than by praying
Extempore. To this I answer, 1. That the Common Cases and necessities of
Christians are for the Main always the same, and therefore may be more fully
comprehended in a Form, than in an Extempore Prayer. For public Prayers, which
are offered up in the Name of the whole Congregation, ought not to descend to
particular Cases, but only to the Common Cases of all, and what every one may
truly and sincerely join with. Now a Form will express them much better than an
Extempore Prayer, which is subject to many omissions. 2. Forms can make as good
provision for Extraordinary cases, as Extempore Prayer. For, as for those that
can be foreseen, such as the want of rain, fair weather, etc. there may be
Forms composed for them aforehand: and as for others that cannot be foreseen,
Forms may be provided, when they happen; and this has ever been done in our
Church. 3. If Forms must not be used, because they do not always reach
Extraordinary Cases, certainly Extempore Prayers ought not to be used, because
by reason of omissions, they will not always reach even Ordinary Cases. In a
word, it appears that all Extraordinary Cases may be very well provided for by
Forms; but supposing it otherwise, yet since it has been proved at large, that
the use of Forms is upon sundry accounts of great advantage to the public
Devotion, it is unreasonable to spoil the Church of them, and leave her to the
mercy of Extempore effusions, only for the sake of a few contingencies, which
may happen but very rarely, if at all, in a whole Age.

III. I am now to prove in the last place, that the imposition of Forms may be
lawfully complied with; and for this a very few words will suffice. For since
the use of public Forms is lawful in it self, therefore it may be lawfully
complied with; because I have shown in the Second Chapter, that a Man may
lawfully do a lawful thing, when it is enjoined by Authority. And now I hope, it
is evident to all impartial Readers, that Forms of Prayer are not only lawful,
but expedient also.

CHAP. IV. Objections against our Morning and Evening Service and Litany
Answered.
HAving justified Forms of Prayer in general, my duty and method oblige me to
justify that of the Church of England in particular. I must confess, I have
always thought the Liturgy of the Church of England to be such, as would
rather have invited Protestants to our Communion, than have kept them from it.
And I believe, if the Dissenters would seriously read over Dr. Beverege's
Sermon concerning the Excellency and usefulness of the Common Prayer, they
would go near to be of the same mind. But alas! this very Liturgy is that which
many persons are incensed against. It has been cried down as Idolatrous,
Popish, Superstitious, etc. It Is true, we do not now so often hear those bitter
exclamations of Rome and Babylon, Baal and Dagon; for the Common Prayer is not
now esteemed such an abominable thing, as some ignorant and heady Zealots were
wont to count it: but yet some Objections are still insisted upon, to which I
hope to return a fair answer.

1. Then it is Objected, that the Confessions of sin in our Liturgy are too
general; and that there are many particular sins, which ought to have been
distinctly confessed, of which there is no mention. But I desire the Objectors
to consider, that there is hardly any thing in public worship, which requires
more caution and prudence in the ordering of it, than that confession of sin,
which is to be made by the whole Congregation. It Is hard to prevent its being
either too general or too particular. The reason is, because such different
persons must join in it, and the sins of some are more numerous and grievous
than the sins of others; so that all persons cannot possibly make the same
particular confession. But I think our confessions, viz. the daily one and that
in the Communion-Office, are so judiciously framed, as to avoid both extremes:
and I am persuaded, all persons may profitably use them. However, the
confession of sin after the Minister has recited each of the Ten Commandments,
is as particular, as can reasonably be desired; and by this a Man may confess
all his known offenses in thought, word or deed. If a Man must not use a
confession, that is possible to be mended, he must never confess at all: and if
a Form of confession were composed by the wisest Dissenters, I suppose no more
would be pretended, but that it might be profitably used. Now this may be said
of our Form, and ought to end the dispute.

Indeed there are examples of Jeremiah, Nehemiah, etc. confessing such sins as
they were not guilty of: but this was done upon solemn humiliation for those
known and public Idolatries of the Nation, which had brought God's heavy
judgments upon them, or for common and scandalous transgressions afterward.
They considered themselves as a part of the Community which had provoked God;
and they bare a part in the Calamity and in the confession, as if they had
offended as greatly as their Countrymen. But I conceive there is a great deal
of difference between those confessions upon such public humiliations, and
those that are fit for the Ordinary Service of the Church.

I may add, that particular confessions are more properly the matter of private
Devotion; and if we did seriously practice strict examination and secret
contrition in our Closets, we should then find our affections prepared to
comply with those more general confessions of sin, which we make with the whole
Congregation. And we should then have less reason to complain, that those
confessions are too general and not apt to move us; because this would cure the
deadness of our hearts, which are commonly most to blame, when we find fault
with the Means, that God has provided for us.

2. The next Objection is the shortness of our Collects, by reason of which
it is pretended, that the Prayer is often suddenly broken off, and then begun
again: and this is thought not so agreeable to the gravity wherewith this duty
ought to be performed, nor so likely a means of exciting Reverence and Devotion
in the People, as one continued Form of Prayer, that might be as long as all
those put together. To this I answer, 1. That the mere shortness of a Prayer is
not to be blamed; since that would disparage the Form, which Christ taught his
Disciples. 2. That 'twill be hard to prove, that many of these short Prayers
being offered up to God one immediately after another, is either not so grave
or not so edifying, as one continued Form. For the work of Praying is as much
continued all the while, as if there were but one continued Form; because we
pass from one Petition to another, or from one matter of invocation to another,
as immediately as if the distinct Forms were all brought into the compass of
one. Nay the attention of the People is rather helped by the frequency of
saying Amen: and their Godly disposition of mind, which is the best thing in
Prayer, may be kept alive and more effectually secured, by calling upon the
Name of God and pleading the Merits of Christ so often as we do. Besides, the
invocation of God somewhat often by his attributes, maintains in our minds a
reverent sense of his Majestic Presence; which we all know, is needful to make
us pray as we ought: and the frequency of mentioning Christ's Merits and
Mediation, strengthens our faith and assurance that we shall be heard. It Is
also the peculiar Character of Christian Devotion; and distinguishes us from
the Papists, in declaring our detestation of calling upon God in the Name of
Saints, or any other but that of Christ. If it be said that we say Amen, and
break off our Prayers too often; I reply, that all wise and humble Men will
submit themselves in that case to the judgment of their superiors.

3. Some except against the repetition of the Lord's Prayer, and of Glory be to
the Father, etc. and of Lord have mercy upon us, and the like; because they
think our Savior forbids it by saying, when ye pray, use not vain repetitions.
But it appears by our Savior's caution against vain repetitions, that some
repetitions are not vain, and consequently not forbidden. This must be
supposed, because he himself, when in his Agony, prayed thrice in the same
words. Now Christ forbids the fault of the Heathens, whose vain repetitions
proceeded from an affectation of speaking much, or from a belief that God would
not help them, unless they repeated the same thing over in a tedious manner:
but the repetition of good Prayers is nothing like their practice. Repetitions
are not vain, if two things be regarded; 1. That the matter be very weighty,
and apt to move those pious affections, which God is most pleased with in our
Addresses to him; and in this respect, I dare say, our repetitions are secured
from vanity. 2. That they be framed with judgment, that they come in fitly and
in due place, and not too often. And these rules are observed in our Liturgy;
for as none did ever blame the disposal of our repetitions, so none can justly
blame the sequency of them. For our repetitions are very few; but if our number
be too great, what shall we think of the 136 Psalm, where His mercy endures
forever, is repeated 26 times? To conclude this matter, I desire those, who do
not yet approve our repetition of the Lord's Prayer, etc. to consider, whether
it be so easy to spend the time it takes up more profitably, than by joining in
good earnest with the Congregation in these Prayers..

4. Some persons dislike the Responsals of the Congregation, and the People's
saying the Confessions and the Lord's Prayer after the Minister, and their
alternate reciting the Psalms and Hymns, and some petitions in the daily
Service. Now I beg these Men to consider, what has been often said, viz. that
this way is apt to check a wandering Spirit, to help attention and quicken a
lively zeal in God's Service, whilst we invite and provoke one another to pray
and give thanks.

They say indeed, that the Minister is appointed to be the mouth of the People
in God's public Service: but to this I answer, 1. That granting the Minister to
be appointed for the mouth of the People, yet it must not be so interpreted, as
to make all Vocal Prayer and thanksgiving in Religious Assemblies unlawful to
the People. For then the People must not say Amen, which is a short responsal
to the Minister; nor must they join in singing Psalms, which oftentimes contain
matter of Prayer. 2. The Scripture does not say, that the Minister is the mouth
of the People to God, or that no Prayer must be offered up in Religious
Assemblies, otherwise than by the mouth of the Minister. It Is true, the
Minister is the mouth of the People in all those Prayers which he utters for
them; and because these are many more than what the People themselves utter, he
may be said to be their mouth to God comparatively, but not absolutely. It Is
true also, that the Minister is appointed for the People in all public Services
appertaining to God, if this be understood for the most part, or of all with
little exception. Some public Services are pronounced by him only: and as for
the rest, it is fit he should ever utter most of them; and that in those wherein
the People have their part, he should ever go before and lead them, and guide
the whole performance; which is all taken care for in our Liturgy.

Nay the Dissenters themselves do not utterly debar the People from all Vocal
Prayer and Thanksgiving of their own in God's solemn Worship. For they allow
the People to sing Psalms; and why then may they not bear a part in the Hymns
and Psalms by alternate responses? I cannot see, why singing or not singing
should make such a difference. 'Twere better, if they were every where sung;
because it is more suitable to the design of them, than bare reciting is: but if
they be not sung, the next use of them, that is most agreeable to their nature
and design, is reciting them by answering in turns, as the Custom is with us;
for this is much nearer to singing, than the Minister's reciting all himself.

But, say they, the People's verse is in a manner lost to some of the
Congregation; since in the confused murmur of so many voices nothing can be
distinctly heard To this I answer, that those who can read, may bring Books;
and those that cannot, may attend to those that are near. Nay I have been
credibly informed, that some devout People that could never read, have attained
to an ability of reciting most of the Psalms without book, by often hearing
them in those Churches where they are alternately recited. I shall add, that
for the most part, the Psalms are recited alternately in those Churches only,
where it may be reasonably presumed, that the whole Congregation can read, very
few excepted.

Now if the People may join in Vocal Praise, why may they not also join in
Vocal Prayer? If it be said, there is some example or warrant in Scripture for
the one, but not for the other; it seems to be a good answer, that there is
such a parity of reason, as that the express warrant of Scripture for the one,
is an implied warrant for the other. I have already shown, Chap. 3. that the
People's joining in Vocal Prayer was very anciently practiced; and if this was
the Primitive way, it is probable, that it was the way in the Apostles times. I
know, it is objected, that the People's speaking to God in the Church is
disorderly, and a breaking in upon the Minister's office. But will they say,
that the Children of Israel entrenched upon the Priest, when they all bowed
themselves upon the Pavement, and worshipped the Lord, and praised him, saying,
for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever; 2 Chronicles. 7.3? Ecclesiastical
Order is secured by the Minister's presiding in God's public Worship, and
guiding the performance of it: but not to allow the People to make an Audible
confession of sin after the Minister, nor to utter some few affectionate
Petitions, and those very short, to which they are also invited and ^^ted by
him, seems rather to favor of an affectation of undue superiority over the
People, than to proceed from any fear of the Minister's office being invaded.
Some urge, that Women are forbidden to speak in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.34. but
this is strangely misapplied to the Matter in hand. For it is plain, that the
speaking mentioned by the Apostle, signifies nothing but Prophesying,
Interpreting, Preaching and Instructing; and that the reason, why he will not
allow this to the Woman, is, because Preaching implies Authority, whereas the
Woman's part is obedience and subjection. They that will read the whole
Chapter, will find that this is the meaning of St. Paul.

5. I proceed in the next place to consider, whether there be any just cause to
find fault with the reading of the Apocryphal Lessons in our Church. Now if
Sermons and Catechizing be allowable, besides the Word of God; why may not some
Apocryphal Lessons be read, which contain excellent Rules of life? Especially
since those Writings were greatly esteemed by the Church in its purest Ages,
when they and other human writings also were publicly read, as well as the
Scriptures: and those Chapters of the Old Testament, which are omitted, do
either recite Genealogies, or the Rules of the Levitical Service, or matters of
fact delivered in other Chapters that are read, or which are hard to be
understood. If it be said, that because the Scripture is all of Divine
Authority, it is more profitable to read any part of that, than any other good
Lesson; I answer, that then no place will be left for Sermons, which are no
more of Divine Authority, than the Apocryphal Lessons. There is no danger of
any person's mistaking the Apocryphal Lessons for Canonical Scripture, because
the Church speaks so plainly in her Sixth Article: nor do we read them
otherwise, than the ancient Church did. I shall only add, that no Apocryphal
Lesson is read upon any Lord's Day in the Year; and as for other exceptions, I
refer the Reader to Dr. Falkener's Libertas Eccles. p. 164, etc.

6. If any object against our Standing at the Creed; Mr. Baxter says, his
judgment is for it, where it is required, and where not doing it would be
aivisive and scandalous. Nay, elsewhere he says, that it is a convenient
praising gesture, etc. See his Christ. Direct. p. 858.

I proceed now to the Vindication of the Litany, against which it is pleaded, 1.
That the People utter the Words of invocation in the Litany for the most part,
the Minister all the while suggesting the matter of it to them. But this
Objection is of no force, if what I have said concerning the lawfulness of
allowing the People an interest in Vocal Prayer, be admitted. If it be said,
that the People bear too considerable a part, to the disparagement of the
Minister's office; I answer, that it is a great mistake; For 1. though the People
say Good Lord deliver us, and We beseech thee to hear us Good Lord; yet the
Minister says the other, and the far greater part of the Prayer. 2. They are
but these Two short and known Petitions, which are excepted against: and if the
People may be allowed any part in Vocal Prayer, I know of nothing more proper
than these; nor are they repeated, but when they are applied to new and
distinct matter. Besides, they relieve our attention, and cherish our warm
affections in Prayer: and I could almost appeal to the keenest of our
Adversaries, whether, if Good Lord deliver us were applied but once in gross to
that part of the Litany, we should not be more apt to languish in the offering
it up, than as it is now ordered. But, 3. It Is plain, that in those Prayers,
the Minister has the principal and guiding part, in that he utters all the
distinct matter of the Prayer, which the People do not; whereas he utters words
of invocation as well as they. And consider, I pray, whether if the People were
to utter that which is the Minister's part now, and the Minister to say that
only which is theirs; we should not have more grievous complaints, that the
Minister's authority was slighted in the whole design; since he seemed only to
learn from the People, what the Congregation was to pray for.

2. It Is Objected, that we pray to be delivered from all deadly sin, which
seems to imply, that there are some sins which are not deadly. Now in answer to
this, it is by some truly enough said, that these words do not necessarily
imply a distinction between sins that are, and sins that are not deadly. But
admitting that such a distinction were intended, yet we must observe, that though
all sin be in its own nature deadly or damnable; yet through the Mercy of God and
the Merits of Christ, sins of mere infirmity are not imputed, and therefore not
deadly to us. But there are some sins so heinous, that he who commits them, is
thereby put into a damnable state: and it is of such sins as these that this
passage is to be understood; as appears by Deadly Sin being added to
Fornication, from Fornication and all other Deadly Sin, Good Lord deliver us.

3. Some are offended with our praying against Sudden Death. But why should we
not by Sudden Death understand our being taken out of this World, when we are
not fit to die? For sometimes a thing is said to be Sudden to us, when we are
not prepared for it. And in this sense can any good Christian find fault with
the Petition? But suppose that by Sudden Death we mean what is commonly
understood by it, that is, a Death of which a Man has not the least warning by
Sickness; are there not Reasons why even good Men may desire not to die
suddenly? May they not, when they find themselves drawing toward their end, by
their good Instructions and Admonitions, make Impressions upon their Friends,
Companions, and Relations, to the bettering of them? May not their Counsels be
then more effectual with them, than ever they were before? And is it not
reasonable to believe they will be so? As for themselves, may not the warning
they have of approaching Death be improved to make them more sit to die, than
they were in their perfect Health? In a word, he that thinks himself to have
sufficiently perfected holiness in the fear of God, and not to stand in need of
those acts of Self-Examination, Humiliation, and Devotion, by which Good Men
improve the Warning of Death, which Mortal Sickness or Extreme Age gives them;
let him suspend his Act, and refuse to join with us, when we pray God to
deliver us from sudden death^

4. Some are offended, that we pray to be delivered By the Mystery of Christ's
Holy Incarnation, etc. By his Agony and bloody Sweat, by his Cross and Passion,
etc. And by the Coming of the Holy Ghost. Some say this is Swearing, others
Conjuring, and I know not what. To these I answer, that when we say, By the
Mystery of thy holy Incarnation, and by thy Cross and Passion, etc. Good Lord
deliver us; we implore Christ, who has already showed such inestimable goodness
toward us, by taking our Nature into his Divinity, to Die upon the Cross, to
be Buried, to Rise again, to ascend into Heaven, and there to intercede with
the Father for us, and by sending the Holy Ghost to qualify the Apostles for
their great Work of carrying the Word of Salvation into the World: I say, we
implore him who has already done such mighty things for our Salvation, and we
plead with him by that goodness which he has already given us such great
demonstrations of, by those Wonders of Mercy that he has wrought for us, that
he would now go on to deliver us by his powerful Grace from those Evils which
we pray against. And this is so reasonable, so devout and affectionate, so
humble and thankful a way of praying, that I am sorry that any who call
themselves Believers should be so ignorant as not to understand it, or so
profane and unlike what they pretend to be, as to deride it.

To conclude, I must confess, that of all the Prayers in our Liturgy, that are
of humane composition, I should be most unwilling to part with the Litany. It
seems to be, what it was designed to be, A Form of Prayer apt to excite our
most intense and fervent desires of God's Grace and Mercy. The whole office is
framed, with respect both to matter and contrivance, for the raising of the
utmost Devotion of good Christians, and for the warming of the coldest hearts
by the heat of the Congregation. And in such a disposition it is most fit to
express our Charity, by praying for others, even all sorts of men, as
distinctly and particularly as public Prayers will bear.

CHAP. V. Of Infant Baptism.
BEfore I proceed to the Vindication of our Office of Baptism, I think it is
proper to justify Infant Baptism, which is practiced by us, and disliked by
some of the Dissenters. And that my Discourse concerning Infant Baptism may be
the better understood, I shall take the liberty of premising a few things.

1. That the Original of the Jewish Church (considered purely as a Church) is
to be dated from the Covenant which God made with Abraham; but that of the
Jewish Commonwealth from the delivery of the Law by Moses. For that the Jewish
Church and Commonwealth are distinct things, is plain, because the Apostle
makes this distinction, Romans 4.13. Gal. 3.17. And therefore,

2. The way to find out the Nature of the Jewish Church is to consider the
Nature of the Covenant made with Abraham, upon which the Jewish Church was
founded. Now it is plain from Romans 4. 9th to the 17th, and 9.6, etc. Gal. 3.5,
etc. that the Covenant made with Abraham was a Spiritual Covenant, made with
him as the Father of Believers, and with his Posterity, not as proceeding from
him by Natural, but by Spiritual Generation, as heirs of his Faith. Hence says
the Apostle, in the name of the Christians, We are the Circumcision, which
worship God in the Spirit, and have no confidence in the Flesh, Phil. 3.3. and
it is one God, which shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and the
Uncircumcision through Faith, Romans 3.30. and if ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the Promise, Gal. 3.29. Nay 'twill
farther appear, that this Covenant was made, not with Abraham's Natural, but
his Spiritual Offspring, if we consider,

3. That the initiatory Sacrament into it was Circumcision. For the Covenant is
called the Covenant of Circumcision, Acts 7.8. and Circumcision on the other
hand is called the Seal of the Righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. faith or
faithful obedience being the condition of that Covenant, which God required of
the Children of Abraham, and which they promised to perform. It also signified
the Circumcision of the heart, Deuteronomy. 10.16. and 30.6. Romans 2.28, 29.

4. As to the Persons to be admitted into the Covenant, we have a very plain
account at the institution of it, Genesis 17. from whence it appears, First, that
the Children of Heathens were to be circumcised; (See Exodus 12.48, 49.) which
also proves that the Promise was made, not to his Natural, but to his Spiritual
Children. Hence in all Ages great numbers of Gentiles were admitted into the
Jewish Church by Circumcision. Secondly, that persons of all Ages were to be
Circumcised, and that God was so far from excluding Children from Circumcision,
that he ordered that the Circumcision of them should not be deferred beyond the
8th day. God was pleased to be so gracious as to choose the Children with their
Parents, and look upon them as holy upon their account. This was ground enough
for their Admission into the Church, and for God to look upon them as
Believers, though they could not make open profession of their faith.

The Faith and consent of the Father or the Godfather, and of the Congregation
under which he was Circumcised, was believed of Old by the Jews to be imputed
to the Child as his own Faith and consent. See Seld. De Jure, lib. 2. c. 2. De
Synedr. lib. 1. c. 3. And they had good ground in Scripture for this opinion;
because the infidelity and disobedience of the Parents, in wilfully neglecting
or despising the Circumcision, was imputed to the Children, who were esteemed
and punished as breakers of the Covenant, when they were not Circumcised, Genesis
17.14. And therefore, if the act of Parents in neglecting to bring their
Children to Circumcision was reputed theirs: much more their act in bringing
them to it, might well be reputed as their act and deed. Thus Numb. 3.28. we
find the keeping of the sanctuary imputed to the Males of the Cohathites, of a
month old and upwards; because their Fathers actually kept it, and they were to
be trained up to it. Thus Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. the little ones are expressly said to
enter into the Covenant with God, because the Men of Israel did so. Thus also,
though Christ healed grown Persons for their own Faith, Matthew. 9.29. yet he
healed Children for the Faith of their Parents, or others who besought him for
them; as it were imputing it to them for their own Faith; Mark 9.23. Matthew.
8.13. John 4.50. Vid. Cassand. De Baptismo Infant. p. 729. Tailor of Baptiz.
Inf. Great Exemplar, Part 1. Sect. 9.

5. The Church was the same for substance under the Law, as it was before it;
and still remains the same for substance under the Gospel, as it was under the
Law. For Abraham is still the Father of the faithful: and we that Believe under
the Gospel, are as much his Children, in the true meaning of the words, as
those that were Believers under the Law. Hence St. Peter, Epist. 1. calls
Christians by those Titles, which God gave to the Jews, as to his peculiar
People, viz. a Chosen Generation, Royal Priesthood, etc. and St. Paul compares
the calling of them to the engrafting of the Wild Olive Tree into the Old
Olive-tree's Stock, Romans 11. Christ and his Apostles introduced as much of
Judaism into the Christian Church, as the nature of the Reformation would bear:
and adhered as much as they could to the Old, both in the Matter and Form of
the New Economy. For the proof of this the Reader may consult Grot. Opusc.
Tom. 3. p. 510, 520, etc. Hammond of Baptizing Infants, Seldom de Jure, l. 2.
c. 2. de Synedr. l. 1. c. 3. Lightfoot's Horae Heb. p. 42. Hammond on Matthew.
2.1, Alting. Dissert Septima de Proselyt. Mede's 1 B. disc. 43. 2 B. Christ.
Sacrif. Cudworth on the Lord's Supper, Thorndike of Religious Assembl. Taylor's
Great Exemplar. Part. 1. Disc. of Baptism. Numb. 11. Dodwell's One Altar and
One Priesthood, Light^oot on 1 Cor. 5.4.

Some things, I confess, they laid aside; but their Reasons for so doing were,
1. Because very many of the Jewish Rites were fulfilled in Christ; and this is
so plain, that I need not prove it. 2. Because many of them were inconsistent
with the Nature of Christianity; which was to be, 1. Manly, in opposition to
the Law, which was but a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, Gal. 3.24. and
the Jews were under it, as Children are under Tutors, Chap. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. for
they had Childish understandings, and were like Children, to be instructed by
Symbolical Lessons, viz. Washings, etc. 2. Free, in opposition to the servile
Nature of the Jewish Church, which was loaded with numberless observances, of
which the Jews were grown weary, and with which they had been for a long time
heavy laden, when Christ called them to take his yoke upon them, which was to
be so easy and light. 3. Universal, God enjoined the Jews many things, in
oposition to the Neighboring Idolatrous Nations; that there might be a mutual
strangeness between them, and that by Ceremonial singularities they might be
distinguished from the rest of the World: but then Christ coming to break down
the Middle wall of Partition betwixt the Jews and Gentiles, and to abolish the
enmity of ordinances that was betwixt them, that he might make peace between
them, and reconcile them both into one body; it was requisite to this end, that
he should abolish these, and all oher distingishing characters betwixt them,
which would have hindered the progress of the Gospel, because they were become
so odious and ridiculous to the Gentile World. And this is the reason, why the
bloody Rite of Circumcision is changed into the easy Rite of Baptism.

6. Circumcision was a Sacrament of equal Significancy, Force and Perfection
with Baptism; and Baptism suceeded in the room of it, not as an Antitype
succeeds in the place of the Type, but as one positive institution succeeds in
the place of another. For we must note, that strictly and properly speaking,
there was the same difference betwixt the Type and the Antitype, as betwixt the
shadow and the substance, or betwixt a Man and his picture in a Glass; insomuch
that what was in the Type, did only represent something which did in a more
perfect manner belong to the Antitype. Thus the blood of Sacrifices represented
the blood of Christ, which does truly purge the Conscience from dead works; and
the healing virtue of the Brazen Serpent was a Symbol of the healing virtue of
Christ upon the Cross. But the case is not so betwixt Circumcision and Baptism;
because Circumcision has no Symbolical likeness with Baptism, nor any thing
belonging to it common to Baptism, which does not as fully belong unto it, as
unto Baptism it self.

For, 1. Circumcision was heretofore a real Sacrament of Initiation into the
Covenant of Grace, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, and a confirmation of
the Covenant betwixt God and Man, as much as Baptism is now. Baptism does
nothing under the Gospel, which Circumcision did not as properly and
effectually do under the Law: and therefore it could not be a Type of Baptism,
any more than the Broad-Seal of England 300 years ago was a Type of this. And
accordingly it is never mentioned in the New Testament as a Type of Baptism, nor
Baptism as the Antitype of it: but succeeded in the room of it, not as the
Antitype did in the place of the Type, but as one absolute Ordinance or
positive Institution does in the place of another. 2. Circumcision was not a
Type of Baptism, because a Type is an Exemplar appointed under the Old
Testament to prefigure something under the New: but Baptism was it self of
Jewish Institution under the Old Testament; and by consequence could not be
Typify'd and prefigur'd by Circumcision, because it was used together with it
in the Jewish Church. The Jewish Church made it a Ceremony of Initiating
Proselytes under the Law; and our Savior liking the Institution, continued the
use of it, and made it the only Ceremony of Initiating Proselytes under the
Gospel; superadding to it the complete nature of an Initiatory Sacrament, or
the full force of Circumcision, as it was a sign of the Covenant, and a seal of
the Righteousness of Faith.

Having premised these Six things, I proceed to the main business, in treating
of which I design to show, 1. That Infants are capable of Baptism. 2. That They
are not excluded from Baptism by Christ. 3. That it is unlawful to separate from
a Church, which appoints Infants to be baptized, 4. That it is the duty of
Christian Parents to bring their Children unto Baptism. 5. That it is lawful to
Communicate with Believers, who were Baptized in their Infancy.

I. Then I shall show, that Infants are capable of Baptism. God commanded
Infants to be Circumcised, as well as adult Persons; and surely, if they were
capable of Circumcision, then they are also capable of Baptism. For the Two
Covenants, of Circumcision and Baptism, are for substance the same, and the
grace of those Covenants the very same; and therefore if the Initiation of
Infants was then no absurdity, it can be none now. Nay, if Infants were
admitted into the Church, when the entrance was more grievous and not without
Blood; how unreasonable is it to assert, that they are now incapable of
admission into it, when the entrance is made more easy, and more agreeable to
the weakness of a tender Child?

It Is said indeed, that Infants are incapable of Baptism, because they cannot
Answer the Ends of it; they cannot understand the Gospel, or Profess their
Faith and Repentance, or submit to Baptism out of their own choice, nor can
they have their Faith and Hope further strengthened in the use of it. But this
way of arguing is very weak and fallacious, and reflecting upon the Wisdom of
God.

First, It is weak and fallacious, because it makes no distinction betwixt a
strict Institution, which is Instituted by God for one, or a few ends, and
precisely for persons of one sort; and an Institution of Latitude, which is
Instituted by him for several ends, and for different sorts of Persons,
differently qualified for those several ends. Of the first sort was the Jewish
Ordinance of Fringes, which could only concern grown Persons, because they only
were capable of answering the End, for which it was Instituted, viz. To look
upon them and remember the Commandments of the Lord: and of the latter sort is
the Holy Ordinance of Marriage, which was appointed for several ends, and for
persons differently qualified for those several ends; insomuch that persons who
are incapacitated as to some ends of Marriage, may yet honestly Marry, because
they are capable of the rest. For this Reason, those who are not capacitated
for the Procreation of Children, may Marry, because they are capable of
answering another end, for which Marriage was Ordained. Now our Adversaries
cannot Prove, that Baptism is a strict Institution, because it succeeded in the
room of Circumcision, which was an Institution of Latitude; and because our
Savior was Baptized, who was less capable of Baptism, than Infants possibly
can be. For John Baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, and thereby Sealed
unto the People the Remission of their Sins. Now our Savior was without sin,
and yet he was Baptized; which shows, that a Man who is capable of some ends of
Baptism, may be Baptized, though he is not capable of the rest.

Secondly, It Is reflecting upon the Wisdom of God, because God Commanded young
Babes to be Circumcised, though all the ends of Circumcision could not be
answered by them. For, since there lies the same objection against
Infant-circumcision as against Infant Baptism, therefore those Men who argue
thus against Infant Baptism, do reproach the Divine Wisdom, which enjoined
Infant-circumcision.

Children are capable of all the ends of Baptism, as it is a Sign, to assure us
of God's favor, and to consign to us the Benefits of the Covenant of Grace.
They may be made Members of a Church, and adopted Heirs of Eternal Life; as
well as they may be made Members of a Family, and adopted Heirs of a Temporal
Estate. And if they are capable of the Benefits and Privileges of Christianity,
why should not the sign of those Benefits and Privileges be applied to them?
Suppose a Prince should send for an attainted Traytor's Child, and in the
presence of several Persons Assembled for that purpose, should say, You know
the blood of this Child is attainted by his Father's Treason; by Law he has
forfeited all Right to his Ancestors Estate and Titles, and is quite undone,
though he be not sensible of his wretched condition. My Bowels of compassion yern
upon him, and here I restore him to his Blood and Inheritance, to which hence
forward he shall have as much Right, as if the Family had never been attainted.
I justify him freely, and declare my self reconciled to him; and that no spot
or imputation may hereafter lie upon him, I here before you all wash him with
pure Water, to signify that he is cleans'd from his original attainder and
corruption of Blood, and that he is as fully restored to his Birthright, as if
he had never been attainted. Suppose, I say, this were done for a poor
attainted Infant; could any Man say, the action was insignificant and invalid,
because that Child knew nothing of it? Or that he was incapable of the sign,
when he was capable of being washed from the attainder, which was the chief
thing signified thereby?

Besides, though Abraham believed, and solemnly professed his Faith before he was
Circumcised; yet Isaac was Circumcised, and entered into the Covenant with God,
before he was able to understand what the condition of the Covenant was. And
will any Man say he was Circumcised in vain, or that God commanded a foolish
thing; though he was under the very same incapacity as to the ends of
Circumcision, that Infants now are as to the ends of Baptism?

If it be said, that Circumcision was more proper for Infants than Baptism,
because it left a Mark in the Flesh, to instruct them what was done in their
infancy, which Baptism does not; I answer, 1. That even the Mark of
Circumcision was as insignificant during the nonage of the Child, as Baptism
is to Christian Infants: neither afterward could he tell what the meaning of
that Character was, but by the instruction of others. And therefore according
to their way of reasoning against Infant Baptism, it ought to have been
deferred till the full years of discretion, when the Circumcised person might
have understood the Spiritual signification thereof. 2. Allowing that
Circumcision was more proper for Infants than Baptism, yet we must consider
that the Jews knew very well, that Baptism left no Mark upon the person. And
therefore those who argue against Infant Baptism, must condemn the Jewish
Church, which for many Ages Baptized Infants and minor Proselytes into the
Covenant, as well as actual Believers, and yet were never reproved for it by
any Prophet; which we may presume they would have been, had baptismal
initiation of Infants into the Covenant been so absurd, insignificant, and
abusive a practice, as the Professors against Infant Baptism pretend it is.

II. I am to show, that Infants are not excluded from Baptism by Christ. That
he never excluded them by any express prohibition, the Anabaptists themselves
do grant, because there is no such prohibition to be found in the New
Testament: but then they pretend, that it was Christ's intention, that none but
grown persons should be Baptized, because the Gospel requires, that persons to
be Baptized should, 1. be Taught, Matthew. 28.29. 2. Believe, Mark 16.16. 3.
Repent, Acts 2.38. But those and the like Texts do no more prove, that none but
grown persons ought to be Baptized, than the Apostle's words, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. do
prove, that none but grown persons ought to eat. For he requires that if any
would not work, neither should he eat; now none but grown persons can work, and
therefore by this way of arguing none but grown persons ought to eat. Again,
suppose there were a Plague in any Country, and God should miraculously call 11
or 12 Men, and give them a Meditine against this Plague, and say; Go into such
a Country, and call the People of it together, and Teach them the Virtues of
this Medicine, and assure them, that he that believes and takes it from you,
shall live, but he that believes not shall die. Now since Children are capable
of the Medicine, though they are ignorant of the Benefits of it; would any Man
conclude, that it was God's intention, that none but grown persons should
receive it, because they only could be called together, and be taught the
Virtues of it, and believe or disbelieve them that brought it? No certainly.
Wherefore, seeing Children, as I have proved, are capable of the Benefits of
Baptism; and the Apostles, who were sent to Baptize all Nations, knew them to
be capable of it, and to have received both Circumcision and Baptism in the
Jewish Church: how should it be thought, but that it was Christ's intention,
that Children as well as grown persons should be Baptized?

Should God, in the days of David, have ordered some Prophets to go and Preach
the Law to every Creature, saying, He that believes, and is Circumcised and
Baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned; would
those Prophets have Circumcised and Baptized only grown persons, contrary to
the practice of the Jewish Church? Or if in a short History of their Mission we
should have read, that they Circumcised and Baptized as many Proselytes, as
gladly received their word; would this have proved, that they did not also
Circumcise and Baptize the Infants of those believing Proselytes, according to
the Laws and Usages of their Mother Church? Or should God bid 12 Men, of a
Church that had always practiced Infant Baptism, go and Preach the Gospel in
the Indies, saying, He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved; would
those Men, that were bred up to the practice of Infant Baptism, think it was
God's intention, that Baptism should be denied to Infants? No certainly; and
therefore by parity of Reason, the Apostles could not so understand their
Commission, as to exclude Infants from Baptism.

Now since our Savior has not, either expressly or otherwise, excluded Infants
from Baptism, certainly his Command to Baptize all Nations, does comprehend
Infants as well as Men. For the Apostles lived under a dispensation, where
Infants were initiated both by Circumcision and Baptism into the Church; and
unless they had been instructed to the contrary, they must naturally understand
their Commission of Baptizing to have extended unto Infants, as well as actual
Believers.

Our Adversaries indeed put the greatest stress upon these words of our
Savior, Mark 16.16. He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved: but if
they would well consider the next words, they would find, that Infants are not
at all concerned in them; because it follows, but he that believes not, shall
be damned. The same want of Faith, which here excludes from Baptism, excludes
also from Salvation: and therefore it cannot be understood of Infants, unless
they will say, that the same incapacity of believing which excludes them from
Baptism, excludes them from Salvation too. Wherefore it is plain, that the
believing or not believing in that Text, is only to be understood of such as
are in a capacity of hearing and believing the Gospel, that is, of grown
persons; just as the words, John 3.36. He that believes on the Son of God,
has Everlasting Life; and he that believes not, shall not see Life, but the
Wrath of God abides on him.

But they urge also, that Baptism is unprofitable for Infants, because putting
away the filth of the Flesh, which is all that Infants are capable of,
signifies nothing; but only the answer of a good Conscience toward God, of
which, say they, Infants are wholly incapable. To this I answer, that another
Apostle tells us, that external Circumcision, which is all that infants are
capable of, profits nothing without keeping the Law, which Infants could not
keep: but that the inward Circumcision of the Heart and in the Spirit, was the
true Circumcision, and yet Infants are incapable of it. So that their way of
arguing proves nothing, because it stretches the words of the Apostles beyond
their just meaning; which was to let both Jews and Christians know, (not that
their Infants were unprofitably Circumcised or Baptized, but) that there was no
resting in external Circumcision or Baptism.

But farther, had not the Church been always in possession of this practice,
or could any time be showed on this side the Apostles, when it began; nay could
it be proved that any one Church in the World did not Baptize Infants, or that
any considerable number of Men (otherwise Orthodox) did decline the Baptizing
of them upon the same principles that these Men do now: then I should suspect,
that their arguments are better than they really are, and that Infant Baptism
might possibly be a deviation from the Rule of Christ. But since it is so
Universal and Ancient a practice, that there never was any Church, Ancient or
Modern, which did not practice it; it can be nothing less than an Apostolical
practice and tradition.

If it be said, that False Apostles and False Teachers brought in
Infant Baptism in the very first Ages; I would fain know, how it came to pass
that the very Companions and Contemporaries of the Apostles, and the Ancient
Saints and Martyrs, who wrote against other Heresies, passed it over in
silence, though we are sure from Irenaeus and Tertullian, that it was See
Suicerus in the words (...) and (...), Hammond on Matthew. 19.28. John 3.5.
Seldom De Jure, lib. 2. c. 4. Vossius De Baptismo. p. 181.
practiced in those early times. It Is impossible, that they should all consent
in such a dangerous Error, or that they should all peaceably and tamely submit
to it without opposition, or that such an alteration should be made without
observation, no body can tell how or when. Certainly those places of the New
Testament, which require a profession of Faith and Repentance in grown Persons
before Baptism, were understood by the ancient Fathers: and yet they never
concluded from thence, that Infants ought not to be Baptized. But if the
Scriptures were doubtful in the case, I appeal to any Man, whether the
harmonious practice of the ancient Churches, and the undivided consent of the
Apostolical Fathers, be not the best interpreters of them. Let any modest
Person judge, whether it be more likely, that so many famous Saints and
Martyrs, so near the Apostles times, should conspire in the practice of
Mock-Baptism, and of making so many Millions of Mock-Christians; or that a
little Sect should be in a grievous Error. The brevity which I design, will
not permit me to recite the Authorities of the ancients, and therefore I refer
the Reader to Cassander, and Vossius De Baptism. Disp. 14. only I desire him to
consider the following particulars.

1. That it is hard to imagine, that God should suffer his Church to fall into
such a dangerous practice, as our Adversaries think Infant Baptism to be, which
would in time. Unchurch it; and that even while Miracles were yet extant in the
Church, and he bare them witness with signs and wonders and diverse gifts of the
Holy Ghost. And yet it is plain, that Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin and Cyprian,
who are witnesses of Infant Baptism in those days, do assure See Irenaeus Adv.
Haer. l. 2. c. 56, 57. Tertull. Apol. and ad Scapul. Origin adv. Celsum, Camb.
p. 34, 62, 80, 124, 127, 334, 376. Cyprian ad Donat. and ad Magn. and ad
Demetrian. p. 202. Edit. Rigalt.
us, that Miracles were then not Extraordinary in the Church.

2. If Infant Baptism was not an Apostolical Tradition, how came the Sea Voss.
Hist. Pelag. lib. 2. p. 2. Id. de Baptis. Disp. 13. These. 18. and Disp. 14.
^hes. 4. Cassand. Praef. ad Duc. Jul. p. 670. and Te^^im. vet. de Bapt. parv.
p. 687.
Pelagians not to reject it for an innovation, when the Orthodox used it as an
argument against them, that Infants were guilty of Original sin? But they were
so far from doing this, that they practiced it themselves, and owned it as
necessary for Childrens obtaining the Kingdom of Heaven, though they denied that
they were Baptized for the remission of Original sin.

3. If Infant Baptism be not an Apostolical Tradition, how came all Churches
See Brerewood's Enquir. c. 20.23. Cassand. Expos. de Auctor. Consult. Bapt Inf.
p. 692. Osor. l. 3. de Rebus gest. Eman. cit. a Voss. Disp. 14. de Bapt.
whatsoever, though they held no correspondence, but were original plantations of
the Apostles, to practice it? One may easily imagine, that God might suffer all
Churches to fall into the harmless practice of Infant-Communion; or that the
Fathers of the Church might comply with the Religious fondness of the People in
bringing their Children to the Lord's Supper, as we do with bringing them to
Prayers: but that God should let them all (not preserving one for a Monument of
Apostolical Purity) fall into a practice, which destroys the being of the
Church, is a thousand times more incredible, than that the Apostles, without a
prohibition from Christ to the contrary, should Baptize Infants according to
the practice of the Jewish Church.

4. Would not the Jewish Christians, who were offended at the neglect of
Circumcision, have been much more offended, if the Apostles had excluded their
Children from Baptism, as the Children of Unbelievers, and refused to Initiate
them under the New Testament, as they had always been under the Old?
Wherefore, since among their many complaints upon the alteration of the Jewish
Customs, we never read that they complained of their Childrens being excluded
from Baptism: we may better argue, that the Apostles Baptized their Children;
than we may conclude from the want of an express example of Infant Baptism,
that they did not Baptize them.

III. I am to prove, that it is unlawful to separate from a Church, which
appoints Infant Baptism. Now it appears from what I have already said, that
Infant Baptism is a lawful thing, and therefore it is a sin to separate from
that Church which commands it; because the Church has authority to Ordain that,
which may be done without sin.

But farther, Infant Baptism is not only lawful, but highly requisite also. For
purgation by Water and the Spirit seem equally necessary, because Except a Man
be born again of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God, John 3.5. And it is reasonable to think, that Children are capable of
entering into Covenant, because they are declared capable of the Kingdom of God,
Mark 10.14. Nay we may justly conclude, that Children were Baptized upon the
Conversion of their Parents, after the Custom of the Jewish Church, because the
Apostles Baptized whole households, Acts 16.15, 33. 1 Cor. 1.16. For it is
probable, that the federal holiness of Believers Children makes them candidates
for Baptism, and gives them a right to it; because the Children of Believers
are called Holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. To which I may add other Texts, Psalm. 5.5. Romans
3.23, 24. Joh. 3.5, 6. 2 Cor. 15.21, 22. and 5.14, 15. which have been alleged
by the ancients, both before and after the Pelagian Controversy, to prove the
Baptism of Infants necessary to wash away their original sin, which makes them
obnoxious to eternal death. See Voss. Hist. Pelag. p. 1. These. 6. p. 2. l. 2. I
say, it may be fairly concluded from these Texts, that Infant Baptism is
requisite: but then these Texts in conjunction with the practice of the ancient
Church do demonstrate that it is requisite; because the Church in the next Age
to the Apostles practiced Infant Baptism, as an Apostolical tradition, and by
consequence, as an institution of Christ.

I do not say, that Baptism is indispensably necessary to the Salvation of
Infants, so that a Child dying unbaptiz'd through the carelessness or superstition
of the Parents, or through their mistaken belief of the unlawfulness of
Infant Baptism, is infallibly damned: but I affirm, that Infant Baptism is in
any wise to be retained in the Church, as being most agreeable to the
Scripture, and the Apostolical practice, and the institution of Christ. And if
Baptism be not only lawful but so highly requisite, as it appears to be; then
certainly it is unlawful to separate from that Church which injoins it.

IV. In the next place I shall show, that it is the duty of Christian Parents to
bring their Children to Baptism; and in doing this I must proceed, as I did in
the foregoing particular. Since Infants are not incapable of Baptism, nor
excluded from it by Christ; nay, since there are good reasons to presume, that
Christ at least allowed them Baptism as well as grown persons: therefore the
command of the Church makes it the People's duty to bring their Children to
Baptism, because it is lawful so to do.

But farther, Infant Baptism is highly expedient also. For, 1. it is very
beneficial to the Infants, who are thereby solemnly consecrated to God, and
made members of Christ's Mystical Body the Church. Besides, they being by
Nature Children of Wrath, are by Baptism made the Children of Grace, and
receive a right to eternal Life. I cannot deny, but they may be saved without
Baptism by the uncovenanted Mercy of God: but then the hopes of God's mercy in
extraordinary cases, ought not to make us less regardful of his sure, ordinary,
and covenanted Mercies, and the appointed Means to which they are annexed. Nay,
Infants do by Baptism acquire a present right unto all the Promises of the
Gospel, and particularly to the promises of the Spirit's assistance, which they
shall certainly receive, as soon and as fast, as their natural incapacity
removes.

Now, since these are the benefits of Baptism, and since Infants are capable of
them; let any impartial Man judge, whether it is more for their benefit, that
they should receive them by being Baptized in their infancy, or stay for them
till they come to years of discretion. Is it better for a Child that has the
Evil, to be touched for it while he is a Child, or to wait till he is of
sufficient Age to be sensible of the benefit? Or is it best for a Traytor's
Child to be presently restored to his Blood and Estate, and his Prince's
Favor, or to be kept in a mere capacity of being restored, till he is a man?

I must add, that Baptism lays such an early pre-engagement upon Children, as
without the highest baseness and ingratitude they cannot afterward retract.
For there is no person of common Ingenuity, Honor or Conscience, but will
think himself bound to stand to the Obligation which he contracted in his
Infancy; when he was so graciously admitted to so many blessings and
privileges, before he could understand his own good, or do any thing himself
toward the obtaining of them. And therefore the Wisdom of the Church is highly
to be applauded, for bringing them under such a beneficial pre-engagement, and
not leaving them to their own liberty at such years, when Flesh and Blood would
be apt to find out so many shifts and excuses, and make them regret to be
Baptized.

2. Infant Baptism is very Expedient, because it conduces much to the
Well-being and Edification of the Church, in preventing those scandalous and
shameful delays of Baptism, which grown Persons would be apt to make in these,
as they did in former times to the great prejudice of Christianity.

Since therefore Infant Baptism is not only Lawful and commanded by the Church,
but most Expedient in it self, and most agreeable to the practice of the
Apostles and Primitive Christians, and to the Will of Christ; it must needs be
concluded, that there lies the same obligation upon Parents to desire Baptism
for their Children, as there does upon grown Persons to desire it for
themselves. For what Authority soever exacts any thing concerning Children or
Persons under the years of discretion, lays at least an implicit obligation
upon Parents, to see that it be performed. For, if in the time of a general
contagion, the Supreme Power should Command, that all Men, Women and Children,
should every Morning take such an Antidote; that Command would oblige Parents
to give it to their Children, as well as to take it themselves. Just so the
Ordinance of Baptism being intended for Children as well as grown Persons, it
must needs oblige the Parents to bring them to it.

What I have here said about the obligation, which lies upon Parents to bring
their Children to Baptism, concerns all Guardians, etc. to whose care Children
are committed. And if any ask, at what time they are bound to bring them to
Baptism? I answer, at any time; for the Gospel indulges a discretional
latitude, but forbids the wilful neglect, and all unreasonable and needless
delays thereof.

V. As to Communion with Believers, who were Baptized in their Infancy, it is
certainly Lawful, and has ever been thought so; nay it is an exceeding great sin
to refuse Communion with them, because that would be a disowning those to be
Members of Christ's Body, whom he owns to be such.

Nothing now remains, but that I take off two objections. First, It Is said that
Infant-Communion may be practiced, as well as Infant Baptism. But I answer, 1.
There is not equal Evidence for the Practice of Infant-Communion; because St.
Cyprian is the first Author which they can produce for it, and then the Author
of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and Cyril of Jerusalem, mention it toward the
latter end of the Fourth Century, and St. Austin in the Fifth: whereas for
Infant Baptism we have the Authority of St. Cyprian and a whole Council of
Fathers, over which he Presided, of Origin, Tertullian, Irenaeus, St. Jerome,
St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, St. Athanasius, Gregory Nazianzen, and the Third
Council of Carthage, who all speak of it as a thing generally practiced, and
most of them, as of a thing which ought to be practiced in the Church. I may
add, that none of the Four Testimonies for Infant-Communion speak of it, as of
an Apostolical Tradition, as Origin does of Infant Baptism. 2. There is not
equal Reason for the Practice of it. For Persons of all Ages are capable of
Baptism: but the Holy Eucharist is the Sacrament of Perfection, instituted for
the remembrance of Christ's Death and Passion; which being an act of great
Knowledge and Piety, Children are not capable to perform. Nor is there an equal
concurrence of Tradition, or the Authority of so many Texts of Scripture for
Infant-Communion; it being grounded only upon John 6.53. Except ye eat the
Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you. Now it is
doubtful whether this be meant of the Eucharist or no, because it was not as
yet instituted: but if it be so to be understood, yet the sense of it ought to
be regulated by the chief end of its Institution, Do this in remembrance of me.
Nay, the Western Church, discerning the Mistake upon which Infant-Communion was
grounded, have long since laid it aside, though they still continue the practice
of Infant Baptism.

But in truth, the practice of Infant-Communion is so far from prejudicing the
Cause of Infant Baptism, that it mightily confirms it; because none were, or
could be admitted to partake of the Holy Communion, till they were validly
Baptized. And therefore the practice of Infant-Communion fully proves, that all
the Churches, wherein it ever was, or still As in the Greek, Russian, and
Abyssin Churches, and among the Christians of St. Thomas in the Indies.
is practiced, were of opinion, that the Baptism of Infants is as Valid and
Lawful, as that of grown Persons.

Secondly, it is objected, that Children who have not the use of Reason, cannot
know what a Covenant means, and therefore they cannot contract and stipulate;
though St. Peter says, the Baptism which saves us, must have the Answer, or
Restipulation of a good Conscience toward God. To this I Answer, 1. That this
Objection is as strong against Infant-Circumcision, as against Infant Baptism.
2. That God was pleased to Seal the Covenant of Grace unto Circumcised Infants
upon an implicit and imputative sort of stipulation, which at years of
understanding they were bound to own; because if they renounced it, the
Covenant was as void, as if it had never been made. And therefore an implicit
stipulation is sufficient for the Baptism of Infants; and St. Peter, it is
likely, had not respect to all Baptism, or Baptism in general, but only to the
Baptism of adult Proselytes, whom the Minister used to interrogate at the time
of Baptism, much after the same manner as we interrogate adult Proselytes now.
But it is plain that Tertullian De Baptism. cap. 18.
makes mention of Sponsors or Sureties for Children at Baptism; and it is very
probable, that the Apostles made Parents, etc. stipulate in the name of their
See Seldom de Synedr. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Minors, when they Baptized them, as the Jews were wont to do; and it is certain,
that our Savior speaks of Children, that Believe in him, Matthew. 18.6. And
therefore St. Peter might also probably allude to all Baptism, because Children
might be Answered for by other Persons.

Thus, I hope, I have sufficiently justified the practice of Infant Baptism,
and shown, that it is by no means a sufficient excuse for separation from us.

CHAP. VI. Objections against our Form of Baptism, and particularly that of the
sign of the Cross, Answered.
I Proceed now to consider the Objections against our Form of Baptism.

I. It is said, that all Baptized Infants are supposed to be regenerated, of
which, some think, we cannot be certain. But since they are Baptized into
Christ's Body, 1 Cor. 12.13. and into Christ, and have put on Christ, Gal.
3.27. and consequently are new Creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17. since, I say, they are
Baptized for the Remission of sins, Acts 2.38. and since Baptism is called the
Washing of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. therefore the Scripture, as well as our
Church, supposes them to be regenerated; unless the Ordinances and Promises of
God are of none effect toward them.

II. It Is objected, that Godfathers and Godmothers have no Authority to
Covenant or act in their names. To which I answer, 1. That the Sureties are
procured by the Parents; and therefore, since it is granted that the Parents may
act in behalf of the Infant, the Sureties have all that Authority which the
Parents can give them. 2. The Church does hereby take great security, that the
Infant shall be religiously brought up: inasmuch as, besides their Parents, an
obligation is laid upon others also to take care of it. If the Parents should
die or be negligent, the Sureties are engaged to admonish the Child, and have
greater authority and better advantages of doing so, than other Persons. And in
this Age, when the Duty of Christian reproof is so generally omitted, 'twere
well if the defect were this way a little supplied: but it is by no means fit,
that the opportunity thereof, and obligation thereto should be taken away. If
it be said, this is seldom practiced; I answer, that the goodness of a Rule is
to be judged of by the good that is done where it is kept, and not where it is
broken. And if the Dissenters have nothing to say, but that it is neglected;
they may remove this objection themselves, by returning to the Church and
increasing the number of those that observe it. Thus they shall have the
benefit of the order of the Church, and the Church the benefit of their
Examples.

As for the Interrogatories put to the Sureties, and their Answers, they are a
Solemn Declaration of what Baptism obliges us to; and that Infants do stand
engaged to perform it, when they come to Age. This is the known meaning of the
Contract; and therefore I see not, why it should be said to be liable to
misunderstanding.

III. But that which is most disliked, is the Cross in Baptism, against which
it is objected, 1. That the sign of the Cross has been so notoriously abused by
the Papists, that our retaining of it makes us partakers of their Superstitions
and Idolatry. 2. That it seems a new Sacrament, and therefore is an invasion of
Christ's right, who alone may institute Sacraments.

As to the First pretense, though I readily acknowledge that the Cross has been
notoriously abused by the Papists, yet this does not prove our retaining of it
to be unlawful, if we consider Three things.

1. That the use of this sign was common in the primitive times, and is more
Ancient, than any of those Corruptions, for which we differ from the Papists.
Tertullian De Coron. Mil.
speaks of it, as of a practice which Tradition had introduced, Custom had
confirmed, and the Believers faith had observed and maintained: which words,
together with his frequent and familiar mention of it, make it very improbable,
that he received it from the Montanists. Forty years after him, and about 200
after Christ, Origin Hom. 2. in Psalm. 38.
mentions those, who at their Baptism were signed with this sign: and about 100
years after, St. Basil De Spir. S. c. 27.
gives this usage the Venerable Title of an Ecclesiastical constitution, or
fixed Law of the Church, that had prevailed from the Apostles days, that those
who believe in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, should be signed with the
sign of the Cross.

But of all the Fathers, St. Cyprian who was before St. Basil and very near (if
not contemporary with) Tertullian himself, not only speaks very familiarly of
the use of this sign, but has some expressions that would now seem very harsh
and unwarrantable: and yet the authority of this Father has saved him from
being questioned about it. He See Cyprian. De Laps. p. 169. adv. Demet. p. 203.
de Unit. p. 175.
tells us, that they are signed in the forehead with the Cross, who are thought
worthy of the Lord; that Baptism is sanctified by the Cross; and that it
compleats every Sacrament. The great the antiquity of this usage is manifest;
nay, the Fathers frequently use being signed in the forehead for being Baptized.

I shall not instance in St. Cyril, St. Ambrose and St. Austin, who sprinkle
their writings with the common mention of this Ceremony, and oftentimes frame
arguments for a good Life, from this very sign upon their foreheads. Only I
shall add this remark; that the first Christian Emperor Constantine the Great,
had his directions probably from Heaven it self, to make this sign the great
Banner in his Wars, with this encouragement, that by this he should overcome.
That this Dream or Vision was from Heaven, and a thing of great reality, is
evident from the success of that Prince's Army under it: and we cannot suppose,
that our Blessed Lord would, by so immediate a revelation, countenance such a
Rite as this, already used in the Church, if he had resented it before as
superstitious or any way unwarrantable. I may add, that we ought not to be too
petulant against that, which the Holy Spirit has sometimes signalized by very
renowned Miracles; as those that consult the Ecclesiastical Histories of the
best Authority, cannot but be convinced: and that those conceits of the Fathers
concerning this sign, which perhaps may be too fanciful, do confirm the ancient
reception of it into the Primitive Church.

If it be said, that the ancient Christians used this sign, because they lived
amongst Jews and Heathens, to testify to both, that they made the Cross the
Badge of their profession, and would not be ashamed of it, though 'twas a
stumbling block to the one and foolishness to the other: whereas we have no
such occasion for it, who do universally profess Christianity; I Answer, 1.
That this Objection supposes the sign to be lawful, and that it may be used
upon weighty Reasons; and surely then the command of Authority may justify the
practice of it. 2. That we have as just reason to use it as the Primitive
Christians, because of the blasphemous Contempt that is generally cast upon the
whole Scheme of Christianity, particularly the Merits of our Savior's Cross
and Passion, by the pretended Wits of our Age. So that St. Cyprian's Epist. 56.
ad Thiber.
words are now pertinent, Arm your Foreheads, that the Seal of God may be kept
safe; as if he should have said, Remember the Badge you took upon you in
Baptism, and so long as you have that upon your Foreheads, never be ashamed or
laughed out of countenance as to the Memory of our Savior's love, and the
foundation of your hopes laid in his Death and Passion.

I grant indeed, that the use of the Cross is an indifferent Ceremony, and that
Baptism is, as our Church declares, complete without it: but what I contend
for, is fully proved, viz. that the Cross was used in the first Ages of
Christianity; from whence it follows, that though it is not necessary, yet it is
warrantable.

2. Our use of this sign is not in the least like the Popish use of it. For, 1.
we admit of no visible Crucifixes; nor has any of our Writers ventured to say
Christian Direct. Eccles. Cas. p. 113. p. 875, 876.
with Mr. Baxter, that a Crucifix well befitteth the imagination and mind of a
Believer; and that it is not unlawful to make an image (of a Crucifix) to be an
Object or Medium of our consideration, exciting our minds to worship God. The
sense of our Church is truly expressed by Mr. Hooker, who Eccles. Pol. l. 5. p.
348.
says, That between the Cross which Superstition honors as Christ, and that
Ceremony of the Cross which serves only for a sign of remembrance, there is as
plain and great a difference, as between those Brazen Images which Solomon made
to bear up the Cistern of the Temple, and that which the Israelites in the
Wilderness did adore. Ours is a mere transient sign, which abides not so long
as to be capable of becoming an Object or Medium of worship, any more than any
words we use in worship may do. 2. Our use even of this transient sign is
nothing like the Popish use of it. For the Papists use it upon all occasions;
and at Baptism they use it much oftener, and so differently from our way, that
it is not used at the same time and with the same words that we use it with.
This is evident from the Roman Ritual.

3. Though the Church of Rome has notoriously abused this sign, yet it is not
unlawful for us to continue the use of it, as I shall fully prove in the Eighth
Chapter.

As to the Second pretense, that the sign of the Cross is a new Sacrament, I
answer, that we all agree, that a Sacrament is an outward and visible sign of
an inward and Spiritual Grace given to us, Ordained by Christ himself, as a
means whereby we receive the same, and as a Pledge to assure us thereof. And
therefore, since we never supposed, that the use of the Cross in Baptism could
confer Grace, nor have ever made the least pretense to any Divine appointment
for it; we ought not to be charged as introducing a New Sacrament.

If it be said, that we make the Cross a sign betokening our Faith and
Christian Courage, because we apply it in token that hereafter he shall not be
ashamed to confess the Faith o^ Christ Crucified, etc. and that therefore we
make it an outward sign of an inward and Spiritual Grace; I answer, that we own
it to be a significant Ceremony, as all other Ceremonies are; for we do not
account a Ceremony innocent, because it is insignificant and impertinent: but
yet we deny it to be an outward and visible sign of an inward and Spiritual
Grace. For our Ceremonies are not seals and assurances from God of his Grace to
us, but hints and remembrances of some Obligation we are under with respect to
him; and this kind of significant Usages has ever been taken up, without any
imputation of introducing a New Sacrament.

For, 1. the Jewish Church changed the posture of eating the Passover, from
Standing to Sitting in token of their Rest and Securi^y in the Land of Canaan.
There was also an Altar of witness reared on the other side of Jordan; and the
Synagogue-Worship, Rites of Marriage, Form of taking Oaths, etc. were
significant; and yet they were all received in the purest times of the Jewish
Church, and complied with by our Savior himself 2. The Christian Church of the
first Ages used the same liberty, as appears by the customs of the Holy Kiss
and the Feasts of Charity. Tertullian, de Orat. speaks as if the public Service
were imperfect, if it concluded not with the Holy Kiss; which was used in token
of the mutual Communion and Fellowship, that Christians had with one another.
The Feasts of Charity also signified the mutual Love and Communion of
Christians, and the equal regard that God and our Savior had toward all sorts
and conditions of Men, when they were all to eat freely together at one Common
meal. I might further instance in the Ceremony of insufflation, which was used
as a sign of Breathing into them the good Spirit; and the Baptized Person's
stripping off his Garment in token that he put off the Old Man; and the trine
immersion, at the Mention of each Person of the Trinity, to signify the Belief
of that great Article. Now all these things were anciently practiced without
any jealousy of invading the prerogative of Christ in instituting New
Sacraments. 3. All the Reformed Churches, nay the very Dissenters themselves,
do use some Symbolical actions in their most Religious Solemnities. For, 1.
Their giving to the Baptized Infant a New Name seems to betoken its being made
a New Creature. Nay the Dissenters generally give it some Scripture-name, or
one that betokens a particular grace; and this is an outward and visible sign,
and this too sometimes of an inward and spiritual grace; and yet they do not
think it a New Sacrament. 2. The Dissenters plead for sitting at the Lord's
Supper, because it is a Table-g^sture, and expresses Fellowship with Christ,
etc. This is an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace; and
yet it is not accounted an additional Sacrament to that of the Lord's Supper. 4.
And lastly, Suppose that an Independent, when he is admitted into their
Church Covenant, should signify his assent by holding up his hand, or the like;
this is an outward and visible sign of no less then a new state of life, that
is, of being made a Member of Christ's Church, and being engaged to all the
duties and instated in all the Privileges of it: and yet this was never charged
upon them by the Presbyterians, as introducing a New Sacrament. Now from all
these instances it is evident, how unreasonable a thing it is, that our using
the sign of the Cross, in token that hereafter he (the Infant) shall not be
ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, etc. should be thought an
adding of a New Sacrament of the Cross to that of Baptism.

But it is objected, that our Convocation, c. 30. declares, That by the sign of
the Cross the Infant is Dedicated, etc. Now, say they, Baptism is it self a
Seal of Dedication to God, and therefore our Dedicating the Infant by our own
invented way of the sign of the Cross, is adding a New Sacrament. To this I
answer, that Dedication may properly signify a Confirmation of our first
Dedication to God, and a Declaration of what the Church thinks of a Baptized
Person; and the sign of the Cross is the Medium of this Declaration. That this
is the meaning of our Church, is evident, if we compare the Office of Baptism
and the Canon together. Both the Rubric and Canon say, that Baptism is complete
without the sign of the Cross. It is expressly said, We receive this Child into
the Congregation of Christ 's Flock, and upon that do sign it with the Cross;
So that the Child is declared to be within the Congregation of Christ 's Flock,
before it is signed with the Cross. Since therefore the Person is Dedicated in
Baptism, and the Baptism is acknowledged complete without, or before the sign
of the Cross; we cannot be thought to Dedicate in Baptism and to Dedicate by
the Cross again: but the Dedication by the Cross must be something very
distinct from the Dedication of Baptism; that is, the one is the sign of the
Dedication, and the other the Dedication it self. So that this is plainly no
other, than a Declaration the Church makes of what the Baptized Person is
admitted to, and what engagement he lies under. Which Declaration is therefore
made in the name of the Church in the Plural number, We receive this Child,
etc. and do sign him with the sign of the Cross, etc. whereas in Baptism, the
Minister alone, as the immediate Agent of Christ, pronounces in the singular
number, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

From what has been said, I hope, it appears, that our Office of Baptism has
nothing in it, that may in the least justify a separation from us.

CHAP. VII. Objections against our Communion-Office, and particularly that of
kneeling at the Sacrament, Answered.
THOUGH the Communion-Office, for the Gravity and Holiness thereof, is preferred
by the Dissenters before all other Offices in the Common Prayer Book, yet it
has not past free from exception. For,

I. It Is objected against it, that the Petition in the Prayer before
Consecration, That our sinful Bodies may be made clean by his body, and our
Souls washed by his most precious Blood, implies that the Blood of Christ has
greater efficacy than his Body, inasmuch as the Soul is said to be cleans'd by
the Blood of Christ, and only the Body by Christ's Body. But I answer, that at
the delivery of the Bread and Wine, the Priest says, The Body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve thy Body and Soul unto
everlasting Life; and The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was, etc. And
therefore it is plain, that our Church teaches, that the Sanctification and
Salvation of our Souls and Bodies flow from the Body as well as the Blood of
Christ. Nor does the mentioning of one alone exclude the other; for the Apostle
speaks sometimes of the Bread alone, 1 Cor. 10.17. and sometimes of the Wine
alone, 1 Cor. 12.13. and yet all Men must grant, that he meant both.

II. It Is said, that Christ did not deliver the Elements into every Person's
hands, with a Form of words recited to every one of them, as we do. But I
answer, 1. That this does not appear from Christ's words; for the Evangelists
may well be supposed to give a short account of the Institution, and then what
might be particularly said or done to every one, would be sufficiently related
in being said to be done or spoken to all. 2. Suppose that our practice does
vary from this circumstance of the Institution, it may be as easily defended as
celebrating the Lord's Supper at Dinnertime, and not at Supper, which the
Dissenters themselves do not scruple. 3. Our Savior commanded his Disciples,
Matthew. 28.19. to Teach all Nations Baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. But will any Man think, that when great
numbers are to be Baptized together, the Form of Baptizing in the Name of the
Father, etc. may not lawfully be expressed severally to every Person? And why
then may not the same be done in the Lord's Supper? Wherefore the practice of
our Church herein is no way unsuitable to the Institution of Christ, or the
nature of the Sacrament; and the alteration of it would be for the worse, and
abate the Solemnity of its Administration. See Falkner 's Libert. Eccles. p.
218, etc.

III. The last and great objection is against the posture of kneeling at the
Sacrament; and therefore I shall consider it largely, and endeavor to show,

1. That Christ has not forbidden us to kneel at the Sacrament.

2. That kneeling is not a deviation from his Example.

3. That it is not unsuitable for its being no Table Gesture.

4. That it is not contrary to the practice of the Church in the best and purest
Ages.

5. That kneeling is not therefore unlawful, because 'twas introduced by
Idolaters, and is still notoriously abused by the Papists to Idolatrous ends
and purposes.

First then, Christ has not forbidden us to kneel at the Sacrament. For in all
the Scriptures God has not given us any express command to determine our
practice one way or other: and, if Authority did not restrain our Liberty, we
might either sit, kneel or stand, without the least violation of the Law of God.

The Apostles and Disciples of our Lord at the Institution of the Sacrament,
which the Scripture relates in several places Matthew. 26.26, etc. Mark 14.22,
etc. Luke 22.19. etc. 1 Cor. 11.23, etc.
were the Representatives of the whole Church, and are to be considered under a
double capacity; either as Governors and Ministers, Entrusted by Christ with
the Power of dispensing and administering the Sacrament, or as ordinary and
Lay-communicants. If we consider them as Governors and Stewards of the
Mysteries, their duty to which they are obliged by the express Command of their
Lord, is to take the Bread into their hands, to Bless and Consecrate it to that
Mysterious and Divine use to which he designed it, to break and distribute it;
and so in the like manner to take and bless the Cup, and give it to their
Fellow Christians. But if we consider them as Private Men, and in common with
all Believers, their duty was to take and receive the Bread and Wine, and to
eat and drink in Commemoration of Christ's Love. But what syllable or shadow of
a Command is there in all the History for the use of any gesture in the act of
receiving? Since then the Holy Scripture is altogether silent as to this
matter, it is silence is a full and clear demonstration, that kneeling is not
repugnant to any express command of our Lord, because no gesture was ever
commanded at all.

But the Scotch Ministers Assembled at Perth, affirm that when our Lord
Commanded his Disciples to do this, he did by those words Command them to use
that Gesture, which he used at that time, as well as to take, eat, drink, etc.
To this I answer, 1. That if our Lord did sit at the Institution (which we will
suppose at present) yet there is no reason to think, that He intended by these
words, do this, to oblige us to observe this Gesture only, and not several
other circumstances, which he observed at the same time, as well as this. For
Example, if the words may be Interpreted thus, Do this, that is, sit as Christ
did; why not thus also, Do this, that is, Celebrate the Sacrament in an
Upper-room, in a Private-house, late at night or in the evening, after a full
Supper, in the Company of Twelve at most, and they only Men, with their Heads
covered according to the Custom of those Countries, and with unleavened Bread?
There lies as great an obligation upon us to observe all those circumstances in
imitation of our Lord, as there does to sit. 2. Even the two last of those
circumstances are generally allowed, but all the rest are mentioned in
Scripture, and were most certainly observed by Christ: whereas the gesture used
by them is not mentioned, and what it was is very disputable, as I shall
afterward prove. How then can any Man think himself obliged in Conscience to
do what Christ is not expreslly said to do; and not obliged to do what the
Scripture expressly says he did? 3. It Is clear from St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.23,
etc. that do this, respects only the Bread and Wine, which signify the Body and
Blood of Christ, and actions that are specified by him, which are essential to
the right and due Celebration of that Holy Feast. For when it is said, Do this
in remembrance of me, and this do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me,
and as often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death
till he come; it is plain, that do this, must be restrained to the Sacramental
actions there mentioned, and not extended to the gesture, of which the Apostle
speaks not a word. Our Lord Instituted the Sacrament in Remembrance of his
Death and Passion, and not in Remembrance of his Gesture in Administering it:
and consequently, do this, is a general Command, obliging us only to such
particular actions and rites as he had instituted, and made necessary to be
used in order to this great end, viz. to signify and represent his Death, and
that bloody Sacrifice which he offered upon the Cross for us miserable Sinners.

Nay the Practice of our Dissenters proves, that no particular gesture is
commanded. For there are many serious and sincere Persons among them, who
profess that (were they left to their liberty) they could use kneeling as well
as any other gesture: but they think that an indifferent thing becomes
unlawful, when it is enjoined by Authority. I have already confuted this
opinion; but it is certain, that by granting they could use the posture of
kneeling, were it not enjoined, and consequently that it is in it is own nature
indifferent; they do thereby grant that there is no Command for any particular
posture.

I must add, that the Reformed Churches of France, and those of Geneva and
Helvetia stand, the Dutch generally sit, but in some places (as in
West-Friesland) they stand. The Churches of the Bohemian and Augustane
Confession, which spread through the large Kingdoms of Bohemia, Denmark, and
Sweden, through Norway, the Dukedom of Saxony, Lithuania and Ducal Prussia in
Poland, the Marquisate of Brandenburg in Germany, and several other places and
free Cities in that Empire, do for the most part, if not all of them, retain
the Gesture of Kneeling. The Bohemian Churches were Reformed by John Husse and
Jerome of Prague, who suffered Martyrdom at Constance about the year 1416. long
before Luther's time, and those of the Ausbourg or Augustan Confessions were
founded and reformed by Luther, and were the first Protestants properly so
called. But these Churches so early reformed and of so large extent, did not
only use the same Gesture that our Church injoins at the Sacrament; but they,
together with those of the Helvetic Confession, did in three 1. At Cracow, Anno
Dom. 1573. 2. Petricow or Peterkaw. 1578. 3. Wiadislaw, 1583.
general Synods unanimously condemn the sitting Gesture (though they esteemed it
in it self lawful) as being scandalous for this remarkable Reason, viz. because
it was used by the Arians (as their Synods call the Socinians) in contempt of
our Saviors Divinity, who therefore placed themselves as Fellows with their
Lord at his Table. And thereupon they entreat and exhort all Christians of
their Communion to change sitting into kneeling or standing, both which
Ceremonies we indifferently leave free, according as the custom of any Church
has obtained, and we approve of their use without scandal and blame. Moreover
they affirm, That these Socinians who deny Christ to be God, were the first
that introduced Sitting at the Sacrament into their Churches, contrary to the
practice of all the Evangelical Churches in Europe. Among all these Foreign
Churches of the Reformation, there is but one that I can find which uses
Sitting, and forbids Kneeling, for fear of Bread-worship; but yet in that Synod
wherein they condemned Kneeling, they left it to the choice of their Churches
to use Standing, Sitting, or an Ambulatory Gesture (as the French Harmon. 4.
Synods of Holl.
do) and at last conclude thus; These Articles are so settled by mutual consent,
that if the good of the Churches require it, they may and ought to be changed,
augmented or diminished. What now should be the ground and reason of this
Variety both in Opinion and Practice touching the Gesture to be used at the
Lord's Supper? Is it to be imagined that an Assembly of Learned and Pious
Divines, met together on purpose to consult how to reform their Churches,
according to the pure Word of God, should through weakness and inadvertency
overlook an express Command of Christ for the perpetual use of any particular
Gesture, if any such there had been? Or shall we be so uncharitable as to
think, that all these eminent Churches wilfully past it by, and established
what was most agreeable to their own fancies, contrary to the known Will of
God? Would they have given liberty to all of their Communion to use several
Gestures according to the Custom of their several Churches, if our Lord had
tied them to observe but one? Would they declare (as the Dutch Synod does) that
what they enjoined might be altered, if the good of the Church so required; if
so be Sitting had been expressly Commanded by our Lord, to be used by all
Christians to the end of the World? No undoubtedly, they would not; we cannot
either in Reason or Charity suppose it.

The true Principle upon which all these Reformed Churches built, and by which
they are able to reconcile all this seeming difference in this matter, is the
very same with that which the Church of England go's by in her Synods and
Convocations; viz. Vid. Art. 34. observat. of the French and Dutch Divines on
the Harmony of Confessions, Edit. Geneva 1681. Sect. 14. p. 120. In hoc etiam
ritu (speaking of Kneeling at the Sacrament) suam cuique Ecclesiae libertatem
salvam reliquendam arbitramur.
That as to Rites and Ceremonies of an indifferent nature, every National
Church has Authority to institute, change and abolish them, as they in Prudence
and Charity shall think most fit and conducive to the setting forth God's
Glory, the Edification of their People, and the Decent and Reverend
Administation of the Holy Sacrament. Whosoever therefore refuses to receive the
Lord's Supper according to the Constitution of the Church of England, purely
because Kneeling is contrary to the express Command of Christ, must condemn the
Judgment and Practice of all the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, who all
agree in this, That the Gesture in the Act of Receiving is to be reckoned among
things Indifferent; and that whether we sit, or kneel or stand, or Receive
walking, we transgress no Law of God; and consequently they prove my Assertion
true, That Kneeling is no more contrary to any express Command than any other
Gesture; because they allow of all, as lawful in themselves to be used, which
cannot consist with an express Command for the use of any one Gesture
whatsoever.

Upon the whole matter, I think we may certainly conclude, that there is not a
tittle of a Command in the whole New Testament to oblige us to receive the
Lord's Supper in any particular posture: and if any be so scrupulous, as not to
receive it in any other Gesture, but what is expressly commanded, they must
never receive it as long as they live.

Secondly, I shall prove, that Kneeling is not a deviation from Christ's
example. This will appear, if we consider, 1. that it is doubtful what Gesture
our Savior used at the Institution of the Sacrament. For the Scripture does
not inform us what it was, and the Jews used variety of Gestures at the
Passover; and therefore, since our Lord's Example cannot certainly be known in
this Matter, our Church cannot be charged with deviation from it. 2. Those who
Kneel at the Sacrament in compliance with the Orders of the Church, do
manifestly follow the Example of Christ. For our Savior complied with that
Passover-gesture, which the Jews then used, though it was not the same that was
used at the Institution in Egypt: and his compliance may teach us, not to be
scrupulous about Gestures, but to conform to the innocent and prevailing
customs of the Church, wheresoever we live. And if Christians did walk
according to this rule, they would greatly promote the peace and welfare of the
Church of Christ, and in so doing procure quiet and peace to themselves, with
unspeakable comfort and satisfaction.

But supposing our Lord did sit, as the Dissenters will have it; yet his bare
example does not oblige all Christians to a like practice. 1. Because naked
examples, without some rule or note added to them, to signify that it is God's
Will to have them constantly followed, have not the force of Laws perpetually
obliging the Conscience. And therefore, in this case, because no such note is
to be found, we are not tied in Conscience to a strict imitation of Christ's
Example. Thus the Example of our Savior does not oblige us to defer our
Baptism till the Age of 30 years, or not to receive the Sacrament till a little
before death; and, I pray, what reason is there to follow his Example in
sitting at the Sacrament, any more than in those particulars? 2. We are bound
to imitate Christ in those things only which he has commanded: but where there
is no command, there is no necessity. Indeed we must follow Christ and his
Apostles; but in what? Why, in acting according to the Gospel-rule. An example
may help to interpret a Law, but of it self it is no Law. Against a rule no
example is a competent warrant: and if the example be according to the rule,
it is not the Example, but the Rule, that is the Measure of our actions. 3. The
bare Example of Christ is no warrant for us to go by, because he was an
Extaordinary Person, and did many things which we cannot, and many which we
must not do. He Fasted 40 Days and 40 Nights, wrought Miracles, etc. which we
are not to pretend to. They say indeed, We are bound to imitate Christ and the
commendable Example of his Apostles, in all things wherein it is not evident,
they had special Reasons moving them thereunto, which do not concern us. But I
would willingly be informed how we shall be ever able to know when they acted
upon special Reasons, and what they were, that we may know our Duty, if a bare
Example without any Rule obliges us. And if we guide our selves by Scripture or
Reason in this matter, then they are the measures of the Example. Besides, if
we are not to imitate them in such things, as they were moved to do upon
special Reasons, which did not concern us; then we are obliged to imitate their
Examples in such things as they did upon general and common Reasons, which
concern us as well as them, or we are not obliged at all by any Example: and if
so, then those Reasons are to be our Rule, to which we are to reduce their
Examples. Unless we find some general or common Reason, we have no Warrant
(according to their own Principle) to follow their Examples: and when such
Reasons do appear, then it is not the Example alone that obliges us, but Reason
that approves the Example. To bring their own Rule to the case in hand, how do
they know but our Lord was moved to Sit at the Sacrament by Special Reasons
drawn from that Time and Place, or the Feast of the Passover, to which that
Gesture was peculiar? How do they know, but that our Lord might have used
another Gesture, if the Sacrament had been Instituted apart from the Passover?

The necessity of the time made the Jews eat the Passover after one fashion in
Egypt, which afterward ceasing, gave occasion to alter it in Canaan; and how do
we know, but that our Lord complied with the present necessity, and that his
Example (if he did Sit) was only temporary, and not designed for a Standing
Law, perpetually obliging to a like Practice? If Christ acted upon special
Reasons, then we are not obliged, by their own Rule: and if he did not, let
them produce the Reasons if they can, which make this Example of Christ of
general and perpetual use, and to oblige all Christians to follow it. 4. It Is
absurd to talk of Christ's Example apart from all Law and Rule, and to make
that alone a principle of duty distinct from the Precepts of the Gospel,
because Christ himself always governed his actions by a Law. For if we
consider him as a Man, he was obliged by the Natural Law, as a Jew by the
Mosaic Law, as the Messiah by the Gospel-Law. He came to fulfill all
Righteousness, and to Teach and Practice the whole Will of God. If therefore we
look only to his Example, without considering the various capacities and
relations he bare, both toward God and toward us, and the several Laws by
which he stood bound, which were the Measures of his Actions; we shall
miserably mistake our way, and act like Fools, when we do such things as he did
pursuant to infinite Wisdom. Thus, if we should subject our selves to the Law
of Moses, as he did, we should thereby frustrate the great design of the
Gospel: and yet even this we are obliged to do, if his Example alone be a
sufficient warrant for our actions. Thus it appears that Christ's bare Example
does not oblige us to do any thing, that is not commanded.

I shall only add, that they who urge the Example of Christ against Kneeling at
the Sacrament, do not follow it themselves. For our Savior probably used a
Leaning Gesture; and by what Authority do they change it to Sitting? Certainly,
our changing the Gesture is as warrantable as theirs. Nor is it enough to say,
that Sitting comes nearer our Savior's Gesture than Kneeling; for if they keep
to their own Rule, they must not vary at all. The Presbyterians (if one may
argue from their Practices to their Principles) lay very little stress on this
Argument taken from the Example of Christ. For though they generally choose to
Sit, yet they do not condemn Standing as Sinful, or Unlawful in it self; and
several are willing to receive it in that posture, in our Churches; which
surely is every whit as wide from the Pattern our Lord is supposed to have set
us, (whether he lay along or sat upright) as that which is enjoined and
practiced by the Church of England. There is too a Confessed variation allowed
of and practiced by the generality of Dissenters, both Presbyterians and
Independents, from the Institution and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, in
the other Sacrament of Baptism. For they have changed dipping into sprinkling;
and it is strange, that those who scruple kneeling at the Lord's Supper, can
allow of this greater change in Baptism. Why should not the Peace and unity of
the Church, and Charity to the Public, prevail with them to kneel at the Lord's
Supper; as much as mercy and tenderness to the Infant's Body, to sprinkle or
pour water on the Face, contrary to the first Institution?

Thirdly, kneeling is not therefore repugnant to the nature of the Lord's
Supper, because it is no Table Gesture. The Sacrament is a Supper; and
therefore, say they, the Gesture at the Lord's Table ought to be the same,
which we use and observe at our ordinary Tables, according to the custom and
fashion of our Native Country: and by consequence, we ought to Sit, and not to
Kneel, because sitting is the ordinary Table Gesture, according to the mode and
fashion of England.

Here, by the way, we may observe, that this Argument overthrows the two others
drawn from the Command and Example of Christ. For, 1. Different Table-gestures
are used in different Countries; and therefore, though Christ did Sit, yet we are
not obliged to Sit after his Example, unless sitting be in our Country the
common Table Gesture. 2. If the Nature of the Sacrament require a
Table Gesture, and that gesture in particular which is customary; then God has
not Commanded any particular gesture, because different Countries have
different Table-gestures.

However, I shall fu^ly Answer this Argument drawn from the Nature of the
Sacrament, by showing, 1. What is the Nature of it. 2. That it does not
absolutely require a common Table Gesture. 3. That Kneeling is very agreeable
to the nature of the Lord's Supper, though it is no Table Gesture.

1. Then, the Nature of the Sacrament is easily understood, if we consider that
the Scripture calls it the Lord's Table and the Lord's Supper. The Greek
Fathers call it a Feast and a Banquet, because of that Provision and
Entertainment which our Lord has made for all worthy Receivers. It Is styled a
Supper and a Feast, either because 'twas Instituted by Christ at Supper-time,
or because it represents a Supper and a Feast; and so it is not of the same
nature with a civil and ordinary Supper or Feast, though it bear the same name.
Three things are essential to a Feast, Plenty, Good Company and Mirth: but the
Plenty of the Lord's Supper is a Plenty of Spiritual Dainties; and the Company
consists of the Three Persons of the Trinity, and good Christians; and the
Mirth is wholly Spiritual. So that the Lord's Supper differs in its nature from
civil Banquets, as much as Heaven and Earth, Body and Spirit differ in theirs.
Farther, the Lord's Supper is a Feast upon a Sacrifice for Sin, wherein we are
particularly to commemorate the Death of Christ. 'Twas also instituted in
honor of our Lord, and to preserve an Eternal Memory of his wondrous Works,
and to Bless and Praise our Great Benefactour. It Is also a Covenanting Rite
between God and all worthy Communicants, and signifies that we are in a state
of Peace and Friendship with him; that we own him to be our God, and swear
Fidelity to him; we take the Sacrament upon it (as we ordinarily say) that we
will not henceforth live unto our selves, but to him alone that died for us.
It Is also a means to convey to us the Merits of Christ's Death, and a Pledge to
assure us thereof. Lastly, 'twas instituted to be a Bond of Union between
Christians, to engage and dispose us to love one another, as our Lord loved us,
who thought not his Life too dear, nor his Blood too much to part with for our
sakes. This therefore being the Nature of the Sacrament, it follows,

2. That it does not absolutely require a common Table Gesture. For if the
Nature of the Sacrament, considered as a Feast, necessarily requires a
Table Gesture; then the nature of the Sacrament, considered as a Feast, does as
well require all other Formalities that are essential, either to all civil
Feasts whatsoever, or to all Feasts as they obtain among us: and consequently
we must carve and drink one to another, etc. at the Lord's Supper, as we
always do at other Feasts. But this our Dissenters will by no means allow; nor
do they think themselves obliged to observe all the other Formalities of a
Feast, though they are as agreeable to the Nature of a Feast, as Sitting is.

It Is not agreeable to the Nature of a Feast, that one of the Guests, and the
principal one too, should fill out the Wine, and break the Bread, and
distribute it to the rest of the Society; but this the Dissenters generally
allow of, and practice at the Holy Communion. It Is not agreeable to the nature
of a Feast to sit from the Table, dispersed up and down the Room. In all public
Feasts there are several Tables provided, when one is not big enough to receive
the Guests; and yet the Dissenters generally receive in their Pews, scattered
up and down the Church, and think one Table is sufficient, though not capable of
receiving the twentieth part of the Communicants in some large Parishes and
numerous Assemblies. And where there are so few, that they may come up to, and
sit at the Table, they generally are against it (especially the Presbyterians)
and think they are not obliged to observe that formality, though constantly
practiced at common and civil Entertainments. It Is by no means agreeable to the
nature of a Feast to be sorrowful. To mourn and grieve at a Feast is as
indecent and unsuitable, as to laugh at a Funeral. But sure our Dissenters will
not say, that to come to the Sacrament with a penitent and broken spirit; to
come with a hearty sorrow for all our Sin, which caused so much pain and
torment to our dearest and greatest Friend, our ever blessed Redeemer; to
reflect upon the Agonies of his Soul in the Garden, the bitterness of his
deadly Cup, the Torture he endured on the Cross, with a deep Sympathy and
Trouble for the occasion; they will not surely, I say, affirm, that such a
disposition of Heart and Mind is improper and unsuitable to the Nature of this
Feast, which we solemnize in Commemoration of his Death for our sakes.

This Sacrament is also called the Lord's Supper; and consequently the nature
of it requires the Evening, as the proper season for it: and yet our Dissenters
make no scruple of Communicating at Noon.

Again, the nature of the Lord's Supper does not necessarily require a
Table Gesture, because it is not of the same nature with common and ordinary
Feasts. For we cannot argue from Natural and Civil things to Spiritual; or
conclude that, because they agree in their names, they are of the same nature.
And therefore, though the Sacrament is a Feast; yet because it is a Spiritual
Feast, and not of the same nature with common and ordinary Feasts, we must not
think, that such a gesture as is necessary to the one, is also necessary to the
other.

I must add, that the nature of the Lord's Supper, considered as a Feast, does
not necessarily require a common Table Gesture in order to right and worthy
receiving; because the Dissenters grant, that it may be worthily received
Standing, though Standing is no common Table Gesture.

If any should yet urge, that no gesture besides Sitting is agreeable to the
nature of the Sacrament, considered as a Feast; and that to use any other
gesture would profane the Ordinance; I answer, that God calls the Passover a
Feast, Exodus 12.14. and yet he commanded the Israelites to celebrate it with
their Loins girt, their Shoes on their Feet, and their Staff in their Hands;
which were all signs of haste, but no Table-gestures either among the Jews or
the Egyptians. Now to say, that God enjoined Gestures unsuitable to that
Ordinance, is to call his Wisdom in question: and to say, that the Feast of the
Passover did in it is nature admit of several Gestures, is to yield all that I
desire; for then the Sacrament, considered as a Feast, will admit of several
too, and consequently does not oblige us to observe only a Feast-gesture for
the due celebration of it.

3. Kneeling is very agreeable to the nature of the Lord's Supper, though it is no
Table Gesture. 1. Because it is a very fit Gesture to express Reverence,
Humility and Gratitude by; which Holy affections are requisite to the
Sacrament. 2. Since Christ ought to be Adored at the Lord's Supper for his
wonderful kindness to us, therefore whatsoever is fit to express our
Veneration, is not unsuitable to the Sacrament; and consequently bowing the
Knees is proper, because it is an external sign of Reverence. 3. Since lifting
up our Hands and Eyes, and employing our Tongues in uttering God's Praises, are
agreeable to the Lord's Supper; why should Kneeling be thought unsuitable, which
is only Glorifying God with another part of our Body? 4. The Holy Sacrament was
Instituted in remembrance of Christ's Death and Sufferings; and therefore I
desire the Dissenters to consider his Gesture in the very extremity of his
Passion, and to observe, that he then prayed Kneeling, Luke 22.41. And surely
no sober Person will say, that it is improper to Kneel at the Sacrament, where
we Commemorate those Sufferings, part of which he endured upon his bended
Knees. 5. If we consider the benefits of the Sacrament, we cannot think
Kneeling an unbecoming Gesture at it. If a grateful hearty sense of God's
infinite Mercy through the Merits and Sufferings of his Son, and of the manifold
Benefits which our Lord has purchased with his most precious Blood; If a Mind
deeply humbled under the sense of our own Guilt, and Unworthiness to receive
any Mercy at all from the Hands of our Creator and Sovereign Lord, whom we have
by numberless and heinous Crimes so highly provoked and incensed against us; If
such an inward temper and disposition of Soul becomes us at this Holy Feast,
(which I think no Man will deny) then surely the most humble and reverential
Gesture of the Body will become us too. Why should not a submissive lowly
deportment of body suit with this solemnity, as well as an humble lowly Mind?
And this is that which our Church See the Declaration at the end of the
Communion Service in the B. of Com. Prayer.
declares to be the end of her Injunction, in requiring all the Communicants to
Kneel, viz. for a signification of an humble and grateful acknowledgment of the
Benefits of Christ therein given to all worthy Receivers. The Commemoration of
the Death and Passion of the Son of God will strike a Man, almost naturally,
into the humblest posture of Adoration: But if any reverence be due at such a
time, I am sure Sitting is a very unfit posture to express it. In a word,
whatsoever Gesture best answers the Principal ends of this Holy Feast, does
best suit it is nature, and ought to be best esteemed of, if we will be guided
by the nature of the thing: and that Kneeling does best answer the Nature and
Ends of the Lord's Supper, I think, I have fully proved.

I shall crave Leave to observe in the last place, that the Primitive Church
had no such Notion of the necessity of a Table Gesture, as the Dissenters
maintain. There is not the least mention made of the name Table, in any of
their Writings, for the space of 200 years after Christ. For they call the
Place, on which the Consecrated Elements stood, the Altar; and the Eucharist
they call an Oblation and a Sacrifice: and what connection, I Pray, is there
between an Altar or a Sacrifice, and a Table Gesture? The Dissenters indeed
Dispute against Kneeling* arg 1. p. 6.^6. etc.
say, that Kneeling or an Adoring-gesture is against the dignity of Guests, and
debars us the Privileges and Prerogatives of the Lord's Table, such as social
admittance and social entertainment; that it is against the purpose of Christ,
whose intention was to dignify us by setting us at his Table; and much more of
this nature: but it is plain that the Fathers thought otherwise, as the Phrases
they use, and the Titles they give the Sacrament, plainly demonstrate. They
call it as St. Paul does, the Lord's Supper, the Kingly, Royal, and most Divine
Supper, which import Deference, Distance, and Respect on our parts; the
Dreadful Sacrifice, the Venerable and Unbloody Sacrifice, the Wonderful and
Terrible Mysteries, the Royal, Spiritual, Holy, Formidable, Tremendous Table.
The Bread and Wine after Consecration, are in their Language called the most
Mysterious, most Holy Food and Nutriment, the most Holy things; and the place
where the Table stood, the most Holy part of the Temple, in allusion to that of
the Jewish Temple, to which the Jews paid the highest Reverence. The Bread in
particular they styled the Bread of God; the Cup, the Holy and Mysterious, the
Royal and Dreadful Cup. They advise the Communicants to Reverence these Holy
Mysteries, to come with Fear and Trembling, with Sorrow and Shame, with silence
and down-cast Eyes, to keep their Joy within, and to approach the Table with
all the Signs and Expressions of Reverence and Humility imaginable. How can
these Speeches consist with that Social, Familiar carriage at the Sacrament,
which the Patrons of the Table Gesture contend for, as the Privilege of Guests,
and the Prerogative of the Lord's Table?

Fourthly, I am to show that Kneeling at the Lord's Supper is not contrary to
the general Practice of the Church in the first Ages. This I shall do by
proving, 1. That it is highly probable, that the Primitive Church used to Kneel
in the act of receiving the Holy Sacrament, as our custom at present is. 2.
That it is most certain they used an Adoring Posture.

First then, it is highly probable, that the Primitive Church used to Kneel in
the act of receiving the Holy Sacrament. I have already shown, that the
Scripture does not inform us, what Gesture was used at the Institution of the
Lord's Supper: and I desire those, who contend for a common Table Gesture, and
particularly Sitting, to observe, that the Primitive Church thought sitting to
be a very irreverent Posture in the Service of God. The Laodicean Synod,
finding great inconveniences to arise from the Love Feasts, which were kept at
the same time with the Lord's Supper, forbad the said Feasts, and the lying
upon Couches in the Church, as their manner was at those Feasts. The same
Practice was forbidden by the Council of Carthage, c. 28. and the Decree was
Ratified by the sixth Trullian Council, c. 74. and that under the pain of
Excommunication. Now the Reasons, upon which 'twas forbidden, were in all
probability taken from the disorder and irreverence, the animosities and
excess, that accompanied those Feasts.

Justin Martyr, who lived in the Second Century, says, We rise up together and
send up our Prayers, Apol. 2. from whence it is clear that they did not Sit: but
in most other places they were not permitted to sit at all, not so much as at
the Lessons or in Sermon-time; as appears plainly from what Philostorgius Hist.
Eccles. l. 3. p. 29.
observes of Theophilus an Indian Bishop, That among several irregularities,
which he corrected in those Churches, he particularly Reformed this, That the
People were wont to Sit, when the Lessons out of the Gospel were read unto
them; and Sozomen Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 19.
notes it as a very unusual thing in the Bishop of Alexandria, that he did not
rise up when the Gospels were read.

Optatus Bishop of Milevis De Schism. Donat. l. 4. See also Albaspin. not. in
Optat.
cites a passage out of the 50. Psalm, and applies it home to Parmenianus the
Donatist, after this manner; Thou sit and speak against thy Brother,
etc. in which place God reproves him that sits and defames his Brother: and
therefore such evil Teachers as you, says he, are more particularly pointed at
in the Text, For the People are not Licensed to sit in the Church. Now if it
had not been the general Custom to stand the whole time of Divine Service, and
particularly at the Lessons and Sermons, Parmenianus might easily have retorted
this Argument upon Optatus, as concluding nothing against him in particular,
but what might be charged in common upon all private Christians, who sat in
the Church as well as he.

De Orat. c. 12.
Tertullian reproves it as an ill custom, that some were wont to sit at Prayer;
and a little further in the same Chapter he has these words; Add thereunto the
Sin of irreverence, which the very Heathen, if they did perceive well and
understand what we did, would take notice of. For if it be irreverent to sit in
the presence of, and to confront, one whom you have a high respect and
veneration for; how much more irreligious is this gesture in the sight of the
living God, the Angel of Prayer yet standing by? Unless we think fit to upbraid
God that Prayer has tired us. Eusebius also De Vit. Constant. l. 4.
commends Constantine, because when he was present at a long Panegyric
concerning Christ's Sepulcher, and was solicited to sit down, he refused to do
so, saying, it was unfit to attend upon any Discourse concerning God with ease
and softness, and that it was very consonant to Piety and Religion, that
Discourses about Divine things should be heard standing.

Thus much may suffice for satisfaction, that the ancient Church did by no
means approve of Sitting, or a common Table Gesture, as fitting to be used in
Divine Service, except at the Reading of the Lessons, and hearing of the
Sermon; which too was only practiced in some places; for in others the People
were not allowed to sit at all in their Religious Assemblies. Which Custom is
still observed in most, if not all the Eastern Churches at this day, wherein
there are no Seats erected or allowed for the use of the People.

Now if the Apostles had Taught and Established Sitting (not only as
convenient, but) as necessary to be used in order to worthy receiving the
Lord's Supper; it is most strange and unaccountable, 1. That there should be
such an early and universal revolt of the Primitive Church from the Doctrine
and Constitutions of the Apostles. 2. That so many Churches in distant
Countries, being perfectly Free and Independent one upon another, should
unanimously conspire together to introduce a novel-custom contrary to the
Apostolical Practice and Order; and not only so, but that, 3. They should
censure the practice and injunctions of inspired Men, as indecent and unfit to
be followed and observed in the public Worship of God; and all this without any
Person's taking notice, or complaining or opposing, either then or in the
succeeding generations.

As for Standing in the time of Divine Service, both at Prayers and at the
Sacrament, it is so evident that the ancient Church did use it, that I shall not
endeavor to prove it: and as for Kneeling, it is plain the Primitive Christians
used that gesture also. For, though on Sundays and the Fifty days between Easter
and Whitsunday they observed Standing; yet at other times they used the gesture
of Kneeling at their public Devotions, as appears from the authorities cited at
the Conc. 1. Nic. c. 20. Resp. Quest. inter Opera Just. Mart. p. 468. Tertull.
de Coron. Mil. c. 3. Epiphan. Expos. fid. Cath. p. 1105. Edit. Par. St. Jer.
Prol. com. in Epist. ad Ephesians. St. Aust. Epist. 119. ad Jan. c. 15. Tertull. de
Orat. c. 3.
bottom.

Now since they were wont, in the first Ages of Christianity, to receive the
Holy Sacrament every day; and since See Tertull. Apol. c. 39. p. 47. St. Aust.
Epist 118. Constable. Apol. l. 2. c. 57. St. Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in c. 2. Ep. 1. ad
Tim. St. Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 5. Cave's Prim. Christ. c. 11. St. Cyril
Catech. Mist. 5. St. Aust. Resp. ad Oros. Quest. 49. Tom. 4. p. 691. Basil.
1541. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 35.
it was delivered and received with a Form of Prayer, and that on those days
when they constantly Prayed Kneeling; and since it is probable, that when they
received the Sacrament, they did not alter the Praying-posture of the day;
therefore I conclude, that they received the Sacrament Kneeling upon those
days, on which they Prayed Kneeling. For, since Sitting was generally
condemned as an indecent and irreverent gesture by the Primitive Church; and
since no Man in his Wits will say, that Prostration, or lying flat upon the
ground, was ever used in the act of receiving, or ever fit to be so; therefore
the posture of receiving must be either standing or kneeling.

And from hence I gather, that on their common and ordinary days (when there
was no peculiar reason to invite or oblige them to Stand at the Sacrament) in
all likelihood they used Kneeling, that is, the ordinary posture. They used one
and the same posture ( viz. Standing) both at their Prayers and at the
Sacrament on the Lord's day, and for Fifty days after Easter, contrary to what
was usual at other times; and why then should any Man think they did not
observe one and the same posture at all other times? viz. that as at such times
they did constantly Kneel at their Prayers, so they did also constantly Kneel
at the Sacrament, which was given and received in a Prayer.

From the strength of these Premises I may promise my self thus much success;
that whosoever shall carefully weigh and peruse them with a teachable and
unprejudiced mind, shall find himself much more inclined to believe the
Primitive Church used at some times to Kneel (as we do) at the Holy Communion,
than that they never did Kneel at all, or that such a posture was never used or
heard of, but excluded from their Congregations, as some great Advocates for
Sitting have confidently proclaimed it to the World.

But Secondly, Suppose they never did Kneel as we do, yet this is most certain,
that they received the Lord's Supper in an adoring posture; which is the same
thing, and will sufficiently justify the present Practice of our Church, as
being agreeable to that of pure Antiquity. For the proof of this, numerous
Testimonies both of Greek and Latin Fathers might be alleged; but I will
content my self (and, I hope, the Reader too) with a few of each sort, which
are so plain and express, that he who will except against them, will also with
the same face and assurance except against the Whiteness of Snow, and the Light
of the Sun at Noonday.

And first for the Greek Fathers, let the Testimony of St. Cyril. Hierosol.
Mystag. Catech. 5. versus finem, Paris. Edit. p. 244.
St. Cyril be heard, than which nothing can be more plain and express to our
purpose. This holy Father in a place before cited, gives Instructions to
Communicants, how to behave themselves when they approach the Lord's Table, and
that in the act of receiving both the Bread and the Wine. At the receiving of
the Cup he advises thus; Approach (says he) not rudely stretching forth thy
hands, but bowing thy self, and in a posture of Worship and Adoration, saying
Amen. To the same purpose 24 Hom. Ep. ad Cor. p. 538. To. 9. Paris.
St. Chrysostom speaks in his Fourteenth Homily on the First Epistle to the
Corinthians, where he provokes and excites the Christians of his time to an
awful and reverential deportment at the Holy Communion, by the Example of the
Wise Men, who adored our Savior in his Infancy, after this manner; This Body
the Wise Men reverene'd even when it lay in the Manger, and approaching
thereunto worshipped it with fear and great trembling. Let us therefore who are
Citizens of Heaven, imitate at least these Barbarians. But thou see this
Body, not in a Manger, but on the Altar; not held by a Woman, but by the
Priest, etc. Let us therefore stir up our selves, and be horribly afraid, and
manifest a much greater Reverence than those Barbarians, lest coming lightly,
and at a venture, we heap fire on our Heads. The same Father in another place
expressly bids them to fall down and Communicate, when the Table is made ready,
and the King himself there: and in order to beget in their Minds great and
awful Thoughts concerning that Holy and Mysterious Feast, he further exhorts
them, St. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Ep. ad Ephesians. in moral. p. 1151.
That when they saw the Chancel doors open, then they should suppose Heaven it
self was unfolded from above, and that the Angels descended, to be Lookers on.
I suppose he means, of their Courage and Behavior at the Table of the Lord,
and by giving their attendance to grace that Solemnity. With the Testimony of
these Ancient Writers Theodoret agrees, who in a Dialogue between an Orthodox
Christian and an Heretic, brings in Orthodoxus thus Discoursing of the Supper
of the Lord. The mysterious Symbols or Signs in the Sacrament (viz. Bread and
Wine) depart not from their proper Nature; for they continue in their former
Essence, and keep their former Shape and Form, and approve themselves both to
our sight and touch to be as they were before: Dialog. 2. To. 4. p. 85. Paris.
Edit.
but they are considered for such as they are made, (that is, in respect to
their Spiritual signification, and that Divine use to which they were
consecrated) and are believed and adored a^ those very things which they are
believed to be. Which words plainly import thus much, that the consecrated
Elements were received with a Gesture of Adoration; and at the same time assure
us, that such a Behavior at the Lords supper was not founded upon the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation. For there is not a more manifest instance in all the
Ancients against that absurd Doctrine, which the Roman Church so obstinately
believes at this very day, than what Theodoret gives us in the words
abovementioned. Lastly, (to allege no more out of the Greek Fathers) that
Story which Gregory Nazianzen O^at. in laud. Gorgon. p. 187. Paris. Edit.
relates concerning Gorgonia, will much confirm what has been said, viz. That
being sick, and having used several Medicines in vain at last she resolved upon
this course. She went in the stilness of the Night to the public Church, and
having with her some of the consecrated Elements which she had reserved at
home, she fell down on her knees before the Altar, and with a loud voice prayed
to him whom she Adored, and in conclusion was healed. I am not much concerned,
whether the Reader will believe or censure this Miracle; but it is certain, that
this famous Father has Recorded it and commends his Sister for the way she took
for her Recovery. This is home to my purpose; and clearly discovers that
Gorgonia did Kneel, or at least used a Posture of Adoration when she ate the
Sacramental Bread. And without doubt in Communicating she observed the same
Posture that others generally did in public: She did that in her sickness,
which all others used to do in their health, when they came to the Sacrament;
that is, She Kneeled down. For it cannot be supposed, that at this time, when
she came to beg so great a Blessing of Almighty God in the public Church and at
the Altar, called by the Ancients The Place of Prayer, she would be guilty of
any misbehaviour, and make use of a singular Posture, different from what was
generally used by Christians when they came to the same place to communicate,
and pray over the great Propitiatory Sacrifice; which they looked upon as the
most prevailing and effectual way of Praying, the most likely to render God
favorable to them, and to prevail with him above all other Prayers which they
offered at any other time, or in any other place. So much for the Authorities
of the Greek Fathers, who were Men eminent for Learning and Piety in their
Days, and great Lights and Ornaments in the Primitive Church. With these the
Latin Fathers fully agree in their Judgments concerning our present Case. And
of these I will only mention two (though more might be produced) and those very
eminent and illustrious Persons, had in great veneration by the then present
Age wherein they flourished, and by succeeding Generations. The first is
Ambros. de Sp. Sanct. l. 3. c. 12.
St. Ambrose Bishop of Milan, in a Book he wrote concerning the Holy Ghost,
where enquiring after the meaning of the Pslamist, when he exhorts Men to exalt
the Lord, and to worship his Footstool, he gives us the sense in these words:
That it seems to belong unto the mystery of our Lord's Incarnation; and then
goes on to show for what Reason it may be accommodated to that Mystery, and at
last concludes thus; By the Footstool therefore is the Earth to be understood,
and by the Earth the body of Christ, which at this day too we adore in the
Sacrament, and which the Apostles worshipped in the Lord Jesus, etc. St. Austin
(Bishop of Hippo) Comments, on the very same words and to the same purpose. For
thus he resolves that Question, How or in what sense the Earth his Footstool
may be worshipped without impiety? Because he took earth of the earth, for
flesh is of the earth; and he took flesh of the flesh of Mary; and because he
conversed here in the flesh, and gave us his very flesh to eat unto Salvation.
Now there is none who eats that flesh, but first worshippeth. We have found
then how this Footstool may be adored; so that we are so far from sinning by
adoring, that we really sin if we do not adore. In the Judgment therefore of
these Primitive Bishops, we may lawfully adore at the Mysteries, though not the
Mysteries themselves; at the Sacraments, though not the Sacraments themselves;
the Creator in the Creature which is sanctified, not the Creature it self; as a
late Phil. Mornay du Plessis de Missa, l. 4. c. 7. p. 732.
Protestant Writer of great Learning and Quality among the French,
distinguishes upon the forecited words of Saint Ambrose.

I think it appears evident from these few Instances that the Primitive
Christians used a posture of adoration at the Communion in the act of
receiving. It were easy to bring a cloud of other Witnesses, if it were
necessary so to do, either to prove or clear the Cause in hand: but since there
is no need to clog the Discourse with numerous References and Appeals to
Antiquity, it would but obscure the Argument, and tend in all likelihood rather
to confound and distaste, than convince and gratify the Reader.

By what has been already alleged, the practice of our Church in Kneeling at
the Sacrament is sufficiently justified, as agreeable to the Customs and
Practice of pure and Primitive Christianity. For if the Ancients did at the
Sacrament use a Posture of Worship and Adoration, (which is very plain they
did) then Kneeling is not repugnant to the practice of the Church in the first
and purest Ages; no, though we should suppose that Kneeling was never practiced
among them: which will be plain, if we cast our Eyes a little upon that heavy
Charge which some of the fiercest, but less prudent Adversaries of Kneeling
have exhibited against it. They object against Kneeling, as being an adoring
Gesture; for they affirm, Gillesp. p. 166, 172. Altar. Damas. p. 801. Rutherf.
Divine Right of Chapter Gov. c. 1. Qu. 5. Sect. 1.3.
That to kneel in the act of Receiving, before the consecrated Bread and Wine,
is formal Idolatry. So also to kneel before any Creature as a memorative object
of God, though there be no intention of giving Divine Adoration to that Creature,
is Idolatry. Now if the Primitive Christians may be supposed to prostrate
themselves before the Altar upon their first approach to it in order to
Receive, or immediately after they had Received the Bread and the Cup from the
Hand of the Minister; or if they bowed their Heads and Bodies after a lowly
manner, in the act of Receiving; or if they received it standing upright, and
ate and drank at the Holy Table with their Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven;
then they incurred the Guilt of Idolatry, as well as we who Kneel at the Lords
supper, in the Judgment of those Scotch Casuists; and by Consequence, Kneeling
at the Blessed Sacrament according to the Custom of our Church, is not contrary
to the practice of the Christian Church in the first and purest Ages. For all
those Postures before mentioned were Postures of Worship and Adoration, and
used as such by the Primitive Christians; especially standing, which is allowed
by the Gillesp. Disp. against E. Po. C^r. p. 101. Disp. of Kneel. p. 93.
Patrons of sitting, to be anciently and generally used in time of Divine
Worship, and particularly in the act of Receiving.

To conclude all with an Instance in their own Case about a common
Table Gesture, let us suppose the Primitive Christians in some places did
receive the Holy Sacrament sitting, or lying along upon Beds, according to the
ancient Custom in those Eastern Countries, at their common and ordinary Tables;
let us put the case that in other places they sat cross-legg'd on Carpets at
the Sacrament, as the Persians and Turks eat at this day; or that they received
standing in other places, after the common mode of Feasting; which we will
suppose only at present. Could any Man now object with reason against the
lawfulness of sitting upright at the Sacrament upon a Form or Chair (according
to the Custom of England*) as being contrary to the Practice of all the
Ancients, who never sat at all? No certainly. For though they differ from the
Ancients as to the site of their Bodies, and the particular manner of
Receiving; yet they all consent in this, that they receive in a common
Table Gesture. They all observe the same Gesture at the Sacrament, that they
constantly observed at their Civil Feasts and ordinary Entertainments in the
several places of their abode. And so say I in the present Case; What though the
Primitive Christians stood upright some of them at the Sacrament, and others
bowed their Heads and Bodies in the act of Receiving, and none of them ever
used Kneeling? Yet they and we do very well agree for all that, because we all
receive in an adoring or worshipping Posture. It is one and the same thing
variously expressed, according to the modes of the different Countries.

Fifthly, and lastly, I am to Prove, that Kneeling is not therefore unlawful,
because 'twas first introduced by Idolaters, and is still notoriously abused by
the Papists to Idolatrous ends and purposes. This will appear, if we consider,
1. That it can never be proved, that Kneeling in the act of receiving was
brought in by Idolaters, as is pretended. 2. That it is not sinful to use such
things, as are or have been notoriously abused to Idolatry.

I. Then, it can never be proved, that Kneeling in the act of receiving was
brought in by Idolaters. I have already made it very probable, that the
Primitive Christians received the Sacrament Kneeling; and I hope our Dissenters
will not charge them with Idolatry. I know, that they pretend the
Kneeling-posture was brought in by Honorius the Third; but that which he
brought in, was a reverent Bow to the Sacrament, when the Priest elevates the
Patten or Chalice, or when the Host is carried to any Sick Person; and not any
Kneeling in the act of receiving. For these are the very words of the Decree,
Decret. Greg. l. 3. tit. 41. c. 10.
That the Priests should frequently instruct their People to Bow themselves
reverently at the Elevation of the Host, when Mass was celebrated, and in like
manner when the Priest carried it abroad to the Sick. Nay, as Bishop Stilling
fleet Unreasonab. of Separat. p. 15.
says, though Kneeling at the Elevation of the Host be strictly required by the
Roman Church, yet in the act o^ receiving it is not; as manifestly appears by
the Pope's manner of receiving, which is not Kneeling, but either Sitting, as
it was in Bonaventure 's time; or after the fashion o^ Sitting, or a little
Leaning upon his Throne, as he does at this day.

If any should ask, when the Gesture of Kneeling came in, I confess I cannot
certainly tell: but this is no Argument against, but rather for the ancient and
universal use of it. Novel-customs are easily traced to their Originals: but
generally we cannot tell from whence the most ancient usages of any Country are
derived.

However, I am so far from thinking (as our Dissenters do) that Kneeling owes
its birth to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, that I verily believe that the
Kneeling or Adoring posture used by the ancient Christians in the act of
receiving, did very much (among other things) conduce to beget and nurse up in
the minds of superstitious and fanciful Men, a conceit, that Christ was really
and corporally present at the Sacrament; which Notion, by subtle and
inquisitive heads, was in a little time improved and explained after this
manner: That after the Elements of Bread and Wine were consecrated, they were
thereby changed into the substance of Christ's natural Body and Blood. This I
am sure of, that the Patrons of Transubstantiation did very early make use of
this very Argument, to prove that they taught and believed no more than the
Primitive Bishops and Christians did. For what else could they intend or mean
(say they) by that extraordinary Reverence and Devotion, which they manifested
when they received the dreadful Mysteries (as they called the Bread and Wine)
if they were bare and empty Signs only, and not changed into the very Body and
Blood of Christ? Which is in effect the very Argument used by Alger. de
Sacramentis. l. 2. c. 3.
Algerus, a stout Champion for Transubstantiation. And Costor. Enchirid. p.
353. Edit. 1590.
Costor, another Popish Writer, is so far from saying, even after
Transubstantiation took place, that the Pope introduced it, that he resolves it
into an ancient Custom continued from the Apostles times. But,

II. Suppose it were otherwise, yet it is not sinful to use such things, as are
or have been notoriously abused to Idolatry, as I shall show in the next
Chapter. I shall only observe at present, that if it be sinful to kneel at the
Sacrament, because that Gesture has been, and is notoriously abused by Papists
to Idolatrous ends; then Sitting is also sinful, which is contended for with so
much Zeal. For the Pope himself fits, in the act of receiving, as was before
noted; and that for the same Reason (says a Alex. Hales de Miss^, p. 2. quest.
10. p. 4.
Popish Author) which our Dissenters urge for Sitting, viz. because the
Apostles sat at the first Institution of the Sacrament. And every Priest by
the order of the Mass Book, is to partake standing at the Altar, and not
Kneeling there. Nay, if Kneeling be unlawful, because it has been abused to
Idolatry; then we must never receive the Holy Sacrament. For we must receive in
some convenient posture, such as Kneeling, Sitting, Discumbing, Standing; and
yet every one of these, either has been or is, notoriously abused by Heathens
and Papists to Idolatrous ends.

I hope, I need not add, that it would be very unjust, to say, that our
Kneeling is an act of Worship to the outward Elements; when the Church has
declared this to be Idolatry to be Abhorred of all Faithful Christians.

I shall conclude this Chapter with the opinions of the Dissenting Writers. Mr.
Tombs has undertaken to show, that whatever the Gesture of our Savior was,
yet we are not obliged to it, Theod. p. 168. It Is granted by Mr. Bains,
Christian Let. 24. and Mr. Bailey, Disswas. c. 2, 6. that the nature of the
Ordinance does not make Sitting necessary, or forbid Kneeling; and Mr. Bains,
ibid. grants that Kneeling is not Idolatrous; and Mr. Cartwright, who thought
it inconvenient, yet did not think it unlawful, Harmon. on Luke, 22.14. Lastly,
Mr. Baxter, Christian Dir. part 2. p. 111. quest. 3. sect. 40. says, For
Kneeling, I never heard any thing yet to prove it unlawful. If there be any
thing, it must be either some Word of God, or the nature of the Ordinance which
is supposed to be contradicted. But, 1. there is no Word of God for any
Gesture, nor against any. Christ 's Example can never be proved to oblige us
more in this, than in many circumstances, that are confessed not obligatory; as
that he delivered but to Ministers, and but to a Family, to Twelve, and after
Supper, and on a Thursday- night, and in an upper-room, etc. and his Gesture
was not such a Sitting as ours. And, 2. for the nature of the Ordinance, it is
mixed: and if it be lawful to take a Pardon from the King upon our Knees, I know
not what can make it unlawful to take a Sealed Pardon from Christ (by his
Ambassador) upon our Knees.

CHAP. VIII. The Objection of our Symbolizing or Agreeing with the Church of
Rome Answered.
BUT, say the Dissenters, there is so great an agreement between your Church
and the Church of Rome, that we cannot think communion with your Church to be
Lawful. They tell us, that our first Reformers were indeed excellent and worthy
Persons for the times they lived in; that what they did was very commendable,
and a good Beginning; but they were forced to comply with the necessities of
the Age, which would not bear a complete Reformation. They left a great deal of
Popish trash in the Church, hoping by degrees to reconcile the Papists to it,
or at least, that they might not make the Breach too wide, and too much
prejudice or enstrange them from it: but we now live under better means, have
greater Light and Knowledge, and so a further and more perfect amendment is now
necessary.

Now I cannot but inwardly reverence the Judgment, as well as love the Temper
of our first Reformers, who in their first Separations from Rome, were not nice
or scrupulous beyond the just reasons of things. Doubtless they were in earnest
enough, as to all true Zeal against the Corruptions of that Church, when they
Sealed the well-grounded offense they took at them, with their warmest Blood;
and cheerfully underwent all the hardships that the Primitive Christians
signalized their Profession with, rather than they would intermix with Rome, in
any usage of Worship or Article of Faith, that had the least favor of
Idolatry, Superstition, or false Religion at all in it. And yet these Holy and
Wise Men, when they had the Power and Opportunity of Reforming wholly in their
hands, being equally jealous of Enthusiasm, as they were of Superstition, would
not give themselves up to those fantastic Antipathies, as to abolish this or
that Ceremony, merely because it had been in use among the Papists, if some
other very substantial Reason did not plead against it. And verily, had they
not always used these temperate and unbiased methods of Reformation, they
would not so easily have justified themselves to their Adversaries, or the
World; or have made it so evident (as by their Wise management they did) that
what was done by them, was from the mere urgencies of Conscience and Reason,
and not the wantonness of Change and Innovation. So that, where any mean
honestly (as I doubt not but many of those do, that Dissent from us) they ought
to have their Reason very well awake, that the mere charge of Popery upon any
disputed point, may not so prejudice them in their enquiries into things, as to
leave no room for mature Consideration.

However, that I may fully answer this objection, drawn from our agreement with
the Church of Rome, I shall endeavor to show, 1. That there is a vast distance
between the Churches of England and Rome. 2. That a Church's Symbolizing or
agreeing in some things with the Church of Rome, is no warrant for separation
from the Church so agreeing. 3. That the agreement between the Churches of
England and Rome, is in no wise such, as will make Communion with the Church of
England unlawful.

I. Then, I shall show that there is a vast distance between the Churches of
England and Rome; as appears by our Church's having renounced all Communion
with Rome, and utterly cast off the Pope's Power. But I shall descend to
particulars, and show the vast distance between them,

First, In all those Doctrines and Practices, whereby the Church of Rome
deprives her Members of their due Liberty, and miserably enslaves them. For, 1.
She denies them all judgment of discretion in matters of Religion, and binds
them all, under pain of damnation, to Believe her infallible: but our Church
permits us to prove all things, that we may hold fast that which is good; she
disclaims all pretense to infallibility, and owns her self to be obnoxious to
error in matters of Faith. 2. The Church of Rome imposes a most slavish
drudgery in the vast multitudes of vain and childish, odd and uncouth Rites and
Ceremonies, which a Man would wonder how they could invent. The like may be
said of their cruel Penances, in imposing of which the Priests are arbitrary.
But our Rites are exceeding few, plain, easy, grave and manly; founded on the
Practice of the Church, long before Popery appeared in the World. Our
Sacraments are but two; and consequently we are not burdened with the
superstitious Fopperies of the other five Popish ones. In short, our Rites are
agreeable to the Rules of doing things decently, and in order, and doing all
things to Edification. Nor does our Church impose them (like the Church of
Rome) as necessary, and as parts of Religion, but as merely indifferent and
changeable things. As for our Penances, it is needless to show that they are not
cruel, like those of Rome. 3. The Church of Rome subjects her Members by
several of her Doctrines to enslaving passions. For instance, Purgatory
subjects them to fear, and auricular confession to shame, and the dependence of
the efficacy of the Sacraments upon the Priest's intention exposes them to
great anxiety. But our Church rejects the Doctrines of Purgatory, and the
dependence of the efficacy of the Sacraments upon the Priest's intention; and
does not oblige her Members to Confess their sins to Men, but when for the
relief of their Consciences, or making satisfaction, etc. it is their duty so
to do. 4. The Church of Rome maintains Licentious Principles and Practices,
which our Adversaries cannot charge upon the Church of England.

Secondly, In all those Doctrines and Practices in which the Church of Rome is
justly charged with plainly contradicting the Scripture. For instance, our
Church rejects and utterly abhors the Popish Doctrines and Practices of
Image Worship, invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation, Pardons, Indulgences,
Sacrifice of the Mass, denying the Bible to the Vulgar, Prayers and Sacraments
in an unknown Tongue, robbing the Laity of the Cup in the Lord's Supper,
prohibiting Marriage to Priests, Merit, Superogation, making simple Fornication
a mere venial sin, damning all that are not of her Communion, etc. Nor is there
any Church, that more severely condemns all instances of unrighteousness and
immorality, than the Church of England does.

Thirdly, In their public Prayers and Offices. To show this in all particulars
would be a tedious task; therefore I shall instance only in the office of
Infant Baptism, by which the Reader may judge of the rest.

Before they go into the Church, after many preparatory prescriptions, the
Priest being dressed in a Surplice and purple Robe, calls the Infant, saying,
what ask thou, etc. the Godfather answers, Faith. P. What shall thou get by
Faith? G. Eternal Life. P. If thou therefore, etc. Then the Priest blows three
gentle puffs upon the Infant's face, and says, Go out of him, O unclean
Spirit, etc. Then Crossing the Infant's Forehead and Breast, he says, Receive
the sign of the Cross, etc. Then he prays that God would always, etc. And
after a long Prayer (the Priest laying his Hand on the Infant's Head) comes the
idle and profane Form of the Benediction of Salt; viz. I conjure thee, O
creature of Salt, in the Name, etc. with many Crossings. Then he puts a little
Salt into the Infant's mouth, saying, Take thou the Salt of Wisdom; (and adds
most impiously) be it thy Propitiation unto Eternal Life. After the Pax tecum
he prays, that this Infant, etc. Then the Devil is conjured again, and most
woefully be-call'd. Then the Priest Crosses the Infant's Forehead, saying, And
this sign, etc. Then he puts his Hand on the Infant's Head, and puts up a very
good Prayer.

Then he puts part of his Robe upon the Infant, and brings him within the
Church, saying, Enter thou, etc. Then follow the Apostles Creed and the
Paternoster. Then the Devil is conjured again; and the Priest takes spittle out
of his mouth, and therewith touches the Infant's Ears and Nostrils, saying,
etc. Then he conjures the Devil again, saying, Be packing, O Devil, etc. Then
he asks the Infant, whether he renounces the Devil, etc. Then dipping his Thumb
in Holy Oil, and anointing the Infant with it in his Breast and betwixt his
shoulders, he says, I anoint thee, etc. Then he puts off his Purple Robe, and
puts on another of White color, and having asked four more questions, and
received the answers, he pours water thrice upon the Child's Head, as he
recites over it our Savior's Form of Baptism. Then dipping his Thumb in the
Chrism or Holy Ointment, he anoints the Infant upon the Crown of his Head in
the figure of a Cross, and prays, O God Omnipotent, etc. Afterward he takes a
white linen cloth, and putting it on the Child's Head, says, Take the white
garment, etc. Lastly, he puts into the Child's or his God-Father's Hand, a
lighted Candle, saying, Receive the burning Lamp, etc. Besides those things
which are in the Common Ritual, there are diverse others added in the Pastorale,
which I shall not mention. And now, if any Man will read our Office of Baptism,
he will acknowledge, that no two things can be more unlike, than these two
Offices are.

Our Litany indeed has been Condemned by Dissenters, as savouring of Popish
Superstition; but nothing is more false, if a Man compares it with the Popish
one, the greater part of which consists in invocations of Saints and Angels.
But the Brevity I am confined to in this Discourse, will not permit me to abide
any longer upon this Argument.

Fourthly, In the Books they receive for Canonical. For the Church of Rome
takes all the Apocryphal Books into the Canon: but the Church of England takes
only those, which the Primitive Church and all Protestants acknowledge. It Is
true, she reads some part of the Apocryphal Books for instruction of manners:
but she does not establish any Doctrine by them.

Fifthly and Lastly, in the Authority on which they found their whole Religion.
The Church of Rome founds the Authority of the Scriptures upon her own
infallibility; and the Authority of many of her own Doctrines on unwritten
traditions and the Decrees of her Councils, which she will have to be no less
inspired than the Prophets and Apostles: but the Church of England builds her
whole Religion upon Scripture, which is her rule of Faith and Practice. She
Reverences ancient general Councils: but does not think them infallible. And as
for that Authority, which our Church claims in Controversies of Faith, by
requiring subscription to 39 Articles, it is plain that she means no more
Authority, than to oblige her Members to outward submission, when her decisions
do not contradict any essentials of Faith or Manners; but not an authority to
oblige Men to believe them infallibly true; and this is necessary for the Peace
of any Church. It Is true, she thinks it convenient, that none should receive
Orders, be admitted to Benefices, etc. but such as do believe them, not all as
Articles of our Faith, but many as inferior truths; and she requires
Subscription as a Test of this belief: but the Church of Rome requires all
Persons under pain of damnation to believe all her false and wicked Doctrines,
as much as the most undoubted Articles of Faith; as may be seen in the Creed of
Pius the fourth.

As to the Motives which our Church proposes for our belief of the Doctrine of
the Holy Scriptures, they are such as are found in the Scriptures themselves;
viz. the excellency of them, and the Miracles which confirm them: and as to the
truth of the Matters of fact, she places it (not in the testimony of any
particular Church, but) in the Universal Tradition of Jews and Pagans, as well
as of all Christians.

II. I am to show, that a Church's symbolizing or agreeing in some things with
the Church of Rome, is no warrant for separation from the Church so agreeing.
The Dissenters tell us, that those things which are indifferent in their own
nature, do cease to be indifferent and become sinful, if they have been used by
the Church of Rome. For, say they, we read, Lev. 18.2. After the doings of the
Land of Egypt wherein ye dwell, shall ye not do, and after the doings of the
Land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall ye not do, neither shall ye walk in
their Ordinances. Now, not to insist on the vast difference of our
circumstances from those of the Israelites, I answer, that it is an absurd
thing to imagine, that the Israelites were so bound up by God, as to be obliged
to be unlike those People in all their actions. The things forbidden from verse
5 th. to 24 th. are not Indifferent, but Incestuous Copulations and acts of
uncleaness; and God does expressly enough restrain that general Prohibition to
those particulars, in saying, v. 24 th. Defile not your selves in any part of
these things, for in all these the Nations are defiled, which I cast out before
you. And they were therefore forbidden under the notion of things done after
the doings of the Egyptians and the Canaanites, because they were the doings of
those People, whom they were exceedingly prone to imitate, even in their
greatest immoralities.

If it be said, that in other places God forbids the Israelites to imitate the
Heathens in things of an indifferent nature; I answer, 1. That supposing this
were so, it does not from thence follow, that God intended to forbid such
imitations in this place; the contrary being so manifest as we have seen. But,
2. That God has any where prohibited the Israelites to symbolize with Heathens,
in things of a mere indifferent and innocent nature; I mean, that he has made
it unlawful for them to observe any such Customs of the Heathens, merely upon
the account of their being like them, is a very great mistake: Which will
appear by considering those places which are produced for it. One is Deuteronomy.
14.2. You shall not cut your selves, nor make any baldness between your Eyes
for the dead. Now, as to the former of these prohibited things, who sees not,
that it is unnatural, and therefore not indifferent? And as to the latter, viz.
the disfiguring of themselves by cutting off their Eyebrows, this was not
merely indifferent neither; it being a Custom at Funerals misbecoming the
People of God; and which would make them look as if they sorrow'd for the Dead
as Men without Hope. Another place is Lev. 19.19. Thou shall not let thy Cattle
gender with a diverse Kind; thou shall not sow thy Ground with mingled Seed;
nor shall a garment of linen and woollen come upon thee. But I answer, that
though these things are indeed indifferent in their own nature, yet they are
forbidden (not because the Heathens used them, but) because they were mystical
instructions in moral duties.

If it be objected also, that God forbad the Jews, Hos. 2.16, 17. to call him
by the Name of Baali, which was a very good Name and signified only My Lord,
because that word was abused in being the name of the Idol Baal; I answer, that
God did not forbid the Name Baali, because an Idol was called by that Name; for
he is called Baal in other places of the Hebrew Bible, and also Jah, which the
Heathens used for an Idol: but because the word Baali signifies an unkind
husband or Lord, such as Baal was to his worshippers; whereas God Promises he
would be called Ishi, that is, a tenderly-loving husband; for he designed to be
kind to his People Israel. I shall add, that Baalim in the next verse signifies
Idols, which God there Promises to destroy. But, suppose that God forbad the
Jews to call him Baal for the future, yet it might be because of their vehement
inclination to the worship of Baal, lest by using it they should be tempted to
worship him again: whereas our Ceremonies were used by the ancient Fathers
without any Superstition or Idolatry, and we are not in danger of returning to
Popery by retaining them.

Well; but they say, it appears from Scripture-precepts and examples, that it
is unlawful to symbolize with the Church of Rome in things, that have been
notoriously abused in Idolatrous and grossly Superstitious Services. To this I
answer,

First, that it is not sinful to use those things which have been abused to
Idolatry, as I shall prove by these following Arguments.

1. No abuse of any Gesture, though it be in the most manifest Idolatry, does
render that Gesture simply evil, and for ever after unlawful to be used in the
Worship of God upon that account. For the abuse of a thing supposes the lawful
use of it; and if any thing otherwise lawful becomes sinful by an abuse of it,
then it is plain that it is not in it is own nature sinful, but by accident, and
with respect to somewhat else. This is clear from Scripture; for if Rites and
Ceremonies, after they have been abused by Idolaters, become absolutely evil,
and unlawful to be used at all; then the Jews sinned in offering Sacrifice,
erecting Altars, burning Incense to the God of Heaven, bowing down themselves
before him, wearing a Linen Garment in the time of Divine Worship, and
observing other Things and Rites which the Heathens observed in the worship of
their false gods.

If the Dissenters say, they except all such Rites as were commanded or
approved of by God; I reply, that such an exception avails nothing. For if the
abuse of a thing to Idolatry makes it absolutely sinful, and unlawful to be
used at all, then it is impossible to destroy that Relation, and what has been
once abused, must ever remain so; that is, an infinite Power cannot undo what
has been done, and clear it from ever having been abused. And therefore I
conclude from the Command and Approbation of God, that a bare conformity with
Idolaters in using those Rites in the Worship of the true God, which they
practice in the worship of Idols, is not simply sinful, or formal Idolatry. For
if it be; God had obliged the Children of Israel by his express Command to
commit sin, and to do what he strictly and severely prohibited in other places.
In truth, such a Position would plainly make God the Author of sin.

2. This principle intrenches upon Christian liberty, if St. Paul himself may
judge, who tells us, 1 Cor. 10.25, etc. that to the pure all things are pure;
and affirms it lawful to eat of such things as had been offered up in Sacrifice
to Idols, and to eat whatsoever was sold in the Shambles. And what reason is
there, why a Gesture should be more defiled by Idolaters, than Meat which they
had Offered up in Sacrifice to Idols? and why should one be sinful and
Idolatrous to use, and not the other? Certainly St. Paul would never have
granted them such a privilege, if he judged it Idolatrous to use what Idolaters
had abused: especially considering that he in the same Chapter exhorts them
earnestly to fly from Idolatry.

3. This Principle subjects the Minds of Christians to infinite fears, scruples
and perplexities: whereas the true and great design of the Gospel, is to breed
in Men a filial cheerful frame of heart, the spirit of love, and of a sound or
quiet mind; to give us a free, easy, comfortable access to God as to our
Father; and to encourage every good Man to a diligent, constant, and frequent
attendance upon his Worship, by the delight that follows it. But now, if
nothing may be used by us without highly offending God, that either has been,
or is abused to Idolatry; who sees not what trouble and distraction will arise
in our Minds hereupon, when we meet together to worship God? It Is well known
that most of our Churches were erected by Idolatrous Papists, and as much
defiled by Idolatry as any Gesture can be. They are dedicated to several Saints
and Angels, whose Images were once set up and adored. Our Bells, Pews, Fonts,
Desks, Churchyards, have been consecrated after a superstitious manner. Many
Cups, Flagons, Dishes, Communion-Tables, have been given and used by Idolaters.
What now is to be done? Perhaps all these things have been abused; and if
certain information cannot be had, we cannot worship in public without great
disquiet of Mind.

4. This Principle will destroy all public Worship. For if nothing must be used
which has been, or is abused by Idolaters; it will be in the power of
Idolaters, by engrossing all the outward marks and signs of that inward
veneration and esteem which we owe to God, to smother our Devotions, so as they
shall never appear in the World; and by that means frustrate the very end and
design of Religious Assemblies. And truly this work is already, by the strength
of this Principle, very well effected. For kneeling at Prayers, and standing
and sitting, and lifting up the Hands and Eyes to Heaven, and bowing of the
Body, together with Prayer and Praise and Singing, have been all notoriously
abused to Idolatry, and are so to this day. If the Dissenters say, they except
such things as are necessary to be used in the Service of God, though they have
been abused by Idolaters; I reply, that so long as the reasons hold to make any
thing sinful, so long it is so. If the use or abuse of any thing by Idolaters
make it simply evil; then it must for ever remain so, and no necessity
whatsoever can make it lawful. So that this Principle drives us into such
streights, that we must sin one way or other. For either we must not worship
God in public, or we must be guilty of Idolatry if we do: and though of two Evils
or Calamities the least is to be chosen, yet of two Sins neither is. Christian
Religion flows from infinite Wisdom; and the Laws of God do not cross one
another, but are even and consistent. We are never cast by God under a
necessity of sinning, of transgressing one Law by the observance of another:
but thus it must be, if we take up and stick to this Principle.

5. The Dissenters condemn themselves in what they allow and practice, by the
same Rule by which they condemn kneeling at the Sacrament, and other Rites of
our Church. For they themselves did use, without scruple, such Places and
Things and Postures as had been defiled and abused by Idolaters. They were wont
to be bare-headed in time of Divine Worship, at Prayer and at the Sacrament;
and so do Idolatrous Papists. They never affirmed, that it was sinful to kneel
at our Prayers, both public and private; yet this Gesture the Papists use in
their Prayers to the Virgin Mary, to the Cross, to Saints and Angels. They used
our Churches, Churchyards, and Bells, and never thought they sinned against
God by so doing; though they knew they had been abused. Nay, the Directory
Direct. of the day and place of worship.
declares, That such places are not subject to any such Pollution by any
Superstition formerly used, and now laid aside, as may render them unlawful and
inconvenient. Mr. Rutherford Rutherf. of Scandal, Q. 5.6.
says of Bells grossly abused in time of Popery, That it is unreasonable and
groundless, that thereupon they should be difus'd. Upon which the Reverend Dr.
Falkner has this judicious Remark; The pretense of their convenient usefulness
would be no better excuse on their behalf, than was the Plea for sparing the
best of the Amalekites Cattle, that they might be a Sacrifice, when God had
devoted them to Destruction. For if God (as they say) had commanded, that all
such Things and Rites should be utterly abolished, as were of Man's devising
and had been abused to Idolatry; then the convenient usefulness of such Places
and things will never bear them out.

6. If this Principle were true, it would go nigh to throw a scorn upon all or
most of the Reformations that have been made from the Church of Rome; for they
do not seem to have governed themselves by this Rule. Some of them in their
public Confessions Confess. Bohem. Art. 15.
declaring, that they might lawfully retain such Rites and Ceremonies as are of
advantage to Faith, the Worship of God, or Peace and Order in the Church, though
they had been introduced by any Synod, or Bishop, or Pope, or any other.

7. Nay, this Principle would render Christianity impracticable; because there
is no Circumstance, no Instrument, no Ministry in Worship, but may have been
some way or other abused by Pagan or Romish Idolatries. It would make every
Garment, of what shape, or of what color soever, unfit for use in our
Religious Service; for not only the White, but the Red, the Green, and the
Black, have been used (even for the significancy of their respective Colors)
by the Gentile or Romanist, to very superstitious purposes in Divine Worship.

Secondly, There is no express Precept of this nature, and the Texts alleged
do not infer it. For, 1. Though some Churches are blamed for suffering some to
teach the People to eat things sacrificed to Idols, Rev. 2.14, 20. yet the
instance is impertinent, because that was no better than Communicating in
Idol-worship, as the Gnostics did. But St. Paul declares, 1 Cor. 8. and chap.
10.27, 28, 29. that eating things offered to Idols without any respect to Idols
in cating is unlawful upon no other account, but that of Scandal. 2. St. Jude's
words, v. 23. hating even the garment spotted by the flesh, teach us indeed to
be as cautious of temptations to sin, as of the Garments of infected Persons;
but there is no danger, when they are well cleans'd from infection. 3. Though the
Jews were commanded to destroy Idols and the appurtenances of them, Deuteronomy. 7.25,
26. Is. 20.22. because they were so prodigiously inclined to Idolatry; yet
surely the Dissenters will not say, we must destroy all things that have been
abused to superstitious uses; for then we must destroy our Bells and Fonts and
Churches. Therefore, as Mr. Calvin, upon the Second Commandment, says, We do
not in the least scruple, whether we may lawfully use those Temples, Fonts and
other Materials, which have been heretofore abused to Idolatrous and
Superstitious uses. I acknowledge indeed, that we ought to remove such things
as seem to nourish Idolatry; upon supposition, that we our selves in opposing
too evidently things in their own nature indifferent, be not too superstitious.
It is equally superstitious to condemn things indifferent as unholy, and to
command them as if they were holy.

As for the example of Hezekiah's breaking in pieces the Brazen Serpent,
because the Children of Israel burnt Incense to it, 2 Kings 18.4. it will not
prove, that whatsoever has been notoriously defiled in Idolatrous or grossly
Superstitious Services, ought to be abolished; and much less, that the not
abolishing some such things, is a good ground for separation from the Church
that neglects so to do. For,

1. The Brazen Serpent was not only defiled, but an Idol it self, and that at
the very time when it was destroyed. Nay, it was worshipped by the generality
of the People; to those days the Children of Israel did burn Incense unto it;
and there was little hope of their being reclaimed, while the Idol stood; and
moreover, the use of it was ceased for which it was first erected. Now without
doubt Governors ought to take away those indifferent things which have been
abused, when the People are inclined to abuse them again; at least, if such
abuse cannot probably be prevented by any other means: but then I deny that our
Rites have been or are any temptation to Idolatry, or to the embracing of
Popery.

Had Hezekiah suffered the Brazen Serpent still to stand, no doubt private
Persons (who have no Authority to make public Reformations) might lawfully have
made use of it, to put them in mind of, and affect them with the wonderful
mercy of God, expressed by it to their Forefathers; notwithstanding that many
had formerly made an Idol of it, and did so at that very time. And much more
might they have lawfully continued in the Communion of the Church, so long as
there was no constraint laid upon them to join with them in their Idolatry; nor
do we read of any that separated from the Church, while the Brazen Serpent was
permitted to stand, as woefully abused as it was by the generality.

2. If Example were a good way of Arguing, we find by Hezekiah's practice in
other things, he did not think it an indispensable Duty, to abolish every thing
that had been made use of to Idolatry; if it did not prove an immediate snare
at that time. For as to the Temples, which Solomon had erected for no other end
but the Worship of false Gods, 1 Kings 11.7. Hezekiah did not make it his
business to destroy them, as being in his time forlorn and neglected things, of
which no bad use was then made. Although indeed King Josiah afterward (probably
upon the increase of Idolatry, and renewed use of those places) found it
expedient to lay them wholly waste, 2 Kings 23.13. Let not any, says De Vitand.
Superstitione.
Calvin, think me so austere or bound up, as to forbid a Christian without any
exception, to accommodate himself to the Papists in any Ceremony or Observance;
for it is not my purpose to condemn any thing, but what is clearly evil and
openly vicious.

III. I proceed now in the last place to show, that the Agreement between the
Churches of England and Rome is in no wise such, as will make Communion with
the Church of England unlawful. This I shall evince in the chief particulars,
which our Dissenters take offense at.

First Then, Episcopacy is so far from being an unlawful symbolizing with the
Church of Rome, that it is an Apostolical Institution; and shall we allow the
Pope so much power, as to make that unlawful by his use, which the Apostles and
their Disciples have recommended to us by theirs? Nay, Bez. Episcop. du Moul.
Past. off. Calv. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 2. and Epist. ad Reg. Pol.
Beza, P. du Moulin, and Calvin grant, that this was the Government of all
Churches in the World, from the Apostles times for about 1500 years together.
Nor do I know how the Dissenters will defend the Observation of the Lord's Day,
while they contend that Episcopacy cannot be concluded from the uninterrupted
tradition of the Church from the Apostles times: or how those that separate
upon the account of Episcopacy, can defend the lawfulness of Communicating with
any Christian Church for about 1500 years together. I shall add no more upon
this point; only I refer my Reader to Chillingworth's Institution of
Episcopacy, and Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of separation, p. 244, etc.

Secondly, Our symbolizing with the Church of Rome in having set Forms of
Prayer, is so far from being culpable, that it is highly commendable. For herein
we symbolize with the Primitive Church; nor is any thing more expedient for the
public Service of God, as I have already shown in the Third Chapter. Now if the
Papists, nay if the Heathens used set Forms, because it was the fittest way for
the Service of God; must we be forbidden to use them? Because they did well,
are we therefore to do worse?

Thirdly, Our Liturgy in particular does not so much symbolize with the Roman
Service, as to cause a separation. For though some Collects are taken out of the
Mass Book; yet that is not enough to make them unlawful. For then the Lord's
Prayer, the Psalms, and a great part of the Scripture besides, and the Creeds
also must never be used.

I know it has been said, that the Scriptures being of necessary use must be
retained by us, though the Church of Rome retains them: but that there is not the
same Reason for Forms, which are not necessary; and that in those we ought to
go as far from that Church as we can. But what reason is there for this? For
the danger that may happen to us in coming too near them, lies in things
wherein they do ill, and not in things wherein they do well. No Man can show a
good reason why those Passages in the Common Prayer Book, which are to be found
in the Mass Book, but which were used also by the Church before Romanism had
corrupted it, are not as much to be valued, because they were once used by good
Christians; as to be run down, because they have been since used by
Superstitious and Idolatrous Men. If any Man would set himself to expose the
Mass Book, he would, I suppose, lay hold upon nothing but the Corruptions that
are in it, and things that are obnoxious to just reproof; not on things that
are justifiable, and may easily be defended. And the Reason of this is plain,
because the Mass Book is to blame for those parts of it only, but not for these.

Lastly, Our symbolizing with the Church of Rome in the use of Ceremonies will
not justify a separation. For ours are scarce the hundredth part of hers: nor
are ours imposed as necessary. If it be said, that Christ severely condemned
the Jewish Traditions; I answer that he condemned only those by which they made
the commandments of God of none effect, and in which they placed special
holiness.

But to descend to particulars; 1. The Surplice in the Church of Rome is
solemnly hallowed, etc. but we use it only for Distinction and Uniformity, and
place no more holiness in it, than in the hoods which denote Degrees. Besides,
in the Primitive Church Ministers did officiate in White Garments; and Beza and
Calvin were Cont. Westph. Vol. 1. p. 55. Epist. ad Bull.
against contending about the Surplice; and, I pray, why is a Minister 's
Linen Garment more Popish, than a Lawyer's Gown or a Judge's Robes? Our famous
Hooker Eccles. Pol. Book 5.228.
says, To solemn actions of Royalty and Justice, there suitable Ornaments are a
beauty; are they only in Religion a stain? 2. The Cross in Baptism is not used
by us, as it is by the Church of Rome. She enjoins numberless Crossings in the
Administration of that Sacrament; but we retain it in Conformity to the ancient
practice, and have abolished all Superstitious abuses of it. 3. Kneeling at the
Sacrament is required by us, only as a reverent Gesture; and the abuses of this
kneeling in the Church of Rome are perfectly removed. The Papists indeed kneel
to their Host, as to their God: but we do nothing like them; for we kneel not
to the Bread and Wine, but at our Receiving of them. Now what they do on no
reason, why may not we do on the best? especially when our Church declares,
that Adoration of the of the Elements is Idolatry to be abhorred of all
faithful Christians. As we are not to disuse the Holy Sacrament, because the
Papists have made it an Idol: so we may continue our Reverence, though they have
paid it Adoration. 4. The Ring in Marriage is most notoriously abused in the
Church of Rome, as may be seen in their Office: but we practice no Superstition
about it, and use it (not as a Sacramental sign, but) as a token of the
Marriage Vow. Lastly, The Feasts and Fasts of our Church cannot be justly
accounted Popish. For the time of Assembling is a Circumstance of our Worship
that cannot be left to particular choice, but must be determined in Common; and
what is to be done at that time, must be determined too in an Ordinary orderly
Assembly: so that it must be left to the discretion of the Governors, when we
are to keep a Festival, and when a Fast. As to the Keeping of the Lord's Day,
our Church was not at Liberty; unless she would have rashly departed from
Apostolical observation, and the continued practice of all Ages and Places
since the beginning of Christianity. As for the Keeping of Easter, she was
under the like Obligation; the Annual Feast of the Resurrection, the Great
Lord's Day, being known to have been the Chief, and the Cause of all the
Weekly. And as to the Fast of Good Friday, it was nigh as early as the Feast of
the Resurrection. They lamented their Sins our Savior died for on the Friday
before, as constantly as they Commemorated His Rising again for our Salvation
the Sunday after. And in Order to the keeping of those two Great Days with
more Devotion, there was likewise in the Church some time beforehand set
apart, for better Recollection and greater Preparation; the number of Days was
in some places more, in some less. That of Forty, had obtained in the Western
Country; and therefore was still kept: and would to God it were as Religiously
observed, as it was Piously appointed. Whitsunday too, the Day on which the
Holy Ghost descended, was observed always and Universally by the Ancient
Church. Only the Nativity of our Savior was of latter remembrance, but yet
before Popery came in. 'Twas first observed in the Western Church; and
afterward taken up by the Eastern, in St. Chrysostom's time, as it stands
recommended by him to the People of Antioch. Other times besides these, have
been appointed for our Religious Assemblies; in which, besides the general
Worship of God, the Examples of his Saints and Martyrs are gratefully remembered
and piously proposed. Those Days are called commonly by the Name of the Person
then particularly Commemorated: Not that the Worship is to the Saint, or that
the Day is employed in his Honor; but because on the occasion of his Memory or
Martyrdom we come together, as to pay our other Duties to our God, so to thank
him for the Graces of his Servant, and to be Edified and Instructed by the
Example. It is true, the Church heretofore, when God had been bountiful to them
in the Number of his Saints, increased in some proportion the Days of his
Worship; and it is to be Confessed that Popery had both acknowledged Saints to
God, which he might not own, and gave the true Saints an Honor which they must
disclaim: but with us the number of those Days is not greater than what the
Affairs of the World may well comply with; and as the number of the Apostles is
not large, so their Sanctity sure is unquestionable; and then on those Days we
neither Beseech by their Merits, nor recommend our selves to their
Intercession. You see then how unreasonable the Objection of Popery is here
too: But see to what absurdity it go's on. First, it is supposed Popery to keep
a Day in the Memory of an Apostle; and then it is thought as Popish, to call
him a Saint. A Great Person at Geneva, it seems, presumed it somewhat Popish to
observe Sunday it self; and considered about changing the Day. Nay some are so
perversely Superstitious on the other hand, as that That day, on which all the
Christian World Remembers our Savior's Bitter Passion, has seemed to them the
fitter for a Feast; and the time Universally now set apart for the Joyful
Memory of his Blessed Nativity, the more proper for a Fast. This indeed is not
like the Papists: No, it is like a Jew or a Heathen.

To conclude, by Popery nothing can be meant, but the corruptions and
usurpations of the Church of Rome. For the Faith of that Church was once as
fair spoken of as it is Errors are now; and had she continued in that purity, we
ought to have been of her Communion: and now we are to depart from her no
otherwise, than she shall be found to have departed from her self, and to have
corrupted that Doctrine which was once delivered unto the Saints. As we must
not receive the Evil for the sake of the Good, so we must not reject the Good
for the sake of the Evil. We have not one Doctrine or Ceremony that is purely
Popish: but we must part with the best things in our Religion, if all those
things are sinful, which the Papists abuse. And as for the Papists themselves,
we do not in the least countenance them in those things wherein they are wrong,
by agreeing with them in those things wherein they are right.

CHAP. IX. The Objection of Mixt-Communion Answered.
SOme think that the Church is to consist of none but real Saints; and
therefore finding many corrupt Members in the Church of England, they separate
from her Communion, and set up Churches of their own, Consisting, in their
judgment, of none but truly sanctified Persons. The Ground of this dangerous
mistake is their false Notion of that holiness, which the Scripture applies to
God's Church.

Holiness in Scripture is twofold. 1. Inherent Holiness, and that can be in
none properly but God, Angels and Men. In God Originally, as he is that Being,
in whom all Excellencies do possess infinite Perfection; and hence he is called
the Holy One of Israel. In Angels and Men by way of Participation. 2. Relative
Holiness founded in a Separation of any thing from common uses, and an
Appropriating it to the Service of God. Thus the Sabbath is holy, and Judea and
Jerusalem are holy; and thus the Church is holy, that is, a Society separated
from the World to serve God after a peculiar manner. Thus the Israelites, even
when very much corrupted, were called God's holy People; Deuteronomy. 7.6. and the
Apostles call the Churches by the name of Saints, though there were strange
immoralities amongst them, because they were separated to God and in Covenant
with him.

Well; but did not Christ die, that the Church should be holy and without
blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. that is, really holy? Yes. But then by Church we must
understand not the whole Universal Church, but either that part of it which is
really holy in this World, or that Church which shall be hereafter, when the
corrupt Members shall be utterly cut off. Neither is this to make two Churches,
but only to assign two different states of the same Church.

This being premised, I shall prove these three Propositions; 1. That an
external profession of the Christan Faith is enough to qualify a person to be
admitted a Member of Christ's Church.

2. That every such Member has a right to all the external privileges of the
Church, till by the just censure of the Church he be excluded from those
privileges.

3. That some corrupt Members remaining in the Church is no just cause of
separation from her.

First then, an external Profession of the Christian Faith (made either by
himself or by his Sureties) is enough to qualify a Person to be admitted a
Member of Christ's Church. For, 1. This is the qualification prescribed by our
Lord, Go, teach all Nations, that is, make Disciples of all Nations, Baptizing
them, etc. Matthew. 28.19. Now the Pastors of the Church cannot know the
sincerity of Men's hearts, but their Profession of Christianity entitles them to
baptism. By this Rule the Apostles acted whilst Christ was upon Earth, and
Baptized more than were sincere; for of so many Persons that were Baptized, not
above 120 continued with Christ to the last. 2. By the same Rule they acted
afterward; for St. Peter Baptized about 3000 in one day upon their professing
the Word, Acts 2.41. though all would not probably prove sincere; and two of
them, Ananias and Sapphira, were gross Hypocrites. St. Philip, Acts 8.12.
Baptized both Men and Women at Samaria, and and amongst them was Simon Magus;
whom the holy Deacon might justly suspect for his former practices, and whose
Hypocrisy appeared afterward. Such other Members of the Church were Demas,
Hymeneus and Alexander, whose bare Profession Entitled them to that privilege.
3. Christ foretells Matthew. 3.12. and 13.24, etc. Joh. 15.1.
that his Church should consist of Good and Bad, by comparing it to a Field of
Wheat and Tares, a Net of all sorts of Fishes, a Flour of Corn and Chaff, etc.
St. Paul says, Romans 9.6.
they are not all Israel, that are of Israel; and Christ says, that many are
called, but few chosen. 4. The many corrupt members 1 Cor. 11.20, 21. 2 Cor.
12.20, 21. 1 Cor. 6. Gal. 3. Rev. 3.
of the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and the seven Churches in Asia, prove the
same. For if the Apostles themselves admitted mere formal Professors, we may
conclude, that they thought it God's Will, that it should be so. 5. No other
Rule in admitting Persons into the Church is practicable; since the Officers of
Christ cannot make a certain judgment of men, because they themselves have
short and fallible understandings.

Secondly therefore, every such member has a right to all the External
privileges of the Church, till by the just censure of the Church he be excluded
from those privileges. By External privileges I mean only a Communion with the
Church in the Word and Ordinances; for the pardon of sin and comforts of the
Holy Ghost, etc. are Internal privileges, which belong to none but the truly
Good, who are born not of water only, but of the Spirit. Now when a Man by
gross and notorious wickedness has forfeited the Internal privileges of the
Church, he ought by the censures of the Church to be excluded from the External
privileges also: but till the sentence of the Church is past upon him, we must
not forsake the Church ourselves to avoid Communion with him; because, till
then, his right to them remains inviolable, and that for several reasons.

1. Because the Baptismal Covenant gives Men a right to God's Promises, as far
as they perform the conditions. If a bare federal holiness gives Men a relation
to God, then it gives them a title to the blessings that belong to that
relation. Not that unworthy Men shall receive the special reward of the truly
Good; but they are to be allowed the liberty to partake of those External
blessings, which he in common bestows upon the whole family.

2. Church Membership necessarily implies Church Communion, or else it
signifies nothing. For to what purpose is a Man a Member of a Society, if he
cannot enjoy the privileges of it?

3. All the Jews were commanded to join in the public Worship, though I doubt
many of them were wicked Livers; and therefore mere Circumcision was enough to
put a Man into a capacity of Communicating with the Jewish Church in it is most
Solemn and Sacred Ordinances.

4. It appears, that St. Paul makes the Number of those that received the
Lord's Supper to be as great, as that of those that were Baptized. For they
were all made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. that is, in the Cup of
the blessed Sacrament, and all are partakers of one Bread, 10.17. and we read
that they, all the 3000, Ananias and Sapphira being of the number, continued in
the Apostles Doctrine, and in breaking of Bread and in Prayer, Acts 2.42.

5. Church Membership is in order to the Edification and Salvation of Men's
Souls; and this cannot be attained without being admitted to all the Acts and
Offices of Church Communion. For it is of mighty advantage to us to hear God's
Word duly Preached, to have our prayers joined with those of other Christians,
and our grace strengthened in the Holy Communion; and these things cannot be
had, but in Church Communion. Nay, our improvement in holiness is more to be
ascribed to the operations of the Spirit, than to the External Administrations;
and therefore, Acts 2.47. Ephesians. 5.23. and 4.4.
since God Promises his Spirit to Believers only as they are Members of of his
Church, and no otherwise than by the use and Ministry of his Word and
Sacraments; since his ordinary method of saving Men is by adding them to the
Church; since Christ suffered for us as incorporated into a Church, and the
operations of the Spirit are confined to the Church; we see the necessity of
holding actual communion with the Church in order to sanctification and
sa^vation.

But it may ^e said, that those who have only the Form and not the power of
Godliness, are guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, and eat and drink their
own damnation, when they receive the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.27, 29. and such men
cannot have a right to that, in doing which they sin so heinous^y. Now to this
I answer, 1. that in a strict sense the very best men are unworthy receivers;
but, 2. those Members, that we have asserted to have a right to the External
privileges of Christ's Church, are not guilty of that unworthiness which the
Apostle speaks of. For we do not plead for the right of such open and
scandalous sinners, whom St. Paul charges with Schism and Divisions, pride and
contempt of their Brethren, sensuality and drunkenness. Such swine as these
ought not indeed to come to the Holy Table of our Lord, because they have
forfeited their right to it, and ought by the censures of the Church to be
excluded.

If it be said, that those receivers, who are destitute of saving grace, though
they are free from scandalous sins, are yet in an unconve^ted condition; and
that this Sacrament is not a converting, but confirming Ordinance; I answer,
that taking conversion for turning Men to the profession of Christianity, 't^s
true that none but converted or Baptized Persons must receive the Sacrament:
but if we take conversion for turning those who are already Baptized, to a
serious practice of holiness, then this is a converting ordinance. For what
more powerful motives to holiness can be found, than what the Sacrament
represents to us; wherein the great love of God in Christ, and our Savior's
sufferings, and God's hatred of sin, and the dismal consequences of it are so
lively set forth?

Thirdly I proceed to show, that some corrupt Members remaining in the Church
is no just cause of Separation from her. And,

1. From the Example of the Jews. What sins could be greater than those of
Eli's Sons, who arrived to such impudence in sinning, that they lay with the
Women before the door of the Tabernacle? Yet did not Elkanah and Hannah refrain
to come up to Shilo, and to join with them in public worship. Nay, they are
said to transgress who refused to come, though they refused out of abhorrence of
the Wickedness of those Men, 1 Samuel 2.17, 24. In Ahab's time, when almost all
Israel were Idolaters, and halted betwixt God and Baal; yet then did the
Prophet Elijah Summon all Israel to appear on Mount Carmel, and hold a
Religious Communion with them in Preaching and Praying, and offering a
miraculous Sacrifice. Neither did the Seven Thousand that had kept themselves
upright, and not bowed their Knee to Baal, absent themselves because of the
Idolatry of the rest; but they all came and joined in that public Worship
performed by the Prophet, 1 Kings 18.39. and 19.18. In the Old Testament, when
both Prince and Priests and People were very much depraved and debauched in
their Manners, we do not find that the Prophets at any time exhorted the
faithful and sincere to separate; or that they themselves set up any separate
Meetings, but continued in Communion with the Church, Preaching to them and
exhorting them to Repentance.

2. From the Example of Christians. Many Members of the Churches of Corinth and
Galatia, and the 7 Churches in Asia, were grown very scandalous; yet we do not
read that good Men Separated from the Church, or that the Apostles commanded
them so to do.

3. From our Savior's own Example, who did not separate from the Jewish
Church, though the Scribes and Pharisees, who ruled in Ecclesiastical Matters at
that time, had perverted the Law, corrupted the Worship of God, were blind
guides and hypocrites, devoured widows houses, and had only a form of
Godliness, Matthew. 15.6, 7, 8. How careful was he, both by his Example and
Precept, to forbid and discountenance a separation upon that account? They sit
in Moses 's Seat, says he; all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that
observe and do, Matthew. 23.2, 3.

4. From the Apostle's express command to hold Communion with the Church of
Corinth, notwithstanding the many and great immoralities that were amongst the
Members of it. 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. and 3.3. and 5.1. and 11.18.
There were Schisms and Contentions amongst them, strife and envyings,
fornication and incest, eating at the Idols Table, and coming not so soberly as
became them to the Table of our Lord; yet does the Apostle not only not command
them to separate, but approve their meeting together, and exhort them to
continue it.

But 1 Cor. 11.28.
let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that
Cup. In these words the Apostle plainly solves the Case I am discoursing on,
and shows what private Christians, in whose power it is not judicially to
correct Vice, are to do, when they see so many vicious Members intruding to the
blessed Sacrament; viz. not to abstain from it, but by preparation and
examination of themselves to take care that they be not of their number. If to
separate had been the way, the Apostle would then have managed his Discourse
after this manner; There are many Schisms and strises in the Church, there is
an incestuous Person not cast out, many proud contemners of their Brethren, Men
of strange Opinions, of untamed Appetites, and unbridl'd Passions, and
therefore I advise you not to come amongst them, nor to partake of the Holy
Sacrament with them, lest you be infected with their Sores, and partake of
their Judgments. But by advising Men to examine themselves, and then to come,
he plainly intimates, that 'twas their Duty to continue in the Communion of the
Church notwithstanding these; as if he had said, I do not mention the foul
Enormities of some that come to this holy Table, to discourage you from coming,
lest you should be polluted by their sins: but to excite you to a due care and
examination of your selves, that you be not polluted by any sinful Acts and
Compliances of your own; and then there is no danger of being defiled by theirs.

5. From the Nature of Church Communion. I have already proved in the First
Chapter, that every act of Church Communion is an act of Communion with the
whole Christian Church, and and all the Members of it, whether present or
absent: and therefore those, who separate from a National Church for the sake
of corrupt Professors, are Schismatics in doing so; and all their Prayers and
Sacraments are not acts of Communion, but a Schismatical Combination. Because,
though they could form a Society as pure and holy as they desire, yet they
confine their Communion to their own select company, and exclude the whole body
of Christians, all the World over, out of it. Their Communion is no larger,
than their gathered Church; for if it be, then they must still Communicate with
those Churches, which have corrupt Members, as all visible Churches on earth
have.

It Is true, good Men must frequently exhort and advise corrupt and scandalous
Members; they must reprove them with prudence, affection and calmness; they
must bewail their sins and pray to God for their Reformation; they must as
much, and as conveniently as may be, avoid their company, especially all
familiarity with them; and if repeated admonitions, either private or before
one or two more, will not do; then they must tell the Church, that by it is more
public reproofs the scandalous Members may be reclaimed, or by it is just
censures cut off from the Communion. These things the Holy Scriptures command
us to do, and the Primitive Christians practiced accordingly. But if after all
the endeavors of private Christians, some scandalous Members, through the defect
of discipline, should remain in the Church; they cannot injure those Persons
that are no way accessory to their sin. For no sin pollutes a Man, but that
which is chosen by him. Noah and Lot were good, even amongst the wicked; nor
did Judas defile our Savior and his Apostles at the passover. The good and bad
Communicate together (not in sin, but) in their common duty. To Communicate in
a sin, is sin: but to Communicate with a sinner, in that which is not sinful,
cannot be a sin.

It Is true, the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5.6. A little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump; but this is a Proverbial speech, and shows only that sin, like leaven, is
of a very spreading nature. The People are as a lump, and a wicked Person is as
leaven amongst them: but, though the leaven is apt to convey it self through the
whole lump, yet only those parts are actually leavened with it, that take the
leaven; and so, though the sinner by his bad example is apt to infect others, yet
those only are actually infected, who Communicate with him in sin. Beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees, says our Savior; he does not advise his
Disciples to leave their Assemblies, but to beware that they take no leaven of
them. The incestuous Person was not cast out of the Church of Corinth; and yet
the Apostle says, at least of some of them, ye are unleavened, 1 Cor. 5.7. And
why may not the joint Prayers of the Church, and the examples of good Men, be
as sovereign an antidote against the infection; as the bare company of wicked
Men is of power to convey it? Especially considering that the sins of the
wicked shall never be imputed to the righteous: but the Prayers of the
righteous have obtained pardon for the wicked.

If it be said, that the pollutions of sin were typify'd by the legal
uncleanesses, and that every thing that the unclean Person touched, was made
unclean; I answer, that those legal pollutions did not defile the whole
Communion, but only those whom the unclean Person touched. For, 1. There was no
Sacrifice appointed for any such pollution, as came upon all for the sin of
some few. 2. Though the Prophets reproved the Priests for not separating the
clean from the unclean, Ezekiel. 22.26. yet they never taught, that the whole
Communion was polluted, because the unclean came into the Congregation through
the neglect of the Priests duty. As those that touched the unclean Person, were
unclean: so those that have Fellowship with the wicked in their sins, are
polluted. 3. When it is said, that the unclean Person, that did not purify
himself, defiled the Tabernacle and polluted the sanctuary; the meaning is,
that he did so to himself, but not to others; so does a wicked Man the
Ordinances of God, in respect of himself, but not of others. The Prayers of the
wicked, though joined with those of the Church, are an abomination unto God;
whilst at the same time the Prayers of good Men go up as a sweet smelling
Savor, and are accepted by him. The Person that comes unworthily to the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, eats and drinks Judgment to himself: but that
hinders not, but that those who at the same time come better prepared, may do
it to their own Eternal Comfort and Salvation. To the pure all things are pure:
but to them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure; but even their
Mind and Conscience is defiled, Tit. 1.15.

I grant indeed, that the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 6.17. Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing: but this makes nothing against my Assertion, if we consider, 1. the
occasion of this Exhortation. For the Christian Corinthians lived in the midst
of Heathens, by whom they were often invited to their Idol-Feasts, at which
some of them did not scruple to eat things Sacrificed to Idols: but the Apostle
persuades them not to go, not only upon the account of scandal to their weak
Brethren, whose ignorance might suffer them to be drawn by their Example to go
and eat at them, even in honor to the Idol; but also, because 'twas plain
Idolatry so to do. For as we receive the Lord's Supper in honor of Christ: so
they must be thought to eat in honor to the Idol; because the Sacrifice was
offered to the Idol. But blessed be God, we live in a Christian Country,
wherein there are no Idol-Feasts at all. 2. That the Persons, from whom they
were to separate, were no better than Unbelievers and Idolaters. But now,
because Christians by the Apostle's command were to separate from the
Assemblies of Heathen Idolaters, does it therefore follow that they must
separate from the Assemblies of Christians, because some, who while they
profess Christ, do not live like Christians, are present at them? Is there no
difference between a Pagan or an Infidel, that denies Christ and worships
Devils; and an immoral Christian, who outwardly owns Christ and worships the
true God? 3. That the unclean thing they were not to touch, was the abominable
practices used by the Heathens in the Worship of their Gods. But now, because
Christians are not to Communicate with Heathens in their filthy Mysteries, nor
to partake with any sort of wicked Men in any Action that is Immoral; does it
therefore follow, that they must not do their Duty, because sometimes it cannot
be done but in their Company? Must they abstain from the public Worship of God
and the Lord's Table, to which they are commanded; because Evil Men, who, till
they repent, have nothing to do there, rudely intrude themselves?

As for St. John's words, Revel. 18.4. Come out of her, my People, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues; they are a
command to all Christians to forsake the Communion of Idolaters; and according
to most Interpreters, those in particular of the Church of Rome: but the Text
does not afford the Dissenters the least Plea to separate from us, who are
Reformed from Popery, and retain nothing of it, but what it retains of the
Gospel and the Primitive Church.

I have nothing now to add, but that the eminent Dissenters do utterly See
Vines on the Sacrament, p. 235, 242. Platform, c. 14.. 8. Brinsly's Arraignm.
p. 37, 38. Jenkin on Jude v. 19. Baily's Disswasive, p. 22. Sacri^. desert. p.
97. Cawdrey's Reformation promoted, p. 131. Manton on Jude, p. 496. Cotton's
Holiness of Church Members, p. 2. Burroughs's Gospel Worship. Sermon. 11. p. 242.
disclaim this Plea of Mixt-Communion. Mr. Vines says it is Donastical; and
others, as Mr. Brinsly, and Mr. Jenkin, that it is the common Plea or Pretense,
which for the most part has been taken up by all Schismatics, in defense of
their Separation from the Church; and therefore that it is necessary the People
should be untaught it, as Mr. Baxter advises. And as they do disclaim it, so
they declare that those who separate upon this account, do it very unjustly;
that the Scandals of Professors are ground of mourning, but not of Separation;
that there may be a sufficient cause to cast out obstinate sinners, and yet not
sufficient cause for one to leave the Church, though such be not cast out; that
the suffering of profane and scandalous Livers to continue in the Church, and
partake in the Sacrament, is doubtless a great sin; yet the Godly are not
presently to separate from it. There is, says Mr. Buroughs, an error on both
sides; either those that think it concerns them not at all with whom they come
to the Sacrament, or those that if they do what they can to keep the Scandalous
away, and yet they should be suffered to come, think that they themselves may
not come to partake of it. This both the Presbyterians and Independents agree
in, and endeavor See Vines on the Sacrament, p. 31, 32, 44, 242, 246.
Vindicat. of Presb. Gov. p. 134. Brinsly's Arraignm. p. 47. Firmin's Separ.
Exam. p. 40. Cawdrey's Church-Re^or. p. 71. Tombes's Theod. p. 74. Hooker's
Survey, Pref. A 3. Platform, c. 14.. 8, 9. Grave Confut. part. 3. p. 53, 55.
Burroughs's Gospel-worsh. Sermon. 11. p. 236, 237. Ball's Trial, c. 10. p. 191,
250, 211. Jean's Discourse on the Lord's Supper. Rutherford's Right of Presbyt.
Blake's Vindic. p. 235. Cotton's Inf. Bapt. p. 102. Cartwright on Proverb.
Edwards's Apol. Baxter's Christian Direct, p. 707. Non-conformists no
Schismatics, p. 16. Bains on the Ephesians. c. 1. v. 1. p. 5.
to prove by several Arguments.

Nay, they answer an Objection drawn from, 1 Cor. 5.11. If any Man that is
called a Brother, be a Fornicator, etc. with such an one no not to eat; and
tell us, First, That if it be meant of excluding such an one from
Church Communion, it must be done by the Church, and not by a private Person.
But you are not commanded to separate from the Church, if they exclude him not.
So Mr. Baxter, etc. Secondly, That it concerns not Religious, but Civil
Communion; and that not all Civil Society or Commerce, but Familiar also. For
which they produce several Reasons; 1. They argue from the Notion of eating
Bread, which is a Token of Love and Friendship in the phrase of Scripture; not
to partake of, or to be shut from the Table, is a sign of Familiarity broken
off. So Mr. Ball, etc. 2. The eating which is here forbidden, is allowed to be
with the Heathen: but it is the civil eating which is only allowed to be with an
Heathen; therefore it is the civil eating which is forbidden to be with a
Brother. So Mr. Jenkin, etc. See Baxter's Defense part 2. p. 27. Ball's Trial,
p. 200. Jenkin on Jude, v. 19. Cawdrey's Church-Reformat. p. 75, 122, 126.
Brinsly's Arraignment, p. 40, 45, 48. Tombes's Theodul. p. 128, 167, 210. Grave
Confut. part 1. p. 17, 18. and part 4. p. 57. Vines on the Sacrament, p. 219,
226, 333, 246. Cartwright's Def. of the Admon. p. 98, 99, 106. Goodwin on the
Ephesians. p. 487, 488. Blake's Vindic. c. 31. p. 236, 238. Gillisp. Nihil
respondet, p. 33. Knutton's Queries. Throughton's Apol. p. 65. Baxter's Cure,
Dir. 47. p. 231. Owen's Evangel. Love, c. 3. p. 77. Brian's Dwelling with God,
Sermon. 6. p. 301. Firmin's Separat. Exam. p. 28. Collins's Provocator
Provocatus, p. 144, 151. England's Remembrancer, Sermon. 16. p. 454.
And as for other Objections, Mr. Baxter's answer is sufficient; If you mark
all the Texts in the Gospel, you shall find that all the Separation which is
commanded in such cases (besides our Separation from the Infidel and Idolatrous
World, or Antichristian and Heretical Confederacies, and No-Churches) is but
one of these two sorts; 1. Either that the Church cast out the impenitent by
the Power of the Keys; or, 2. That private Men avoid all private Familiarity
with them; but that the private Members should separate from the Church,
because such Persons are not cast out of it, show me one Text to prove it if
you can.

To conclude, this objection of Mixt-Communion proves nothing but a
supercilious Arrogance, and a great want of Charity in those that make it. What
care they may take in their new way of Discipline, I cannot tell: but our
Church has given the Minister a power of rejecting scandalous Sinners, See
Rubr. after the Communion.
and this is as much as can be done; for the close Hypocrite will escape the
narrowest search. Every Man is charged to examine himself, and not another; and
'twou'd be well, if all would do so. For he that enquires seriously into his
own sins, will find great cause to be humble and penitent: but he that is
curious to pry into the miscarriages of others, will be apt to be vain, proud,
self-conceited, and censorious; which will make him as unfit for the Table of
the Lord, as any of those Faults which he so scornfully condemns in his
Neighbors, that he esteems himself and the Ordinances of God polluted by their
Company.

CHAP. X. The Pretenses of Purer Ordinances, and Better Edification among the
Dissenters, Answered.
WELL; but though our Communion be not sinful, yet they can find Purer Ordinances
and Better Edification amongst the Dissenters; and therefore they may lawfully
separate from the Church of England.

But First, what Purer Ordinances would Men have than those of our Savior's
own Institution, without any corrupt and sinful mixtures to spoil their Virtue
and Efficacy? The Purity of Divine Administrations must consist in their
agreement with the Institution, that there is not any such defect or addition
as alters their nature and destroys their Virtue: but he who thinks that the
Sacraments lose their Efficacy, unless they be administered in that way which he
likes best, is guilty of gross Superstition; and attributes the Virtue of
Sacraments to the manner of their administration, not to their Divine
Institution.

Secondly, the pretense of better Edification will by no means justify
separation. For this Edification must be understood, either of the whole
Church, or of particular Christians. Now Edification is building up, and is
applied to the whole Church, considered as God's House and Temple. This is the
true Scripture Notion of it, as appears by many Texts, 1 Cor. 3.9, 10. and 8.1.
and 14.5, 12. Ephesians. 2.21. and 4.12, 13, 15, 16. Matthew. 21.42. Acts 4.11. 2 Cor.
10.8, 12, 19. and 13.10. Now it is an odd way of building up the Temple of God
by dividing and separating the parts of it from each other. As for the
Edification of particular Persons, which is also spoken of in Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. it is therefore called Edification, because it is an improvement
of a Man's Spiritual Condition; and it is wrought in the Unity of the Church,
and makes particular Christians one Spiritual House and Temple, by a firm close
Union and Communion of all the parts of the Church; so that every Christian is
Edified, as he grows up in all Christian Graces and Virtues in the Unity of the
Church. And indeed, if our Growth in Grace be more owing to the assistance of
God's Spirit, than to the external administrations, as St. Paul tells us, 1
Cor. 3.6, 7. and if the Spirit confines his influences to the Unity of the
Church, there being but one Body and one Spirit, Ephesians. 4.4. then it does not
seem a very likely way for Edification, to cut our selves off from the Unity of
Christ's Body. St. Jude, v. 19. seems to tell us, that true Edification was a
stranger to those who separated from the common building: but those who kept to
the Communion of the Church, built up themselves in their most Holy Faith, and
Prayed in the Holy Ghost; and a Man may with greater assurance expect the
Blessing of God, if he continue in the Church, than if he separate.

But I shall examine this pretense at large; and show, that it is unlawful for
any particular Christian to separate from the Church of England, because he
thinks he can Edify better amongst the Dissenters. This I shall prove by Four
Arguments.

1. Because better Edification cannot be had in separate Meetings, than in our
Churches; as will appear, if we consider, First, how fit our constitution is to
Edify Men's Souls; Secondly, that this constitution is well managed for
Edification.

First then, That our constitution is fit to Edify Souls, will appear, if we
consider Four things. 1. Our Creeds contain all Fundamental Articles of Faith,
that are necessary to Salvation; but we have no nice and obscure matters in
them. We believe all that the early Christians in the first Three Hundred years
thought needful; that is, all that Christ and his Apostles taught: and this
Faith will sufficiently and effectually Edify the Souls of Men. 2. The
necessity the Church lays upon a good Life and Works. The Articles of her
Creed, when firmly believed, do plainly tend to make Men good. She declares,
that without preparatory Virtues the most zealous devotion is not pleasing to
God; and that it is but show, unless obedience follow. Such a Faith she lays
down as Fundamental to Salvation, as produces excellent Virtues; and
determines, that without Faith and Good Works no Man shall see God. Her
Festivals commemorate the Virtues and recommend the Examples of Excellent Men.
Her Ceremonies are decent; her Prayers are for Holiness; her Discipline is to
force, and her Homilies to persuade Men to that Piety, which her whole
constitution aims at. She tells Sinners plainly, that unless they repent, they
must perish; and says that plain Virtues are the Ornament and Soul of our
Faith. And certainly the Civil Interest of a Nation is Edified by such a
Church, as teaches Men to perform the duties of their several relations so
exactly. 3. She is fitly constituted to excite true Devotion; because she gives
us true Notions of God and our selves, by describing his attributes and our
wants. Her Prayers are grave and of a due length; and she has proper Prayers
for most particular occasions. She has Offices to quicken our affections and
confirm our obedience. The Offices of the Lord's Supper, Baptism and Burial,
are extremely good in their kind. Bring but an honest mind and good affections
to all these parts of Devotion, and they will make the Church a Choire of
Angels. 4. Her Order and Discipline are such, that she makes Religion neither
slovenly, nor too gay. Wise and good Men have judged all her Ceremonies to be
decent and useful; and they are of great Antiquity, and fit to make our
Services comely. And truly, whilst we have Bodies, these outward helps are very
convenient, if not necessary. Her Government is so well tempered, that her
Members may not be dissolute, nor her Rulers insolent. And if all Vices are not
chastised, the reason is, because unnecessary divisions have stopped her
Discipline upon offenders. Her Government is Apostolical, Primitive and
Universal. None of her parts or Offices give just cause for any to revolt from
her; but considering all things, she is the best constituted Church in the
World. If therefore Heb. 6.1. 2 Pet. 3.18. Romans 15.2. 1 Cor. 14.3.
Edification be going on to perfection, or growing in grace; if it is doing
good to the Souls of Men; if it be to make plain the great things in Religion
to the understandings of Men; then it is to be found in this Church.

Secondly, that our Constitution is well managed for Edification, will appear
if we consider, 1. That Pastors are not left to their Liberty, but strictly
commanded under great temporal Penalties to direct their Flocks, to preserve
Faith and a good Conscience with substantial Devotion, which will to the
purpose Edify Men's Souls, and effectually save them. 2. That these commands are
obeyed by our Pastors. For this we appeal to good and wise Men in our
Communion, who have honesty and judgment enough to confess that they have found
it true; and to say that they are prejudiced, and want sincerity and knowledge
to pass a judgment, is uncharitable. Our Protestant Neighbors have commended
our Government, condemned the Separation, Magnified our Pastors, and wished they
were under such a Discipline, and Translated many of our Men's Works to Edify
their People. Dissenters themselves own our Sermons to be really good. And though
some few may not be able to answer the true design of Preaching, yet in general
Men may Edify very well among us. Nor has there been for these many hundred
years a Clergy so Learned, Pious, Prudent and Industrious to Edify Men's Souls,
as now is in the English Church.

II. Because those who make this pretense, do commonly mistake better
Edification. And surely* to desert the plain and great duty of Church Communion
for disputable or mistaken Edification, is to be guilty of the sin of Schism.
Now the mistakes of these Men are principally three.

1. In taking nice notions for Edifying truths. He that discourses about
Angels, separated Souls, the situation of Paradise and Hell, etc. shall be
thought a sounder Divine, than he that teaches the way of Salvation plainly, by
Faith and a good Conversation. Such things pass with too many for saving
truths; and many ignorant and corrupt Men, that espouse Parties and Interests,
readily embrace them. The Apostle speaks of some that have itching ears, 2 Timothy 4.3. If the food, though wholesome and good, be not to their fancy, they
complain of starving. Bring but an honest, sincere and teachable mind, and you
may Edify in a worse Church than ours; but otherwise the best Doctrine will be
insipid to you. Place Edification in the substantial things of Religion, in a
right Faith and a holy Conversation, which our Church presses upon us under the
penalty of eternal damnation; for these things alone do truly Edify the souls
of Men, and to these all Religion tends. The Kingdom of Christ consists in
righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. Now such a
Religion as this being so strongly enjoined and zealously taught in our Church,
we need not complain for want of Edification; and the desire of other
nourishment is spiritual pride and wantonness. Wherefore desire the sincere
milk of the Word (the food of your understanding, and not of your fancy) that
you may grow thereby. For if you had but such an increase of grace, as to hear
meekly God's Word and to receive it with pure affection, you could not easily
fail to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit. Therefore it is dangerous and
sinful to give Men a Liberty to run from any established Church for better
Edificaton, which is so often and easily mistaken. And may we not add, that
when a quarrel arises from an unjust denial of the Minister's Dues, then he is
called dull, and a better must be sought elsewhere. Thus one fault helps out
another, and defamation must excuse the Schism.

2. In taking the Opinions of parties for essential truths. This those Men do,
that are wedded to a Party; and if we do not explain all things in their way,
they cry, we destroy the Gospel truths, and that instead of being Edified they
are weakened in their faith. The early and best Christians thought it
sufficient to know Jesus and the Resurrection in their full extent; and it were
well if Men were satisfied with this old way; otherwise they break the Peace of
the Church and Obedience to Governors, which are the great things of Religion,
upon the score of better Edification.

3. In taking sudden heats and warmth, arising from melting tones and other
arts, for Edification; whereas a bright or a lowering day, or a Dose of Physic
can do the same things; and they have often happened in the worst of Men.
According as these Heats and Bodily Passions are Stirred, so in some Men's
Opinion the Ministry is Edifying or Unprofitable. But sound and solid Reasoning
is the true way to Edification; whereas the Silly and Weak, who are most
subject to these Heats and Colds, are Inconstant, and turn round in all
Religions. Such Persons being all sail, are the more easily tossed about with
every wind of Doctrine.

III. Because the pretense of better Edification will cause endless divisions
in the Church. For since every Man must judge, and the Governor must not
restrain him, therefore People may run from Teacher to Teacher to find out
Better Edification, Ever learning and never coming to the knowledge of the
truth, 2 Timothy 3.7. And when once they have torn the Unity of the Church in
pieces, then envy, detraction, strife, murmurings, fierceness, and numberless
other mischiefs will come in; and that which divided them from the Church, will
crumble them into Endless Parties, to the joy of our Enemies. But all this
would be avoided, if Men were sensible of the heinous nature of Schism, which
the Apostles and all the ancient Christians have painted forth in the blackest
colors.

IV. Because this is a discouragement to an honest and truly Christian
Ministry. For if the Flock run from a Pastor, that instructs them rightly, upon
pretense of better Edification; will it not cool his zeal, check his labors,
and affront his Person and Office? And this may be done to the best Pastors, as
well as to others; and the most judicious Dissenters have complained of it:
though upon this principle it cannot be remedied, because the people must judge
for themselves. And ought the Ministers to be scorned and discountenanced and
have their Ministry rendered useless, for the fancies, peevishness and humor of
the People? If it be said, that the Pastor is idle or unsound in Doctrine; I
answer, that our Governors, upon a just and modest complaint will quicken the
lazy and negligent, and correct the Heretical Pastor, and restore the Flock to
true Edification.

I may add, that the eminent Dissenters do declare, that the pretense of Better
Edification is not a sufficient excuse for Separation, as those who have
leisure may find in these Books of theirs which I have quoted See Hildersh.
Lect. 28, 29.54, 58, 66. Methermeneut. p. 71, 72, 74. Baxter's Cure, p. 359.
his Defense, part 1. p. 85. his Farewell-Sermon. Continuat. of Morn. Exer.
Sermon. 4. Jenkin on Jude, v. 19. England's Remembrancer, Sermon. 16. Burroughs's
Irenic. c. 12, 23. Platform, Pref. p. 7. etc. 13. Ball's Trial, c. 4. Brinsly's
Arraignment, p. 48. Cawdry's Independ. a Schism, p. 50. Vines on the Sacrament,
p. 246. Tuckney's Sermon. on Acts 9.31. Jus Div. Min. Evangel. p. 11, 12. Letter
of the Minist. in Old-Eng. to the Brethren in New-Eng. p. 13. Nye's Case of
great use, p. 3, 25. Tombes's Theodul. c. 9.. 8.
at the bottom.

But after all that has been said, I know some Persons will object, that our
Ministers are unedifying Preachers, for they cannot profit by their Sermons.
Therefore I shall endeavor to give these Men full satisfaction; and I doubt
not to demonstrate, that they may profit by our Sermons, if it be not their own
fault.

We are all agreed, that the Scriptures contain all things necessary to
Salvation; and therefore when they are rightly opened and duly applied in a
Sermon, so that the hearers improve in Christian Knowledge, or in Faith, or in
well-doing, then they profit by that Sermon. Now if any Man do not improve in
these by the help of our Sermons, the fault must be, either in the Matter of
the Sermon, or in the manner of it.

And as for the former of these, I can scarce think, that any Dissenter will
except against our Sermons upon that account; they being taken out of the
Scriptures, which were never better opened and applied, than in our Sermons. I
am sure, all heavenly truths are faithfully declared in them. Matters of
Controversy are rarely handled in our Pulpits; for the drift of our Preachers
is to make the People good. They resolve Cases of Conscience, and press the
motives to believe, and the arguments to convince Men of their duty. They
condemn all Vices, recommend all Virtues, and apply the Promises and
Threatenings of the Gospel. And if Men cannot profit where such things are
constantly well managed; I am sure the fault does not lie in the Matter of the
Sermons, but somewhere else.

If some say, that the Matter is good, but the manner is such, that they cannot
reap the like benefit by them, as by the Non-Conformists Preaching; I answer,
that the fault must then lie, either in the Composition or the Delivery. First,
as to the Composition, I am confident, that never did Men more endeavor after
clear method and plain Language, than our Preachers now do. If it be objected,
that they do not keep the old method of Doctrine, Reason and Use; I answer,
that they always choose it, when it is natural: but the ancient Doctors never
observed any constant Rule; and yet the People profited much more, than they do
now. Secondly, as to the Delivery, if it be objected that our Preachers are not
vehement enough; I answer, that they are, when the Matter requires it; but
vehemence loses it is effect, if it be spent upon all things alike. Vehemence
does not consist in the strength of voice, nor yet in that heat of temper,
which makes some Men speak earnestly, when they are not so deeply affected, as
some of cooler tempers are. Sedate Men may instruct and move by the help of
serious consideration; and those affections that are raised without it, are
little worth. But neither all your Men, nor all ours, have the same voice or
the same temper; and therefore this can be no more hindrance to Edification
among us, than among you. If reading of Sermons be objected, I answer, that
some of our Preachers use no notes in the Pulpit, others read but little; and
if a Man will but turn his head another way, and not look upon the Preacher, a
Sermon that is read altogether, will sound as well, as if it were pronounced
without book. If reading make a thing unprofitable; the Bible, when it is read,
must be unprofitable, and it must be got without book to make it Edifying.
Besides, some famous Preachers of your own read every word; and therefore you
may profit by ours as well as by them.

But I fear, that when Men complain they cannot profit by our Sermons, they
mean nothing, but that our Preachers do not move their affections, as the
Non-Conformists do. To this I could say much, but it will be sufficient to
mention only three things. 1. Your Men and ours have several Talents, some for
informing the judgment, others for moving the affections, and others for both.
All your Men do not move you alike; and yet you make such account of all, that
you think it a very disorderly thing for People to run from their own to
another Minister (though of the same way) merely to have the affections more
moved. Because, 2. It is far from profiting by Sermons, to be tickled for a
while and never to grow the better for them. 3. The chief thing is this, that
affections raised merely by the earnestness of the Preacher, are nothing
comparable to those, which we raise by consideration and reflection upon what
we have heard. And these affections our Sermons will certainly raise, if you
will take a little pains with your selves, and lay them close to your
Consciences.

Now since our Sermons cannot be blamed; I pray, consider where the fault must
lie, if you cannot profit by them. I beseech you, in the fear of God, by whose
Word we must one day be all judged, to consider impartially, and ask your
Consciences such Questions as these. 1. Had you not some prejudice against the
Minister you came to hear, either for his Conformity, or his strictness in it,
and the like? If you had; such prejudices bar the heart so strongly against the
most excellent instructions, that a Man will not profit by them. 2. Did you not
come to Church but once or twice, and then conclude too hastily, that there was
no good to be gotten there? and were you not willing to have this excuse for
absenting your self wholly from it? Had you attended much, perhaps you had
never left it. Try again for some time; and when you are acquainted with your
Minister's method and style and way of reasoning, his Sermons may be clear,
easy and awakening to you. The Scriptures themselves are obscure to the best of
us, till we are acquainted with them; and if they had been treated, as our
Sermons are, (I mean, rejected because they are not presently understood) they
had been thrown away long since as unprofitable. 3. Did you not leave the
Church, because, when you came, the Minister happened to Treat of a Subject
cross to your opinion? Hasty persons fling away from those that contradict
them; but had you had patience, you might have been profited and convinced by
such Discourses. 4. Was not the Minister, when you chanced to go to Church,
treating of some distastful Subject, which you love not to hear of? Was it not
Schism, or Disobedience to Governors? It is certain there are such sins, which
are very dangerous, and he ought to Treat of them some time or other; and if he
Preach of Unity and Obedience, may not you profit by it?

I doubt you have heard some of your own Ministers speak harder words of
Conformity and Conformists, than you would have had them, and you fancy you can
profit even by those Sermons; why then should you leave our Ministers, because
they press some duties more strictly than you like? Do not many of your own way
complain of their unprofitableness under your own Ministers, which arises
perhaps from a natural dullness? and will not prejudice, passion, and
disaffection to the way of worship, or to any Christian Doctrine, hinder
profiting much more than natural indisposition? So that if you complain of
deadness and unprofitableness under our Ministry, it is no more than many do
under your own. You should not rashly conclude our Ministry to be Unedifying,
but rather suspect your selves to be guilty.

Those also who fancy, that though they can profit something by our Ministry, yet
they can profit more by others, ought to consider the same things, and ask
their own consciences the same questions. Does not this conceit arise from the
forementioned causes? Are you not more earnestly pressed in our Congregations
to be thoroughly good, than in those where you think you profit more? This I
must say, that if you do not grow more holy in all respects, you do but deceive
your selves with an opinion of profiting more by the Nonconforming Ministry
than by ours. If you would attend at our Churches, you need not go any whither
else for true Edification. There is no end of seeking better entertainment of
the fancy; and the old Non-Conformists thought this a dangerous principle, that
Men must go where they can profit most. And because the opinion of a famous Man
of your own may prevail with you more than ours, I Will tell you what Mr.
Hildersham says of Men's leaving their own Pastors to hear others, Lect. 58.
upon John 4.

First he says, It is the ordinance of God that every Pastor should have his
own Flock to attend, and every one of God's People should have a Pastor of his
own to depend upon. Now they who dwell next together, should be of the same
Congregation. And if thy own Pastor be a Man whose gift is approved by God's
Church, and one who is conscionable in his place, and of unblamable life; though
his gifts be far inferior to some others, yet take heed thou leave him not at
any time with contempt of his Ministry, saying, I cannot profit by him. For a
Man may be a true Minister, though his gifts be far inferior to many others. And
you are bound to Love him and Reverence him, and thank God for him. And
doubtless thou may profit by him, if the fault be not in thy self. Nay,
there is never a Minister, that is of the most excellent gifts (if he have a
godly heart,) but he can truly say, he never heard any faithful Minister in his
life, that was so mean, but he could discern some gift in him, that was wanting
in himself, and could profit by him. The fruit and profit that is to be
received from the Ministry, depends not only, nor chiefly, upon the gifts of
the Man that Preaches, but upon the blessing that God is pleased to give unto
his own ordinance. And God does often give a greater blessing to weaker, than to
stronger means. And consider, the fault may be rather in thy self than in thy
Teacher, that thou can not profit. And indeed how is it possible thou
shoud'st profit by his Ministry, if thou come with prejudice, without any
Reverence, and delight unto it? Some follow another pastor because of his human
gifts, some only for varieties sake; some because they show more Zeal in their
voice and gesture, and phrase of speech, and manner of delivery; though (happily)
the Doctrine it self be nothing so wholesome, as the Doctrine of their own Pastor
is. But he only makes right use of the benefit of hearing such as have more
excellent gifts than his own Pastor, as learns thereby to like his own Pastor
the better, and to profit more by him; As they use Physic well, whose appetite
is amended, and who are by it made able to relish and like their ordinary food
the better. These are his words who was of such note heretofore among
Non-Conformists; and how come you to differ so much from the best of your own
way in former days? The same Author speaking of the partial estimation of
Ministers, says, this factious disposition in the hearers of God's Word has
in all Ages been the cause of much confusion in the Church of God, and greatly
hindered the fruit of the Gospel of Christ, and made them incapable of profit by
the word. Lect. 66.

O that you would ponder such profitable instructions! which were said on
purpose to check that, which is since grown the prevailing humor. Yes, will
some say, we might be persuaded to hear your Preachers constantly, but you can
never justify the compelling us to it. But, says Mr. Hildersham, Lect. 52. it
is certain, that where there is a good Ministry established, the Magistrate may
and ought to compel all his Subjects to come and hear; notwithstanding all
pretense of their Conscience to the contrary.

In short, a Sermon is then profitable, when it strengthens faith and promotes
holiness; but the best Sermon in the world, though indicted by the Spirit of God,
will not profit, unless Men will attend without prejudice, passion, partiality,
conceit and spiritual pride; and unless they will impartially consider those
things, which are contrary to their present sense; for want of which,
multitudes did not profit by our Savior's Sermons, but were rather more
exasperated by them. Consider, I beseech you, whether this be not your case;
and submit unto what shall appear to be reason, after you have weighed the
matter impartially. This I hope will bring you to Church; where if you do not
presently find such profit, as is promised, you may conclude in Mr.
Hildersham's words; First, either you have not sought it aright, not with
earnestness, or not with a good heart: Or Secondly, if you have, and do not
find it at first; yet you shall hereafter, if you seek it here with an honest
heart.

You would profit more by Sermons, if you would observe some Rules delivered by
the same Author, Lect. 26. which now, alas! are generally neglected. One is,
that at your coming into the Congregation, and during the whole time of your
abode there, you would behave your selves reverently. For an awful sense of
God's presence would be an excellent preparation to receive benefit by his
Service. Another Rule is, That we must all come to the beginning of God's
public Worship, and tarry till all be done. Yea, it is the duty of God's
People, says he, to be in God's House before the beginning; for it becomes
them to wait for the Minister of God, and not to let him wait for them. For he
shows, that Men may profit by all parts of the Service; for (says he) as he
that is away from any part of the Sermon, shall profit the less by that which
he does hear: so he' that is away from any part of the Divine Service, gets the
less good by that at which he is present. Nay, he says, Lect. 28. though we
could receive no profit by the exercises used in our Assemblies, yet we must be
present at them all, to do our homage unto God; and show the Reverent Respect
we have to his Ordinances. A Third Rule is, that we ought to join with the
Congregation in all the parts of God's Worship. For it is comely, that all
things in God's Service should be done in good order, as if the whole
Congregation were but one Man. And in several places he reproves with a great
deal of zeal, Men's great carelessness in this. A Fourth Rule is, that we ought
to teach our Children and Servants to show Reverence to the Sanctuary and
public Worship of God. For God hates profaness even in Children; and contempt
done by any may bring God's Curse upon all. And certainly, says he, among
other causes of the Plague, and other Judgments of God upon the Land, this is
not the least, that God's public Worship is performed among us with so little
Reverence and Devotion as it is.

But I will transcribe no more; only I shall earnestly desire two things.
First, that you would consider seriously, how you would have liked what I have
transcribed from Mr. Hildersham, if one of our Men had Preached it; especially
if he added, that for the Reverence of God's public Worship, care should be
taken, that the place where the Congregation Assembleth, may be decent and
comely; and that it is a foul sin and contempt of God's house, to be careless
about the Neatness of it. If you would have thought it unprofitable; then
consider, why such things as please out of one Man's mouth, should displease
out of another's. Is it not manifest, that partiality makes you not profit by
our Sermons? Or if you could not like such Discourses, either from
Non-Conformists, or our Ministers; then are you not mistaken about profiting by
Sermons, when you think those discourses unprofitable, which sober Men of all
sides have thought necessary? For Mr. Hildersham says, Profaneness and Atheism
has made us too void of all care in beautifying the house of God.

Secondly, If you think such a Sermon profitable, consider whether you have
learnt so much out of Scripture, as to study and observe those Rules. Do you,
for instance, pay Reverence to God's house, and come at the beginning of
Service, and stand up and kneel with the Congregation, etc? If you do not, then
the fault is not in our Sermons, that you do not profit; for you do not profit
by the Scriptures themselves, which plainly teach these things.

To conclude, if we have all things necessary to the building us up in our most
Holy Faith, in the Communion of the Church; it will be but a poor excuse for
our Dividing from it, that we hoped to be better Edified: when we had no
encouragement at all to hope it, as long as we continued in the state of
Separation upon this Pretense. For it is the Blessing of God alone, and not any
Man's Skill in dispensing them, that can make the word and ordinances any way
beneficial to us. With the help of his grace, those means of Instruction which
we undervalue most, may be profitable to our Salvation. Without it our Ears may
be tickled, and our Fancies pleasantly entertained for the time; but we cannot
be truly Edified by the most fluent and popular Tongue, or the most melting and
pathetical Expressions in the World.

CHAP. XI. The pretense of it is being against one's Conscience to join with the
Church of England, Answered.
HAving Answered the most considerable Objections against our Communion, I am
now to deal with such Persons as separate from us, though they have nothing to
object against us; such as pretend that they are not satisfied in our way, that
it is against their Conscience to join with us, or that they doubt of the
lawfulness of our Communion, or at least they scruple it. But I shall show,
that these excuses are utterly insignificant; and that they cannot escape the
wrath of God, who commit a sin, and think to cover it by pretending Conscience
for it.

But before I enter upon these Matters, I shall lay down the Principles I mean
to proceed upon, by treating distinctly on these Five Heads. 1. Of the Nature
of Conscience. 2. Of the Rule of Conscience. 3. Of the Power of Human Laws to
oblige the Conscience. And particularly, 4. In the instances of
Church Communion. 5. Of the Authority of Conscience; or how far a Man is
obliged to be guided by it in his actions.

I. Then, to find out the Nature of Conscience, let us consider what every Man
does really mean by that word, when he has occasion to use it. Now as to this,
I observe, First, that a Man never speaks of his Conscience, but with respect
to his own actions. We do not, for instance, make it a point of Conscience,
whether a thing be true or false, or whether an accident be prosperous or
unfortunate, or whether another Man has done well or ill. These things indeed
may please or trouble us; but our Conscience is affected only with that, which
is willingly done or left undone by us, or which we may do, or may forbear.
Secondly, We never use the Word Conscience about our actions, but only so far
as those actions are to be directed by some Law or Rule; with which if they
agree, they are good, and if they disagree, they are evil. Thirdly, Our
actions, as we concern our Conscience in them, are either already done, or not
already done. But whether they are done or not done, whether past or future,
they are either commanded by God, and so they are Duties; or forbidden by God,
and so they are Sins; or neither commanded nor forbidden, and so they are
indifferent actions. Our actions, I say, do not touch our Conscience, but as
they fall under these considerations; and in all these respects we mean the
same thing by Conscience. For,

First, If the action be not already done, we think it either commanded by God,
and say, we are bound in Conscience, or think it our duty to do it; or
forbidden by God, and say, it is against our Conscience, or we think it a sin
to do it; or else we think it is indifferent, and say, we may do it with a safe
Conscience, that is, we believe the action may be done without transgressing
any Law of God. This is undeniably every Man's meaning, when he talks of
Conscience as to actions, that are not yet done. Secondly, If we speak of our
actions, that are done and past, saying, my Conscience bears me witness, or I
am satisfied or troubled in Conscience for doing, what I have done; we mean
nothing more than this, that reflecting upon our own actions, we find, that we
have either done, as we are convinced we ought to do, and this is a
satisfaction to us; or not done, as we ought to do, and the remembrance of this
troubles us. But in all these Cases we mean the same thing by Conscience, to
wit, our Judgment and Persuasion concerning what we ought to do, or ought not
to do. Only in the first sort, Conscience is considered as the guide of actions
to be done; and in the second sort, as the witness of those that are already
done: but in both sorts Conscience is the same thing, to wit, the Judgment of a
Man's mind concerning the Morality of his Actions.

This is the true Notion of Conscience in general; but if we put Epithets to
it, and talk of a good or evil Conscience, a tender Conscience, or the like,
then it includes more than I am now concerned to give an account of.

II. I proceed to the Rule of Conscience. It appears by what I have said, that
Conscience must always have a Rule to follow. For, since Conscience is a Man's
judgment about actions as good, or bad, or indifferent; it is certain, a Man
must have some measure, by applying which, he may judge of what sort the action
is. This Measure is the Rule of Conscience, and Conscience is no farther safe,
than as it follows that Rule. Now this Measure or Rule of Conscience can be
nothing else but the Law of God; because nothing can be a Duty, or Sin, but
what is commanded or forbidden by God's Law; and that thing only is
indifferent, which his Law neither commands nor forbids.

Now by the Law of God, which is the Rule of Conscience, I mean God's Will for
the Government of Men's actions; whether declared by Nature, or Revelation. By
the Law of Nature I mean those Principles of Good and Evil, just and unjust,
which God has written in our minds, and which every Man is naturally convinced
of. Some things are eternally Good, as to Worship God, etc. and we know them to
be our Duty; others are eternally Evil, and we know them to be Sins, by the
light of Reason; and the Apostle says, the Gentiles had this Law written in
their hearts. But Christians have the Law of Revelation too contained in the
Scriptures; by which God does not make void the Law of Nature, but declare it is
Precepts more certainly and accurately, with greater strength, and greater
rewards and punishments, than before. By this also he has perfected the Law of
Nature, and obliged us to higher instances of Virtue, and added some positive
Laws; as for instance, to believe in Christ, to pray to God in Christ's Name,
to be Baptized and partake of the Lord's Supper.

Thus then the Natural and Revealed Law of God is the great Rule of Conscience.
Only we must remember, that by the Law of Nature is to be understood, not only
the chief and general heads of it, but also the necessary deductions from these
heads; and by the Revealed Law is to be understood, not only express Commands
and Prohibitions, but also the necessary consequences of those commands and
prohibitions. So that whatever is by direct inference or parity of reason
commanded or forbidden, is a Duty or a Sin; though it be not commanded or
forbidden in the Letter of the Law. And if it be neither commanded nor
forbidden by the Letter of the Law, nor yet by inference or parity of reason;
the thing is indifferent, and we may do it, or let it alone, with a safe
Conscience.

III. In the third place I must consider the power of Human Laws to oblige the
Conscience; for in a secondary sense they are a part of the Rule of Conscience,
by virtue of, and in subordination to the Laws of God. This I shall explain in
four propositions.

First, It is most certain, that God's Law Commands us to obey the Laws of Men.
For all Society is founded in this Principal Law of Nature, that we must obey
our Governors in all honest and just things. Otherwise no State, City or
Family can subsist happily. And it is most evident, that God Commands us in
Scripture to Obey them, that have the Rule over us, and to be Subject not only
for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake. So that a Man is bound in duty to obey
Human Laws, and consequently they are a part of the Rule of Conscience.

Secondly, Human Laws do not bind the Conscience by any Virtue in themselves,
but merely by Virtue of God's Law, who has commanded us both by Nature and
Scripture, to obey our Superiors. Conscience is our judgment of our actions
according to God's Law, and has no Superior but God alone: but yet we are
bound in Conscience to obey Men, because therein we obey God.

Thirdly, Human Laws do no farther bind the Conscience, than as they are
agreeable to the Laws of God; so that when Men command any thing sinful, we
must not obey. For God has not given any Man power to alter his Laws, or impose
any thing inconsistent with them.

Fourthly, Though Human Laws, generally speaking, bind the Conscience; yet I do
not say, that every Human Law (though consistent with God's Law) does at all
times and in all cases, oblige every Man's Conscience to active obedience to
it, so as that he sins against God, if he transgress it. For then who could be
innocent? But First, where the Public or some private Person shall suffer
damage or inconvenience by our not observing the Law; or Secondly, where the
Manner of our not obeying it argues contempt of Authority, or sets an ill
example, there the transgression of a Human Law is sinful; and not in other
cases. So that there are many cases, in which a Man may transgress a purely
Human Law, and yet not be a sinner before God; provided, I say, there be no
contempt of Authority, or ill example in it; for either of these makes it a
sin. For this I insist upon, that God's Law and the public good require, that
Authority be held sacred; and therefore when Governors insist upon a thing,
though it be trifling or inconvenient, yet we must not even seem to contest the
matter with them, provided it be not sinful. For to affront their Authority, or
to encourage others by our example to do it, is a greater evil to the public,
than our obedience to an inconvenient Law can easily be.

IV. I shall now consider the power of Human Laws to oblige the Conscience in
the instance of Church Communion. And here I affirm, That every Man is bound in
Conscience to join with the Church established by Law in the place where he
lives, so long as that Church is a true sound part of the Catholic Church, and
nothing sinful is required as a condition of Communion with it. For I have
already shown, that Men are bound to obey Human Laws, that are not contrary to
the Laws of God; and therefore they must obey in Church Matters; unless it can
be showed, that God has forbidden Men to make Laws about Religion; which can
never be done.

But farther, I earnestly desire it may be well considered by Dissenters, that
we are all really bound by the Laws of Jesus Christ and the Nature of his
Religion, to preserve as much as in us lies, the Unity of the Church, which
consists not only in professing the same faith, but joining together in the
same worship. And therefore whoever breaks this Unity, does really transgress
the Laws of Jesus Christ, and is guilty of Schism, which is so much cautioned
against, and so highly condemned in Scripture.

Those therefore, who think they are no more bound to come to Church, than to
obey any common Act of Parliament, are greatly mistaken; because they break not
only the Law of Man, but the Law of God. For though all the circumstances of
Worship are Human Institutions, yet the Public Worship it self, under Public
Lawful Governors, is of Divine appointment; and no Man can renounce it without
sinning against Christ as well as Human Laws.

A Divine Law clothed with circumstances of Man's appointment, creates another
kind of obligation, than a Law, that commands a thing perfectly indifferent. In
the former case we must obey, because it is God's own Law; in the other we only
obey Man, because God has obliged us in general to obey our Superiors.

God commands every Subject to pay tribute to whom tribute is due: but Human
Authority determines, out of what goods, and in what proportion he must pay.
Now, because Human Authority interposes, if a Man can by fraud detain the
King's right, does he incur no other guilt, than breaking an Act of Parliament,
and being liable to penalties, if he be detected? Yes certainly; for Tribute
being enjoined by God's Law, the Man is unjust, and breaks God's Law; and his
willingness to suffer the penalties does not lessen his guilt. The Case is the
same as to Church-Vnity; for though Human Laws prescribe particular circumstances
and Forms of Worship: yet God's Laws oblige us to keep the Unity of the Church,
as much as to pay the King his due. And that Man, that paies his just debts by
such a method, as the Law of the Land declares to be unjust, may as well acquit
himself from knavery before God; as that Man, that chooses a way of public
worship in opposition to the Church-Laws, can acquit himself of Schism before
God. Nay, separation from the Church is so much against the Law of God, that
should Human Laws grant a Toleration, and call no Man to an account for
separation from the established Church; yet such a separation would still be a
Schism, and a Sin against God. For no Human Law can make that Lawful, which
God's Law has forbidden.

V. It remains, that I speak of the Authority of Conscience, or how far a Man
is obliged to be guided by his Conscience in his actions; that is, how far we
are obliged to act or not act, when we are convinced in our judgment, that the
action is commanded or forbidden by God. Now our judgment concerning what God
has commanded, or forbidden, or left indifferent, is either right or wrong. If
right, we are said to have a right Conscience; if wrong, we have an erroneous
Conscience. There is also a doubting Conscience, when we know not well how to
make any judgment at all; but of this I shall Treat in another place.

Now if our Conscience or judgment be right, that is, according to God's Law,
without doubt we are forever bound to act according to it; nor can we sin in
doing so, whatever the consequence be. But the great question is, what we must
do, when our Conscience is erroneous and mistaken; and to answer this, I lay
down three Rules, which I think, may give any Man satisfaction.

First, Where a Man is mistaken in his judgment, even in that case it is
always a sin to act against it. Though we take a sin for a duty, or a duty for a
sin: yet so long as we are thus persuaded, it will be a great crime to act
against this persuasion. Because by so doing we act against the best light we
have at present; and therefore our will is as wicked, as if it acted against a
true light. Nothing but Conscience can guide our actions; and though an eroneous
Conscience is a very bad and unsafe guide; yet still it is the only guide we
have: and if we may lawfully refuse to be guided by it in one instance, we may
with as much reason reject it is guidance in all. What is a wilful sin, or a sin
against knowledge, but acting otherwise, than we were convinced to be our duty?
Is not that Man thought sincere, that acts as he believes; and that Man an
hypocrite, that acts otherwise, whether his judgment be true or false? He, who
being under a mistake, acts contrary to his judgment, would certainly upon the
same temptation act contrary to it, were his judgment never so well informed.
And therefore his Will being as bad in the one case as in the other, he is
equally a sinner as to the Wilfulness of the Crime, though indeed in other
respects there will be a great difference in the cases. Should a Jew turn
Christian, or a Papist turn Protestant, while yet they believe their former
Religions to be true, we should all believe them to be great Villains and
Hypocrites; because they did it upon base principles, and in contradiction to
their judgments. Nay we should all think more favorably of a Protestant, that
being seduced by a cunning Papist, did really out of Conscience go over to the
Romanists, than of such Persons. All this put together shows, that no Man can
in any case act against his judgment, but he is guilty of sin in so doing.

Secondly, The mistake of a Man's judgment may be of such a nature, that as it
will be a sin to act against his judgment, so it will likewise be a sin to act
according to it. For that action is good and a duty, which God has commanded,
and that is a sin which he has forbidden. It Is not our Opinion, but his Law,
that makes things good or evil. And therefore we shall be forever obliged to do
some actions and forbear others, whatever our judgment be; because we cannot
alter the Nature of things. For if the Moral goodness or badness of actions
were to be measured by Men's opinions; then duty and sin would be the most
uncertain things in the world, and what is good or evil to day, would be the
contrary to morrow, as any Man's opinion alters. But such consequences are
intolerable; and therefore, though a Man does follow his judgment, yet he may be
guilty of sin (and be damned for it too) if his judgment lead him to act
against the Law of God.

But it must be observed, that I do not say, that every action according to a
mistaken judgment is sinful; but that a Man's mistake may be such, that it will
be a sin to act either against it, or according to it. For a Man may often
mistake, and yet not sin; provided his mistakes do not lead him to a breach of
God's Law. For First, if a Man believe a thing to be commanded by God, which is
neither commanded nor forbidden; as if he think himself obliged to Pray seven
or three times a day; he is certainly mistaken, because God has bound him up to
neither. And therefore, since God has not commanded the contrary, he may safely
act according to his mistake; nay, so long as his mistake continues, he is
bound to do so. Secondly, If a Man believe a thing to be forbidden by God,
which is neither commanded nor forbidden; as if he think that God has forbidden
him to play at Cards; in this case he may follow his false opinion without sin;
nay he is bound to follow it. Because, since God has not forbidden it, it is no
sin to follow his mistaken Conscience; but it is a sin to act against it. But
then in other cases, when a Man thinks that to be sinful or indifferent, which
God commands; or that to be Lawful or a Duty, which God forbids; here the
mistake is dangerous, and it is a sin to act against his judgment, or according
to it.

Thirdly therefore, for the untying this great difficulty, I say, That the
great thing to be attended to in this case of a Man's following a Mistaken
Judgment, is the faultiness or innocence of the mistake upon which he acts; for
according as this is, so will his guilt in acting according to it, be either
greater or less, or none at all. If the mistake be such, as an honest minded
Man might make; if he did his best to understand his duty, and wanted means to
know it better; then we think him innocent, and not properly guilty of any sin,
though the action is contrary to God's Law. For no Man is obliged to do more,
than what is in his power to do; and whatever a Man is not obliged to do, it is
no sin in him, if he do it not. Since he could not understand better, his
mistake and acting according to his mistake are not sinful.

The only point is this; whether the Man be to be blamed for his erroneous
Conscience, or no. If the error be not his own fault, he does not sin in
acting according to it: but if he had power and opportunities of informing his
Conscience better, and yet neglected so to do, though it was his duty; then the
Man sins, while he acts contrary to God's Law under the mistake; and his sin is
greater or less in proportion to his negligence. Thus you see, that God enables
all Men to do their duty; and that none lie under a necessity of sinning, but
those who wilfully embracing false Principles, fall into sin, whether they act
according to their Conscience, or against it.

Having now done with the Five Principles of my Discourse, I proceed to my
first intended business; that is, to speak to the Case of those that separate
from the Communion of the Church of England upon this pretense, That it is
against their Conscience to join with us in it. And that I may clear this
point, I shall do two things; First, I shall separate those who can plead
Conscience for their Nonconformity, from those that cannot; for a great many
that pretend Conscience, refuse Communion with us upon another Principle.
Secondly, I shall enquire, how far this Plea of Conscience, when truly made,
will justify any Dissenter, that continues in separation from the Church.

First then, that I may Distinguish the true Pretenders to Conscience from the
false ones, I shall lay down this proposition, that no Man can justly plead
Conscience for his separation from the Church of England, or say, that it is
against his Conscience to join in Communion with it, unless he is persuaded,
that he cannot Communicate with us without sinning against God in so doing. For
God's Law is the only Rule to judge, whether an action be a Duty or a Sin, or
indifferent; and Conscience is nothing else, but a Man's judgment of an action,
whether it be a Duty, or a Sin, or indifferent by that Rule. So that a Man
cannot be bound in Conscience to do or forbear any action, unless he is
persuaded, that God's Law has commanded or forbidden it; and therefore no Man
can justly plead Conscience for Nonconformity, unless he is persuaded, that
God's Law has forbidden him to join with us.

If it be said, that a Man, who does not think our Communion directly sinful,
may notwithstanding think it his duty to join constantly with others, for his
greater Edification, or the like cause; I answer, that my proposition still
holds, because he thinks, that he is bound by God's Law to join with others,
which Law he must not break by leaving them to join with us. Again, If it be
said, that a Man, who does not think our Communion unlawful, but only doubts of
the lawfulness of it, may justly plead Conscience for Nonconformity, so long
as his doubts remain; I answer, that if he thinks it a sin to do any thing with
a doubting Conscience, then he thinks, that our Communion is forbidden by God,
so long as his doubts remain: but if he does not think it a sin to act with a
doubting Conscience, then it cannot go against his Conscience to join with us.
So that my proposition remains true, that none can justly plead Conscience for
Nonconformity, but those who think, that they cannot join with us without sin.

Now since this proposition is so certainly true, how many Men's pretenses to
Conscience for their separating from us, are hereby cut off? For First, those
that separate, either because they have been disobliged by some Churchman, or
to please a Relation, or increase their Fortunes, or procure or regain a
Reputation, or for any other worldly consideration, cannot plead Conscience for
separation. Nor Secondly, can those Lay People, who are resolved to hear their
beloved Teachers in Conventicles, since they cannot hear them in our Churches,
and who would join with us, if we would suffer those Godly Men to Preach; nor
Thirdly, those who dislike Forms of Prayer, Ceremonies, etc. thinking them not
convenient, though they do not judge them to be sinful; nor Fourthly, those who
separate upon the account of Edification, or acquaintance with Persons of
another persuasion; or because many Godly Persons condemn our way; all these, I
say, cannot justly plead Conscience for their separation. Because neither
fancy, nor example can be the Rule of any Man's Conscience, but only the Law of
God: and therefore such Persons cannot justly plead Conscience, because they do
not think our Communion to be forbidden by God's Law. Nor Fifthly, can those
plead Conscience for their separation, who think that our Governors have
encroach'd too much upon Christian Liberty, and laid too much stress upon
indifferent things; for suppose the Governor's be faulty in it, yet the
Conscience of the Subject is not concerned, so long as the things commanded do
not interfere with any Law of God. Nor Sixthly, can those justly plead
Conscience for their separation, who can join with us sometimes both in Prayer
and the Lord's Supper; for if our Communion be sinful, with what Conscience do
they dare to join in it at all? and if it be lawful once, it is a duty always.

But leaving these false pretenders, I proceed to the case of those, that can
justly plead Conscience for their separation, or who think it a sin to join
with us; for I shall consider the case of those that plead a doubting
Conscience afterward, in a particular discourse.

Secondly therefore, I shall inquire how far this Plea of Conscience, when
truly made, will justify any Dissenter, that continues in separation from the
Church. For there are many, that say, they would join with us with all their
hearts, but they are really persuaded, they cannot do it without sin. For they
think, that it is against the command of Christ to use Forms of Prayer, the
Cross in Baptism, kneeling at the Sacrament, and the like. And surely, say
they, you would not have us join in these practices, which we verily believe to
be sins. They are so well satisfied in their separation upon these accounts,
that they think themselves safe, and that they are able to justify themselves
to God and all the world.

Now in answer to this, I grant, that if the things they except against, be
really forbidden by God, then they are not to be blamed; for then separation
from us is not a sin, but a duty. Nay, supposing that they think that to be
forbidden, which is not really forbidden; yet so long as they think so, they
cannot act against their mistaken Conscience without sin. But then the point we
stand upon is this, that our Governors do require nothing that is forbidden by
God; and therefore their thinking our Communion unlawful will not acquit them
from being guilty of sin before God.

I am not now to answer the particular objections against our establishments.
This has been sufficiently done already in the several foregoing Chapters. The
Point I am concerned in, is this, whether a Man's thinking our Communion to be
unlawful, when indeed it is not unlawful, will justify his separation from it:
and I answer, that a Man's false persuasion will not justify his breaking of
God's Law. So that if God's Law does command me to hold Communion with the
Church where I have no just cause to break it, my false persuasion will not
acquit me from sin before God, if I separate from it without just cause.

Though the truth of this appears from what I have said before, yet I shall
further confirm it by asking this question. When St. Paul thought himself bound
in duty to persecute Christians, was his persecution sinful, or no? Yes surely;
for he call's himself the greatest of sinners for that very reason. And
therefore a Man's thinking a thing to be a duty or lawful, will not acquit him
before God for doing that thing, if it be against God's Law. So that it
infinitely concerns all Dissenters to consider well, before they separate. For
Schism is a crying sin, and as vehemently spoken against by Christ, and his
Apostles, and the Fathers, as any sin whatever. Let Dissenters look to it, that
they be not guilty of it; for their false persuasion, that our Communion is
unlawful, will not make their separation to be no Schism.

This matter will appear a little more evident, if we put the case in another
instance, wherein we are not so nearly concerned. Suppose a Papist, that
heartily believes Popery to be the only true Religion, does in obedience to it
worship Images and the Host. This person would certainly abhor these practices,
did he think them to be Idolatrous; but he believes them to be necessary
duties. And yet we do all charge such Papists with Idolatry, though they disclaim
it, and profess they do no more than their duty, when they give divine worship
to such objects. And we charge them rightly in this; for if it be really
Idolatry by God's word to do so; then it will be Idolatry in any Man to do so,
let his opinion be what it will. For a Man's false opinion does not alter the
nature of things. Now the case is the same in the matter before us; for
causeless separation is as properly Schism, as worshipping a Creature is
Idolatry: and he is as much a Schismatic, who thinks it his duty to separate,
as he is an Idolater, who thinks it his duty to worship a Creature. A Man's
mistake, according to the greater or less culpability of it, will more or less
excuse him before God in both instances: but it cannot change the nature either
of Schism or Idolatry.

But it will be said; What shall a Man do? He cannot Conform with a safe
Conscience; and yet he sins, if he do not. I answer, he is to take all
imaginable care to rectify his mistakes, and then he may do his duty without
sinning against his Conscience. Now the only way of doing this, is by laying
aside Pride, Passion, Interest and all other Carnal prepossessions, and
endeavoring seriously and impartially to understand his duty; considering
without prejudice, what can be said on both sides, advising with the wisest
Men, and above all things seriously endeavoring to understand the Nature and
spirit of the Christian Religion, practicing all undoubted duties, and begging
God's Assistance for the Matters in question.

Well, but supposing a Man has done all this, and after all his endeavors is
persuaded that he cannot join with us without sin; what shall this Man do? This
is the great difficulty, and I have two things to say to it.

First, We do heartily wish, that this was the Case of our Dissenters; for then
I am persuaded, our scandalous divisions would presently be at an end. But
alas! we fear they have not done their duty in this Matter; that they have not
heartily endeavored to satisfy themselves. If they had; surely they should,
before they pronounced Conformity to be unlawful, be able to produce some one
plain Text to prove it so. For the Texts they produce are such, as had they in
the least examined them, could scarce have been wrested to such a sense. Nay,
the generality of Dissenters do not seem to have much consulted their own
Teachers in this affair. If they had, they would think better of our way than
they do. For the most eminent of their own Ministers are ready to declare, that
though some things may be inconvenient, yet a Lay-Person may lawfully join with
us in all things; nay, they themselves are ready upon occasion to join in all
the instances of Lay-Communion. In short, most of our Dissenters have taken up
their opinions hand over head, and scarce think it possible for them to be in
the wrong.

Show us a Man, that has no end to serve by Religion, but only to go to heaven,
and in the choice of his way is only concerned that it be the way that leads
him thither; that is wonderfully sollicitous about his duty, and will refuse no
pains to understand it; that in the midst of Church-divisions is modest, humble
and docible, and believes that he and his friends may be mistaken; that thinks
his Governors may be wiser than himself, and that every opinion, that he has
inconsiderately taken up, ought not to be maintained against Authority; a Man,
that where his duty to God seems to thwart his duty to Man, endeavors to be
truly informed; and to that end begs God's assistance, and uses the best helps
and guides he can, hears and reads the arguments on both sides, and is biased
neither way; I say, show us such a Man, and we readily grant, he has done his
best to satisfy himself. But then we must add, that we believe, such a Man will
soon think it, not only lawful, but his Duty also to Conform.

Secondly, If a Man has really done his best to satisfy his Conscience, and yet
thinks it a sin to Conform; though his separation be materially a Schism, yet he
is not formally guilty of it. For all those that commit Schism, are not equally
guilty of it, Those that separate to serve a turn, are horribly and inexcusably
guilty of Schism; and those that separate through such mistakes, as they might
have avoided if they had been careful, are very blameable, and are bound, as
they love their souls, to take more care of informing their Consciences, that
so they may leave their sin: but when God, who searches the hearts, knows that
a Man did his best, and had not means or opportunities of understanding better;
then though the Man commit Schism, yet he is innocent of it. And God, who judges
of Men by their inward sincerity, will impute it to his ignorance, and forgive
it at the last day; especially if this innocently mistaken Man be careful in
the following points.

First, that he be not obstinate, but ready to receive Conviction. Secondly,
That he separate no more, than he needs must; but comply in all those
instances, where he is satisfied he may do it with a safe Conscience. Thirdly,
That where he cannot comply, he patiently submit to the penalty of the Law;
neither exclaiming at his Governors or the Magistrates, nor using illegal
means to get more liberty, but living as a quiet and peaceable Subject.
Fourthly, That he do not censure those of another persuasion, but show himself
a good Neighbor and friendly to them. Whoever observes these things, though he
dissent from us, I shall be loath to censure him as an ill Man, ill Subject, or
ill Christian.

But then all that I have said, does no more justify or lessen the sin of
Schism, than the sin of Idolatry; for the case is the same in both, whether the
Man be a deluded Dissenter, or a deluded Papist. And therefore, notwithstanding
all that may be said concerning the innocence or excusableness of some Men's
mistakes about these matters; yet nevertheless, it infinitely concerns every
Person, to have a care how he be engaged either in the one or the other.

To conclude; I have shown how absolutely necessary it is, that every Man should
endeavor to inform himself aright, before he disobey his Governors or
separate from the Church; and that though something in our worship be really
against his Conscience, yet separation may be a great sin, if a Man should
prove to be mistaken in his Notions. And therefore every Dissenter ought
presently to set about the true informing of his judgment, for fear he live in
a grievous sin.

Let him not satisfy himself with frivolous pretenses. For though we agree in the
rule of faith and manners; yet Schism is a dreadful sin, and a Man may be
damned for that as certainly, as for heresy or drunkenness. Sure I am, the
ancient Fathers thought so. What if the points of Conformity be matters of
dispute? Who made them so? The Church of England would have been well pleased,
if these Controversies had never been. We think a Man may be a very good
Christian and go to heaven, that is not able to defend our Ceremonies, etc. but
he that separates upon the account of them, is bound at the peril of his own
Salvation, to use the best means he can, to be satisfied about them.

To those that pretend, that these are subtle points above their capacity, I
answer, that since they have understanding enough to find fault and separate,
they ought to have honesty enough to seek satisfaction; which is all that we
desire of them: otherwise they will never be able to answer to God or Man for
the Mischiefs of Separation.

We are bound, especially in this case, to prove all things, and hold fast that
which is good. For no Man can disobey his Superiors without sin, unless after
he has used his best endeavors, he finds their commands inconsistent with his
duty to God. For a Man to disobey till he has done this, is an unwarrantable
thing; and in the Case I now speak of, it is no less than the sin of Formal
Criminal Schism.

CHAP. XII. The pretense of a Doubting Conscience Answered.
I Come now to the Case of those, who separate, because they doubt, whether
they may lawfully Communicate with us or no; and who fear they should sin in
doing any thing with a doubting Conscience. To this I might answer from the
former Chapter; that if Communion with our Church be a Duty, no Man's doubts
concerning the lawfulness of it, will justify his separation from it. For if a
Man's settled Persuasion, that an action is unlawful, will not justify his
omission of it, supposing that God commands it; much less will his bare doubt
excuse him.

But because this answer seems rather to cut the knot, than to unty it, I shall
particularly examine this Plea of a doubting Conscience, by giving an account,
First, Of the nature of a doubting Conscience. Secondly, Of the Rule of it.
Thirdly, Of the Power that Human Laws have over it. Fourthly, Of its Authority,
i. e. whether at all, or how far a Man is obliged by it.

I. In speaking of the Nature of a doubting Conscience I shall Treat, 1. Of
doubting in General. 2. Of such doubts as affect the Conscience. 3. Of the
difference between the doubting and the scrupulous Conscience.

First Then, A Man is said to doubt, when he cannot determine, whether the thing
he is considering, be so, or be not so; he thinks the question probable on both
sides, but cannot fix upon either. So that his mind is like a balance, when by
reason of equal weight in both Scales, neither Scale comes to the bottom. It Is
true, a Man may lean more to one side of the question, than the other; and yet
be doubtful still; just as one Scale may have more Weight than the other, while
yet that Weight is not able to carry it perfectly down: but when there is so
much more evidence on one side, that the mind can determine it self, then the
Man doubts no longer, but is said to be Persuaded; as the Balance is said to
be fixed, when there is Weight enough to carry it down on either side. It Is
true, a Man has not always the same degree of Persuasion. Sometimes the
evidence is so strong, that he entirely assents without the least doubtfulness.
This is Assurance or full Persuasion. At other times the evidence may gain an
Assent, but not such as excludes all doubts of the contrary. This kind of
Assent is called Opinion or probable Persuasion. So a greater or less Weight
carries down the Scale with greater or less force and briskness. But still, in
both these Cases, the Mind is determined, the Balance is turned, and the doubt
is ended; though perhaps the Man is not perfectly free from all scruple about
that thing.

Secondly then, I shall Treat of such doubts as affect the Conscience. A Man
may doubt of any thing, which he has to consider, but every doubt does not
affect the Conscience. As a Man's Conscience is affected with nothing but his
own actions, so his doubts do not affect his Conscience any farther, than they
concern his own actions. And as his Conscience is not affected with his own
actions any otherwise, than as they are commanded or forbidden by God's Laws;
so his doubts concerning them affect his Conscience no otherwise, than as God's
Law may be transgressed in them. So that, where a Man apprehends no danger of
transgressing God's Law, his doubts about an action do not concern his
Conscience.

Thirdly, From what has been said it is easy to perceive the difference between
the doubting and the Scrupulous Conscience. Every body knows, that when we
speak of a Resolved Conscience, we mean, that the Man is satisfied, whether the
action be a Duty or a Sin, or indifferent. Now the Scrupulous Conscience is a
Conscience in some measure Resolved, but yet accompanied with a fear of acting
according to that resolution. The Person is convinced, that the thing is fit to
be done, and has nothing considerable to object, nor any new reasons to
unsettle him; but yet when he comes to act, he is troubled with unaccountable
fears. But the doubting Conscience is quite different, and is nothing else but
the suspense of a Man's judgment in a question about the Duty or the Sin of an
Action, occasioned by the equal (or near equal) probabilities on both sides.
The resolved Conscience acts cheerfully; the scrupulous Conscience acts
fearfully: but the doubtful Conscience is not satisfied at all, because of the
equal appearances of reason on both sides. The Man that has either a resolved
or a scrupulous Conscience, passes a judgment on the thing: but a doubting
Conscience passes no judgment at all; for then it would no longer be a doubting
Conscience.

After all it must be acknowledged, that truly and strictly speaking, a
doubting Conscience is no Conscience at all. For Conscience, as we have often
said, is a Man's mind making a judgment about the morality of his actions: but
a doubting Conscience wavers, and is a Man's mind making no judgment; and
therefore it is not properly a Conscience. And we may as well say an unresolved
resolution, as a Doubting Conscience. However, to comply with Custom, I follow
the Common way of speaking.

II. I proceed now to the Rule of a doubting Conscience; in speaking of which I
shall show, First, what kind of Rule Conscience needs in a doubtful case.
Secondly, what that Rule is.

First then, by the Rule of a doubting Conscience I mean, not a Rule by which a
Man may resolve all doubts concerning every point, so as to doubt no longer
about it; but a Rule, by which he may determine in every doubtful case, so as
to act with a safe Conscience, whether he can get rid of his doubts or not. A
Rule, that determines, not whether a thing in general be lawful, or no; but
what I am to do, where I doubt of the Lawfulness of the thing. For instance,
the Rule of a doubting Conscience is not to determine, whether is be Lawful to
play at Cards; but what I must do, if I doubt of the Lawfulness of playing at
Cards.

Before a Man acts, he ought to be satisfied, that that side of the action, he
determines himself to, is, all things considered, the more fit and reasonable
to be chosen: but it is absurd to say, that no Man must act, till he is able to
unty all the difficulties, and resolve all the doubts, that may have been
started about the Action. For this in many cases is utterly impossible; the
Person may not have sufficient time or means for the doing it. And in such a
case, a man cannot possibly do better, than to get satisfied by reason and
advice, what is fittest for him to do in the present circumstances, and to
proceed accordingly. And this is certainly the the usual way of proceeding
among the most conscientious men. Thus have I shown what kind of Rule
Conscience needs in a doubtful case.

Secondly therefore, I shall show what that Rule is, first by giving an account
of the general Rule it self; and then secondly, by applying it to the several
Heads of doubtful cases.

1. First then, since a Man never doubts but upon equal appearances of Reason
on both sides, it is plain, that nothing ought to turn the Balance, but
greater weight of Reason; and therefore the Rule of a doubting Conscience is,
That in all doubtful cases, that side which, all things considered, does appear
more reasonable, is to be chosen.

Some indeed say, that in doubtful cases the safer side is to be chosen: but I
do purposely avoid the expressing it so, because the Rule is true or false,
according as the word safer side is expounded.

For First, if by safer side we mean that side which is more free from danger
of sinning, I think the Rule will prove rather a Snare, than a Guide to a Man's
mind. For if this Rule be true, most Persons do transgress it every day; nay
the best of men do frequently expose themselves to such dangers of sinning, as
they might have avoided; and this without any reproach from their own
Conscience, or any censure from other men. He that avoids all entertainments,
is certainly more free from the danger of intemperance, than others are; and
yet when occasion serves, no Man makes any great scruple of going to them. We
are not commanded to avoid all possible danger of sinning; but only to avoid
all sin, when we are in danger. For otherwise, he that would be Religious, must
forsake all worldly business, and retire to a Cloister.

But to come more strictly to the point; there are many cases, in which the
most honest Person does not think he is obliged to determine himself to that
side of the action, on which he apprehends there is least danger of sinning.
For First, greater probability will often turn the Balance against the greater
safety. Thus if a Man scruple eating Blood, and afterward by discoursing with
a Learned Person be satisfied, that it is far more probable that he may
Lawfully eat it, than that he is forbidden to eat it; I believe most men will
think, that he may eat it with a quiet Conscience. And yet it is certainly more
safe not to eat it; because many do question whether it be Lawful to do so, but
all men grant it may be Lawfully forborne. Secondly, greater temporal advantages
will have weight enough with a very honest Man to overbalance the greater
safety. Thus if after the strictest inquiry a Man be not satisfied, that he
owes a sum of Money, which another demands confidently and with great
appearances of Reason; there are equal probabilities on both sides. If he pay
the Money, perhaps his circumstances are such, that he wrongs his Wife and
Children; and if he refuse to pay it, perhaps he detains another Man's right
from him. In this case, since it is as probable that the demand is unjust, as
that it is just; I believe most men will say, that he ought not to prejudice
himself and his family, till it be either by Law adjudg'd, or he have more
convincing proofs, that he ought to pay it. It appears therefore, that any Man
(who is wise as well as good) may in many cases wave the safer for the more
Prudent side; and consequently it is not always a Rule to a doubting
Conscience to choose the safer side, or the side which is more free from danger
of sinning.

But Secondly, if by safer side we mean that which is freest from all dangers
and inconveniences of all kinds whatsoever, and does best serve all the
Spiritual and Temporal interests that a wise and good Man can propose; I freely
grant, that it is the only Rule to a doubting Conscience to follow the safer
side. For then the safer side is the more reasonable side, which, as I said
before, is in all doubtful cases to be chosen.

2. Having given an account of the general Rule of a doubting Conscience, I
come now in the Second place to make application of it to the several Heads of
doubtful cases. Now all doubts of Conscience are either single or double. It is
a single doubt, when a Man doubts on one side, but is satisfied on the other.
For instance, he doubts, whether it be Lawful to do the action, but is
satisfied he may Lawfully omit it; or he doubts whether he may Lawfully omit
it, but is satisfied he may Lawfully do it. It is a double doubt, when a Man
doubts on both sides; when he is at a loss what to do, because he fears he may
sin, whether he does the action or does it not.

First, as to the case of a single doubt, we may thus apply the General Rule.
When a Man doubts only on one side, it is more reasonable, if all other
Considerations be equal, to choose that side which he has no doubt of. In such
a case we must not do what we doubt of; for it is unreasonable to run the
risque of sinning, when a Man can without any inconveniency avoid it. If a Man
doubt, whether it be Lawful for a Christian to go to Law, and cannot positively
determine with himself, whether it be Lawful or Unlawful so to do; in this and
all other suchlike cases the Rule is plain, that while he doubts, it is more
reasonable to forbear; because he runs a hazard in venturing upon what he
doubts of, but he runs no hazard in forbearing. But then if there be other
Considerations to overbalance this Consideration of uncertainty; it will be
more reasonable to choose that side, which I did before doubt of. Nay it is our
Duty so to do; for if I doubt, I do by doubting own, that I cannot tell whether
the action be Lawful or Unlawful; and surely then the weight of pressing
Considerations ought to turn the Balance; otherwise I cannot answer to my self
or the World, for the consequences that may ensue. Thus if I am Guardian to an
Orphan, whose Estate is so entangled, that a Lawsuit is necessary for the
clearing it; I am obliged, notwithstanding my doubt, to secure his Right by
going to Law. To conclude; it is not only Lawful, but Advisable, to do that
which we doubt of, if a great good may be compassed, or a great evil may be
avoided by the doing of it.

Secondly, in the case of a double doubt, when a Man fears he may sin, whether
he do the action or does it not, it is in vain to say, he must get his doubt
removed; for perhaps that may be impossible through want of time or good Counsel.
He is therefore to follow the same Rule as in other doubtful Cases; that is to
say, he is to act as reasonably as he can: and if he do this, I am sure he
incurs no blame. But because the application of this General Rule is various,
according to many circumstances that may happen, therefore I shall comprise all
the varieties in these Four following Propositions.

1. If the sin we are afraid of, appear equal on both sides, we must do that,
which we doubt the least of; that is, we must do that which appears more
probable to be free from the danger of sin. 2. If we think there is equal
danger on both sides, we must do that which appears to be the less sin. 3. If
we think the one side more probable, and the other less sinful; we must act
according to the degree of the probability, or the sin. If there be much more
probability on the one side than on the other, and but small difference between
the sins; then we must act that which is more probable. But then, if the
consequences on one side, if a Man should happen to be mistaken, be so
terrible, that they overbalance all the probabilities on the other side; a
wise Man will act that, which sets him free from these consequences. Thus if a
Man be tried for his Life, and the Evidence against him be not so full as to
create a persuasion in the Jury that he is Guilty; in this case, they should
rather acquit him, notwithstanding some probabilities of his Guilt, than run
the hazard of doing Murder by condemning the innocent. 4. If a Man doubts
equally on both sides, and the sin appear equal on both sides; then his own
ease, or advantage, or reputation, or any other prudential inducements must
determine him to do the action he doubts about, or to let it alone. When all is
said, every Man in doubtful cases is left to his own discretion; and if he acts
according to the best Reason he has, he is not culpable, though he be mistaken in
his measures.

But to render these Rules about a double doubt more intelligible and more
useful, I shall give the Reader an instance of a Case, in which they are all
applied. The case is this,

Here is a Man, that thinks it his Duty to receive the Sacrament constantly, or
at least frequently; but on the other side, though no grievous sin lies upon his
Conscience unrepented of, yet by reason of his mistakes about the Nature and
Ends of the Lord's Supper, and the dispositions that fit a Man for it, he is
under great fears of his being unqualify'd for it. Now the question is, what
this Man, who after all his endeavors cannot get over these difficulties,
ought to do. For if he do not come to the Sacrament, he doubts he sins on that
account; if he do come, he doubts he approaches unworthily, and so sins upon
that account. Shall he receive the Sacrament doubting as he does? or shall he
forbear it doubting as he does?

Now a Man cannot resolve this question, but by applying the foregoing Rules
after this manner.

First, since the Man doubts, that he sins, whether he come to the Sacrament
or forbear; it must be considered, which side appears most likely to free him
from sin. Now I am confident, he will think it more reasonable to come meanly
prepared than customarily to abstain; because he is much more certain, that
it is his duty to frequent it, than that he is unprepared for it. Indeed were he
a debauched person, or had he been lately guilty of some notorious Sin, and
came to the Lord's Table with that sin unrepented of; he had reason to dread
unworthy receiving, as much as abstaining: but since the case is quite
otherwise, since he is mistaken while he thinks himself unworthy; certainly he
runs a greater danger by absenting himself, than by coming with his doubts
about him. Because his doubts of his unworthiness, being only surmises, cannot
possibly be so well grounded, as his doubts, that he sins by habitually
abstaining, which is expressly forbidden by God's Law.

Secondly, Though it can hardly be supposed in our case, yet let us suppose, that
the Man has as much reason to believe, that he is an unworthy receiver, if he
receive at all; as he has to believe, that it is a sin in him if he do not
receive; the question then is, which is the least sin, to receive unworthily
out of a sense of duty, or not to receive at all. For the least sin is to be
chosen, when he cannot avoid both. For my part I think, that a Man, who obeys
one known Law of God for Conscience sake, when he cannot do it without breaking
another law in the manner of performance; I say, I think that that man, though he
is not innocent, yet is far less guilty, than he who omits a known duty, and so
breaks a known Law of God for Conscience sake. Suppose two Men, who know
themselves to be unfit so much as to say their Prayers; one of these Men does
upon this account forbear all Prayers; the other dares not to forbear his usual
offices, though he believes he performs them sinfully. Now I dare say, that all
Men will think him the better Man, who says his Prayers; though both of them be
very faulty. Because whatever a Man's indisposition be, he is obliged to do his
duty as well as he can; and it is better to perform a duty after an ill manner,
than wholly to omit it. Since therefore the greater sin is to be avoided, when
a Man is under a necessity of committing one; it is more reasonable that a Man
should come to the Sacrament, doubting of his unworthiness, than that he should
habitually abstain from it.

If it be said, that he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself; 1 Cor. 11.29. and that there cannot be a greater
sin, than that which will actually damn a Man: I answer, that let the sin of
receiving unworthily be as damnable, as we can reasonably suppose it; yet the
sin of totally withdrawing from it, is much greater and more damnable. So that
if he who partakes unworthily, does eat and drink damnation to himself; he that
partakes not at all, is so far from mending the matter, that he does much
increase that damnation. And certainly, did Men seriously consider what a sin
it is to live without the Sacrament, and what dreadful consequences they bring
upon themselves hereby, they would not look upon it as so slight a matter to
neglect it: but what apprehensions soever they had of the sin and danger of
receiving unworthily, they would think it more sinful and more dangerous not to
receive at all.

Thirdly, Suppose the Man takes all opportunities of receiving the Sacrament,
though perhaps he is not often very well satisfied about his preparation: but
since his last receiving he finds he has lived more loosly than he was wont, or
he has been very lately guilty of some grievous sin; so that he thinks himself
unfit to receive at his next usual time. Upon this he is in a great perplexity;
for he thinks he has more reason to believe he sins, if he receives in these
circumstances, than if he forbears; because he is more certain that God forbids
him to receive unworthily, than he is certain, that God commands him to receive
upon every opportunity. But then if he be really bound to receive upon every
opportunity, he is sensible in that case, it is a greater sin to neglect this
duty, than to perform it unworthily, so long still as he performs it out of
Conscience. On one side he runs a greater danger of sinning; on the other, if
he be mistaken, he sins in a greater degree. What now is the Man to do in this
case.

I answer; First, It is very reasonable that he should forbear receiving, once
or twice, for his exercise of repentance and better preparation against another
opportunity. Because, since we have no reason to think that God has commanded
us to receive so many times a year, any more than that we should pray so many
times a day; we are not obliged by an express Law to receive upon every
opportunity: but there is an express law against receiving unworthily, and
therefore there is greater danger in doing so. So that the consideration of the
certain danger ought to over balance that of the greater sin; and the Man
ought rather to defer his receiving, than to receive in his present
circumstances. But Secondly, a Man must not habitually absent himself upon the
the account of unworthiness. For I have shown, that there is more danger of
sinning by not receiving at all, than by receiving unworthily; and there is a
much greater sin in wholly withdrawing, than in coming with never so great
fears of being unfit. And therefore he must receive frequently, though he be in
danger of doing it unworthily; rather than not receive at all.

Fourthly, if the Person think, that the danger of sinning and the sin it self
are equal, whether he receive or no; then he is to consider the inducements of
Prudence and Interest, and they are to turn the balance. And it is plain, that
it is better to receive than to forbear, upon those accounts. For besides the
temporal advantages of receiving, he reaps this Spiritual profit by it, viz.
that he takes the best method of growing more worthy, and curing his doubts;
whereas by absenting himself his doubts increase, and he is in great danger of
losing that sense of Religion, which he now has.

Thus have I shown how to apply all the Rules concerning a double doubt; and if
I have dwelt too long upon this subject, I hope the frequency and importance of
the case will excuse me.

III. Having settled the Notion and Rule of a Doubting Conscience, I come now in
the Third place to speak of the power of human Laws over a Doubting Conscience.
And my assertion is, that wherever lawful Authority has commanded an action,
that command is (generally speaking) a sufficient warrant for a Man to do that
action, though he doubts whether in it self it be lawful or no. That I may speak
clearly to this point, I shall, 1. premise some things. 2. show the grounds of
my assertion. 3. answer the Objections brought against it.

1. I premise Five things. First, That no Authority upon earth can oblige Men
to do what God forbids, or to forbear what God commands. Secondly, If a Man
thinks that thing, which his Governors oblige him to, is sinful; though he be
mistaken, he cannot obey them without sinning. But then, if he be mistaken, he
also sins in disobeying; if he be mistaken through his own fault. Thirdly, If a
Man doubt, whether the action enjoined by Authority be sinful or no; yet if he
think it unlawful to act against his private doubt, he cannot do that action
without sin. But then if this Notion of his be false (as I shall show it is) he
sins also in disobeying, if he be mistaken through his own fault. Fourthly, If a
Man has been so extremely careless in learning his duty, that he doubts of the
plainest matter; in such a case a Man is highly accountable for doing that
which contradicts the Law of God, though he did it purely in obedience to that
Authority which God has set over him, and purely in compliance with this true
principle, that in doubtful cases we must be guided by our Superiors. For
certainly, if a sinful thing be commanded, not only he that commands, but he
that obeys also, must answer for it, whether he do it doubtingly, or with a
persuasion of it is lawfulness. Only we must remember, First, that this is true
only in such cases where the Man might have known his duty, had he not been
careless; for if a Man be ignorant or doubtful, because he wanted means or
opportunities of informing himself, he is not guilty of sin before God, though he
break God's Law. Secondly, that when this case happens, the sin does not lie in
obeying his Superiors with a doubting conscience; but in his doing that, which
he would have known to be sinful, if he had been so careful as he should have
been. For obeying his Superiors, whether with a doubt or without one, is no
part of the sin. Fifthly I premise, that whatever the power of Superiors be
for the overruling a private doubt; it must not destroy the truth, or take
away the use of the foregoing Rules in the Case of a double Doubt. Because the
case of obeying Superiors, when we doubt of the Lawfulness of their commands,
is a double Doubt as properly as any other: and therefore, if it be two to one
more probable, that the command is unlawful, than that it is lawful, we must
not obey it by the first Rule. But then, though the Authority of Superiors alone
will not turn the Balance; yet there are usually such considerations of the
greater sin and more dreadful consequences of disobeying, as will outweigh all
the probabilities on the other side, and make it more reasonable to obey.
However, if the command be lawful, a man's false opinion that it is sinfiul,
will not excuse him; unless his mistake be such as he could not rectify.

These things being premised, the plain question is this; whether in the case
of a pure doubt about the lawfulness or unlawfulness of an action, where the
probabilities are on both sides pretty equal, and where likewise the Man
concerned has done all that he was obliged to do for the satisfying himself;
whether, I say, in this case the command of a lawful superior does not oblige
the Man to do that of which he doubts. I affirm, it does oblige him so to do;
and therefore,

2. I shall show the grounds of my assertion. And First, Modesty obliges us to
pay as much deference to the judgment of our Superiors, as this comes to. If a
doubt should arise about the lawfulness of any civil practice, we should
without any great difficulty be determined by the judgment of a few Learned,
Prudent and honest Persons, whom we think better able to judge of the case than
our selves; and does it not argue much selfconceit and great contempt of our
Superiors, to refuse the same respect to their judgment, whose business it is
to consult and command for the best?

Secondly, Bishop Sanderson and other Casuists agree, that in all disputed
cases, he that is in possession of the thing contended for, has the advantage
of the other, that contends with him, supposing all other things be equal.
Thus, if I am in possession of an Estate which another Claims, I cannot justly
be dispossessed, till the other Man's Title appears to be better than mine. Now
in our Case the Superior asserteth his right and commands; the Subject
questioneth his right, because he doubts whether the command be not sinful: but
since the superior is in possession of the Authority to command, the Subject
must by no means by his disobedience dispossess him of that Authority, till he
is convinced, that he has greater reason to disobey, than to obey. But this is
impossible, because the reasons are supposed equal on both sides.

Thirdly, Since in all doubtful Cases it is a common rule, that the safer side
is to be chosen, it is certain, that it is safer to obey than to disobey in a
doubtful case. For there is a plain Law of God that commands us to obey
Superiors in all lawful things; and if the command be unlawful, the only
hazard we run, is of transgressing some Law of God, which we did not know, and
which perhaps we were not bound, or had not means to know: but in a doubtful
case it is very uncertain, whether the Law of God forbid the thing or no; and
if the command be lawful, then we run the hazard of transgressing a plain Law
which we cannot but know, and which is of the greatest importance to Mankind.

Fourthly, Since in all cases we must do as we would have others do to us, let
us consider whether we should not think it unreasonable for our own inferiors
to contradict our Rules upon pretense of doubting about their being lawful. If
a Parent should command his Son to sit uncovered before him, or a Master
command his Servant to dress a Dinner on the Lord's Day, and either of them
should refuse to do so, because he is not satisfied that the thing is lawful;
would not a Parent or a Master say, I am to judge what is fit for you to do,
and you must not think by your foolish doubts and scruples to control my
commands? I dare say, most Men will think this a very just reply. And if so,
then our Superior also is to be obeyed in purely doubtful cases,
notwithstanding our doubt. And if we think otherwise, it is because our own
Liberty and Interest are concerned, and we are prejudiced in favor of our
selves.

Fifthly, If Superiors may not determine in merely doubtful cases, their
authority signifies nothing, nor can it secure the public happiness. For there
is no indifferent thing, but some Person or other will doubt whether it be
lawful; and if such a doubt be a just reason to deny obedience, what will be
the consequence of such a principle, but perpetual confusions? For instance, if
a Prince make War, and every ignorant and unexperienced Subject may lawfully
withdraw his assistance, in case he doubts whether that War be lawful or no;
what a sad case would that Kingdom be in? But these consequences are
intolerable; and therefore the principle from whence they flow, must needs be
thought intolerable also.

3. Having thus proved my assertion, I come now to answer the arguments that
are brought on the other side.

First then they say, if the Superior must determine in every doubtful case,
the inferior must often commit most grievous sins. As for instance; if a Man
doubt whether Jehovah or Baal be the true God, and the Ruler command that Baal
should be worshipped, the Man must renounce the true God. But this is no
argument against us; for I have already said, that neither doubtfulness nor
ignorance will excuse an action that is plainly sinful, though it be done in
obedience to Authority; and I only assert, that the Superior is to overruled,
when we doubt equally, whether an action be lawful or no, and have done our
best to satisfy our selves.

Nay, this argument concludes as strongly against them, as against us. For if a
Man doubt, whether Jehovah or Baal be the true God, and the Ruler command that
Jehovah only should be worshipped; what advice would they give the doubting
Man? If they say, he must obey the Ruler, they give up the cause; and if he
must not obey the Ruler, he must worship Baal, and so be guilty of Idolatry.

Secondly They say, that God has commanded us to obey our Superiors, not in
all things, but in those things only, which are not contrary to his Law. So
that when we are uncertain, whether the command be lawful, we are also
uncertain, whether we are bound to obey; and therefore it is no more our duty
to obey, than to disobey. But I answer, that I have already given many weighty
reasons, why we should rather obey than disobey, when we equally doubt whether
the command be lawful or no.

But Thirdly, the principal argument is drawn from St. Paul's words, He that
doubts is damned, if he eat, because he eats not of faith; for whatsoever
is not of faith, is sin; Romans 14.23. From whence they argue, that if it was a
sin to eat any food, though in it self lawful to be eaten, so long as they
doubted whether it was lawful or no; then by parity of reason it must be a sin
to do any other action, so long as we doubt of the lawfulness of it; and if so,
the Ruler's command will not make it lawful to do it. This is the great
argument, and I shall give it a full answer; only I think it needful to premise
a general account of the Text it self, before I take of the objection that is
drawn from it.

Now St. Paul discourses in this Chapter of the case of those Jewish
Christians, who were persuaded, or at least thought it most probable, that they
were bound to keep Moses's Laws concerning the observation of days and
difference of meats; whereas other Christians, who were better instructed, made
no scruple of eating any kind of food, though forbidden by the Law of Moses. If
it be said, that the second verse intimates their total abstinence from flesh,
and eating only herbs, which Moses's Law did not oblige them to; I answer (with
some Fathers) that they thinking the Law still in force, chose to eat only
herbs, that their way of living might pass rather for a Religious abstinence,
than a legal observance; and so the other Christians might not reproach them
for keeping the Law.

As for the word (...), which we translate he that doubts, it does as
properly signify he that makes a difference; and it is so used both in
Scripture and other Writers. And therefore the Text is thus to be rendered, he
that makes a difference (between meats) is damned or condemned if he eat (any
thing which he judges to be unclean) because he eats not of faith. This
rendering is put in the Margin of our Bibles, and is approved by most Latin
Expositors. The word faith also in this and the foregoing verse, does not
signify, in the large sense, a belief of the Christian Religion, but only a
Man's assent to the lawfulness of any particular action, that he takes in hand.
So that to have faith about an action, is to be persuaded that it is lawful;
and to do an action not of faith, is to do that which we have reason to think
is unlawful. And whereas St. Paul says, he is damned if he eat, we must
observe that he does not mean damnation in hell, but the condemnation of his
own Conscience; so that the sense is this, He that makes a difference between
meats, and yet eats, is condemned for it in his own Conscience; because he
does that which he apprehends to be sinful.

That Man will soon be satisfied of the truth of this interpretation, who
considers that St. Paul had been persuading the stronger Christians, who
thought it lawful to eat any sort of food, not to give scandal to the weak
Christians, who thought otherwise. And he thus concludes his advice; Have thou
faith, art thou satisfied that it is lawful to eat any sort of food? have it to
thy self before God, enjoy thy persuasion; but do not upon every occasion make
use of it, least thy weak Brother be emboldened by thy example to do that,
which he thinks to be unlawful. It Is true, happy is he that condemns not
himself in that which he allows, happy is he that does not do what he thinks
to be unlawful; but he that doubts, that makes a difference between meats,
is damned or condemned in his Conscience, if he eat what he thinks it is not
lawful to eat, because he eats not of faith, and is not satisfied that it is
lawful to eat it; and whatsoever is not of faith, whatsoever a Man thinks
unlawful, is sin to him that thinks it so.

Having thus given an account of the Text it self, I am now to consider the
objection, which is drawn from it, and which, as I have already said, is this;
If it was a sin to eat any food, though in it self lawful, so long as a Man
doubted, whether it was lawful or no; then by parity of reason it must be a sin
to do any other action, so long as we doubt of the lawfulness of it. But I
answer, that this Text is nothing to the purpose; for St. Paul here speaks not
of a Doubting Conscience, but of a Resolved Conscience only. For the Persons he
speaks of, were not wavering in their minds; but were persuaded that those
meats were unclean, because they thought the Law of Moses still in force. This
is clear from the 2, 5, and 14 verses of this Chapter; I know (says St. Paul)
and am persuaded, 'that there is nothing unclean of it self: but to him that
esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean.

If it be said, that the word doubts is used, and that to doubt of the
unlawfulness of an action, is quite another thing, than to be persuaded of it;
I answer, that the word may as properly be rendered, he that makes a difference
between meats, as he that doubts. But though the word doubts be retained, yet
it is undeniably plain that St. Paul speaks of a doubt strengthened with so
many probabilities, that it wanted but very little of a persuasion; or rather
it was a persuasion with some mixture of doubtfulness. If the Man was not fully
persuaded that it was a sin to eat, yet he thought it much more probable that
it was a sin, than that it was not. For he could not be condemned of his own
Conscience for eating, if he did not think his eating to be unlawful, and were
not in some degree persuaded of it.

Well, but the Apostle says, v. 5. One man esteems one day above another,
another man esteems every day alike: let every man be fully persuaded in his
own mind. From whence it is plain, that a Man must be persuaded that the action
is lawful, else he does not act with a safe Conscience. And is not that the
very same thing that is here said, He that doubts is condemned if he eat,
because he eats not of faith, or with a full persuasion? The Apostle
therefore by the former Text directs us to interpret this latter in the proper
sense of doubting.

But I answer, that St. Paul did not oblige them to get full persuasions in
their several ways, for there was too much of that already amongst them; and
'twas nothing to his purpose to tell them, that if they acted without a full
persuasion of the lawfulness of the action, they sinned against Conscience: but
his design was to persuade them, quietly to permit each other to enjoy their
several persuasions in those little matters without censuring one another. So
that the words must be rendered, Let every one be filled with his own mind, or
satisfied with his own persuasion. This indeed differs from our English
Translation: but Grotius and the Vulgar Latin, as well as St. Chrysostom and
Theodoret do thus interpret it; and moreover the matter requires it. For
otherwise the precept is neither reasonable nor possible; since if there
appears reason of doubting, it is in vain to command a man not to doubt. Nay it
is then as much his duty to doubt, as in other cases to believe. Thus then it
appears that these words ( he that doubts is damned if he eat) do not
overthrow my assertion.

But, though this is a true and substantial answer to the argument, yet I shall
give another, which unties the difficulty upon the Dissenters own Principles.
Supposing therefore (what is utterly false) that St. Paul speaks of a really
doubting Person, and not of one that is persuaded; and that the Man did sin in
eating those meats, of the lawfulness of which he doubted: yet it does not
follow, that a Man sins in obeying Authority, where he doubts of the lawfulness
of the command. For there is a vast disparity in the Cases; since the Man St.
Paul speaks of, was at Liberty to forbear eating, and sinned in choosing to run
a needless hazard of transgressing God's Law; but when the Superior commands,
a Man is not at Liberty. In the former case the Man might forbear without any
danger, but in the latter case there is greater danger in forbearing than in
acting; and therefore he is Bound to act in the latter case, though it might be
sin to act in the former.

But further, the reason, why he that eats doubtingly, sins in so doing, is
this, because he eats not of faith; and therefore St. Paul does not say, it
is always sinful to act in a doubtful case; because there are some doubtful
cases, wherein a Man may act with faith, notwithstanding his doubt. For he that
is satisfied that he acts according to his duty in the present circumstances,
does act with faith; and therefore when a Man is satisfied that it is more
reasonable, all things considered, to do an action than to forbear it, and that
it would be sinful in his circumstances to act otherwise; that Man does not sin
in acting, though he act with some kind of doubt; because he acts in faith, being
satisfied that he acts according to his duty in his present circumstances. Thus
then it is plain, that to obey authority in a purely doubtful case is not
sinful; because a Man may soon be satisfied, that it is not only more
reasonable, but his duty so to do.

If it be said, that a Man cannot have faith, that is, be satisfied about an
action, and yet doubt of it at the same time; I answer, that the case often
happens. A Man has often very great doubts about the lawfulness of an action in
general, and yet may be satisfied, that considering the circumstances he is in,
it may be lawfully done. All doubting is not contrary to faith. It is
sufficient if the doubts be over-ballanc'd. Though a Man's doubts be hard and
troublesome, yet if he is persuaded, that all things considered, it is more
advisable to do the action, than to forbear it; he has faith enough to act with
a safe Conscience. Because he acts according to his best judgment, and more
than this a Man cannot do.

IV. I am now to speak in the Fourth and last place of the authority of a
doubting Conscience, and to inquire, whether at all, or how far a Man is
obliged by it. I say therefore in general, that a doubting Conscience does not
oblige at all. For a doubting Conscience is the suspense of a Man's judgment
about a particular action; he doubts whether he be bound to do it or forbear
it. Now to suppose that a Man thinks himself bound in Conscience, while he is
disputing whether he is bound or no, is to suppose a contradiction. A Man
cannot be bound in Conscience to do or forbear any action, but as he thinks
that God's Law has commanded or forbidden it; and therefore he that is
doubtful, whether it be commanded or forbidden, cannot be obliged in Conscience
either way. There is no particular Law of God, which determines our actions one
way or other in the case of a doubt; and the general Laws, whether natural or
revealed, can oblige us to no more, than to endeavor to understand our duty as
well as we can; and when we are at a loss, to act as reasonably as we can. He
that does thus, acts with a safe Conscience, though he act doubtfully.

Having thus largely discussed the case of a doubting Conscience, I think it
will not be amiss to apply what has been said to the Case of our present
Dissenters. There are several Persons, that are unsatisfied about the
lawfulness of our Communion; some upon the account of Ceremonies, others of
other things. None of them can say, that these things are unlawful; for that is
the case of a resolved Conscience, with which we have nothing here to do: but
they are uncertain, whether they be lawful or no; and so long as they thus
doubt, they dare not join in our worship, fearing they should sin against God
in so doing. Of these Persons some have a single doubt, that is, they doubt
whether they may lawfully join with us, but they are satisfied they may
lawfully separate from us: others have a double doubt, that is, they doubt
whether they may lawfully join with us, and they doubt whether they may
lawfully separate from us.

As to the First of these sorts, though in a single doubt it is more safe to
choose that side on which a Man has no doubt, than that on which he doubts; yet
this Rule holds only in such cases, where a Man may forbear the action without
danger of sinning, though he cannot do it without danger of sinning. But in our
case it is evident, that as there may be sinning in Conforming, so there is
certainly danger of sinning in not Conforming. Nor is it more safe to separate
in case of a single doubt, than of a double one. For the Man who is satisfied
in his mind, that he may lawfully cut himself off from the Communion of the
Church, and live in constant disobedience to his Superiors (which things are
directly contrary to God's Laws) must needs be grossly and criminally ignorant
of his duty; and therefore his being satisfied about such sins will not excuse
him; because he was able, and it was his duty to know better.

Nay further, though God had left it indifferent, whether we keep the Unity of
the Church and obey our Superiors or no; though the case were really that of a
single doubt; though there was no danger in forbearing these things, but the only
danger was in doing them; yet I say, it is more reasonable to Conform than to
Separate notwithstanding. For though in a single doubt a Man is to choose that
side on which he has no doubt, rather than that on which he doubts; yet this
Rule (as I said before) does not hold, unless all other considerations be
equal. And therefore if a great good may be obtained, or a great evil avoided
by acting on the doubtful side, that consideration ought to turn the Balance,
and overruled the doubt; as I showed in the Case of going to Law. And
certainly, if weighty considerations ought to overbalance a single doubt in
any case; then the considerations of the Peace of the Kingdom, the Security of
Religion, and those many Public and Private Mischiefs that attend Separation,
ought to prevail in this of ours, and oblige Men to Conform. And I wish this
were well considered by our doubting Dissenters.

As to the Second sort, who doubt both of the lawfulness of Conforming, and
also of the lawfulness of separating from us; I say First, if the probabilities
appear pretty equal on both sides, then it is their duty to obey Authority as I
proved in the Third general Head of this Discourse. Secondly, if they think it
more probable that they ought not to Conform, than that they ought; then, though
the Authority of Superiors alone have not weight enough to turn the Balance,
yet the consideration of the great sin and the more dreadful consequences of
separation are sufficient, and ought to oblige them to Conform, as appears from
the Third prop. about a double doubt, p. 256, 257.

Now let any indifferent Man judge between us and our Dissenters. It Is plain,
that the things they doubt of, are not directly forbidden by God. And if they
are forbidden by consequences, those consequences are so obscure, that though
such usages have ever been in the Christian Church, yet they were never
condemned as sinful till our days. And even now these consequences are not
discovered by our superiors; no, not by as great and good Divines of all
persuasions, as any in the World. Nay the far greater number, and those as
Pious and Able as any, do plainly own our injunctions to be innocent at least,
if not Apostolical. So that if they are all mistaken, it can at most be but a
sin of ignorance in an ordinary person, where so many of the best guides are
mistaken, if he should transgress. But now on the other hand, if our Governors
be in the right, and our Communion lawful; then how great a sin are they guilty
of, in breaking the Laws of Church-Vnity, which are as plain as any in the
Bible; and that in such instances, where the whole Catholic Church of Old, and
the greatest and best part of the present Church, are of a different persuasion
from them? The consequences also of their separation are most dreadful; for by
it they deprive themselves of the ordinary means of Salvation, and keep up
those discords and animosities in the Church, which have torn the bowels of it,
and caused Atheism and Profaneness to overspread it; they affront their
Governors, give scandal to all peaceable persons, and offer a very fair
pretense to factious Men to practice against the best of Goverments. So they
take the Most effectual course to ruin the best Church in the World, and with
it the reformed Religion in this Kingdom. And now let any Man judge, whether
any doubt about the lawfulness of our Communion, and all the probabilities of
the doubt, have weight enough to Balance against such a sin and such
consequences. Certainly an unconcerned Person will pronounce, that in such a
case a Man is bound to Conform, rather than to Separate; and that is all I
contend for.

CHAP. XIII. The pretense of a Scrupulous Conscience Answered.
I Proceed now to the pretense of a Scrupulous Conscience; in Treating of which
I shall, 1. Show what I mean by it. 2. Observe some few things concerning it.
3. Offer some plain Rules and Means, by which we may best get rid of it.

First then, Conscience is a Man's judgment concerning the Goodness or Evil or
his Actions; and a Scrupulous Conscience is a Scrupulous judgment concerning
things in their own nature indifferent; and consists either, 1. in strictly
tying up our selves to some things, which God has no where commanded; as the
Pharisees made great Conscience of washing before meat, etc. and observed such
usages as Religiously, as the most indisputable commands of God: or, 2. in a
conscientious abstaining from some things, which are no ways unlawful;
doubting and fearing where no fear is; thinking that God is as much offended by
our eating some kind of Meats, or wearing some Garments, as by Adultery or
Murder; and being more precise about little matters, than other Good Christians
are, or our selves ought to be.

Secondly, Concerning this Scrupulous Conscience we may observe, 1. that it is
a sickly temper of Mind, and a state of Infirmity, arising from a Want of right
understanding our Religion, from Timerousness, Melancholy, and Prejudice. Now
this is no more a Virtue or commendable Quality in us, than it is to be sickly
and often indisposed. A good Conscience is firm and steady, well settled and
resolved: but such needless scruples are at the best a sign of an ungoverned
fancy and a weak judgment; just as the Niceness and Squeamishness of a Man's
stomach, that distasts Wholesome Food, is a symptom of an unsound and unhealthy
Body. 2. It Is often a sign of Hypocrisy; as 'twas in the Scribes and Pharisees,
who strained at a Gnat and swallowed a Camel, and hoped to make amends for
their gross Transgressions in other cases of far greater Weight and Moment, by
their curiosity about some external Observances. They therefore who are so
Scrupulous about little indifferent matters, ought to approve their Honesty and
Sincerity by the most accurate diligence in the practice of all other Duties of
Religion, which are plainly and undoubtedly such. They who pretend to such a
tender Conscience above other Men, must know, that the World will watch them as
to the fairness and justice of their Dealings, the calmness of their Tempers,
their Behavior in their several Relations, their Modesty, Humility, Charity,
Peaceableness, and the like. If in all these things they keep the same Tenor,
use the same caution and circumspection, and be uniformly conscientious; then
it must be acknowledged, that it is only Weakness or Ignorance that raises
their Scruples, and not any vicious Principle; and the condition of those who
are under the power of such Scruples, is much to be commiserated. But when I
see a Man scrupling praying by a Book or Form, and yet living without any sense
of God, or fear of him; afraid of a Ceremony in God's Worship, and not afraid
of a plain damnable Sin, of Coveteousness, rash censuring his Brethren, of
Hatred and Strife, Faction and Schism, and disobedience to Superiors; when I
see one that out of Conscience refuses to kneel at the Sacrament, and yet
dares totally neglect the Communion; who takes great care not to give offense
to his weak Brother, but can freely speak evil of Dignities, and despise his
lawful Governors: it is not then uncharitable to say, That it is not a dread
of displeasing God, but some other End or Interest that acts and moves him; and
that in pleading the Tenderness of his Conscience he is no other than a
downright Hypocrite. 3. It Is excessively troublesome and vexatious. It robs a
Man of that Peace and Satisfaction, which he might otherwise find in Religion,
and makes his Condition continually uneasy and restless. 4. It Is scruples are
infinite and endless; for there is hardly any thing to be done, but some small
exceptions may be started against it. Scrupulous Men go on from one Thing to
another, till at Length they Scruple every thing. This is notorious amongst us;
for those who have taken Offense at some things in our Church, and have
thereupon separated from us, and associated themselves with a purer
Congregation, have soon disliked something amongst them also; and then they
would reform themselves farther, and after that refine themselves more still,
till at last they have sunk down either into Quakerism, Popery, or Atheism. 5.
This Needless scrupling has done unspeakable mischiefs to the Church of Christ,
especially to the Reformed Church of England. In the great and necessary Truths
of Religion we all profess to be agreed. We all worship the same God, believe
in the same Lord and Savior, have the same Baptism, the same Faith, the same
Hope, the same common Interest: our Sacraments, as to the main, are rightly
administered according to our Savior's Institution; our Churches are
acknowledged to be true Churches of Jesus Christ; but there are some
Constitutions which chiefly respect outward Order, and the decent Performance
of Divine Worship, against which Men have received strange Prejudices, on the
account of them have raised a mighty noise and clamor against the Church, and
have openly separated from her Communion; as if by renouncing of Popery we had
only exchanged one idolatrous Service for another. About these Skirts and
Borders, the dress and circumstances of Religion, has been all our quarrelling
and contention; and these Differences have proceeded to such an height, as to
beget immortal Feuds and Animosities, to break and crumble us into little
Parties and Factions; whereby mutual Edification is hindered, our common
Religion suffers Reproach, the Enemies of it are strengthened and encouraged,
public Peace endangered, and brotherly Love, the Badge of Christ's Disciples,
quite lost amongst us; and the continuance of these miserable Distractions
amongst us upon such frivolous Accounts, is a matter of sad consideration, and
forebodes great Evils in Church and State. I doubt not to say, that the Devil
has fought more successfully against Religion under the Mask of a zealous
Reformer, than under any other disguise whatever.

Thirdly, I shall offer some plain Rules and Means, by which we may best get
rid of a Scrupulous Conscience.

1. We should Endeavor to have the most Honorable thoughts of God; for
accordingly as we Conceive of His Nature, so shall we judge what Things are
most Pleasing or most Offensive to Him. Now consider, I pray; Does not God
principally Regard the Frame of our Minds in Prayer? or will He refuse to hear
us, because He dislikes the Garment of the Minister? Does God regard any
particular Gestures or Habits, which are neither Dishonorable to Him, nor
Unsuitable to the Nature of the Religious performance, so far, as that the
acceptance of our Worship should depend upon such Circumstances? To surmise any
such Thing is surely to Dishonor God, as if he were a low, poor, humoursom
Being; like a Father that should disinherit his Dutiful Child, only because he
did not like his Complexion, or the Color of his Hair. The Wiser and Greater
any Person is, to whom we address our selves, the less he will stand upon
little Punctilioes.

Mean Thoughts of God are the true ground of all Superstition, when we think to
court and please him by making great Conscience about little things; and so it
has been truly observed, that there is far more Superstition in conscientious
abstaining from that which God has no where forbidden, than there is in doing
that which God has not commanded. A Man may certainly do what God has not
commanded, and yet never think to flatter God by it, nor place any Religion in
it: but he may do it only out of obedience to his Superiors, for outward Order
and Decency, for which end our Ceremonies are appointed; and so there is no
Superstition in them. But now a Man cannot out of Conscience refuse to do what
God has not forbidden, and is by lawful Authority required of him; but he must
think to please God by such abstaining: and in this conceit of pleasing or
humouring God by indifferent things, consists the true Spirit of Superstition.

2. We should lay out our Great Care and Zeal about the Necessary and Essential
Duties of Religion; and this will make us less Concerned about Things of an
Idifferent and Inferior Nature. St. Paul says; Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God
is not Meat nor Drink, but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
What needs all this stir and bustle? this censuring, disputing and dividing,
about Standing or Kneeling? These are not the great matters of our Faith; they
are not worth so much Noise and Contention. The great stress and weight in our
Religion is laid upon the Duties of a Righteous and Holy Life, and a Peaceable
Spirit and Conversation; For, says St. Paul, ver. 18. he that in these things
serves Christ, is acceptable to God and approved of men. He that minds those
Things most, on which the Efficacy of his Prayers for Christ's sake does
Depend, will not Need new Phrases every time to raise his Affections: and the
more a Man is concerned about the Necessary Preparation for the Sacrament, the
less afraid will he be of offending God by Kneeling at it. For he will find,
that True Religion consists in the Constant Practice of Holiness, Righteousness
and Charity; which make a Man really Better, and more Like to God.

3. If Men were but really Willing to receive satisfaction, this alone would
half conquer their Scruples: but when they are fond of them, and nourish them,
and will neither hear nor read what is to be said on the other side; there can
be but Little Hopes of recovering them to a Right Apprehension of things. Would
they come once to distrust their own Judgments, to suppose that they may
perhaps be all this while mistaken; would they calmly and patiently hear,
faithfully and impartially consider, what is said or written against them; as
eagerly seek for satisfaction, as Men do for the cure of any Disease they are
subject unto; would they, I say, thus diligently use all fit means and helps
for the removal of their Scruples, before they troubled the Church with them;
it would not prove so very difficult a Task to convince and settle such
teachable Minds. When they have any Fear or Suspicion about their worldly
concerns, they presently repair to those who are best skilled, and most able to
resolve them; and in their judgment and determination they commonly acquiesce
and satisfy themselves. Has any Man a Scruple about his Estate, whether it be
firmly settled, or he has a true legal Title to it? The way he takes for
satisfaction is to advise with Lawyers, the most eminent for Knowledge and
Honesty in their Profession. If they agree in the same Opinion, this is the
greatest assurance he can have, that it is right and safe. Thus is it with one
that doubts whether such a custom or practice be for his Health; the opinion of
known and experienced Physicians is the only proper means to determine him in
such a Case. The reason is the same here. When any private Christian is
troubled and perplexed with Fears and Scruples, that concern his Duty or the
Worship of God; he ought in the first place to have recourse to the public
Guides and Ministers of Religion, who are appointed by God, and are best fitted
to direct and conduct him; I say, to come to them, not only to dispute with
them, and pertly to oppose them; but with modesty to propound their doubts, and
meekly to receive Instruction, humbly begging of God to open their
Understandings, that they may see and embrace the truth, taking great care that
no evil affection, love of a Party, or carnal Interest influence or bias their
Judgments.

I do not by this desire Men to pin their Faith upon the Priest's Sleeve; but
only diligently to Attend to their Reasons and Arguments, and to give some due
Regard to their Authority. For it is not so Absurd, as some may Imagine, for the
Common People to take upon Trust from their Lawful Teachers, what they are not
Competent Judges of themselves. But the difficulty is, how a private Christian
shall govern himself, when the very Ministers of Religion disagree. By what
Rule shall he choose his Guide? I answer, 1. If a Man be tolerably able to Judge
for himself; let him impartially hear both sides, and think it no Shame to
Change his Mind, when he sees good Reason for it. Could we thus prevail with
the People diligently to examine the Merits of the cause, our Church would
every day gain more Ground amongst all wise Men. For we care not how much
Knowledge and Understanding our People have, so they be but humble and modest
with it: nor do we desire Men to become our Proselytes any further, than we
give them good Scripture and Reason for it. 2. As for those who are not capable
of Judging, they had better Depend on those Ministers, who are Regularly and by
the Laws of the Land set over them; than on any other Teachers, that they can
choose for themselves.

I speak now of these present Controversies about Forms and Ceremonies, which
are above the sphere of Common People; not of such things as Concern the
Salvation of all Men, which are plain and evident to the Meanest Capacities.
When therefore in such Cases, about which we cannot easily satisfy our selves,
we follow the Advice of the Authorized Guides; if they chance to Mislead us, we
have something to say for our selves; our error is more Excusable, as being
occasioned by those, whose Judgment God commands us to respect: but when we
choose Instructors according to our own Fancies, if we then prove to be in the
wrong, and are betrayed into sin; we may Thank our own Wantonness for it, and
are more severely Accountable for such mistakes. Thus if a Sick Person should
miscarry under a Licensed Physician; he has this contentment, that he used the
wisest means for Recovery: but if he will hearken only to Quacks, and then grow
worse and worse; he must charge his own Folly as the Cause of his Ruin.

4. We should thoroughly consider, what is the true Notion of Lawful; and how it
differs from what is Necessary, and from what is Sinful. That is necessary, or
our Duty, which God has expressly commanded; that is sinful which God has
forbidden; that is lawful which God has not by any Law obliging us, either
commanded or forbidden. For Where there is no Law, says the Apostle, there is
no Transgression, Romans 4.15. There can be no Transgression, but either omitting
what the Law commands, or doing what the Law forbids. For instance, If any Man
can show where Kneeling at the Sacrament is forbidden in Scripture, and Sitting
is required; where Praying by a Form is forbidden, and Extempore Prayers are
enjoined; then indeed the Dispute would soon be at an end: but if neither the
one nor other can be found, as most certainly they cannot, then Kneeling at the
Sacrament, and reading Prayers out of a Book, must be reckoned amongst things
lawful. And then there is no need of scrupling them, because they may be done
without Sin: Nay, where they are required by our Superiors, it is our Duty to
submit to them, because it is our Duty to obey them in all lawful things. This
way of arguing is very plain and convincing, and cannot be evaded, but by
giving another notion of lawful. And therefore it is commonly said, that
nothing is lawful, especially in the Worship of God, which God himself has not
prescribed and appointed, or that has been abused to evil Purposes: but having
fully confuted these two Mistakes in the Second and Eighth Chapters, I shall
pass them over here.

5. I desire those who Scruple to comply with our Church, to consider that
there never was, nor ever will be, any public Constitution, that will be every
way unexceptionable. The best Policy, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, that can
be established, will have some flaws and defects, which must be born and
tolerated. Some Inconveniences will in process of time arise, that never could
be foreseen or provided against; and to make alteration upon every emergent
difficulty, may be often of worse consequence, than the evil we pretend to cure
by it. Let the Rules and Modes of Government, Discipline, Public Worship, be
most exact and blameless; yet there will be faults in Governors and Ministers
as long as they are but Men. We must not expect in this World a Church without
spot or wrinkle, that consists only of Saints, in which nothing can be found
amiss; especially by those who lie at the catch, and wait for an advantage
against it. Men must be willing, if ever they would promote Peace and Unity, to
put candid Constructions and Favorable Interpretations upon Things; and not
strain them on purpose, that they may raise more considerable Objections
against them.

6. If these and the like Considerations will not conquer a Man's Scruples;
then let him lay them aside, and act against them. But here I easily imagine
some ready presently to ask me, Do you persuade us to Conform to the Orders of
the Church, though we are not satisfied in our Minds concerning them? I answer,
That I think this is the best Advice that can be given to such Scrupulous
Persons. It would be an endless thing, and Communion with any Church would be
altogether unpracticable, if every private Christian was obliged to suspend
joining himself to it, till he was perfectly satisfied about the reasonableness
and expediency of all that was required, or was in use in that Church. For
indeed; private Persons are by no means proper Judges of what is fit and
convenient in the Administration of Church-Goverment, Discipline, or public
Worship, any more than they are of matters of State, or the Reasonableness of
all Civil Laws. Things of a Public Nature belong to Superiors; and if they
Appoint what is Indecent or Inconvenient, they only are Accountable for it: but
it is not the Fault of Inferiors, who join with such Worship, or yield to such
Injunctions (not plainly sinful) for the sake of Peace and Order.

I do not by this encourage Men to venture blindfold on Sin, or to neglect any
reasonable care of their Actions; but if People raise all the Difficulties and
objections they can start, before they proceed to a Resolution about things
that have no manifest Impiety in them, nor are plainly, nor by any easy
consequence, contrary to the revealed Will of God; this cannot but occasion
infinite Perplexity and Trouble to Men's minds, and there are but few things
they shall be able to do with a safe and quiet Conscience. Before we separate
from a Church, or refuse to comply with it is Orders, we ought to be fully
satisfied and persuaded, that what is required, is forbidden by God; because by
leaving the Communion of any Church, we pass Sentence upon it and condemn it,
which ought not to be done upon light and doubtful Causes. But there is not the
same necessity, that we should be thus fully satisfied about our Conformity to
all things prescribed by the Church. We may presume them to be innocent, unless
they plainly appear to us otherwise. If any one think, that this Principle will
introduce Popery, and make People without any examination submit to every
Thing, which their Superiors please to impose upon them; let him only
Consider, that there are many things in Popery, which God has manifestly
forbidden, which render our Separation from it necessary: whereas ours are at
the worst only doubtful, or rather not so Good as might be Devised; and this
surely makes a wide Difference in the Case.

But does not St. Paul say, Romans 14.14. I know and am persuaded by the Lord
Jesus, that there is nothing Unclean of it self; but to him that esteems any
thing Unclean, it is unclean? Does he not say, He that doubts, is damned if
he eat, v. 23. and that whatsoever is not of faith, is sin? I answer, Yes. But
then, when I speak of a Scrupulous Conscience, I suppose the Person tolerably
well persuaded of the lawfulness of what is to be done: but yet he has some
little Exceptions against it; he does not think it best and fittest all things
considered. This is properly a Scruple; and is certainly the case of all those,
who do sometimes join in our Worship; which they could not do, did they judge
it absolutely sinful. So that, though it should be granted, that a Man cannot
innocently do that, of which his Conscience doubts whether it be Lawful or no,
which case I have discoursed of in the foregoing Chapter: yet a Man may, and in
some cases is bound to do that, which is not Unlawful, though upon some other
accounts he Scruples the doing of it. Now, if we have no very Weighty Reason
for the doing of them; then it may be the safest way to forbear all such
things, as we scruple at. Of such Cases the Apostle speaks in the
forementioned places of eating or not eating some Meats; neither of them was
required by Law. Eating was no Instance of Duty, nor was it any ways forbid
Christians. Where to do or not to do is perfectly at our own choice, it is best
for a Man to forbear doing that which he has some suspicion of, though he be not
sure that it is sinful. As suppose a Man have Scruples in his Mind about
playing at Cards and Dice, or going to see Stage Plays, or putting out his
Money to Usury; because there is no great Reason or Necessity for any of these
things, and to be sure they may be innocently forborne, without any detriment to
our selves or others; though we do not judge them absolutely sinful, yet it is
safest for him who cannot satisfy himself concerning the Goodness and Fitness
of them, wholly to deny himself the use of them. But in these two cases it is
most for the quiet of our Consciences, to act against, or notwithstanding our
Fears and Scruples, when either our Superiors, to whom we owe Obedience, have
interposed their Commands, or when by it we prevent some great Evil or Mischie^.

1. All Fears and Scruples only about the Convenience and Expediency of Things,
ought to be despised, when they come in Competition with the Duty of Obedience.
Would Men but think themselves in Conscience bound to pay the same Duty and
Respect to the Judgment and Authority of Magistrates and Governors, whether in
Church or State, as they do expect their Servants and Children should to
themselves; they would soon see the reasonableness of such Submissions. For all
Government and Subjection would be very precarious and arbitrary, if every one
that did not approve of a Law, or was not fully satisfied about the
reasonableness of it, was thereby excepted from all Obligations to obey it.
This is to give the Supreme Authority to the most humoursome or perverse sort
of Christians; for, according to this Principle, no public Laws and
Constitutions can be valid and binding, unless every scrupulous, though a very
ignorant Conscience, consent to them.

2. We are not to mind or stand upon our Scruples, when they probably occasion
a great Evil, or general Mischief. They are not fit to be put in the balance
with the Peace of the Church and Unity of Christians. Suppose for once, that
our public way of Worship is not the best that can be devised; that many things
might be amended in our Liturgy; that we could invent a more agreeable
Establishment than this present is; (which yet no Man in the World can ever
tell, for we cannot know all the Inconveniences of any alteration, till it
comes to be tried) yet granting all this, it cannot be thought so intolerable
an Evil, as contempt of God's Solemn Worship, dividing into Sects and Parties,
living in Debate, Contention, and Separation from one another. If there be some
Rites and Customs amongst us not wisely chosen or determined, some Ceremonies
against which just Exceptions may be made; yet to forsake the Communion of such
a true Church of Jesus Christ, and set up a distinct Altar in opposition to it,
to combine and associate into separate Congregations, is (as it is somewhere
expressed) like knocking a Man on the Head, because his Teeth are rotten, or
his Nails too long. How much more agreeable is it to the Christian Temper, to
be willing to sacrifice all Doubts and Scruples to the Interests of public
Order and Divine Charity? For better surely it is to serve God in a defective
manner, to bear with many Disorders and Faults; than to break the Bond of Peace
and Brotherly Communion.

CHAP. XIV. The pretense of Scandal, or giving Offense to Weak Brethren,
Answered.
BUT there are some, who tell us, that they are indeed themselves sufficiently
persuaded of the lawfulness of all that is enjoined by the Church of England;
but then there are many other godly, but weaker Christians of another
persuasion, with whom they have long been joined. And should they now totally
forsake them and Conform; they should thereby give great offense to all those
tender Consciences, which are not thus convinced of the lawfulness of holding
Communion with our Church. Which sin, say they, is so very great, that our
Savior tells us, Matthew. 18.6. Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones
which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about
his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea: and in St. Paul's
account it is no less than spiritual murder, a destroying him for whom Christ
died, Romans 14.15.

These Persons I design to answer in this Chapter, by showing that No private
Christian (as the case now stands amongst us) is obliged to absent himself from
his Parish Church for fear of Offending or Scandalizing his Weak Brethren. And
this I shall do by inquiring, 1. What is the true Notion of a Weak Brother. 2.
What it is to Offend such an one. 3. How far, and in what instances we are
bound to consider the Weakness of our Brother.

I. Then, a Weak Brother or weak in Faith in Scripture language denotes one
newly converted to Christianity; and so neither thoroughly instructed in the
Principles, nor well settled in the practice of it; the same whom our Savior
calls a little one, and the Apostle a babe in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1. Conversion to
Christianity is called our New Birth; and the Converts were for a while
reckoned as in an infant State: and accordingly were to be most gently used,
till by degrees, by the improvement of their knowledge, they came to be of full
Age, Heb. 5.14. They were at first to be fed with Milk, to be taught the
easiest and plainest Doctrines, and great Prudence and Caution was to be used
toward them; lest they should suddenly fly back and repent of their change. For
they having been Jews and Gentiles, retained still a great Love for many of
their Old Customs and Opinions; they had mighty and inveterate prejudices to
overcome; the Old Man was by degrees to be put off: and therefore they were at
first treated with all the tenderness and condescension imaginable. The
stronger and wiser Christians would not stand rigidly on any little Matters,
but Tolerate many things, which were necessary afterward to be done away;
hoping that in time they might be brought off those mistakes they now labored
under. Hence I observe,

1. That the Rules, which are laid down in Scripture concerning Weak Brethren,
are not standing Laws equally obliging all Christians in all Ages: but were
suited to the Infant-state of the Church, till Christianity had gotten firm
footing in the World. The Apostle's design in all his complyances, was to win
many to Christ; 1 Cor. 9.19. Now to do as St. Paul did, would always be the
Duty and Wisdom of one in his circumstances, who was to spread Christianity
amongst Heathens and Infidels: but his Directions and Practice do no more agree
with our Times, wherein Christianity is the National Religion; than the same
Clothes which we did wear in our Infancy, would serve us now at our full Age.
We ought indeed to remove every Straw out of Childrens way, lest they stumble
and fall: but it is ridiculous to use the same care toward grown Men. There is
not now amongst us any such competition between Two Religions: but every one
learns Christianity as he does his Mother Tongue. St. Paul would not take that
Reward that was due to him for Preaching the Gospel, but himself labored hard
night and day, because he would not be chargeable to his Converts, 1 Thessalonians.
2.9. and this he did for the furtherance of the Gospel, that all might see he
did not serve his own Belly: but surely our Dissenters do not think themselves
obliged by this Example, in places where public maintenance is settled on
Ministers by Law, to refuse to take it, and earn their own Bread by some manual
Occupation; though thereby they avoid giving Offense to Quakers, and those who
call them Hirelings, and say they prophesy only for filthy lucre. In short,
there are no such Weak Persons now amongst us, as those were for whom the
Apostle provides; or as those little ones were, for whom our Savior was so
much concerned.

2. The Dissenters, according to their weak opinion of themselves, are of all
Men the farthest off from being Weak Christians in any sense. They who take
upon themselves to be Teachers of others, wiser and better than their
Neighbors, the only sober and godly Party, and are too apt to despise all
other Christians as ignorant or profane; with what color of Reason can they
plead for any favor to be shown, or Regard to be had to them in compliance
with their weakness? Though they love to argue against us from the Example of St.
Paul's condescension to the ignorant Jews or Gentiles; yet it is apparent that
they do not in other Cases willingly liken themselves to those weak Believers,
or Babes in Christ. They have really better thoughts of themselves, and would
be Leaders and Masters in Israel, and prescribe to their Governors, and give
Laws to all others, and prefer their own private Opinion (which they call their
Conscience) before the Judgment of the wisest Men, or the Determinations of
their lawful Superiors. And if in all Instances we should deal with them as
weak Persons, turn them back to their Primmer, advise them to learn their
Catechism; they would think themselves highly wronged and injured. But the
truth is, they ordinarily look upon their Opposition to the Orders of our
Church, as the Effect of an higher Illumination, a greater Knowledge than
others have attained unto. They rather count us the weak Christians, if some of
them will allow us so much; for otherwise, if they do not take us for the
weaker and worse Christians, Why do they separate from us? Why do they
associate and combine together into distinct Congregations, as being purer,
more select Christians than others? Now, though such Persons as these may be in
truth very weak, of little Judgment or Goodness, notwithstanding this Conceit
of themselves and their Party; yet these are not by any means to plead for
Indulgence under that Character, nor to expect we should forego our Liberty, to
please and humor them.

3. Those who are really weak, that is, ignorant and injudicious, are to be
born withal only for a time, till they have received better instruction: but we
cannot be always Babes in Christ, without our own gross fault and neglect.
Such as will not yield to the clearest reason, if it be against their Interest
or their Party, can upon no account claim the privileges of Weak Persons. Of
these our Savior had no regard, who were so unreasonable and obstinate in
their opposition, Matthew. 15.14.

Not that I would be so uncharitable as to condemn all, or the generality of
Dissenters for being Malicious and wilful in their dissent from us: but
however, 1. I beg them to examine, whether they have sincerely endeavored to
satisfy themselves, and have devoutly prayed to God to free their minds from
prejudices and corrupt affections; for otherwise their Weakness is no more to
be pitied, than that Man's sickness, who will not, though he may be cured. 2. I
must say, that old and inveterate Mistakes, that have been a 1000 times
answered and protested against, are not much to be heeded by us. If People will
by no means be prevailed upon to lay aside their fancies, they do not deserve
that compassion, which St. Paul prescribes toward Weak Brethren. In matters of
a doubtful or suspicious nature, that are capable of being misunderstood and
abused, yet if there be no Moral evil in them, and the doing of them is of some
considerable consequence to me; I am bound to forbear them no longer, than till
I have endeavored to inform them rightly concerning the innocence of my action
and intention, and given them notice of the evil, that might possibly happen to
them. If I dig a pit or lay a block in the way, whereby others not knowing any
thing of it, are hurt and wounded; I am guilty of causing them to fall: but if
they are plainly and often told of it, and yet will run into the danger; they
are then only to thank themselves. Now, if it be thus in Cases that are liable
to suspicion and misinterpretation; it holds much more in the Orders of our
Church, where the Offense arises not so much from the Nature of the
Injunctions, as from Men's gross ignorance, mis-conceit, or perverseness. This
shall suffice to show, what is the true Notion of a Weak Brother.

II. I am now to show, what it is to offend such an one. People are generally
mistaken about the sense of offending or giving offense. For by it they
commonly understand displeasing or grieving another, and making him angry with
them; and so they think themselves bound in Conscience to forbear all those
things, which Godly Persons do not like or approve of, or are contrary to their
Fancy or Judgment. It Is true, there is one place, that seems to favor this
conceit; Romans 14.15. If thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou
not charitably. But it must be observed, that by grieving our Brother, is not
meant displeasing, but wounding and hurting him: and so it is used to denote
that which causes grief or sorrow; and is the same with destroying, and
putting a stumbling block or an occasion to fall, v. 15, 21. To be offended or
grieved is not to be troubled at what another has done out of pity and concern
for his Soul: but to receive hurt our selves from it, being drawn or deceived
into some sin by it.

But because many well-dispos'd People do think, that they must not do any
thing, which good Men are displeased or grieved at, I desire them to consider a
few things. 1. That to censure and condemn, and be displeased with the actions
of those that differ from them, or refuse to join any longer with them in their
separate Congregations, is a great instance of peevishness and
uncharitableness; and is that very sin which St. Paul often warns his Weak
Believers against, viz. that they should not rashly judge those, who understood
their Christian Liberty better than themselves. At this rate any company of
Men, that shall resolve to quarrel with all that do not do as they do, must
oblige all to remain forever with them, for fear of giving them offense. If
what I do, is not evil in it self; it cannot become such, because another Man
is causlesly angry with me for doing of it. 2. They that pretend, that this
fear of offending, that is, displeasing their Weak Brethren, hinders their
compliance with the Church, ought seriously to examine themselves, whether it
is not really only the care of their credit and reputation with that Party, or
else the securing of some worldly interest, that keeps them from Conformity. 3.
If to displease our Weak Brethren were the sinful offending him condemned by
St. Paul; it would prove an intolerable yoke upon Men's Consciences, and beget
such endless perplexities, that we should not be able to do any thing, though
never so indifferent, with a well-assur'd mind; since one or other will in this
sense be scandalized at it. We shall anger some by doing, others by forbearing:
and since those, who call themselves weak, are divided into several factions,
each condemning all the other; it is impossible for us to comply with any one of
them, but we shall thereby displease all the rest. 4. If we do nothing which
may displease our Weak Brethren; we do submit our Judgments and Consciences to
the conduct of the most ignorant and injudicious Christians: and yield them
that authority over us, which we deny to our lawful Superiors. And it is
strange, that those who think their Christian Liberty so much violated by the
determinations of their Superiors about indifferent matters, should yet suffer
themselves to be thus tied up by the passions of their Weak Brethren. Whatever
condescension may be due to the Weak, yet 'twas never intended they should
Govern the Wiser: and who can Govern more absolutely than those, whom none must
displease?

Since then Scandalizing or giving offense does not signify doing something
which another takes ill, I design to show what is the true meaning of it in
Scripture. The Greek word which we translate Scandal or Offense, signifies
either a Trap or Snare, or else more commonly something laid in the way of
another, which occasions his stumbling or falling, by which he is bruised and
hurt. And so, whatever it was that hindered Men from becoming Christ's
Disciples, or made them entertain unworthy thoughts of their profession, or
discouraged them in it, or tempted them to forsake it, is called a Scandal or
Offense. It is sometimes rendered an occasion to fall, Romans 14.13. occasion of
stumbling, 1 John 2.10. a stumbling block, Rev. 2.14. or a thing that does
offend, Matthew. 13.41. in all which places there is the same original word.
Hence to Offend or Scandalize any one, as it is commonly used in the Sea Matthew.
17.27. and 26.31. Mark 4.17. and 6.3. Joh. 6.61. 1. Cor. 1.23.
New Testament, is to do something which tends to fright him from Christianity,
to make him think hardly of it, or is apt to make him Repent of his Conversion.
So that in the most general sense, to Scandalize or Offend any one, is to give
occasion to his sin, and consequently his Ruin and undoing; and this I suppose
will be granted by all, that do not receive their opinions from the mere sound
of words. Hence I observe Four things.

1. The better Men are, the harder it is to Scandalize them. Those are not such
Godly Persons, as they would be thought, who are so ready at all turns to be
Offended. For how can they excel others in knowledge or goodness, who are so
easily drawn or tempted to sin?

2. That Man, that says, he shall be Scandalized at what another Man does,
speaks falsely. For it is as much as to say, that he shall be led into sin
ignorantly: whereas his saying so confutes his ignorance; for if he knows it to
be a sin, he commits it wilfully.

3. Since Offending or scandalizing signifies tempting to sin, there can be no
fear of Offending any one by Conforming to the Church; because there is nothing
used in it, but what may be complied with without sin. For the Man that fears
giving Offense to the Weak, is supposed to be satisfied himself, that
Conformity is lawful: and how then should he fear that his example will tempt
others to sin in doing an innocent action? If it be said, that though what I do
is lawful, yet it may give occasion to others to do something else that is
unlawful, and so I may become truly guilty of giving Offense; I answer, that we
are accountable only for the Natural tendencies of our actions, and not for
such consequences, as wicked or silly Men may draw from them; for at that rate
a Man could not speak or do any thing without the guilt of giving Scandal. If
it be said, that though I am satisfied my self, yet I may by my example tempt
others that are not satisfied, or that think Conformity to be sinful, to follow
me with a doubting or gainsaying Conscience; I answer, 1. that it is as unlawful
to go to separate Meetings against one's Conscience, as to Conform against
one's Conscience: and the Man ought to fear, lest he draw some to separate
Meetings against their Conscience; as well as he fears the drawing of others to
Church against their Conscience. The influence of his example is the same in
both instances, and the danger of Scandal is equal; and therefore his own
persuasion must determine his practice. 2. A Man that is satisfied himself,
ought to endeavor to satisfy others, especially those whom he formerly
persuaded to separation by his example; and when he has done thus, he has done
what lies in his power to prevent the ill effect, and shall not be farther
answerable for the consequences of what he does.

4. Since Scandalizing is leading into sin, we may Scandalize others as soon by
complying with them, as by thwarting their humor. St. Paul, who circumcised
Timothy, Acts 16.3. in favor of the Weak Jews, lest they should have forsaken
the Faith; refused to circumcise Titus, Gal. 2.3. (though he angered the Jews by
it) lest they should think the Jewish Law still in force. And this he did,
because the condition of the Persons was different. If he had pleased them, he
had truly Scandalized them, by hardening them in their folly and ignorance. Mr.
Baxter says (in his Cure of Church-Divisions) Many a time I have the rather
gone to the Common Prayers of the public Assemblies, for fear of being a
Scandal to those same men, that called the going to them a Scandal; that is,
for fear of hardening them in a sinful Separation and Error. Because I knew,
that was not Scandal which they called Scandal; that is, displeasing them, and
crossing their Opinions; but hardening them in an Error or other Sin, is true
Scandalizing. Understand this, or you will displease God under pretense of
avoiding Scandal, p. 135. This surely ought to be well considered of by a sort
of Men amongst us, who shall go to Church in the Morning, and to a Conventicle
in the Afternoon; who halt between both, and would fain displease neither side,
but indeed give real Offense to both. From all this, I think, it is very plain,
that he, who is satisfied in his own mind of the lawfulness of Conformity, but
is afraid of giving Offense by it, if he be true to his Principle, ought to
hasten the faster to his Parish Church, that he may not offend those very
Dissenters, of whom he would seem to be so tender.

III. In the last place I am to inquire how far, and in what instances we are
bound to consider the Weakness of our Brethren. In answer to this I shall now
suppose, notwithstanding all I have already said, that the Dissenters are truly
weak Persons, and that there may be some danger of their being, through their own
fault, Offended by our Conformity; yet taking this for granted, I shall plainly
show, that he who is in his own mind convinced of the lawfulness of Conformity,
ought not to forbear it for fear of giving such Offense to his Weak Brethren.
For,

First, Nothing that is sinful may be done to avoid others being Scandalized.
We must not do evil, that good may come, Romans 3.8. We must not commit the least
sin our selves, to prevent the greatest sin in another. The very best things
may be perverted, and Christ himself is said to be set for the fall of many,
Luke 2.24. but this does not cancel our obligations to obey God's Laws. If
offense be taken at my doing any duty, those only that are offended are
chargeable with it. Since those who fear giving Offense, do themselves think
Conformity lawful; and since Conformity is enjoined; and since nothing is more
plain from Scripture, than that we must obey our Superiors in all lawful
things; therefore it is evident that we must not omit the duty of Conforming for
fear of giving Offense.

But it is Objected, that those Precepts which contain only rituals, are to give
place to those which concern the welfare of Men's Bodies, and much more to those
which concern the welfare of their Souls: so that when both together cannot be
observed, we must break the former to observe the latter. God will have mercy,
and not sacrifice. Now if sacrifices prescribed by God himself, must give place
to Acts of Mercy, much more must Human Inventions yield to them. To this I
answer, that the commands of our Superiors do not bind us either in a case of
absolute necessity, or when they plainly hinder any moral duty to God or our
Neighbor: but this is only when the necessity is urgent and extreme, and the
sin we must otherwise commit, evident and certain; and at last our obedience is
dispensed withal only for that one time. We may be absent from Church to save
the life of our Neighbor, or to quench the firing of his house: but 'twou'd be
a pitiful pretense for the constant neglect of our public Prayers, because in
the mean time our Neighbors house may be fired, or his life invaded, and so he
may stand in need of our help. Though this argument may serve to excuse the
omission of something commanded by lawful Authority, in extraordinary cases
which very rarely happen: yet to be sure it will not help those, who live in
open disobedience to the Laws, only because they are loath to offend those who
are not satisfied with what is appointed.

But, say they, Scandal is Spiritual Murder: and if we must obey Authority,
though Scandal follow; then, when Authority commands, we may murder the Soul of
our Brother, and destroy him by our meats, for whom Christ died. But I answer,
that wearing a Surplice, Kneeling at the Sacrament, etc. will not make Men
forsake Christianity; which I have proved, is the only proper Scandalizing our
Brother, which St. Paul charges with the guilt of Soul-murther. Nay, this
argument concludes as strongly against obedience to any other command of God,
if a Brother be offended at it; as it does against submission to Superiors in
things lawful. For it is not only the Law of Man, but the Law of God also, that
is broken by disobedience to Superiors. We cannot be bound to transgress a
plain Law of God for fear of some evil, that may chance to happen to some
others through their own fault: because every one is bound to have a greater care
of his own, than of others Salvation; and consequently to avoid sin in himself,
than to prevent it in his Brethren. Nay, as Bishop Sanderson says, To allow
Men, under pretense that some offense may be taken thereat, to disobey Laws and
Constitutions made by those that are in Authority over us, is the next way to
cut the Sinews of all Authority, and to bring both Magistrates and Laws into
contempt; for what Law ever was made, or can be made so just and reasonable,
but some Men or other either did, or might take offense thereat?

If it be here asked, whether any Human Authority can make that action cease to
be Scandalous, which if done without any such command, had been Scandalous; I
answer, that no Authority can secure that others shall not be offended by what
I do out of obedience to it: but then it frees me from blame, by making that my
duty, which if I had otherwise done, might have been uncharitable.

If it be said, that avoiding of Scandal is a main duty of charity; and that,
if Superiors may appoint, how far I shall show my charity toward my Brother's
Soul, then an earthly Court may cross the determinations of the Court of
heaven; I answer, that here is no crossing the Determinations of God, since it
is his express Will, that in all lawful things we should obey our Governors;
and he who has made this our Duty, will not lay to our charge the Mischiefs,
that may sometimes without our fault, through the folly and peevishness of Men,
follow from it. And certainly it is as equal and reasonable, that our
Superiors should appoint how far we shall exercise our Charity toward our
Brethren; as it is, that the mistake and prejudice of any private Christians
should set Bounds to their Power and Authority; or that every ignorant and
froward Brother should determine, how far we shall be obedient to those whom
God has set over us. But farther, duties of justice are of stricter obligation
than duties of Charity. Now obedience to Superiors is a debt; and we injure
them, if we do not pay it: but avoiding Scandal is a duty of charity; which
indeed we are obliged to, as far as we can, but not till we have given to every
one his due. It is therefore, says Bishop Sanderson, no more lawful for me to
disobey the lawful command of a Superior, to prevent thereby the Offense of
one or a few Brethren; than it is lawful for me to do one Man wrong, to do
another Man a courtesy withal; or than it is lawful for me to rob the Exchequer
to Relieve an Hospital.

If it be replied, that though the care of not giving Offense be in respect of
our Brother but a debt of Charity, yet in regard of God it is a legal debt,
since he may, and does require it as due, and we do him wrong if we disobey
him; I grant indeed, that we are required both to be obedient to Superiors,
and to be Charitable to our Brother: but then I say, this is not the Charity
which God requires, when I give what is none of my own. A servant must be
Charitable to the Poor according to his ability: but he must not rob his Master
to Relieve them. Our Superiors only must consider the danger of Scandal: but
we must consider the duty we owe them; this being a matter wherein we cannot
show our charity without violating the right of our Superiors.

Thus then it is plain, that they are things merely indifferent, not only in
their own nature, but also in respect to us, in the use of which we are obliged
to consider the Weakness of our Brethren. What is our duty, must be done, though
Scandal follow it: but in matters, wherein our practice is not determined by
any command, we ought so to exercise our Liberty, as to avoid (if possible)
giving any Offense. It Is an undoubted part of Christian Charity, to endeavor
by admonition, instruction, good example, and by the forbearance of things
lawful, at which we foresee our Neighbor out of weakness will be apt to be
Scandalized, to prevent his falling into any sin or mischief. After this manner
do we profess our selves ready to do or forbear any thing in our own power, to
gain Dissenters to the Church: but we must not omit our duty for it.

I shall only add, that this very Rule of yielding to our Brother in things
indifferent, ought to have some restrictions; but I think there are no
unalterable Rules to be laid down in this affair. For it being an exercise of
Charity, must be determined by the measure of Prudence according to
Circumstances: and we may as well go about to give certain Rules for Men's
Charity in other Cases, and fix the proportion which every Man ought to give of
his Estate toward the Relief of the Poor; as positively to tell how far a Man
must deny himself in the use of indifferent things, and forego his own Liberty
for the sake of his Brother. This whole matter (says Dr. Hammond, disc. of
Scand.) is to be referred to the Christian's Pious Discretion or Prudence; it
being free to him either to abstain, or not to abstain, from any indifferent
action (remaining such) according as that Piety and that Prudence shall
represent it to be most Charitable and Beneficial to other Men's Souls.

Secondly, To avoid a less Scandal being taken by a few, we must not give a
greater Offense, and of vastly more pernicious consequence, to a much bigger
number of Persons. And if this matter were rightly considered; we should soon
f^^d our selves much more obliged, upon this account of Scandal, to join with
our Church, than to s^parate from it. For, 1. Our separation hardens other
Dissenters in their persuasion of the unlawfulness of Conformity. For they will
think we separate upon the same reason with themselves; and this is true
Scandalizing them, or Confirming them in an evil cause. 2. Whatever Sect we
join with, we Offend all the other Parties; who sometimes speak as hardly of
one another, as of the Conformists. 3. Hereby great Offense is given to the
Conformists. For this separation is a public condemning of the Church, and is
apt to breed Scruples, distaste and prejudices, in the well-meaning, but
least-knowing Members of it. 4. Scandal is thereby given to Superiors, by
bringing their Laws and Authority into contempt. And if it be so sinful to
Offend a little one; what shall we think of Offending a Prince, a Parliament,
etc! No Scandal taken at an indifferent thing can be so great, as both the sin
and Scandal of confusion, and contempt of Authority. 5. Hereby Scandal is given
to the Papists, who are hardened in their own way, because they only have Peace
and Unity; and this is a mighty temptation to many wavering Christians to turn
Papists. The Papists always hit us in the Teeth with our Divisions: whereas by
our hearty Uniting with the Church of England, we may certainly wrest this
Weapon out of their hands. 6. Separation is a Scandal to Religion in general.
It prejudices Men against it as an uncertain thing, and matter of endless
dispute; when they see what dangerous Quarrels commence from our Religious
differences: and all the disorders they have caused, shall by some be charged
upon Christianity it self. Thus our causeless separations open a wide door to
Atheism, and all kind of Profaness and Irreligion.

The CONCLUSION, Containing an earnest Persuasive to Communion with the
Established Church of England.
AND now, having shown the Necessity of Maintaining constant Communion with the
Church of England, and answered those pleas, by which the Dissenters endeavor
to excuse their Separation from her; nothing remains, but that I add an earnest
Persuasive to the practice of that, which I have proved to be a Christian Duty.
I beseech you therefore with all the Earnestness that becomes a Matter of so
great Importance, and with all the Kindness and Tenderness that becomes a
Christian, to suffer the Word of Exhortation, and duly consider what I offer to
you.

I have shown you in the first Chap. of this Discourse, that Nothing but sinful
Terms of Communion can justify a Separation; and therefore you must charge our
Church with sinful terms of Communion, or else you cannot possibly defend your
practice. Suppose that there were some things in our Constitution, that might
be contrived better; yet every defect or supposed Corruption in a Church is not
warrant enough to tear the Church in pieces. The question is not, Whether there
be any thing in our Constitution, which a Man could wish to be altered: but
whether any thing unlawful be appointed, which will make an alteration not only
desirable, but necessary; and Whether you are bound to withdraw, till such
Alteration be made. We separate from the Church of Rome, because She has
corrupted the Main Principles of Religion, and requires her Members to join in
these Corruptions: but this Charge cannot be fastened upon the Church of
England, and therefore Separation from her must be unlawful.

Mr. Ca^^^^ Institut. lib. 4. sect. 10, 11, 12.
says, that Wherever the Word of God is duly preached, and reverently attended
to, and the true use of the Sacraments kept up, there is the plain appearance
of a true Church, whose Authority no Man may safely despise, or reject it is
Admonitions, or resist it is Counsels, or set at naught it is Discipline; much
less separate from it, and violate it is Unity. For that our Lord has so great
regard to the Communion of his Church, that he accounts him an Apostate from
his Religion, who obstinately separates from any Christian Society, which keeps
up the true Ministry of the Word and Sacraments; that such a separation is a
denial of God and Christ; and that it is a dangerous and pernicious Temptation,
so much as to think of separating from such a Church, the Communion whereof is
never to be rejected, so long as it continues in the true Use of the Word and
Sacraments. This is as plain and full a Determination of the Case, as if he had
particularly designed it against your own practice. Nay, the Ministers of
New England tell you, that To separate from a Church for some Evil only
conceived, or indeed in the Church, which might and should be tolerated, and
healed with a Spirit of Meekness, and of which the Church is not yet convinced,
though perhaps your self be; for this or the like Reasons to withdraw from public
Communion in Word, Seals or Censures, is unlawful and sinful.

If you say, that the Governors may as well come down to you, by forbearing
what you dislike, as you come up to the law, by doing what it requires; I
beseech you to consider, Whether our Case will bear this Wantonness, and
Whether such Expressions be consistent with your Duty. I do not think it hard,
I confess, to make out the prudence of their Determinations: but I think it
hard, that a Public Rule should not be thought Reason enough to justify things
of this sort, and to oblige the People to Compliance without more ado.
Certainly there is no prospect of Union, till Men learn Humility and Modesty,
and are contented to be Governed. What is the Duty of Superiors in our Case, I
cannot determine: but sure I am, that a Change (though in things perfectly
indifferent) is no indifferent thing; and it is infinite odds, but if once they
begin to change without necessity, there will never be an end of changing.

But farther, I desire you to consider, that the most eminent even of your own
Writers, do flatly condemn your Separation from the Church of England. For they
acknowledge her to be a true Church, and See Buroughs 's Iren. p. 184. Vind.
of Presb. Gov. Brinsly's Arraignm. p. 16, 31. Corbet 's Plea for Lay-C^m.
Newcomen 's Iren. Epist. to the Read. ^all's Trial, c. 7. Je^u^ba^l* p. 28.30.
Throughton's Apol. p. 107. Robinson of the Lawful. of Hear. p. ult.
hold, that You are not to separate farther from a true Church, than the things
you separate for, are unlawful, or conceived so to be; that is, they hold that
you ought to go as far as you can, and do what you lawfully may, toward
Communion with it. They See Tombs 's Theod. Answer to Pref. Sect. 23. Blake's
Vind. c. 31. Brinsly 's Arraignm. p. 50. Noyes 's Temple Meas. p. 78. Owen 's
Evangel. Love, p. 76. Cotton on the 1 Epist. of John, p. 156. Baxter's Cure,
dir. 5. Vines on the Sacram. p. 239. Corbet 's Acc. of Sep. p. 103. Jerubba^l,
p. 12.
hold also, that You are not to separate from a Church for unlawful things, if
the things accounted unlawful, are not of so heinous a Nature as to unchurch a
Church, or are not imposed as necessary Terms of Communion. Nay they See
Brownists Confess. art. 36. Jenkin on Jude, v. 19. Allen's Life, p. 3. Engl.
Remembrancer, Sermon. 4, 14, 16. Ball 's Trial, p. 74, etc. 132, etc. 159, etc.
308. Platform of Discipl. c. 14. sect. 8. Hildersham on John, Lect. 35, 82.
Brian 's Dwell. with God, p. 293, 294. Bradshaw's Unreason. of Sep. p. 103,
104. Non-Conf. no schismat. p. 15. Cawdry 's Indep. a great schism, p. 192,
195. Owen 's Evang. Love, c. 3. Throughton 's Apol. p. 100. Vines on the
Sacram. p. 242. Crofton's Hard way to Heaven, p. 36. Noyes's Temp. Meas. p. 78,
89. Davenport's Reply, p. 281. Cotton on 1 Epist. of John. p. 156. Calamy's
Godly Man 's Ark, Epist. Ded. Allen 's Godly Man's Portion, p. 122, 127. B^ins
on Ephesians. 2.15. Contin. Morn. Exer. sermon. 16. Baxter's Cure, dir. 35. Def. of
his Cure, part. 1. p. 47. and part. 2. p. 171. Buroughs 's Iren. c. 23. Morton
's Memorial, p. 78, etc. Blake's Vind. c. 31. Tombes's, Theodul. answer to
Pref. Sect. 25. Conf. Savoy, p. 12, 13. Calamy's Door of Truth opened, p. 7.
Corbet's N. C. Plea, p. 6. Robinson 's Lawful. of Hear. p. 19, 23. Nye's Case
of great and pres. Use, p. 10, 16, 18.
produce several arguments to prove, that Defects in Worship, if not essential,
are no just reason for withdrawing from it. 1. Because to break of Communion
for such Defects, would be to look after a greater Perfection, than this
present state will admit of. 2. Our Savior and his Apostles did not separate
from defective Churches. 3. Christ does still hold Communion with defective
Churches, and so ought we. 4. To separate from such defective Churches, would
destroy all Communion. Nor, 5. is it at all Warranted in scripture. Nor, 6. is
it necessary, because a Person may communicate in the Worship without partaking
in those Corruptions. Nay, 7. they urge that it is a duty to join with a
defective Worship, where we can have no better.

And as for our Injunctions in particular, they See Let. Min. of Old-Engl. p.
12, 13. Bryan's Dwell. with God, p. 311. Troughton's Apol. c. 7. p. 68. Owen's
Peace-Off. p. 17. Misch. of Impos. Epist. Ded.
own them to be tolerable, and what no Church is without, more or less; that
they are not sufficient to hinder Communion; and that they are but few. Nay
farther, several of the old Non-Conformists zealously opposed Separation from
the Church of England, and joined with it to their dying Day, though they could
not conform as Ministers: and several of the Modern Non-Conformists have
written for Communion with it, and have in print See Baxter's Sacril. Desert.
p. 75. Mr. J. Allen's Life, p. 111. Collins's Doctr. of Schism. p. 64. Lye's
Reas. Account, etc. Hickman's Bonas. Vap. p. 113. Baxter's Plea for Peace, p.
240.
declared it to be their Duty and Practice.

But besides the Sentiments of your own Teachers, there is greater Authority to
be urged against you. For in those things, wherein you differ from us, you are
condemned by the Practice of the Whole Catholic Church for fifteen hundred
Years together; and surely this Consideration ought to prevail with Modest and
Peaceable Men. This might afford a large field for Discourse: but I shall only
hint at a few Particulars.

1. We desire you to produce an Instance of any settled Church, that was without
Episcopacy, till Calvin's time. The greatest Opposers of Episcopacy have been
forced to grant, that it obtained in the Church within a few Years after the
Apostolic age; and we are sure we can carry it higher, even to the Apostles
themselves. There are but two Passages, and both of them not till the latter
end of the fourth Century, that may seem to question Episcopal Authority. That
of In Epist. ad Tit. cap. 1.
St. Jerome, when improved to the utmost that it is capable of, only intimates
Episcopacy not to be of Apostolical Institution. And very clear it is to those
that are acquainted with St. Jerome's Writings, that he often wrote in have, and
did not always weigh things at the Beam, and forgot at one time what he had
said at another; that many Expressions fell from him in the heat of
Disputation, according to the warmth and eagerness of his Temper; and that he
was particularly chased into this Assertion by the fierce opposition of the
Deacons at Rome, who began to Usurp upon, and overtop the Presbyters; which
tempted him to magnify and extol their Place and Dignity, as anciently equal to
the Episcopal Office, and as containing in it the common Rights and Privileges
of Priesthood. For at other times, when he wrote with cooler thoughts about
him, he does plainly and frequently enough assert the Authority of Bishops over
Presbyters; and did himself constantly live in Communion with, and Subjection
to Bishops. The other passage is that of Aerius, who held indeed that a Bishop
and a Presbyter differed nothing in Order, Dignity, or Power. But he was led
into this Error merely through Envy and Emulation, being vexed to see that his
Companion Eustatbius had gotten the Bishopric of Sebastia, which himself had
aimed at. This made him start aside, and talk extravagantly: but the Church
immediately branded him for an Heretic, and drove him and his Followers out of
all Churches, and from all Cities and Villages. And Epiphanius, who was his
Cotemporary, represents him as very little better than a Madman. 2. We desire
you to name any Church, that did not constantly use Forms of Prayer in public
Worship; but of this I have discoursed at large in the third Chapter. 3. Show
us any Church, that did not always observe festivals in Commemoration of Christ
and his Saints. 4. Name any one Church since the Apostles times, that had not
it is Rites and Ceremonies, as many (if not more) in Number, and as liable to
Exception, as those that we use. Nay, there are few things (if any at all)
required by us, which were not in use in the best Ages of Christianity. Nay
farther, I could easily See Durel 's View of the Goverm. etc. and Spirit's
Cassend. Anglic. p. 123, etc.
show, that most (if not all) the Usages of our Church, are either practiced in
foreign Churches, or at least allowed of by the most Eminent and Learned
Divines of the Reformation.

Consider also, that Separation is the ready way to bring in Popery, as Mr.
Baxter Defense, p. 27, 52.
has proved. The Church of England is the great Bulwark against Popery, and
therefore the Papists have used all possible Means to destroy it, and
particularly by Divisions. They have attempted to pull it down by pretended
Protestant hands; and have made use of you to bring about their own designs. In
order hereunto they have upon all Occasions strenuously promoted the
Separation, and mixed themselves with you; they have put on every Shape, that
they might the better follow the Common Outery against the Church as Popish and
Antichristian; spurring you on to call for a more pure and spiritual Way of
Worship, and to clamor for Liberty and Toleration; as foreseeing, that when
they had subverted all Order, and beaten you out of all sober Principles, you
must be necessitated at last to center in the Communion of the Romish Church.
This trade they began almost in the very infancy of the Reformation; as appears
by the Foxes and Firebrands.
stories of Comin and Heath: and no doubt they held on the same in succeeding
Times; as appears (besides all other Instances) by See Stillingfleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation, Pref. p. 20, etc.
Bellarini's Letter concerning the best Way of managing the Popish Interest in
England upon the Restoration of King Charles the II. For therein it was advised
to foment Fears and Jealousies of the King and Bishops; to asperse the Bishops
and Ministers of the Church of England, and to represent it is Doctrine and
Worship as coming too near the Church of Rome; to second the factious in
promoting an Indulgence, and to endeavor, that the Trade and Treasure of the
Nation might be engrossed between themselves and other discontented Parties.

We know how restless and industrious the Romish Faction has ever been; and the
only visible security we have against the prevailing of it, lies in the firm
Union of Protestants. And therefore I conjure you by all the kindness, which
you pretend for the Protestant Religion, heartily to join in Communion with us.
For the Common Enemy waits all Opportunities, and stands ready to enter at
those breaches, which you are Making. You might condemn the Rashness of your
own Counsels, and lament it, it may be, when it would be too late; if you
should see Popery erected upon the ruins of that Church, which you your selves
had overthrown. It would be a sad addition to your Miseries, if the Guilt and
Shame of them too might be laid to your charge. With what remorse would you
reflect upon it, (when the heat of your Passion was over) if the Protestant
Profession should be farther endangered, and the Agents of Rome get greater
advantages daily by those Distractions, which have been secretly managed by
them, but openly carried on and maintained by your selves? With what face would
you look, to see the Papists, not only triumphing over you, but mocking and
deriding you, for being so far imposed upon by their Cunning, as to be made the
immediate instruments of your own Ruin? Therefore I beseech you not to act, as
if you were prosecuting the Designs of the Conclave; and proceed just as if you
were governed by the Decrees of the pretended Infallible Chair. You may be
ashamed to look so much like Tools in the hands of the Jesuits; when you suffer
your selves to be guided by those Measures which they had taken, and talk and
do as they would have you, as if you were immediately inspired from Rome.

To these arguments I must add another, which I hope will prevail with you;
viz. I cannot see, how you can avoid being self-condemned, if you continue in
your Separation. For certain it is, that most of you have been at our Churches,
and received the Sacrament there; and I am not willing to think, that you acted
against your Consciences, or did it merely to secure a gainful Office, or a
place of Trust, or to escape the Lash and Penalty of the Law. These are Ends so
very Vile and Sordid; this is so horrible a Prostitution of the Holy Sacrament,
the most venerable Mystery of our Religion; so deliberate a Way of sinning,
even in the most solemn act of Worship; that I can hardly suspect any should be
guilty of it, but Men of Profligate and Atheistical Minds. But then, why does
not the same Principle, that brings you at one Time, bring you at another? Why
can we never have your Company, but when Punishment or Advantage prompts you to
it? We blame the Papists for dispensing with Oaths, and receiving the Sacrament
to serve a turn, and to advance the Interest of their Cause: but God forbid,
that so heavy a Charge should ever lie at the Doors of Protestants; and
especially those who would be thought most to abhor Popish practices; and who
would take it ill to be accounted not to make as much, if not more, Conscience
of their Ways, than other Men.

Now I beseech you to reason a little; If our Communion be sinful, why did you
enter into it? If it be lawful, why do you forsake it? Is it not that which the
commands of Authority have tied upon you; which Commands you are bound to
submit to, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake? Are not the Peace
and Unity of the Church, things that ought greatly to sway with all Sober,
Humble and Considering Christians? If it be possible, says the Apostle, and as
much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. And shall Peace be broken
only in the Church, where it ought to be kept most entire? And that by those
who acknowledge it to be possible, and within their Power? Are you satisfied in
your Conscience to join in Communion with us; and will you not do it for the
sake of the Church of God? Will you refuse to do what is lawful, and (as the
Case stands) necessary in order to Peace; only because Authority commands, and
has made it your Duty? Let me entreat you, as you love your dear Redeemer, to
do as much for the Peace of His Church, as for a Vote or Office; and to come to
the Sacrament of his Body and Blood as Christians, and not as Politicians.

Let these great truths sink into your hearts; and consider, I beseech you,
what you are doing. Be well advised, before you venture upon that, which makes
you guilty of a sin of the blackest Nature. Be not blinded by Prejudice or
Passion, nor take Opinions upon trust: but search and examine into the truth.
Consciences truly tender are willing and desirous to embrace all Opportunities
of Resolution; and are ready to kiss the hand, that would bring them better
Information. They will not neglect, much less thrust from them, the means that
might ease them of their Doubts and Scruples. But it looks very odly, that so
many of you are no more concerned to understand the true State of the Church of
England, and the Nature and Reasons of her Constitutions; that so few of you
care to confer with those that are able to instruct you: but cry out, You are
satisfied already; nay, some of you, to my knowledge, when desired to propose
your Scruples, in order to the Giving you Satisfaction, have plainly and
absolutely refused to do it. There is little reason to believe, that such
Persons have ever read and examined, what the Church of England has to say for
her self. Are there not many, that not only Scruple, but rail at the Book of
Common Prayer, that yet never heard it, nor perhaps ever read it, in all their
Lives? And if this be not to speak evil of what they know not, I cannot tell
what is.

You generally forbear our Public Worship, upon no other ground, but because
you prefer your own arbitrary way before it: whereas I may take the Confidence
to affirm, that our Liturgy was made and revised with that Prudence and
Moderation, that Care and Circumspection, that there is nothing now extant in
that kind, that has been composed with greater Wisdom and Piety. If I should
compare it with the Performances in the other way; (not to mention the many
indecent, incoherent, irreverent Expressions, to say no worse, that might be
collected) let any Extempore Prayer, made by the ablest of those, that magnify
that way and despise ours, be taken in writing and published to the World; and
I am confident, that one Man, without any great pains, may find more things
really exceptionable in that single Prayer, in a short time; than the several
Parties of Dissenters, with all the Diligence they have hitherto used, have
been able to discover in the whole Service of our Church, in more than an
hundred Years. And yet some of you, that seek industriously for Scruples in the
Common Prayer, will readily join in Extempore Prayers without any Scruple. This
is such Partiality and unequal Dealing, as cannot easily be excused.

It Is true, the early Prepossession of a contrary Opinion, the powerful
Prejudices of Education, an implicit and unexamin'd belief of what their Guides
and Leaders teach them, have a strange force upon the minds of Men; so that in
effect they no more doubt of the truth and goodness of the Cause they are
engaged in, than they question the Articles of their Creed. These and the like
are very dangerous and usual Mistakes, that do frequently proceed from the
Prevalency of our Passions. Now the first step toward Concord in Opinion and
Affections, is to dispose your Minds to a calm and teachable Temper; to be
always ready to acknowledge the force of an Argument, though it contradict your
persuasions never so much. Wherefore I do once and again entreat you, that
laying aside all Pride, Partiality and Self-conceit, you would not think more
highly of your selves, and of your own way, than you ought to think. Truth
makes the easiest entrance into Modest and Humble Minds. The Meek will he guide
in judgment, the Meek will he teach his Way. The Spirit of God never rests upon
the proud Man.

But especially you must be very careful, that Secular Interest did not either
engage you in the Separation at the beginning, or provoke you to continue in
it. And there is the more reason to put you upon this Inquiry, not only because
Secular Ends are very apt to mix with, and shelter themselves under the shadow
of, Religion; but because this has been an old Artifice, made use of to promote
Separation. Thus the Donatists upheld their Separation, and kept their Party
fast together, by trading only within themselves, and employing none but those
that would be of their side; nay and sometimes hiring Persons to be Baptized
into their Party, as Crispin did the People of Mappalia. And how evident the
same Policy is among our modern Quakers, is too notorious to need either Proof
or Observation. Whoever looks into the Nation, must needs take notice how
Interests are formed, and by what methods Parties and Factions are kept up; how
many thousands of the poorer sort of you depend upon this or that Man for your
Work and Livelihood; how many of you depend upon others for your Trade, whom
accordingly those Men can readily Command, and do produce to give Votes and
increase Parties on all public Occasions; and what little encouragement any Man
finds from you, that deserts you, and comes over to the Church of England. Let
me beseech you therefore impartially to examine your selves; and to search,
whether a worldly spirit be not at the bottom of your Zeal and Stifness. These,
I confess, are Designs too base and sordid to be owned above-board: but Be not
deceived, God is not mocked; Man looks to the outward Appearance, but God looks
to the Heart. If you hope to gain and grow rich by your Separation; if you are
ashamed or scorn to retract your Opinions; if you imagine you have more Light
than the first Reformers, when indeed you are very ignorant; if you cannot
endure to be opposed in any thing; if you murmur and repine at your Governors,
when they require your Obedience, where you are unwilling to pay it; these are
Signs, that your affections are turbulent and unruly: and while you are thus
disposed, you can never be assured, but that Coveteousness, Pride, and
Impatience, might be the greatest Motives, that induced you to make a
Separation, and the strongest Arguments that you have to maintain it.

But above all things, I beseech you for the sake of your precious Souls, to
consider the Heinous Nature and Guilt of Schism; which is nothing else but the
separating your selves from a true Church, without any just occasion given. I
doubt, you are not sufficiently sensible, how much you oppose that Spirit of
Peace and Brotherly Love, which should diffuse it self through the whole Body of
Christian People; when you suppose every slender Pretense enough to justify
your departing from us, and setting up a Church against a Church. The Old
Non-Conformists charged the People to be as tender of Church-Division, as they
were of Drunkenness, Whoredom, or any other enormous Crimes; whereas you seem
to think it a matter almost indifferent, and that you are left to your own
choice to join with what Society of Christians you please. Which giddy
principle, if it should prevail, would certainly throw us into an absolute
Confusion; and introduce all the Errors and Mischiefs, that can be imagined.
But our Blessed Lord founded but one Universal Church; and when he was ready to
be Crucified for us, and prayed not for the Apostles alone, but for them also
that should believe in him through their Word; one of the last Petitions which he
then put up, amongst diverse others to the same Purpose, was That they all may
be One, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in
us, that the World may believe that thou have sent me. It Is plain this was to
be a Visible Unity, that might be taken notice of in the World, and so become
an Inducement to move Men to embrace the Christian Faith. Peace and Amity, and
a good Correspondence betwixt the several Members of which they consist, is the
only Beauty, Strength and Security of all Societies; and on the contrary, the
nourishing of Animosities, and running into opposite Parties and Factions, does
mightily weaken, and by degrees almost unavoidably draw on the Ruin and
Dissolution of any Community, whether Civil or Sacred. Concord and Union
therefore will be as necessary for the Preservation of the Church, as of the
State. It has been known by too sad an Experience, as well in ours, as other
Ages, what a pernicious Influence the Intestine Broils and Quarrels among
Christians have had. They have been the great stumbling block to Jews, Turks,
and Heathens, and the main hindrance of their Conversion; they have made some
among our selves to become Doubtful and Skeptical in their Religion; they have
led others into many dangerous Errors, that shake the very Foundations of our
Faith; and some they have tempted to cast off the Natural sense they had of the
Deity, and emboldened them to a professed Atheism. Therefore as you would avoid
the hardening of Men in Atheism and Infidelity, and making the Prayer of our
dying Savior (as much as in you lies) wholly ineffectual; you ought to be
exceeding cautious, that you do not wilfully Divide his Holy Catholic Church.

You are often warned of this; and how many Arguments does St. Paul heap
together to persuade you to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace?
One Body and one Spirit, even as you are called in one Hope of your Calling,
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all; Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6.
And how pathetically does the same Apostle exhort you again to the same thing,
by all the mutual Endearments that Christianity affords? If there be therefore
any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort in Love, if any Fellowship of the
Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies; fulfill ye my Joy, that ye be like minded,
having the same Love, being of one Accord, of one Mind; Phil. 2.1, 2. These
vehement Exhortations to Peace and Concord, do strictly oblige you to hold
Communion with that Church, which requires nothing but what is lawful of you.
They that have the same Articles of Faith, and hope to meet in the same Heaven,
through the Merits of the same Lord; should not be afraid to come into the same
Assemblies, and join seriously in sending up the same Prayers, and
participating of the same Sacraments. Besides the many strict Precepts and
other strong Obligations which you have to this Duty, our Savior died, that he
might gather together in One, the Children of God that were scattered abroad;
John 11.52. And do you not then contradict this end of his Death, in setting
those at Variance, whom he intended to Unite? Nay, may you not be said to
Crucify the Son of God afresh, by mangling and dividing a sound and healthful
part of that Body, of which he owns himself to be the Head? If indeed our
Church did require you to profess any false Doctrine, or to do any thing
contrary to any Divine Command; you were bound in such instances to withdraw
from her: but since her Doctrine, Discipline and Worship are good and lawful;
you are indispensably engaged to join in Communion with her. For, as I said
before, and it cannot be inculcated too often, Nothing but the Unlawfulness of
joining with us can make a Separation Lawful.

Let it pity you at least to see the ghastly wounds, that are still renewed by
the continuance of our Divisions. Be persuaded to have some Compassion on a
Bleeding Church, that is ready to faint, and in imminent Danger of being made a
prey to her Enemies, by the unnatural Heats and Animosities of those, that
should Support and Defend her. Why should you leave her thus Desolate and
Forlorn, when her present Exigencies require your most Cordial Assistance? If
the condition of her Communion were such as God's Laws did not allow; you might
forsake her that had forsaken him: but since this cannot be Objected against
her; since she exacts no forbidden thing of you, you ought to strengthen her
Hands by an unanimous Agreement. Since the Substantials of Religion are the
same, let not the Circumstances of external Order and Discipline be any longer
an Occasion of Difference amongst us. And so shall we bring Glory to God, a
happy Peace to a Divided Church, a considerable Security to the Protestant
Religion; and probably defeat the subtle Practices of Rome, which now stands
gaping after All, and hopes by our Distractions to repair the Losses she has
suffered by the Reformation.

May the Wisdom of Heaven make all wicked Purposes unsuccesful; and the Blessed
Spirit of Love heal all our Breaches, and prosper the charitable Endeavors of
those that follow after PEACE. Amen.

THE END.

