OROONOKO: OR, THE Royal Slave. A TRUE HISTORY.

By Mrs. A. BEHN.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Canning, at his Shop in the Temple-Cloysters. 1688.

TO THE Right Honorable THE Lord MAITLAND.
My Lord,
SInce the World is grown so Nice and Critical upon Dedications, and will Needs
be Judging the Book, by the Wit of the Patron; we ought, with a great deal of
Circumspection, to choose a Person against whom there can be no Exception; and
whose Wit, and Worth, truly Merits all that one is capable of saying upon that
Occasion.

The most part of Dedications are charged with Flattery; and if the World knows
a Man has some Vices, they will not allow one to speak of his Virtues. This, my
Lord, is for want of thinking Rightly; if Men would consider with Reason, they
would have another sort of Opinion, and Esteem of Dedications; and would
believe almost every Great Man has enough to make him Worthy of all that can be
said of him there. My Lord, a Picture-drawer, when he intends to make a good
Picture, essays the Face many Ways, and in many Lights, before he begins; that
he may choose, from the several turns of it, which is most Agreeable, and gives
it the best Grace; and if there be a Scar, an ungrateful Mole, or any little
Defect, they leave it out; and yet make the Picture extremely like: But he who
has the good Fortune to draw a Face that is exactly Charming in all its Parts
and Features, what Colors or Agreements can be added to make it Finer? All
that he can give is but its due; and Glories in a Piece whose Original alone
gives it its Perfection. An ill Hand may diminish, but a good Hand cannot
augment its Beauty. A Poet is a Painter in his way; he draws to the Life, but
in another kind; we draw the Nobler part, the Soul and Mind; the Pictures of
the Pen shall out-last those of the Pencil, and even Worlds themselves. It Is a
short Chronicle of those Lives that possibly would be forgotten by other
Historians, or lie neglected there, however deserving an immortal Fame; for Men
of eminent Parts are as Exemplary as even Monarchs themselves; and Virtue is a
noble Lesson to be learned, and it is by Comparison we can Judge and Choose. It Is
by such illustrious Presidents, as your Lordship, the World can be Bettered and
Refined; when a great part of the lazy Nobility shall, with Shame, behold the
admirable Accomplishments of a Man so Great, and so Young.

Your Lordship has Read innumerable Volumes of Men, and Books; not Vainly for
the gust of Novelty, but Knowledge, excellent Knowledge: Like the industrious
Be, from every Flower you return Laden with the precious Dew, which you are
sure to turn to the Public Good. You hoard no one Perfection, but lay it all
out in the Glorious Service of your Religion and Country; to both which you are
a useful and necessary Honor: They both want such Supporters; and it is only
Men of so elevated Parts, and fine Knowledge; such noble Principles of Loyalty
and Religion this Nation Sighs for. Where shall we find a Man so Young, like
St. Augustine, in the midst of all his Youth and Gaiety, Teaching the World
divine Precepts, true Notions of Faith, and Excellent Morality, and, at the
same time, be also a perfect Pattern of all that accomplish a Great Man? You
have, my Lord, all that refined Wit that Charms, and the Affability that
Obliges; a Generosity that gives a Luster to your Nobility; that. Hospitality,
and Greatness of Mind, that ingages the World; and that admirable Conduct, that
so well Instructs it. Our Nation ought to regret and bemoan their Misfortunes,
for not being able to claim the Honor of the Birth of a Man who is so fit to
serve his Majesty, and his Kingdoms, in all Great and Public Affairs: And to
the Glory of your Nation be it spoken, it produces more considerable Men, for
all fine Sense, Wit, Wisdom, Breeding, and Generosity (for the generality of
the Nobility) than all other Nations can Boast; and the Fruitfulness of your
Virtues sufficiently make amends for the Barrenness of your Soil: Which however
cannot be incommode to your Lordship; since your Quality, and the Veneration
that the Commonalty naturally pay their Lords, creates a flowing Plenty there
-- that makes you Happy. And to complete your Happiness, my Lord, Heaven has
blessed you with a Lady, to whom it has given all the Graces, Beauties, and
Virtues of her Sex; all the Youth, Sweetness of Nature; of a most illustrious
Family; and who is a most rare Example to all Wives of Quality, for her eminent
Piety, Easiness, and Condescension; and as absolutely merits Respect from all
the World, as she does that Passion and Resignation she receives from your
Lordship; and which is, on her part, with so much Tenderness returned. Methinks
your tranquil Lives are an Image of the new Made and Beautiful Pair in
Paradise: And it is the Prayers and Wishes of all, who have the Honor to know
you, that it may Eternally so continue, with Additions of all the Blessings
this World can give you.

My Lord, the Obligations I have to some of the Great Men of your Nation,
particularly to your Lordship, gives me an Ambition of making my
Acknowledgments, by all the Opportunities I can; and such humble Fruits, as my
Industry produces, I lay at your Lordships Feet. This is a true Story, of a Man
Gallant enough to merit your Protection; and, had he always been so Fortunate,
he had not made so Inglorious an end: The Royal Slave I had the Honor to know
in my Travels to the other World; and though I had none above me in that
Country, yet I wanted power to preserve this Great Man. If there be any thing
that seems Romantic, I beseech your Lordship to consider, these Countries do,
in all things, so far differ from ours, that they produce unconceivable
Wonders; at least, they appear so to us, because New and Strange. What I have
mentioned I have taken-care should be Truth, let the Critical Reader judge as
he pleases. 'Twill be no Commendation to the Book, to assure your Lordship I
writ it in a few Hours, though it may serve to Excuse some of its Faults of
Connection; for I never rested my Pen a Moment for Thought: It Is purely the
Merit of my Slave that must render it worthy of the Honor it begs; and the
Author of that of Subscribing herself,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most obliged and obedient Servant, A. BEHN.

THE HISTORY OF THE Royal Slave.
I Do not pretend, in giving you the History of this Royal Slave, to entertain
my Reader with the Adventures of a feigned Hero, whose Life and Fortunes Fancy
may manage at the Poets Pleasure; nor in relating the Truth, design to adorn it
with any Accidents, but such as arrived in earnest to him: And it shall come
simply into the World, recommended by its own proper Merits, and natural
Intrigues; there being enough of Reality to support it, and to render it
diverting, without the Addition of Invention.

I was my self an Eyewitness, to a great part, of what you will find here set
down; and what I could not be Witness of, I received from the Mouth of the
chief Actor in this History, the Hero himself, who gave us the whole
Transactions of his Youth; and though I shall omit, for Brevity's sake, a
thousand little Accidents of his Life, which, however pleasant to us, where
History was scarce, and Adventures very rare; yet might prove tedious and heavy
to my Reader, in a World where he finds Diversions for every Minute, new and
strange: But we who were perfectly charmed with the Character of this great
Man, were curious to gather every Circumstance of his Life.

The Scene of the last part of his Adventures lies in a Colony in America,
called Surinam, in the West Indies.

But before I give you the Story of this Gallant Slave, it is fit I tell you the
manner of bringing them to these new Colonies; for those they make use of
there, are not Natives of the place; for those we live with in perfect Amity,
without daring to command 'em; but on the contrary, caress 'em with all the
brotherly and friendly Affection in the World; trading with 'em for their Fish,
Venison, Buffilo's, Skins, and little Rarities; as Marmosets, a sort of Monkey
as big as a Rat or Weesel, but of a mavelous and delicate shape, and has Face
and Hands like an Humane Creature: and Cousheries, a little Beast in the form
and fashion of a Lion, as big as a Kitten; but so exactly made in all parts
like that noble Beast, that it is it in Minature. Then for little Parakeetoes,
great Parrots, Muckaws, and a thousand other Birds and Beasts of wonderful and
surprising Forms, Shapes, and Colors. For Skins of prodigious Snakes, of which
there are some threescore Yards in length; as is the Skin of one that may be
seen at His Majesty's Antiquaries: Where are also some rare Flies, of amazing
Forms and Colors, presented to 'em by my self; some as big as my Fist, some
less; and all of various Excellencies, such as Art cannot imitate. Then we
trade for Feathers, which they order into all Shapes, make themselves little
short Habits of 'em, and glorious Wreaths for their Heads, Necks, Arms and
Legs, whose Tinctures are unconceivable. I had a Set of these presented to me,
and I gave 'em to the King's Theater, and it was the Dress of the Indian Queen,
infinitely admired by Persons of Quality; and were unimitable. Besides these, a
thousand little Knacks, and Rarities in Nature, and some of Art; as their
Baskets, Weapons, Aprons, etc. We dealt with 'em with Beads of all Colors,
Knives, Axes, Pins and Needles; which they used only as Tools to drill Holes
with in their Ears, Noses and Lips, where they hang a great many little things;
as long Beads, bits of Tin, Brass, or Silver, beat thin; and any shining
Trincket. The Beads they weave into Aprons about a quarter of an Ell long, and
of the same breadth; working them very prettily in Flowers of several Colors
of Beads; which Apron they wear just before 'em, as Adam and Eve did the
Fig Leaves; the Men wearing a long Stripe of Linen, which they deal with us
for. They thread these Beads also on long Cotton-threads, and make Girdles to
tie their Aprons to, which come twenty times, or more, about the Waste; and
then cross, like a Shoulder-belt, both ways, and round their Necks, Arms and
Legs. This Adornment, with their long black Hair, and the Face painted in
little Specks or Flowers here and there, makes 'em a wonderful Figure to
behold. Some of the Beauties which indeed are finely shaped, as almost all are,
and who have pretty Features, are very charming and novel; for they have all
that is called Beauty, except the Color, which is a reddish Yellow; or after a
new Oiling, which they often use to themselves, they are of the color of a new
Brick, but smooth, soft and sleek. They are extreme modest and bashful, very
shy, and nice of being touched. And though they are all thus naked, if one
lives for ever among 'em, there is not to be seen an indecent Action, or
Glance; and being continually used to see one another so unadorned, so like our
first Parents before the Fall, it seems as if they had no Wishes; there being
nothing to heighten Curiosity, but all you can see, you see at once, and every
Moment see; and where there is no Novelty, there can be no Curiosity. Not but I
have seen a handsome young Indian, dying for Love of a very beautiful young
Indian Maid; but all his Courtship was, to fold his Arms, pursue her with his
Eyes, and Sighs were all his Language: While she, as if no such Lover were
present; or rather, as if she desired none such, carefully guarded her Eyes
from beholding him; and never approached him, but she looked down with all the
blushing Modesty I have seen in the most severe and cautious of our World. And
these People represented to me an absolute Idea of the first State of
Innocence, before Man knew how to sin: And it is most evident and plain, that
simple Nature is the most harmless, inoffensive and virtuous Mistress. It Is she
alone, if she were permitted, that better instructs the World, than all the
Inventions of Man: Religion would here but destroy that Tranquillity, they
possess by Ignorance; and Laws would but teach 'em to know Offense, of which
now they have no Notion. They once made Mourning and Fasting for the Death of
the English Governor, who had given his Hand to come on such a Day to 'em, and
neither came, nor sent; believing, when once a Man's Word was past, nothing but
Death could or should prevent his keeping it: And when they saw he was not
dead, they asked him, what Name they had for a Man who promised a thing he did
not do? The Governor told them, Such a man was a Liar, which was a Word of
Infamy to a Gentleman. Then one of 'em replied, Governor, you are a Liar, and
guilty of that Infamy. They have a Native Justice, which knows no Fraud; and
they understand no Vice, or Cunning, but when they are taught by the White Men.
They have Plurality of Wives, which, when they grow old, they serve those that
succeed 'em, who are young; but with a Servitude easy and respected; and
unless they take Slaves in War, they have no other Attendants.

Those on that Continent where I was, had no King; but the oldest War-Captain
was obeyed with great Resignation.

A War-Captain is a Man who has lead them on to Battle with Conduct, and
Success; of whom I shall have Occasion to speak more hereafter, and of some
other of their Customs and Manners, as they fall in my way.

With these People, as I said, we live in perfect Tranquillity, and good
Understanding, as it behooves us to do; they knowing all the places where to
seek the best Food of the Country, and the Means of getting it; and for very
small and unvaluable Trifles, supply us with what it is impossible for us to
get; for they do not only in the Wood, and over the Sevana's, in Hunting,
supply the parts of Hounds, by swiftly scouring through those almost impassable
places; and by the mere Activity of their Feet, run down the nimblest Deer, and
other eatable Beasts: But in the water, one would think they were Gods of the
Rivers, or Fellow-Citizens of the Deep; so rare an Art they have in Swimming,
Diving, and almost Living in Water; by which they command the less swift
Inhabitants of the Floods. And then for Shooting; what they cannot take, or
reach with their Hands, they do with Arrows; and have so admirable an Aim, that
they will split almost an Hair; and at any distance that an Arrow can reach,
they will shoot down Oranges, and other Fruit, and only touch the Stalk with
the Dart's Points, that they may not hurt the Fruit. So that they being, on all
Occasions, very useful to us, we find it absolutely necessary to caress 'em as
Friends, and not to treat 'em as Slaves; nor dare we do other, their Numbers so
far surpassing ours in that Continent.

Those then whom we make use of to work in our Plantations of Sugar, are
Negro's, Black-Slaves altogether; which are transported thither in this manner.

Those who want Slaves, make a Bargain with a Master, or Captain of a Ship, and
contract to pay him so much a-piece, a matter of twenty Pound a Head for as
many as he agrees for, and to pay for 'em when they shall be delivered on such
a Plantation: So that when there arrives a Ship laden with Slaves, they who
have so contracted, go a-board, and receive their Number by Lot; and perhaps in
one Lot that may be for ten, there may happen to be three or four Men; the
rest, Women and Children: Or be there more or less of either Sex, you are
obliged to be contented with your Lot.

Coramantien, a Country of Blacks so called, was one of those places in which
they found the most advantageous Trading for these Slaves; and thither most of
our great Traders in that Merchandice traffick'd; for that Nation is very
warlike and brave; and having a continual Campaign, being always in Hostility
with one neighboring Prince or other, they had the fortune to take a great
many Captives; for all they took in Battle, were sold as Slaves; at least,
those common Men who could not ransom themselves. Of these Slaves so taken, the
General only has all the profit; and of these Generals, our Captains and
Masters of Ships buy all their Freights.

The King of Coramantien was himself a Man of a Hundred and odd Years old, and
had no Son, though he had many beautiful Black-Wives; for most certainly, there
are Beauties that can charm of that Color. In his younger Years he had had
many gallant Men to his Sons, thirteen of which died in Battle, conquering when
they fell; and he had only left him for his Successor, one Grandchild, Son to
one of these dead Victors; who, as soon as he could bear a Bow in his Hand, and
a Quiver at his Back, was sent into the Field, to be trained up by one of the
oldest Generals, to War; where, from his natural Inclination to Arms, and the
Occasions given him, with the good Conduct of the old General, he became, at
the Age of Seventeen, one of the most expert Captains, and bravest Soldiers,
that ever saw the Field of Mars: So that he was adored as the Wonder of all
that World, and the Darling of the Soldiers. Besides, he was adorned with a
native Beauty so transcending all those of his gloomy Race, that he struck an
Awe and Reverence, even in those that knew not his Quality; as he did in me,
who beheld him with Surprise and Wonder, when afterward he arrived in our
World.

He had scarce arrived at his Seventeenth Year, when fighting by his Side, the
General was killed with an Arrow in his Eye, which the Prince Oroonoko (for so
was this gallant Moor called) very narrowly avoided; nor had he, if the
General, who saw the Arrow shot, and perceiving it aimed at the Prince, had not
bowed his Head between, on purpose to receive it in his own Body rather than it
should touch that of the Prince, and so saved him.

'Twas then, afflicted as Oroonoko was, that he was proclaimed General in the
old Man's place; and then it was, at the finishing of that War, which had
continued for two Years, that the Prince came to Court; where he had hardly
been a Month together, from the time of his fifth Year, to that of Seventeen;
and 'twas amazing to imagine where it was he learned so much Humanity; or, to
give his Accomplishments a juster Name, where 'twas he got that real Greatness
of Soul, those refined Notions of true Honor, that absolute Generosity, and
that Softness that was capable of the highest Passions of Love and Gallantry,
whose Objects were almost continually fighting Men, or those mangled, or dead;
who heard no Sounds, but those of War and Groans: Some part of it we may
attribute to the Care of a Frenchman of Wit and Learning; who finding it turn
to very good Account to be a sort of Royal Tutor to this young Black, and
perceiving him very ready, apt, and quick of Apprehension, took a great
pleasure to teach him Morals, Language and Science; and was for it extremely
beloved and valued by him. Another Reason was, He loved, when he came from War,
to see all the English Gentlemen that traded thither; and did not only learn
their Language, but that of the Spaniards also, with whom he traded afterward
for Slaves.

I have often seen and conversed with this great Man, and been a Witness to
many of his mighty Actions; and do assure my Reader, the most Illustrious
Courts could not have produced a braver Man, both for Greatness of Courage and
Mind, a Judgment more solid, a Wit more quick, and a Conversation more sweet
and diverting. He knew almost as much as if he had read much: He had heard of,
and admired the Romans; he had heard of the late Civil Wars in England, and the
deplorable Death of our great Monarch; and would discourse of it with all the
Sense, and Abhorrence of the Injustice imaginable. He had an extreme good and
graceful Mien, and all the Civility of a well-bred great Man. He had nothing of
Barbarity in his Nature, but in all Points addressed himself, as if his
Education had been in some European Court.

This great and just Character of Oroonoko gave me an extreme Curiosity to see
him, especially when I knew he spoke French and English, and that I could talk
with him. But though I had heard so much of him, I was as greatly surpised
when I saw him, as if I had heard nothing of him; so beyond all Report I found
him. He came into the Room, and addressed himself to me, and some other Women,
with the best Grace in the World. He was pretty tall, but of a Shape the most
exact that can be fansy'd: The most famous Statuary could not form the Figure
of a Man more admirably turned from Head to Foot. His Face was not of that
brown, rusty Black which most of that Nation are, but a perfect Ebony, or
polished Jett. His Eyes were the most awful that could be seen, and very
piercing; the White of 'em being like Snow, as were his Teeth. His Nose was
rising and Roman, instead of African and flat. His Mouth, the finest shaped
that could be seen; far from those great turned Lips, which are so natural to
the rest of the Negroes. The whole Proportion and Air of his Face was so noble,
and exactly formed, that, bating his Color, there could be nothing in Nature
more beautiful, agreeable and handsome. There was no one Grace wanting, that
bears the Standard of true Beauty: His Hair came down to his Shoulders, by the
Aids of Art; which was, by pulling it out with a Quill, and keeping it combed;
of which he took particular Care. Nor did the Perfections of his Mind come
short of those of his Person; for his Discourse was admirable upon almost any
Subject; and who-ever had heard him speak, would have been convinced of their
Errors, that all fine Wit is confined to the White Men, especially to those of
Christendom; and would have confessed that Oroonoko was as capable even of
reigning well, and of governing as wisely, had as great a Soul, as politic
Maxims, and was as sensible of Power as any Prince civilized in the most
refined Schools of Humanity and Learning, or the most Illustrious Courts.

This Prince, such as I have described him, whose Soul and Body were so
admirably adorned, was (while yet he was in the Court of his Grandfather) as I
said, as capable of Love, as 'twas possible for a brave and gallant Man to be;
and in saying that, I have named the highest Degree of Love; for sure, great
Souls are most capable of that Passion.

I have already said, the old General was killed by the shot of an Arrow, by
the Side of this Prince, in Battle; and that Oroonoko was made General. This
old dead Hero had one only Daughter left of his Race; a Beauty that, to
describe her truly, one need say only, she was Female to the noble Male; the
beautiful Black Venus, to our young Mars; as charming in her Person as he, and
of delicate Virtues. I have seen an hundred White Men sighing after her, and
making a thousand Vows at her Feet, all vain, and unsuccessful: And she was,
indeed, too great for any, but a Prince of her own Nation to adore.

Oroonoko coming from the Wars, (which were now ended) after he had made his
Court to his Grandfather, he thought in Honor he ought to make a Visit to
Imoinda, the Daughter of his Foster-father, the dead General; and to make some
Excuses to her, because his Preservation was the Occasion of her Father's
Death; and to present her with those Slaves that had been taken in this last
Battle, as the Trophies of her Father's Victories. When he came, attended by
all the young Soldiers of any Merit, he was infinitely surpised at the Beauty
of this fair Queen of Night, whose Face and Person was so exceeding all he had
ever beheld, that lovely Modesty with which she received him, that Softness in
her Look, and Sighs, upon the melancholy Occasion of this Honor that was done
by so great a Man as Oroonoko, and a Prince of whom she had heard such
admirable things; the Awfulness wherewith she received him, and the Sweetness
of her Words and Behavior while he stayed, gained a perfect Conquest over his
fierce Heart, and made him feel, the Victor could be subdued. So that having
made his first Complements, and presented her an hundred and fifty Slaves in
Fetters, he told her with his Eyes, that he was not insensible of her Charms;
while Imoinda, who wished for nothing more than so glorious a Conquest, was
pleased to believe, she understood that silent Language of newborn Love; and
from that Moment, put on all her Additions to Beauty.

The Prince returned to Court with quite another Humor than before; and though
he did not speak much of the fair Imoinda, he had the pleasure to hear all his
Followers speak of nothing but the Charms of that Maid; insomuch that, even in
the Presence of the old King, they were extolling her, and heightning, if
possible, the Beauties they had found in her: So that nothing else was talked
of, no other Sound was heard in every Corner where there were Whisperers, but
Imoinda! Imoinda!

'Twill be imagined Oroonoko stayed not long before he made his second Visit;
nor, considering his Quality, not much longer before he told her, he adored
her. I have often heard him say, that he admired by what strange Inspiration he
came to talk things so soft, and so passionate, who never knew Love, nor was
used to the Conversation of Women; but (to use his own Words) he said, Most
happily, some new, and till then unknown Power instructed his Heart and Tongue
in the Language of Love, and at the same time, in favor of him, inspired
Imoinda with a Sense of his Passion. She was touched with what he said, and
returned it all in such Answers as went to his very Heart, with a Pleasure
unknown before: Nor did he use those Obligations ill, that Love had done him;
but turned all his happy Moments to the best advantage; and as he knew no Vice,
his Flame aimed at nothing but Honor, if such a distinction may be made in
Love; and especially in that Country, where Men take to themselves as many as
they can maintain; and where the only Crime and Sin with Woman is, to turn her
off, to abandon her to Want, Shame and Misery: Such ill Morals are only
practiced in Christian-Countries, where they prefer the bare Name of Religion;
and, without Virtue or Morality, think that is sufficient. But Oroonoko was none
of those Professors; but as he had right Notions of Honor, so he made her such
Propositions as were not only and barely such; but, contrary to the Custom of
his Country, he made her Vows, she should be the only woman he would possess
while he lived; that no Age or Wrinkles should incline him to change, for her
Soul would be always fine, and always young; and he should have an eternal Idea
in his Mind of the Charms she now bore, and should look into his Heart for that
Idea, when he could find it no longer in her Face.

After a thousand Assurances of his lasting Flame, and her eternal Empire over
him, she condescended to receive him for her Husband; or rather, received him,
as the greatest Honor the God's could do her.

There is a certain Ceremony in these Cases to be observed, which I forgot to
ask him how performed; but 'twas concluded on both sides, that, in Obedience to
him, the Grandfather was to be first made acquainted with the Design: for they
pay a most absolute Resignation to the Monarch, especially when he is a Parent
also.

On the other side, the old King, who had many Wives, and many Concubines,
wanted not Court-Flatterers to insinuate in his Heart a thousand tender
Thoughts for this young Beauty; and who represented her to his Fancy, as the
most charming he had ever possessed in all the long Race of his numerous Years.
At this Character his old Heart, like an extinguished Brand, most apt to take
Fire, felt new Sparks of Love, and began to kindle; and now grown to his second
Childhood, longed with Impatience to behold this gay thing, with whom, alas! he
could but innocently play. But how he should be confirmed she was this Wonder,
before he used his Power to call her to Court (where Maidens never came, unless
for the King's private Use) he was next to consider; and while he was so doing,
he had Intelligence brought him, that Imoinda was most certainly Mistress to
the Prince Oroonoko. This gave him some Shagrien; however, it gave him also an
Opportunity, one Day, when the Prince was a-hunting, to wait on a Man of
Quality, as his Slave and Attendant, who should go and make a Present to
Imoinda, as from the Prince; he should then, unknown, see this fair Maid, and
have an Opportunity to hear what Message she would return the Prince for his
Present; and from thence gather the state of her Heart, and degree of her
Inclination. This was put in Execution, and the old Monarch saw, and burnt: He
found her all he had heard, and would not delay his Happiness, but found he
should have some Obstacle to overcome her Heart; for she expressed her Sense of
the Present the Prince had sent her, in terms so sweet, so soft and pretty,
with an Air of Love and Joy that could not be dissembled; insomuch that 'twas
past doubt whether she loved Oroonoko entirely. This gave the old King some
Affliction; but he salv'd it with this, that the Obedience the People pay their
King, was not at all inferior to what they paid their Gods: And what Love
would not oblige Imoinda to do, Duty would compel her to.

He was therefore no sooner got to his Apartment, but he sent the Royal Veil to
Imoinda; that is, the Ceremony of Invitation; he sends the Lady, he has a Mind
to honor with his Bed, a Veil, with which she is covered, and secured for the
King's Use; and it is Death to disobey; besides, held a most impious
Disobedience.

It Is not to be imagined the Surprise and Grief that seized this lovely Maid at
this News and Sight. However, as Delays in these Cases are dangerous, and
Pleading worse than Treason; trembling, and almost fainting, she was obliged to
suffer her self to be covered, and led away.

They brought her thus to Court; and the King, who had caused a very rich Bath
to be prepared, was led into it, where he sat under a Canopy, in State, to
receive this longed for Virgin; whom he having commanded should be brought to
him, they (after dis-robing her) led her to the Bath, and making fast the
Doors, left her to descend. The King, without more Courtship, bad her throw off
her Mantle, and come to his Arms. But Imoinda, all in Tears, threw her self on
the Marble, on the Brink of the Bath, and besought him to hear her. She told
him, as she was a Maid, how proud of the Divine Glory she should have been of
having it in her power to oblige her King: but as by the Laws, he could not;
and from his Royal Goodness, would not take from any Man his wedded Wife: So
she believed she should be the Occasion of making him commit a great Sin, if
she did not reveal her State and Condition; and tell him, she was another, and
could not be so happy to be his.

The King, enraged at this Delay, hastily demanded the Name of the bold Man,
that had married a Woman of her Degree, without his Consent. Imoinda, seeing
his Eyes fierce, and his Hands tremble; whether with Age, or Anger, I know not;
but she fansy'd the last, almost repented she had said so much, for now she
feared the Storm would fall on the Prince; she therefore said a thousand things
to appease the raging of his Flame, and to prepare him to hear who it was with
Calmness; but before she spoke, he imagined who she meant, but would not seem
to do so, but commanded her to lay aside her Mantle, and suffer her self to
receive his Caresses; or, by his Gods, he swore, that happy Man whom she was
going to name should die, though it were even Oroonoko himself. Therefore (said
he) deny this Marriage, and swear thy self a Maid. That (replied Imoinda) by
all our Powers I do; for I am not yet known to my Husband. It Is enough (said
the King:) it is enough to satisfy both my Conscience, and my Heart. And rising
from his Seat, he went, and led her into the Bath; it being in vain for her to
resist.

In this time the Prince, who was returned from Hunting, went to visit his
Imoinda, but found her gone; and not only so, but heard she had received the
Royal Veil. This raised him to a Storm; and in his Madness, they had much ado
to save him from laying violent Hands on himself. Force first prevailed, and
then Reason: They urged all to him, that might oppose his Rage; but nothing
weighed so greatly with him as the King's Old Age incapable of injuring him
with Imoinda. He would give way to that Hope, because it pleased him most, and
flattered best his Heart. Yet this served not altogether to make him cease his
different Passions, which sometimes raged within him, and sometimes softened
into Showers. 'Twas not enough to appease him, to tell him, his Grandfather
was old, and could not that way injure him, while he retained that awful Duty
which the young Men are used there to pay to their grave Relations. He could
not be convinced he had no Cause to sigh and mourn for the Loss of a Mistress,
he could not with all his Strength and Courage retrieve. And he would often
cry, O my Friends! were she in walled Cities, or confined from me in
Fortifications of the greatest Strength; did Enchantments or Monsters detain
her from me, I would venture through any Hazard to free her: Buthere, in the
Arms of a feeble old Man, my Youth, my violent Love, my Trade in Arms, and all
my vast Desire of Glory, avail me nothing: Imoinda is as irrecoverably lost to
me, as if she were snatched by the cold Arms of Death: Oh! she is never to be
retrieved. If I would wait tedious Years, till Fate should bow the old King to
his Grave; even that would not leave me Imoinda free; but still that Custom
that makes it so vile a Crime for a Son to marry his Father's Wives or
Mistresses, would hinder my Happiness; unless I would either ignobly set an ill
President to my Successors, or abandon my Country, and fly with her to some
unknown World, who never heard our Story.

But it was objected to him, that his Case was not the same; for Imoinda being
his lawful Wife, by solemn Contract, 'twas he was the injured Man, and might,
if he so pleased, take Imoinda back, the Breach of the Law being on his
Grand-father's side; and that if he could circumvent him, and redeem her from
the Otan, which is the Palace of the King's Women, a sort of Seraglio, it was
both just and lawful for him so to do.

This Reasoning had some force upon him, and he should have been entirely
comforted, but for the Thought that she was possessed by his Grandfather.
However, he loved so well, that he was resolved to believe what most favored
his Hope; and to endeavor to learn from Imoinda's own Mouth, what only she
could satisfy him in; whether she was robbed of that Blessing, which was only
due to his Faith and Love. But as it was very hard to get a Sight of the Women,
for no Men ever entered into the Otan, but when the King went to entertain
himself with some one of his Wives, or Mistresses; and 'twas Death at any other
time, for any other to go in; so he knew not how to contrive to get a Sight of
her.

While Oroonoko felt all the Agonies of Love, and suffered under a Torment the
most painful in the World, the old King was not exempted from his share of
Affliction. He was troubled for having been forced by an irresistible Passion,
to rob his Son of a Treasure, he knew, could not but be extremely dear to him,
since she was the most beautiful that ever had been seen; and had besides, all
the Sweetness and Innocence of Youth and Modesty, with a Charm of Wit
surpassing all. He found that, however she was forced to expose her lovely
Person to his withered Arms, she could only sigh and weep there, and think of
Oroonoko; and oftentimes could not forbear speaking of him, though her Life
were, by Custom, forfeited by owning her Passion. But she spoke not of a Lover
only, but of a Prince dear to him, to whom she spoke; and of the Praises of a
Man, who, till now, filled the old Man's Soul with Joy at every Recital of his
Bravery, or even his Name. And 'twas this Dotage on our young Hero, that gave
Imoinda a thousand Privileges to speak of him, without offending; and this
Condescension in the old King, that made her take the Satisfaction of speaking
of him so very often.

Besides, he many times inquired how the Prince bore himself; and those of whom
he asked, being entirely Slaves to the Merits and Verrues of the Prince, still
answered what they thought conduced best to his Service; which was, to make the
old King fansy that the Prince had no more Interest in Imoinda, and had
resigned her willingly to the Pleasure of the King; that he diverted himself
with his Mathematicians, his Fortifications, his Officers, and his Hunting.

This pleased the old Lover, who failed not to report these things again to
Imoinda, that she might, by the Example of her young Lover, withdraw her Heart,
and rest better contented in his Arms. But however she was forced to receive
this unwelcome News, in all Appearance, with Unconcern, and Content, her Heart
was bursting within, and she was only happy when she could get alone, to vent
her Griefs and Moans with Sighs and Tears.

What Reports of the Prince's Conduct were made to the King, he thought good to
justify as far as possibly he could by his Actions; and when he appeared in
the Presence of the King, he showed a Face not at all betraying his Heart: So
that in a little time the old Man, being entirely convinced that he was no
longer a Lover of Imoinda, he carried him with him, in his Train, to the Otan,
often to banquet with his Mistress. But as soon as he entered, one Day, into
the Apartment of Imoinda, with the King, at the first Glance from her Eyes,
notwithstanding all his determine d Resolution, he was ready to sink in the
place where he stood; and had certainly done so, but for the Support of Aboan,
a young Man, who was next to him; which, with his Change of Countenance, had
betrayed him, had the King chanced to look that way. And I have observed, it is
a very great Error in those, who laugh when one says, A Negro can change
Color; for I have seen 'em as frequently blush, and look pale, and that as
visibly as ever I saw in the most beautiful White. And it is certain that both
these Changes were evident, this Day, in both these Lovers. And Imoinda, who
saw with some Joy the Change in the Prince's Face, and found it in her own,
strove to divert the King from beholding either, by a forced Caress, with which
she met him; which was a new Wound in the Heart of the poor dying Prince. But
as soon as the King was busied in looking on some fine thing of Imoinda's
making, she had time to tell the Prince with her angry, but Love-darting Eyes,
that she resented his Coldness, and bemoaned her own miserable Captivity. Nor
were his Eyes silent, but answered hers again, as much as Eyes could do,
instructed by the most tender, and most passionate Heart that ever loved: And
they spoke so well, and so effectually, as Imoinda no longer doubted, but she
was the only Delight, and the Darling of that Soul she found pleading in 'em
its Right of Love, which none was more willing to resign than she. And 'twas
this powerful Language alone that in an Instant conveyed all the Thoughts of
their Souls to each other; that they both found, there wanted but Opportunity
to make them both entirely happy. But when he saw another Door opened by
Onahal, a former old Wife of the King's, who now had Charge of Imoinda; and saw
the Prospect of a Bed of State made ready, with Sweets and Flowers for the
Dalliance of the King; who immediately lead the trembling Victim from his
Sight, into that prepared Repose. What Rage! what wild Frenzies seized his
Heart! which forcing to keep within Bounds, and to suffer without Noise, it
became the more insupportable, and rent his Soul with ten thousand Pains. He
was forced to retire, to vent his Groans; where he fell down on a Carpet, and
lay struggling a long time, and only breathing now and then, -- O Imoinda! When
Onahal had finished her necessary Affair within, shutting the Door, she came
forth to wait, till the King called; and hearing some one sighing in the other
Room, she passed on, and found the Prince in that deplorable Condition, which
she thought needed her Aid: She gave him Cordials, but all in vain; till
finding the nature of his Disease, by his Sighs, and naming Imoinda. She told
him, he had not so much Cause as he imagined, to afflict himself; for if he
knew the King so well as she did, he would not lose a Moment in Jealousy, and
that she was confident that Imoinda bore, at this Minute, part in his
Affliction. Aboan was of the same Opinion; and both together, persuaded him to
reassume his Courage; and all sitting down on the Carpet, the Prince said so
many obliging things to Onahal, that he half persuaded her to be of his Party.
And she promised him, she would thus far comply with his just Desires, that she
would let Imoinda know how faithful he was, what he suffered, and what he said.

This Discourse lasted till the King called, which gave Oroonoko a certain
Satisfaction; and with the Hope Onahal had made him conceive, he assumed a Look
as gay as 'twas possible a Man in his Circumstances could do; and presently
after, he was called in with the rest who waited without. The King commanded
Music to be brought, and several of his young Wives and Mistresses came all
together by his Command, to dance before him; where Imoinda performed her Part
with an Air and Grace so passing all the rest, as her Beauty was above 'em; and
received the Present, ordained as a Prize. The Prince was every Moment more
charmed with the new Beauties and Graces he beheld in this fair One: And while
he gazed, and she danced, Onahal was retired to a Window with Aboan.

This Onahal, as I said, was one of the Cast-Mistresses of the old King; and
'twas these (now past their Beauty) that were made Guardians, or Governants to
the new, and the young Ones; and whose Business it was, to teach them all those
wanton Arts of Love, with which they prevailed and charmed heretofore in their
Turn; and who now treated the triumphing happy Ones with all the Severity, as
to Liberty and Freedom, that was possible, in revenge of those Honors they rob
them of; envying them those Satisfactions, those Gallantries and Presents, that
were once made to themselves, while Youth and Beauty lasted, and which they now
saw pass were regardless by, and paid only to the Bloomings. And certainly,
nothing is more afflicting to a decayed Beauty, than to behold in it self
declining Charms, that were once adored; and to find those Caresses paid to new
Beauties, to which once she laid a Claim; to hear 'em whisper as she passes by,
That once was a delicate Woman. These abandoned Ladies therefore endeavor to
revenge all the Despights, and Decays of Time, on these flourishing happy Ones.
And 'twas this Severity, that gave Oroonoko a thousand Fears he should never
prevail with Onahal, to see Imoinda. But, as I said, she was now retired to a
Window with Aboan.

This young Man was not only one of the best Quality, but a Man extremely well
made, and beautiful; and coming often to attend the King to the Otan, he had
subdued the Heart of the antiquated Onahal, which had not forgot how pleasant
it was to be in Love: And though she had some Decays in her Face, she had none
in her Sense and Wit; she was there agreeable still, even to Aboan's Youth; so
that he took pleasure in entertaining her with Discourses of Love: He knew
also, that to make his Court to these She-Favourites, was the way to be great;
these being the Persons that do all Affairs and Business at Court. He had also
observed that she had given him Glances more tender and inviting, than she had
done to others of his Quality: And now, when he saw that her Favor could so
absolutely oblige the Prince, he failed not to sigh in her Ear, and to look
with Eyes all soft upon her, and give her Hope that she had made some
Impressions on his Heart. He found her pleased at this, and making a thousand
Advances to him; but the Ceremony ending, and the King departing, broke up the
Company for that Day, and his Conversation.

Aboan failed not that Night to tell the Prince of his Success, and how
advantageous the Service of Onahal might be to his Amor with Imoinda. The
Prince was overjoyed with this good News, and besought him, if it were
possible, to caress her so, as to engage her entirely; which he could not fail
to do, if he complied with her Desires: For then (said the Prince) her Life
lying at your Mercy, she must grant you the Request you make in my Behalf.
Aboan understood him; and assured him, he would make Love so effectually, that
he would defy the most expert Mistress of the Art, to find out whether he
dissembled it, or had it really. And 'twas with Impatience they waited the next
Opportunity of going to the Otan.

The Wars came on, the Time of taking the Field approached, and 'twas
impossible for the Prince to delay his going at the Head of his Army, to
encounter the Enemy: So that every Day seemed a tedious Year, till he saw his
Imoinda; for he believed he could not live, if he were forced away without
being so happy. 'Twas with Impatience therefore, that he expected the next
Visit the King would make; and, according to his Wish, it was not long.

The Parley of the Eyes of these two Lovers had not passed so secretly, but an
old jealous Lover could spy it; or rather, he wanted not Flatterers, who told
him, they observed it: So that the Prince was hastened to the Camp, and this
was the last Visit he found he should make to the Otan; he therefore urged
Aboan to make the best of this last Effort, and to explain himself so to
Onahal, that she, deferring her Enjoyment of her young Lover no longer, might
make way for the Prince to speak to Imoinda.

The whole Affair being agreed on between the Prince and Aboan, they attended
the King, as the Custom was, to the Otan; where, while the whole Company was
taken up in beholding the Dancing, and antic Postures the Women Royal made, to
divert the King, Onahal singl'd out Aboan, whom she found most pliable to her
Wish. When she had him where she believed she could not be heard, she sighed to
him, and softly cried, Ah, Aboan! When will you be sensible of my Passion? I
confess it with my Mouth, because I would not give my Eyes the Lie; and you
have but too much already perceived they have confessed my Flame: Nor would I
have you believe, that because I am the abandoned Mistress of a King, I esteem
my self altogether divested of Charms. No, Aboan; I have still a Rest of Beauty
enough engaging, and have learned to please too well, not to be desirable. I
can have Lovers still, but will have none but Aboan. Madam (replied the
half-feigning Youth) you have already, by my Eyes, found, you can still
conquer; and I believe it is in pity of me, you condescend to this kind
Confession. But, Madam, Words are used to be so small a part of our
Country-Courtship, that it is rare one can get so happy an Opportunity as to
tell one's Heart; and those few Minutes we have are forced to be snatched for
more certain Proofs of Love, than speaking and sighing; and such I languish for.

He spoke this with such a Tone, that she hoped it true, and could not forbear
believing it; and being wholly transported with Joy, for having subdued the
finest of all the King's Subjects to her Desires, she took from her Ears two
large Pearls, and commanded him to wear 'em in his. He would have refused 'em,
crying, Madam, these are not the Proofs of your Love that I expect; it is
Opportunity, it is a Lonehour only, that can make me happy. But forcing the
Pearls into his Hand, she whispered softly to him, Oh! Do not fear a Woman's
Invention, when Love sets her a-thinking. And pressing his Hand, she cried,
This Night you shall be happy. Come to the Gate of the Orange-Groves, behind
the Otan; and I will be ready, about Midnight, to receive you. 'Twas thus
agreed, and she left him, that no notice might be taken of their speaking
together.

The Ladies were still dancing, and the King, laid on a Carpet, with a great
deal of pleasure, was beholding them, especially Imoinda; who that Day appeared
more lovely than ever, being enlivened with the good Tidings Onahal had brought
her of the constant Passion the Prince had for her. The Prince was laid on
another Carpet, at the other end of the Room, with his Eyes fixed on the Object
of his Soul; and as she turned, or moved, so did they; and she alone gave his
Eyes and Soul their Motions: Nor did Imoinda employ her Eyes to any other Use,
than in beholding with infinite Pleasure the Joy she produced in those of the
Prince. But while she was more regarding him, than the Steps she took, she
chanced to fall; and so near him, as that leaping with extreme force from the
Carpet, he caught her in his Arms as she fell; and 'twas visible to the whole
Presence, the Joy wherewith he received her: He clasped her close to his Bosom,
and quite forgot that Reverence that was due to the Mistress of a King, and
that Punishment that is the Reward of a Boldness of this nature; and had not
the Presence of Mind of Imoinda (fonder of his Safety, than her own) befriended
him, in making her spring from his Arms, and fall into her Dance again, he had,
at that Instant, met his Death; for the old King, jealous to the last degree,
rose up in Rage, broke all the Diversion, and led Imoinda to her Apartment, and
sent out Word to the Prince, to go immediately to the Camp; and that if he were
found another Night in Court, he should suffer the Death ordained for
disobedient Offenders.

You may imagine how welcome this News was to Oroonoko, whose unseasonable
Transport and Caress of Imoinda was blamed by all Men that loved him; and now
he perceived his Fault, yet cried, That for such another Moment, he would be
content to die.

All the Otan was in disorder about this Accident; and Onahal was particularly
concerned, because on the Prince's Stay depended her Happiness; for she could
no longer expect that of Aboan. So that, ever they departed, they contrived it
so, that the Prince and he should come both that Night to the Grove of the
Otan, which was all of Oranges and Citrons; and that there they should wait her
Orders.

They parted thus, with Grief enough, till Night; leaving the King in
possession of the lovely Maid. But nothing could appease the Jealousy of the
old Lover: He would not be imposed on, but would have it, that Imoinda made a
false Step on purpose to fall into Oroonoko's Bosom, and that all things looked
like a Design on both sides, and 'twas in vain she protested her Innocence: He
was old and obstinate, and left her more than half assured that his Fear was
true.

The King going to his Apartment, sent to know where the Prince was, and if he
intended to obey his Command. The Messenger returned, and told him, he found
the Prince pensive, and altogether unpreparing for the Campaign; that he lay
negligently on the Ground, and answered very little. This confirmed the
Jealousy of the King, and he commanded that they should very narrowly and
privately watch his Motions; and that he should not stir from his Apartment,
but one Spy or other should be employed to watch him: So that the Hour
approaching, wherein he was to go to the Citron-Grove; and taking only Aboan
along with him, he leaves his Apartment, and was watched to the very Gate of
the Otan; where he was seen to enter, and where they left him, to carry back
the Tidings to the King.

Oroonoko and Aboan were no sooner entered, but Onahal led the Prince to the
Apartment of Imoinda; who, not knowing any thing of her Happiness, was laid in
Bed. But Onahal only left him in her Chamber, to make the best of his
Opportunity, and took her dear Aboan to her own; where he showed the height of
Complaisance for his Prince, when, to give him an Opportunity, he suffered
himself to be caressed in Bed by Onahal.

The Prince softly wakened Imoinda, who was not a little surpised with Joy to
find him there; and yet she trembled with a thousand Fears. I believe, he
omitted saying nothing to this young Maid, that might persuade her to suffer
him to seize his own, and take the Rights of Love; and I believe she was not
long resisting those Arms, where she so longed to be; and having Opportunity,
Night and Silence, Youth, Love and Desire, he soon prevailed; and ravished in a
Moment, what his old Grandfather had been endeavoring for so many Months.

It Is not to be imagined the Satisfaction of these two young Lovers; nor the
Vows she made him, that she remained a spotless Maid, till that Night; and that
what she did with his Grandfather, had robbed him of no part of her
Virgin-Honour, the Gods, in Mercy and Justice, having reserved that for her
plighted Lord, to whom of Right it belonged. And it is impossible to express the
Transports he suffered, while he listened to a Discourse so charming, from her
loved Lips; and clasped that Body in his Arms, for whom he had so long
languish'd; and nothing now afflicted him, but his sudden Departure from her;
for he told her the Necessity, and his Commands; but should depart satisfied in
this, That since the old King had hitherto not been able to deprive him of
those Enjoyments which only belonged to him, he believed for the future he
would be less able to injure him; so that, abating the Scandal of the Veil,
which was no otherwise so, than that she was Wife to another: He believed her
safe, even in the Arms of the King, and innocent; yet would he have ventured at
the Conquest of the World, and have given it all, to have had her avoided that
Honor of receiving the Royal Veil. 'Twas thus, between a thousand Caresses,
that both bemoaned the hard Fate of Youth and Beauty, so liable to that cruel
Promotion: 'Twas a Glory that could well have been spared here, though desired,
and aimed at by all the young Females of that Kingdom.

But while they were thus fondly employed, forgetting how Time ran on, and that
the Dawn must conduct him far away from his only Happiness, they heard a great
Noise in the Otan, and unusual Voices of Men; at which the Prince, starting
from the Arms of the frighted Imoinda, ran to a little Battel-Ax he used to
wear by his Side; and having not so much leisure, as to put on his Habit, he
opposed himself against some who were already opening the Door; which they did
with so much Violence, that Oroonoko was not able to defend it; but was forced
to cry out with a commanding Voice, Whoever ye are that have the Boldness to
attempt to approach this Apartment thus rudely, know, that I, the Prince
Oroonoko, will revenge it with the certain Death of him that first enters:
Therefore stand back, and know, this place is sacred to Love, and me this
Night; to Morrow it is the King's.

This he spoke with a Voice so resolved and assured, that they soon retired
from the Door, but cried, It Is by the King's Command we are come; and being
satisfied by thy Voice, O Prince, as much as if we had entered, we can report
to the King the Truth of all his Fears, and leave thee to provide for thy own
Safety, as thou art advised by thy Friends.

At these Words they departed, and left the Prince to take a short and sad
Leave of his Imoinda; who trusting in the strength of her Charms, believed she
should appease the Fury of a jealous King, by saying, She was surpised, and
that it was by force of Arms he got into her Apartment. All her Concern now was
for his Life, and therefore she hastened him to the Camp; and with much a-do,
prevailed on him to go: Nor was it she alone that prevailed, Aboan and Onahal
both pleaded, and both assured him of a Lie that should be well enough
contrived to secure Imoinda. So that, at last, with a Heart sad as Death, dying
Eyes, and sighing Soul, Oroonoko departed, and took his way to the Camp.

It was not long after the King in Person came to the Otan; where beholding
Imoinda with Rage in his Eyes, he upbraided her Wickedness and Perfidy, and
threatening her Royal Lover, she fell on her Face at his Feet, bedewing the
Floor with her Tears, and imploring his Pardon for a Fault which she had not
with her Will committed; as Onahal, who was also prostrate with her, could
testify: That, unknown to her, he had broke into her Apartment, and ravished
her. She spoke this much against her Conscience; but to save her own Life,
'twas absolutely necessary she should feign this Falsity. She knew it could not
injure the Prince, he being fled to-an-Army that would stand by him, against
any Injuries that should assault him. However, this last Thought of Imoinda's
being ravished, changed the Measures of his Revenge; and whereas before he
designed to be himself her Executioner, he now resolved she should not die. But
as it is the greatest Crime in nature amongst 'em to touch a Woman, after
having been possessed by a Son, a Father, or a Brother; so now he looked on
Imoinda as a polluted thing, wholly unfit for his Embrace; nor would he resign
her to his Grandson, because she had received the Royal Veil. He therefore
removes her from the Otan, with Onahal; whom he put into safe Hands, with Order
they should be both sold off, as Slaves, to another Country, either Christian,
or Heathen; 'twas no matter where.

This cruel Sentence, worse than Death, they implored, might be reversed; but
their Prayers were vain, and it was put in Execution accordingly, and that with
so much Secrecy, that none, either without, or within the Otan, knew any thing
of their Absence, or their Destiny.

The old King, nevertheless, executed this with a great deal of Reluctance; but
he believed he had made a very great Conquest over himself, when he had once
resolved, and had performed what he resolved. He believed now, that his Love
had been unjust; and that he could not expect the Gods, or Captain of the
Clouds, (as they call the unknown Power) should suffer a better Consequence
from so ill a Cause. He now begins to hold Oroonoko excused; and to say, he had
Reason for what he did: And now every Body could assure the King, how
passionately Imoinda was beloved by the Prince; even those confessed it now,
who said the contrary before his Flame was abated. So that the King being old,
and not able to defend himself in War, and having no Sons of all his Race
remaining alive, but only this, to maintain him on his Throne; and looking on
this as a Man disobliged, first by the Rape of his Mistress, or rather, Wife;
and now by depriving of him wholly of her, he feared, might make him desperate,
and do some cruel thing, either to himself, or his old Grandfather, the
Offender; he began to repent him extremely of the Contempt he had, in his Rage,
put on Imoinda. Besides, he considered he ought in Honor to have killed her,
for this Offense, if it had been one: He ought to have had so much Value and
Consideration for a Maid of her Quality, as to have nobly put her to death; and
not to have sold her like a common Slave, the greatest Revenge, and the most
disgraceful of any; and to which they a thousand times prefer Death, and
implore it; as Imoinda did, but could not obtain that Honor. Seeing therefore
it was certain that Oroonoko would highly resent this Affront, he thought good
to make some Excuse for his Rashness to him; and to that End he sent a
Messenger to the Camp, with Orders to treat with him about the Master, to gain
his Pardon, and to endeavor to mitigate his Grief; but that by no means he
should tell him, she was sold, but secretly put to death; for he knew he
should. never obtain his Pardon for the other.

When the Messenger came, he found the Prince upon the point of Engaging with
the Enemy; but as soon as he heard of the Arrival of the Messenger, he
commanded him to his Tent, where he embraced him, and received him with Joy;
which was soon abated, by the down-cast Looks of the Messenger, who was
instantly demanded the Cause by Oroonoko, who, impatient of Delay, asked a
thousand Questions in a Breath; and all concerning Imoinda: But there needed
little Return, for he could almost answer himself of all he demanded, from his
Sighs and Eyes. At last, the Messenger casting himself at the Prince's Feet,
and kissing them, with all the Submission of a Man that had something to
implore which he dreaded to utter, he besought him to hear with Calmness what
he had to deliver to him, and to call up all his noble and Heroic Courage, to
encounter with his Words, and defend himself against the ungrateful things he
must relate. Oroonoko replied, with a deep Sigh, and a languishing Voice, -- I
am armed against their worst Efforts --; for I know they will tell me, Imoinda
is no more --; and after that, you may spare the rest. Then, commanding him to
rise, he laid himself on a Carpet, under a rich Pavillion, and remained a good
while silent, and was hardly heard to sigh. When he was come a little to
himself, the Messenger asked him leave to deliver that part of his Embassy,
which the Prince had not yet devin'd: And the Prince cried, I permit thee --
Then he told him the Affliction the old King was in, for the Rashness he had
committed in his Cruelty to Imoinda; and how he daign'd to ask Pardon for his
Offense, and to implore the Prince would not suffer that Loss to touch his
Heart too sensibly, which now all the Gods could not restore him, but might
recompense him in Glory, which he begged he would pursue; and that Death, that
common Revenger of all Injuries, would soon even the Account between him, and a
feeble old Man.

Oroonoko bad him return his Duty to his Lord and Master; and to assure him,
there was no Account of Revenge to be adjusted between them; if there were,
'twas he was the Agressor, and that Death would be just, and, maugre his Age,
would see him righted; and he was contented to leave his Share of Glory to
Youths more fortunate, and worthy of that Favor from the Gods. That henceforth
he would never lift a Weapon, or draw a Bow; but abandon the small Remains of
his Life to Sighs and Tears, and the continual Thoughts of what his Lord and
Grandfather had thought good to send out of the World, with all that Youth,
that Innocence, and Beauty.

After having spoken this, whatever his greatest Officers, and Men of the best
Rank could do, they could not raise him from the Carpet, or persuade him to
Action, and Resolutions of Life; but commanding all to retire, he shut himself
into his Pavillion all that Day, while the Enemy was ready to engage; and
wondering at the Delay, the whole Body of the chief of the Army then addressed
themselves to him, and to whom they had much a-do to get Admittance. They fell
on their Faces at the Foot of his Carpet; where they lay, and besought him with
earnest Prayers and Tears, to lead 'em forth to Battle, and not let the Enemy
take Advantages of them; and implored him to have regard to his Glory, and to
the World, that depended on his Courage and Conduct. But he made no other Reply
to all their Supplications but this, That he had now no more Business for
Glory; and for the World, it was a Trifle not worth his Care. Go, (continued
he, sighing) and divide it amongst you; and reap with Joy what you so vainly
prize, and leave me to my more welcome Destiny.

They then demanded what they should do, and whom he would constitute in his
Room, that the Confusion of ambitious Youth and Power might not ruin their
Order, and make them a Prey to the Enemy. He replied, He would not give himself
the Trouble --; but wished 'em to choose the bravest Man amongst 'em, let his
Quality or Birth be what it would: For, O my Friends (said he!) it is not
Titles make Men brave, or good; or Birth that bestows Courage and Generosity,
or makes the Owner happy. Believe this, when you behold Oroonoko, the most
wretched, and abandoned by Fortune, of all the Creation of the Gods. So turning
himself about, he would make no more Reply to all they could urge or implore.

The Army beholding their Officers return unsuccessful, with sad Faces, and
ominous Looks, that presaged no good Luck, suffered a thousand Fears to take
Possession of their Hearts, and the Enemy to come even upon 'em, before they
would provide for their Safety, by any Defense; and though they were assured by
some, who had a mind to animate 'em, that they should be immediately headed by
the Prince, and that in the mean time Aboan had Orders to command as General;
yet they were so dismayed for want of that great Example of Bravery, that they
could make but a very feeble Resistance; and at last, downright, fled before
the Enemy, who pursued 'em to the very Tents, killing 'em: Nor could all
Aboan's Courage, which that Day gained him immortal Glory, shame 'em into a
Manly Defense of themselves. The Guards that were left behind, about the
Prince's Tent, seeing the Soldiers flee before the Enemy, and scatter
themselves all over the Plain, in great Disorder, made such Outcries as roused
the Prince from his amorous Slumber, in which he had remained buried for two
Days, without permitting any Sustenance to approach him: But, in spite of all
his Resolutions, he had not the Constancy of Grief to that Degree, as to make
him insensible of the Danger of his Army; and in that Instant he leaped from
his Couch, and cried, -- Come, if we must die, let us meet Death the noblest
Way; and 'twill be more like Oroonoko to encounter him at an Army's Head,
opposing the Torrent of a conquering Foe, than lazily, on a Couch, to wait his
lingering Pleasure, and die every Moment by a thousand wrecking Thought; or be
tamely taken by an Enemy, and led a whining, Lovesick Slave, to adorn the
Triumphs of Jamoan, that young Victor, who already is entered beyond the Limits
I had prescrib d him.

While he was speaking, he suffered his People to dress him for the Field; and
sallying out of his Pavillion, with more Life and Vigor in his Countenance
than ever he showed, he appeared like some Divine Power descended to save his
Country from Destruction; and his People had purposely put him on all things
that might make him shine with most Splendour, to strike a reverend A we into
the Beholders. He flew into the thickest of those that were pursuing his Men;
and being animated with Despair, he fought as if he came on purpose to die, and
did such things as will not be believed that Humane Strength could perform; and
such as soon inspired all the rest with new Courage, and new Order: And now it
was, that they began to fight indeed; and so, as if they would not be outdone,
even by their adored Hero; who turning the Tide of the Victory, changing
absolutely the Fate of the Day, gained an entire Conquest; and Oroonoko having
the good Fortune to single out Jamoan, he took him Prisoner with his own Hand,
having wounded him almost to death.

This Jamoan afterward became very dear to him, being a Man very gallant, and
of excellent Graces, and fine Parts; so that he never put him amongst the Rank
of Captives, as they used to do, without distinction, for the common Sale, or
Market; but kept him in his own Court, where he retained nothing of the
Prisoner, but the Name, and returned no more into his own Country, so great an
Affection he took for Oroonoko; and by a thousand Tales and Adventures of Love
and Gallantry, flattered his Disease of Melancholy and Languishment; which I
have often heard him say, had certainly killed him, but for the Conversation of
this Prince and Aboan, the French Governor he had from his Childhood, of whom I
have spoken before, and who was a Man of admirable Wit, great Ingenuity and
Learning; all which he had infused into his young Pupil. This Frenchman was
banished out of his own Country, for some Heretical Notions he held; and though
he was a Man of very little Religion, he had admirable Morals, and a brave Soul.

After the total Defeat of Jamoan's Army, which all fled, or were left dead
upon the Place, they spent some time in the Camp; Oroonoko choosing rather to
remain a while there in his Tents, than enter into a Place, or live in a Court
where he had so lately suffer d so great a Loss. The Officers therefore, who
saw and knew his Cause of Discontent, invented all sorts of Diversions and
Sports, to entertain their Prince: So that what with those Amuzements abroad,
and others at home, that is, within their Tents, with the Persuasions,
Arguments and Care of his Friends and Servants that he more peculiarly prized,
he wore off in time a great part of that Shagrien, and Torture of Despair,
which the first Efforts of Imoinda's Death had given him: Insomuch as having
received a thousand kind Embassies from the King, and Invitations to return to
Court, he obeyed, though with no little Reluctance; and when he did so, there
was a visible Change in him, and for a long time he was much more melancholy
than before. But Time lessens all Extremes, and reduces 'em to Mediums and
Unconcern; but no Motives or Beauties, though all endeavored it, could engage
him in any sort of Amor, though he had all the Invitations to it, both from
his own Youth, and others Ambitions and Designs.

Oroonoko was no sooner returned from this last Conquest, and received at Court
with all the Joy and Magnificence that could be expressed to a young Victor,
who was not only returned triumphant, but beloved like a Deity, when there
arrived in the Port an English Ship.

This Person had often before been in these Countries, and was very well known
to Oroonoko, with whom he had traffick'd for Slaves, and had used to do the
same with his Predecessors.

This Commander was a Man of a finer sort of Address, and Conversation, better
bred, and more engaging, than most of that sort of Men are; so that he seemed
rather never to have been bred out of a Court, than almost all his Life at Sea.
This Captain therefore was always better received at Court, than most of the
Traders to those Countries were; and especially by Oroonoko, who was more
civilized, according to the European Mode, than any other had been, and took
more Delight in the White Nations; and, above all, Men of Parts and Wit. To
this Captain he sold abundance of his Slaves; and for the Favor and Esteem he
had for him, made him many Presents, and obliged him to stay at Court as long
as possibly he could. Which the Captain seemed to take as a very great Honor
done him, entertaining the Prince every Day with Globes and Maps, and
Mathematical Discourses and Instruments; eating, drinking, hunting and living
with him with so much Familiarity, that it was not to be doubted, but he had
gained very greatly upon the Heart of this gallant young Man. And the Captain,
in Return of all these mighty Favors, besought the Prince to honor his Vessel
with his Presence, some Day or other, to Dinner, before he should set Sail;
which he condescended to accept, and appointed his Day. The Captain, on his
part, failed not to have all things in a Readiness, in the most magnificent
Order he could possibly: And the Day being come, the Captain, in his Boat,
richly adorned with Carpets and Velvet-Cushions, rowed to the Shore to receive
the Prince; with another Longboat, where was placed all his Music and
Trumpets, with which Oroonoko was extremely delighted; who met him on the
Shore, attended by his French Governor, Jamoan, Aboan, and about an hundred of
the noblest of the Youths of the Court: And after they had first carried the
Prince on Board, the Boats fetched the rest off; where they found a very
splendid Treat, with all sorts of fine Wines; and were as well entertained, as
'twas possible in such a place to be.

The Prince having drunk hard of Punch, and several Sorts of Wine, as did all
the rest (for great Care was taken, they should want nothing of that part of
the Entertainment) was very merry, and in great Admiration of the Ship, for he
had never been in one before; so that he was curious of beholding every place,
where he decently might descend. The rest, no less curious, who were not quite
overcome with Drinking, rambl'd at their pleasure Fore and Aft, as their
Fancies guided 'em: So that the Captain, who had well laid his Design before,
gave the Word, and seized on all his Guests; they clapping great Irons suddenly
on the Prince, when he was leaped down in the Hold, to view that part of the
Vessel; and locking him fast down, secured him. The same Treachery was used to
all the rest; and all in one Instant, in several places of the Ship, were
lashed fast in Irons, and betrayed to Slavery. That great Design over, they set
all Hands to work to hoise Sail; and with as treacherous and fair a Wind, they
made from the Shore with this innocent and glorious Prize, who thought of
nothing less than such an Entertainment.

Some have commended this Act, as brave, in the Captain; but I will spare my
Sense of it, and leave it to my Reader, to judge as he pleases.

It may be easily guessed, in what manner the Prince resented this Indignity,
who may be best resembl'd to a Lion taken in a Toil; so he raged, so he
struggled for Liberty, but all in vain; and they had so wisely managed his
Fetters, that he could not use a Hand in his Defense, to quit himself of a Life
that would by no Means endure Slavery; nor could he move from the Place, where
he was tied, to any solid part of the Ship, against which he might have beat
his Head, and have finished his Disgrace that way: So that being deprived of
all other means, he resolved to perish for want of Food: And pleased at last
with that Thought, and toiled and tired by Rage and Indignation, he laid
himself down, and sullenly resolved upon dying, and refused all things that
were brought him.

This did not a little vex the Captain, and the more so, because, he found
almost all of 'em of the same Humor; so that the loss of so many brave Slaves,
so tall and goodly to behold, would have been very considerable: He therefore
ordered one to go from him (for he would not be seen himself) to Oroonoko, and
to assure him he was afflicted for having rashly done so unhospitable a Deed,
and which could not be now remedied, since they were far from shore; but since
he resented it in so high a nature, he assured him he would revoke his
Resolution, and set both him and his Friends ashore on the next Land they
should touch at; and of this the Messenger gave him his Oath, provided he would
resolve to live: And Oroonoko, whose Honor was such as he never had violated a
Word in his Life himself, much less a solemn Asseveration; believed in an
instant what this Man said, but replied, He expected for a Confirmation of
this, to have his shameful Fetters dismissed. This Demand was carried to the
Captain, who returned him answer, That the Offense had been so great which he
had put upon the Prince, that he durst not trust him with Liberty while he
remained in the Ship, for fear lest by a Valor natural to him, and a Revenge
that would animate that Valor, he might commit some Outrage fatal to himself
and the King his Master, to whom his Vessel did belong. To this Oroonoko
replied, he would engage his Honor to behave himself in all friendly Order and
Manner, and obey the Command of the Captain, as he was Lord of the King's
Vessel, and General of those Men under his Command.

This was delivered to the still doubting Captain, who could not resolve to
trust a Heathen he said, upon his Parole, a Man that had no sense or notion of
the God that he Worshipped. Oroonoko then replied, He was very sorry to hear
that the Captain pretended to the Knowledge and Worship of any Gods, who had
taught him no better Principles, than not to Credit as he would be Credited:
but they told him the Difference of their Faith occasioned that Distrust: For
the Captain had protested to him upon the Word of a Christian, and sworn in the
Name of a Great GOD; which if he should violate, he would expect eternal
Torment in the World to come. Is that all the Obligation he has to be Just to
his Oath, replied Oroonoko? Let him know I Swear by my Honor, which to
violate, would not only render me contemptible and despised by all brave and
honest Men, and so give my self perpetual pain, but it would be eternally
offending and diseasing all Mankind, harming, betraying, circumventing and
outraging all Men; but Punishments hereafter are suffered by ones self; and the
World takes no cognizances whether this God have revenged em, or not, it is done
so secretly, and deferred so long: While the Man of no Honor, suffers every
moment the scorn and contempt of the honester World, and dies every day
ignominiously in his Fame, which is more valuable than Life: I speak not this
to move Belief, but to show you how you mistake, when you imagine, That he who
will violate his Honor, will keep his Word with his Gods. So turning from him
with a disdainful smile, he refused to answer him, when he urged him to know
what Answer he should carry back to his Captain; so that he departed without
saying any more.

The Captain pondering and consulting what to do, it was concluded that nothing
but Oroonoko's Liberty would encourage any of the rest to eat, except the
Frenchman, whom the Captain could not pretend to keep Prisoner, but only told
him he was secured because he might act something in favor of the Prince, but
that he should be freed as soon as they came to Land. So that they concluded it
wholly necessary to free the Prince from his Irons, that he might show himself
to the rest; that they might have an Eye upon him, and that they could not fear
a single Man.

This being resolved, to make the Obligation the greater, the Captain himself
went to Oroonoko; where, after many Complements, and Assurances of what he had
already promised, he receiving from the Prince his Parole, and his Hand, for
his good Behavior, dismissed his Irons, and brought him to his own Cabin;
where, after having treated and reposed him a while, for he had neither eat nor
slept in four Days before, he besought him to visit those obstinate People in
Chains, who refused all manner of Sustenance; and entreated him to oblige 'em
to eat, and assure 'em of their Liberty the first Opportunity.

Oroonoko, who was too generous, not to give Credit to his Words, showed
himself to his People, who were transported with Excess of Joy at the sight of
their Darling Prince; falling at his Feet, and kissing and embracing 'em;
believing, as some Divine Oracle, all he assured 'em. But he besought 'em to
bear their Chains with that Bravery that became those whom he had seen act so
nobly in Arms; and that they could not give him greater Proofs of their Love
and Friendship, since 'twas all the Security the Captain (his Friend) could
have, against the Revenge, he said, they might possibly justly take, for the
Injuries sustained by him. And they all, with one Accord, assured him, they
could not suffer enough, when it was for his Repose and Safety.

After this they no longer refused to eat, but took what was brought 'em, and
were pleased with their Captivity, since by it they hoped to redeem the Prince,
who, all the rest of the Voyage, was treated with all the Respect due to his
Birth, though nothing could divert his Melancholy; and he would often sigh for
Imoinda, and think this a Punishment due to his Misfortune, in having left that
noble Maid behind him, that fatal Night, in the Otan, when he fled to the Camp.

Possessed with a thousand Thoughts of p^st Joys with this fair young Person,
and a thousand Griefs for her eternal Loss, he endured a tedious Voyage, and at
last arrived at the Mouth of the River of Surinam, a Colony belonging to the
King of England, and where they were to deliver some part of their Slaves.
There the Merchants and Gentlemen of the Country going on Board, to demand
those Lots of Slaves they had already agreed on; and, amongst those, the
Overseers of those Plantations where I then chanced to be, the Captain, who
had given the Word, ordered his Men to bring up those noble Slaves in Fetters,
whom I have spoken of; and having put 'em, some in one, and some in other Lots,
with Women and Children (which they call Pickaninies,) they sold 'em off, as
Slaves, to several Merchants and Gentlemen; not putting any two in one Lot,
because they would separate 'em far from each other; not daring to trust 'em
together, lest Rage and Courage should put 'em upon contriving some great
Action, to the Ruin of the Colony.

Oroonoko was first seized on, and sold to our Over-seer, who had the first
Lot, with seventeen more of all sorts and sizes; but not one of Quality with
him. When he saw this, he found what they meant; for, as I said, he understood
English pretty well; and being wholly unarmed and defenseless, so as it was in
vain to make any Resistance, he only beheld the Captain with a Look all fierce
and disdainful, upbraiding him with Eyes, that forced Blushes on his guilty
Cheeks, he only cried, in passing over the Side of the Ship, Farewell, Sir: It Is
worth my Suffering, to gain so true a Knowledge both of you, and of your Gods
by whom you swear. And desiring those that held him to forbear their pains, and
telling 'em he would make no Resistance, he cried, Come, my Fellow-Slaves; let
as descend, and see if we can meet with more Honor and Honesty in the next
World we shall touch upon. So he nimbly leaped into the Boat, and showing no
more Concern, suffered himself to be rowed up the River, with his seventeen
Companions.

The Gentleman that bought him was a young Cornish Gentleman, whose Name was
Trefry; a Man of great Wit, and fine Learning, and was carried into those Parts
by the Lord -- Governor, to manage all his Affairs. He reflecting on the last
Words of Oroonoko to the Captain, and beholding the Richness of his Vest, no
sooner came into the Boat, but he fixed his Eyes on him; and finding something
so extraordinary in his Face, his Shape and Mien, a Greatness of Look, and
Haughtiness in his Air, and finding he spoke English, had a great mind to be
enquiring into his Quality and Fortune; which, though Oroonoko endeavored to
hide, by only confessing he was above the Rank of common Slaves, Trefry soon
found he was yet something greater than he confessed; and from that Moment
began to conceive so vast an Esteem for him, that he ever after loved him as
his dearest Brother, and showed him all the Civilities due to so great a Man.

Trefry was a very good Mathematician, and a Linguist; could speak French and
Spanish; and in the three Days they remained in the Boat (for so long were they
going from the Ship, to the Plantation) he entertained Oroonoko so agreeably
with his Art and Discourse, that he was no less pleased with Trefry, than he
was with the Prince; and he thought himself, at least, fortunate in this, that
since he was a Slave, as long as he would suffer himself to remain so, he had a
Man of so excellent Wit and Parts for a Master: So that before they had
finished their Voyage up the River, he made no scruple of declaring to Trefry
all his Fortunes, and most part of what I have here related, and put himself
wholly into the Hands of his new Friend, whom he found resenting all the
Injuries were done him, and was charmed with all the Greatnesses of his
Actions; which were recited with that Modesty, and delicate Sense, as wholly
vanquished him, and subdued him to his Interest. And he promised him on his
Word and Honor, he would find the Means to re-conduct him to his own Country
again: assuring him, he had a perfect Abhorrence of so dishonorable an Action;
and that he would sooner have died, than have been the Author of such a
Perfidy. He found the Prince was very much concerned to know what became of his
Friends, and how they took their Slavery; and Trefry promised to take care
about the enquiring after their Condition, and that he should have an Account
of 'em.

Though, as Oroonoko afterward said, he had little Reason to credit the Words
of a Backearary, yet he knew not why; but he saw a kind of Sincerity, and awful
Truth in the Face of Trefry; he saw an Honesty in his Eyes, and he found him
wise and witty enough to understand Honor; for it was one of his Maxims, A Man
of Wit could not be a Knave or Villain.

In their passage up the River, they put in at several Houses for Refreshment;
and ever when they landed, numbers of People would flock to behold this Man;
not but their Eyes were daily entertained with the sight of Slaves, but the
Fame of Oroonoko was gone before him, and all People were in Admiration of his
Beauty. Besides, he had a rich Habit on, in which he was taken, so different
from the rest, and which the Captain could not strip him of, because he was
forced to surprise his Person in the Minute he sold him. When he found his
Habit made him liable, as he thought, to be gazed at the more, he begged Trefry
to give him something more befitting a Slave; which he did, and took off his
Robes. Nevertheless, he shone through all; and his Osenbrigs (a sort of brown
Holland Suit he had on) could not conceal the Graces of his Looks and Mien; and
he had no less Admirers, than when he had his dazeling Habit on: The Royal
Youth appeared in spite of the Slave, and People could not help treating him
after a different manner, without designing it: As soon as they approached him,
they venerated and esteemed him; his Eyes insensibly commanded Respect, and his
Behavior insinuated it into every Soul. So that there was nothing talked of
but this young and gallant Slave, even by those who yet knew not that he was a
Prince.

I ought to tell you, that the Christians never buy any Slaves but they give
'em some Name of their own, their native ones being likely very barbarous, and
hard to pronounce; so that Mr. Trefry gave Oroonoko that of Caesar; which Name
will live in that Country as long as that (scarce more) glorious one of the
great Roman; for it is most evident, he wanted no part of the Personal Courage
of that Caesar, and acted things as memorable, had they been done in some part
of the World replenished with People, and Historians, that might have given him
his due. But his Misfortune was, to fall in an obscure World, that afforded
only a Female Pen to celebrate his Fame; though I doubt not but it had lived
from others Endeavors, if the Dutch, who, immediately after his Time, took
that Country, had not killed, banished and dispersed all those that were
capable of giving the World this great Man's Life, much better than I have
done. And Mr. Trefry, who designed it, died before he began it; and bemoaned
himself for not having undertook it in time.

For the future therefore, I must call Oroonoko, Caesar, since by that Name
only he was known in our Western World, and by that Name he was received on
Shore at Parham-House, where he was destined a Slave. But if the King himself
(God bless him) had come ashore, there could not have been greater
Expectations by all the whole Plantation, and those neighboring ones, than was
on ours at that time; and he was received more like a Governor, than a Slave.
Notwithstanding, as the Custom was, they assigned him his Portion of Land, his
House, and his Business, up in the Plantation. But as it was more for Form,
than any Design, to put him to his Task, he endured no more of the Slave but
the Name, and remained some Days in the House, receiving all Visits that were
made him, without stirring toward that part of the Plantation where the
Negroes were.

At last, he would needs go view his Land, his House, and the Business assigned
him. But he no sooner came to the Houses of the Slaves, which are like a little
Town by it self, the Negroes all having left Work, but they all came forth to
behold him, and found he was that Prince who had, at several times, sold most
of 'em to these Parts; and, from a Veneration they pay to great Men, especially
if they know 'em, and from the Surprise and Awe they had at the sight of him,
they all cast themselves at his Feet, crying out, in their Language, Live, O
King! Long live, O King! And kissing his Feet, paid him even Divine Homage.

Several English Gentlemen were with him; and what Mr. Trefry had told 'em, was
here confirmed; of which he himself before had no other Witness than Caesar
himself: But he was infinitely glad to find his Grandeur confirmed by the
Adoration of all the Slaves.

Caesar troubled with their Over-Joy, and Over-Ceremony, besought 'em to rise,
and to receive him as their Fellow-Slave; assuring them, he was no better. At
which they set up with one Accord a most terrible and hidious Mourning and
condoling, which he and the English had much a-do to appease; but at last they
prevailed with 'em, and they prepared all their barbarous Music, and every one
killed and dressed something of his own Stock (for every Family has their Land
apart, on which, at their leisuretimes, they breed all eatable things;) and
clubbing it together, made a most magnificent Supper, inviting their Grandee
Captain, their Prince, to honor it with his Presence; which he did, and
several English with him; where they all waited on him, some playing, others
dancing before him all the time, according to the Manners of their several
Nations; and with unwearied Industry, endeavoring to please and delight him.

While they sat at Meat Mr. Trefry told Caesar, that most of these young Slaves
were undon in Love, with a fine she Slave, whom they had had about Six Months
on their Land; the Prince, who never heard the Name of Love without a Sigh, nor
any mention of it without the Curiosity of examining further into that tale,
which of all Discourses was most agreeable to him, asked, how they came to be
so Unhappy, as to be all Undon for one fair Slave? Trefry, who was naturally
Amorous, and loved to talk of Love as well as any body, proceeded to tell him,
they had the most charming Black that ever was beheld on their Plantation,
about Fifteen or Sixteen Years old, as he guest; that, for his part, he had
done nothing but Sigh for her ever since she came; and that all the white
Beautys he had seen, never charmed him so absolutely as this fine Creature had
done; and that no Man, of any Nation, ever beheld her, that did not fall in
Love with her; and that she had all the Slaves perpetually at her Feet; and the
whole Country resounded with the Fame of Clemene, for so, said he, we have
Christ'ned her: But she denis us all with such a noble Disdain, that it is a
Miracle to see, that she, who can give such eternal Desires, should herself be
all Ice, and all Unconcern. She is adorned with the most Graceful Modesty that
ever beautifyed Youth; the softest Sigher -- that, if she were capable of Love,
one would swear she languish'd for some absent happy Man; and so retired, as if
she feared a Rape even from the God of Day; or that the Breezes would steal
Kisses from her delicate Mouth. Her Task of Work some sighing Lover every day
makes it his Petition to perform for her, which she excepts blushing, and with
reluctance, for fear he will ask her a Look for a Recompense, which he dares
not presume to hope; so great an Awe she strikes into the Hearts of her
Admirers. I do not wonder, replied the Prince, that Clemene should refuse
Slaves, being as you say so Beautiful, but wonder how she escapes those who can
entertain her as you can do; or why, being your Slave, you do not oblige her to
yield. I confess, said Trefry, when I have, against her will, entertained her
with Love so long, as to be transported with my Passion; even above Decency, I
have been ready to make use of those advantages of Strength and Force Nature
has given me. But oh! she disarms me, with that Modesty and Weeping so tender
and so moving, that I retire, and thank my Stars she overcame me. The Company
laughed at his Civility to a Slave, and Caesar only applauded the nobleness of
his Passion and Nature; since that Slave might be Noble, or, what was better,
have true Notions of Honor and Virtue in her. Thus past they this Night, after
having received, from the Slaves, all imaginable Respect and Obedience.

The next Day Trefry asked Caesar to walk, when the heat was allayed, and
designedly carried him by the Cottage of the fair Slave; and told him, she whom
he spoke of last Night lived there retired. But, says he, I would not wish you
to approach, for, I am sure, you will be in Love as soon as you behold her.
Caesar assured him, he was proof against all the Charms of that Sex; and that
if he imagined his Heart could be so perfidious to Love again, after Imoinda,
he believed he should tear it from his Bosom: They had no sooner spoke, but a
little shock Dog, that Clemene had presented her, which she took great Delight
in, ran out; and she, not knowing any body was there, ran to get it in again,
and bolted out on those who were just Speaking of her: When seeing them, she
would have run in again; but Trefry caught her by the Hand, and cried, Clemene,
however you fly a Lover, you ought to pay some Respect to this Stranger:
(pointing to Caesar) But she, as if she had resolved never to raise her Eyes to
the Face of a Man again, bent 'em the more to the Earth, when he spoke, and
gave the Prince the Leisure to look the more at her. There needed no long
Gazing, or Consideration, to examine who this fair Creature was; he soon saw
Imoinda all over her; in a Minute he saw her Face, her Shape, her Air, her
Modesty, and all that called forth his Soul with Joy at his Eyes, and left his
Body destitute of almost Life; it stood without Motion, and, for a Minute, knew
not that it had a Being; and, I believe, he had never come to himself, so
oppressed he was with over-Joy, if he had not met with this Allay, that he
perceived Imoinda fall dead in the Hands of Trefry: this awakened him, and he
ran to her aid, and caught her in his Arms, where, by degrees, she came to
herself; and it is needless to tell with what transports, what ecstasies of Joy,
they both a while beheld each other, without Speaking; then Snatched each other
to their Arms; then Gaze again, as if they still doubted whether they possessed
the Blessing: They Graspt, but when they recovered their Speech, it is not to be
imagined, what tender things they expressed to each other; wondering what strange
Fate had brought 'em again together. They soon informed each other of their
Fortunes, and equally bewailed their Fate; but, at the same time, they mutually
protested, that even Fetters and Slavery were Soft and Easy; and would be
supported with Joy and Pleasure, while they could be so happy to possess each
other, and to be able to make good their Vows. Caesar swore he disdained the
Empire of the World, while he could behold his Imoinda; and she despised
Grandeur and Pomp, those Vanities of her Sex, when she could Gaze on Oroonoko.
He adored the very Cottage where she resided, and said, That little Inch of the
World would give him more Happiness than all the Universe could do; and she
vowed, It was a Palace, while adorned with the Presence of Oroonoko.

Trefry was infinitely pleased with this Novel, and found this Clemene was the
Fair Mistress of whom Caesar had before spoke; and was not a little satisfied,
that Heaven was so kind to the Prince, as to sweeten his Misfortunes by so
lucky an Accident; and leaving the Lovers to themselves, was impatient to come
down to Parham House, (which was on the same Plantation) to give me an Account
of what had happened. I was as impatient to make these Lovers a Visit, having
already made a Friendship with Caesar; and from his own Mouth learned what I
have related, which was confirmed by his Frenchman, who was set on Shore to
seek his Fortunes; and of whom they could not make a Slave, because a
Christian; and he came daily to Parham Hill to see and pay his Respects to his
Puple Prince: So that concerning and intresting my self, in all that related to
Caesar, whom I had assured of Liberty, as soon as the Governor arrived, I
hasted presently to the Place where the Lovers were, and was infinitely glad to
find this Beautiful young Slave (who had already gained all our Esteems, for
her Modesty and her extraordinary Prettyness) to be the same I had heard Caesar
speak so much off. One may imagine then, we paid her a treble Respect; and
though from her being carved in fine Flowers and Birds all over her Body, we
took her to be of Quality before, yet, when we knew Clemene was Imoinda, we
could not enough admire her.

I had forgot to tell you, that those who are Nobly born of that Country, are
so delicately Cut and Rac'd all over the forepart of the Trunk of their
Bodies, that it looks as if it were Japan'd; the Works being raised like high
Point round the Edges of the Flowers: Some are only Carved with a little
Flower, or Bird, at the Sides of the Temples, as was Caesar; and those who are
so Carved over the Body, resemble our Ancient Picts, that are figured in the
Chronicles, but these Carvings are more delicate.

From that happy Day Caesar took Clemene for his Wife, to the general Joy of
all People; and there was as much Magnificence as the Country would afford at
the Celebration of this Wedding: and in a very short time after she conceived
with Child; which made Caesar even adore her, knowing he was the last of his
Great Race. This new Accident made him more Impatient of Liberty, and he was
every Day treating with Trefry for his and Clemene's Liberty; and offered
either Gold, or a vast quantity of Slaves, which should be paid before they let
him go, provided he could have any Security that he should go when his Ransom
was paid: They fed him from Day to Day with Promises, and delayed him, till the
Lord Governor should come; so that he began to suspect them of falsehood, and
that they would delay him till the time of his Wives delivery, and make a Slave
of that too, For all the Breed is theirs to whom the Parents belong: This
Thought made him very uneasy, and his Sullenness gave them some Jealousies of
him; so that I was obliged, by some Persons, who feared a Mutiny (which is very
Fatal sometimes in those Colonies, that abound so with Slaves, that they exceed
the Whites in vast Numbers) to discourse with Caesar, and to give him all the
Satisfaction I possibly could; they knew he and Clemene were scarce an Hour in
a Day from my Lodgings; that they eat with me, and that I obliged 'em in all
things I was capable of: I entertained him with the Lives of the Romans, and
great Men, which charmed him to my Company; and her, with teaching her all the
pretty Works that I was Mistress off; and telling her Stories of Nuns, and
endeavoring to bring her to the knowledge of the true God. But of all
Discourses Caesar liked that the worst, and would never be reconciled to our
Notions of the Trinity, of which he ever made a Jest; it was a Riddle, he said,
would turn his Brain to conceive, and one could not make him understand what
Faith was. However, these Conversations failed not altogether so well to divert
him, that he liked the Company of us Women much above the Men; for he could not
Drink; and he is but an ill Companion in that Country that cannot: So that
obliging him to love us very well, we had all the Liberty of Speech with him,
especially my self, whom he called his Great Mistress; and indeed my Word would
go a great way with him. For these Reasons, I had Opportunity to take notice to
him, that he was not well pleased of late, as he used to be; was more retired
and thoughtful; and told him, I took it Ill he should Suspect we would break
our Words with him, and not permit both him and Clemene to return to his own
Kingdom, which was not so long a way, but when he was once on his Voyage he
would quickly arrive there. He made me some Answers that showed a doubt in him,
which made me ask him, what advantage it would be to doubt? it would but give
us a Fear of him, and possibly compel us to treat him so as I should be very
loath to behold: that is, it might occasion his Confinement. Perhaps this was
not so Luckily spoke of me, for I perceived he resented that Word, which I
strove to Soften again in vain: However, he assured me, that whatsoever
Resolutions he should take, he would Act nothing upon the White-People; and as
for my self, and those upon that Plantation where he was, he would sooner
forfeit his eternal Liberty, and Life it self, than lift his Hand against his
greatest Enemy on that Place: He besought me to suffer no Fears upon his
Account, for he could do nothing that Honor should not dictate; but he accused
himself for having suffered Slavery so long; yet he charged that weakness on
Love alone, who was capable of making him neglect even Glory it self; and, for
which, now he reproaches himself every moment of the Day. Much more to this
effect he spoke, with an Air impatient enough to make me know he would not be
long in Bondage; and though he suffered only the Name of a Slave, and had
nothing of the Toil and Labor of one, yet that was sufficient to render him
Uneasy; and he had been too long Idle, who used to be always in Action, and in
Arms: He had a Spirit all Rough and Fierce, and that could not be tamed to lazy
Rest; and though all endeavors were used to exercise himself in such Actions
and Sports as this World afforded, as Running, Wrestling, Pitching the Bar,
Hunting and Fishing, Chasing and Killing Tigers of a monstrous Size, which this
Continent affords in abundance; and wonderful Snakes, such as Alexander is
reported to have incounter'd at the River of Amozons, and which Caesar took
great Delight to overcome; yet these were not Actions great enough for his
large Soul, which was still panting after more renowned Action.

Before I parted that Day with him, I got, with much ado, a Promise from him to
rest yet a little longer with Patience, and wait the coming of the Lord
Governor, who was every Day expected on our Shore; he assured me he would, and
this Promise he desired me to know was given perfectly in Complaisance to me,
in whom he had an entire Confidence.

After this, I neither thought it convenient to trust him much out of our View,
nor did the Country who feared him; but with one accord it was advised to treat
him Fairly, and oblige him to remain within such a compass, and that he should
be permitted, as seldom as could be, to go up to the Plantations of the
Negroes; or, if he did, to be accompanied by some that should be rather in
appearance Attendants than Spys. This Care was for some time taken, and Caesar
looked upon it as a Mark of extraordinary Respect, and was glad his discontent
had obliged 'em to be more observant to him; he received new assurance from the
Overseer, which was confirmed to him by the Opinion of all the Gentlemen of the
Country, who made their court to him: During this time that we had his Company
more frequently than hitherto we had had, it may not be unpleasant to relate to
you the Diversions we entertained him with, or rather he us.

My stay was to be short in that Country, because my Father died at Sea, and
never arrived to possess the Honor was designed him, (which was
Lieutenant General of Six and thirty Islands, besides the Continent of Surinam)
nor the advantages he hoped to reap by them; so that though we were obliged to
continue on our Voyage, we did not intend to stay upon the Place: Though, in a
Word, I must say thus much of it, That certainly had his late Majesty, of
sacred Memory, but seen and known what a vast and charming World he had been
Master off in that Continent, he would never have parted so Easily with it to
the Dutch. It Is a Continent whose vast Extent was never yet known, and may
contain more Noble Earth than all the Universe besides; for, they say, it
reaches from East to West; one Way as far as China, and another to Peru: It
affords all things both for Beauty and Use; it is there Eternal Spring, always
the very Months of April, May and June; the Shades are perpetual, the Trees,
bearing at once all degrees of Leaves and Fruit, from blooming Buds to ripe
Autumn; Groves of Oranges, Limons, Citrons, Figs, Nutmegs, and noble
Aromaticks, continually bearing their Fragrancies. The Trees appearing all like
Nosegays adorned with Flowers of different kind; some are all White, some
Purple, some Scarlet, some Blew, some Yellow; bearing, at the same time, Ripe
Fruit and Blooming Young, or producing every Day new. The very Wood of all
these Trees have an intrinsic Value above common Timber; for they are, when
cut, of different Colors, glorious to behold; and bear a Price considerable,
to inlay withal. Besides this, they yield rich Balm, and Gums; so that we make
our Candles of such an Aromatic Substance, as does not only give a sufficient
Light, but, as they Burn, they cast their Perfumes all about. Cedar is the
common Firing, and all the Houses are built with it. The very Meat we eat, when
set on the Table, if it be Native, I mean of the Country, perfumes the whole
Room; especially a little Beast called an Armadilly, a thing which I can liken
to nothing so well as a Rhinoceros; it is all in white Armor so joynted, that it
moves as well in it, as if it had nothing on; this Beast is about the bigness
of a Pig of Six Weeks old. But it were endless to give an Account of all the
diverse Wonderful and Strange things that Country affords, and which we took a
very great Delight to go in search of; though those adventures are oftentimes
Fatal and at least Dangerous: But while we had Caesar in our Company on these
Designs we feared no harm, nor suffered any.

As soon as I came into the Country, the best House in it was presented me,
called St. John's Hill. It stood on a vast Rock of white Marble, at the Foot of
which the River ran a vast depth down, and not to be descended on that side;
the little Waves still dashing and washing the foot of this Rock, made the
softest Murmurs and Purlings in the World; and the Oposite Bank was adorned
with such vast quantities of different Flowers eternally Blowing, and every Day
and Hour new, fenced behind 'em with lofty Trees of a Thousand rare Forms and
Colors, that the Prospect was the most raving that Sands can create. On the
Edge of this white Rock, toward the River, was a Walk or Grove of Orange and
Limon Trees, about half the length of the Marl hear, whose Flowery and Fruity
bear Branches meet at the top, and hindered the Sun, whose Rays are very fierce
there, from entering a Beam into the Grove; and the cool Air that came from the
River made it not only fit to entertain People in, at all the hottest Hours of
the Day, but refreshed the sweet Blossoms, and made it always Sweet and
harming; and sure the whole Globe of the World cannot show so delightful a
Place as this Grove was: Not all the Gardens of boasted Italy cen produce a
Shade to outvie this, which Nature had joined with Art to render so exceeding
Fine; and it is a marvel to see how such vast Trees, as big as English Oaks,
could take footing on so solid a Rock, and in so little Earth, as covered that
Rock but all things by Nature there are Rare, Delightful and Wonderful. But to
our Sports;

Sometimes we would go surprising, and in search of young Tigers in their Dens,
watching when the old Ones went forth to forage for Prey; and oftentimes we
have been in great Danger, and have fled apace for our Lives, when surpised by
the Dams. But once, above all other times, we went on this Design, and Caesar
was with us, who had no sooner stolen a young Tiger from her Nest, but going
off, we incounter'd the Dam, bearing a Buttock of a Cow, which he had torn off
with his mighty Paw, and going with it toward his Den; we had only four Women,
Caesar, and an English Gentleman, Brother to Harry Martin, the great Oliverian;
we found there was no escaping this enraged and ravenous Beast. However, we
Women fled as fast as we could from it; but our Heels had not saved our Lives,
if Caesar had not laid down his Cub, when he found the Tiger quit her Prey to
make the more speed toward him; and taking Mr. Martin's Sword desired him to
stand aside, or follow the Ladies. He obeyed him, and Caesar met this monstrous
Beast of might, size, and vast Limbs, who came with open Jaws upon him; and
fixing his Awful stern Eyes full upon those of the Beast, and putting himself
into a very steady and good aiming posture of Defense, ran his Sword quite
through his Breast down to his very Heart, home to the Hilt of the Sword; the
dying Beast stretched forth her Paw, and going to grasp his Thigh, surprised
with Death in that very moment, did him no other harm than fixing her long
Nails in his Flesh very deep, feebly wounded him, but could not grasp the Flesh
to tear off any. When he had done this, he hollowed to us to return; which,
after some assurance of his Victory, we did, and found him lugging out the
Sword from the Bosom of the Tiger, who was laid in her Blood on the Ground; he
took up the Cub, and with an unconcern, that had nothing of the Joy or Gladness
of a Victory, he came and laid the Whelp at my Feet: We all extremely wondered
at his Daring, and at the Bigness of the Beast, which was about the highth of
an Heifer, but of mighty, great, and strong Limbs.

Another time, being in the Woods, he killed a Tiger, which had long infested
that part, and born away abundance of Sheep and Oxen, and other things, that
were for the support of those to whom they belonged; abundance of People
assailed this Beast, some affirming they had shot her with several Bullets
quite through the Body, at several times; and some swearing they shot her
through the very Heart, and they believed she was a Devil rather than a Mortal
thing. Caesar, had often said, he had a mind to encounter this Monster, and
spoke with several Gentlemen who had attempted her; one crying, I shot her with
so many poisoned Arrows, another with his Gun in this part of her, and another
in that; so that he remarking all these Places where she was shot, fancied
still he should overcome her, by giving her another sort of a Wound than any
had yet done; and one day said (at the Table) What Trophies and Garlands Ladies
will you make me, if I bring you home the Heart of this Ravenous Beast, that
eats up all your Lambs and Pigs? We all promised he should be rewarded at all
our Hands. So taking a Bow, which he chus'd out of a great many, he went up in
the Wood^ with two Gentlemen, where he (...) th^s Devourer to (...) not past
very far (...) but they heard her Voice, ^^owling and grumbling, as if (...)
pleased with something (...) was doing. When they came in view, they found her
muzzling in the Belly of a new ravished Sheep, which she had torn open; and
seeing herself approached, she took fast hold of her Prey, with her fore Paws,
and set a very fierce raging Look on Caesar, without offering to approach him;
for fear, at the same time, of loosing what she had in Possession. So that
Caesar remained a good while, only taking aim, and getting an opportunity to
shoot her where he designed; 'twas some time before he could accomplish it, and
to wound her, and not kill her, would but have enraged her more, and endangered
him: He had a Quiver of Arrows at his side, so that if one failed he could be
supplied; at last, retiring a little, he gave her opportunity to eat, for he
found she was Ravenous, and fell too as soon as she saw him retire; being more
eager of her Prey than of doing new Mischiefs. When he going softly to one side
of her, and hiding his Person behind certain Herbage that grew high and thick,
he took so good aim, that, as he intended, he shot her just into the Eye, and
the Arrow was sent with so good a will, and so sure a hand, that it stuck in
her Brain, and made her caper, and become mad for a moment or two; but being
seconded by another Arrow, he fell dead upon the Prey: Caesar cut him Open with
a Knife, to see where those Wounds were that had been reported to him, and why
he did not Die of 'em. But I shall now relate a thing that possibly will find
no Credit among Men, because it is a Notion commonly received with us, That
nothing can receive a Wound in the Heart and Live; but when the Heart of this
courageous Animal was taken out, there were Seven Bullets of Lead in it, and
the Wounds seam'd up with great Scars, and she lived with the Bullets a great
while, for it was long since they were shot: This Heart the Conqueror brought
up to us, and 'twas a very great Curiosity, which all the Country came to see;
and which gave Caesar occasion of many fine Discourses; of Accidents in War,
and Strange Escapes.

At other times he would go a Fishing; and discoursing on that Diversion, he
found we had in that Country a very Strange Fish, called, a Numb Eel, (an Eel
of which I have eaten) that while it is alive, it has a quality so Cold, that
those who are Angling, though with a Line of never so great a length, with a
Rod at the end of it, it shall, in the same minute the Bait is touched by this
Eel, seize him or her that holds the Rod with benumb'dness, that shall deprive
'em of Sense, for a while; and some have fallen into the Water, and others
dropped as dead on the Banks of the Rivers where they stood, as soon as this
Fish touches the Bait. Caesar used to laugh at this, and believed it impossible
a Man could loose his Force at the touch of a Fish; and could not understand
that Philosophy, that a cold Quality should be of that Nature: However, he had
a great Curiosity to try whether it would have the same effect on him it had on
others, and often tried, but in vain; at last, the sought for Fish came to the
Bait, as he stood Angling on the Bank; and instead of throwing away the Rod, or
giving it a sudden twitch out of the Water, whereby he might have caught both
the Eel, and have dismissed the Rod, before it could have too much Power over
him; for Experiment sake, he grasped it but the harder, and fainting fell into
the River; and being still possessed of the Rod, the Tide carried him senseless
as he was a great way, till an Indian Boat took him up; and perceived, when
they touched him, a Numbness seize them, and by that knew the Rod was in his
Hand; which, with a Paddle (that is, a short Oar) they struck away, and
snatched it into the Boat, Eel and all. If Caesar were almost Dead, with the
effect of this Fish, he was more so with that of the Water, where he had
remained the space of going a League; and they found they had much a-do to
bring him back to Life: But, at last, they did, and brought him home, where he
was in a few Hours well Recovered and Refreshed; and not a little Ashamed to
find he should be overcome by an Eel; and that all the People, who heard his
Defiance, would Laugh at him. But we cheared him up; and he, being convinced,
we had the Eel at Supper; which was a quarter of an Ell about, and most
delicate Meat; and was of the more Value, since it cost so Dear, as almost the
Life of so gallant a Man.

About this time we were in many mortal Fears, about some Disputes the English
had with the Indians; so that we could scarce trust our selves, without great
Numbers, to go to any Indian Towns, or Place, where they abode; for fear they
should fall upon us, as they did immediately after my coming away; and that it
was in the possession of the Dutch, who used 'em not so civilly as the English;
so that they cut in pieces all they could take, getting into Houses, and
hanging up the Mother, and all her Children about her; and cut a Footman, I
left behind me, all in Joints, and nailed him to Trees.

This feud began while I was there; so that I lost half the satisfaction I
proposed, in not seeing and visiting the Indian Towns. But one Day, bemoaning
of our Misfortunes upon this account, Caesar told us, we need not Fear; for if
we had a mind to go, he would undertake to be our Guard: Some would, but most
would not venture; about Eighteen of us resolved, and took Barge; and, after
Eight Days, arrived near an Indian Town: But approaching it, the Hearts of some
of our Company failed, and they would not venture on Shore; so we Poll'd who
would, and who would not: For my part, I said, If Caesar would, I would go; he
resolved, so did my Brother, and my Woman, a Maid of good Courage. Now none of
us speaking the Language of the People, and imagining we should have a half
Diversion in Gazing only; and not knowing what they said, we took a Fisherman
that lived at the Mouth of the River, who had been a long Inhabitant there, and
obliged him to go with us: But because he was known to the Indians, as trading
among 'em; and being, by long Living there, become a perfect Indian in Color,
we, who resolved to surprise 'em, by making 'em see something they never had
seen, (that is, White People) resolved only my self, my Brother, and Woman
should go; so Caesar, the Fisherman, and the rest, hiding behind some thick
Reeds and Flowers, that grew on the Banks, let us pass on toward the Town,
which was on the Bank of the River all along. A little distant from the Houses,
or Hutts; we saw some Dancing, others busied in fetching and carrying of Water
from the River: They had no sooner spied us, but they set up a loud Cry, that
frighted us at first; we thought it had been for those that should Kill us, but
it seems it was of Wonder and Amazement. They were all Naked, and we were
Dressed, so as is most comode for the hot Countries, very Glittering and Rich;
so that we appeared extremely fine; my own Hair was cut short, and I had a
Taffaty Cap, with Black Feathers, on my Head; my Brother was in a Stuff Suit,
with Silver Loops and Buttons, and abundance of Green Ribon; this was all
infinitely surprising to them, and because we saw them stand still, till we
approached 'em, we took Heart and advanced; came up to 'em, and offered 'em our
Hands; which they took, and looked on us round about, calling still for more
Company; who came swarming out, all wondering, and crying out Tepeeme; taking
their Hair up in their Hands, and spreading it wide to those they called out
too; as if they would say (as indeed it signified) Numberless Wonders, or not
to be recounted, no more than to number the Hair of their Heads. By degrees
they grew more bold, and from gazing upon us round, they touched us; laying
their Hands upon all the Features of our Faces, feeling our Breasts and Arms,
taking up one Petticoat, then wondering to see another; admiring our Shoes and
Stockings, but more our Garters, which we gave 'em; and they tied about their
Legs, being Laced with Silver Lace at the ends, for they much Esteem any
shining things: In fine, we suffered 'em to survey us as they pleased, and we
thought they would never have done admiring us. When Caesar, and the rest, saw
we were received with such wonder, they came up to us; and finding the Indian
Trader whom they knew, (for it is by these Fishermen, called Indian Traders, we
hold a Commerce with 'em; for they love not to go far from home, and we never
go to them) when they saw him therefore they set up a new Joy; and cried, in
their Language, Oh! here is our Tiguamy, and we shall now know whether those
things can speak: So advancing to him, some of 'em gave him their Hands, and
cried, Amora Tiguamy, which is as much as, How do you, or Welcome Friend; and
all, with one din, began to gabble to him, and asked, If we had Sense, and Wit?
if we could talk of affairs of Life, and War, as they could do? if we could
Hunt, Swim, and do a thousand things they use? He answered 'em, We could. Then
they invited us into their Houses, and dressed Venison and Buffelo for us; and,
going out, gathered a Leaf of a Tree, called a Sarumbo Leaf, of Six Yards long,
and spread it on the Ground for a Table-Cloth; and cutting another in pieces
instead of Plates, setting us on little bow Indian Stools, which they cut out
of one entire piece of Wood, and Paint, in a sort of Japan Work: They serve
every one their Mess on these pieces of Leaves, and it was very good, but too
high seasoned with Pepper. When we had eat, my Brother, and I, took out our
Flutes, and played to 'em, which gave 'em new Wonder; and I soon perceived, by
an admiration, that is natural to these People; and by the extreme Ignorance
and Simplicity of 'em, it were not difficult to establish any unknown or
extravagant Religion among them; and to impose any Notions or Fictions upon
'em. For seeing a Kinsman of mine set some Paper a Fire, with a Burning-glass,
a Trick they had never before seen, they were like to have Adored him for a
God; and begged he would give them the Characters or Figures of his Name, that
they might oppose it against Winds and Storms; which he did, and they held it
up in those Seasons, and fancied it had a Charm to conquer them; and kept it
like a Holy Relic. They are very Superstitious, and called him the Great
Peeie, that is, Prophet They show d us their Indian Peeie a Youth of about
Sixteen Years old, as handsome as Nature could make a Man. They consecrate a
beautiful Youth from his Infancy, and all Arts are used to complete him in the
finest manner, both in Beauty and Shape: He is bred to all the little Arts and
cunning they are capable of; to all the Legerdemain Tricks, and Slight of Hand,
whereby he imposes upon the Rabble; and is both a Doctor in Physic and
Divinity. And by these Tricks makes the Sick believe he sometimes eases their
Pains; by drawing from the afflicted part little Serpents, or odd Flies, or
Worms, or any Strange thing; and though they have besides undoubted good
Remedies, for almost all their Diseases, they cure the Patient more by Fancy
than by Medicines; and make themselves Feared, Loved, and Reverenced. This
young Peeie had a very young Wife, who seeing my Brother kiss her, came running
and kissed me; after this, they kissed one another, and made it a very great
Jest, it being so Novel; and new Admiration and Laughing went round the
Multitude, that they never will forget that Ceremony, never before used or
known. Caesar had a mind to see and talk with their War Captains, and we were
conducted to one of their Houses; where we beheld several of the great
Captains, who had been at Council: But so frightful a Vision it was to see 'em
no Fancy can create; no such Dreams can represent so dreadful a Spectacle. For
my part I took 'em for Hobgoblins, or Fiends, rather than Men; but however
their Shapes appeared, their Souls were very Humane and Noble; but some wanted
their Noses, some their Lips, some both Noses and Lips, some their Ears, and
others Cut through each Cheek, with long Slashes, through which their Teeth
appeared; they had other several formidable Wounds and Scars, or rather
Dismemberings; they had Comitias, or little Aprons before 'em; and Girdles of
Cotton, with their Knives naked, stuck in it; a Bow at their Backs, and a
Quiver of Arrows on their Thighs; and most had Feathers on their Heads of
diverse Colors. They cried, Amora Tigame to us, at our entrance, and were
pleased we said as much to em; they seated us, and gave us Drink of the best
Sort; and wondered, as much as the others had done before, to see us. Caesar
was marvelling as much at their Faces, wondering how they should all be so
Wounded in War; he was Impatient to know how they all came by those frightful
Marks of Rage or Malice, rather than Wounds got in Noble Battle: They told us,
by our Interpreter, That when any War was waging, two Men chosen out by some
old Captain, whose Fighting was past, and who could only teach the Theory of
War, these two Men were to stand in Competition for the Generalship, or Great
War Captain; and being brought before the old Judges, now past Labor, they are
asked, What they dare do to show they are worthy to lead an Army? When he, who
is first asked, making no Reply, Cuts of his Nose, and throws it contemptably
on the Ground; and the other does something to himself that he thinks surpasses
him, and perhaps deprives himself of Lips and an Eye; so they Slash on till one
gives out, and many have died in this Debate. And 'its by a passive Valor they
show and prove their Activity; a sort of Courage too Brutal to be applauded by
our Black Hero; nevertheless he expressed his Esteem of 'em.

In this Voyage Caesar begot so good an understanding between the Indians and
the English, that there were no more Fears, or Heart-burnings during our stay;
but we had a perfect, open, and free Trade with 'em: Many things Remarkable,
and worthy Reciting, we met with in this short Voyage; because Caesar made it
his Business to search out and provide for our Entertainment, especially to
please his dearly Adored Imoinda, who was a sharer in all our Adventures; we
being resolved to make her Chains as easy as we could, and to Compliment the
Prince in that manner that most obliged him.

As we were coming up again, we met with some Indians of strange Aspects; that
is, of a larger Size, and other sort of Features, than those of our Country:
Our Indian Slaves, that Rowed us, asked 'em some Questions, but they could not
understand us; but showed us a long Cotton String, with several Knots on it;
and told us, they had been coming from the Mountains so many Moons as there
were Knots; they were habited in Skins of a strange Beast, and brought along
with 'em Bags of Gold Dust; which, as well as they could give us to understand,
came streaming in little small Channels down the high Mountains, when the Rains
fell; and offered to be the Convoy to any Body, or Persons, that would go to
the Mountains. We carried these Men up to Parham, where they were kept till the
Lord Governor came: And because all the Country was mad to be going on this
Golden Adventure, the Governor, by his Letters, commanded (for they sent some
of the Gold to him) that a Guard should be set at the Mouth of the River of
Amazons, (a River so called, almost as broad as the River of Thames) and
prohibited all People from going up that River, it conducting to those
Mountains of Gold. But we going off for England before the Project was further
prosecuted, and the Governor being drowned in a Hurricane, either the Design
died, or the Dutch have the Advantage of it: And it is to be bemoaned what his
Majesty lost by loosing that part of America.

Though this digression is a little from my Story, however since it contains
some Proofs of the Curiosity and Daring of this great Man, I was content to
omit nothing of his Character.

It was thus, for sometime we diverted him; but now Imoinda began to show she
was with Child, and did nothing but Sigh and Weep for the Captivity of her
Lord, her Self, and the Infant yet Unborn; and believed, if it were so hard to
gain the Liberty of Two, 'twou'd be more difficult to get that for Three. Her
Griefs were so many Darts in the great Heart of Caesar; and taking his
Opportunity one Sunday, when all the Whites were overtaken in Drink, as there
were abundance of several Trades, and Slaves for Four Years, that Inhabited
among the Negro Houses; and Sunday was their Day of Debauch, (otherwise they
were a sort of Spys upon Caesar;) he went pretending out of Goodness to 'em, to
Feast amongst 'em; and sent all his Music, and ordered a great Treat for the
whole Gang, about Three Hundred Negros; and about a Hundred and Fifty were able
to bear Arms, such as they had, which were sufficient to do Execution with
Spirits accordingly: For the English had none but rusty Swords, that no
Strength could draw from a Scabbard; except the People of particular Quality,
who took care to Oil 'em and keep 'em in good Order: The Guns also, unless here
and there one, or those newly carried from England, would do no good or harm;
for it is the Nature of that County to Rust and Eat up Iron, or any Metals, but
Gold and Silver. And they are very Unexpert at the Bow, which the Negros and
Indians are perfect Masters off.

Caesar, having singl'd out these Men from the Women and Children, made an
Harangue to 'em of the Miseries, and Ignominies of Slavery; counting up all
their Toyls and Sufferings, under such Loads, Burdens, and Drudgeries, as were
fitter for Beasts than Men; Senseless Brutes, than Humane Souls. He told 'em it
was not for Days, Months, or Years, but for Eternity; there was no end to be of
their Misfortunes: They suffered not like Men who might find a Glory, and
Fortitude in Oppression; but like Dogs that loved the Whip and Bell, and fawned
the more they were beaten: That they had lost the Divine Quality of Men, and
were become insensible Asses, fit only to bear; nay worse: an Ass, or Dog, or
Horse having done his Duty, could lie down in Retreat, and rise to Work again,
and while he did his Duty endured no Stripes; but Men, Villainous, Senseless
Men, such as they, Toiled on all the tedious Week till Black Friday; and then,
whether they Worked or not, whether they were Faulty or Meriting, they
promiscuously, the Innocent with the Guilty, suffered the infamous Whip, the
sordid Stripes, from their Fellow Slaves till their Blood trickled from all
Parts of their Body; Blood, whose every drop ought to be Revenged with a Life
of some of those Tyrants, that impose it; And why, said he, my dear Friends and
Fellow Sufferers, should we be Slaves to an unknown People? Have they
Vanquished us Nobly in Fight? Have they Wone us in Honorable Battle? And are
we, by the chance of War, become their Slaves? This would not anger a Noble
Heart, this would not animate a Soldiers Soul; no, but we are Bought and Sold
like Apes, or Monkeys, to be the Sport of Women, Fools and Cowards; and the
Support of Rogues, Runagades, that have abandoned their own Countries, for
Rapin, Murders, Thefts and Villainies: Do you not hear every Day how they
upbraid each other with infamy of Life, below the Wildest Salvages; and shall
we render Obedience to such a degenerate Race, who have no one Humane Virtue
left, to distinguish 'em from the vilest Creatures? Will you, I say, suffer the
Lash from such Hands? They all Replied, with one accord, No, no, no; Caesar has
spoke like a Great Captain; like a Great King.

After this he would have proceeded, but was interrupted by a tall Negro of
some more Quality than the rest, his Name was Tuscan; who Bowing at the Feet of
Caesar, cried, My Lord, we have listened with Joy and Attention to what you
have said; and, were we only Men, would follow so great a Leader through the
World: But oh! consider, we are Husbands and Parents too, and have things more
dear to us than Life; our Wives and Children unfit for Travel, in these
unpassable Woods, Mountains and Bogs; we have not only difficult Lands to
overcome, but Rivers to Wade, and Monsters to Encounter; Ravenous Beasts of
Prey -- To this, Caesar Replied, That Honor was the First Principle in Nature,
that was to be Obeyed; but as no Man would pretend to that, without all the
Acts of Virtue, Compassion, Charity, Love, Justice and Reason; he found it not
inconsistent with that, to take an equal Care of their Wives and Children, as
they would of themselves; and that he did not Design, when he led them to
Freedom, and Glorious Liberty, that they should leave that better part of
themselves to Perish by the Hand of the Tyrant's Whip: But if there were a
Woman among them so degenerate from Love and Virtue to choose Slavery before the
pursuit of her Husband, and with the hazard of her Life, to share with him in
his Fortunes; that such an one ought to be Abandoned, and left as a Prey to the
common Enemy.

To which they all Agreed, -- and Bowed. After this, he spoke of the Impassable
Woods and Rivers; and convinced 'em, the more Danger, the more Glory. He told
them that he had heard of one Hannibal a great Captain, had Cut his Way through
Mountains of solid Rocks; and should a few Shrubs oppose them; which they could
Fire before 'em? No, 'twas a trifling Excuse to Men resolved to die, or
overcome. As for Bogs, they are with a little Labor filled and hardened; and
the Rivers could be no Obstacle, since they Swam by Nature; at least by Custom,
from their First Hour of their Birth: That when the Children were Weary they
must carry them by turns, and the Woods and their own Industry would afford
them Food. To this they all assented with Joy.

Tuscan then demanded, What he would do? He said, they would Travel toward the
Sea; Plant a New Colony, and Defend it by their Valor; and when they could
find a Ship, either driven by stress of Weather, or guided by Providence that
way, they would Sieze it, and make it a Prize, till it had Transported them to
their own Countries; at least, they should be made Free in his Kingdom, and be
Esteemed as his Fellowsufferers, and Men that had the Courage, and the Bravery
to attempt, at least, for Liberty; and if they Died in the attempt it would be
more brave, than to Live in perpetual Slavery.

They bowed and kissed his Feet at this Resolution, and with one accord Vowed
to follow him to Death. And that Night was appointed to begin their March; they
made it known to their Wives, and directed them to tie their Hamaca about their
Shoulder, and under their Arm like a Scarf; and to lead their Children that
could go, and carry those that could not. The Wives who pay an entire Obedience
to their Husbands obeyed, and stayed for 'em, where they were appointed: The
Men stayed but to furnish themselves with what defensive Arms they could get;
and All met at the Rendezvous, where Caesar made a new encouraging Speech to
'em, and led 'em out.

But, as they could not march far that Night, on Monday early, when the
Overseers went to call 'em all together, to go to Work, they were extremely
surprised, to find not one upon the Place, but all fled with what Baggage they
had. You may imagine this News was not only suddenly spread all over the
Plantation, but soon reached the Neighboring ones; and we had by Noon about
Six hundred Men, they call the Militia of the County, that came to assist us in
the persute of the Fugitives: But never did one see so comical an Army march
forth to War. The Men, of any fashion, would not concern themselves, though it
were almost the common Cause; for such Revoltings are very ill Examples, and
have very fatal Consequences oftentimes in many Colonies: But they had a
Respect for Caesar, and all hands were against the Parhamites, as they called
those of Parham Plantation; because they did not, in the first place, love the
Lord Governor; and secondly, they would have it, that Caesar was Ill used, and
Baffled with; and it is not impossible but some of the best in the Country was
of his Council in this Flight, and depriving us of all the Slaves; so that they
of the better sort would not meddle-in the matter. The Deputy Governor, of whom
I have had no great occasion to speak, and who was the most Fawning
fair-tongu'd Fellow in the World, and one that pretended the most Friendship to
Caesar, was now the only violent Man against him; and though he had nothing,
and so need fear nothing, yet talked and looked bigger than any Man: He was a
Fellow, whose Character is not fit to be mentioned with the worst of the
Slaves. This Fellow would lead his Army forth to meet Caesar; or rather to
pursue him; most of their Arms were of those sort of cruel Whips they call Cat
with Nine Tayls; some had rusty useless Guns for show; others old Basket-hilts,
whose Blades had never seen the Light in this Age; and others had long Staffs,
and Clubs. Mr. Trefry went a long, rather to be a Mediator than a Conqueror, in
such a Batail; for he foresaw, and knew, if by fighting they put the Negroes
into despair, they were a sort of sullen Fellows, that would drown, or kill
themselves, before they would yield; and he advised that fair means was best:
But Byam was one that abound^d in his own Wit, and would take his own Measures.

It was not hard to find these Fugitives; for as they fled they were forced to
fire and cut the Woods before 'em, so that Night or Day they persu'd 'em by the
light they made, and by the path they had cleared: But as soon as Caesar found
he was persu'd, he put himself in a Posture of Defense, placing all the Women
and Children in the Rear; and himself, with Tuscan by his side, or next to him,
all promising to Dye or Conquer. Encouraged thus, they never stood to Parley,
but fell on Pell-mell upon the English, and killed some, and wounded a good
many; they having recourse to their Whips, as the best of their Weapons: And as
they observed no Order, they perplexed the Enemy so sorely, with Lashing 'em in
the Eyes; and the Women and Children, seeing their Husbands so treated, being
of fearful Cowardly Dispositions, and hearing the English cry out, Yield and
Live, Yield and be Pardoned; they all run in amongst their Husbands and
Fathers, and hung about 'em, crying out, Yield, yield; and leave Caesar to
their Revenge; that by degrees the Slaves abandoned Caesar, and left him only
Tuscan and his Heroic Imoinda; who, grown big as she was, did nevertheless
press near her Lord, having a Bow, and a Quiver full of poisoned Arrows, which
she managed with such dexterity, that she wounded several, and shot the
Governor into the Shoulder; of which Wound he had like to have Died, but that
an Indian Woman, his Mistress, sucked the Wound, and cleans'd it from the
Venom: But however, he stirred not from the Place till he had Parlv'd with
Caesar, who he found was resolved to dye Fighting, and would not be Taken; no
more would Tuscan, or Imoinda. But he, more thirsting after Revenge of another
sort, than that of depriving him of Life, now made use of all his Art of
talking, and dissembling; and besought Caesar to yield himself upon Terms,
which he himself should propose, and should be Sacredly assented to and kept by
him: He told him, It was not that he any longer feared him, or could believe
the force of Two Men, and a young Heroin, could overcome all them, with all the
Slaves now on their side also; but it was the vast Esteem he had for his
Person; the desire he had to serve so Gallant a Man; and to hinder himself from
the Reproach hereafter, of having been the occasion of the Death of a Prince,
whose Valor and Magnanimity deserved the Empire of the World. He protested to
him, he looked upon this Action, as Gallant and Brave; however tending to the
prejudice of his Lord and Master, who would by it have lost so considerable a
number of Slaves; that this Flight of his should be looked on as a heat of
Youth, and rashness of a too forward Courage, and an unconsider'd impatience of
Liberty, and no more; and that he labored in vain to accomplish that which
they would effectually perform, as soon as any Ship arrived that would touch on
his Coast. So that if you will be pleased, continued he, to surrender your
self, all imaginable Respect shall be paid you; and your Self, your Wife, and
Child, if it be here born, shall depart free out of our Land. But Caesar would
hear of no Composition; though Byam urged, If he persu'd, and went on in his
Design, he would inevitably Perish, either by great Snakes, wild Beasts, or
Hunger; and he ought to have regard to his Wife, whose Condition required ease,
and not the fatigues of tedious Travel; where she could not be secured from
being devoured. But Caesar told him, there was no Faith in the White Men, or
the Gods they Adored; who instructed 'em in Principles so false, that honest
Men could not live amongst 'em; though no People professed so much, none
performed so little; that he knew what he had to do, when he dealt with Men of
Honor; but with them a Man ought to be eternally on his Guard, and never to
Eat and Drink with Christians without his Weapon of Defense in his Hand; and,
for his own Security, never to credit one Word they spoke. As for the rashness
and inconsiderateness of his Action he would confess the Governor is in the
right; and that he was ashamed of what he had done, in endeavoring to make
those Free, who were by Nature Slaves, poor wretched Rogues, fit to be used as
Christians Tools; Dogs, treacherous and cowardly, fit for such Masters; and
they wanted only but to be whipped into the knowledge of the Christian Gods to be
the vilest of all creeping things; to learn to Worship such Deities as had not
Power to make 'em Just, Brave, or Honest. In fine, after a thousand things of
this Nature, not fit here to be recited, he told Byam, he had rather Dye than
Live upon the same Earth with such Dogs. But Trefry and Byam pleaded and
protested together so much, that Trefry believing the Governor to mean what he
said; and speaking very cordially himself, generously put himself into Caesar's
Hands, and took him aside, and persuaded him, even with Tears, to Live, by
Surrendering himself, and to name his Conditions. Caesar was overcome by his Wit
and Reasons, and in consideration of Imoinda; and demanding what he desired,
and that it should be ratified by their Hands in Writing, because he had
perceived that was the common way of contract between Man and Man, amongst the
Whites: All this was performed, and Tuscan's Pardon was put in, and they
Surrender to the Governor, who walked peaceably down into the Plantation with
'em, after giving order to bury their dead. Caesar was very much toiled with
the bustle of the Day; for he had fought like a Fury, and what Mischief was
done he and Tuscan performed alone; and gave their Enemies a fatal Proof that
they durst do any thing, and feared no mortal Force.

But they were no sooner arrived at the Place, where all the Slaves receive
their Punishments of Whipping, but they laid Hands on Caesar and Tuscan, faint
with heat and toil; and, surprising them, Bound them to two several Stakes, and
Whipped them in a most deplorable and inhumane Manner, rending the very Flesh
from their Bones; especially Caesar, who was not perceived to make any Moan, or
to alter his Face, only to roll his Eyes on the Faithless Governor, and those
he believed Guilty, with Fierceness and Indignation; and, to complete his Rage,
he saw every one of those Slaves, who, but a few Davs before, Adored him as
something more than Mortal, now had a Whip to give him some Lashes, while he
strove not to break his Fetters; though, if he had, it were impossible: But he
pronounced a Woe and Revenge from his Eyes, that darted Fire, that 'twas at
once both Awful and Terrible to behold.

When they thought they were sufficiently Revenged on him, they untied him,
almost Fainting, with loss of Blood, from a thousand Wounds all over his Body;
from which they had rent his Clothes, and led him Bleeding and Naked as he was;
and loaded him all over with Irons; and then rubbed his Wounds, to complete
their Cruelty, with Indian Pepper, which had like to have made him raving Mad;
and, in this Condition, made him so fast to the Ground that he could not stir,
if his Pains and Wounds would have given him leave. They spared Imoinda, and
did not let her see this Barbarity committed toward her Lord, but carried her
down to Parham, and shut her up; which was not in kindness to her, but for fear
she should Dye with the Sight, or Miscarry; and then they should loose a young
Slave, and perhaps the Mother.

You must know, that when the News was brought on Monday Morning, that Caesar
had betaken himself to the Woods, and carried with him all the Negroes. We were
possessed with extreme Fear, which no persuasions could Dissipate, that he
would secure himself till Night; and then, that he would come down and Cut all
our Throats. This apprehension made all the Females of us fly down the River,
to be secured; and while we were away, they acted this Cruelty: For I suppose I
had Authority and Interest enough there, had I suspected any such thing, to
have prevented it; but we had not gone many Leagues, but the News overtook us
that Caesar was taken, and Whipped like a common Slave. We met on the River with
Colonel Martin, a Man of great Gallantry, Wit, and Goodness, and whom I have
celebrated in a Character of my New Comedy, by his own Name, in memory of so
brave a Man: He was Wise and Eloquent; and, from the fineness of his Parts,
bore a great Sway over the Hearts of all the Colony: He was a Friend to Caesar,
and resented this false Dealing with him very much. We carried him back to
Parham, thinking to have made an Accommodation; when we came, the First News we
heard was, that the Governor was Dead of a Wound Imoinda had given him; but it
was not so well: But it seems he would have the Pleasure of beholding the
Revenge he took on Caesar; and before the cruel Ceremony was finished, he
dropped down; and then they perceived the Wound he had on his Shoulder, was by a
venomed Arrow; which, as I said, his Indian Mistress healed, by Sucking the
Wound.

We were no sooner Arrived, but we went up to the Plantation to see Caesar,
whom we found in a very Miserable and Unexpressable Condition; and I have a
Thousand times admired how he lived, in so much tormenting Pain. We said all
things to him, that Trouble, Pity, and Good Nature could suggest; Protesting
our Innocence of the Fact, and our Abhorance of such Cruelties. Making a
Thousand Professions of Services to him, and Begging as many Pardons for the
Offenders, till we said so much, that he believed we had no Hand in his ill
Treatment; but told us, he could never Pardon Byam; as for Trefry, he confessed
he saw his Grief and Sorrow, for his Suffering, which he could not hinder, but
was like to have been beaten down by the very Slaves, for Speaking in his
Defense: But for Byam, who was their Leader, their Head; -- and should, by his
Justice, and Honor, have been an Example to 'em. -- For him, he wished to Live,
to take a dire Revenge of him, and said, It had been well for him, if he had
Sacrificed me, instead of giving me the contemptable Whip. He refused to Talk
much, but Begging us to give him our Hands; he took 'em, and Protested never to
lift up his, to do us any Harm. He had a great Respect for Colonel Martin, and
always took his Counsel, like that of a Parent; and assured him, he would obey
him in any thing, but his Revenge on Byam. Therefore, said he, for his own
Safety, let him speedily dispatch me; for if I could dispatch my self, I would
not, till that Justice were done to my injured Person, and the contempt of a
Soldier: No, I would not kill my self, even after a Whiping, but will be
content to live with that Infamy, and be pointed at by every grining Slave,
till I have completed my Revenge; and then you shall see that Oroonoko scorns
to live with the Indignity that was put on Caesar. All we could do could get no
more Words from him; and we took care to have him put immediately into a
healing Bath, to rid him of his Pepper; and ordered a Surgeon to anoint him
with healing Balm, which he suffered, and in some time he began to be able to
Walk and Eat; we failed not to visit him every Day, and, to that end, had him
brought to an apartment at Parham.

The Governor was no sooner recovered, and had heard of the menaces of Caesar,
but he called his Council; who (not to disgrace them, or Burlesque the
Government there) consisted of such notorious Villains as Newgate never
transported; and possibly originally were such, who understood neither the Laws
of God or Man; and had no sort of Principles to make 'em worthy the Name of
Men: But, at the very Council Table, would Contradict and Fight with one
another; and Swear so bloodily that 'twas terrible to hear, and see 'em. (Some
of 'em were afterward Hanged, when the Dutch took possession of the place;
others sent off in Chains:) But calling these special Rulers of the Nation
together, and requiring their Counsel in this weighty Affair, they all
concluded, that (Damn 'em) it might be their own Cases; and that Caesar ought
to be made an Example to all the Negroes, to fright 'em from daring to threaten
their Betters, their Lords and Masters; and, at this rate, no Man was safe from
his own Slaves; and concluded, nemine contradicente that Caesar should be
Hanged.

Trefry then thought it time to use his Authority; and told Byam his Command
did not extend to his Lord's Plantation; and that Parham was as much exempt
from the Law as White Hall; and that they ought no more to touch the Servants
of the Lord -- (who there represented the King's Person) than they could those
about the King himself; and that Parham was a Sanctuary; and though his Lord
were absent in Person, his Power was still in Being there; which he had
entrusted with him, as far as the Dominions of his particular Plantations
reached, and all that belonged to it; the rest of the Country, as Byam was
Lieutenant to his Lord, he might exercise his Tyrany upon. Trefry had others as
powerful, or more, that int'rested themselves in Caesar's Life, and absolutely
said, He should be Defended. So turning the Governor, and his wise Council, out
of Doors, (for they sat at Parham-house) they set a Guard upon our Landing
Place, and would admit none but those we called Friends to us and Caesar.

The Governor having remained wounded at Parham, till his recovery was
completed, Caesar did not know but he was still there; and indeed, for the
most part, his time was spent there; for he was one that loved to Live at other
Peoples Expense; and if he were a Day absent, he was Ten present there; and
used to Play, and Walk, and Hunt, and Fish, with Caesar. So that Caesar did not
at all doubt, if he once recovered Strength, but he should find an opportunity
of being Revenged on him: Though, after such a Revenge, he could not hope to
Live; for if he escaped the Fury of the English Mobile, who perhaps would have
been glad of the occasion to have killed him, he was resolved not to survive
his Whiping; yet he had, some tender Hours, a repenting Softness, which he
called his fits of Coward; wherein he struggled with Love for the Victory of
his Heart, which took part with his charming Imoinda there; but, for the most
part, his time was past in melancholy Thought, and black Designs; he
considered, if he should do this Deed, and Dye, either in the Attempt, or after
it, he left his lovely Imoinda a Prey, or at best a Slave, to the enraged
Multitude; his great Heart could not endure that Thought. Perhaps, said he, she
may be first Ravished by every Brute; exposed first to their nasty Lusts, and
then a shameful Death. No; he could not Live a Moment under that Apprehension,
too insupportable to be born. These were his Thoughts, and his silent Arguments
with his Heart, as he told us afterward; so that now resolving not only to
kill Byam, but all those he thought had enraged him; pleasing his great Heart
with the fancied Slaughter he should make over the whole Face of the
Plantation. He first resolved on a Deed, that (however Horrid it at first
appeared to us all) when we had heard his Reasons, we thought it Brave and
Just: Being able to Walk, and, as he believed, fit for the Execution of his
great Design, he begged Trefry to trust him into the Air, believing a Walk would
do him good; which was granted him, and taking Imoinda with him, as he used to
do in his more happy and calmer Days, he led her up into a Wood, where, after
(with a thousand Sighs, and long Gazing silently on her Face, while Tears gust,
in spite of him, from his Eyes) he told her his Design first of Killing her,
and then his Enemies, and next himself, and the impossibility of Escaping, and
therefore he told her the necessity of Dying; he found the Heroic Wife faster
pleading for Death than he was to propose it, when she found his fixed
Resolution; and, on her Knees, besought him, not to leave her a Prey to his
Enemies. He (grieved to Death) yet pleased at her noble Resolution, took her
up, and embracing her, with all the Passion and Languishment of a dying Lover,
drew his Knife to kill this Treasure of his Soul, this Pleasure of his Eyes;
while Tears trickl'd down his Cheeks, hers were Smiling with Joy she should dye
by so noble a Hand, and be sent in her own Country, (for that is their Notion of
the next World) by him she so tenderly Loved, and so truly Adored in this; for
Wives have a respect for their Husbands equal to what any other People pay a
Deity; and when a Man finds any occasion to quit his Wife, if he love her, she
dies by his Hand; if not, he sells her, or suffers some other to kill her. It
being thus; you may believe the Deed was soon resolved on; and it is not to be
doubted, but the Parting, the eternal Leave taking of Two such Lovers, so
greatly Born, so Sensible, so Beautiful, so Young, and so Fond, must be very
Moving, as the Relation of it was to me afterward.

All that Love could say in such cases, being ended; and all the intermitting
Irresolutions being adjusted, the Lovely, Young, and Adored Victim lays her
self down, before the Sacrificer; while he, with a Hand resolved, and a Heart
breaking within, gave the Fatal Stroke; first, cutting her Throat, and then
severing her, yet Smiling, Face from that Delicate Body, pregnant as it was
with Fruits of tend' rest Love. As soon as he had done, he laid the Body
decently on Leaves and Flowers; of which he made a Bed, and concealed it under
the same cover-lid of Nature; only her Face he left yet bare to look on: But
when he found she was Dead, and past all Retrieve, never more to bless him with
her Eyes, and soft Language; his Grief swelled up to Rage; he Tore, he Raved he
Roared, like some Monster of the Wood, calling on the loved Name of Imoinda; a
thousand times he turned the Fatal Knife that did the Deed, toward his own
Heart, with a Resolution to go immediately after her; but dire Revenge, which
now was a thousand times more fierce in his Soul than before, prevents him; and
he would cry out, No; since I have sacrificed Imoinda to my Revenge, shall I
loose that Glory which I have purchased so dear, as at the Price of the
fairest, dearest, softest Creature that ever Nature made? No, no! Then, at her
Name, Grief would get the ascendant of Rage, and he would lie down by her side,
and water her Face with showers of Tears, which never were wont to fall from
those Eyes: And however bent he was on his intended Slaughter, he had not power
to stir from the Sight of this dear Object, now more Beloved, and more Adored
than ever.

He remained in this deploring Condition for two Days, and never rose from the
Ground where he had made his sad Sacrifice; at last, rousing from her side, and
accusing himself with living too long, now Imoinda was dead; and that the
Deaths of those barbarous Enemies were deferred too long, he resolved now to
finish the great Work; but offering to rise, he found his Strength so decayed,
that he reeled to and fro, like Boughs assailed by contrary Winds; so that he
was forced to lie down again, and try to summons all his Courage to his Aid; he
found his Brains turn round, and his Eyes were dizzy; and Objects appeared not
the same to him they were wont to do; his Breath was short; and all his Limbs
surprised with a Faintness he had never felt before: He had not Eat in two
Days, which was one occasion of this Feebleness, but excess of Grief was the
greatest; yet still he hoped he should recover Vigor to act his Design; and
lay expecting it yet six Days longer; still mourning over the dead Idol of his
Heart, and striving every Day to rise, but could not.

In all this time you may believe we were in no little affliction for Caesar,
and his Wife; some were of Opinion he was escaped never to return; others
thought some Accident had happened to him: But however, we failed not to send
out an hundred People several ways to search for him; a Party, of about forty,
went that way he took; among whom was Tuscan, who was perfectly reconciled to
Byam; they had not gone very far into the Wood, but they smelt an unusual Smell,
as of a dead Body; for Stinks must be very noisome that can be distinguished
among such a quantity of Natural Sweets, as every Inch of that Land produces.
So that they concluded they should find him dead, or somebody that was so; they
past on toward it, as Loathsome as it was, and made such a rusling among the
Leaves that lie thick on the Ground, by continual Falling, that Caesar heard he
was approached; and though he had, during the space of these eight Days,
endeavored to rise, but found he wanted Strength, yet looking up, and seeing
his Pursuers, he rose, and reeled to a Neighboring Tree, against which he
fixed his Back; and being within a dozen Yards of those that advanced, and saw
him; he called out to them, and bid them approach no nearer, if they would be
safe: So that they stood still, and hardly believing their Eyes, that would
persuade them that it was Caesar that spoke to 'em, so much was he altered;
they asked him, What he had done with his Wife? for they smelt a Stink that
almost struck them dead. He, pointing to the dead Body, sighing, cried, Behold
her there; they put off the Flowers that covered her with their Sticks, and
found she was killed; and cried out, Oh Monster! that have murdered thy Wife:
Then asking him, Why he did so cruel a Deed? He replied, he had no leisure to
answer impertinent Questions; You may go back, continued he, and tell the
Faithless Governor, he may thank Fortune that I am breathing my last; and that
my Arm is too feeble to obey my Heart, in what it had designed him: But his
Tongue faultering, and trembling, he could scarce end what he was saying. The
English taking Advantage by his Weakness, cried, Let us take him alive by all
means: He heard 'em; and, as if he had revived from a Fainting, or a Dream, he
cried out, No, Gentlemen, you are deceived; you will find no more Caesar's to be
Whipped; no more find a Faith in me: Feeble as you think me, I have Strength yet
left to secure me from a second Indignity. They swore all anew, and he only
shook his Head, and beheld them with Scorn; then they cried out, Who will
venture on this single Man? Will no body? They stood all silent while Caesar
replied, Fatal will be the Attempt to the first Adventurer; let him assure
himself, and, at that Word, held up his Knife in a menacing Posture, Look ye,
ye faithless Crew, said he, it is not Life I seek, nor am I afraid of Dying;
and, at that Word, cut a piece of Flesh from his own Throat, and threw it at
'em, yet still I would Live if I could, till I had perfected my Revenge. But
oh! it cannot be; I feel Life gliding from my Eyes and Heart; and, if I make
not haste, I shall yet fall a Victim to the shameful Whip. At that, he ripped up
his own Belly; and took his Bowels and pulled 'em out, with what Strength he
could; while some, on their Knees imploring, besought him to hold his Hand. But
when they saw him tottering, they cried out, Will none venture on him? A bold
English cried, Yes, if he were the Devil; (taking Courage when he saw him
almost Dead) and swearing a horrid Oath for his farewell to the World; he
rushed on Caesar, with his Armed Hand met him so fairly, as stuck him to the
Heart, and he fell Dead at his Feet. Tuscan seeing that, cried out, I love
thee, oh Caesar; and therefore will not let thee Dye, if possible: And, running
to him, took him in his Arms; but, at the same time, warding a Blow that Caesar
made at his Bosom, he received it quite through his Arm; and Caesar having not
the Strength to pluck the Knife forth, though he attempted it, Tuscan neither
pulled it out himself, nor suffered it to be pulled out; but came down with it
sticking in his Arm; and the reason he gave for it was, because the Air should
not get into the Wound: They put their Hands across, and carried Caesar
between Six of 'em, fainted as he was; and they thought Dead, or just Dying;
and they brought him to Parham, and laid him on a Couch, and had the Surgeon
immediately to him, who dressed his Wounds, and sowed up his Belly, and used
means to bring him to Life, which they effected. We ran all to see him; and, if
before we thought him so beautiful a Sight, he was now so altered, that his
Face was like a Death's Head black'd over; nothing but Teeth, and Eyeholes: For
some Days we suffered no body to speak to him, but caused Cordials to be poured
down his Throat, which sustained his Life; and in six or seven Days he
recovered his Senses: For, you must know, that Wounds are almost to a Miracle
cured in the Indies; unless Wounds in the Legs, which rarely ever cure.

When he was well enough to speak, we talked to him; and asked him some
Questions about his Wife, and the Reasons why he killed her; and he then told
us what I have related of that Resolution, and of his Parting; and he besought
us, we would let him Dye, and was extremely Afflicted to think it was possible
he might Live; he assured us, if we did not Dispatch him, he would prove very
Fatal to a great many. We said all we could to make him Live, and gave him new
Assurances; but he begged we would not think so poorly of him, or of his love
to Imoinda, to imagine we could Flatter him to Life again; but the Surgeon
assured him, he could not Live, and therefore he need not Fear. We were all
(but Caesar) afflicted at this News; and the Sight was gashly; his Discourse
was sad; and the earthly Smell about him so strong, that I was persuaded to
leave the Place for some time; (being my self-but Sickly, and very apt to fall
into Fits of dangerous Illness upon any extraordinary Melancholy) the Servants,
and Trefry, and the Surgeons, promised all to take what possible care they
could of the Life of Caesar; and I, taking Boat, went with other Company to
Colonel Martin's, about three Days Journey down the River; but I was no sooner
gone, but the Governor taking Trefry, about some pretended earnest Business, a
Days Journey up the River; having communicated his Design to one Banister, a
wild Irish Man, and one of the Council; a Fellow of absolute Barbarity, and fit
to execute any Villainy, but was Rich. He came up to Parham, and forcibly took
Caesar, and had him carried to the same Post where he was Whipped; and causing
him to be tied to it, and a great Fire made before him, he told him, he should
Dye like a Dog, as he was. Caesar replied, this was the first piece of Bravery
that ever Banister did; and he never spoke Sense till he pronounced that Word;
and, if he would keep it, he would declare, in the other World, that he was the
only Man, of all the Whites, that ever he heard speak Truth. And turning to the
Men that bound him, he said, My Friends, am I to Dye, or to be Whipped? And they
cried, Whipped! no; you shall not escape so well: And then he replied, smiling,
A Blessing on thee; and assured them, they need not tie him, for he would stand
fixed, like a Rock; and endure Death so as should encourage them to Dye. But if
you Whip me, said he, be sure you tie me fast.

He had learned to take Tobaco; and when he was assured he should Dye, he
desired they would give him a Pipe in his Mouth, ready Lighted, which they did;
and the Executioner came, and first cut off his Members, and threw them into
the Fire; after that, with an ill-favored Knife, they cut his Ears, and his
Nose, and burned them; he still Smoked on, as if nothing had touched him; then
they hacked off one of his Arms, and still he bore up, and held his Pipe; but
at the cutting off the other Arm, his Head sunk, and his Pipe dropped; and he
gave up the Ghost, without a Groan, or a Reproach. My Mother and Sister were by
him all the while, but not suffered to save him; so rude and wild were the
Rabble, and so inhumane were the Justices, who stood by to see the Execution,
who after paid dearly enough for their Insolence. They cut Caesar in Quarters,
and sent them to several of the chief Plantations: One Quarter was sent to
Colonel M^^tin, who refused it; and swore, he had rather see the Quarters of
Banister, and the Governor himself, than those of Caesar, on his Plantations;
and that he could govern his Negroes without Terrifying and Grieving them with
frightful Spectacles of a mangled King.

Thus Died this Great Man; worthy of a better Fate, and a more sublime Wit than
mine to write his Praise; yet, I hope, the Reputation of my Pen is considerable
enough to make his Glorious Name to survive to all Ages; with that of the
Brave, the Beautiful, and the Constant Imoinda.

FINIS.

