

THE Lucky Mistake: A New NOVEL. Written by Mrs. A. Behn.



LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley at the Post House in Russel Street in Covent
Garden. 1689.

To George Greenviel Esquire SIR,
AT this Critical Juncture, I find the Authors will have need of a Protector,
as well as the Nation, we having peculiar Laws and Liberties to be defended as
well as that, but of how different a Nature, none but such Judges as you, are
fit to determine; whatever our Province be, I am sure it should be Wit, and you
know what Ellevated Ben says, That none can judge of Wit but Wit. Let the
Heroes toil for Crowns and Kingdoms, and with what pretenses they please. Let
the Slaves of State drudge on for false and empty Glories, troubling the repose
of the World and ruining their own to gain uneasy Grandeur, whilst you, Ob!
happyer Sir, great enough by your Birth, yet more Illustrious by your Wit, are
capable of enjoying alone that true Felicity of Mind, which belongs to an
absolutely Virtuous and Gallant Man, by that, and the lively Notions of Honor
Imprinted in your Soul, you are above Ambition, and can Form Kings and Heroes,
when 'ere your delicate Fancy shall put you upon the Poetical Creation.

You can make those Heroes Lovers too, and inspire 'em with a Language so
Irresistible as may instruct the Fair, how easily you can Conquer when it comes
to your turn, to plead for a Heart, nor is your delicate Wit the only Charm;
your Person claims an equal share of Graces with those of your Mind, and both
together are capable of rendering you Victorious, wherever you shall please to
Address 'em, but your Virtue keeps you from those Ravages of Beauty, which so
wholty employ the hours of the Rest of the Gay and Young, whilst you have
^^siness more sollid, and more ^oble for yours.

I would not by this have the World imagine, you are therefore exempt from the
tenderness of Love, it rather seems you were on purpose formed for that soft
Entertainment, such an Agreement there is between the Harmony of your Soul and
your Person, and sure the Muses, who have so divinely inspired you with Poetic
Fires, have furnished you with that Necessary, Material (Love) to maintain it,
and to make it burn with the more Ellevated Flame.

`Tis therefore Sir, I expect you will the more easily Pardon the the
Dedicating to your idler hours (if any such you have) this little Amor, all
that I shall say for it, is, that it is not Translation but an Original, that
has more of realty then fiction, if I have not made it fuller of intreague,
'twas because I had a mind to keep close to the Truth.

I must own, Sir, the Obligations I have to you, deserves a greater testimony
of my respect, then this little piece, too trivial to bear the honor of your
Name, but my increasing Indisposition makes me fear I shall not have many
opportunities of this Kind, and should be leath to leave this ungrateful World,
without acknowledging my Gratitude more signally then barely by word of Mouth,
and without wishing you all the happiness your merit and admirable Virtues
deserve, and of assuring you how unfeignedly I am (and how Proud of being) Sir,

Your most obliged and most humble Servant, A. Behn.

THE FIRST NOVEL. The Luckey Mistake.
THE River Logre has on its delightful Banks abundance of handsome Beautiful
and Rich Towns and Villages, to which the Noble Stream adds no small Graces and
Advantages, blessing their Fields with plenty, and their Eyes with a thousand
Diversions. In one of these happily cituated Towns, called Orle^nce, where
abundance of People of the best Quality and Condition reside. There was a Rich
Nobleman now retired from the busy Court, where in his Youth he had been bred,
wearyed with the Toyls of Ceremony and Noise, to enjoy that perfect
Tranquillity of Life, which is no where to be found, but in retreat, a faithful
Friend and a good Library; and as the admirable Horace says, in a little House
and large Gardens, Count Bellyanrd, for so was this Noble Man called, was of
this Opinion, and the rather because he had one only Son, called Rinaldo now
grown to the Age of Fifteen, who having all the Excellent Qualities and Grace
of Youth, by Nature; he would bring him up in all Virtues and Noble Sciences,
which he believed the Gayety and Luster of the Court might divert: he therefore
in this retirement spared no Cost, to those that could instruct and accomplish
him, and he had the best Tutors and Masters that could be purchased at Court:
Bellyaurd making far less account of Riches than of fine Parts. He found his
Son was capable of all Impressions, having a Wit suitable to his delicate
Person, so that he was the sole Joy of his Life, and the Darling of his Eyes.

In the very next House, which joined close to that of Bellyuard', there lived
another Count, who had in his Youth been banisbt the Court of France for some
misunderstandings, in some high Affairs wherein he was concerned, his Name was
De Pais, a Man of great Birth, but no Fortune; or at least one not suitable to
the Grandeur of his Original. And as it is most Natural for great Souls to be
most proud, (if I may call a handsome Disdain by that Vulgar Name) when they
are most deprest, so De Pais was more retired, more estranged from his
Neighbors, and kept a greater distance, than if he had Enjoyed all he had lost
at Court, and took more Solemnity and State upon him, because he would not be
subject to the reproaches of the World, by making himself familiar with it. So
that he rarely visited, and was as rarely visited; and contrary to the Custom
of those in France, who are easy of excess, and free of conversation, he kept
his Family retired so close, that 'twas rare to see any of 'em, but when they
went abroad, which was but seldom, they wanted nothing as to outward
appearance, that was fit for his Quality, and was much above his Condition.

This old Count had two only Daughters, of exceeding Beauty, who gave the
Generous Father ten thousand Torments, as often as he beheld them, when he
considered their Extreme Beauty, their fine Wit, their Innocence, Modesty, and
above all, their Birth; and that he had not the Fortune to marry them according
to their Quality; and below it he had rather see 'em laid in their silent
Graves, then consent to; for he scorned the World should see him forced by his
Poverty, to commit an Action below his Dignity.

There lived in a Neighboring Town, a certain Nobleman, Friend to De Pais,
called Count Vernole; A man of about forty Years of Age, of low Stature,
Complexion very black and swarthy, lean, lame, extreme proud and haughty;
extracting of a Descent from the Blood Royal, not extremely brave, but very
glorious; he had no very great Estate, but was in Election of a greater, and of
an Addition of Honor from the King, his Father having done most worthy
Services against the Hugonots, and by the high Favor of Cardinal Mazarine was
represented to his Majesty, as a Man related to the Crown, of great Name but
small Estate; so that there was now nothing but great Expectations and
Preparations in the Family of Count Vernole to go to Court, to which he daily
hoped an Invitation or Command.

Vernole's Fortune being hitherto something akin to that of De Pais; there was
a greater Correspondency between these two Gentlemen, then they had with any
other Persons; They accounting themselves above the rest of the World, believed
none so proper and fit for their Conversation, as that of each other; so that
there was a very particular Intimacy between them, whenever they went abroad,
they club'd their Train, to make one great Show, and were always together,
bemoaning each others Fortune; that from so high a Descent, as one from
Monarchs, by the Mothers side, and the other from Dukes of his side, they were
reduced by Fate, to the degree of Private Gentlemen. They would often consult
how to manage Affairs most to Advantage, and often De Pais would ask Council of
Vernole, how best he should dispose of his Daughters, which now were about
their Ninth Year the Eldest, and Eight the Youngest; Vernole had often seen
these two Buds of Beauty, and already saw opening in Atlante's Face and Mind
(for that was the Name of the Eldest, and Charlot the Youngest) a Glory of Wit
and Beauty; which could not but one Day display it self with Dazzling Luster to
the wondering World

Vernole was a great Vertuoso, of a Humor, Nice, Delicate, Critical and
Opiniative; he had nothing of the French mein in him, but all the Gravity of
the Don; his ill Favored Person, and his low Estate, put him out of Humor
with the World, and because that should not upbraid or reproach his Follies and
Defects, He was sure to be before hand with that, and to be always Satyric upon
it, and loved to live and act contrary to the Custom and Usage of all Mankind
besides.

He was infinitely delighted to find a Man of his own Humor in De Pais, or at
least a Man that would be persuaded to like his so well, to live up to it; and
it was no little Joy and Satisfaction to him to find, that he kept his
Daughters in that Severity, which was wholly agreeable to him, and so contrary
to the Manner and Fashion of the French of Quality; who allow all Freedoms,
which to Vernole's rigid Nature, seemed as so many Steps to Vice, and in his
Opinion, the Ruiner of all Virtue and Honor in Woman kind. De Pais was
extremely glad his conduct was so well interpreted which was no other in him,
than a proud Frugality; who, because they could not appear, in so much
Gallantry, as their Quality required, kept 'em retired, and unseen to all, but
his particular Friends, of which Vernole was chief.

Vernole never appeared before Atlante (which was seldom,) but he assumed a.
Gravity and Respect, fit to have entertained a Maid of twenty, or rather a
Matron, of much greater Years and Judgment. His Discourses were always of
Matters of State or Philosophy; and sometimes when De Pais would laughing say,
he might as well entertain Atlante, with Greek and Hebrew, would reply gravely;
you are mistaken Sir, I find the Seeds of great and profound Matter in the Soul
of this Young Maid, which ought to be nourisht, now while she was Young, and
they will grow up to very great Perfection; I find Atlante capable of all the
Noble Virtues of the Mind, and am infinitely mistaken in my Observations, and
Art of Phisiognomy, if Atlante be not born for greater things than her Fortune
does now promise, she will be very Considerable in the World, believe me, and
this will arrive to her perfectly from the Force of her Charms: De Pais was
extremely overjoyed to hear such good Prophesi'd to Atlante, and from that
time, set a sort of an Esteem upon her, which he did not on Charlot his
Younger; who by the persuasions of Vernole, he resolved to put in a Monastery,
that what he had might defcend to Atlante, not but he consess'd Charlot had
Beauty, extremely attractive, and a Wit that promised much, when it should be
cultivated by Years and Experience; and would show it self with great
advantage, and Luster in a Monastery; all this pleased De Pais very well, who
was easily persuaded, since he had not a Fortune to marry her well in the World.

As yet Vernole had never spoke to Atlante of Love; nor did his Gravity think
it Prudence, to discover his Heart to so Young a Maid, he waited her more
sensible Years, when he could hope to have some return. And all he expected
from this her tender Age, was by his daily converse with her, and the Presents,
he made her suitable to her Years, to ingratiate himself insensibly into her
Friendship and Esteem: Since she was not yet capable of Love, but even in that
he mistook his Aim, for every day, he grew more and more disagreeable to
Atlante, and would have been her Absolute Aversion, had she known, she had
every day entertained a Lover, but as she grew in Years and Sense, he seemed
the more despicable in her Eyes as to his Person, but as she had respect to his
Parts and Qualities, she paid him all the Complaisance she could, and which was
due to him; and it must be confessed, though he had a stiff Formality in all he
said and did, yet he had Wit and Learning, and was a great Philosopher; as much
of his Learning, as Atlante was capable of attaining to, he made her Mistress
of, and that was no small Portion, for all his Discourse was fine and easily
comprehended, his Notions of Philosophy fit for Ladies; and he took greater
pains with Atlante, than any Master would have done with a Scholar; so that it
was most certain, he added very great Accomplishments to her Natural Wit, and
the more because she took a very great Delight in Philosophy; which very often
made her Impatient of his coming: Especially when she had many Questions, to
ask him concerning it, and she would often receive him, with a Pleasure in her
Face; which he did not fail to interpret to his own Advantage, being very apt
to flatter himself, her Sister Charlot would often ask her, how she could give
whole afternoons to so disagreeable a Man: What is it, said She, that charms
you so, his Tawny Leather Face, his extraordinary high Nose, his wide Mouth and
Eyebrows, that hang Lowering over his Eyes, his lean Carcafs, and his Lame and
Haulting Hips. But Atlante would discreetly reply, if I must grant all you say
of Count Vernole to be true yet he has a Wit and Learning, that will atone
sufficiently for all those Faults you mention: A fine Soul is infinitely to be
preferred to a fine Body; this decays, but that is Eternal; and Age that ruins
one, refines the other; Though possibly Atlante thought as ill of the Count, as
her Sister; yet in Respect to him, she would not own it.

Atlante was now arrived to her thirteenth Year, when her Beauty, which every
day increased, became the discourse of the whole Town; which had already gained
her as many Lovers as had beheld her, for none saw her without Languishing for
her, or at least but what were in very great Admiration of her, every body
talked of the young and charming Atlante, and all the Noble Men who had Sons
(knowing the smallness of her Fortune and the luster of her Beauty) would send
them for fear of their being Charmed with her, either to some other part of the
World, or exhorted them, by way of precaution, to keep out of her fight: Old
Bellyuard was one of these Wise Parents, and by a timely prevention as he
thought of Rinaldo's falling in Love with Atlante, perhaps, was the occasion of
his being so; he had before heard of Atlante and of her Beauty; but it had made
no impressions on his Heart, but his Father no sooner forbid him Loving, than
he felt a new desire Tormenting him, of seeing this lovely and dangerous young
Person; he wonders at his unaccountable Pain, which daily solicits him within,
to go where he may behold this Beauty; of whom he frames a thousand Ideas, all
such as were most agreeable to him, but then upbraids his fancy for not forming
her half so delicate as she was, and longs yet more to see her, to know how
near she approaches to the Picture he has drawn of her in his Mind; and tho he
knew she lived the next House to him, yet he knew also she was kept within like
a Vowed Nun, or with the severity of a Spaniard: And tho he had a Chamber which
had a jetting Window that looked just upon the the door of Monsieur De Pays, and
that he would watch many hours at a time, in hope, to see them go out, yet he
could never get a glimps of her; yet he heard she often frequented the Church
of our Lady: thither then the young Rinaldo resolved to go, and did so two or
three Mornings, in in which time to his unspeakable grief, he saw no Beauty
appear that charmed him, and yet he fancied that Atlante was there, and that he
had seen her, that some one of those young Ladies, that he saw in the Church
was she, tho he had no body to inquire of, and that she was not so fair as the
World reported, for which he would often sigh as if he had lost some very great
Expectation, however he ceased not to frequent this Church, and one day saw a
young Beauty, who at first glimps made his Heart leap to his Mouth, and fell
trembling again into its wonted place, for it immediately told him that that
young Maid was Atlante, she was with her Sister Charlot, who was very handsome,
but not comparable to Atlante. He fixed his Eyes upon her, as she kneeled at the
Altar, which he never removed from that charming face as long as she remained
there, he forgot all Devotion, but what he paid to her, he Adored her, he Burnt
and Languish'd already for her, and found he must possess Atlante, or Dye;
often as he gazed upon her he saw her fair Eyes lifted up toward his, where
they often met, which she perceiving would cast hers down into her Bosom or on
her Book, and blush as if she had done a Fault: Charlot perceived all the
Motions of Rinaldo, how he folded his Arms, how he sight, and how he gazed on
her Sister; she took Notice of his Clothes, his Garniture and every particular
of his Dress, as young Girls use to do, and seeing him so very handsome, and so
much better dressed than all the young Cavaliers that were in the Church, she was
very much pleased with him, and could not forbear saying in a low voice to
Atlante, look, look, my Sister, what a pretty Monsieur yonder is, see how fine
his Face is, how delicate his Hair, how gallant his Dress, and do but look how
he gazes on you? This would make Atlante blush anew, who durst not raise her
Eyes for fear she should encounter his. While he had the pleasure to imagine
they were talking of him, and he saw in the pretty Face of Charlot, that what
he said was not to his disadvantage, and by the blushes of Atlante, that she
was not displeased with what was spoken to her; he perceived the young one
importunate with her, and Atlante jogging her with her Elbow, as much as to
say, hold your peace, all this he made a very kind Interpretation of, and was
transported with Joy at the good Omens, he was willing to flatter his new
Flame, and to Complement his young Desire, with a little Hope; but the divine
Ceremony ceasing, Atlante left the Church, and it being very fair weather she
walked home, Rinaldo, who saw her going, felt all the Agonys of a Lover, who
parts with all that can make him Happy, and seeing only Atlante attended with
her Sister, and a Footman, following with their Books, he was a thousand times
about to speak to 'em, but he no sooner advanced a step or two toward 'em, to
that purpose (for he followed them) but his Heart failed, and a certain awe and
reverence, or rather the fears and tremblings of a Lover, prevented him, but
when he considered that possibly he might never have so favorable an
opportunity again, he resolved anew, and called up so much Courage to his Heart
as to speak to Atlante, but before he did so, Charlot looking behind her, saw
Rinaldo very near to 'em, and cried out with a voice of Joy: Oh! Sister,
Sister, look where the handsome Monsieur, is just behind us, sure he is some
body of Quality, for see he has two Footmen that follow him in just such
Liveries, and so Rich, as those of our Neighbor Monsieur Bellyaurd: at this
Atlante could not forbear, but before she was aware of it, turned her Head and
looked on Rinaldo, which encouraged him to advance, and putting off his Hat,
which he clapped under his Arm, with a low Bow, said, Ladies you are so slenderly
attended, and so many Accidents arrive to the fair in the rude Streets, that I
humbly implore you will permit me, whose Duty it is, as a Neighbor, to wait on
you to your Door, Sir, said Atlante blushing, we fear no insolence, and need no
Protector, or if we did we should not be so rude to take you out of your way to
serve us; Madam, said he, my way lies yours, I live at the next door and am Son
to Bellyaurd your Neighbor; but Madam added he, if I were to go all my Life
out of the way to do you Service, I should take it for the greatest Happiness,
that could arrive to me, but Madam, sure a Man can never be out of his way, who
has the Honor of so Charming Company, Atlante made no reply at this, but
blushed and bowed, but Charlot said, Nay Sir, if you are our Neighbor we will
give you leave to Conduct us home; but pray Sir, how came you to know we are
your Neighbors, for we never saw you before to our knowledge. My pretty Mis,
replied Rinaldo, Iknew it from the tranfcendent Beauty that appeared in your
Faces and fine Shapes, for I have heard there was no Beauty in the World like
that of Atlante's, and I no sooner saw her but my Heart told me it was she;
Heart, said Charlot, Laughing, why does Heart use to speak; the most
intelligibly of any thing, replied Rinaldo, when it is tenderly touched, when
it is charmed and transported, at these words he fight, and Atlante to his
extreme satisfaction blushed; touched, charmed and transported, said Charlot,
what is that? and how do you do to have it be all these things? for I would give
any thing in the World to have my Heart speak: Oh! said Rinaldo, your Heart is
too young, it is not yet arrived to the Years of speaking, about thirteen or
fourteen it may possibly be saying a thousand soft things to you, but it must
first be inspired by some Noble Object, whose Idea it must retain; what
replied, this pretty Pratler, I Will warrant I must be in Love? Yes, said
Rinaldo, most passionately, or you will have but little Conversation with your
Heart, Oh! replied she, I am afraid the pleasure of such a Conversation will
not make me amends for the Pain that Love will give me, that, said Rinaldo, is
according as the Object is kind, and as you hope, if he Love, and you hope you
will have a double Pleasure, and in this how great an advantage have you fair
Ladies above us Men: it is almost impossible for you to Love in vain, you have
your choice of a thousand Hearts which you have subdued, and may not only choose
your Slaves but be assured of 'em; without speaking you are beloved, it needs
not cost you a sigh or tear; but unhappy Man is often destined to give his
Heart, where it is not regarded, to sigh, to weep and languish without any hope
of Pity. You speak so feelingly, Sir said Charlot, that I am afraid this is
your Case; Yes, Madam, replied Rinaldo, sighing, I am that unhappy Man; indeed
it is pity said she, pray how long have you been so? ever since I heard of the
charming Atlante, replied he, sighing again, I adored her Character, but now I
have seen her, I dye for her; for me, Sir, said Atlante (who had not yet spoke,
this is the common compliment of all the young Men, who pretend to be Lovers,
and if one should pity all those sighers, we should have but very littel left
for our selves; I believe, said Rinaldo, there are none that tell you so, who
do not mean as they say, yet among all those adorers and those that say they
will dye for you, you will find none will be so good as their words as Rinaldo,
perhaps said Atlante, of all those who tell me of dying, there are none that
tell it with so little reason as Rinaldo, if that be your Name Sir; Madam it
is, said he, and who am Transported with an unspeakable joy, to hear those last
words from your fair mouth, and let me Oh! Lovely Atlante, assure you that what
I have said, are not words of Course, but proceed from a heart that has vowed
it self, eternally yours, even before, I had the happiness to behold this
Divine Person, but now that my Eyes have made good all my heart before
imagined, and did but hope, I swear I will dye a Thousand deaths, rather then
violate what I have said to you, that I adore you, that my Soul and all my
faculties are charmed with your Beauty and Innocence, and that my Life and
Fortune, not inconsiderable, shall be laid at your Feet: this he spoke with a
fervency of passion, that left her no doubt of what he had said; yet she blushed
for shame, and a little angry at her self, for suffering him to say so much to
her, the very first time she saw him, and accused herself for giving him any
encouragement: and in this confusion she replied, Sir, you have said too much
to be believed, and I cannot imagine so short an acquaintance can make so
considerable an Impression, of which confession I accuse my self much more than
you, in that I did not only harken to what you said, without forbiding you to
entertain me at that rate, but for unheedily speaking something, that has
encouraged this boldness; for so must I call it in a Man, so great a stranger
to me: Madam, said he, if I have offended by the suddainess of my presumptious
discovery, I beseech you to consider my reasons for it, the few opportunities I
am like to have, and the impossibility of waiting on you, both from the
severity of your Father and mine; who 'ere I saw you, warned me of my Fate, as
if he foresaw, I should fall in Love as soon as I should chance to see you; and
for that reason has kept me closer to my Studies, than hitherto I have been,
and from that time I began to feel a Flame, which was kindled by report alone,
and the Description my Father gave of your wondrous and dangerous Beauty:
therefore Madam, I have not suddenly told you of my passion, I have been long
your Lover, and have long Languisht without telling of my Pain, and you ought
to Pardon it now, since it is done with all the respect and Religious Awe, that
it is possible for a heart to deliver and unload it self in; therefore Madam, if
you have by chance uttered any thing, that I have taken advantage or hope from,
I assure you it is so small, that you have no reason to repent it; but rather if
you would have me live, send me not from you, without a confirmation of that
little hope; see Madam, said he, more earnestly and trembling, see we are
almost arrived at our homes, send me not to mine in a despair, that I cannot
support with Life, but tell me I shall be blessed with your Sight sometimes in
your Balcony, which is very near to a jetting Window in our House, from whence
I have sent many a longing look toward yours, in hope to have seen my Souls
Tormenter; I shall be very unwilling, said she, to enter into an intreague of
Love, or Friendship with a Man, whose Parents will be averse to my happiness,
and possibly mine as refractory, though he cannot but know such an Alliance
would be very considerable; my Fortune being not suitable to yours, I tell you
this, that you may withdraw in time from a Engagement, in which I find there
will be a great many Obstacles Oh! Madam replied Rinaldo, sighing, if my Person
be not disagreeable to you; you will have no cause to fear the rest, it is that
I dread, and that which is all my fear, he sighing beheld her with a
Languishing look, that told her, he expected her answer, when she replied, Sir,
if that will be Satisfaction enough for you at this time, I do assure you, I
have no aversion for your Person, in which I find more to be vallu'd than in
any I have yet seen, and if what you say be real, and proceed from a heart
truly affected, I find in spite of me, you will oblige me to give you hope.

They were come so near their own Houses, that he had not time to return her
any answer, but with a low bow he acknowledged her Bounty, and expressed the joy
her last words had given him, by a look that made her understand, he was
charmed and pleased, and she bowing to him, with an Air of satisfaction in her
Face, he was well assured, there was nothing to be seen so lovely as she then
appeared, and left her to go into her own House, but till she was out of sight,
he had not Power to stir, and then sighing retired to his own Apartment, to
think over all that had past between them, he found nothing but what gave him a
thousand joys, in all she had said; and he blessed this happy day, and wondered
how his Stars came so kind, to make him in one hour at once see Atlante, and
have the happiness to know from her own mouth, that he was not disagreeable to
her, yet with this satisfaction, he had a thousand thoughts mixed, which were
tormenting, and those were the fear of their Parents, he foresaw from what his
Father had said to him already, that it would be difficult to draw him to a
consent of his Marriage with Atlante, these joys and fears were his companions
all the Night, in which he took but little rest. Nor was Atlante without her
inquietudes: she found Rinaldo more in her thoughts, than she wished, and a
sudden change of humor, that made her know something was the matter with her,
more then usual; she calls to mind Rinaldo's speaking of the conversation with
his heart, and found hers would be tatling to her, if she would give way to it,
and yet the more she strove to avoid it, the more it importuned her, and in
spite of all her resistance, would tell her, that Rinaldo had a thousand
charms, it tells her that he Loves and adores her, and that she would be the
most cruel of her Sex, should she not be sensible of his passion, she finds a
thousand graces in his Person and Conversation, and as many advantages in his
Fortune, which was one of the most considerable in all those Parts, for his
Estate exceeded that of the most Noble Men in Orleance, and she imagins she
should be the most Fortunate of all Womankind in such a Match; with these
thoughts, she employed all the hours of the Night, so that she lay so long in
Bed the next day, that Count Vernole, who had invited himself to Dinner, came
before she had quitted her Chamber, and she was forced to say she had not been
well; he had brought her a very fine Book, newly come out, of Delicate
Philosophy, fit for the study of Ladies, but he appeared so disagreeable to
that heart, wholly taken up with a new and fine Object, that she could now
hardly pay him that civility, she was wont to do, while on the otherside, that
little State and Pride Atlante assumed, made her appear the more charming to
him, so that if Atlante had no mind to begin a new Lesson of Philosophy, while
she fancied her thoughts were much better employed, the Count every moment
expressing his tenderness and passion, had as little an inclination to instruct
her, as she was to be instructed; Love had taught her a new Lesson, and he
would fain teach her a new Lesson of Love, but fears it will be a diminishing
of his Gravity and Grandeur, to open the Secrets of his heart to so young a
Maid, he therefore thinks it more agreeable to his Quality and Years, being
about forty, to use her Father's Authority in this Affair, and that it was
sufficient for him, to declare himself to Monsieur De Pais, who he knew would
be Proud of the Honor he did him sometime past, before he could persuade
himself, even to declare himself to her Father; he fancies the little coldness
and Pride he saw in Atlante's Face, which was not usual, proceeded from some
discovery of Passion, which his Eyes had made, or now and then a Sigh, that
unawares broke forth, and accuses himself of a Levity below his Quality and the
Dignity of his Wit and Gravity: and therefore assumes a more rigid and formal
Behavior then he was wont, which rendered him yet more disagreeable than.
before; and 'twas with greater pain than ever, she gave him that respect which
was due to his quality.

Rinaldo after a restless Night, was up very early in the Morning, and though he
was not certain of seeing his Adorable Atlante, he dressed himself with all that
care, as if he had been to have waited on her, and got himself into the Window,
that overlooks Monsieur De Pays his Balcony, where he had not remained long,
before he saw the pretty Charlot come into it, not with any design of seeing
Rinaldo, but to look and gaze about her a little, Rinaldo saw her, and made her
a very low Reverence, and found some disordered Joy on the sight of even
Charlot, since she was Sister to Atlante, he called to her (for the Window was
so near her, he could easily be heard by her) and told her he was infinitely
indebted to her Bounty, for giving him an opportunity yesterday of falling on
that discourse, which had made him the happiest Man in the World, he said, if
she had not by her agreeable Conversation encouraged him, and drawn him from
one word to another, he should never have had the confidence to have told
Atlante, how much he adored her; I am very glad, replied Charlos, that I was
the occasion of the beginning of an Amor which was displeasing to neither one
nor to the other, for I assure you for your comfort, my Sister nothing but
thinks on you, we lie together and you have taught her already to sigh so, that
I could not sleep for her; at this his Face was covered over with a rising Joy
which his Heart could not contain, and after some more discourse in which this
innocent Girl discovered more then Atlante wished she should, he besought her to
become his Advocate, and since she had no Brother, to give him leave to assume
that Honor, and call her Sister, thus by degrees he flattered her into a
consent of carrying a Letter from him to Atlante, which she who believed all as
innocent as her self, and being not forbid to do so, immediately consented to,
when he took his Pen and Ink that stood in the Window with Paper, wrote Atlante
this following Letter.

Rinaldo to Atlante.
IF my Suit be so severe as to deny me the happiness of sighing out my pain and
passion daily at your Feet, if there be any Faith in the Hope you were pleased
to give me (as 'twere a Sin to doubt,) do not, Oh Charming Atlante! suffer me
to Languish both without beholding you, and without the blessing of now and
then a Billet in answer to those that shall daily assure you of my eternal
Faith and Vows, it is all I ask till Fortune and our Affairs shall allow me the
unspeakable satisfaction of Claiming you, yet if your Charity can sometimes
afford me a sight of you, either from your Balcony in the Evening, or at Church
in the Morning, it would save me from that Despair and Torment, which must
possess a Heart so unassured as that of,

Your Eternal Adorer Rin. Bellyuard.


He having Writ and Sealed this, tossed it into the Balcony to Charlot, having
first looked about to see if none perceived them; she put it in her Bosom and
ran into her Sister, whom by chance she found alone, Vernole having taken De
Pays into the Garden to Discourse with him concerning the sending Charlot to
the Monastery, which work he desired to see performed, before he declared his
intentions to Atlante, for among all his other good qualities, he was very
avaritious, and as fair as Atlante was he thought she would be much fairer with
the Addition of Charlot's Portion: this Affair of his with Monsieur De Pays
gave Charlot an opportunity of delivering her Letter to her Sister, who no
sooner drew it from her Bosom, but Atlante's Face was covered over with
Blushes, for she imagined from whence it came, and had a secret Joy in that
imagination; though she thought she must put on the Severity and Niceness of a
Virgin, who would not be thought to have surrendered her Heart with so small an
Assault, and the first too; so she demanded from whence Charlot had that
Letter, who replied with joy, from the fine Young Gentleman, our Neighbor; at
which Atlante assumed all the gravity she could, to chide her Sister, who
replied, well Sister had you this day seen him, you would not have been angry
to have received a Letter from him, he looked so handsome, and was so richly
dressed, ten times finer then he was Yesterday; and I promised him you should
read it, therefore pray let me keep my word with him, and not only so, but
carry him an Answer, well, said Atlante, to save your Credit with Monsieur
Rinaldo, I will read it, which she did and finished with a sigh; while she was
reading it, Charlot ran into the Garden to see if they were not likely to be
surprised, and finding the Count, and her Father, set in an Arbor in deep
Discourse, she brought Pen, Ink and Paper to her Sister, and told her she might
Write without the fear of being disturbed, and urged her so long to what was
enough her inclination, she at last obtained this Answer;

Atlante to Rinaldo.
CHarlot, your little importunate Advocate has at last subdued me to a Consent
of returning you this; she has put me on an Affair, which I am wholly
unacquainted with; and you ought to take this very kindly from me since'tis the
very first time I ever Writ to one of your Sex, though perhaps I might with less
danger have done it to any other Man; I tremble while I Write, since I dread a
Correspondence of this Nature, which may insensibly draw us into an
inconvenience, and engage me beyond the limits of that Nicety, I ought to
preserve; for this way we venture to say a thousand little kind things which in
Conversation we dare not do, for now none can see us blush; I am sensible I
shall this way put my self too soon into your power, and though you have
abundance of Merit, I ought to be ashamed of Confessing, I am but too sensible
of them; -- but hold -- I shall discover for your Repose (which I would.
preserve) too much of the Heart of

Atlante.


She gave this Letter to Charlot, who immediately ran into the Balcony with it,
where she still found Rinaldo in a Melancholy posture, leaning his Head on his
Hand, she showed him the Letter, but was afraid to toss it to him, for fear it
might fall to the ground, so he ran and fetched a long Cane which he cleft at
one End, and holding it where she put the Letter into the Cleft, and staid not
to hear what he said to it, but never was Man so transported with Joy, as he
was at the reading of this Letter; it gives him new wounds; for to the
generous, nothing obliges Love so much as Love; tho it is now too much the
Nature of that inconstant Sex to cease to Love as soon as they are sure of the
Conquest. But it was far different with our Cavalier, he was the more inflamed
by imagining he had made some impressions on the Heart of Atlante, and kindled
some sparks there, that in time might increase to something more; so that he
now resolves to dye hers, and considering all the Obstacles that may possibly
hinder his Happiness, he found none but his Fathers obstinacy, perhaps
occasioned by the meanness of Atlante's Fortune, to this he urged again that he
was his only Son, and a Son whom he loved equal to his own Life; and that
certainly as soon as he should behold him dying for Atlante, which if forced to
quit he must be, that then he believed the tenderness of so fond a Parent,
would break forth into Pity and Compassion, and plead within for his Consent:
these were the thoughts that flattered this Young Lover all the day, and
whether he were Riding the great Horse, or at his Study of Philosophy, or
Mathamaticks, Singing or Dancing, or whatever other Exercise his Tutors
ordered, his thoughts were continually on Atlante, and now he profited no more;
whatever he seemed to do, every day he failed not to Write to her by the Hand
of the kind Charlot, who young, as she was, had conceived a very great
Friendship for Rinaldo, and failed not to fetch his Letters, and bring him
Answers such as he wished to receive; but all this did not satisfy our impatient
Lover, absence killed, and he was no longer able to support himself without a
sight of this Adorable Maid; he therefore implores she will give him that
satisfaction, and she at last grants it, with a better Will than he imagined,
the next day was the appointed time, when she would under pretense of going to
Church give him an assignation, and because all public places were dangerous,
and might make a great noice, and they had no private place to trust to,
Rinaldo under pretense of going up the River in his Pleasure Boat, which he
often did, sent to have it made ready against the next day, at ten of the
Clock; this was accordingly done and he gave Atlante Notice of his design of
going an hour or two on the River, in his Boat, which lay near such a place,
not far from the Church: she and Charlot came thither, and because they durst
not come out, without a Footman or two, they taking one, sent him with a how do
ye, to some Young Ladies, and told him he should find them at Church; so
getting rid of their spy, they hastened to the River side, and found a Boat and
Rinaldo waiting to carry them on Board his little Vessel, which was richly
adorned, and a very handsome Collation ready for them of Cold Meats, Sallads and
Sweetmeats; as soon as they were come into the Pleasure Boat, unseen of any, he
kneeled at the Feet of Atlante, and there uttered so many passionate and tender
things to her, with a voice so trembling and soft, with Eyes so Languishing,
and a Fervency and Fire so sincere, that her young Heart wholly incapable of
Artifice, could no longer resist such Language, and such Looks of Love, she
grows tender, and he perceives it in her fine Eyes, who could not dissemble, he
reads her Heart in her Looks, and found it yielding apace, and therefore
Assaults it anew with fresh forces of Sighs and Tears, he implores she would
assure him of her Heart, which she could no other way do then by yiedling to
Marry him; he would carry her to the next Village, there consummate that
Happiness, without which he was able to live no longer, for he had a thousand
Fears, that some other Lover was, or would, suddenly be provided for her, and
therefore he would make sure of her, while he had this opportunity; and to that
end he answered all the Objections, she could make, to the contrary: but ever
when he named Marriage, she trembled with fear of doing something that she
fancied she ought not to do without the Consent of her Father, she was sensible
of the Advantage, but had been so used to a strict Obedience, that she could
not without Horror think of Violating it, and therefore besought him, as he
valued her Repose, not to urge her to that, and told him further that if he
feared any Rival, she would give him what other Assurance and Satisfaction he
pleased, but that of Marriage, which she could not consent to, till she knew
such an Aliance would not be Fatal to him; for she feared as passionately as he
loved her, when he should find she had occasioned him the loss of his Fortune,
or his Fathers Affection, he would grow to hate her; though he answered to this,
all that a fond Lover could urge, yet she was resolved, and he was forced to
content himself with obliging her by his Prayers and Protestations, his Sighs
and his showers of Tears to a Contract, which they solemnly made each other,
vowing on either side, that they would never Marry any other, this being
solemnly concluded, he assumed a Look more Gay and Contented than before, he
presented her a very rich Ring, which she durst not put on her Finger, but hid
it in her Bosom: and beholding each other now as Man and Wife, she suffered him
all the decent Freedoms he could wish to take, so that the hours of this Voyage
feem'd the most soft and charming of his Life, and doubtless they were so,
every touch of Atlante transported him, every look pierced his Soul, and he was
all Raptures of Joy, when he considered this charming lovely Maid was his own.

Charlot all this while was gazing above Deck, admiring the motion of the
little Vessel, and how easily the Wind and Tide bore her up the River; she had
never been in any thing of this Kind before, and was very well pleased and
entertained, when Rinaldo called her down to eat, where they enjoyed themselves
as well as was possible, and Charlot was wondering to see such a Content in
their Eyes.

But now they thought it was high time for them to return, they fancy the
Footman missing them at Church, would go home and Alarm their Father, and the
Knight of the ill Favored Countenance, as Charlot called Count Vernole, whose
severity put their Father on a greater restriction of them than naturally he
would do of himself: At the Name of this Count, Rinaldo changed color, fearing
he might be some Rival, and asked Atlante, If this Vernole was akin to her, she
answered No; but was a very great Friend to her Father, and one who from their
Infancy, had had a particular concern for their breeding, and was her Master
for Philosophy. Ah! replied Rinaldo sighing, this Man's concern must proceed
from something more than Friendship for her Father, and therefore conjured her
to tell him, whether he were not a Lover? A Lover replied Atlante; I aslure
you, he is a perfect Antidote against that Passion; and though she suffered his
Ugly Presence now, she should loath and hate him, should he name but Love to
her.

She said, she believed she need not fear any suchPersecution, since he was a
Man, who was not at all Amorous, that he had too much of the Satyr in his
Humor to harbor any softness there: and Nature had formed his Body to his
Mind, wholly unfit for Love; and that he might set his Heart absolutely at
rest, she assured him her Father had never yet proposed any marriage to her,
though many advantageous ones are offered him every day.

The Sails being turned to carry them back from whence they came; after having
discoursed of a thousand things, and all of Love and Contrivance to carry on
their Mutual Design, they with Sighs parted, Rinaldo staying behind in the
Pleasure Boat, and they going a Shore in the Whery, that attended; after which
he cast many an Amorous and sad Look, and perhaps was answered by those of
Atlante.

It was past Church time two or three Hours; when they arrived at Home wholly
unprepared with an excuse, so Absolutely was Atlante's Soul possessed with Softer
Business. The first Person they met withal was the Footman, who opened the
Door, and began to cry out, how long he had waited in the Church, and how in
Vain; without giving them time to reply, De Pais came toward 'em, and with a
Frowning Look, demanded where they had been? Atlante who was not accustomed to
Excuses and Untruth, was a while at a stand, when Charlot with a Voice of Joy
cried out, Oh Sir we have been a Board of a fine little Ship: At this Atlante
blushed fearing she would tell the Truth. But she proceeded on, and said; that
they had not been above a Quarter of an Hour at Church, when the Lady --
withsome other Ladies and Cavaliers, were going out of the Church, and that
spying them, they would needs have them go with 'em; mySisterSir, continued
she, was veryloath to go, for fear you should be angry, but my Lady -- was so
importunate with her on one side, and I on the other; because I never saw a
little Ship in my Life, that at last we prevailed with her, therefore good Sir,
be not angry. He promised them he was not, and when they came in, they found
Count Vernole, who had been inspiring De Pais with Severity, and councel'd him
to chide the Young Ladies, for being too long Absent, under Pretense of going
to their Devotion, nor was it enough for him to set the Father on, but himself
with a Gravity, where Concern and Malice were both apparent, reproacht Atlante
with Levity, and told her, he believed she had some other Motive, then the
Invitation of a Lady, to go on Ship board, and that she had too many Lovers,
not to make them doubt that this was a Designed thing, and that she had heard
Love from some one, for whom it was designed: To this she made him but a short
reply, that if it was so, she had no reason to conceal it, since she had Sense
enough to look after herself, and if any Body had made Love to her, he might be
assured it was some one, whose Quality and Merit deserved to be heard; and with
a Look of Scorn, she past on to another Room, and left him silently raging
within with Jealousy. Which if before she tormented him, this Declaration
increased it to a Pitch not to be concealed. And this Day he said so much to
the Father, that he resolved forthwith to send Charlot to a Nunery, and
accordingly the next Day, he bid her prepare to go: Charlot, who was not yet
arrived to the Years of Distinction, did not much regret it, and having no
trouble, but leaving her Sister, she prepared to go to a Nunery not many
Streets from that where she dwelt. The Lady Abbess was her Father's Kins-woman,
and had treated her very well, as often as she came to visit her, so that with
satisfaction enough, she was condemned to a Monastic Life, and was now going
for her Probation Year: Atlante was troubled at her departure, because she had
now no body to bring and to carry Letters between Rinaldo and she: However she
took her leave of her, and promised to come and see her, as often as she should
be permitted to go abroad, for she feared now some constraint extraordinary
would be put upon her, and so it happened.

Atlante's Chamber was that to which the Balcony belonged, and though she durst
not appear there in the day time, she could in the Night, and that way give her
Lover as many hours of her conversation, as she pleased without being
perceived: but how to give Rinaldo notice of this she could not tell, who not
knowing Charlot was gone to a Monestary, waited many days at his Window to see
her; at last they neither of them knowing who to trust with any Message, one
day when he was, as usual, upon his watch, he saw Atlante step into the
Balcony, who having a Letter, in which she had put a piece of Led, she tossed it
into his Window, whose Casement was open, and run in again unperceived by any
but himself, the Paper contained only this.

My Chamber is that which looks into the Balcony, from whence, though I cannot
converse with you in the day, I can at Night when I am retired to go to Bed,
therefore be at your Window, Farewell.

There needed no more to make him a dilligent watcher, and accordingly she was
no sooner retired to her Chamber, but she would come into the Balcony, where
she failed not to see him attending at his Window, this happy contrivance was
thus carried on for many Nights, where they entertained one another, with all
the indearment that two hearts could dictate, who were perfectly united and
assured of each other, and this pleasing Conversation would often last till day
appeared, and forced 'em to part.

But old Belyuard perceiving his Son frequent that Chamber more then usual,
fancied something extraordinary must be the the cause of it, and one Night
asking for his Son, his Vallet told him he was gone into the great Chamber, so
this was called: Belyuard asked the Vallet what he did there, he told him he
could not tell, for often he had lighted him thither, and that his Master would
take the Candle from him at the Chamber Door, and suffer him to go no further;
though the Old Gentleman could not imagine, what Affairs he could have alone every
Night in that Chamber, he had a curiosity to see, and one unlucky Night,
putting off his shoes he came to the Door of the Chamber which was open, he
entered softly, and saw the Candle set in the Chimney, and his Son at a great
open Bay Window; he stopped a while to wait when he would turn, but finding him
immovable, he advanced something further, and at last heard the soft Dialogue
of Love, between him and Atlante, whom he knew to be she, by his often calling
her by her Name in their discourse, he heard enough to confirm him how Matters
went, and unseen as he came, he returned, full of indignation and thought how
to prevent so great an Evil, as this Passion of his Son might produce, at first
he thought to round him severely in the Ear about it, and upbraid him for doing
the only thing he had thought fit to forbid him, but then he thought that would
but terrify him for a while, and he would return again, where he had so great
an inclination if he were near her; he therefore resolves to send him to Paris,
that by absence he might forget this young Beauty, that had charmed his Youth:
therefore without letting Rinaldo know the reason, and without taking notice
that he knew any thing of his Amor; he came to him one day, and told him all
the Masters he had for the improving him in Noble Sciences were very dull, or
very remiss, and that he resolved he should go for a Year or two, to the
Academy at Paris; to this the Son made a thousand Evasions, but the Father was
possitive, and not to be persuaded by all his reasons, and finding he should
absolutely displease him, if he refused to go, and not daring to tell him the
dear cause of his desire to remain at Orleance, he therefore with a breaking
heart consents, to go; nay resolves it, though it should be his death; but
alas! he considers that this parting, will not only prove the greatest Torment
upon Earth to him, but that Atlante will share in his misfortune, also; this
thought gives him a double Torment, and yet finds no way to evade it.

The Night that finisnt this fatal day, he goes again to his wonted Station,
the Window; where he had not fight very long, but he saw Atlante enter the
Balcony, he was not able a great while to speak to her, or to utter one word,
the Night was light enough to see him at the wonted place, and she admires at
his silence, and demands the reason in such obliging Terms, as adds to his
grief; and he with a deep sigh replied, urge me not my fair Atlante to speak,
least by obeying you, I give you more cause of grief, then my silence is
capable of doing, and then sighing again, he held his peace and gave her leave
to ask the cause of these last words, but when he made no reply, but by
sighing, she imagined it much worse then indeed it was, and with a trembling
and fainting voice she cried; Oh! Rinaldo, give me leave to Divine that cruel
news, you are so unwilling to tell me; it is so, added she, you are destined to
some more Fortunate Maid than Atlante, at this Tears stopped her Speech, and she
could utter no more, no my dearest charmer, replied Rinaldo, (Elavating his
voice) if that were all, you should see with what fortitude I would dye, rather
than obey any such commands; I am vowed yours to the last moment of my Life,
and will be yours in spite of all the opposition in the World, that cruelty I
could evade, but cannot this that threatens me; Ah! cried Atlante, let Fate do
her worst, so she till continue Rinaldo mine, and keep that Faith he has sworn
to me entire; what can she do besides that, can afflict me? she can separate
me, cried he, for some time from Atlante, Oh! replied she, all misfortunes fall
so below that, which I first imagined, that methinks, I do not resent this, as
I should otherwise have done; but I know when I have a little more considered
it, I shall even dye with the grief of it, absence being so great an Enemy to
Love, and makes us soon forget the Object beloved, this though I never
Experienced, I have heard and fear it may be my fate, he then convinced her
fear with a thousand new vows, and a thousand imprecations of constancy; she
then asked him, if their Loves were discovered, that he was with such half to
depart, he told her nothing of that was the cause, and he could almost with it
were discovered since he could resolutely then refuse to go, but it was only to
cultivate his Mind, more effectually than he could do here, 't was the care of
his Father to accomplish him the more, and therefore he could not contradict
it, but, said he, I am not sent where Seas shall part us, nor vast distances of
Earth, but to Paris, from whence he might come in two days to see her again,
and that he would expect from that Balcony, that had given him so many happy
moments, many more, when he should come to see her, he besought her to send him
away, with all the satisfaction she could, which she could no otherwise do,
than by giving him new assurances, that she would never give away that right he
had in her, to any other Lover, she vows this with innumerable Tears; and is
almost angry with him for questioning her Faith; he tells her then he has but
one Night more to stay, and his grief will be unspeakable, if he should not be
able to take a better leave of her than at a Window, and that if she would give
him leave, he would by a Rope or two, tied together, so as it may serve for
steps, ascend her Balcony; he not having time to provide a Ladder of Ropes: she
tells him, she has so great a confidence in his verture and Love, that she will
refuse him nothing, though it will be a very bold venture for a Maid, to trust
her self with a passionate young Man, in silence of Night; and though she did
not exert a vow from him to secure her, she expected he would have a care of
her Honor, he swore to her, his Love was too Religious for so base an attempt,
there needed not many vows to confirm her Faith, and it was agreed on between
'em, that he should come the next Night into her Chamber.

It happened, that Night, as it often did, that Count Vernole, lay with
Monsieur De Pays, which was in a Ground-room just under that of Atlantes; and
as soon as she knew all were in Bed, she gave the word to Rinaldo, who was
attending with the impatience of a passionate Lover below under the Window, and
who no sooner heard the Balcony open, but he ascended with some difficulty, and
entered the Chamber, where he found Atlante tremble with joy and fear: he
throws himself at her Feet, as unable to speak as she, who nothing but blushed
and bent down her Eyes, hardly daring to glance 'em toward the dear Object of
her desires, the Lord of all her vows, she was ashamed to see a Man in her
Chamber, where yet none had ever been alone, and by Night too; he saw her fear,
and felt her trembling, and after a thousand sighs of Love had made way for
Speech, he besought her to fear nothing from him, for his Flame was too sacred,
and his passion too Holy to offer any thing, but what Honor with Love might
afford him; at last he brought her to some courage, and the Roses of her fair
Cheeks, assumed their wonted Color, not blushing too Red, nor Languishing too
Pale: but when the conversation began between them, it was the softest in the
World, they said all, that parting Lovers could say, all that wit and
tenderness could express, they exchanged their vows a new, and to confirm his,
he tied a Bracelet of Diamonds about her Arm, and she returned him one of her
Hair, which he had long begged, and she had on purpose made, which clasped
together with Diamonds, this she put about his Arm, and he swore to carry it to
his Grave; the Night was very far spent in tender Vows, soft sighs and Tears on
both sides, and it was high time to part, but as if death had been to have
arrived to 'em in that Minute, they both lingered away the time, like Lovers,
who had forgot themselves, and day was near approaching, when he bid farwell,
which he repeated very often, for still he was interrupted by some commanding
softness from Atlante, and then lost all his Power of going, till she more
courageous and careful of his interest, and her own Fame forced him from her,
and it was happy she did so, for he was no sooner got over the Balcony, and she
had flung him down his Rope, and shut the Door, but Vernole whom Love and
Contrivance kept waking, fancied several times he heard a noise in Atlantes
Chamber, and whether in passing over the Balcony, Rinaldo made any noise or
not? or whether 'twere still his jealous fancy, he came up in his Night Gown,
with a Pistol in his hand, Atlante was not so much lost in grief, though she
were all in tears, but she heard a Man come up, and imagined it had been her
Father, she not knowing of Count Vernoles lying in the House that Night, if she
had, she possibly had taken more care to have been silent, but whoever it was,
she could not get to Bed soon enough, and therefore turned her self to her
dressing Table, where the Candle stood, and where lay a Book open of the story
of Ariadne and Thesias, the Count turning the Latch, entered halting into her
Chamber, in his Night Gown clapped close about him, which betrayed an ill
favored shape, his Nightcap on, without a Periwig, which discovered all his
lean withered Jaws, his Face pale, and his Eyes staring, and making altogether
so dreadful a Figure, that Atlante who no more dreamt of him, then of a Devil,
had possibly rather have seen the last, she gave a great screek, which
frightened Vernole, so both stood for a while staring on each other, till both
were recollected, he told her the care of her Honor, had brought him thither,
and then rolling his small Eyes round the Chamber, to see if he could discover
any Body, he proceeded and cried Madam, if I had no other motive than your
being up at this time of Night, or rather of Day, I could easily guess how you
have been entertained, what insolence is this, said she, all in a rage, when to
cover your boldness, of approaching my Chamber at this hour, you would question
how I have been entertained, either explain your self, or quit my Chamber, for
I do not use to see such terrible Objects here; possibly those you do see, said
the Count, are indeed more agreeable, but I am afraid have not that regard to
your Honor, as I have, and at that word, he stepped to the Balcony, opened it,
and look out, but seeing no Body, he shut it too again, this enraged Atlante
beyond all patience, and snatching the Pistol out of his hand, she told him, he
deserved to have it aimed at his head, for having the impudence to question her
Honor, or her conduct, and commanded him to avoid her Chamber as he loved his
Life; which she believed he was fonder of than of her Honor, she speaking this
in a Tone wholly Transported with rage, and at the same time holding the Pistol
toward him, made him tremble with fear, and he now found whether she were
guilty or not, it was his turn to beg Pardon; for you must know however it came
to pass, that his Jealousy made him come up in that fierce Posture, at other
times Vernole was the most tame and passive Man in the World, and one who was
afraid of his own shadow in the Night, he had a natural aversion for danger,
and thought it below a Man of Wit or common Sense, to be guitly of that bruital
thing called courage or fighting, his Philosophy told him, 'twas safe sleeping
in a whole skin, and possibly he apprehended as much danger from this Virago,
as ever he did from his own Sex, he therefore fell on his Knees, and besought
her to hold her fair hand, and not to suffer that, which was the greatest mark
of his respect to be the cause of her hate or indignation, the pittyful Faces
he made, and the signs of mortal fear in him, had almost made her Laugh, at
least it allayed her anger, and she bid him rise and play the Fool hereafter
somewhere else, and not in her presence, yet for once she would deign to give
him this satisfaction, that she was got into a Book, which had many moving
Stories very well writ, and that she found her self so well entertained, she
had forgot how the Night past; he most humbly thankt her for this satisfaction
and retired, perhaps not so well satisfied as he pretended.

After this he appeared more submissive and respectful toward Atlante, and she
carried her self more reserved and haughty toward him, which was one reason he
would not yet discover his Passion.

Thus the time ran on at Orleance, while Rinaldo found himself daily
Languishing at Paris: he was indeed in the best Academy in the City amongst a
number of brave and noble Youths. Where all things that could accomplish them,
was to be learnt by those that had any Genius: but Rinaldo had other thoughts
and other business, his time was wholly past in the most Solitary parts of the
Garden, by the Melancholy Fountains, and in the most Gloomy Shades, where he
could with most Liberty breath out his Passion and his Griefs, he was past the
Tuterage of a Boy, and his Masters could not upbraid him, but found he had some
secret cause of Grief which made him not mind these Exercises which were the
delight of the rest; so that nothing being able to divert his Melancholy,
which daily increased upon him, he feared it would bring him into a Fever, if
he did not give himself the satisfaction of seeing Atlante, he had no sooner
thought of this, but he was impatient to put it into Execution, he resolves to
go (having very good Horses) without acquainting any of his Servants with it;
he got a very handsome and light Ladder of Ropes made which he carried under his
Coat, and away he Rid for Orleance, stayed at a little Village till the
darkness of the Night might favor his Design, and then walking about Atlante's
Lodgings, till he saw a light in her Chamber, and then making that noice on his
Sword as was agreed between them, he was heard by his Adorable Atlante, and
suffered to mount her Chamber: where he would stay till almost break of Day and
then return to the Village, and take Horse and away for Paris again, this once
in a Month was his Exercise without which he could not live, so that his whole
Year was past in Riding between Orleance and Paris, between Excess of Grief,
and Excess of Joy by turns.

'Twas now that Atlante, arrived to her Fifteenth Year, shon out with a luster
of Beauty greater than ever, and in this Year of the absence of Rinaldo, had
carried her self with that severity of Life, without the youthful desire of
going abroad, or desiring any Diversion, but what she found in her own retired
thoughts, that Vernole wholly unable, longer to conceal his Passion, resolved
to make a publication of it, first to the Father and then to the lovely
Daughter, of whom he had some hope, because she had carried her self very well
toward him for this year past, which she would never have done, if she had
imagined he would ever have been her Lover, she had seen no signs of any such
misfortune toward her in these many Years, he had conversed with her and she
had no cause to fear him: when one day her Father taking her into the Garden,
told her what Honor and Happiness was in store for her, and that now the Glory
of his fallen Family would rise again, since she had a Lover of an Illustrious
Blood, allied to Monarchs, and one whose Fortune was newly increased to a very
considerable degree, answerable to his Birth, she changed Color at this
Discourse, imagining but too well, who this Illustrious Lover was, when De Pays
proceeded and told her, indeed his Person was not the most agreeable that ever
was seen, but he Married her to Glory and Fortune, not the Man; and a Woman,
says he, ought to look no farther.

She needed not any more to inform her who this intended Husband was, and
therefore bursting forth into Tears, she throws her self at his Feet, imploring
him not to use the Authority of a Father, to force her to a thing so contrary
to her inclinations, assuring him she could not consent to any such thing, and
that she would rather dye than yield, she urged many Arguments, for this her
Disobedience; But none would pass for current with the Old Gentleman, whose
Pride had flattered him with hope of so considerable a Son-in-Law, what himself
was to Hope, De Pays after some consideration resolved to tell him, she
received the offer, very well; but that he must expect a little Maiden Nicety
in the case, and accordingly did tell him so, and he was not at all doubtful of
his good Fortune.

But Atlante, who resolved to dye a thousand Deaths rather then break her
solemn Vows to Rinaldo, or to Marry the Count, cast about how she should avoid
it, with the least hazard of her Fathers Rage, she found Rinaldo the better and
more advantageous Match of the two, could they but get his Fathers Consent, he
was Beautiful and Young, his Title was equal to that of Vernole, when his
Father should dye, and his Estate exceeded his, yet she dares not make a
discovery for fear she should injure her Lover, who at this time, tho she knew
it not, lay sick of a Fever, while she was wondering that he came not as he
used to do: however she resolves to send him a Letter, and acquaint him with
the misfortune, which she did in these Terms.

Atlante to Rinaldo.
My Fathers Authority would force me to violate my sacred Vows to you; and give
them to the Count Vernole, whom I mortally hate, yet could wish him the
greatest Monarch in the World, that I might shom you I could even then despise
him for your sake: my Father is already too much enraged by my denial to hear
Reason from me, if I should confess to him, my Vows to you: so that I see
nothing but a prospect of Death before me, for assure your self, my Rinaldo, I
will dye rather then consent to Marry any other: therefore come my Rinaldo, and
come quickly, to see my Funerals, instead of those Nuptials they vainly expect
from,

Your Faithful Atlante.


This Letter Rinaldo received, and there needed no more to make him fly to
Orleance; this raised him soon from his Bed of Sickness, and getting
immediately to hers, he arrived at his Father's House, who did not so much
admire to see him, because he heard he was sick of a Fever and gave him leave
to return it he pleased, he went directly to his Fathers House, because he knew
somewhat of the business, he was resolved to make his passion known as soon as
he had seen Atlante, from whom he was to take all his measures, he therefore
failed not, when all were in Bed to rise and go from his Chamber, into the
Street; where finding a light in Atlante's Chamber, for she every Night
expected him, he made the usual sign, and she went into the Balcony, and he
having no convenience of mounting up into it, they discourst, and said all they
had to say, from thence, she tells him of the Counts passions, of her Fathers
Resolution and her own, which was rather to dye his than live any bodies else,
and at last as their last refuge, they resolve to discover the whole Matter,
she to her Father, and he to his, to see what Accommodation they could make, if
not to dye together: They parted at this resolve, for she would not permit him
longer to stay in the Street after such a sickness; so he went home to Bed but
not to sleep.

The next day at Dinner Mons signiore Bellyuard believing his Son absolutely
cured by absence of his passion, and speaking of all the News of the Town,
among the rest, told him he was come in good time to Dance at the Wedding of
Count Vernole with Atlante, the Match being agreed on: No Sir, replied Rinaldo,
I shall never Dance at the Marriage of Count Vernole with Atlante, and you will
see in Monsieur De Pays House a Funeral sooner than a Wedding, and thereupon he
told his Father all his passion, for that lovely Maid: and assured him if he
would not see him laid in his Grave, he must consent to this Match: Bellyuard
rose in a fury, and told him he had rather see him in the Grave then in the
Arms of Atlante, not continued he, so much for any dislike I have to the Young
Lady, or the smallness of her Fortune, but because I have so long warned you
from such a passion, and have with such care endeavored by your absence to
prevent it, he traverst the Room very fast, still protesting against this
Aliance, and was deaf to all Rinaldo could say, on the other side, the day
being come wherein Atlante was to give her final Answer to her Father,
concerning her Marriage with Count Vernole, she assumed all the Courage and
Resolution she could to withstand the Storm, that threatened a Denial; and her
Father came to her, and demanding her Answer; she told him, she could not be
the Wife of Vernole, since she was Wife to Rinaldo, only Son to Bellyuard: if
her Father stormed before, he grew like a Man distracted at this Confession,
and Vernole hearing them loud, ran to the Chamber to learn the Cause, where
just as he entered, he found De Pays Sword drawn and ready to kill his
Daughter, who lay all in Tears at his Feet, he withheld his hand, and asking
the cause of this Rage, he was told all that Atlante had consest, which put
Vernole quite beside all his Gravity, and made him discover the infirmity of
Anger, which he used to say ought to be dissembled by all Wise Men, so that De
Pays forgot his own to appease his, but 'twas in vain, for he went out of the
House vowing Revenge on Rinaldo, and to that end being not very well assured of
his own Courage, as I said before, and being of the Opinion that no Man ought
to expose his Life to him, who has injured him; he hired Swis and Spanish
Soldiers to attend him in the nature of Footmen, and watched several Nights
about Bellyuards Door, and that of De Pays, believing he should sometime or
other see him under the Window of Atlante, or perhaps mounting into it, for now
he no longer doubted, but this happy Lover was he, whom he fancied he heard go
from the Balcony that Night, he came up with his Pistol, and being more a
Spaniard than a French Man in his Nature, he resolved to take him any way
Ungarded or Unarmed if he came in his way.

Atlante who heard his threatenings, when he went from her in a rage, feared his
Cowardice might put him on some base Action, to deprive Rinaldo of his Life,
and therefore thought it not safe to suffer him to come to her by Night, as he
had before done; but sent him word in a Note that he should forbear her Window,
for Vernole had sworn his Death; this Note came unseen by his Father to his
Hands; but this could not hinder him from coming to her Window, which he did as
soon as it was dark, he came thither, only attended with his Vallet and two
Footmen, for now he cared not who knew the Secret; he had no sooner made the
sign, but he found himself incompast with Vernoles Bravoes; and himself
standing at a distance, cried out, that is he: with that they all drew on both
sides, and Rinaldo received a Wound in his Arm, Atlante heard this, and ran
crying out that Rinaldo pressed by numbers would be killed. De Pays who was
reading in his Closet, took his Sword, and ran out, and contrary to all
expectation, seeing Rinaldo Fighting with his back to the Door, pulled him into
the House, and fought himself with the Bravoes. Who being very much wounded by
Rinaldo, gave ground and sheer'd off: and De Pays putting up Old Billo into the
Scabbard went into his House, where he found Rinaldo almost Fainting with loss
of Blood, and Atlante with her Maids binding up his Wound, to whom De Pays
said, this Charity Atlante very well becomes you, and is what I can allow you;
and I could wish you had no other Motive for this Action: Rinaldo by degrees
recovered of his Fainting, and as well as his weakness would permit him, he got
up and made a low Reverence to De Pays, telling him, he had now a double
Obligation to pay him all the respect in the World, first for his being the
Father of Atlante, and secondly, for being the Preserver ofhis Life, two ties
that should eternally oblige him to Love and Honor him, as his own Paient; De
Pays replied, he had done nothing but what common Humanity compelled him too:
but if he would make good that respect he professed toward him, it must be in
quitting all hopes of Atlante, whom he had destined to another, or to an
eternal enclosure in a Monastery, he had another Daughter, whom if he would
think worthy of his regard, he should take his Aliance as a very great Honor,
but his Word and Reputation, nay his Vows, were past to give Atlante to Count
Vernole; Rinaldo, who before he spoke, took measure from Atlantes Eyes, which
told him, her Heart was his; returned this Answer to De Pays: that he was
infinitely glad to find by the generosity of his Offer, that he had no Aversion
to his being his Sonin-Law, and that next to Atlante, the greatest Happiness he
could wish would be, his receiving Charlot from his hands, but that he could
not think of quitting Atlante, how necessary soever it would be for her Glory
and his -- (the further) Repose: De Pays would not let him at this time, argue
the Matter farther seeing he was Ill, and had need of looking after, he
therefore begged he would for his Healths sake retire to his own House, whither
he himself Conducted him; and left him to the care of his Men, who were escaped
the Fray; and returned to his own Chamber, he found Atlante retired, and so he
went to Bed full of Thoughts, this Night had increased his Esteem for Rinaldo,
and lessened it for Count Vernole, but his Word and Honor being past, he could
not break it, neither with safety nor honor; for he knew the haughty resenting
Nature of the Count, and he feared some danger might arrive to the brave
Rinaldo, which troubled him very much, at last he resolved, that neither might
take any thing ill at his Hands, to loose Atlante, and send her to the
Monastery where her Sister was, and compel her to be a Nun, this he thought
would prevent mischiefs on both fides, and accordingly the next day (having in
the Morning sent word to the Lady Abbess what he would have done, he carries
Atlante under pretense of visiting her Sister, which they often did) to the
Monastery, where she was no sooner come, but she was led into the enclosure,
her Father he had rather Sacrifice her than she should be the cause of the
Murder of two such Noble Men as Vernole and Rinaldo.

The noise of Atlantes being enclosed was soon spread all over the busy Town,
and Rinaldo was not the last to whom the News arrived, he was for a few days
confined to his Chamber, where when alone, he raved like a Man distracted, but
his Wounds had so incensed his Father against Atlante, that he swore he would
see his Son dye of them rather then suffer him to Marry Atlante, and was
extremely overjoyed to find she was Condemned for ever to the Monastery, so
that the Son thought it the wisest Course, and the most for the advantage of
his Love, to say nothing to contradict his Father, but being almost assured
Atlante would never consent to be shut up in a Cloister and Abandon him, he
flattered himself with hope, that he should steal her from thence, and Marry
her in spite of all opposition: this he was impatient to put in Practice he
believed, if he were not permitted to see Atlante, he had still a kind Advocate
in Charlot, who was now arrived to her thirteenth Year, and infinitely advanced
in Wit and Beauty. Rinaldo therefore often goes to the Monastery surrounding
it, to see what possibility there was of accomplishing his Design, if he could
get her Consent, he finds it not impossible, and goes to visit Charlot, who had
command not to see him or speak to him; this was a Cruelty he looked not for,
and which gave him an unspeakable trouble, and without her aid it was wholly
impossible to give Atlante any account of his Defign, in this perplexity he
remained many days, in which he Languisht almost to Death, he was distracted
with thought, and continually hovering about the Nunnery - Walls, in hope at
sometime or other to see or hear from the lovely Maid, who alone could make his
Happiness, in these Traverses he often met Vernole, who had liberty to see her
when he pleased, if it happened that they chanced to meet in the day time,
though Vernole were attended with an Equipage of Ruffins, and Rinaldo but only
with a couple of Footmen, he could perceive Vernole shun him, grow pale and
almost tremble with fear sometimes, and get to the other side of the Street,
and if he did not, Rinaldo having a mortal hate to him, would often bear up so
close to him, that he would jostle him against the Wall, which Vernole would
patiently put up and paseon, so that he could never be provoked to fight by day
light, how sollitary soever the place was where they met, but if they chanced
to meet at night they were certain of Skirmish, in which he would have no part
himself, so that Rinaldo was often like to be assassinated, but still came off
with some slight Wound: this continued so long and made so great a noise in the
Town, that the two Old Gentlemen were mightily Alarmed by it, and Count
Bellyuard came to De Pays one day to discourse with him of this Affair, and
Bellyuard for the preservation of his Son, was almost consenting, since there
was no Remedy, that he should Marry Atlante: De Pays confessed the Honor he
proffered him, and how troubled he was, that his word was already past to his
Friend the Count Vernole, whom he said she should Marry or remain for ever a
Nun, but if Rinaldo could displace his Love from Atlante, and place it on
Charlot, he should gladly consent to the Match: Bellyuard who would now do any
thing for the repose of his Son, tho he believed this exchange would not pass,
yet resolved to propose it, since by Marrying him, he took him out of the
Danger of Vernole's Assassinates, who would never leave him till they had
dispatched him, should he marry Atlante.

While Rinaldo was contriving a thousand ways to come to speak to, or send
Billets to, Atlante, none of which would succeed without the Aid of Charlot,
his Father came and proposed this Agreement between De Pais and himself, to his
Son. At first Rinaldo received it with changed Countenance, and a Breaking
Heart; but swiftly turning from Thought to Thought, he conceived this the only
way to come at Charlot, and so consequently at Atlante, he therefore after some
dissembled regret consents, with a sad put-on-Look: and Charlot has notice
given her to see and entertain Rinaldo, as yet they had not told her the
Reason, which her Father would tell her, when he came to visit her, he said,
Rinaldo overjoyed at this Contrivance, and his own Dissimulation, goes to the
Monastery, visits Charlot, where he ought to have said something of the
Proposition, but wholly bent on other Thoughts, he solicits her to convey some
Letters and Presents to Atlante, which she readily did, to the unspeakable Joy
of the Poor Distressed: sometimes he would talk to Charlot of her own Affairs,
asking her, if she resolved to become a Nun: to which she would sigh and say,
if she must, it would be extremely against her Inclinations; and if it pleased
her Father, she had rather begin the World with any Tolerable Match.

Things past thus for some Days, in which our Lovers were happy, and Vernole
assured he should have Atlante. But at last De Pais came to visit Charlot, who
asked her if she had seen Rinaldo, she answered, she had, and how does he
entertain you, replied De Pais? have you received him as a Husband? and has he
behaved himself like one? at this a sudden Joy seized the Heart of Charlot,
and loath to confess what she had done for him to her Sister; she hung down her
Blushing Face to study for an Answer: De Pais continued, and told her the
Agreement between Bellyaurd and him, for the saving of Bloodshed: She who blessed
the Cause, whatever it was, having always a very great Friendship and
Tenderness for Rinaldo, gave her Father a Thousand Thanks, for his Care, and
assured him, since she was commanded by him, she would receive him as her
Husband: and the next Day when Rinaldo came to visit her, as he used to do, and
bringing a Letter with him, wherein he proposed the Sight of Atlante, he found
a Coldness in Charlos, as soon as he told her his Design; and desired her to
carry the Letter, he asked the Reason of this Change, she tells him, she was
informed of the Agreement between their two Fathers, and that she looked upon
her selt as his Wife, and would act no more as a Confident, that she had ever a
Violent Inclination of Friendship for him, which she would soon improve into
something more Soft. He could not deny the Agreement nor his Promise, but it
was in vain to tell Her, he did it only to get a Correspondence with Atlante;
she is Obstinate, and he as pressing with all the Tenderness of Persuasion, he
vows he can never be any but Atlantes, and she may see him die, but never break
his Vows; she urges her Claim in Vain, so that at last she was overcome, and
promised she would carry the Letter, which was to have her make her Escape that
Night; he waits at the Grate for her Answer, and Charlot returns with one that
pleased him very well, that was, that Night her Sister would make her escape,
and that he must stand in such a Place of the Nunery Wall, and she would come
out to him: after this she upbraids him with his false promise to her, and of
her Goodness to serve him after such a Disappointment. He receives her
Reproaches with a thousand Sighs, and bemoans his Misfortune in not being
capable of more than Friendship for her, and vows, that next Atlante he Esteems
her of all Womenkind: She seems to be obliged by this and assured him, she
would hasten the Flight of Atlante, and taking leave, he went Home to order a
Coach, and some Servants to assist him.

In the mean time Count Vernole came to visit Atlante, but she resused to be
seen by him: and all he could do there that Afternoon was Entertaining Charlot
at the Grate, to whom he spoke a great many fine things, both of her improved
Beauty and Wit' and how happy Rinald, would be in so fair a Bride, she received
this with all the Civility that was due to his Quality, and their Discourse
being at an end, he took his leave, it being toward the Evening.

Rinaldo wholly impatient came betimes to the Corner of the Dead Wall, where he
was appointed to stand, having ordered his Footmen and Coach to come to him as
soon as it was dark, while he was there walking up and down, Vernole came by
the End of the Wall to go home, and looking about, he saw at the other end
Rinaldo Walking, whose Back was toward him, but he knew him well. And though
he feared and dreaded his Business there, he durst not encounter him, they
being both attended but by one Footman a Piece. But Vernole's Jealousy and
Indignation was so high, that he resolved to fetch his Bravoes to his aid and
come and assault him; for he knew he waited there for some Message from Atlante.

In the mean time it grew dark, and Rinaldo's Coach came with another Footman;
which were hardly arrived, when Vernole with his assistance came to the corner
of the Wall, and screening themselves a little behind it, near to the place
where Rinaldo stood, who vvaited now close to a little door, out of which the
Gardners used to throw the Weeds and Dirt; Vernole could perceive anon the door
to open, and a Woman come out of it, calling Rinaldo by his Name, who stepped up
to her, and caught her in his Arms, with signs of insinite Joy; Vernole being
now all rage, cried to his Assassinate, fall on and kill the Ravisher, and
immediately they all fell on; Rinaldo, who had only his two Footmen on his
side, he was forced to let go the Lady, who would have run into the Garden
again, but the door fell too and locked; so that while Rinaldo was fighting, and
beaten back by the Bravoes, one of which he laid dead at his Feet; Vernole came
up to the frighted Lady, and taking her by the hand, cried, come my fair
Fugitive, you must along with me; she wholly scared out of her Senses, was
willing to go any where out of the Terror, she heard so near her, and without
reply, gave her self into his hand, who carried her directly to her Fathers
house, where she was no sooner come, but he told her Father all that had past,
and how she was running away with Rinaldo, but that his good Fortune brought
him just in the Lucky Minute, her Father turning to Reproach her found by the
Light of a Candle, that this was Charlot and not Atlante; whom Vernole had
brought Home, at which Vernole was Extremely astonished. Her Father demanded of
her, why she was running away with a Man, who was designed her by consent, yes,
said Charlot, you had his Consent Sir, and that of his Father, but I was far
from getting it, I found he resolved to die rather then quit Atlante, and
promising him my Assistance in his Amor, since he could never be mine, he got
me to carry a Letter to Atlante, which was to desire her to fly away with him,
instead of carrying her this Letter, I told her he was designed for me, and had
cancelled all his Vows to her, she swoonded at this News, and being recovered a
little, I left her in the Hands of the Nuns to persuade her to live: which she
resolves not to do without Rinaldo, though they pressed me, yet I resolved to
pursue my Design, which was to tell Rinaldo, she would obey his kind Summons,
he waited for her, but I put my self into his Hands in lieu of Atlante, and had
not the Count received me, we had been married by this time, by some false
Light that could not have discovered me: But I am satisfied if I had, he would
never have lived with me longer than the Cheat had been undiscovered, for I
find them both resolved to die rather then change; and for my Part, Sir, I was
not so much in Love with Rinaldo, as I was out of Love with a Nunnery; and took
any Opportunity to quit a Life Absolutely contrary to my Humors. She spoke
this with a Gayety so brisk, and an Air so agreeable, that Vernole found it
touched his Heart; and the rather because he found Atlante would never be his,
or if she were, he should be still in Danger from the Resentment of Rinaldo; he
therefore bowing to Charlot, and taking her by the Hand cried, Madam; since
Fortune has disposed you thus Luckily for me, in my Possession, I humbly
implore you would Consent, she should make me entirely Happy, and give me the
Price for which I fought, and have conquered by my Sword; my Lord, replied
Charlot, with a Modest Air: I am Superstitious enough to believe, that since
Fortune, so contray to all our Designs, has given mo into your Hands, that she
from the Beginning Destined me to the Honor, which with my Fathers Consent; I
shall receive as becomes me: De Pais Transported with Joy, to find all things
would be so well brought about, it being all one to him whether Charlot or
Atlante gave him Count Vernole for his Son-in-Law readily consented, and
immediately a Priest was sent for, and they were that Night Married; and it
being now not above Seven a Clock, many of their Friends were invited, the
Music sent for, and as good a Supper as so short a time, would provide was made
ready.

All this was performed in as short a time, as Rinaldo was fighting, and having
killed one, and wounded the rest, they all fled before his Conquering Sword,
which was never drawn with so good a will; when he came where his Coach stood,
just against the Back-Garden Door, he looked for his Mistress, but the Coachman
told him, he was no sooner engaged, but a Man came, and with a thousand
reproaches on her Levity bore her off: this made our young Lover rave, and he
is satisfied she is in the hands of his Rival, and that he had been fighting,
and Shedding his Blood, only to secure her flight with him; he lost all
patience, and 'twas with much ado his Servants persuaded him to return, telling
him in their Opinion, she was more likely to get out of the hands of his Rival
and come to him, than when she was in the Monastery.

He suffers himself to go into his Coach, and be carried home, but he was no
sooner alighted, but he heard Music, and a noise of Feastivals at De Pay's
House, he saw Coaches surround his door, and Pages and Footmen with Flamboys:
this sight and noise of joy made him ready to sink down at the Door, and
sending his Footman to learn the cause of this Triumph, the Pages that waited
there, told him that Count Vernole was this Night Married to Monsieur De Pay's
Daughter. He needed no more to deprive him of all sense, and stagering against
his Coach, he was caught by his Footmen, and carried into his House; and to
his Chamber, where they put him to Bed all scnseless as he was, and had much
ado to recover him to Life; he asked for his Father with a saint voice, for he
desired to see him before he died, it was told him he was gone to Count
Vernoles Wedding, where there was a perfect peace agreed on between them, and
all animosities laid aside; at this news Rinaldo fainted again, and his
Servants called his Father home, and told him in what condition they had
brought home their Master, recounting to him all that was past: he hasted to
Rinaldo, whom he found just recovered of his Swoonding, who putting his hand
out to his Father, all cold and trembling, cried well Sir, now you are
satisfied, since you have seen Atlante Married to Count Vernole, I hope now you
will give your unfortunate Son leave to dye, as you wished he should rather then
give him to the Arms of Atlante: here his Speech failed, and he fell again in a
fit of swonding, his Father ready to dye with fear of his Sons death, kneeled
down by his Bed side, and after having recovered him a little, he said to him,
my dear Son, I have indeed been at the Wedding of Count Vernole, but'tis not
Atlante to whom he is Married, but Charlot, who was the Person, you were
bearing from the Monastery instead of Atlante, who is still reserved for you,
and who is dying till she hear you are reserved for her, therefore as you
regard her Life, make much of your own, and make your self fit to receive her,
for her Father and I have agreed the Marriage already; and without giving him
leave to thank him, he called to one of his Gentlemen, and sent him to the
Monastery, with this news to Atlante, Rinaldo bowed himself as low as he could
in his Bed, and kissed the hand of his Father with tears of joy, but his weakness
continued all next day, and they were fain to bring Atlante to him, to confirm
his happiness.

It must only be guest by Lovers, the perfect joy these two received in the
sight of each other, Bellyuard received her as his Daughter, and the next day
made her so with very great solemnity, at which were Vernole and Charlot;
between Rinaldo and him was concluded a perfect Peace, and all thought
themselves happy in this double Union.

FINIS.

