A LETTER Written by a MINISTER, For the Satisfaction of a PERSON Doubting in
RELIGION. Shown to be Unsatisfactory.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

TO THE READER.
I Know it will be expected by the Reader, I should inform him what it was that
occasioned these following Papers. J. W. a young man of Preston in Lancashire,
fell into some doubts about the main concern of his Soul, Whether he had
hitherto the right Faith, or were in the true Church. Mr. T. B. whose
Parishioner he was, used his best endeavors to dissuade him from embracing the
Catholic Communion. For which I should not discommend him, for it was precise
duty in him, in case he verily judged the Negatives, in which Protestants
differ from Catholics were True, and that he had any solid Grounds for judging
so. Nay, he offered too to dispute with any Roman-Catholic before him, to
settle his Doubts, and give him satisfaction that the Protestant Religion was
True: which was a very fair Proffer, had it been as heartily performed.
Whereupon I was invited to give him a meeting; And when I came, to make the
Dispute short, I began with the first Principle in Controversy, The Rule of
Faith. I told him, that all our Contest was summed up in this one Enquiry, What
it was that Christ and his Apostles taught; and that if the Rule which was to
acquaint us with, that were not absolutely or infallibly Certain, all our Faith
must by consequence be Uncertain, and might possibly be an Error. I alleged,
that all His Rule that grounded His Persuasions about what was Faith, depended
on Interpretations of Scripture, made by himself or the Protestant Church; both
which being confessedly fallible, or possible to be deceived, he might
possibly, (that is, perhaps was actually) in an Error as to all his Faith for
ought he or they knew. When I expected an Answer, he stepped to his Study, and
fetched down a great Book, biding me read that, and offering me to lend it. I
admired at this strange method of answering, that instead of replying, when he
was pressed by my Reasons, he could think it a competent satisfaction to tell me,
he would lend me a Book to Read. Whereupon I pressed him for a positive Reply to
my Discourse, telling him, that since he had now Preached a Doctrine, pretended
to be Christ's, so many years, it was incredible he should not be able to give
an account of his Faith, and the Ground it was built on, without the assistance
of a Voluminous Book; the tossing over which I saw was very convenient for him,
to avoid answering, and to turn our Dispute into an endless Wrangling, (which
was all he aimed at) but never to bring the point to any Issue. He still
insisting upon my Reading that huge Book, I desired him to turn to any
particular place in it, which he would undertake, gave an Answer to my former
Discourse, and I would be contented to excuse him, and consider what it said.
But it would not be granted; so that I saw plainly, this was only an invention
to ward the blow from himself, and let it fall upon another. I pressed him again,
to make out to us by Grounds of His, he could be absolutely certain of any one
point of Faith, nay, even that Christ was God. He replied, he believed it,
because it was in the Creed. I could have told him, the Socinians grant those
words in the Creed, and yet deny Christ to be truly God; but I waved this, and
urged him to declare upon what inerrable Rule he believed what was contained in
the Creed. Upon this, to avoid answering, he began the most disingenuous cavil
that ever man heard; and fell upon me as if I believed not the Creed my self;
whereas I only pressed him to show us by His Grounds, or by any Rule of Faith
proper to Protestants, as they are distinct from Catholics, how He could
rationally believe even the Creed to be certain, and know the certain sense of
it, since it is Letter is as liable to misconstructions as the Scripture is. I
could do no less than tell him, how unhandsome this procedure was, to put upon
me without the least show of reason or common sense, a thing that never yet was
said or thought of any Roman Catholic in the World. But he with much heat,
still insisted, that I did disbelieve it, because I urged him to show how by
His Principles He did or could believe it; and fell into a high passion. Upon
which perceiving plainly, that all this pother and dust was raised, to get
clear of disputing, and despairing to bring him to give any account of his
Faith, even so much as pretending to show it to be as true Faith ought to be,
Infallibly certain, I came away with the young man, he having first declared
before Mr. T. B's. face, that he was fully satisfied, he could give no account
of his Faith, and consequently was not to be followed: and upon this became a
Catholic.

These things having past on in this manner here related, as soon as I saw a
Paper from him, to the young man, which here follows, I durst have sworn it had
been some Account of the Certainty of his Faith, in regard that was still
incumbent on him, having been left in so great a passion about that Point at
our last Interview. But, it seems it was too hard a morsel for his tender skill
to nibble upon; and instead of that, other points, though never so remote, are
fetched in by head and shoulders to keep off that discourse. How ill he handles
these too, will appear by the following Answer. But all these diversions shall
not serve his turn. That is, the point about which our Discourse was then, it is
that which stuck on his side; it is that concerning which he yet owes
satisfaction; and consequently, it is that to which with all right and reason, I
must still demand an Answer, and challenge him to run the Lists if he do not
perform it.

P. I.

Mr. T. B.'s PAPER To J. W.
PRESTON, Aug. 3. 1686. Poor Soul,
IT is now more than six Weeks since I observed your Apostatizing from our
Church; during which time, I have not been remiss in praying for your Recovery;
and now think it seasonable, by this short Paper, to endeavor it.

The pretended cause is, you cannot obtain satisfaction among us, about those
two points, Transubstantiation and Purgatory, (but mostly the former.)

Your Soul being (in my opinion) in great danger by the course you take, I
could not (with any quiet) see you so expose your self; and wished that you
might rather bestow your thoughts, on what more immediately touched you, and
was more suited to your Capacity: But seeing it verified in you (which is in
most persons) that you are most busy about what least concerns you; and
nothing pleases your Fancy, but what flies above your Understanding. I
purposed to let you know my thoughts (even) in the remote question of
Transubstantiation; of which, if you make good use, I shall proceed to the
latter.

Yet I deferred the thing, till I could learn, that the Person on whose Ability
you lean, ( viz. Mr. G.) was returning from London, that he might be near at
hand to furnish you with Answers; to the intent I should not be calumniated, as
a Designer to surprise and lurch you.

Wherefore I now send these few Lines, to desire you to provide your self of a
satisfactory resolution about this Question, or let me receive intimation how
that satisfaction does arise. I abridge you not of liberty to consult with any
other person that may add any thing to Mr. G. for I love Truth, and am loath
you should be carried away with Falsehood: and nothing will more content me,
than to receive an Answer of weight to this Paper; which shall (at this time)
only touch a few doubts, many more being reserved to be proposed when these
are cleared.

At present I must tell you, 1. What you are (or must be) taught to Believe.2.
How hard it will be for you to Believe what you shall be so Taught.

In the former, I Will note the Doctrines Taught, and the Method of Teaching
them. The latter, viz. the Method, I begin with.

That you may believe, your Mind must be abstracted (as much as possible it
may) from the judgment of your own Senses. Now this method will be hard for you
to submit to, when you consider that it is about their proper object, and your
Senses duly disposed to give their judgment, and the common Senses of Mankind
concurring with yours.

But yet this will be yet harder to digest, John 20.27. 1 John 1.1.
seeing this new method is directly contrary to the method which Christ used to
instruct Thomas; which was not to abstract his Mind from the judgment of his
Senses, but to employ his Mind about the judgment of his Senses. The method
also of St. John, is not to abstract from the judgment of the Senses, but he
appeals to the judgment of the Senses, to beget and confirm Faith. Hence
therefore the first Question will arise:

1. Quest. Why the method of your new Teachers, is so opposite to the method of
Christ and his Apostles?

Now to the Doctrines taught.

Three things most admirable are effected in the Eucharist, by the words of
Consecration, which the Catholic Faith believes and confesses without any
doubting.

1. That the true Body of Christ, even the same which was born of the Virgin,
and now sits in Heaven at the right hand of the Father, is contained in the
Sacrament.

2. That no substance of the Elements remains in it.

3. That the Accidents which are perceived by the Senses, are, in a wonderful
and inexplicable manner, without any subject matter: the substance of the Bread
and Wine are so changed, that they wholly cease to be; but the Accidents (even
all of them) of the Bread and Wine, you may see and perceive, which inhere in
no substance, but consists by themselves. The proof of this follows.

Now the words of Christ are so plain (in this matter) that none in his sound
mind can be ignorant, what he must understand when he hears, This is my Body.

Also the words of Paul are plain, 1 Cor. 11. Let a man examine,etc. He that
eatech and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not
discerning the Lords body. For what need is there of such weighty words, if
there were nothing in the Sacrament, but a memory and sign of Christ's Passion,
as Heretics teach? The same thing Paul more at large explained in these words:
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communication of the blood of
Christ?

You hear the Doctrine and the Proof of it from Christ and Paul; now for the
explication of these words, to make out the proof.

These places of Scripture, must be so explained by the Pastors, and this must
chiefly. be taught, that nothing of doubtfulness or uncertainty is left (of
what was abovesaid) especially when the Authority of the Church of God has
interpreted these things: the knowledge of which we attain two ways. 1. When we
consult with the Fathers who flourished from the beginning of the Church, and
so downward. 2. When we see the contrary Opinion condemned.

This Doctrine thus proved by Scripture, and the Scripture they explained you
must believe. Now to show how hard it will be for you to believe this, these
following Questions are proposed.

1. Quest. Whether the words of Christ being Spiritual, it may not suffice to
take them in a Spiritual Sense, but it be necessary to take them in the literal
sense of his natural body, and that without a Figure?

2. Quest. Whether the first Article be not sufficiently believed, when the
Body of Christ is believed to be really truly present, even the same Body, but
not in the same manner?

3. Quest. Whether the second and third Articles be of equal Truth and
Certainty with the first, and must so be believed?

4. Quest. Whether the words cited for proof, are intended to prove all Three
Articles equally, or the First only, and the Second and Third are left to shift
for themselves?

5. Quest. Whether every one in his wits can see such inforcement in the words
of Christ or Paul, without the especial helps of the Churches Authority and the
Fathers?

6. Quest. If not, then whether Reason wills that not the Church in the
Apostles times, should be principally heard in this Authoritative
Interpretation?

7. Quest. Whether you are truly taught that we Heretics say, That in the
Sacrament there is nothing else but a Memory and a Sign of Christ's Passion? And
whether the Fathers that prove there is something more, and condemn such as say
there is nothing more, do prove any thing against us, or do condemn us?

I should now think it reasonable, to request of you to return to us, until
these difficulties be overcome. But if Mr. G. will not yield to this request,
then I pray you, improve all your interest with him for some satisfaction for
your self and me, what is his true and serious sense of this whole matter, and
put him to it on his own behalf in this manner, viz.

Sir, seeing if I eat unworthily, I eat judgment to my self. If I discern not
the Lords Body in eating, I eat unworthily. If I discern not the very same Body
formed in the Womb, etc. If I discern not accidents without a substance, etc. I
discern not the Lords Body.

Therefore, that I may be confirmed, I beseech you assure me concerning your
self, who are strong in Faith, whereas I am but weak. Your self, who know your
own intention in Consecrating, whereas I know it not. Your self, who have
looked upon and examined the Elements that they are not corrupted, whereas I
have not. Your self, who have uttered the words of Consecration, whereas I
perhaps, heard not, perhaps understood not. I say, That you your self are so
right in your wits, as to perceive no doubt, nor uncertainty in this matter,
but that you do fully, absolutely, and without reservation, forever renounce
all your part and hope in the Body and Blood of Christ, if this Sacrament now
by you Consecrated, be not the very same natural flesh and natural Blood, which
was formed in the Virgins Womb, hung upon the Cross, was buried, arose, and now
sits at Gods right hand; but is so changed, that upon the speaking of the
words, here is no more substance of Bread and Wine, but the Smell, Color, Form,
and all other Accidents of Bread and Wine are truly remaining, without any
subject matter for them to remain in. That your Eyes, Nose, Hands, Palate, do
deceive you in their judgment about the substance, but at the same time, do not
deceive you about the Accidents of Bread and Wine.

I beg that you will press him for a clear resolution of the former Questions,
and this last especially, as touching himself, and transmit it to me; which
shall ever be acknowledged your kindness to me, as well as justice to your self.

T. B.

AN ANSWER To the foregoing PAPER.
SIR,
I Received a Paper of yours, to which you require a Satisfactory Answer, and
desire earnestly of your Friend to press me for a Clear Resolution. I must in
the first place acknowledge very heartily, that you are the most civil
Adversary I ever yet met with: For, you are so far from attacking me rudely, or
pressing me with any Argument, as other brisker Disputants use, that you do not
so much as attempt to offer any, nor scarce advance one single Proposition;
nay, not so much as put down your own Tenet expressly: Which certainly is the
most civil way of Disputing that ever was heard of, if indeed it may be allowed
that Name, and ought not rather be called a saying just Nothing; all your
performance in this Paper, being (as you here tell us) to touch a few Doubts;
and I must confess, you touch them very gingerly; I suppose, lest being pressed,
they should discover their soft temper.

Your gentile way of setting upon me, is to ask me Questions: I will not object
the Proverb, That a Fool may ask more Questions, than a Wise man can answer;
for it neither suits with you nor me. Not with you; for, by proceeding in this
method, you show your self a deep Politician, and keep out of the reach, nay
out of the possibility of a Confutation: since no man living knows how to take
hold of an Adversary, who affirms nothing himself, but only asks another.
Only I must say, this way of handling Controversy, by Catechizing your
Adversary, instead of Arguing against him, is an invention so pleasant and
surprising, so new and so unheard of to the dull World hitherto, that you have
all the right and reason in the World to get a Patent for it, that none may use
it without your License. Nor will that Proverb suit with me; for I hope you are
well satisfied, you shall never fail of an Answer from me, when you produce any
substantial proofs, since you see I have that respect for you, as to undergo
here, for your sake, the drudgery to sweep down your very Cobwebs.

Now, your Arguments being so perfectly unconquerable, (for they are altogether
invisible) it was but reason you should say, that no less than an Answer of
weight to this Paper, would content you. Though I cannot comprehend the
Mystery, why the Answer needs be so weighty, when there is nothing but a few
feathers and straws in the counterballance; yet I must seriously grant, that
it is in some cases requisite, that Questions should be asked when the
Adversary's Tenet is not well understood; that so the Arguments may not be
wrong levelled against some position, which perhaps he neither holds nor
maintains: For this gives the Arguer a right aim, and makes clearer way for the
future Dispute. But, alas! your modest way of arguing has no such high
ambition; for, you tell us here very learnedly, This Paper shall only touch a
few Doubts, many more being reserved to be proposed, when these are cleared. So
that for any thing I see or am to expect, your intention is only to go on
asking Questions to the end of the Chapter, and so turn the Controversy into a
mere Catechism, consisting only of Questions and Answers; only you provide
wisely, that your self bear the easier and more honorable part in the
Dialogue, and assuming to your self the magestical Office of the Catechist,
make me the poor ignorant Catechumen, to be posed at your pleasure.

But I beseech you, Sir, (that we may be a little serious) what needs this
fluttering about with Questions, and other frivolous pretenses, as if you were
ignorant what I held about Transubstantiation, or what the person concerned, is
to hold for Faith? You know well enough beforehand, it is already publicly
extant in the Council of Trent; so that you might have saved all this
sleeveless labor, and have fallen to work with your Arguments, to combat its
Definition in this particular point. If you overthrow that, you reduce J. W.
and make a Proselyte of me too; if you do not, we both stand where we were, and
all your feeble Talk is utterly insignificant. This Council is received, as to
matters of Faith, by the whole diffusive Body of all those particular Churches
in Communion with the Roman, and proceeds all along upon the Rule of Catholic
Faith, Tradition. If you will go to work like a Controvertist, you ought to
impugn her and us by Scripture, interpreted by as great Authority, proceeding
upon that Rule, or some other more certain: for all Arguments of less weight,
cannot with any show of Reason, pretend to shock her or the Faith she
recommends; and all other Proofs (had you any) would be but running voluntary
divisions upon your own Fancy. If then you have the least hope to gain credit
to your explications of Scripture, which are contrary to hers, it were
advisable you should first show evidently to the World, what Natural Means you
have above the whole Body of the Roman Catholic Church, enabling you to
understand Scripture better than she does: Or, if you pretend to Supernatural
Gifts above her, show us some Supernatural outward Testimony, certifying us of
this invisible qualification you lay claim to. If you do either of these, you
will do wonders; but I am sure, and your self is conscious, you are so utterly
unable to manifest that your self, or the Protestant Church have either of
these advantages above the Catholic, that, as it was never attempted, though it
would most highly avail your Cause, could you compass it, so the very going
about it, would shame the Attempter. And, unless you do this, what man in his
wits will believe you understand Scripture better than that Great and most
Learned Body of the Roman Catholic Church? This being as absurd, as to think a
man may compass an End better without better means; that is, as to that degree
which is better, without means. This is your Duty, Sir, if you hope to gain any
credit to your Cause, or would show your self a Controvertist: But I perceive
you have been so accustomed to Preaching, where you have your full swing in the
Pulpit, to talk on any fashion against the abominable Rapists, without any to
control you; that you have conceived some hope the same will pass in
Controversy: Wherefore I must take the freedom to tell you, it is the duty of a
Controvertist, to propose his or his Adversary's Tenet clearly, and state the
Question between them; and then bring his Proofs, and vouch them to be
Conclusive. This is what becomes a Man, and a Scholar; and what falls short of
this, though it may pass, (and perhaps with applause) in a Sermon, is perfectly
ridiculous and insignificant in a Controversy. But it is high time now to
remember the drudging Service I promised you.

Passing by then your old saying, that the Person seeking satisfaction about
Transubstantiation least concernd him; as if it were nothing to him, whether he
Adord a piece of Bread with Christ, or Christ alone, I come to your Stuff; for
I want another proper word to call it by, being forbid by common sense to call
it Reasoning.

You give us a taste of your Philosophy, in speaking so soberly of the Judgment
of Senses, our Senses giving their Judgments, and many other expressions of the
like nature. By which you seem to make account a man's Judgment lies in his
Heels or Toes, or his Wits in his Elbows; for all these have Sense: And,
according to this new Scheme of Philosophy you have enlightened the world with,
the Sense judges. I wish, for your own sake, you had only asked Questions here
too; for you are as miserably out in your Philosophy, as in your Divinity. As
to this whole business then, you may please to receive these few Instructions
from a Friend. 1. That the Senses are only Organs or Instruments to transmit
Impressions to the Brain, and so to the Soul, only which judges or knows: and
if the way to the Brain be intercluded, no knowl edge is produced by any
impression on Sense. 2. That if the Senses be duly disposed, it is granted they
send right impressions thither. 3. That it is granted a fortiori, that if the
Senses be not vitiated by some Disease, or Miracle do not intervene, they never
give our Judging Power wrong Advertisements concerning their proper Objects. 4.
That, in our case they are employed about their Proper Objects, which are
certain Accidents or Qualities, as all Philosophers agree: Nor are they in our
case fallacious in representing them. Now you would make Substance their Proper
Object, and would have them inerrable in judging of Substances: Of which
Positions, the first is utterly false, since all Learned men in the World
agree, that Substance or Being is the proper Object of the Understanding. The
second is confuted by experience; for we see that in debased Money (for
example) and many other Instances, even all the Senses may deceive us in our
judging of the Substance of it by their Impressions; so that we are forced to
call to our assistance the Maxims of our Reason, and use our best Art to frame
a right Judgment in such cases. 5. Amongst those Knowledges, of which, in our
case, the Faithful are to make use to judge rightly of the Substance; the
Knowledge that God has revealed, it is his Body, and that this is attested by
his Church, proceeding on an inerrable Rule of Faith, deriving down to us
Christ's Doctrine, is to be taken in for one, nay ought to have the chiefest
Place; and, so, in due reason ought to restrain the Faithful from judging of
this high Mystery, according to the ordinary methods of Nature in other common
Natural Effects. 6. That Faith comes by Hearing; which Sense, employed about
Sounds articulated, and complext with an almost infinite variety, I could (were
the place proper) demonstrate to be more certain, than all the rest of the
Senses put together; unless perhaps the Eyes employed about the various
figuration of Letters. So that you ought not to have imposed upon us, to deny
the Certainty of all the Senses, but to have excepted that of Hearing,
conversant in the Objects now spoken of; especially (as the Scripture tells
you) this being the proper Sense by which Faith comes, you ought in justice to
have let the World know, that we allow indeed the absolute Certainty of that
Sense which introduces Faith, and deny only the Certainty of some of the rest
in some Cases, and in Objects which are not proper to them: this being indeed
the true state of our Tenet. Now, if Hearing alone can teach us Christ's
Doctrine with a perfect Certainty, it is neither good Manners to his Infinite
Veracity, nor Justice to such a vast Body of Attesters, nor in any regard
common sense to trust the more fallacious Senses, especially, not employed
neither about their Proper Objects, before the more certain one, employed about
it is, assuring us God has said it. Remember the Check St. Thomas had, for not
believing upon the Testimony of others, to be credited as to their veracity
(that is, not admitting Faith proposed and ascertained to him by Hearing, but
he would needs use the other Senses too) Beati qui non viderunt and
crediderunt, and apply it to your self. 7. You distinguish not between the
Senses employed about the Motives antecedent to Faith, and about the Mysteries
of Faith, as appears by your Citations out of Scripture. In the former, it
becomes God's Providence to leave Nature to its free course, and us to judge
according to its ordinary methods, in regard we have as yet no other Light to
walk or judge by. But when once through Hearing we are enlightened by Faith, it
becomes then God's Providence, that the Mysteries proposed to us (they having a
nearer approach to an Infinite Agent, the Omnipotence of God, than Natural
Productions have) should be so sublime, as to be above the reach even of
unelevated Reason, much more above the common and coarse methods of Sensation,
or the Judgments we frame from the Senses alone. Pause upon these particulars,
and apply them, and you will see you are quite out in what I conceive you would
be at; for you are at nothing yet but at asking Questions. But you divide your
Text, and tell J. W. first, What it is he must be taught; and (secondly) How
hard it will be to believe it. Then, as to the former, you seem to subdivide it
into the Doctrines Taught, and the method of Teaching them. Now the Doctrines
taught, was the Genus or Thing to be divided, and here you seem to make it one
of the Species or Members dividing; and so make it at once above and under it
self: But this is only a slip of your Logic, noting (as you call it) the
Doctrines Taught, as one of the things to be considered in the Doctrines
Taught. And, certainly, such a rare Note is well worth the marking.

By what is said above, the Reader will see, what a heedless Quoter of Scripture
you are, though it be your best or rather only Talent. You allege against us,
1 John 1. v. 1. where the first words are, Quod audivimus, That which we have
heard; as if we forbid you to use your Hearing, by which Faith comes. For it is
evident beyond all need of Proof, that as the Church heard Christ, so if every
succeeding Age had followed what they heard from the former, Christian Faith
must have continued till now the self-same the Apostles heard from Christ; and,
as long as this Method (called by us Tradition) is followed, it must ever
continue still the selfsame to the Worlds End. Now we are so far from bidding
you not follow the Advertisements of your Senses, that our only Quarrel to you
is, that you relinquisht the most certain Sense, the Hearing your Lawful
Pastors in the Church you left, and fell to scan Mysteries of Faith by the
less-certain ones, employed about Objects not within their cognizance, and
(which is as absurd) Glossing Scripture-Texts, without any Rule to guide you,
but your own awkward Fancies.

Next follow in your Papers, the Doctrines taught with Proofs, which properly
and directly belong only to the first Article, viz. That the True Body of
Christ is contained in the Sacrament. But such as your self will never he able
todisprove, viz. the Scripture interpreted by the Church, the Testimonies of
Fathers witnessing the Tradition of the Church in their time, and the
Condemnation of the contrary Opinions denying the Real Presence, and
Transubstantiation, as Heretical.

What should move you thus to show the weakness of your own Cause, which has no
other Rule of your Faith, but Scripture interpreted by every man's Private
Spirit or Reason, and can bear no proportion with that of the public
Interpretation of the Church, attested, by the Authority of the most Eminent
Fathers of the Primitive Times, and strengthened by the Condemnation of the
contrary Heresies, I cannot easily imagine; but finding them too strong to be
combated by so weak a Champion, you fairly take leave of them, and betake your
self to show in the next place, after your fashion, that is, blindly, how hard
it will be to believe this Doctrine by asking us Questions. And I must confess,
it is most insuparably hard, if Senses must be admitted to Judge of the hidden
and most abstruse Mysteries of Faith, which is your darling Method; though any
wise man would think, this would turn Faith into Experimental Knowledge, and so
rather destroy all the Faith in the world. But my Task is set, and I must
attend to your Questions.

To the first then I answer, That the words, This is my Body, are to be taken
Literally, and yet the End of receiving, is meant Spiritually: And, I farther
say, That this Spiritual Nourishment consisting in raising in us devout
Affections, is incomparably advanced by the Real Presence of Christ's Body and
Blood: So that these two are so far from being inconsistant, as you would hint,
that the taking the words Literally, does exceedingly conduce to the Spiritual
feeding on Christ; even as far as the believing him really present, is more apt
to stir up Devotion in us, than the not believing it; or the receiving his Real
Body, is above the receiving a piece of Bread signifying it, which is beyond
all proportion.

To the second Question, I answer affirmatively, If we regard the point of the
Real Presence precisely: For we grant, that it is sufficient to believe the Body
of Christ is really truly present, even the same Body, but not in the same
manner. It Is the very Doctrine of the Council of Trent it self, Sess. 13. cap.
1. That the Body of Christ is in Heaven, juxta modum existendi naturalem
(according to its natural manner of existing) and yet that it is in other
places, Sacrament aliter praesens, present Sacramentally. But I much fear you
are not in earnest here, when you seem to yield it is really truly present, but
that this Kindness of yours, will grow cold, when it comes to the trial; and
that these hearty expressions will dwindle away into Christ's Body, being here
only in a Sign; which is to say, the Sign is there, and his Body absent.
Hollow words are but wind, and it is hard to grasp Air.

To the Third, asking whether the Second and Third Article you put, be of equal
Truth and Certainty with the First, I answer, That I was never taught to
believe a thing as a half-Truth, or a three-quarter Truth, but all to be True,
(for Truth consists in an Indivisible) which the Church has expressly declared
to be of Faith, by a General Council; and accordingly, whatsoever the Church,
thus believes, and proposes as an Article of Faith, I absolutely believe and
embrace as Truths delivered by Christ and his Apostles.

To the Fourth I answer, as above, That the Proofs you set down, belong
properly and directly only to the first Article. And as for the Second and
Third, they may also shift well enough for themselves, for any Authority or
Reason you have brought against either the one or the other. But I would gladly
know, how all your Faith will shift for it self, having nothing to keep it from
sinking into an inferior Assent (called Opinion), nay into a mass of senceless
Errors, as far as it opposes Tradition, but your self; and other Fallible
Interpreters like your self to buoy it up.

As for your Fifth, I know no enforcement that is beyond Cavil in any one place
of Scripture which is Dogmatical, while the words are left to be tossed by
Criticisms, Grammar-learning, Allusions of places to one another, and such like
little tricks. No one word in those Sacred Books can escape being equivocal or
double senc't, while the word [God] which of all others should seem
incommunicable, is Wier-drawn by such shifts to signify a Creature, as we
experience in the Arians and Socinians glosses upon those Texts which concern
Christ's Divinity. You know well enough already, that neither my self, nor any
Catholic builds our Faith upon any Text of Scripture, interpreted by our own
private Fancy, but only by the public Tradition of the Church.

Your Sixth asks, If the Church must be taken in to expound Scripture, whether
Reason wills not, that the Church in the Apostles time, should be principally
heard in their Authoritative Interpretation? I answer, In case you mean the
Apostles were of greater Authority than their Successors, it is granted: But if
your Question relates to the Truth of what the Church delivers, it is the same
as to ask, whether the Holy Ghost, that assists the Church, spoke truer one
time than another.

Your Seventh Question, whether you are truly represented, by putting you to
say, There is nothing else in the Sacrament, but a Memory and Sign of Christ's
Passion; and whether the Fathers that prove there is something more, and
condemn such as say there is nothing more, do prove any thing against you, or
condemn you. I am heartily glad to see some glimmering hope of your Conversion:
For in case there be in the Sacrament, something more than a Sign, as you seem
here to acknowledge is your true Tenet, you must say the thing signified is
there too, and so we are good Friends. But, because this unexpected Confession
of yours, like the first New in a Gazette, needs a Confirmation, I beseech you
to satisfy me clearly, what this Thing is in the Sacrament, which is more, or
more than a Sign: This way of questioning, is the worst way of explaining in
the world, though it be a special stratagem to avoid Confute.

Your Proposals that follow, are very Extraordinary. I little thought that when
you had done Catechizing me, you would put me to Swearing; nor that, when I
expected Arguments from another, I should be forced to take my Oath my self,
that my Faith is true. But that you may have no cause to complain, I will
gratify you in that too, and do here frankly declare, without any Equivocation
(which I abhor in an Oath) that I do renounce all my hopes of Heaven, (which is
more than you put me to) provided there be no fault in the matter, nor in the
Priest, if there be not present in the Sacrament, after the words of
Consecration, Christ's very true Body, which was born of the Virgin, suffered
on the Cross, was buried, arose, and now sits at God's right hand, and this by
the Conversion of the whole Substance of the Bread into his Body, as also of
the Wine into his Blood, the Species only of Bread and Wine remaining, as is
declared in the Council of Trent, Sess. 13. Can. 2. But now, Sir, having done
this, take notice, that I must in requital challenge from you the same deep
Protestation, that your Negative Faith or Opinion is True. If you refuse, since
your exacting it of me, has made it decent, equitable, and just, you are
convinced to be a very ill man, and to doubt of the Faith you profess to hold
your self, and propose to others as the way to Salvation. And, if you do it,
yet acknowledge your own Interpretations of Scripture, and your Churches too
(which grounds all your Faith) to be Fallible, you are one of the boldest and
rashest Swearers that ever called himself a Christian; and in either case, must
lose your credit for ever with your Flock and Auditory.

But that we may draw to a Conclusion, I beseech you, Sir, if you have any more
to say to me, let us have no more of this trifling. Consider what you are about:
you are about Controversy, whose work it is to settle Christian Faith upon
certain Grounds; and since you profess your Faith to have been taught by
Christ, this is required of your, if you have any such Faith to settle, or
Grounds to settle it on. Go to work like a Scholar, and do not thus expose your
self for Children to laugh at. Lay your Principles first, then draw your
Consequences; warrant them rightly deduced, and bring them to the Conclusion,
or the Position that is contradictory to your Adversaries Tenet. It Is manly to
affirm confidently what one holds heartily; it is becoming a Man to argue
against your Adversary smartly, and not to spare him: but it is the height of
ridiculousness, to task him only with Questions, and putting him to make sacred
Protestations, instead of combating him with your Reasons: Whenas you knew well
enough beforehand, what he holds, and what he would Answer. One thing I must
needs re-mind you of at parting, because I fear you will be apt to forget it;
which is, that you bear in memory the Oath you owe me, that your Tenets are
True; that is, That Christ's True Body is not in the Sacrament, That there is
no Third or Middle State called Purgatory, no Transubstantiation, etc. Then to
uphold the Opinion of your Sincerity, let us know what Certain Grounds you
confide in, to secure you from being Perjured. The taking this Test, may
qualify you in time for some great Office; for if your Fallible Principles,
will justify your Honesty in taking such an Oath, I do not know what you may
not be fit for next.

FINIS.

