CONSTANTIVS THE APOSTATE: BEING A Short Account of His LIFE, and the Sense of
the Primitive Christians about His Succession: AND Their Behavior toward Him.

Wherein is shown the Unlawfulness of Excluding the Next Heir upon the Account
of Religion, and the Necessity of Passive Obedience, as well to the Unlawful
Oppressor, as the Legal Persecutour: BEING A full Answer to a late Pamphlet,
entitled Julian the Apostate, etc.

(...)

Sopho. Let us either deserve to have a good Prince, or patiently suffer and
obey such as we deserve.

1 Hom. against Wilful Reb. etc. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the
Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO Mr. JOHNSON, Author of IVLIAN the APOSTATE.
SIR,
THE kindness you have for an Apostate (for certainly Julian was never better
treated than by you) makes me think Constantius has a particular title to your
Protection, especially since we are sure he revolted to Arrianism, and not to
Popery. Now whether these kind sentiments proceed from a diffusive Charity, or
rather a Natural inclination whereby every thing favors its like, I shall not
presume to determine, though the latter is ^he more probable, since, like
Julian, you took holy Orders, and like him too have, in effect at least, denied
a Passive Crucified Savior: this will be plain to any one that considerately
reads your book, and is the only thing has induced me to say what I have;
for I declare I am wholly unacquainted with any thing that belongs to you, but
that, your Name and your Character in the Church; so that no personal grudge
could be the occasion of these papers; but a just sense of what I owe to my
Religion, and the Civil Government under which I live; from which I ill deserve
the Protection and Liberty I enjoy, if I should not use my utmost endeavor to
sustain it, when it is so evidently supplanted (as now it is) by your
pernicious principles. And I cannot think but your Religion is as indifferent
to you, as you would have the World believe that of the Rippon-Addressers is to
them, since you so palpably explode the glorious end of it Obedience.

I say this after a due and careful reading of your papers; and I was more
exact in the perusal, because your prejudiced friends gave it out, that your
book ought to be the perfect measure of our conduct in relation to his R. H.
and the true State of that Civil Obedience we owe to a Tyrant; and added
likewise, that the Authorities you quoted were unquestionable, your inferences
and deductions necessary and pertinent, and your arguments unanswerable: but
after the most diligent and impartial search, not a syllable of all this
appeared; and indeed when I considered the Vouchers, I laughed at my self for
giving credit to any thing they so confidently asserted, since o^ late all that
have not a mind to b^ imposed upon, understand what they say, with the same
precaution they believe women, or interpret dreams; and indeed they have that
quality of great Liars to have the contrary of what they affirm generally true.

I hope, Sir, you will not take this for a too severe reflection upon your
friends; I am sure they value themselves upon these pious artifices; and it
would have been unkind in them, when you had taken so much pains in publishing
so many notorious falsities to advance the cause, if they had not advanced the
credit of your book by the same means. After these unwelcome truths I can
expect little favor from you, and indeed entreat none; all that I desire is,
that you would read this as patiently as I did yours, and then, if you please,
censure as freely: but of all faults, I am confident you have no reason to
accuse me of that, which is almost natural to Dedications, Flattery, and which
would have been an unpardonable crime in

Your Servant.

THE PREFACE.
SInce I intend to use the same method i^ the Account of the Life of
Constan^ius, as is observed in Julian's; it will be necessary to take a view of
the Preface to that Book, that I may clear all things as I go, leaving nothing
unanswered, that has the least appearance of an argument. And that, what he
urges may more evidently appear, I shall reduce the force of all he says, to
these following Propositions, and give my answers to them distinctly.

1. The Rippon-Addressers are very solicitous, lest his Majesty should agree to
the Bill of Exclusion ( page 4.) and thence infers, that if they were
Protestants, they were men weary of their Religion, p. 6. 2. The Primitive
Christians conduct contrary to that of the Addressers. 3. If they had known
Julian's Religion before Constantius's Death, he had not succeeded. p. 7. 4.
Passive Obedience necessary for the first Christians, because the Laws were
against them; ( p. 7.) but not for those under Julian, because they had the
Laws on their side; for when it is prescribed without Law, and against Law, it is
Mahumetan ( p. 8.) 5. Passive Obedience contrary to the Gospel; this he
pretends to prove from 1 Cor. 7. 21, 22, 23 verses, with Dr. Hammond's
Paraphrase: and by the example of St. Paul, Act. 22. 25, 26, etc. 16. 39, etc.
p. 9. 6. Passive Obedience contrary to the Law of the Land.
As to the first of these.

I don't find the Addressers of Rippon are fond of a Popish, but a lawful
Successor: and if Mr. Johnson infers from their aversion to the Bill of
Exclusion, that they are weary of their Religion; certainly he does not think
them Protestants now. For what can be a greater mark of that sacred profession,
than to be severely cautious to prevent an Action that would be contrary to all
Laws divine and humane? They are strangers to that way of preserving their
Religion, by acting contrary to the dictates of it; and will hardly venture to
do an unjust thing now, that they may go quietly to Church hereafter.
Certainly we are not by this means to avoid Persecution; this is nothing else,
but preferring the eternal torments of the next world, before the little
pressures of this, and leaping into Hell to avoid the Cross. I should have made
a far different construction of this Address; for if the Gentlemen of Rippon
were sure his R. H. were a Papist (whereof no man yet ever made a legal proof)
yet what they did was their duty; for they knew Imperatores bonos voto
expetendos, qualescunque tolerandos: And that this was the opinion of the
Primitive Christians, as well as Tacitus. Which will be more fully made out in
my answer to the second Position, which is, That the Conduct of the Primitive
Christians, was quite contrary to that of the Addressers.

It will be hard to reconcile this saying of his, not only to truth, but
sense; for if the Primitive Christians acted quite contrary to the Addressers,
then when these made it their humble Petition to his Majesty not to exclude his
R. H. they supplicated to Constantius to put by Julian; but this was not so, as
he himself assures us ( p. 18.) so that his saying the Primitive Christians
acted contrary to the Gentlemen of Rippon, when he acknowledges they did
nothing at all, must either be nonsense, or made out by a new definition of
contraries.

But I will suppose he means had the Christians known Julian's Apostasy, they
would have used all possible means to have prevented hi^ coming to the Empire.
Which is the substance ^ the third Position to be answered.

Certainly he ought to have good grounds for this assertion, and know of some
presidents of their precluding the next Heir upon the account of Heresy or
Apostasy; or at least that it is manifest, from some principles they owned,
that they would, if it had lain in their power: If he knows any thing of this
nature, he would do well to inform the world of it, and give us a second
Edition of his Book, which only such an Addition could make considerable. For
in his Preface he gives no reason at all ^for what he asserts; and in the
second Chapter of his Book, where proofs of this kind would be very necessary,
he only tells as that Gregory Nazianzen [highly before disobliged by Julian]
in an invective long after his death tells Constantius [then in Heaven] that he
did ill in s^ving and making Julian King; who was both ill saved, and made an
ill King: and then concludes, Constantius would not have done so, if he had
known Julian's Apostasy. Sure this Gentleman has had the misfortune that the
Christian's Children had under Julian, to be denied the use of Logic and
Rhetoric; for how else could he make such an absurd inference, or
understanding the nature of an Invective, undertake to deduce a concluding
argument from any thing that is delivered in one? I declare, (though I have the
greatest veneration for the Holy Fathers imaginable, and especially for that
great Name Gregory Nazianzen) yet I cannot think it my duty strictly to believe
all they say in the height of a Panegyric, or an Invective; there are certain
allowances to be made in our belief of Speeches, that are the effects of either
kindness or anger; and the distinction may not be improperly ad^mitted, between
the Father, and the Orator: but this will be more evident, to any impartial
man, when I shall prove that many things in Gregory's Invective said in favor
of Constantius, or against Julian, are not precisely true: for every one knows
Constantius had faults; for it is acknowledged ( p. 29.) that he was guilty of
the Murder of his kindred and innovation in matters of Faith (for it is there
said he repented of these things at his death) and I shall add, of a severe
Persecution (which will be seen anon.) Granting this to be true, how could he
justly merit this Complement from Gregory? You were led by the hand of God into
every counsel and enterprise, whose wisdom was admired above your power, and
again your power, more than your wisdom; but your piety was valued above them
both. (Greg. Inv.)

If Mr. Johnson thinks this deservedly said of Constantius, he must either
think all Histories that give us an account of that unhappy Emperor's life,
fabulous, or entitle God to his Apostasy; but I suppose he is not arrived to
that height of folly, to believe the former, or of impiety, to admit of the
latter. It Is probable he will rather conform to the general opinion of all
understanding men, that Gregory did, and might say more in an Invective, than
would be allowable in a History or a Sermon.

Again, that he should make the Devil steal in along with the Consult ( p. 25.)
can only be imputed to the uncontrollable liberty of an Invective; for St.
Austin tells us, God that gave the Empire to the Christian Prince Constantine,
gave it also to Julian the Apostate. Those things without doubt, that One and
the True God does govern and rule as he pleases, by causes, although hidden,
yet not unjust. ( Aug. de Civ. D. 5. c. 21.) Origin likewise tells us, that bad
and good Princes are both the gift of God, Si mali sunt actus nostri, and
operamur malignum in conspectu dei; dantur nobis principes secundum cor
nostrum. [Orig. in lib. Iud. Hom. 4.] Now which is in the right, St. Austin or
Gregory, let any man judge. But farther, can any man believe that the Father
spoke in earnest, when he tells Constantius he did ill to save Julian, (p. 23.)
i. e. he had done well if he had Murdered him (for there is no difference in
the Court of Conscience, between doing an injury your self, and permitting it
to be done by others, if it lie in your power to prevent it,) if by that means
he had prevented his succession; since it is contrary, not only to Scripture,
but common prudence, to prevent a future inconvenience by a present ill, and by
a sin endeavor to avert only a possible misfortune.

I cannot tell how difficult it is to satisfy other people; but for my own
part, I think, I can justly conclude from these instances, that every thing in
Gregory's Invective, is not to be urged for proof: And this does not at all
derogate from the truth and sincerity of his other works, because the nature of
the thing gives him liberties now; which, as they are not allowable in his
other Writings, so neither are they usual.

But certainly nothing in the world is more senseless and ridiculous, than that
which Mr. Johnson urges to enhanse the credit of this Invective ( p. 27.) where
he says the things [concerning Julian] were not delivered coldly, and nakedly
set down, but with an Emphasis, and the greatest vehemence: For all people
know, the passion they were delivered with, ought to make us suspect the truth
of them; for angry men often speak what they don't think themselves; they do
not consider what ought to be said, but what makes most against their enemy;
and their fury improves every thing into a weapon to serve their revenge: For I
would fain know of Mr. Johnson, which he thinks more exactly true, Tully's
Offices, or his Philippicks; and yet how nakedly and coldly one is delivered,
and with what vehemence and pomp of words the other, is easily seen.

Therefore (with all submission) I think Gregory's authority in this Invective,
ought to have no more weight with us, than Grotius allows to the sayings of
Orators [Prol. l. 1. de Ju. Bell. and Pa.] Nos saepe iis utimur, non tam ut inde
astruamus fidem, quam ut his quae dicere volumus, ab ipsorum dictis, aliquid
ornamenti accedat.

I can hardly imagine that Holy Father himself, had he been at the Consult,
would have encouraged Constantius to exclude Julian, though he knew his
Apostasy; because it cannot be easily supposed, that he would coolly have done
an Action, contrary to the Law of Nature: the revealed word of God: and the
practice of the Primitive Christians.

1. That the Exclusion of Julian, would have been contrary to the Law of
Nature, may be gathered from what Mr. Johnson says of his Title to the Crown (
p. 19.) viz. that it was (...), so that destroying this, must needs be a great
breach of the Law of Nature, which cannot be allowable upon any Consideration;
for a Heathen will tell us, Nec derogari aliquid ex hac [lege naturae] licet,
neque tota abrogari potest: neque vero per Senatum, aut per populum, solvi hac
lege possumus; nec est quaerendus interpres, aut explanator ejus alius; nec
erit alia l^x Romae, alia Athenis, alia nunc, alia posthac: sed and omnes
gentes, and omni tempore, una lex and sempiterna and immortalis continebit;
unusque erit communis quasi magister, and imperator omnium, Deus ille legis
hujus inventor, disceptator, lator; cui qui non parebit ipse se fugiet, and
naturam hominis aspernabitur; atque hoc ipso luet maximas poenas, etiamsi
caetera supplicia quae putantur effugerit. [ This is quoted Lact. 6. Inst. 8.
out of Cic. Books de Repub. that are lost.] If this be true (which I am sure no
man of common knowledge will deny) what becomes of the lawfulness of Excluding
Julian? 'Twould have been equally as just to have prevented his Succession hy
death as any other means; for any thing tending to this had been a breach of
the Law of Nature, and would only differ from the former, as robbing a man
does, from cutting his Throat.

2. That such an attempt is contrary to the revealed Law of God, may
necessarily be inferred from the exact agreement there is between the Scriptures
and the Law of Nature; This, being only (...) legis illius architypae and
aeternae quae est immense divina; and those, his revealed will: but it is
expressly set down in Scripture, that the Right of Succession is entailed on
Primogeniture; for Genesis 49. 3. when Jacob blessed his sons, he called Reuben
his firstborn the Excellency of dignity, and the Excellency of power; and in 2 Chronicles. 21. 3. it is said, that Jehoram succeeded Jehosaphat, because he was the
firstborn. I might fill my Margin with quotations to this purpose, but I shall
only add that great instance of the Right of Primogeniture, Genesis 4. 7. where
God tells Cain of his younger brother Abel, Unto thee shall be his desire, and
thou shall rule over him; which are the very words which God spoke Chap. 3. v.
16. when he gave the man dominion over the woman. Now that this right extends
to proximity of blood, no body questions; so that unless we have some warrant
from Scripture to res^ind this title, it is the highest sacrilege imaginable to
attempt it; and I challenge all the world to show where that warrant is. God
himself, indeed, may dispose of the right that he first gave; but I would fain
know what people could ever lawfully pretend to alter the Succession, without
an express warrant from God? David, I confess, made Solomon King, but he
declares 'twas by God's immediate ^ppointment; and of all my sons, for the Lord
has given me many sons, he has chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the Throne
of the kingdom of the Lord over Israel, 1 Chronicles. 28. 5. Now I shall readily
grant the Author of Julian's friends, Enthusiasts; but I can hardly admit they
have a particular revelation for what they would now be at; and without this, I
think the Exclusion of the Next Heir utterly unlawful.

And that this was the sense of the first Christians, will be evident from the
Apology of Athenagoras to M. Aurelius, and his son Commodus: where having
declared the Christians were of all others most piously inclined toward God and
their Empire, he concludes with this profession: We pray for your Empire, that
the Son (as it is most fit) may in the Kingdom succeed the Father, and that
your Empire may increase and flourish, all being made subject to you, which
would be much for our good, that we leading a quiet and peaceable life, may
readily obey you in all your Commands. I think nothing can be fuller than this
to prove what I designed, for that in these words he declared the sense of the
Church, we must necessarily grant, if we consider what his Character then was,
when he spoke them. Athe. Legate. pro Christ.

But to come nigher to the business in hand; the Primitive Christians did know
Julian's Apostasy, before Constantius died: For as soon as ever he was declared
Emperor by the Soldiers, he laid by all pretense to Christianity; for going
through every City, he opened the Temples, and called himself the High Priest (
Soz.) So that, like Mr. Johnson, he did not lay by the name of Priest, though
he turned Apostate. Now that the Army should be ignorant of what Julian did so
publicly in the face of the Sun, is not to be imagined; especially if
Constantius himself knew it; which Mr. Johnson would have us believe, from the
passage he cites from Gregory Naz. that Constantius repented his declaring
Julian his Successor; which could only be upon the account of his Apostasy,
so that he must needs know it.

But if we give any credit to Marcellinus (whose authority I am sure Mr.
Johnson seems much to value) if Constantius did know that Julian was a Pagan,
it was impossible he should repent of his leaving him his Successor: for he
tells us ( l. 21.) that upon his falling sick he did in his right understanding
[integro sensu] nominate Julian his heir, and ( l. 22.) with his last breath [
suprema voce] pronounced hi^ Emperor: Now that he spoke or showed any signs of
his repentance after his death, Mr. Johnson will hardly allow, because that
looks too like a Popish Miracle.

I am rather inclined to believe that Constantius thought the Right of
Succession was so inviolable, that the highest provocation imaginable ought not
to prevail with him to alter it; for else why did he not endeavor to exclude
him, when he had been guilty of the highest ingratitude, in procuring himself
to be declared Emperor by the Army, and af^erwards in justifying his title by
an open rebellion? It had certainly been but justice to have proceeded with the
greatest rigor against him for so insolent an Usurpation. But alas! he knew
his Edicts in this case would be superseded by a greater Law, and that they
would be of little force against that title from which he first derived the
power to make them.

I hope this is a sufficient answer to the second Chapter, wherein Mr. Johnson
pretends to show the sense of the Primitive Christians about Julian's
Succession, but makes one man's opinion the sense of the whole Church, and
takes that opinion too of his, from his Invectives: this is so dis-ingenuous,
it could never be excused: but that the badness of the cause he is engaged in,
can find nothing else to support it.

As to the fourth Position, that Passive Obedience was necessary for the first
Christians, because the Laws were against them, but not to those under Julian,
because the Laws were for them. I answer; that this distinction is frivolous;
for since the will of their Emperor was a Law (as Gregory acknowledges In. p.
92.) if they were executed by his Command, they died lawfully. But I shall
refer the farther proof of this to a particular Chapter of Passive Obedience.

But since he urges the Authority of holy Scripture to confirm what he says in
this place, we must, for method sake, take notice of it: which is the fifth
thing to be answered, viz.

That Passive Obedience is contrary to the Gospel, as may be seen 1 Cor. 7. 21,
22, 23 verses, with Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase.

It Is very strange, that when our Savior so often recommends sufferings to us
as our duty, and the badge of our profession, that quietly and patiently
submitting to them, should be contrary to the Gospel; certainly he has a
particular Bible to himself; for we find in ours, that suffering is
particularly the business of the Gospel; and is the great concluding beatitude,
( Mat. 5. 11.) nay it is evident that misery and persecution were first entailed
on Christianity; for the Jews had the prospect of Temporal blessings: Riches
and honors were the lot of their inheritance; but we are commanded to take up
the Cross, and despise the shame of it, that thereby we might imitate him, who
condescended to be our great exemplar: But however, it will not be amiss to see
what Reason he has for this monstrous assertion; and because every one has not
Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase at hand (which I am confident is the reason he quoted
it) I shall give it you here with the Text.

V. 21. Art thou called being a servant? care not for it: but if thou may be
made free, use it rather.

Para. [In what condition of life soever a man is, when he is converted to
Christianity, let him contentedly continue in it, and not think that Christian
Religion frees a man from any obligation that lay upon him before; for that is
to make Christian Religion a pretense to covetousness, or lust, or secular
advantages, (see 1 Timothy 6.) if either being a Christian might manumit a
servant, or free a husband, or a wife from former obligation. He therefore that
being a bondsman is converted to Christianity, must not think that it is any
disparagement to his Christianity, that he continues a servant still, nor be
solicitous of changing his condition. Yet this is not so to be understood, but
that if by any fair regular means, he can obtain his freedom, he may then make
use of them, and prefer liberty before servitude; for so he might have done,
had he never been a Christian.]

Ver. 22. For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lord's
freeman; likewise he that is called, being free, is Christ's servant.

Para. [For he that being in the condition of a servant, is converted to
Christianity, does by his conversion become a freeman in respect of Christ; not
that he ceases to be a servant to his former master, or reaps any secular
advantages thereby, but his advantages are spiritual, viz. that by being a
Christian he is freed from many servitudes, that of sin, etc. that lie upon all
others; and to live in Christ's family as one of his freemen, though in respect
of the world he continue as a servant. And so on the other side, he that is a
freeman, and turns Christian, becomes thereby a servant of Christ's,
undertaking Obedience to his Command, though he lose not his liberty in the
world by that means. (By which it is clear, that Christ meddles not with the
secular Government of this world, nor changes any man's outward condition by
his becoming Christian.)]

Ver. 23. Ye are bought with a price, be not servants of men.

Para. [Ye that are Christians, and not formerly servants to Heathens, do not
voluntarily put your selves in that condition, but choose liberty rather.]

Certainly Mr. Johnson has a different Edition of Dr. Hammond, as well as of
the Bible, from that which is in use with us; for from these Texts above cited,
nothing can be inferred to prove what he designs, viz. that we are encouraged by
Christianity to procure more civil Liberties and Franchises; for it is
positively set down in the Paraphrase, that Christ meddles not with the secular
government of this world, nor changes any man's outward condition, by his
becoming Christian.

One would think, by this way of procedure, Mr. Johnson, like Julian, only
reads the Scriptures, to pervert other people by an ill application of them,
and to use the Gospel against his Savior.

2. His inference, that St. Paul was against Passive Obedience [ Act. 22. 26,
etc.] because he told the Captain (that was ignorant of his condition) that he
was a Roman, and consequently exempt from the punishment he was going to
inflict upon him, is the most absurd reasoning imaginable.

I perceive after all his bawling against Passive Obedience, he is perfectly
ignorant what it is; for to suffer torments when we can avert them by lawful
means, is not Passive Obedience, but stupidity: this is not taking up the Cross
(as a great Man observes) but pulling it down upon us: Christianity allows us
to make a defense, but we are not to resist; we may certainly tell our story;
but if that will not be heard, we must submit with patience. And these were the
Methods of the Primitive Christians, they prayed to God, they supplicated to
their Emperors, to avert a threatened persecution; but if these means would not
do, they had Gregory Nazianzen's comfort left still, to dye patiently. (...).

Since Passive Obedience is not only allowed, but enjoined by the Gospel (as
is briefly shown already, and shall be more fully proved by and by) that it
should be contrary to the Law of the Land (which is the sixth and last thing he
lays down) cannot be admitted, since our Laws must necessarily conform to the
determinations of the Holy Scriptures; and whatsoever is enacted contrary to
them, is ipso facto void; and I am sure whatever he says, will hardly induce
any man in his right senses to think otherwise. I am sure the Case he brings (
p. 9.) is nothing to the purpose; for he can only infer from that, That a man
may kill an aggressour, and the Law take no hold of him. If he could prove from
any instance that the Law obliges a man (if he can) to kill one that offers
violence to him, he had said something: But there is a vast difference between
what the Law permits, and what it commands; he is not indeed obnoxious to any
legal punishment here, but the verdict of a Jury will not absolve him from a
guilt he has contracted by disobeying our Savior, who has commanded us not to
resist evil, [evil not signifying a thing, but a person] Mat. 5. 39. So that
the killing of a Pursevant, though it be excused in the eye of the Law, it will
not be so hereafter in heaven; For if he only designed an arrest (as it is
owned he did) a man ought not to take away his life: this is plain from Dr.
Hammond [Prac. Cat. p. 164.] where he tells us a private man may not by the Law
of Christ take away another's life, to save his own goods, or to repel any
such kind of injury, because life is more than goods; nay, '^twould be better
to avoid taking away another's life, though to save his own; thereby imitating
his Savior who laid down his life for his enemies. lbid.

As to those arguments ( p. 15.) from Sir Simon Ewe's Iournal to prove the
lawfulness and necessity of excluding a Popish Successor. I hardly think them
worth the least remark. For what can be more unreasonable, than that which they
seem to enforce, that it had been just and warrantable not only to have
dis-inherited the Queen of Scots, but to have taken away her life too, for her
Religion?

For what just pretense could Queen Elizabeth have to Condemn a Princess
altogether as independent as her self, and one that was only accountable to
God for her actions? they might as well have addressed against the French King or
the Pope for endeavoring to pervert her Majesty's Subjects, for the Queen had
equal power over these Princes, though she had them not in possession: And
though an Act of Parliament against them, would not perhaps have been of very
great force, yet it would have been expedient to have shown her good will (as
Mr. Johnson calls it.)

But we shall find the weakness of these arguments in the effect they bad on
the Queen; for she was so far from being persuaded that the fact was lawful,
that she always denied her being consenting, or so much as privy to it, when it
was done; and though there might be some probable reasons to believe she was
innocent, yet the very suspicion of her being privy to it, has fixed an eternal
blot upon her (otherwise unspotted) reputation.

So that these arguments will seem of very little weight to his present
Majesty, when all the world knows how unjustly, and unsuccessfully too, they
were urged against his great Ancestour, to a Princess that was her mortal
enemy, and one but too desirous of her destruction.

There is nothing now left in the Preface that is worth taking notice of, but
the Act of the 13 of Queen Elizabeth, whereby 'twas enacted Treason during her
life, to affirm that she, and her Parliament, could not make Laws and Statutes,
of sufficient force and validity, to limit and bind the Crown of this Realm,
and the Descent, Limitation, Inheritance, etc. I shall not presume to determine
of the equity and justice of this Act, or whether it were in their power to do
as they did; but the Excellent Author of a late Pamphlet, entitled, The Great
point of Succession discussed, being an Answer to the History of Succession,
etc. though he was a Member of those very Parliaments that were so hot for the
Bill of Exclusion, freely declares that the Crown of England is, and ought to
be, inseparably annexed to proximity of blood, by the Laws of God, and Nature,
and this Realm; so that consequently any Act, that pretends to alter the
Succession, is utterly unlawful, and ipso facto void: and so it ought to be
adjudged when it ever comes to the Question before the Reverend Judges, p. 35.
If any one requires fuller satisfaction, I refer him to the Book it self, which
will convince not only the diffiders, but the prejudiced too, of the truth of
what is here delivered.

As for the great Subscribers to that Act, we have a Hierarchy not at all
inferior to them, either in piety or learning, who are of the contrary
opinion; and till I know the reasons why they subscribed, I shall not be swayed
by their Authorities, when I think I have as great to balance them.

'Twill be time now to give some account of the ensuing Work, but any
considering man will read the design in the Title Page, or at least will find
it in the Book it self, from which I shall no longer detain him.

The Editions of those Authors that are Cited.
AThanasius 2 Vol. Par. 1627. Lactantius Basil. 1563. Origin con. Cel. Cantab.
1658. August. Opera Bas. 1569. Gregory Naz. Par. 1609. Tertullian Par. 1616.
Ambrose Bas. 1555. Athenagoras Par. 1577. Theodoret Par. 1673. Rufinus Par.
1580. Nicep. Call. Fran. 1588. Socratis and Sozome. Histor. Eccl. Par. 1668.
Homilies Lon. 1623.


The Editions of Dr. Hammond, Bishop Tailor, etc. of the English Divines, are
not so various that I need to set down here the particular times or places when
and where they were printed.

Constantius THE APOSTATE.
CHAP. I. A Short Account of the Life of Constantius.
CONSTANTINE the Great having by his last Will divided his Empire between his
three Sons, Constantine, Constantius, Constance, died in the Suburbs of
Nicomedia, no one of his Sons being present at his death: But Constantius, not
so far off as the other two, first came to Court; where having paid the usual
respects that are due to the memory of a deceased Parent, as if all other ties
of Nature were buried with his Father, he commanded, or at least permitted, the
execution of his Uncle and Cousins, Constantius Dalmatius and his Sons. [ Atha.
p. 856.] About three months after the Brothers were proclaimed Emperors by the
Army, each took his share, though not without some dissatisfaction and
disturbance; but things being happily composed for the present, they retired to
their respective Provinces.

This agreement did not last long, for Constantine thought himself hardly dealt
withal, and not content with his share of F^ance, Spain and Britain, would
needs encroach upon his Brother Constance, who had Italy and Africa, but was
slain in the prosecution: Thus the Empire of the West devolved to Constance,
but all this new accession could not prevent his being assasinated by
Magnentius an Usurping Rebel: who at length after many defeats by Constantius,
was forced to that degree of despair, that he slew himself, and left his
Conqueror in the quiet possession of all the Empire.

I was unwilling to perplex this brief account of his coming to the entire
possession of the Empire, with the relation of any of his particular actions,
reserving it rather to this place where I may do it with less interruption.

Constantius had not been long upon the Throne, but by the insinuations of an
Arian Priest, he was brought over to be a great favourer of that Heresy; the
account of his perversion, is at large in most Ecclesiastical Histories; and
because it may be material, I shall give it at length out of Theodoret [ l. 2.
c. 3.]

Constantia, Sister to Constantine the Great, was very intimate with an Arian
Priest, who, dissembling his own opinion, made it his business to defend or
excuse Arius; this man, upon her deathbed, she recommended to her Brother's
care, who was signally kind to him; and as a particular mark of his favor,
entrusted his last Testament in his hands: the delivery of which to
Constantius, when he came to Court, was sufficient to recommend him to his
favor; and gave him an interest, that in a short time became pernicious to the
whole Christian World; ^or he improving the opportunity he had of being nigh
the Emperor, and making his advantage of an inconstant humor that was
peculiar to him, easily made him out of love with the true Religion, and as
zealous for the false. He persuaded the Emperor, who was but too prone to
hearken to any thing that was ill, ( Ath. p. 883.) that all the disturbances in
the Church arose from introducing the word Consubstantial into the Articles of
Faith, which was nowhere to be found in Holy Scripture, and the blame of this
was laid upon Athanasius. Thus was that unhappy Emperor perverted to a
Heresy, the most dangerous that ever infested the Church, for Athanasius tells
us (who had certainly good reason to know) they denied Christ. [ p. 590.]

Athanasius was the first man that suffered by the Emperor's Apostasy; for his
piety and learning rendering him formidable to those Heretics, they soon
traduced him to Constantius, who sent part of his Army to seize him at
Alexandria, but by a miraculous escape, he prevented the danger and fled to
Rome.

Georgius an Arian succeeded him in his Diocese, who repeated all the Cruelties
of the former Persecutions, which were ten times worse in him, than in the
Heathens, since he at least professed Christianity; he whipped the Men with rods,
stripped the Virgins naked, and brought them to the fire, [ Nicep. Call. Eccl.
Hist.] and in fine, acted all those torments a busy malice could invent, or a
blind fierce zeal could execute.

But Alexandria was not the only Scene of Persecution; it spread it self in a
short time as far as the Heresy that was the cause of it; but it raged
particularly in Constantinople: for Macedonius despising the known methods of
cruelty as too mean for an Arian to exercise, had recourse to those that were
particularly of his own invention; he did not only punish those that would not
Communicate with him, with the ordinary punishments of Whips, Chains, Death:
but by an unpresidented cruelty, would force open their mouths with Clubs, and
then throw into them the sacred Elements.

Women likewise and Children, though not initiated nor baptized, were
preposterously forced to be partakers of the Holy Sacrament, and were made, as
far as it lay in his power, Heretics before they knew what Religion was. [
Nic. Call. ib.] This certainly was a far greater wickedness than that of
Julian; when by adding the Images of the Heathen gods to his own, he designed
to deceive the Christians into Idolatry; for this was downright forcing them
(if it were possible) into Heresy.

Upon these unheard of methods of Persecution, and other bodily torments no
less strange, that are at large set down in that History, the Author makes
this severe remark: Insolitum sane id, exoticumque supplicium, ab iis, qui
Christum professi sunt, inventum; quod ea quae olim Graecorum Tyranni magno
studio and ambitione excogitarunt, long post se reliquit. (Ni. Call. ib.)

Egypt and Lybia were deprived of all their Orthodox Bishops, whose places
were supplied by Arians. Ath. Epis. ad Soli. vi.

Liberius, Hosius, Paulinus, Dionysius, Eusebius, Luciferus, were Banished for
refusing to subscribe against Athanasius, who had been acquitted by so many
Synods before. Ib.

And Constantius himself at length proceeded to that degree of cruelty against
the Orthodox Christians, that he made an Edict, not only to banish them, but
to put them to death. Athan. p. 8. 53.

And the same Father tells us, that when Maximianus (Constantine's Father)
persecuted the Christians, the Heathens themselves would conceal them, and were
so generous often as to suffer fines and imprisonment, rather than betray those
that fled to them for Protection: but the New Heretics act just the contrary,
they voluntarily take upon them the office of Searchers, and Executioners, and
think that he that hides a Christian is as much their enemy as he that is hid.

And then speaking of Constantius, he says ( Atha. p. 8. 36.) Maximianus sent
the Confessors into one common place of Banishment; so that in all their
mi^fortunes, they had one comfort left (and that no small one) of mutual
society. But Constantius industri^^^^^ ^^^rted those that were friends, that he
might make the misery of their banishment more insupportable, and prevent the
only happiness they desired, not to be parted till they died. This was so
great a Cruelty, that never can be excused, and no body but a Primitive
Christian could bear it without repining.

It would be an endless piece of business to recount all the sufferings of the
Church, under this cruel Apostate, who was no less a Tyrant in Civil affairs,
than a Persecutour in Religious; it being an observed Maxim, that under him no
one had escaped Condemnation, of whom it had been but whispered that he was
guilty; for he seldom heard above one side, viz. the whispering Arian or
Eunuch, and 'twas counted as insolent for any one accused to pretend to make a
defense as to protest against Arianism. Ammian. in 21 tells us, Si affectatae
dominationis ansam quandam falsam reperiisset, aut leve^, hanc sine fine
scrutando fasque eodem modo ducens ac nefas, Caligulae, Domitiani, and Commodi
immanitatem facile superavit.

So that if a Roman Emperor can act contrary to the Law (as Mr. Johnson
affirms), certainly Constantius did: For what can be more evident, than that no
man should be condemned without being first heard, or his Accuser appearing,
was an Established Law of the Empire? But yet that he acted quite contrary to
this, we may plainly see in Athanasius: For how many were dragged to death,
without daring to offer at a defense? Which would have been so far from
excusing them, that it would only have rendered them more guilty in the eye of
the Judge; who being always resolved to condemn, must needs res^nt any thing
ill, that looked as if it designed to prevent him.

And if putting People to death upon pretense and shamms was the particular
mark (as Mr. Johnson delivers) of an Arbitrary lawless Tyrant, certainly
Constantius put in as fair for the Title as any one; For what could be more so,
than the Actions of his Deputies in Egypt by his Commission? Where innocent
children, and ^oolish old women were executed; these for prescribing, those for
wearing an insignificant charm against an Ague, under the pretense that they
dealt in Sorcery. The first time certainly that people ever died for being
fools, or that old women suffered for superstition, which in them is as
necessary an effect of Age as gray hairs; and they might as justly have been
executed for being ugly, or having wrinckles.

Neither were the Emperor's actions at home less unaccountable; for when his
Sycophants had once persuaded him, that the safety of the World did so much
depend upon his, that it must cease to be with him, (which he vain man
believed!) he suspected all that came nigh him to have designs upon him; a
whisper or a wry look was death; discontent at any thing was mis-interpreted
disaffection to the government; and a man must not be angry, for fear it should
be thought he was displeased at the Emperor. These, and many other things of
this inhumane strain, are recounted at large in the Histories of that age.
Where, if any one will please to look, he will find that I have just occasion
to say a great deal more than I have.

If these provocations could not urge the Primitive Christians to have so much
as ill thoughts of their Emperor, what can do it? The benefi^s of Constantine
the Great, the first Patron of their Religion, and Establisher of their
happiness, were still fresh in their memories, which must needs make their
wounds deeper now; for having once sound the joys of a peaceful settled
Church, where (as they do in heaven now) they enjoyed the purest Religion, and
the most perfect peace; certainly it must needs be matter of the highest
discontent, to have all these comforts s^atch't from them, and by the Son of
the Great Constantine that gave them: Here are the most aggravating
circumstances imaginable; but their patience was not to be conquered, they
still made good that saying of Athanasius, That Persecution was the lot of
Christianity, Atha. p. 836. But this will be more evident when we come, in the
third Chapter, to show the behavior of the Christians toward Him.

CHAP. II. The Sense of the Primitive Christians about his Succession.
COnstantius came to the Crown with the profession of that Religion his Father
was so eminent a defender of; so that the Christians under Constantine (without
the gift of Prophecy) could not well expect his Apostasy. But I am induced to
believe, that if they had, there would have been no Petitions to the Emperor
to exclude his Son, to secure their Religion; but rather assurances from them,
that this was not a just way to preserve it; there would have been no Bill from
the Senate with a Contradiction in the belly of it, to tell the Emperor they
would by no means attempt the violation of his Prerogative, or the alteration
of the fundamental Laws of the Empire; and yet in the very next clause, offer
at the Exclusion of his lawful Heir; the nature of the thing will not allow me
to make any proof from History that it was so, but I don't question to make it
more than probable it would have been so, if there had been occasion.

For since the Right of the next Heir to the Crown is so strongly secured by
the Laws of God and Nature, (as I hope has been sufficiently proved in the
Preface) and that it is plain Constantius had this right, being descended from
Constantine; I cannot imagine that the fears of the Christians (though they had
the assurance of Constantius being an Arian) could authorize them to attempt
his Exclusion; for besides that it is contradictory to the Principles of their
Religion, to prevent a future inconvenience, by a present ill, (as is shown
before) if we may conclude what they would have done then, from what their
forefathers did before, or they themselves afterward, we shall find that they
thought no reason great enough to put by the lawful Heir.

For when a Heathen was to succeed, there was not the least attempt to bar him;
not only because they doubted their strength, and therefore thought their
endeavors would be in vain, but because they thought the contrary their duty;
for they did not only not make it their business to prevent his coming to the
Empire, but as much as in them lay assisted it; for as it is above cited from
Athenagoras, they declared they thought it most just that Commodus, as
rightful Heir, should succeed his Father M. Aurelius; nay 'twas their constant
prayer to Almighty God that he might: which certainly had been the greatest
madness in the world (he being a Heathen, and consequently their mortal enemy)
if they had not thought it so necessary a duty incumbent upon them, that no
consideration of their future quiet, or the unmolested enjoyment of their
Religion, could exempt them from. So that if the Actions of these Christians
have any Authority with us, if we have not disclaimed their very principles as
well as piety, we shall not think it so strange, as Mr. Johnson would have the
world believe we do, for Christians not to oppose the Succession of their
lawful Prince, though part of his Religion be to extirpate theirs. If it were
our own case, we might lawfully pray for his conversion, and I don't question
but we should do it very heartily, for the free exercise of our Religion is
the greatest happiness we can wish for on this side heaven; but if we could
have it but for an evil thought, 'twere much too dear, and not to be purchased
at that rate: And therefore I have often looked with horror upon that
unchristian prayer of the Protestants under Queen Mary, which was certainly
(whatever Mr. Johnson declares to the contrary) never heard or read, to have
been used by any good Christian man against any Prince, though he were a Pagan
or Infidel, etc. [Pream. to the Act] (as shall be seen at large when I come to
treat of the Christians prayers) and it was deservedly made Treason then, for
it was so long before in the eye of heaven; for if an evil thought or wish
against our neighbor, is made as much murder, by the Gospel, as actually
striking him to the heart, why such a notorious profession of our hatred to our
Princess, and desire of her destruction (upon what consideration soever) should
not incurr a proportionable guilt, I cannot easily imagine.

But to come nigher to the case in hand, 'twill be evident to any, never so
little conversant in the Ecclesiastical Writers, that most of those very
people, that Mr. Johnson represents to the world for such fierce Excluders of a
Prince, that professed a contrary Religion to theirs, did not think (or at least
did not act as if they thought) that a Prince could be barred of his Right of
Succession, upon the score of Religion; for not two years after Iulian's death,
Valens a furious Arian, and bitter persecutour of those that dissented from
him, was peacefully admitted to be Emperor, and assisted too by the Army; whom
we cannot think in the least inclined to favor that Heresy (for they were
Iovinian's Soldiers) but they knew their duty to their Prince.

I hope these plain instances will satisfy any reasonable man, that the
Primitive Christians did not think it consistent with the Principles of their
Religion, to exclude a lawful Successor upon any terms, since we see that
neither being a Heathen or an Arian (two the most dangerous enemies to
Christianity) could prevail with them to attempt it.

'Twould be easy here to answer all the pretended Arguments and Authorities
Mr. Johnson brings, to prove the contrary actions of the Primitive Christians
toward Julian: but I suppose the Reader remembers what has been already said of
them particularly in the Preface; so that I shall not need to trouble him, or
my self, with a repetition.

But I shall hasten to give an Account of their Behavior toward Constantius,
and leave the world to judge whether it be not more agreeable to the Gospel,
than that which Mr. Johnson falsely scandalizes the Christians, under Julian,
with; and consequently fittest for our imitation.

CHAP. III. Their Behavior toward Him in Words.
IT IS a strange account Mr. Johnson gives us of the Christians behavior
toward their Emperor, though a Persecutour, and an Apostate; for railing is
certainly so far from being Evangelical, that it is contrary to the Principles
of common breeding. But perhaps these were some of those unhappy people the
Emperor had interdicted the benefit of going to School to, and now he
deservedly found the effect of his cruelty. But then he ought to have told us
so, and not to have laid it down in such general terms, as if it were the
approved practice of the whole Church: This is the strangest injustice to that
famous age imaginable, and only exposing those examples, one would think, by
the end of his book, he designs we should imitate; for from the scope of his
Book, I can conclude nothing but this, viz. That he intends to give us an
account how the Christians in former ages behaved themselves toward an
Apostate, to inform us what we may do on the like occasion. I must confess he
has done most of his own party a considerable kindness; for they hitherto have
railed without president, as well as without cause: And I suppose Greek ever
long will be much in fashion with them, as a Language that will extremely
accomplish them for that Christian liberty. But as for us, we shall rather
fetch the methods of our Conduct from the graver Writings of the Fathers of
those times; and not imitate him, who, like our late traveling Sparks, only
observes, and treasures up the vices and follies of the places he visits, and
exposes them, when he comes home, for rarities and accomplishments.

None certainly but the scum and rabble of that age could be guilty of those
indignities to their Emperor: but Mr. Johnson tells us, no less a man than
Theodoret commends them for their Nicknames and Reproaches, and quotes his 3 d
Book and c. 22. for what he says; I have looked with both eyes, and cannot find
any thing like it: He commends indeed the Antiochians for their Zeal, but not
their rudeness.

As to the Example of Maris, which he brings as the second and last argument to
justify ill language given to an Emperor, if an Apostate, is of very little
force; for without all doubt, it was an indiscreet Action, and nothing but his
great Zeal for Religion could make any colorable excuse for it; For who,
unless he had a mind to be a Martyr, would affront an Emperor in the height of
his devotion, and upbraid his gods when he was paying his adorations to them?
Origin I am sure would have counted such an Action downright madness; for he
tells us, when we do nothing contrary to the law and word of God, we are not
so mad or furious as to stir up, against our selves, the wrath of the King or
of the Magistrate, which would bring upon us blows, Orig. l. 8. contra Cel.
torments, and diverse kinds of death.

And I have some reason to assert this, from the quite different Conduct of all
the Fathers that lived under Constantius; that were so far from doing any thing
of this nature, unprovok't, that all the Cruelties that Apostate Emperor could
inflict, did not extort the least mis-becoming expression from them.

Athanasius tells the Emperor in his Apology; I am not mad, O King, neither
have I forgot the voice of God that says, Atha. Apol. ad Constable.
Curse not the King, Ath. ibid.
no not in thy heart. And again, I did not oppose the Command of your Majesty,
God forbid. I am not such a man as would oppose the very Treasurer of the City,
much less so great an Emperor; I was not so mad as to contradict such a
Command as yours; I neither did oppose the Command of your Majesty, nor will
now attempt to enter into Alexandria, until you, of your Goodness, will
please, I shall.

And in another place of the same Apology he tells Constantius, If I had been
accused before others, I had appealed unto your Majesty, as the Apostle
appealed unto Caesar -- But seeing they have taken the boldness to calumniate
me before Thee, to whom shall I appeal from Thee, but to the Father of him who
said, I am truth, that he may incline thy heart to mercy?

St. Hilary tells him (and in the time of Persecution too) your mild nature
(blessed Lord) agrees with your gracious disposition; and because of your
great mercy, we don't doubt of easily obtaining what we desire of you; we beg
of you not only with words, but tears, that the Catholic Church be no longer
persecuted by our brethren. Hilar. ad Constable. l. 2.

And 20 Bishops of the West, in the conclusion of a Letter from a Synod at
Ariminum, We beseech you, that you cause us not to stay from our Charges; but
that the Bishops, together with their own People, may with peace employ
themselves in prayers and the service of God, making supplication for your
Kingdoms safety and peace, in which the divine Majesty long preserve you. Atha.
Epist. de Syn. Ari. etc.

Hosius likewise (a man of an extraordinary Zeal and Courage) though provoked
by the severest Persecutions imaginable, cannot think it lawful for him to
speak so much as dis-respectfully of the Emperor: but tells him, Since he had
received his Imperial Power from God, whosoever did detract any thing from
that, should be looked upon as an opposer of the Ordinance of God.

It would be easy to seem very learned upon this point, that is, to stuff my
Margin with quotations; but that is a vanity I am not over-desirous to be
thought guilty of. I hope the authorities I have already cited, will be
sufficient to prove what I designed, viz. That it was the judgment of the
Primitive Christians, that no ill usage from their Emperor, though a Heathen
or Apostate, could authorize them to affront him; and that difference of
Religion, does not, by any means, cancel our Obedience to him.

Now that the face of things should be so soon changed, as that it should be
damnation to speak ill of the Emperor under Constantius; and under Julian, his
immediate Successor, not only permitted, but meritorious, to curse him (as
Mr. Johnson acquaints us) is very strange.

I am confident if they did those Actions he lays to their charge, they had no
president for them in former ages; and the doctrine they governed themselves
by, was perfectly new and their own: For it is well known all the first
Christians acted quite contrary; they continually night and day prayed for the
safety of the Emperor, [ Cypr. ad Demet.]

It would be easy out of the Martyrologies of the first times, to give
instances of the Christians submission, as strange, as the cruelty of their
Persecutours: But this will be unnecessary, since their sufferings and patience
are so well known, that Mr. Johnson himself is forced to own it; but tells us
withal, 'twas their duty to suffer patiently, because they were persecuted
according to law. This answer is of very little force, for there was no other
law but the will of their Emperors against them, or their Edicts, which were
only their will manifested; both which were as much Laws in Iulian's time, as
N^ro's: Therefore why the Christians should think it their duty patiently to
submit to all the inhumane cruelties of that first Persecutour, and those under
Julian rebel, or at least murmur at those lighter pressures of their Emperor,
I am not able to resolve.

I am inclined to think, that Mr. Iohnson's Christians were not so good as they
should be; for those that will only submit quietly to Persecution upon some
conditions (for he tells u^, though they resisted Julian, they would patiently
have bore the cruelty of a Heathen persecutour) are governed rather by humor
than Religion; for the Gospel I am sure makes no distinction, and it is a
received maxim, Ubi lex non distinguit nemo distinguere debet; Where the Law
makes no distinction, no man ought to do it.

But besides, it has been sufficiently proved, that Constantius's proceedings
were altogether as illegal and arbitrary, as those of Julian could possibly be;
they were both Apostates, and though indeed the latter was less to be excused
(it being something a worse defection to Paganism than Arianism) yet in respect
of the quiet and security of the Church, they were both equally dangerous. And
yet we see from the Examples of so many Bishops, the prayers of all the people,
that they were so far from cursing him or giving him to the Devil for his due,
that they seem to be fond of his life, and make the establishment and welfare
of the Empire, to be the first business of their prayers. For hence it is that
we give respect to a Heathen, if put in Authority; for though he be most
unworthy of it himself, who holding God's place, gives the Devil thanks for it;
but the honor we give him, his place challenges. [ Q. 35. exerc. Nov. Test.
Tom 4. op. Av.]

CHAP. IV. ^h^ir Actions.
BEfore I give an Account of the Christi^^ (...) their Actions toward (...)
^^ll be necessary to make (...) R^m^^ks upon those two Actions of a Soldier
and a ^ishop under Julian, which Mr. Johnson says may manifest how the
Primitive Christians despised him (besides that it i^ very foul pl^y to infer
the general sense of the Church from that of but two members of it) I cannot
grant that the Primitive Christians would by any means allow of these Actions.

As to the first, that of Valentinian, I must needs own 'twas far more
excusable than what old Gregory did, for his Character, and the meanness of the
person that suffered by him, may plead something in his behalf, striking in a
Soldier being more pardonable than in a Bishop, and bea^ing a Priest, more
tolerable, than kicking an Emperor; but this will not justify the violence,
for it was undoubtedly a fault, though the praises the Historian gives it,
would seem to prove the contrary. For to this I answer, That the Action
deserved to be praised, not for its own sake, but because it showed an
extraordinary Zeal for Christianity; it was the Motive, and not the Fact, that
was to be commended; and that this is not purely a (...), but the real truth of
the matter, we may i^fe^ from this plain instance. In the Primitive Church many
killed themselves, when they could by no other means avoid sacrificing to
Idols; and they stand now upon Record for Martyrs. This Action of theirs was
certainly self-mur^her, and consequently criminal; and Dr. Hammond aff^rms,
that it was a fault in them too; but the love of God, and the fear they should
be polluted by Idols, was the cause of it. And so though it might as a frailty
be pardoned by God's mercy in Christ, yet sure this killing themselves was not
that which made them Martyrs; but that great love of God, and resolving against
Idolatrous worship, which testified it self in their killing themselves for
that Cause: This it was that made them pass for Martyrs, and that other
incident fault of theirs, was not, in that case, thought so great, as to divest
them or rob them of that Honor, [Dr. Ham. Pr. C^.] and (...) highly probable
that this was Valentinian's Case; 'twas not his striking the Priest, but his
Confession, that gave him a title to two Kingdoms, that of the Empire and
Heaven.

But I need not have said so much of this, for Mr. Johnson himself allows it to
be an unaccountable Action, p. 44.

As to the extravagant Action of old Gregory Nazianzen (for I cannot justly give
it a milder Epithet) certainly nothing but the partiality of a Son can excuse
it, and it is a fault even in him to commend it; for who can stretch forth his
hand against the Lord's anointed (sure the Foot is not excepted) and be
guiltless (1 Samuel 26. 9.) St. Chrysostom's forbidding the Empress Eudoxia to
come within the Church, was not half so insolent as this Act of Gregory's, yet
he severely repented of it, and tells us, in the cooler hours of his life, he
did more than he could justify.

If I were to specify the particular Actions of the Primitive Christians under
Constantius, in opposition to those under Julian, I should be as prolix and
tedious as Mr. Johnson is in his comparison of Popery and Paganism; I shall add
in general terms, (and I defy any one to disprove me out of the Writings of
the Fathers, the Histories, and the Martyrologies of that age) that the
Soldiers, (though of a contrary opinion) fought for him. The Fathers (though
banished) prayed for him, as likewise did the Martyrs under persecution, till
the Ex^cutioner put an end at once, both to their devotion, and their lives.

CHAP. V. Of their Devotion, their Psalms and Prayers.
I Don't think there is so much difference between Prayers and Psalms, as to
treat of them severally in two distinct Chapters. But shall speak of them here
together (I hope) without any great absurdity.

I must confess there seems some weight in the instance Mr. Johnson urges of
the young Martyr Theodorus, who cursed the Emperor out of the Psalms; and when
he suffered for it, by an extraordinary assistance from Heaven, not only
survived, but enjoyed the torture: But (like all the rest he writes) it is only
gloss, and only fit to be swallowed by those whose use he designs his book
for, the prejudiced and ignorant: These believe, because they don't understand;
Those, because it makes for them. For this Holy Martyr repeated this with the
same spirit that David first delivered it, by way of denouncing God's
judgments, not delivering his own sentiments: And Mr. Johnson may as well say
the Priest curses the People in the solemn Service on Ash^ednesday, as
Theodorus did the Emperor then; for the Idolaters come in for their share
there too.

Mr. Johnson says but little of their prayers, an^ that little too he draws
from Gregory's (...) where he ^lls the People what a Champion his Father had
been against Iu^^, how he had stricken him with the joint prayers of the
people, etc. If he did, 'twas (...) all that the Christians ^ver did before
him. And then what may we judge of th^^ p^^yers, but that they were as
extraordinary and unjustifiable as his threat^^ing to kick the Emperor? the
supplicati^^^ (...) Predecessors were not of this (...) will tell us [That the
Scriptures enjoin us for showing the redundancy of our Charity, to pray to God
even for our enemies, and wish well unto our persecutours.] Tertul. Apol. cap.
31, and 32. And in another place, [We pray for the Emperor's safety, we call
upon the eternal God, the true God, the living God, whom the Emperors
themselves would wish above all others should be propitious to them. Ibid. 30.]

And what is more, he tells them in the same place, [Having our arms thus
spread out unto our God, let the Hooks tear us, the Crosses hang us, the Fires
lick us up, etc. the posture of a Christian praying is fitted for all kind of
torments: Come ye good Governors, wrest out the soul that is supplicating for
the Emperor:] Can any thing be greater? This is the patience of a Primitive
Martyr. By this we see not only calmly to dye for the Truth, but even to dye
praying for the Persecutour, was one of the great requisits to obtain so
glorious a title.

But perhaps Mr. Johnson will tell us this is but one Doctor's opinion; but if
he will take the pains only to look in the Indexes of the Fathers, he will be
directed to many places, in each of them, to this purpose.

Cyprian speaking to the Emperor, says, [Day and night continually and
instantly do we pray, propitiating and appeasing God, for your peace and
safety.] Cypr. ad Demet.

Sebastian tells the Emperor Dioclesian, [The Priests of the Temples do
possess your Majesty with an unjust suspicion of us, suggesting false tales, as
if we were enemies to the Commonwealth; whereas by our prayers the Commonwealth
is bettered and increased; for we cease not to pray for your Empire and the
Roman Army.]

But to come ^igher home, Athanasius (a man not over tame but when it was his
duty) gives this reason for celebrating prayer in the Church of Alexandria,
before it was dedicated, that the people earnestly pressed him, that they might
all pray for the safety of the Emperor in the Church, which he himself had
builded; being ready otherwise to go out of the City, and assemble themselves
in the deserts, at the solemnity of Easter, which at that time was to be
celebrated.

And again, speaking to the Emperor, [You do not forbid, but are willing that
all men should pray, knowing that this is the prayer of all, that you may live
in safety, and continually reign in peace^ -- And again (O Emperor of God most
beloved) many circuits of years, I pray, may you live, and accomplish the
dedication of this Church; for those prayers that are made within for your
welfare, don't at all hinder the dedication of the Church.]

This will be enough to satisfy any reasonable man, that Cursing an Emperor
is not so Catholic a Doctrine as Mr. Johnson would have us to believe, and
that all the Fathers were not of old Gregory's mind. I am inclined to believe,
that if he could have found but one instance more of such a fiery Zeal, it had
certainly appeared, and been improved to the best advantage: For we find by his
transcribing so great a part of the Book of Homilies, he is of a good
Communicative nature, and keeps nothing to himself that may prove in the least
beneficial to the public.

But I believe it will be a hard thing to find the least pretense for this
Doctrine, in all the Orthodox Writings in former ages; and any of the Fathers
would look upon the broacher of such principles with as much detestation, and
call him as many names as Gregory did Julian the Apostate.

Before I conclude this Chapter, it will not be impertinent to show, that
prayers and tears were not so much out of fashion in the Primitive Church, as
to be rediculous in ours; as for their prayers, that they were not aimed
against the Emperor, I hope has been sufficiently showed already, but only
intend^d for his safety. And though it may seem unmanly, yet that it was not
unchristian to weep, St. Ambrose will inform us; who speaking to his Flock at
Milane, tells them, [Willingly I will never forsake you; being constrained, I
know not how to make opposition; I can sorrow, I can weep, I can sigh, against
Armor, Soldiers and Goths: Tears are my weapons, for such is the Armor of a
Priest, otherways I cannot, dare not, resist.] Amb. in Ora. de Bas. non Trad.

And this same Father (who had likewise to deal with an Arian Emperor,
Valentinian the younger) did not defend himself with his hand or his weapon,
but by fastings, and continual watchings, and continuing under the Altars, by
his prayers he procured God to be a defender both of him and his Church. Ruf.
Ec. H. l. 2. c. 26.

And that Prayers and Tears do very well together, St. Bernard tells us,
writing to ^udovicus then King of France. [Indeed we will stand and sight even
unto death, if need so requires, in our Mothers behalf, with such weapons as we
may lawfully use; not with Bucklers and Swords, but with Prayers and Tears to
God.] I suppose if he had meant against the Emperor, he would hardly have
wrote him word so. Ber. in Ep. 221. ad Ludo. Re.

CHAP. VI. Constantius's Death.
COnstantius, after having reigned 38 years, (a great while for a Roman
Emperor and Persecutour, and yet not too long, for Athanasius wishes him many
Circuits of years) making War in Persia, heard the unwelcome News of Iulian's
being proclaimed Emperor by the Army: It Is not to be imagined but he resented
this treacherous Action with the highest indignation; but we do not hear that
he attempted to exclude him for it; he knew he had declared Iulian's right to
the Succession, by making him Caesar; and that consequently it was not in his
power to take away that right which was derived from the Law of Nature, and
confirmed by his Edict, and which could only cease with Iulian's Life. That
these were his thoughts, we shall best judge by his proceedings in this affair;
for he did not put out his Edicts to take away the title of Caesar from Julian
(which was equivalent to that of H^ir-Apparent with us) thereby showing his
design to dis-inherit him; but leaving the prosecution of that War he had begun
in Persia, he carried his Army against Julian, to be revenged of that
ungrateful Usurper, and to secure himself in the Empire; for he might kill
Julian as a Rebel, and so his right would fall of course; but he could not
dis-inherit him as such, because God, though he gave the power of life and
death to the Magistrate, has yet reserved the disposing of Kingdoms to
himself. But to proceed in the Narrative: Constantius, whether from inward
grief, or the toil of a long journey, or both (is not material) fell ill at
Mopsuecrene, a place between Cappado^ia and Cilicia, where in a very short time
he died of a very high Fever; for Marcellinus says, that he burnt all over
like fire, so that his servants could not so much as touch his body. Socrates
indeed gives us a far different account of his distemper, attributing his Death
to an Apoplexy. I shall leave the reconciliation of these two Historians to
those that think themselves concerned in it; for it is not material here of
what death he died: but it is certain the News of it was miraculously conveyed
to Julian; for after he had consulted his Gods and Priests about the event of
things, and they had assured him of success above his hopes, yet he was
dissatisfied still; he looked upon what they said to be rather slattery than
prophecy, and thought their predictions rather squared to his desires, than
truth; but he was quickly satisfied by an extraordinary revelation; for at the
very same time the Emperor died in Cilicia, a Soldier that lif^ed Julian upon
his horse; he being seated, suddenly himself fell down upon the ground, and
cried out in the hearing of all the company, That he who had raised him up so
high, was fallen himself. Marcel. lib. 21.

Having given this account of his Death, I hope it will not be preposterous to
speak a word or two of his Repentance.

Socrates is silent in this matter, and the great Athanasius positively
affirms, that he continued in his damnable Heresy till the last. [(...)] p.
907. And that dying, he desired to be baptized, but not by a holy man, but by
one Euzoius (this is also confirmed by Socrates) that had been deposed for
Arianism. Ibid.

If any one enquires into the credit of this great Father, I shall refer him to
Gregory Nazianzen's own Speech in commendation of him, which he thus begins,
[In praising Athanasius, I praise Virtue it self, etc.] Greg. Nazian. in Land.
Athan. And to Constantius's Character of him (who certainly might be believed
when he commended one he hated) in a Letter he sent to the people of
Alexandria, wherein he highly commends his integrity, etc. Athan. Works. Epist.
2. ad Pop. Alex. Now which is to be believed, Athanasius or Gregory, in the
account of Constantius's dying a Convert or an Apostate, I leave the Impartial
Reader to judge.

But the authority he uses to induce us to believe a Christian did that
treacherous act, is much to be suspected; for Amm. Marcell. lib. 24. is silent
as to that, who was concerned in the expedition, and an eyewitness of what
past; as likewise Eutropius. But Aurelius Victor affirms the quite contrary,
viz. that he was killed by a Horseman of the enemies, and one that was ^lying
too. But Theodoret tells us positively, cap. 25. lib. 3. (...); Who it was that
struck this just stroke, no man knows to this day. And that it was not probable
that a Christian would be guilty of this fact, will manifestly enough appear,
from the passionate resentments they showed at his death. See Marcell. l. 24.

CHAP. VII. How they used his Memory.
THE Primitive Christians were so far from offering any injury to the Memory of
Constantius, that as if they had only remembered he was their Emperor; and now
by his being dead, owned a new obligation superadded to that, to speak well of
Him; they deplore his loss with all the demonstrations of a real sorrow: the
eyes that were wet when he persecuted them, wept afresh at his funeral, as if
they had perfectly learned that great lesson of their Savior, not only to
bear with, but even to love their enemies. The Soldiers you would think, by
the extravagance of their grief, had forgot their Character; and Constantine
himself died not more lamented than his Son. Julian, who had no great reason to
be fond of his life, if he consulted his own safety, assisted at his Obsequies,
and made a very considerable figure in that sorrowful procession; and if we
read Gregory Nizianzen's description of his funeral, we must needs stand
amazed at the greatness of their Charity; He tells us, that he was carried
forth with all the solemnity the Christians used to honor the Corpse of a Pious
Hero with; and would fain persuade the people to believe that the very Angels
themselves, in reward of his unusual piety, contributed their assistance to
inhance the Glories of his Funeral; but whether this is one of that Father's
flights, or really true, I shall not contend: this is certain from all the
Histories of that age, that he died generally lamented; and that those that
suffered by his Edicts, did not presume to blaspheme the Memory of him that
made them.

This was the Conduct of the Primitive Christian; and if they ever acted
contrary, it was not to be imputed to their Religion, but their Passions. I
shall easily grant that there are some severe reflections upon Julian to be met
withal in Authors of very good note; but I hope Mr. Johnson will not infer
from that, that they are warrantable. If he reads those very Fathers thorough,
he will find that their Theory runs sometimes contrary to their Practice, and
that they don't always act according to their own principles; and I don't know
why he should draw those passages into presidents for us, which the Authors
themselves in their cooler minutes were ashamed to own.

CHAP. VIII. Reflections on the Behavior of these Christians, wherein, of
Passive Obedience.
THat the Persecution under Constantius was much severer than any of the ten
former, is evident to any one that considers the Cruel^ies that were daily
acted by the Arian Heretics; who as they were much more zealous for their
Opinions than the Heathens, so consequently they were more eager in prosecuting
those that dissented from them: The loss of a Trade or Profession was not the
punishment of their Nonconformity, but of Life too; nay, there were penalties
inflicted where death was the least part of the punishment: But all these heavy
grievances did not make them question God's Providence, or remonstrate to the
Decrees of the Emperor; they did not make their pressures just, by impatiently
submitting to them; nor frustrate the reward of their sufferings, by reviling
their Persecutours; thereby by rendering their Persecution only an unprofitable
affliction: they looked upon their miseries as necessary trials of their faith,
knowing that the power of even wicked and hurtful Kings is from God.

What therefore can justify the Primitive Christians carriage toward Julian,
if it were according to the account Mr. Johnson gives of it, p. 66? That they
vexed every vein in his Royal heart; said all their prayers backward; and called
down for vengeance upon his head, etc. And at last concludes, They seem to have
broke all the measures by which all the ancient and suffering Christians have
gone by in their Per^ecutions, p. 68. The reasons he brings to justify their
Actions, are these:

1. That their case was different from that of the first Christians, because
Christianity was now the Established Religion of the Empire, and they were
justly incensed at Julian in offering to disturb them in the exercise of it.

2. Since Constantius had repealed all the sanguinary Edicts against them, they
were persecuted contrary to Law.

To the first of these I answer; That if he takes Christianity for the true
Religion Constantine professed and maintained, his assertion is utterly false;
for the Emperor's Religion, which is likewise the Religion of the Empire, as
far as Edicts can make it, (and Constantine had no other way to establish any
thing) was Arianism; for Constantius had long maintained that damnable Heresy,
and had supplied all the places of the Orthodox Bishops, who were banished for
their Confession with the most violent professors of it. So that when Julian
came to the Empire, the Church was far from enjoying that peace and
tranquillity Mr. Johnson describes, p. 68. for it was miserably rent with
divisions, and hardly visible but in a few persecuted, distressed members: For
granting that Constantius did at last repent, it was so late first, he had no
time to settle the true Religion, but left the Empire infected with the Heresy
he first introduced: which was no more Christianity then, than Mahumetism is
now; for though they acknowledged a Savior, 'twas one of their own making, and
the Notions they entertained of Christ may perhaps only entitle them to
greater damnation, than the Heathens that never heard his name: So that the
quiet enjoyment of their Religion could not make them so ^ierce against Julian,
for designing to molest them, for he could not put them into a greater
confusion than they were in already: Nay, they rather found the contrary; for
whoever will take the pains to compare Iulian's Usage of the Christians with
that of Constantius, he will find that the Heathen was less a Persecutour than
the Arian; and that the Church had more quiet minutes in the short Reign of
Julian, than in 30 years before; for he (upon what private designs matters not)
called home the Banished Bishops, and r^stor'd them to their places in the
Church: And though he ridiculed Christianity, he did not often persecute the
professors of it; he endeavored indeed to gain Pro^^lytes, but yet, like
Arians, he did not compel people to his Altars: Nay if we will take Mr.
Iohnson's word, he was rather a Tempter than a Persecutour. I hope this is
enough to show, that there is not a word true of all that gay description Mr.
Johnson gives u^, p. 68, 69, etc. of the flourishing condition of the Church;
and consequently the just sense of the happiness they enjoyed, and a fear to be
robbed of it, could not animate the Christians to that degree that he tells us
it did.

2. As to the second, That Constantine repealed all the sanguinary Edicts
against the Christians, and therefore if they were persecuted, 'twas contrary
to Law; it is a very ^hallow inference: For though that first Christian
Emperor repealed all the sanguinary Edicts, yet his Successor was not in the
l^ast ti^d up: One single word of his would put them all in force again. Nay if
we believe Justinian (who certainly was a good judge in the case) the Emperor
could not act contrary to Law; for what he did, was according to his pleasure,
and his pleasure was a Law, Quod Principi placuit legis habet vigorem, [Just.
Inst. l. 1. c. 2.] and the Edicts were altogether as Arbitrary, for they were
only the Emperor's will more publicly made known; for Theop. defines them,
Edicta sunt, cum Princeps motu proprio, (...) aliquid constituit ad honestatem
and utilitatem reipublicae; for whatever the Emperor enacted, how ill soever,
was supposed to be so; for as his sentence was always presumed to be just [
Principis sententia praesumitur semper justa unde ab ea non appellatur;] so
likewise were all his actions: So that whether Julian put the Christians to
death upon sanguinary Edicts, or rather accused them of other Crimes (that he
might avoid the invidious name of a Persecutour) and so destroyed them, is not
material, for '^is certain he commanded them to be executed; and if he did,
they died lawfully, for his Command was a Law; and that the Emperor's Command
had this authority, is evident from the Protestation of the people of
Alexandria, Athan. p. 858. [If it be the Emperor's Command we should be
persecuted, we are all ready to suffer Martyrdom; but if there be no such
thing, we beseech Maximus, the Governor of Egypt, and all the Magistrates,
that they would entreat his Majesty that no such thing may be attempted against
us.] So that what Mr. Johnson means, p. 72. by saying the first Christians
suffered according to the Laws of their Country, whereas those under Julian
were persecuted contrary to Law, is hard to determine; for every one knows the
will of their Emperors was the Law of their Country, for they were as
Arbitrary then as he that now Usurps their Throne; and I hope no body will say
the great Turk persecutes his Subjects contrary to Law, when he kills 5 or 6000
of them for diversion: That he acts unjustly, I grant, but the Laws (that is,
his will and pleasure) are on his side.

But to put an end to this matter, 'twill be evident to any that have read the
former part of this Book, that all the sanguinary Acts against Christians were
not repealed; for those made by Constantius, which were severe enough (if we
believe Athanasius, p. 821.) stood still in force till Julian his immedia^e
Successor came to the Crown.

But Mr. Johnson need not have given himself all this trouble to justify the
Actions of the Primitive Christians, for they were never guilty of any that
wanted an excuse; for the Church under Julian never owned those principles or
practices that tended to the dishonor of their Emperor, as has been showed at
large in the 2, 3, 4 Chapters, etc. of this book.

I shall con^ine my self no longer to the Actions of a particular people or
Nation, but consider what is our duty as Christians in relation to our
Governors; and what submission is due to them when they persecute us according
to Law, or destroy us by an uncontrollable Arbitrary power.

As to the first of these, the case is plain, and agreed upon on all hands,
that submission is necessarily required to a Persecutour, that acts according
to the Laws of his Country: this Mr. Johnson allows, p. 92. in these words:
[When the Laws of God and our Country interfere, and it is made death by the Law
of the Land to be a good Christian, then we are to lay down our lives for
Christ's sake.]

So that all the dispute is about our Submission to a Persecutour, that acts
without the authority of the Law, and contrary to it.

Mr. Johnson denies that Submission is due to him by the Gospel, [ ibid.] but I
shall make the contrary appear from the plain authority of the Holy Scriptures,
the sense of the Primitive Christians, as likewise from that too of our present
Church.

For, first, if we are not obliged to submit to a Tyrant that acts contrary to
the Law, we may resist him, for there is no Medium, flying being part of our
Passive Obedience that is acknowledged due to a Persecutour that acts according
to Law: but resisting is not in any case allowable; for besides our Savior's
own words, (...), it is forbidden, Romans 12. 17. to return any man evil for evil.
And again v. 19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place
unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it, says the
Lord. Now if no man may pay evil to his brother that has injured him, but by
the hand of the Supreme Power, how can it be allowable to render evil for evil
to the Supreme Power it self? It cannot be done but by a Superior, and He
only is God. We have redress indeed against the violence of our fellow
subject, by applying our selves to the Magistrate, who may punish the offender,
being authorized by God so to do [ Romans 3. 4.] But we don't find the People
have the like Power over the Magistrate: Obedience is our business, which is
inconsistent with the liberty of resisting. Grotius tells us plainly, Si, quia
summum imperium habenti libet, injuria nobis inferatur, toleranda potius est
quam vi resistendum; For though by the Law of Nature we have the power of
Repelling injuries, yet we have a greater obligation from the Civil Government
under which we live, that wholly devests us of this right. Potest igitur
Civitas jus illud resistendi promiscuum publicae pacis and ordinis causa
prohibere, cap. 4. l. 2. de Iu. Bell. and Pa. So that this patient submitting to
the Arbitrary determinations of the Magistrate is not only from the doctrine
of our Savior, but from the principl^s of Civil prudence: For the Lawyers will
tell us, that a mischief is better than an inconvenience; not that the first
formally considered is to be preferred to the latter, but that an
inconvenience, whose consequence would reach unto the general, should be
prevented rather than a mischief, that would only endamage particular. Hence
it is that opposing the Magistrate is forbid upon any terms whatsoever, since
the indulgence of it would bring a train of ill consequences, ten times worse
than all the mischiefs we can possibly suffer from the cruelty of a lawless
Tyrant; For as Grotius has it in his Commentary on the 13 of the Romans, Reges
constituuntur ut improbitate repressa tutius vivant boni, hoc autem plenissime
praestant boni reges, mali quoque aliquatenus vel sui causa, and quanquam
aliquando vitii aliquid interveniat, nunquam tamen non tutius est esse
Principes, quam non esse: Recte ergo Tacitus, vitia erunt donec homines, sed
neque haec continua and meliorum interventu pensantur.

It was a Maxim the former Heathens learnt from their Philosophers, (...), and
that this anger was not always supposed to be just, a Latin saying, to the same
purpose, will show us, ames parentem si aequus est, si non, feras; and that the
same, if not much greater difference is to be paid to our common Father, is out
of question.

In some cases I allow it is lawful not to obey our Parent, or our King, but
in all cases it is necessary not to resist. St. Peter Commands Servants to be
subject to their Masters, with all fear; not only the good and gentle, but
also the froward; for this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience sake toward
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully: and Grotius will tell us, Quod dicitur
subjectionem dominis deberi etiam duris, idem ad reges quoque referendum. Nay
we owe a greater submission to our Governors, than a Servant does to his
Master; for if he complains of wrongful usage, redress is to be had from the
Magistrate; but we can only appeal to God.

But to put this matter beyond all controversy, let us consider what St. Paul
says, Romans 13. 2. Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God;
and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. Here is a general
rule laid down without the least exception; and that it belongs to us, will be
evident, if we consider who gave it St. Paul, who being the Apostle of the
Gentiles, what he delivers is universal. And why should we presume to be wiser
than the Law, and make distinctions where we find none? St. Paul tells us,
Whoever resists the power, shall be damned. Mr. Johnson tells us, we may resist
one that acts contrary to Law: This distinction might be plausible, if this
wicked power were not the Ordinance of God; but since it is (as I shall
evidently make out by and by) the resisting this Ordinance contracts a guilt,
that makes us obnoxious to eternal torments. Mr. Johnson indeed quotes Bracton
to prove, that a Magistrate can have no power from God, to act contrary to the
Law, Quia potestas juris solius Dei est, potestas autem injuriae Diaboli: But I
wonder what Divine ^ver consulted a common Lawyer before about a Case of
Conscience; for I believe Westminster Hall Divinity is as bad as Pulpitlaw: He
may likewise, if he please, make use of Scotch Politics, and he will find his
Friend^, Knox and Buchanan, of his opinion: But St. Augustine will tell him (
Praef. in Enar. 2 Ps. 29.) [Every evil man has in himself the will to hurt;
but to be able to hurt, is not in his power: In that he has the will to hurt,
he is already guilty; but that he should have the ability, is permitted by the
secret dispensation of God's Providence; toward some for Punishment; toward
some for Trial; toward some for obtaining a Crown: For punishment, as the
Philistines were permitted to subdue the people of Israel, because they had
sinned against God: For trial, the Devil was permitted to assault Job; but Job
was tried, the Devil confounded: For winning the Crown, the Persecutours were
let loose against the Martyrs; the Martyrs were slain, the Persecutours thought
they had gotten the day; these did falsely triumph in public, the other were
truly crowned in secret: Therefore that he is permitted to deal against any,
proceeds from the secret dispensation of God's Providence; but that he has a
will to hurt, comes from the man himself.] Here we see opposing even a
Persecutour, is resisting the Ordinance of God (since he has his power from
above,) and what the consequence of that is, no Christian can be ignorant of.
Now that this was not Casually spoken by that Great Father, but his settled
opinion, is plain from his constant adhering to it: For in another place he
says, ( l. 5. de C. D. c. 8.) [From whom [God] are all powers, howsoever all
men's wills are not from him;] and again ( Id. de Na. Bon. etc.) [The power even
of hurtful Kings is from God.] Theod. likewise on the 13 to the Romans, Quum
vult eos qui peccant castigare a malis Magistratibus regi permittit. And
Isidore tells us plainly, [Hence we see both a bad and good power is ordained
by God, Bonam propitio, malam irato; for we owe good Kings to the gift of God,
but evil ones to our sins; Reges quando boni sunt, ^uneris est De^, quando vero
mali sceleris est Populi.] But some may say the Fathers are men, and
consequently may err; to obviate this Cavil, I shall add the undoubted
authority of Scripture, Romans 13. 1. There is no power but of God, and the
powers that be are ordained of God: and Job 34. 10. God makes a wicked man to
reign for the sins of the People.

Since therefore it is plain from these many instances, that the power of wicked
Princes is from God, our resistance cannot be any ways warrantable: We may as
well quarrel with Providence for sending Plagues among us, or murmur at the
Almighty when he visits us with his Judgments, as resist a Persecutour; for he
is sent to punish us for our sins; he is only the instrument, the rod in God's
hand, which we ought rather to kiss than burn.

I hope it has been sufficiently proved from the Scriptures, and Sense of the
Fathers, that the power of wicked Princes is from God, and consequently it is
our duty to submit to them, though they act never so illegally. It remains now,
that I should prove, that this is likewise the Doctrine of our present Church;
and here I might refer my Reader to all the Writings of our Eminent Divines
since the Reformation, whose business it has been to preach up Obedience to
Governors, and have unanimously declared against resistance upon any terms
whatsoever: I might transcribe great part of Bishop Bilson, Bishop Taylour and
Dr. Hammond's Tracts upon this subject, but I shall rather choose only to quote
the Homilies, it being agreed on all sides, that in them is contained the true
Doctrine of our Church; and Mr. Johnson deservedly styles them the next best
book to the Bible. I wish he could commend them upon his own knowledge; but I
am afraid he never read any more of them than served for a present purpose, and
cares as little for them otherwise as the Country people do: For if he had met
with the Homilies against Rebellion and Disobedience, we should never have had
that assertion, p. 92. That the only Case wherein the Gospel requires Passive
Obedience, is when the Laws are against a man: For in the first Homily against
Disobedience and Wilful Rebellion, there are these words, [We shall find in
very many and almost infinite places in Holy Scripture, as well of the Old
Testament as the New; as well the Evil as the Good do reign by God's Ordinance,
and we are bound to obey them.] And again -- [It comes not of chance and
fortune (as they term it) nor of the ambition of mortal men and women climing
up of their own accord to dominion, that there be Kings, Queens and Princes,
and other Governors over men, being their Subjects; but All Kings and Queens
and other Governors are especially appointed by the Ordinance of God.] -- And
again, [What shall Subjects do then? shall they obey the valiant, stout, wise
and good Princes, and contemn, disobey and rebel against Children, or against
indiscreet and evil Governors? God forbid, etc.] And the reason follows --
[For a Rebel is worse than the worst Prince, and Rebellion worse than the
worst Government of the worst Prince that hitherto has been.] -- And in another
place, [Shall the Subjects both by their wickedness provoke God for their
deserved punishment, to give them an undiscrect or evil Prince, and also rebel
against them, and also against God, who for the punishment of their sins did
give them such a Prince?] I am weary of transcribing out of a Book that ought
to be almost as well known to us as our Bibles; but I cannot forbear to insert
this passage, which is so pertinent to the business in hand, and makes it plain
that we ought by our repentance to avert the miseries of a wicked Prince, and
not by resisting his power; the words are these, -- [Let us take away our
wickedness, that provoked God to set such an one over us, and God will either
displace him, or of an evil Prince, make him a good Prince; so that we first
change our evil into good; for Subjects to deserve through their sins, to have
an evil Prince, and to rebel against him were double and treble evil, by
provoking God more to plague them: Nay, let us either deserve to have a good
Prince, or let us patiently suffer and obey such as we deserve.]

Having thus secured the Supreme Magistrate from the violence of his Subjects,
it will be necessary to take some care of his under Officers; whose power,
since it is the Ordinance of God (for Epiphanius proves, that the many
Magistrates under one King are Ordained of God, from the 13 to the Romans)
ought no more to be resisted than the King's.

Though this may seem something harsh in an English man's ears, who will
acknowledge perhaps that the King can do no injury, and is above the censure
of the Law, yet he knows his Officers are accountable for any illegal act; and
the very Command of the Prince cannot secure them from being impeach't by the
People: granting this to be very true; yet I shall still assert, that the
inferior Magistrate, though in the execution of an illegal act is not to be
repelled by force; for though Bracton tells us, Ei qui vult viribus uti erit
viriliter resistendum; and the law in our own defense permits us to kill our
enemy, R^f 17. 18.
yet (as it is sufficiently declared before) we sin in so doing; and though we
escape here, judgment will overtake us hereafter. Let Us hear St. Peter's
opinion in the case, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15. Submit your selves unto every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether to the King as supreme, or unto
governors, as unto them that are sent by him^ -- For this is the will of God,
etc. -- From this it is plain that we ought to submit to inferior Officers for
the Lord's sake, as well as supreme; this subordinate power being from God,
though not immediately: This is sufficiently acknowledged in our Savior's
answer to Pilate, Thou could have no power over me, except it were given thee
from above; and we all know he was under the Emperor.

I am not ignorant that the above cited Text from St. Peter has been perverted
to serve upon a far different occasion; the improper proper translation of
(...) humane Ordinance giving occasion to some ignorant or ill-minded people to
infer, that all government is of humane institution; but to any considering man
it is plain, that (...) here signifies a person, and not a thing, from the
division subjoined, whether it be to Kings as Supreme, or Governors, etc. and
therefore the best Translation runs, Submit your selves to every humane
creature. Here it may be objected, that this explication is too large, because
undoubtedly we are not to submit to all men: To this I answer, that sentenc^s
delivered in general terms are not always to be taken in their full extent; but
restrictions are allowable, provided they are had from parallel places in
Scripture; for this Command of subjecting our selves to all men, implies no
more but this, We must submit our selves to all men to whom submission is due:
of Haymo in Romans 13. Subditi estote omni creaturae, i.e. omnibus hominibus
nobis praepositis. But that which gives color for the allowance of this
restriction, is the like expression in the same Chapter, v. 17. where we are
commanded to honor all men. Certainly the meaning of this is not that the King
should honor his Subjects, or the Father his Children. But as Dr. Hammond in
his Paraphrase on the place, [Give every man the Honor and Obedience that is
due to him:] and St. Paul confirms this, Romans 13. 7. Give all men their due,
Tribute to whom tribute -- Honor to whom honor.

But to make this point of our submission to under O^^icers, as plain a^
possible, let us consider the example of our Savior, who when he was set upon
by a great multitude with swords and staves, etc. who certainly acted very
illegally, for they had no just Commission for what they did, nor could have
(for our Savior tells them, Luke ^2. 53. This is your hour, and the power of
darkness; which Dr. Hammond explains in his Paraphrase, [This is the time when
the Devil and you are permitted to work your wills on me.] Yet he was so far
from resisting them (though he had ten Millions of Angels at his command) that
he severely rebuked Peter for drawing his sword in his defense, and bid him put
it up, for all that take the sword, shall perish by the sword. Here we see our
Savior does not only encourage us by his example to submit patiently to those
that wrongfully assault us, but by his Precept enjoy^s it as our duty; he does
not leave it at our disposal, whether we will submit or no; nor is this only a
Counsel of Perfection, which brings honor and reward to those that keep it;
but to those that do not, no manner of danger at all (as Mr. Johnson speaks,
p. 68. from Greg. Naz.) for we see here a penalty threatened to the resister;
though if any case might be excepted, this ought to claim the privilege, for
the sword could never be drawn in a better cause, or by a better hand: But the
Precept is universal and unalterable. St. Peter himself must not resist, though
to defend his Savior.

This is a hard lesson (I know) to flesh and blood, but we must not Consult
them when we are to take up the Cross; which is the indispensable duty of every
Christian, 2 Timothy 3. 12. And again, Heb. 11. 6, 7, 8. For whom the Lord loves,
he chas^eneth; and scourges every son whom he receives.

I hope I have not omitted any thing in Mr. Iohnson's book that might deserve
the least Consideration; but to make the surer work, it will be necessary to
make some particular remarks upon those five Propositions, p. 92. into which he
tells us there he has reduced the force and strength of what was formerly
delivered in his Book.

1. Christianity destroys no man's natural or civil Rights, but confirms them.

Ans. Christianity does not at all meddle with our Civil Rights [1 Cor. 7. 20,
21. with Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase.] And as for Natural Rights, some it has
confirmed, but destroyed others; for many things were lawful to us as men,
which are not so as Christians. Nay, there were many things allowed under the
Jewish Economy, which Christ has absolutely forbid; and particularly in this
case of private revenge, and resisting the unlawful Oppressor. See Matthew. 5.
v. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. with Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase.

2. All men have a natural and civil Right and Property in their Lives, till
they have forfeited them by the Laws of their Country.

Ans. We had indeed a natural Right to our Lives, and we might have defended
them by force, and those weapons that nature had bestowed upon us; but this
Right is superseded not only by the Maxims of Christianity, but Civil policy
too (as has been shown from Grotius); and we can no more defend our Lives by
violence, than we can destroy them upon private discontent; both the preserving
and destroying the Subject being lodged in the hands of the Supreme Magistrate.

3. When the Laws of God and our Country interfere, and it is made death by the
Law of the Land to be a good Christian, then we are to lay down our lives for
Christ's sake. This is the only case wherein the Gospel requires Passive
Obedience, namely, when the Laws are against a man: And this was the case of
the first Christians.

Ans. 1. The rule of our Obedience and Submission is universal, there is no
person excepted; nay, it is plain from Scripture that we ought not only to
submit when the Laws are against us, but when they are for us, and we are
illegally oppressed: For if our Savior commands us, Matthew. 5. 38, 39, etc. not
to resist a private person that offered us an injury, (which is certainly
illegal, and acknowledged so all over the world, since he acts without so much
as any pretended a^thority) how much rather ought we to submit to the
Magistrate, though he acts contrary to Law; for besides the general obligation
we have just now mentioned, there is another that more particularly restrains
us, viz. St. Paul's Command, to submit to his power as he is a Magistrate, and
cons^quently ordained by God.

2. The Laws were no more against the first Christians, than they were against
those under Julian; for they suffered both by the same Law, viz. the
uncontrollable will of their Emperor.

4. That killing a man contrary to Law is Murder.

Ans. I cannot grant this universally true, for sometimes it is more than
Murder, viz. Treason, sometimes less, viz. Manslaughter: but that Murder is
Murder, I allow. I hope the Reader will pardon the seeming lightness of this
Answer, since it is necessary to show how hard it is for Mr. Johnson to speak
truth or sense in the most trivial concerns.

5. That every man is bound to prevent Murder as far as the Law allows, and
ought not to submit to be Murdered if he can help it.

Ans. How plausible soever this seems, it is utterly false: We ought indeed to
prevent Murder by all the means our Laws command, for they can command nothing
contrary to the Scriptures, but not by those they barely allow; for it is
evident from what has been delivered already, that the Law permits some means
that are not warranted by the Gospel, and those we must not, cannot use; for we
ought not to damn our selves to prevent the violence of a Murderer, though
offered to our selves; for our Savior assures us we don't lose our lives by
this patient submission to death, but gain them.

'Twill not be impertinent now to take notice of some Quotations picked up out
of Bracton, to countenance Mr. Iohnson's Doctrine, p. 83. who certainly has a
peculiar way of perverting the sense of Authors: For how else could he arm
Bracton against his Prince? who, good man! little thought his authority should
be made use of to countenance disobedience, or to pull down the Prerogative, of
which he really was so just and vigorous a defender: But our Lawbooks may well
be debaucht to serve the purposes of ill men, when the Bible is, and Bracton
has not so much reason to complain of the injury, since he has St. Paul for a
fellow Sufferer: The substance of all he cites from Bracton is this; Rex est
sub Deo and sub Lege quia Lex facit Regem. If Mr. Johnson would but let Bracton
interpret himself, we should have none of the absurd inferences he makes, p.
83. for he tells us, ^. 3. c. 26. Rex habet superiorem Deum item Legem per quam
factus est Rex, item Curiam suam, viz. Comites and Barons. Here we see there
is no more power allowed to the Law, than there is to the Earls and Barons; and
that they cannot civilly oblige the King to Obedience, but only morally oblige
his Conscience when he is persuaded their Counsels are just, I am sure Mr.
Johnson himself will allow: Therefore it is evident that those words cannot
relate to any coercive power, but only directive; for he says just before, Nec
factum Regis nec Chartam potest quis judicare ita quod factum Domini Regis
irritetur: And what he delivers in the following words, only implies a Moral
superiority, by reason of a directive power in the Law, and likewise in the
Earls, etc. not any civil jurisdiction or coercive power; for he declares, cap.
4. p. 17. that for all the ill the King can do, God only can punish him:
Satis sufficit ei pro poena quod Dominum expected ultorem. This is enough to
satisfy those that never did, and perhaps never may see Bracton's Books of the
meaning of that great Lawyer; as for those that understand him, they know that
he of all men is not in the least guilty of any saying that may derogate from
the Prerogative of the Prince, for he has evidently made it his business to
justify it in its fullest extent.

I might here conclude, but that Mr. Johnson will give us another touch of the
Primitive Christians, p. 93. where he tells us we have no occasion for that
admirable example of the Thebaean Legion: If he had not forgot the Service of
the Church, he would know the patience of Martyrs was not only the business of
our imitation, but the subject of our prayers too: And though we have not
always occasion to follow their example, yet it is our constant duty to thank
God for it. And therefore in the most peacefully settled times this sad story
is not impertinent from the Pulpit; we have solemn days to Commemorate the
sufferings of our blessed Savior and the Apostles: And though the Church has
not thought fit to give this glorious Action a place in the Calendar, it ought
certainly to be eternally fixed in our Memories; for then if ill times should
come (and if we consider impartially God's justice and our own sins, we have
little reason to expect otherwise) the Example and Conduct of the Thebaean
Legion will be of great use to us; there we shall see Soldiers dye with the
same Mien they used to triumph; and Chieftains not inspiring their Soldiers
with Courage, but instilling the softer Maxims of Patience: Eucherius tells the
Emperor (after a second Decemation of the Legion, and upon his Command to
destroy them all) [Despair it self, O Emperor, which is strongest in dangers,
has not armed us against thee: Behold we have weapons, and yet offer not to
resist, because we had rather dye than overcome, choosing rather to dye
innocent, than live guilty, etc.] No body but Mr. Johnson would say this great
Example is not universally to be imitated; and his reason is, because they
suffered according to the Laws of their Country. This shift of his has been
sufficiently exposed already; but that he may not have the least pretense to it
hereafter, I shall show that the Christians under Julian had power to resist
(and he declares the Laws were for them,) and yet they did not; so that his
assertion, p. 94. that they would if they could; and consequently that we may,
is utterly false. Now that the Christians were able, appears from all the
Historians that speak of that age; for not only the greatest part of the world
were Christians, but Iulian's Army was entirely so; for when they chose
Iovinian for their Emperor, he refused the Honor, telling them, That since he
was a Christian, he could not Command over Heathens; but they all, with one
accord, cried out, We are Christians.] Rusin. l. 2. c. 1. Theodoret is more
full in this case; for he makes the Army tell him, that he shall command
Christians that were ever bred up to that profession [(...)] for those that
were elder, had Constantine for their Teacher, the younger Constantius; nay,
they assure him they could not be Heathens, for Julian did not live long enough
to pervert them: (...). Th. l. 4. c. 1. This Mr. Johnson himself knew, for all
he says, p. 94. [What would they have a few desenceless Christians do, when
they had lost their strength, and so many of their numbers?] for in his
Preface, p. 25. he quotes St. Aug. in Ps. 124. who there says, [Though Julian
was an Apostate, an Oppressor and Idolater, yet Christian Soldiers served
under him.] Now whether these were unarmed or defenseless when they were to
fight, let any reasonable man judge; and for their Numbers, I appeal to the
Historians.

Thus I hope I have performed my promise, viz. 1. I have shown the Unlawfulness
of Excluding the next Heir upon the account of his Religion, and that it is a
practice altogether unknown to the Primitive Christians.

2. I have proved the necessity of Passive Obedience from the Scripture, the
Sense of the Primitive Fathers, and the Doctrine of our present Church.

3. I have not left any thing unanswered in Julian, etc. that opposed the Right
of the next Heir, or justified Resistance.

As for the latter part of the Book, since I am not concerned in the
Vindication of the Papists, I shall leave it to the censure of those that are.
But I must needs say, that Mr. Johnson had more effectually routed the Papists,
if he had rather set down the Arguments with which those great Men confuted
their Doctrines, than only the Rhetoric they exposed them with; for we,
(whether it be the civility or judgment of the age, I shall not determine) are not
much affected with the Old Elizabeth-way of railing.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press another Answer to Julian the Apostate, Entitled
JOVIAN. An Answerto Julian the Apostate. By a Minister of London.

Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
DR. Fowler's Libertas Evangelica. Octavo. Mr. Kidder's Discourse of Christian
Forti^ude. Oct. Mr. Allen's Discourse of Divine Assistence. Oct. -- Christian
Justification Stated. Oct. -- against Ferguson of Justification. Oct. --
Persuasive to Peace and Unity: with a large Preface against the Quakers. Oct.
-- Mystery of Iniquity unfolded, against the Papists. Oct. -- Serious and
Friendly Address to the Non-conformists. Oct. -- Practical Discourse of
Humility. Oct. Mr. Lamb's Stop to the Course of Separation. Oct. -- Fresh Suit
against Independency. Oct. Mr. Long's History of the Donatists. Oct. --
Character of a Separatist. Oct. -- against Hale's of Schism: with Baxter's
Arguments for Conformity. Oct. -- Non-conformists Plea for Peace Impleaded,
against Mr. Baxter. Oct. Dr. Grove's Vindication of the Conforming Clergy.
Quarto. -- Defense of the Church and Clergy of England. Qu. -- Responsio ad
Celeusma. Qu. -- Defentio suae Responsionis ad nuperum Libellum qui inscribitur
Celeusma. Qu. Remarks on the Growth and Progress of Nonconformity. Qu.
Baxter's Vindication of the Church of England, in her Rights and Ceremonies,
Discipline and Church Order. Qu. Mr. Halliwell's Discourse of the Excellency of
Christiani^y. Qu. -- True and lively Representation of Popery: showing that
Popery is only Newmodelled Paganism. Qu. -- Account of Familism, against the
Quakers. Oct. -- Sacred Method of saving Humane Souls. Qu. -- Discourse of the
Kingdom of Darkness. Oct. Cleget's Reply to the Mischief of Impositions, in
Answer to Dr. Stilling ^^eet's Sermon. Qu. The True Englishman: Humbly
proposing something to rid us of the Plot in State and Contention in the
Church. Qu. A Persuasive to Reformation and Unity, as the best security against
the Designs of our Popish Enemies. Qu. The Harmony of Natural and Positive
Divine Laws: by Walter Charleton, M. D.

