Tradidi Vobis: OR THE Traditionary Conveyance OF FAITH Cleared, In the
RATIONAL WAY, Against The Exceptions of a Learned Opponent.

By J. B. Esquire.

1 COR. 11.2. Laudo autem vos fratres, quod -- sicut
Tradidi vobis, praecepta mea tenetis.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

The PUBLISHER to the Reader.
IF I trespass against Civility in publishing this Controversy, without the
Authors consents, I presume them as much righted in my good opinion of them,
which chiefly emboldened me to this attempt; for I looked upon them both as
hearty lovers of truth, and aymers both at the same fair mark, though their
shafts were shot from opposite Camps; and hence concluded a disposition in them
to submit any private consideration to that most prevalent concern, and to
expose their candid thoughts to the open day, however the Genius of modesty
blushes to be made its own discoverer, and rather permits it self to be guessed
at by others, affecting to leave, not without some unnaturalness, its hopeful
productions to be fostered up and cherished by the care of providence, or the
charitable pity of some accidental Passenger.

This Character I have of the worthy and learned Author of these Objections,
from acquaintance, and his own sober Pen; and the same I dare avow of my Friend
the Replyer. And that as the former intended only his own private satisfaction;
so the later had no further end in his eye, than to satisfy so candid an
Enquirers particular scruples, or perhaps a grateful respect to that
incomparable and much envied Master of his, the great Explainer of Tradition;
to the defense of whose Doctrine he owes the employment of that strength the
same Doctrine had given him. Yet, why may I not add, too, as a likely motive of
his pains, at any fair hint of occasion, his high zeal for the subject it self,
Tradition; so onelily important, so radically influential toward steddiness in
faith, That Rushworths Dialogues, and the Apology for them can never be over
importunely abeted and pressd.

Now though I am bound by my Reason to hold the victory on my friends side, and
to expect the Readers should judge the same; yet I profess ingenuously I
printed not this out of a conceit that the weak carriage of the Objector gave
any advantage or encouragement; but rather impute much to his excellent wit,
that using a clear and unblundering expression, (a thing rare in such
Adversaries) could manage so well so infirm a cause; and that having weighed
Doctor Hammonds Discourse against Tradition with his, I judged this far the
more nervous, manly, and worthy my Friends thoughts, then the former; not only
because that affects too much wordishness, and confusedness, but because the
death of its Author might make it, with some show of reason, objected, that it
was ignoble to seek to triumph over the ashes of one adversary, and decline
others, yet alive of equal or greater force, entering the lists upon the same
quarrel.

S. W.

ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 15. read inviolate, p. 15. l. ult. r. there may. p. 26. l. 6. r.
critically evince. and l. 15. r. comes now. p. 19. l. 4. r. of your. p. 21. l.
6. r. they not understanding, his craft will -- and l. 14. r. which all. p. 28.
l. 13. for made, r. incident. p. 41. l. 21. for their, r. your. p. 52. l. 20.
for that, r. your. p. 61. l. 18. r. her. p. 73. l. 7. r. in it. p. 74. l. 12.
r. as in. p. 80. l. 7, 8. r. gingling, and l. 14. for one, r. an. p. 81. l. 19.
r. notion. p. 88. l. 6. r. news. p. 96. l. 20. r. to another. p. 99. l. 8. r.
there are. p. 114. l. 15. r. confirmandos. p. 119. l. 7. r. deference. p. 122.
l. 22. r. de et p. 123 l. 20. r. derive their. p. 125. l. 20. r. Books, is. p.
142. l. 5. r. could not, not. p. 164. l. 14. dele yet. p. 176. l. 18. r. evince
them. p. 181. l. 7, 8. r. has provided even against the defects of nature. p.
182. l. 27. r by design. p. 188. l. 12. r. I see. p. 192. dele and. l. 26. r.
another, and spread among the vulgar upon the authority of private men, as
Doctors, are -- p. 197. l 6. r. descent. p. 218. l. 27. r. wonder at what you
say first; p. 126. l. 21. before it be consecrated* pr 227. l. 22. r into it.
p. 232. l. 6. r. furem. p. 241. l. 4. r they, not yet being admitted. p. 246.
l. 21. r. non-admission; it is false. p. 252. l. ult. r. do not. p. 265. l. 18.
r. reverenced and l. 25. for prays r. prayers. p. 270. l. 27. r. places. p.
271. l. 15. r. hold true. p. 283. l. 7. r. is evidenced. p. 293. l. 19. r. if
any. p. 279, l. 26. r. upon. p. 287. l, 14. r, 'twould have.

CONTENTS.
PART I. Scripture not the Rule of Faith.
Incertaintie of the Letter of Scripture, in order to that effect. Sect. 1.
page 1. Incertainty of the sense of Scripture from the bare Letter. Sect. 2. p.
23. Scripture, critically managed, not sufficient to decide Controversies.
Sect. 3. p. 45. The two Places, John 20. and Luke 1. no proof that the written
Word is a sufficient means for the salvation of mankind. Sect. 4. p, 86. Answer
to those Fathers, who are brought for the sufficiency of Scripture. Sect. 5 p.
109.
PART II. Tradition the Rule of Faith.
Certainty of Tradition. Sect. 1. p. 160. Authority of Fathers.
Transubstantiation. Sect. 2. p. 205. Prayer to Saints. Sect. 3. p. 238. Images,
Sect. 4. p. 274. The Conclusion. Sect. 5. p. 285.
PART I. SCRIPTURE not the Rule of FAITH.
SECT. I. Incertainty of the Letter of Scripture in Order to that Effect.
SIR,
I Have often bemoaned my loss of your ingenuous society, and think my self
unhappy that my hopes are gone, of having those verbal conferences, in which I
much delighted, and for which I am exceedingly obliged unto you for many
civilities; that which I have learnt from you has put me upon further
enquiries then ever I should (as I believ) had you not been the occasion of
them, my resolution still remains to proceed by all possible means to make up
my present deficiency: If I know any thing of my self, I am an impartial lover
of truth, therefore ready to embrace any I am capable of that concerns me to
know. I have perused those two Pieces of Mr. Whites with diligence, to find
that Demonstration promised, but still remain in my first wonder, that so many
excellent able men should embrace that for clear truth which to me is falsehood,
I think I have not willingly shut my eyes against light, but opened them both,
to see what I cannot discern, and lest I should be thought to stifle truth, and
smother conviction in my breast, I have here endeavored to give you a brief
account of my apprehensions of the Discourse, in hope of that candid answer and
satisfaction your ingenuity has been pleased to promise me. I remember a wise
saying of yours, If this one thing (upon which all depends) the nature of
Tradition were well looked into, many Volumes might be saved; surely truth may
be cleared with few Arguments, which is often invisible in a crowd of words.
Mr. White excellently well resolves, only to meddle with Arguments, and not to
confute Authors in all Punctilioes, because of loss of time to no purpose. I
wish you were but as willing to urge any one of your strongest Arguments (which
might be don in a little Paper) as I am desirous to follow you in the pursuit,
I should then hope of benefit, which your ingenuity will not altogether suffer
me to despair of, you having yet (as I remember your words) never refused to
dispute with any man.

. 2. Though there be many things in the First Dialogue which I do not consent
to, yet I think it in vain to mention them, till we be agreed on the second and
third, in which the main point lies on which they depend.

. 3. In the Second Dialogue he proves Scripture alone cannot decide
Controversies in Religion, because of uncertainty of Copies, Translations, etc.
1. I grant we cannot fully determine all things we might desire to know by what
we have in Scripture, neither do I think it was intended to make us omniscient.
2. We might possibly have known more then we do, were it not for those several
causes of uncertainty mentioned.

Part I. Sect. I. 1, 2, 3.
SIR,
WHere I find so much civility, I expect to feel far stronger Arguments, than
if Passion were the manager of your cause, and even your courtesy alone had
hazarded to conquer me, had the concern of my cause, and the evident truth on
my side left me to my good nature; But these engage me to use the best weapons
my reason and knowledge affords, with rigor too against the point you maintain,
and to exchange those personal complements into the solider respects of
heartily endeavoring your satisfaction; assuring you unfainedly that I more
willingly attempt it, because your best advantage, the ^ight of Truth, (which
not only your sincere expressions, but your temper and genius manifest to be
your aim) is included in my victory; who your Friend is with whom you had those
verbal Conferences, I am not so happy as to learn, nor yet (which is a great
misfortune) your self: But since it is your soul that I speak to, and that I
have great acquaintance with it by those expressions it has given of it self
in your ingenuous Papers, I can securely own so much knowledge of you as to take
a right measure how to behave my self toward you, that is with candor and
civility. What circumstances may have hindered your friends giving satisfaction
by his own pen, I know not; But I am sure, though the importunity of powerful
Friends, in the absence of that excellent Master of mine, have even forced me
to this task, yet I may with truth say, 'twas your temperate way of writing,
your clearness, and apprehended sincerity, which were my chief encouragers:
Entering the lists then with this protestation, that you have an hearty servant
for your Adversary, and one who combats you only to make you more my friend,
and your own, I address to my Defense, And

2. 3. Because I know not whether the state of the Question be not mistaken, I
conceive this place very fit to observe how it stands in the second Dialogue:
viz. We believe that by Scripture alone, left without the guard of the Church,
nothing, or at least, not sufficient for the salvation of mankind can be
sufficiently proved; Where the words mankind and sufficiently being of special
Energie, ought particularly to be observed. What is meant by sufficient proof
the 15th Encounter of the Apology, p. 142. declares to be inavoidable and
convincing Demonstration beyond any shadow of Reply.

. 4. Yet thirdly, notwithstanding all that has been said, I think we have
sufficient certainty out of Scripture alone, concerning those things which are
absolutely necessary for Salvation, and many things besides only profitable, my
Reasons are these.

. 4. You put the contradictory to your Adversary, which you assume to prove
fairly, meaning by Salvation, the the salvation of mankind, as I presume you
do: But your reasons seem to come short of your intent: For suppose all true
which you urge to the tenth Paraph, namely, that the alterations mentioned to
be possible (whereof you deny not but that many have happened, yet) have not all
of them actually befallen Scripture. Suppose I say this to be true, what a
Chaos is there betwixt that Premise, and your Conclusion, That Faith may with
sufficient certainty be proved out of Scripture alone? For though all have not
happened, yet since some have, and you are uncertain precisely where, it is
manifest you can never be certain, but that they have happened in whatsoever Text
you shall pitch upon to prove any thing by, and consequently you can never be
absolutely certain of any; again, since Demostration implies a must be of the
Conclusion, and must be evidently excludes may be of the opposite, it is plain,
that to destroy Demonstration, that is, in this case, sufficient certainty, it
suffices to prove the opposite may be; so that though it be granted, these
alterations have not all happened, yet while there appears a possibility they may
have done so, there appears an impossibility of ever coming to a rigorous
certainty by Scripture. But to take particular notice of every Paragraph.

5. 1. It seems to me more improbable that nothing of Scripture (as you say)
should be contrary to your Faith (supposing it the true) notwithstanding those
innumerable alterations of Scripture, then that all those alterations of
Scripture (proved Metaphysically only possible) should actually have befell the
Scripture.

. 5. It Is very strange it should appear improbable to you, but that Scripture
and our Faith must needs contradict one another, supposing the one to be
Scripture, and the other true, as you do: Must truths needs be opposed to
themselves, which have hitherto been esteemed opposite only to falsehood? If you
mean by Scripture, the alterations of Scripture, as the sequel makes me imagine,
how much wrong do you do the Word? for if Scripture be altered or changed from
what it was, then it is not what it was, that is, it is not Scripture. But of
these Alterations it is not our Tenet, that none of them have been contrary to
our Faith (the alterations made by the Translations of the first Founders of
Protestancy having been judged so contrary to it, that it occasioned the
prohibition to read the Scriptures in Vulgar Tongues) But only that there is
nothing in the Vulgar Edition, according to that sense, in which the Church
understands it, which is contrary to her faith. And if you will allow the
Church but to know the Faith she is appointed to teach, and know what she means
by what she reads, and what a contradiction is, [three Requests which cannot
well be refused her] you must make her very ignorant, if you deny her power to
discern whether there be between what she reads, and what she teaches, any
contradiction or not.

. 6. Suppose all these alterations supposed possible had actually crept in,
might we not seek for Scripture in Scripture, seeing they are innumerable even
to every line and word (as Mr. White) and how is it possible, that all those
deviations from true Scripture should in nothing contradict truths, for you say
there is nothing in Scripture contrary to your faith, therefore surely you
cannot think there are so many corruptions; for besides what he himself has
(lest he should prove more then he was willing) many Copies had the same
faults; I add, that the Christians, in the Primitive times, were very careful
of the Bible, especially when Copies were made for public use to be in the
Church, there was the greatest diligence possible taken to have the oldest and
best, which they might have better ground to disscern then we can, who lived
nigher the first Age; besides the ancientest Copies, the best being kept by
public care were more secure, and could, yea did remain many hundred years (as
some there are to this very day) by which the Copies that are afterward copied
out, may escape many corruptions of others before them.

. 6. You see then how the first part of this Paraph is answered; for we do not
say that our Faith has never been contradicted by these deviations, the number
of which, though we cannot determine, we cannot choose but think very great;
and, whatever we think of theirs, know, that to our purpose it is enough they
may have happened, whether actually they have, or have not.

And for the second part of it, concerning the care of the Primitive
Christians, as I will not deny what you say, to have some probability, so
neither can you deny that probability will not serve the turn; and that their
care, how great soever, exempted them not from being men, and subject to the
casualties of humane actions. I shall therefore fairly allow them to have been
as careful as they could be, and conceive the condition^ they lived in, left
them not a capacity of doing what is necessary for their intent. For it being
known, the Church was under persecution 300 years; the experience I have how
hard it is in this depression, we our selves live in, to preserve monuments in
a condition fit to undergo a severe juridical examination, much less such a one
as the salvation of mankind ought depend on; such a one as will not only endure
the Test of wise and honest judgments, but must be proof against all cavils of
all sorts of critical wranglers, makes me suspect your conjectures were not
thoroughly and rigorously looked into. First, I doubt the public care, you
suppose, and persecution agree not well together: What sanctuaries, what places
free from search, were there for the public care to secure these sacred
Monuments in? What safety could there be for their writings, whose persons were
in perpetual hazard? necessarily they must have been entrusted to the fidelity
of private men, which, let us for once suppose, did always remain unviolate,
and never betray their trust to any hope or fear, it is hard to imagine it could
so preserv them from the innumerable hazards necessary to be met with, from so
many enemies in so long a time, as that no alterations should creep into the
Text. For, (to bar malice and all wilful faults, both the devotion of private
Christians would require, and public prudence, the better to preserve it,
would endeavor as great a multiplicity of Copies as might be. These Copies
must of necessity be made in have and fear, and what enemies they are to
exactness, it is needless to insist on. Now in after times what shall hinder
these Copies from contesting with their Originals in Authority, and if, (which
the influence of chance must sometimes needs bring to pass) the Originals come
to be lost, and the Copies remain, what reason shall prefer one before another?
As for the true Originals, the very Writings, I mean, sent from the Apostles,
they cannot be imagined able to wrestle with so great an Age, especially if we
reflect the reverence universally born the Apostles, and desire to see what
proceeded from them, exposed them to the view and handling of so many, that
they could not fail in a short time to be much worn. What public use they were
of in the Church, especially when there was no public face of a Church, and
the pieces sent to one city, were unknown in another, (perhaps for a good
while unwritten) is something troublesome to guess, and at best, but pure
guess. And for what you say last, that many of the best Copies survived many
Ages, and some even to this day; I should have been glad if you had acquainted
me with the Reasons why you so confidently affirm, what I doubt you do but
gratis suppose: For what signs, what proofs to satisfy you, do these Copies
bring that they truly deserve the Authority they pretend to; that they were of
the number of those best, preserved by public care; In fine, that they are not
even fuller of faults then those which they would have corrected by them?

. 7. Again, there is a very good way to discern the best, by those several
Translations that have been made in or nigh the Apostles times of the Bible in
Arabic, Syriack, and other Languages.

. 7. Now for Translations, I should conceive the greater the variety of
Translations is, the greater must the confusion be: Since certainly where they
differ, as Translations of necessity must do, no one language bearing all the
Proprieties of another, there lies a suspicion, the Translation has bin made
out of different copies, whereof that which you have not, may, for ought you
know, be better then that you have. Then again, why should one Translation
yield to another? and who shall determine whether the fault belong to the
Arabic for example, or the Syriack? So that what you have said hitherto, is
resolved, not only into conjecture, whereas your cause requires demonstration,
but unlikely conjecture too.

. 8. 2. To me this is a good Argument that there is no such great corruption in
our Original Copies; All those Fathers which I have read (which are chiefly of
the first, second, and third Centuries) agree excellent well (though not
exactly) in their manifold quotations out of Scripture, with our present
Copies: Some corruptions there are, but nothing nigh what is imagined; the
Bible was not before Printing every man's Money (as Mr. White) therefore not so
many as now, and so not liable to many corruptions, besides being exceeding
dear, they must needs look to have them well done for their great price, but
especially those Copies which were procured by a whole Society for their
public use, or those preserved in public Libraries.

8. How numerous the Quotations are, which you have observed, I cannot tell:
but must needs think it strange every thing should be game that rises. I
beseech you, should I press to know the number of Fathers you have read, and
of places whose agreement you have observed, what account could your good
argument yield? There be millions of Sentences in the Holy Scriptures: have you
observed agreement in a single million? nay in 100. in 50. in 40? I spare your
modesty, and go no lower; but beg you to reflect what it is which you call a
good argument, viz. that because there is some kind of agreement, of some few
places, in ours, with more Ancient Copies, which for any thing we know may be
corrupted too, and these places I conceive, not concerning our disputes;
Therefore the whole Book is evidenced to be so free from corruption in all
places, that the Salvation of mankind may securely rely upon it. Next 'twould
afford much matter of discourse, to consider how an agreement in Quotations
should be excellent, and not exact? for certainly it is a pretty odd kind of
excellence which wants exactness. 3ly. How does it appear but that the
agreement, such as it is, proceeds from this, that our Translators have
conformed their Translations, to the Fathers Quotations? In which case here may
very well be an agreement with the quoted places, but no likelihood of
inferring any with the rest. But I insist upon this, that since you acknowledge
some disagreement, and some corruptions, it is not possible you should
rigorously, and critically crime the Innocence of any one place in question,
much less of all that are necessary to the Salvation of mankind. That before
Printing there were fewer Bibles, I conceive true, but not that the^ were fewer
faults in those which were; it being certainly much easier to print, then write
correctly, and yet no Bible comes new forth without Errata'^. As much care too
is now used of the press, as could be then of the Copyer, and yet Errata's,
there still be, and will be while man is man, and subject to the Laws of
transitory things. And for public Libraries, and Societies, they belong to
later times; when the rust of incertainty had already eaten too far, for any
industry to scour it clean away.

. 9. They had the Bible in no less reverence then we, yea, the very Jews (who
are thought willingly to corrupt the Hebrew) seem more careful then the
Christians, as appears by their Majoreth. Montanus frees them sufficiently from
the Aspersion, in those places we (any of us) accuse them to falsify, they
have of their own accord shown the diversities in their diverse Copies, and
their counting the very number of the Letters in the Bible sufficiently pleads
for them: But in general I conceive it a hard matter for any Heretics or
others so to corrupt willingly as is pretended, both because of the number
dispersed in several parts of the world, which they could not come at, and
likewise by reason of the possessors of other Copies, being their enemies in
opinion, would never suffer them without making it known to the endeavourers
disgrace, and frustation of the end which should move them to endeavor, which
must have been to prove their errors by those apparent corruptions.

9. Whether the Jews deserve the accusation of willful corruption or not, which
is yet a moot case betwixt Scholars, I intend not to determine; since I
apprehend it will contribute little to the settlement of our differences
concerning the new Law, to settle in what manner they used the old one. Only
this is certain, that if, of learned men, some condemn, some absolve them; the
matter is left probable, and incapable of being a sure foundation for any thing
to be built upon it. But I must wonder, the nice diligence you attribute to
them, of counting the number of Letters in the Bible, should seem a sufficient
plea of their sincerity; as if it were not most easy to retain the number of
letters, and yet change the words, Sacred and Cursed are the same in number of
letters, though otherwise, not only most different, but most opposite. And for
what you say concerning Heretics, it is likely they did not corrupt all Copies,
but if they corrupted any, they quite spoiled your Argument; for what shall
distinguish in your grounds, betwixt a corrupt and a true copy? Yes, but they
could not corrupt, because their Adversaries would have discovered the foul
play. Therefore they should not if you will; but that they have done it, is
evident, almost of all Heretics upon record yet remaining in the Writings of
several of the Fathers. Among the rest Marcion kept such a nibling and gnawing
the Scriptures, that he got himself the name of Mus Ponticus, a name which
perhaps no antiquity will gnaw off. But what do we dispute whether that may
have happened in former Ages, which, if any credit may be given to the best of
their Authors, it is beyond dispute manifest, has happened in ours? See Protest.
Apology.
Zuinglius, Osiander, and Keckerman reprehend Luther for corruptions in
Scripture; and whether he deserved it not, who had the obstinate insolency to
maintain his Additions of the Word, [onely] to Faith, in his Transl. of 3 Romans
28. with this Plea; Dr. Martin Luther will have it so, and says he is a Doctor
above all the Doctors in the Papacy, do you judge. Luther is not behind hand
with the Zuinglians, whom he terms fools, Antichrists, deceivers, etc. And
Conradus Sclusselburg professes of Zuinglius, that his scelus (of changeing hoc
est, into hoc significat, is by no means to be excused. The Translations of
Basil and Castalio, are in Beza's judgment, wicked, altogether differing from
the Holy Ghost, Sacrilegious and Ethnical; his own contains Errors too many to
be noted in a Book of an ordinary bulk, if you will believe Castalio, and
plainly change the Text, according to Carol Molinaus, who also attests of
Calvin, that he strains the Gospel, makes it totter up and down, and plainly
adds to the Text. And, if the judgment of our Church add any thing to the
credit of your own Authors, consider that the horror she had of the manifold
corruptions every day produced, and the sense she had of the danger which they
threatened to the souls she was obliged to take care of, occasioned the
prohibition, you so much dislike, of reading Scriptures in Vulgar Languages,
that is, corrupted; for to the Vulgar Latin the prohibition extends not.

Now, it being, as I conceive, very evident that corruptions have been made,
and that willingly too: I would fain know, what shall hinder a corrupt Copy
from out-living the Books written to discover the corruption, and pleading in
after ages, its antiquity for a title to genuine, with as much likelihood as
the truest Copy in the world? while there is nothing but the bare words of
either to discern betwixt them? But you think the discovery of the corruption
would frustrate the end of him that makes them, not considering that these
baits are laid for simple only, not learned men, whose easiness if the
Heretic have won any credit upon, he must be the veriest Dunce in the world,
if he be not able, to any crime whatsoever, to frame some, either, to them
plausible, or at least, confused Defense, which they, not understanding his
craft, will make use of his Authority to persuade them, his innocence suffers,
not by desert, but by want of capacity in them to see it.

. 10. All that plausible discourse of the possibility of Scripture-corruption
only teaches me wariness and diligence to use all means, withal confirming my
Faith that it is the Word of God, seeing so many contrary minds could never
have combined to forge it, nor those various Lections crept in, had it not been
universally in respect of time and place received.

. 10. That something was commended to Writing by divine Authority, you gather
well; but that the Books we have and as we have them, are that something, is, if
it be part of your Faith, what you will not find any thing able to confirm.
Suppose an Atheist, or witty Infidel, whose faithfulness to his nature
requires severe demonstration, reply to your discourse, that, although contrary
minds could not combine to a forgery, yet they may be deceived by a forger,
who for any thing appears to the contrary, may have adulterated the first Copy
of the Original, from which adulterated Copy, all our Lections may have been
derived: What return could you make to this man? Could all your wariness and
diligence deny but that this case might happen? which if it could, what
confidence could motion to him the receiving those Books as Infallible and
Divine, which he sees may have been corrupted, and you are unable to show but
that they have been so. Reflect therefore if you please, what a pretty
confirmation you have of your Faith, which can neither satisfy another, nor
establish your self upon a foundation of any certainty, and less then
certainty, and that absolute and rigorous, cannot in these matters be a
foundation. I pass therefore to the next Section, after I have observed, that
this neither proves there is so much as one corruption less in the Bible, then
your Adversary thinks may be, and that although it had proved many less, it
would nothing have advanced your purpose, since, that Corruptions may be there,
that is for ought you know, are there, does as much destroy your pretense to
certainty, as if you knew they actually were there.

SECT. II. Incertainty of the Sense of Scripture from the bare letter.
1 THe next material Question is how to understand these Scriptures, which we
may see sufficiently to agree, because the Original Languages are not now
commonly known, equivocations incident to all writings and words, etc.

1 THat which you call the next material Question, I do not comprehend how you
come to state in the manner you do. I presume you intend to oppose the 8th. and
following Sections of the 2d. Dialogue, where, several incertainties
necessarily springing out of the variety of Translations, Copies, etc. being
already handled, is examined what must needs follow from this, that the
Scripture, in the supposition there were but one authentical Copy extant, is a
Book written in words of men. So that the Question there seems not to be of the
method how to understand the Scripture, but of this, whether they may be
understood with that certainty which in our business is requisite.

2. Here I wonder at the excellent Mr. White, not to have prevented this my
difficulty; that the same difficulty lies as heavy, yea heavier upon Tradition,
for that came by the same way (as you will confess) first delivered in those
Original Tongues, and must be Translated (by word of Mouth) and Expounded even
into our Native Languages, before we can be made sensible of them; and is it
not as hard for me, to tell you that in English, which another told me in
Latin, as for me (or another better learnt than my self) to Translate so much
written to my hand in Latin, into English, surely this later is the exactest
way.

2. Here you must give me leave to wonder too, but it is that you raise such a
difficulty, and attribute so much heaviness to it upon so light ground: Truly,
I am so far from confessing that Scripture and Tradition came by the same way,
that I conceive it impossible they should do so: For Scripture contains a
determinate number of words, which are the same to whoever reads them;
Tradition is not at all confined, but uses fewer, and more obscure to ingenious
persons; more, and clearer to those who are duller, and consequently is not
subject to translation; since certainly I cannot be said to have translated, if
what another has told me in 500 words of French, I tell you in 100 of English:
What you assume therefore, that Christianity was first delivered in the
Original tongues, is in this sense true, that it was first preached to those
Nations, whose Vulgar Languages were those which we call Original, but that
gives you no pretense to add, 'twas translated into ours, it being delivered
neither to them nor us in a set form of words, which might be translated, but
so preached to both in our several Vulgar Languages, that the people understood
the meaning of what their Preachers delivered to them, and were not left to
guess at it by scanning the various, and therefore doubtful, signification of
the words, they expressed it in. So that Tradition is not subject to any of the
uncertainties which writing cannot be exempt from; a truth, which the next
word, expounded, seems to confess. For it being the business of Exposition to
render the Text clear, if the Gospel were by tradition expounded to the people,
there must have been a great fault in the Expositor, if there remained any
uncertainty or doubt in them.

. 3. You will say perhaps not the words, but the sense was delivered by
Tradition at first in several expressions.

Answ. Yet still by words liable to all those difficulties incident to
Scripture, yea greater, when they again transmit it to others of another
language. Scripture too has the same truths essential to Christianity in diverse
expressions, several places almost in every Book; and whether this be not the
surer way of transmitting truths, let Papias his example witness, who pretended
to hear the Apostles themselves teach the Doctrine of Millenaries, had he
transmitted the very words in Writing, others, having judgment which he
wanted, as Eusebius, would have seen his mistake, by this appears in general,
Writing the surest way, Litera scripta manet.

3. It Is true then, that not a set form of words, but a determinate sense came
down to us by Tradition, by the means of words indeed, but not as you say,
liable to all those difficulties incident to Scripture. For though words are
necessary to both, yet there is this difference, that in Traditon, where, by
the observation of the Master, or notice of the Scholar any doubt is
perceived, it is presently explicated by other words, till it be perfectly taken
away, and the thing understood: Whereas Scripture is confined to those precise
words it contains, concerning which if either your self have any doubt, or
another raise it in you, you have no means of satisfaction; for how can you
come to the knowledge of the thing signified, while you are at a loss about the
sign? that sign, which is all you have to trust to, being to explicate another
thing, not it self. Now, if you reflect that the Gospel was preached, or
d^livered by word of mouth, with that care and time, that it was not only well
understood by the people, but settled deeply in their souls, by a constant
practice and high esteem; you will see that since they understood the doctrine
delivered to them, and could not forget it by reason of their constant
practice, nor lose it by reason of their multitude, Tradition has not one of
the difficulties made to Scripture. This advantage too, which orall delivery
has above writing, ought not be forgotten, that the liveliness of the voice,
and aptness of the gesture, and such companions of words fitly pronounced, do
infinitely contribute to make them be understood. We see Ironical expressions
differ no otherwise from serious ones, then in the motion of a lip or eye, and
yet how vast is the difference? Nay, the actions of the speaker suited to, and
joined with the circumstance in which he speaks, is perhaps of all Interpreters
the best, and admits the least doubt of his meaning. Writing therefore,
necessarily wanting these helps, must of necessity want also a most effiacious
means of making the words it presents to the eye intelligible, which these
enjoy that are conveyed to us by the ear. That Scripture has couched in i^
most, if not all truths essential to Christianity in diverse Expressions, I
conceive to be true; but if you will compare it to Tradition, you must add,
that these truths are indisputably acknowledged, and practiced both with
constancy, and high esteem by a multitude, and I shall then not think it
inferior to Tradition, with which perhaps 'twill be the very same. And for the
example of Papias, I am sure it is nothing against me, it being evident there
want the conditions necessary to Tradition: Viz. Of being openly and constantly
preached to such a multitude, as can certainly witness of it, that perfectly
understand it, and practice according to it: And I think it makes for me, since
in all likelihood the error proceeded from this, that the words used in
discourse by the Apostle, were mis-understood by some of the hearers; and what
happened to them when they were spoken, I know nothing can hinder them from being
liable to, after they are written: So that even that example concludes that all
error proceeds from the deceitfulness of set words, which Tradition not being
tied to, is also freed from the inconveniences they are the occasion of.

4. We may to our comfort remember, this Age affords such as are as well
skilled in the Originals, yea, letter then many Learned men, that lived several
hundreds of years before us. I confess (what they are forced to acknowledge)
some things we cannot yet know, by reason of those difficulties: No more could
the Church for above 12 hundred years ago, yet as then so now, we have
sufficient, though not all, light to salvation only out of Scripture. Because
we cannot understand all things (some whereof of in Scripture S. Peter tells us
are hard to be understood) shall we say we can understand nothing certainly?
Why should we doubt our Savior was born of the Virgin Mary, more then that we
understand any sentence we hear commonly from one another, although there be no
other way then Scripture to know it. We make no doubt but we understand a place
of Plato, Aristotle, Tully, etc. and cannot God write as intelligibly?

4. What the learning is of men of this age, I conceive very unnecessary to
examine, especially since all the use you make of it, is to affirm confidently,
That we have sufficient light to salvation only out of Scripture; to which all
I shall return, is, that so critical an Exceptor against Arguments, should not
himself use for one, the Conclusion barely said over. That we can understand
nothing certainly, is not Mr Whites Position, but that we cannot understand
enough for the salvation of mankind with certainty requisite to that effect,
and till you say something against him, I have nothing to say against you. Why
we should doubt of our Saviors being born of the Virgin Mary, I know not, and
were there no other Readers of Scripture, but such as you, and I, perhaps none
would; but if any do, as I think Helvidius did, and you have no other means of
convincing him but by words, which a subtle Critic will show are capable of
other senses; pray how will you hinder a multitude, with whom an opinion of
learning, and holiness has gotten him credit, from following him into
damnation? of the parity between Scripture and Aristotle's writings you will
give me occasion to speak more fully by and by.

5. Surely God would be understood by all, seeing he commands all not only to
read his Law, but to write it upon their posts and doors and Phylacteries, and
be continually talking of those things that are necessary for salvation, Deuteronomy.
6.7. and by his Apostles, tells us, that he intends so to do, not always to
speak in Parables, John 16.25, 26. and in 2 Cor. 4.2, 3, 4. not handling the
Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commending our
selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God, but if our Gospel be hid,
it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the
minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the image of God should shine unto them. Prove. 8.9. They are all
plain to him that understands, and right to them that find knowledge; but
what more plain then that in Hab. 2.2. And the Lord answered me and said, Write
the vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that he may run that reads.

. 5. For the citations you fill the next Paraph with, I profess I am at a loss
to find any opposition in them to what I am maintaining: The Dialogues say,
Equivocation, the nature of the Original tongues, their being ceased, etc.
causes an uncertainty of the sense of Scripture; and you reply that God
commanded his Law to be written upon Posts, Doors, and Philacteries; that he
intended to speak to his Apostles without Parables, that S. Paul did not handle
the word of God deceitfully, that the words of wisdom are plain to him that
understands; and that the Prophet was commanded to write a Vision plain: Does
any of this, or all prove that equivocation, etc. brings in no incertainty, or
that it and the rest, are not found in Scripture? This is what I conceive it
had been proper to have spoken to, every thing else being not the Question. But
to speak minutely to each, I must tell you, the Comments I have seen upon what
you urge out of Deuteronomie, apprehend the command mentioned not to intend so
much a literal obedience (for certainly all could not read, every one had not
Philacteries, etc.) as it endeavored to make it the business of the Jews to
sink the Law into their hearts by a perpetual practice and high esteem. But the
Question is not, Whether the Scripture be not plain enough for the intent for
which it was made; (you know the Dialogues affirm the Motives of the love of
God and our neighbor, etc. are easily found in the Bible, by a discreet
reading, and not only that, but a man may by such a reading become a perfect
believing Catholic) but whether it were intended for the effect which you
attribute to it, Viz. to be the rule of Faith, that is, alone to secure the
passage for all mankind to heaven, when strength of wit, strength of malice,
and stronger then both, the weakness of mortality, and repugnance of humane
frailty, all join to stop it up. This we deny, and not but that Scripture may
have been well enough understood when 'twas first written: For certainly, while
the Circumstances last in which, and for which it is made, it is much easier to
comprehend the meaning of a writing, then afterward when they being past, we
are left to guess at the sense without other help then the bare letter, which
we are apt to interpret every one his own way. It Is true therefore that
Scripture was intended to be intelligible to those to whom it was written, but
not to after Ages without other means. To exemplify in the Jews, of whom your
Objection runs, did not the Pharisees and Saduces (not to mention the rest of
their Sects) both admit the Scripture, and yet so far disagree in understanding
it, that many times they were both wrong? Neither would I have you reply, They
were out, in things only of less concern, in not fundamentals; for besides that
this, would you but determine what a Fundamental were, might be showed to be
false, it gives no satisfaction to the Argument, although admired for true;
since unquestionably God did not write any thing at all, with design to
instruct the Reader, fundamental, or not fundamental, which he would not have
understood; 'twere blasphemy to impute such folly to him; if then they failed
in any thing, they understood not something which God intended should be
understood. It Is therefore in my opinion, very clear, that his intention lasted
no longer, then the circumstances which accompanied the action, and which being
past, the bare letter was no longer sufficient without other helps, their
constant practice, for example, the best Interpreter of a Law, which while they
adhered to it, kept them right in all things commended by it, and by it the
sense of the letter was cleared to after Ages, which to the first, was
sufficiently determined by other circumstances; although not so but that, even
then, it was to a wrangling Caviller very possible to be wrested, as the
example of St. Paul's writings undeniably evince of the New Testament. The
following one from John 16. seems farther from the purpose: For how can you
deduce any thing relating to it out of this, That our Savior told his
Apostles, the time was coming when he would speak to them without Parables? I
conceive he means the forty days conversation with them after his Passion, in
which, because he made them fully understand what he said, will it ever follow
that every one fully and certainly understands what is written? Farther off, if
a greater distance may be, is what you cite from 2 Cor. where the Apostle
having in his absence, been defamed by some pseudo-Apostle to the Corinthians,
justifies himself, and his fellow laborers, affirming they performed their
Obligation of preaching the Gospel sincerely and uprightly; which what it has
to do with our Question, indeed I cannot imagine. That from the Proverbs (if it
may be meant of the Scripture, which I doubt it cannot, the Text seeming very
plain against that sense) is against you; for it requires an aptitude and
promptness in the Reader, which is to confess, where these qualities are not,
the plainness, you urge, must also vanish. Now since these dispositions consist
not with pride and obstinacy, and in controversies of Faith, heresy must of
necessity take one of the parts, and heresy cannot be without pride and
obstinacy, nothing can be plainer then that these dispositions cannot be in the
Readers on both sides, and that Scripture by consequence, is no effectual
weapon against one of them. As for the last, it is I think farthest of all, the
command signifying no more then this, that whereas Prophecies use to be couched
in mysterious language, the Prophet was directed here to do otherwise, and
write the vision plainly, that is, not mysteriously: Your plain argument
therefore stands thus, that because one vision was commanded to be written not
misteriously, therefore the bare letter of Scripture is a sufficient means to
as much certainty as is necessary to the Salvation of mankind, which is
plainly, no argument at all.

. 6. Truths necessary are plain enough, though others only profitable be not
all so, nor is it requisite, seeing God has not thought good they should be
all so, else he would have made them plain too, indeed to them that are not
duly qualified, what will be plain? A man shut his eyes against any thing, but
let a man come with a good mind, ready to fetch, not bring any meaning,
observe the drift of the place, what went before, what follows, compare
obscure with plain places, heartily pray unto God; such a man will certainly
see what shall be sufficient for his Salvation, if he live accordingly.

. 6. This paragraph conjectures a man may be saved by Scripture alone, and
since it does no more, I might, if I would, make a drawn match of it, by
opposing my No, to your l. But sincerity and diligence being virtues which God
may very much favor, and since a weak vessel will bring a man to his Haven,
who sails in a perpetual calm, I cannot see what it prejudices me to admit,
what you say, to be true. For we enquire not what upright honesty will be
satisfied with, but how to convince wrangling obstinacy? and how to be able to
allay, or at least live in those storms of doubts, which, either our own too
curious natures, or the malice of others is sure to raise in a multitude,
especially such a one as Providence has made us parts of.

. 7. I see not what Objections can destroy this, and wonder to read in some of
your disputing against us such expressions as these; No cause imaginable could
avert our will from giving the function of Supreme and sole Judge to holy writ,
if both the thing were not impossible in it self, and if both Reason and
Experience did not convince our understanding, that by this Assertion
contentions are increased and not ended. We acknowledge holy Scripture to be a
most perfect Rule, for as much as a writing can be a Rule, etc. Would you stand
to that, Scripture is a most perfect Rule, as any Rule can be, this Assertion
would soon end contentions between us. Why cannot Scripture be a perfect Rule
without need of unwritten Traditions, to end controversies by? I see not the
impossibility, I would you would be pleased to teach me; All that the Apostles
taught and delivered to their Successors, were all truths, and were they not
sufficient to be a Rule to Judge by, whether written or by word of mouth? I
think all those truths they delivered were a sufficient Rule, for their
Successors could have nothing else to Judge by, except they pretend to an
infallible Spirit; well, then could not all of that truth be written which was
delivered, surely, yea, for I know not any thing one man may speak to another
by word of mouth, but he may write it, therefore it is possible such a
sufficient Rule may be made (I prove now only the possibility) and if it may,
his Assent is due to our Doctrine, because he protests to have no other
imaginable ground, that could avert his will from giving it the function of
supreme and sole Judge.

. 7. The next Paraph opposes a pair of Assertions, which since I know not whose
they are, I hope you will not take it amiss, if I do not engage my self to
defend. It Is well, if I can preserve Mr. White himself from so strong an enemy
as you are. For the Positions themselves I conceive the second absolutely
false, and that a Writing may be contrived with much more perfection, that is
fitness to be a Rule, then the Scripture is. And for the first (though I
conceive it true, as the case stands, so many uncertainties from so many
several causes unavoidably crowding into the writing we have) yet abstractedly
to examine whether a writing may not be framed without them, is a Question so
little to our purpose, that I beseech you give me leave to say no more of it,
then that while we have no better words, nor better skill in ordering them then
yet are known, it is to be doubted no one Book will be exempted from the face of
all, even those which by design are the plainest, as Laws, which no industry
could yet contrive so but that the moot-cases bear a notable proportion to the
resolved ones: As for their discourse, it is agreed that Truths are a sufficient
rule to judge by, provided they be sufficiently, that is, certainly known to be
Truths. It Is also agreed, they may be written; but we deny the sense of that
Writing can always sufficiently be made out by its bare Characters, without
other assistance; and this which yet is our only question, your discourse
takes no notice of, but supposing to be truth, and to be known to be truth, is
the same thing, roves, handsomely indeed, but yet roves.

8. Again, to prove Scripture may be a Supreme rule, to decide all necessary
controversies, I pray answer me, Whether the determinations of your Councils
can end controversies? I suppose you affirm it: Those determinations are
printed by you, to be read by all, and be such a Rule, can they be understood?
I have read of two of your Doctors both present at the Council of Trent, oppose
each other, and allege the decree against each other, so that your
determinations are not always sufficient, no, nor ever can they be, if what you
affirm of Scripture be true, Viz. insufficient to determine: For suppose your
decrees most plain, how shall I be certain this is the meaning of those
determinations, If I cannot, till a further determination come out to explain
the first, I ask again, How I shall be certain that I understand and have the
right meaning of this second? What by another determination again? Why so, I
shall be querying in infinitum, and never be sure, unless I rest in some one
determination which may be sufficiently intelligible to me, to satisfy and
assertain me of the truth, and if Man's writings can be a determination and
sufficient Rule to beget certain truth in me, why not Gods?

. 8. The Parity, you next urge, betwixt Scripture and Councels, I should think
of great force, if there were nothing but the bare letter in both. But in the
former the word is the only interpreter of the sense, in the later, the word is
interpreted by the sense: in the first, the sense is to be accomodated to the
word, in the 2d. the word to the sense. To explicate my self, be pleased to
reflect, That Bishops going into Council, go not to find out a faith which
before they knew not, but to certify that which they already know, Then,
before they agree upon words to express it by, they have in their heads that
which they would express: and when the words are agreed on, they perfectly
know what they mean by them, and in which of the senses, if they be capable of
more than one, they are to be taken in. This they testify by their practice
when they are out of Council, and so leave to their posterity, not only a Rule,
but a Method to preserve it from being wrested by the craft, and perverseness
of their Adversaries. Now in Scripture the case is quite different; There are
none to tell you the sense of the word in question, neither can the word it
self help you, for it is of it you doubt. In our case too, it is interpreted
quite against the common practice, and therefore (which give me leave to hint
by the way) the interpreter ought not to be contented the word may bear his
sense, but must evidently see it can bear no other.

For he that leaves the common practice to which the word may be accomodated,
when his Salvation depends upon the choice, for this that the word may also be
accomodated to another sense, I doubt apprehends but slightly the value of his
Soul, and what it is to be eternally, or happy, or miserable. But this by the
bye. The printed determinations therefore of Councils barely are not our Rule,
but the printed determinations understood and practiced; And were the Scripture
so qualified, I know not what condition it would want necessary to a Rule. In
the mean time the instance of the Tridentine Doctors seems to be as much
against you as a Thing can be: for what possibility of certainty from words,
when the very same are cited in behalf of contradictories; and if a verbal
foundation be found weak in Councils, how can you think 'twill sustain a
building of Scripture? Though in this particular case the accident has nothing
of wonder, since the Council abstaining, as far as I remember, purposely, from
determining either side, and speaking abstractedly, must of necessity leave a
color for both, and a latitude for wit and fancy to work on, and determine
which side they please.

SECT. III. Scripture, critically managed, not sufficient to decide
Controversies.
. 1. THe 3d. Question whether Scripture can determine Controversies? 1. We
affirm not, all possible Controversies of Religion can satisfactorily be
determined by Scripture, neither do I think you dare say they can by your
Traditions, but 2ly. all necessary to Salvation may. In the 15th. Encounter of
the Apol. page 136. Mr. White makes use of an old Objection to disprove
Scriptures sufficiency in general, which truly I should not have thought worth
the taking notice of, did it not come from Mr. White, whom I much honor, and
find more Rational than many others of your Controversy writers I have since
Read; it is this Scripture has not these 1600 years ended Controversies,
therefore it is not a sufficient Rule. 1. He speaks more then he proves of 1600
years. As to the experience since Luthers time, it is plainly false, that not
one point has been resolved by it; that Christ is the Messiah promised, that
through Faith in his name Salvation is to be had, and many others have been,
and are resolved, and agreed unto by Protestants who own not your Traditions;
but what Wonder Scripture does not end the feud between you and us, seeing you
will not be ruled by Scripture as the Supreme Rule to decide by; he might as
well have concluded against traditions, because they have not yet ended the
Controversies since Luthers time between you and us, who does not acknowledge
your Traditions as a supreme Rule to judge by.

1. The next Reason begins with a Question, which as you state it, has no
opposition to the Dialogues, for after they have shown how points of Religion
may be decided, and controversies determined by Scripture, me thinks it should
not be questioned whether that may be done, which they show how it is done. The
difference betwixt you, though you say nothing of it, is of the certainty of
determining Controversies; their Position being, That a discreet and diligent
perusal of Scripture will make a man a perfect Catholic, but not with that
steady firmness as to be able to evince his Religion before a Critical Judge,
against a wrangling and crafty Adversary; and this is your task to oppose, if
you will oppose the Dialogues. To the experience Master White glances at in his
fifteenth Encounter; you answer, he proves not what he says of sixteen hundred
years, which is true; but sure to your second thoughts that place, which
professes not to treat the Question, and only mentions it by the by, will not
seem proper for a large proof: Yet if you desire to see one, his Tabulae
Suffragiales will serve you, where he handles that question largely.

And for what you say, since Luthers time that many points have been resolved
by Scripture, though he speak of Points controverted betwixt Catholics and
Protestants, and so your Position does not directly thwart him, yet I conceive
you are in the wrong, and doubt whether any one point ever have been resolved
amongst the adversaries of the Roman Church merely by Scripture: It Is true,
there are several in which they all agree, and Catholics with them, as those
you instance in; but not because Scripture has reconciled their differences
concerning them, but because they never owned any differences to reconcile.
Consult History faithfully and impartially, and if you find one side ever
plainly convinced another, or generally any other agreement then this, that the
Point controverted belonged not to salvation, and so either part permitted to
keep their own opinion, I shall learn something of you, which yet I am yet
ignorant of. Mean while the points, yon say are agreed, I conceive, are so
only, because they have not been questioned; whereof I take the reason to be
the nature of man, which being accustomed to any one thing, cannot be brought
to the opposite but by degrees and time, a quality which grounds that Maxim,
Nemo repent fit pessionus. So I conceive that Luther, being brought up and
long inured to Religion, though Passion obliged him to renounce some points of
it, yet was withheld by the course of nature from following his Principles
whether they would at last have brought him, into infidelity. His successors
still went farther, and I do not see that where they exceeded him, either
himself in his lifetime, or Scholars after him were able to correct and bound
them by Scripture; but that every one had as fair a plea for deserting him, as
he for deserting the Church: Whether the Clew would have brought him, had he
pursued it far enough, the fifth Monarchy and Quakerism will inform you; which
though perhaps you may look on but as Bastards, and think it strange they
should be laid to his charge, yet I cannot tell any thing should hinder you
from acknowledging them his issue, but their deformity; for they profess
Scripture as much as he, and have by his principles and example as great a
liberty to interpret it. You will say they err in their Interpretation: True,
but so did he, and as long as they follow what seems the truth to them, they do
all that he did; and if that seeming be a Plea for him against possession and
authoty, I see not how you can deny it them. Against some of these, and perhaps
this Labyrinth has many more windings we are yet unacquainted with, it is
possible you may have occasion to dispute some of the points you conceive
agreed of: and till experience satisfy you of the success, you would do well
not to be too confident of the favor of Scripture: In the mean time pray do
not take that for resolved, which was never disputed.

As to what you say, that we refuse to be ruled by Scripture, you do us wrong,
for by acknowledging it the Word of God, we bind our selves to accept
whatsoever can be proved it teaches; so that if it be true, as you say that
your Religion may be convinced out of Scripture, your victory over us is
certain. Nay we have one Copy too, which to us is authentical, and which in
Disputation we refuse not, whereas, when you are pressed you ^lie from one to
another: And how you, that pretend to rely on Scripture, can have fairer play
shown you, then a Book brought, which your Adversary acknowledges to be
Scripture, and professes an absolute obedience, and submission to whatever it
says, indeed I cannot imagine.

Since then nothing more can be required on our sides, pray charge us not with
such injurious scandals; and take it not amiss, if I tell you with that
plainness, which in concerns of the soul, being a duty of Charity, should
never be looked upon as a breach of civility, that what you so loudly call the
Word of God, and with the Majesty of so great a Name, endeavor to dazzle your
adversaries eyes, while in truth you blind your own, proves, when faithfully
and severely scanned, no other thing, but your own mere fancy, to which you
accommodate the outward Word in which the true Word of God is contained, and
because you can do so, break communion with us, because we prefer another
sense, which the words also agree withal, suitable to our constant and
universal practice, and which to leave upon no better inducement, I must
confess I know not how to excuse from downright madness. Moreover, some of our
Controvertists, laying down in condescendence to you, their own assured Arms,
Tradition, have engaged with you at your own weapon, critical handling of
Scripture; of whose endeavors, I am content almost even partiality it self
should be Judge, being very confident no Byas can be great enough to draw a
reasonable nature, so far wide of Truth, as to pronounce us, in that kind of
war, overcome.

When you say Tradition has not ended controversies, you express where the
fault lies, Viz. in that not acknowledging them, it being unpossible that Judge
should end a difference, whose sentence is refused by either of the parties:
But then this is not for want of necessary qualities in him, but submission in
them: We refuse not to make Scripture sole Judge out of fear it should give
sentence against us; we know its sense much better then you, and know it is for
us, and if you think you can convince us by it, do it, we both must and will
submit; but out of fear, by its not giving sentence at all, our dissentions
should never come to an end. We earnestly long to see all the sheep of Christ
quietly seeding again in one fold, and that unhappy wall of division, which so
long has separated them, battered down; and because we do so, cannot but
testify Scripture is no fit Engine to do it: 'Twas to us she was given, not to
you, and we know her efficacy is more in times of peace, then War; that she is
more proper to increase charity, then beget faith; and that being principally
intended to sanctify the faithful, she does ordinarily require they should
first be faithful, that they may afterward be sanctified. Had you the same
disposition to peace, you would either effectually show the Scripture a sit
Judge to decide controversies, critically and frowardly handled, or appeal to
some other: for he that pretends a desire of an end, in order to which he will
obstinately believe those to be means, which both from reason and experience he
may learn to be none, and will not be brought to use other, is convinced to do
no more then barely pretend it.

2. Reason, in things that depend upon it, is often a sufficient rule, yet many
cannot be brought to an agreement by it even in things which are evident and by
others demonstrated; shall we then think it sufficient to disprove it a rule
because some, yea many are not made to accord with it? Mr. White p. 153. grants
the Jews might have been (though they were not) led to Christ and salvation by
Scripture, if they had interpreted it with charity and humility: And p. 110.
However the marks of the Church are apparent enough in Scripture, if there want
not will in the seeker to acknowledge them: If this be not to contradict himself
I know not what is. To ill-disposed or undisposed refractory minds nothing is
sufficient. I see a monstrous difficulty for you to understand Scripture
aright, who are resolved to make no other sense, then what agrees with your
supposed Traditions.

2. That which I conceive to be the drift of this Paragraph, Viz. That it is
perhaps more often, the fault of the parties, then of the Judge, that
differences are kept alive, is certainly true: But you apply it not, neither,
as we think, can you do it with any appearance to conclude we are in fault,
that bind our selves, even in this kind of trial to much stricter conditions
then you will be brought to do. For, besides the reverence we bear the
Scripture, even to an absolute submission to whatever it says, (then which you
neither do, nor can do more) we also bring you a Book, which we so acknowledge
to be Scripture, that in disputation we refuse it not; would you do so much
perhaps more good might be done then is, mean time this is certain, that more
cannot be required of us.

Next you pretend a contradiction from two places which you cite; and I cannot
tell whether you mean those places contradict one another, which nevertheless
seem to say the same thing, or that both those places contradict the former
Doctrine: Now that asserts two things; 1. That Scripture does not speak plain
enough to convince a wrangling Critic. 2. That it does speak plain enough to
satisfy an humble and charitable Reader, in which if you see any
contradiction, you see not only what I cannot, but what I conceive is not
there to be seen.

. 3. Page 137. Mr. White seems to grant (what I cannot tell how he can deny)
that the Scripture is as well able to make us understand its meaning, as Plato
or Aristotle theirs, but the supposition where all the venom lies is concealed
(as he is pleased to phrase it) so the Scripture was written of those
controversies which since are risen; I see no danger in this poison rightly
understood, God delivering those things in Scripture which are sufficient for
salvation, speaks so, that he may be as well understood as Plato, Aristotle,
etc. in their Writings, then the Reader of holy Writ, (that comes to it, as
page 153. the Jews should have done with charity and humility, which would
actually have brought them to the truth) may have the true meaning of Gods
Word, as to the points of faith and practice; Now having the truth, cannot he
see that error which shall aft^rwards arise to be falsehood, because it is
contrary to the truth which he has out of Scripture, linea recta est Judex sui
and obliqui. But strange opinions may spring up, which can neither be proved
nor disproved satisfactorily by Scripture, nor is it necessary all possible
controversies should be determinable, I do not think you pretend to this kind
of Omniscience by your Traditions. I pray tell me, how does your Church confute
new errors, which were not started in the Apostles time, by thinking only that
they are false, or by looking upon those truths, which it pretends the Apostles
at first delivered before those errors came up, which it sees are contrary to
those received truths: unless you pretend to new Revelations to discover new
errors by, and what poison is there in making written truths the straight Rule
to measure future inormities by, more then to make unwritten truth serve for
that end.

. 3. The next Paragraph insists upon the Parity betwixt Scripture, and the
writings of Plato, or Aristotle, touching which, what you say Mr. White seems
to grant, that the one is as well able to make us understand its meaning, as
the other; I must tell you does but seem so, and it is a wonder to me you
observed it not, the very next page, but one, to that you cite, being employed
in showing the way of writing used, by Aristotle, has a great advantage toward
being understood, over that of the Bible. But he denies not but both may be
understood; and that stuff you weave into this Conclusion: That a Reader of
Scripture may come to the truth, and by it judge arising Errors. Pray what is
this against Mr. White; because he may arrive at truth, shall he therefore be
fixed there with that constancy that no subtlety can stagger him? Shall his
Humility and Charity, which introduced him, provide him too with Arms to
maintain the place, and defend it against the assaults of Wit and Malice
leagued together? I see no glimmering of such a consequence; which
nevertheless should have been yours, for, till you are there, your Journeys
end is still before you.

Besides, your foundation, that all things sufficient for Salvation are
delivered in Scripture, meaning the Salvation of mankind, is not firm,
especially making, as you do afterward, every one of the Gospels to contain a
perfect sum of what is necessary to be believed and practiced; for some things,
and those necessary to Salvation, are believed merely upon the account of
Traditions, as the Scripture it self etc. Those strange opinions too; which,
you say, may spring up, may perhaps concern things necessary to Salvation,
which, if they can neither be proved nor disproved satisfactorily by Scripture,
plainly there is not by your method, any satisfaction left us in things
necessary to Salvation.

And for what you urge last, that written truths may be as straight a Rule as
unwritten ones, it is true, provided they be agreed on to be truths; But the
question is not whether written truths will convince a rising error, but
whether written words will so convince the truths they contain to, whoever
rises up in error against them, that no Artifice shall be able to pervert their
fidelity, and introduce another sense into the same sounds. An instance may
make the thing clearer. Let the Church, before Arius, have had no better weapon
to defend her faith of the Consubstantiality of the Father and Son, then these
and the like words. Ego and Pater unum sumus: and you will make me much wiser
then I am, if you render it possible she should preserve her self from being
overcome by the craft of that Heretic, who would have proved at least
plausibly, as Heretics used to do, by the Rule of conferring one place with
another, that those words ought not to be understood of an unity of Substance;
since our Savior elsewhere prays his Apostles may be one, as his Father and he
are one; which evidently contradicting a substantial unity, The former words
ought to yield to these plain ones, Pater major me est. 'Twas not then by those
words, but by the sense of them, so firmly rooted in her practice, that neither
the wit, nor power of Arius, joined with a perverse and lasting obstinacy,
could shake it, that she decided the controversy, and transmitted sound
Doctrine to her posterity; She saw his interpretation contradicted her sense,
delivered by Christ and his Apostles, and continued by Tradition, but no body
could see it contradicted the words, which his wit made as favorable to him as
her. By which very same Method (to answer your Question in your own words) I
conceive the Church would at this day confute new errors, viz by looking upon
the truths first delivered by the Apostles, and since preserved by her
practice, not the words in which they were delivered. To sum up your Paraph
therefore in short, it is true, that Linea recta est judex sui and obliqui; It Is
true, that truth is linea recta t^ It Is true also, that the Reader, duly
qualified, may by due reading Scripture come to truth; but that this truth will
be enough to serve all the exigencies of all mankind, in all circumstances, or
that what satisfied his sincerity and diligence will be able to satisfy all
manner of peevishness and obstinacy, are two Positions, which I see you have
not, and think you cannot prove. There is no doubt but truth ought to judge,
which is the thing you do say: But if there be a doubt which is truth, I
conceive bare words, which were perhaps sufficient to discover hers to charity
and humility, will not be able to convince her against malicious craft and
pride; which is what you should, but do not prove.

4. If words would affright a man, Mr. White does it by search after evidence
of Argument. In the same page 137. he requires any one Book in the whole Bible
whose Theme is now controverted; he mentions S. John's Gospel, which was to show
the Godhead of Christ, but that is not so directly (says he) his Theme as the
miraculous life of our Savior, from whence his Divinity was to be deduced. And
page 153. John intended only such particulars as prove that Christ was God, in
which later expression if he do not seem (as to me he does) to contradict his
former, the former making S. John's intent a History, the latter a Discourse
only (as his word is) of a controversal truth.

4. The contradiction you glance at here, will not, even with your assistance,
so much as seem such to any diligence of mine; and since I cannot overcome it,
I must beseech you to pardon that dullness which will let me see but one sense
in these two expressions: Viz. S. John wrote the miraculous life of our
Savior, so as his Divinity might be deduced from it, and S. John in his
History specifies such particulars as prove the Divinity of our Savior.

5. Yet this he clearly says, S. John made an Antidote against that error, then
beginning, yet (as he) the design so unsuccessful, that never any heresy was
more powerful, then that which opposed the truth intended by his Book, whence
he seems to infer, Scripture no sufficient Rule to decide, because the Arians
were not silenced by it. I demand why the Arians were not convinced by that
Book written on purpose to oppose that error which they held, by a very large
discovering the contrary truth; was it because there was not evidence enough of
that truth, which S. John only intended in his whole Book; surely you must say
so, and then I pray consider what you say, whether it be not imputing weakness
to S. John, or to the Holy Ghost writing by him, quod horrendum, that he should
set himself to write a whole Book in which (as Mr Whites words are) he intended
only such particulars as prove that Christ was God, and yet not prove it
sufficiently: If S. John did prove it sufficiently, why were not the Arians
convinced by it; surely the fault was not in the want of evidence of those
miraculous actions (which, our Savior says, prove him to be the Son of God,
and one with the Father) but in their wills, I say it was their own fault; so
then notwithstanding all Mr White has said, I conclude the Scripture may be a
sufficient means to decide controversies by, although refractory minds be not
silenced by it. Neither has God promised that obstinate opposers of truth,
shall have any means of truth made effectual to them.

5. To the difficulty of the following Paragraph, because you propose it by
demands, I shall answer by Replys: and to the first, Why the Arians were not
convinced by that Book, I answer, because 'twas a Book, that is, a multitude of
words, which having no Interpreter to protect them, could not preserve
themselves from being wrested into senses different from what was meant by the
Author. Was there not then, say you, Evidence enough of that truth? Yes, to
humble Seekers; but to convince it to the Arians, no; Evidence and Conviction
(taking them severely) are things above the reach of mere words. But this
imputes weakness to S. John, or rather the Holy Ghost; why so? put a Reed into
a Giants hand, and because with it he cannot cleave an Oak, is he therefore
weak? a feeble instrument is no argument of the feebleness of him that uses it:
Now words I take to be very weak, and they cease not to be words, whoever he be
that employs them; not but that S. John, or rather the Holy Ghost by him, which
I think, you will not deny might have managed them much better, and made a much
nearer approach to evidence, had he so pleased, or that been his aim. I see men
write plainer every day, and God forbid I should think they understand the use
of words better than he that gave them the power to understand. Neither dare I
attribute the contrivance of the Book to chance or imagine the works of God to
be directed by any thing but his own infinite wisdom and providence. Whence
then the obscurity of that book? Truly I am not of Council with the Divinity:
but believe I may safely assert thus much, that since the Holy Ghost knew what
you would object, and yet chose that manner of writing, he meant you should see
that book was not intended for a Judge of differences in Religion, to which he
refused to give all the qualities necessary for a Judge, and which even a book
is capable of.

To this I foresee you will object, that at least S. John cannot be excused
from the weakness of making choice of a means by which he knew his end was not
to be arrived at; and that to write against Corinthus when he was conscious his
writing could not prove his intent, was not only unnecessary, but hurtful. To
which I reply, he writ so, as abundantly to prove his intent, in that manner as
he designed to prove it, but his intent was not that his writing should be a
proof, contentiously and frowardly scanned, but humbly and diligently studied.
In the former way he had left them a much better weapon both to defend
themselves, and overcome their Adversaries, then words can be, namely that
which S. Paul commands us to desert upon no inducements, no nor even of an
Angel from Heaven; but besides this, for the superabundant comfort and strength
of the faithful, he added also a confirmation of their faith by writing,
intelligible enough, at the time, and to the persons he writ, when every body
knew what it was which Cerinthus objected, and his followers insisted on, and
consequently knew how to apply the Physic to the disease, and plainly see his
pretenses overborn by the Apostles authority. But now the case is quite
different. To say nothing of the alteration of words and the great change which
so much time, must needs make, in the Phrases, and manner of speech, our
Intelligence of that Heresy is faint and dim, and to expect we should
comprehend what was written against it, equally with those ages which
flourished with it, is to make him, that has hardly any knowledge of the
disease, as cunning in the cure, as that Doctor whose charge the Patient is;
The Apostles Gospel, therefore, was, in those circumstances, plain enough by
the letter, to those to whom he writ, but to us so dark, that except we look
upon it with the spectacles of Tradition, or other helps, we have no security
of penetrating its sense; though even to them it was not so clear, but that it
was wrestible (and much more in the time of Arius) to malicious subtlety and
wit, which Heretics never want. But then those Heretics, not the Scripture,
were in fault, say you; and no body doubts but that Heresy and fault are
inseparable: But whether they be in fault or no, the Church ought to be
furnished with Arms to defend her self against all sorts of Enemies, and not,
till they cease to be in fault (when they will also cease to be her enemies) be
left ungarded; she must be provided as well to confound the proud, as confirm
the humble: And this first quality is that which we deny to Scripture, and if
you only attribute to it the second, you oppose not us, neither do I know why
we should oppose you.

But God has not promised that obstinate opposers of truth, shall have any
means of truth made effectual to them. Very true, but he has promised the gates
of Hell, in which I doubt, these obstinate men cannot be denied to stand, shall
not prevail against his Church; and I understand not how they can be denied to
have prevailed, if that, which you would make her only guard, uncertain words,
being by their craft seduced into a compliance with them, they may as plausibly
object obstinacy to the Church, as she to them. For that and constancy are
distinguished only by their alliance, or enmity with truth, and if truth cannot
be made appear, as you say to obstinate men, God has not promised it shall,
neither can it, whether be the obstinate opposers, they or the Church. Besides,
to bate those inseparable companions of Heresy, Pride, Obstinacy, consider
what will, in your principles, become of sincere, but sharp understandings,
people that are not yet faithful, nor ever were obstinate, but always witty;
who look upon disputes in Religion without concern of any thing, but truth, but
look that what themselves accept for truth, be truly such, and will not be put
off with counterfeit ware, and take, in stead of truth, the partial
construction of either side. Neither will they be denied, neither can justice
deny them, but that they should first see the truth, before they be pressed to
embrace it: Now, that Truth be seen to be truth, it is plainly necessary that
there be no possibility of falsehood; there being no contradiction in the world
more manifest then that the same thing, should, at the same time, be possible
to be false, and evidently true, that is, impossible to be false.

It Is equally plain that, where there is nothing to make out the truth, but
words, if those words be made agree to two senses, neither can be made out to
be truth; for you put but one cause, and that producible of both effects. That
one may sometimes, seem the more proper, is nothing to the purpose: For, besides
that to offer plausibility to those who look after truth, and can discern it,
is to go about to allay hunger with steam in stead of meat, it is agreed by all
parties, that many times the improper acception is the true one: So by
first-begotten in Mat. 1. we both understand only begotten, which nevertheless,
are in rigor very different, and it is the same of many other and universally
of all mystical places.

To apply all to our case, can you deny but that he, who sees the thing may be
false, does not see it is true, and consequently that to accept it for truth,
is to wrong his nature? Conformably to your Maxim in the 2d Part, That no man
must give assent without sufficient evidence? Can you deny, that amongst all
the differing Sects of Christians, there is any one which does not, in whatever
place of Scripture you urge against them, find a sense favorable to
themselves, which they make the words tolerably bear? Can the charity, you
claim, suffer you to say, there is no sincerity, no wit, but in your own party,
and deny there are amongst the Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Independents, etc.
persons, as sincere as your selves, as desirous of truth, who search and pray,
and yet differ? if none of all this can be denied, consider what a desperately
wretched principle it is, according to which there is no effectual means of
truth provided, not only for obstinate opposers, but neither for earnest
pursuers of it? And since, without the truths we speak of, there is no
salvation, and they are not to be had without being seen to be truths, and your
principle will not let them be seen, being applicable also to falsehood, it is a
plain case, that according to it these men, that is the most considerable part
of mankind, if not in number, at least in value, must be either Infidel, or
irrational, either eternally miserable men, or not men in their most important
actions, for certainly who acts against reason, is so far not man, but beast.

6. I think Mr White p. 139. does but beat the air in requiring Gods written
Word (if it be to decide) to proceed artificially or scientifically; Let the
Almighty have liberty to deliver himself as he please, I think the learned
and acutest have cause to bless his Majesty, that he will stoop to meanest
capacities (intending his Law for all) that so the greatest (if the mean may)
might more easily understand his oracles and pleasure; that very thing Mr.
White thinks wanting in Scripture to the making of it a sufficient Rule to
decide, St. Paul glories in, as most suitable to the highness of divine
mysteries, which scorn (rather then they will be beholden to) the props of
humane wit and invention. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. I came not (says
the Apostle) to you with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, declaring unto
you the testimony of God, my speech and my preaching was not with enticing
words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and power, that your
faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God, etc. The
demonstration of divine truths was given in plain language, without humane
arts, (though St. Paul had them) yet all the Apostles were not so, some being
illiterate plain Fishermen; as was their writing, such was their preaching, for
we have some part of their discourses penned, which were accomodated to vulgar
capacities to whom they preached. I ask whether they did not sufficiently
demonstrate divine truths to their people in plain language? if not, then they
did not leave the Gospel evident enough, if they did, then we have a sufficient
demonstration of divine truths, although the Bible be not written logically,
and its plainness hinders it not from being a sufficient Rule to decide or
know truths.

. 6. I do not find that Mr. White, in the place you cite, ties Almighty God to
such strict conditions: in saying no more then that writings, penned according
to the severity of science, are more easily understood, then such as are
written loosely without connection; and this I think you deny not. The second
^^^^^gue indeed, out of this, that the Scripture is not written in a method
necessary to deliver a judging Law, gathers it was not meant by God for such.
But this consequence you do not, and I think the candid ingenuity you are
Master of, will not suffer you to oppose. What you cite from the Apostle I
cannot imagine which way you will draw to your assistance. The whole place is
expressly of preaching and speech, writing not so much as once glanced at, and
how Scripture should be proved to be sole Judge of controversies from thence
where it is not either named or thought of, I profess my sight is too short to
discover; your self seem to make use of it against your self, when you say that
if they did sufficiently demonstrate divine truths to their people in plain
language, then we have sufficient evidence of them. True, but not by the Bible,
for 'twas not by writing but by preaching they taught the people, and it is by
adhering to what they so taught that we also, whom personally they did not
teach, come to have sufficient evidence of divine truth (...).

. 7. I (...) that, as Acts 2. etc. and Acts 18.28. Apollos mightily convinced
the Jews, and that publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ,
so that Scripture affords sufficient Arguments, to prove even most material
points sufficiently, although obstinate opposers, as the Jews, are not
silenced, It will be an aggravation to their punishment that will not be
convinced by Scripture evidence, and I see not how it can deserve punishment,
if there be not evidence enough to convince.

. 7. What you may urge out of the Acts know not: what I can find of my self, I
am sure makes nothing against me. For the example of Apollos, no body doubts,
but arguments may be drawn out of Scripture with mavelous efficacy. You know
the Dialogues hold Catholicism may be victoriously evidenced to be more
conformable to Scripture than Protestancy by arguments purely drawn from the
Text, without extrinsical helps: and what they hold may be done against you, I
conceive was the very thing Apollos did against the Jews, not that he pretended
Scripture was the only foundation of Faith; The place will not be drawn to any
such meaning, and we know our Savior tells the Jews his works give testimony
of him, and that they should believe the works, and not believe him without
them; Now I imagine, that to this evidence of miracles when the Jews opposed
the Authority of Scripture, pretending those could not be the works of God,
which justified a Doctrine contradictory to the word of God, Apollos took away
this pretense, by showing his doctrine not only not contradictory, but much
more conformable then theirs, and this I apprehend was the sense of the
Controversies between them. Now if in this universal liberty of prophesying
which this age affords us, only my interpretation do not yet pass for
current, be pleased to reflect, no necessity of answering your argument obliges
me to rely upon it, to which it is enough to say, that no such thing as you
intend appears in the place you cite. That the not being convinced, will be an
aggravation of punishment to the Jews in this sense, that the pride, and
blindness, caused by it, which hinders them from coming, by an humble reading,
to such a degree of truth, as they might, is a fault for which they shall be
punished, I readily grant; but that their punishment shall be aggravated, or
they at all punished for not finding a rigorous evidence there where it is not,
is a fancy in which I cannot perceive any color of appearance.

. 8. In the 16. Encounter page 151. Mr. White answers that 5th. John, brought
to prove Scripture was sufficient to Salvation without Tradition, why else did
God command Moses to write those Laws he had given, if that written word was
not a perfect Rule, which he commanded to be kept so carefully, and to be read
continually, 31. Deuteronomy. 9, 10, 11. and to be copyed out for the King, as Deuteronomy.
18.19. to read therein all the days of his life, unto which God would have no
addition, because it was a perfect Rule, and therefore when the Scribes and
Pharisees, would needs bring in their Traditions, as you do, to make void the
Law of God, you know what our Savior denounced against them; Now though we
prove the sufficiency even of one Book of Scripture, for to be a sufficient
rule to salvation, we are far from contradicting our selves, as though by that
reason all the rest (every one of which is profitable) might be burnt: For thus
I argue, if one single Gospel be a sufficient rule to salvation, much more are
all the Books of the Bible sufficient without your Traditions.

8. The places which here you cite out of Deuteronomy seem little to the
purpose: Your premises, That God commanded his Laws to be written, to be kept
carefully, and read continually, to be copied out for the King, etc. being so
vastly distant from the Conclusion, Viz. That the written Word was a perfect
Rule, that my dullness cannot see any approach between them; all this we see
practiced in our Laws, in which notwithstanding we also see a manifest
necessity of an Interpreter: That God would therefore have no addition, because
it was a perfect Rule, is a reason for which you are perfectly beholding to
your own invention, and which in things of this concern, you would do well not
to trust over-far, at least you will pardon an Adversary if he do not.

As for the Scribes and Pharisees, who you say, brought in their Traditions to
make void the Law of God, when our cases are alike, I shall think you do us no
wrong to rank us with them. But you will be pleased to stay till we do make
void the Law of God; for while we confess that the Word, whether written or
orally delivered, is the Law, and only enquire after the meaning of the first,
which when understood, we profess an entire submission to, I conceive we go not
about to make void, but to fulfill the Law; for certainly the wrong sense of
the Law is not the Law, and as certainly that cannot be the right sense, which
sets the two words, whereof neither can vary from truth, at variance one with
another. But to look into the thing, their Traditions have nothing of common
with ours but the Word, which will inform you how dangerous a foundation words
are, when by the same sound are expressed things most different. Tradition with
us signifies a public delivery to a multitude, so as what was so delivered was
settled in their understanding, and rooted in their hearts by a constant visible
practice. Their Tradition was a close underhand conveyance from a few to a few,
neither so many, nor so honest, as to be secure from mistakes, both accidental,
and wilful, and yet the cheat, if any happened, remaining by the secrecy
undiscovered; so that nothing more apt to make void the Law of God then such a
Tradition as this: Whereas, since it cannot be denied, but that what was orally
delivered by Christ and his Apostles to their Disciples, and by them practiced
was the Law of God, you must either say we have violated their practice, (which
since we affirm it to be our rule, you cannot fairly do, without evidencing
what you say) or you will have much ado your selves to avoid the imputation you
lay upon us: for evidently the Law is made void, as much by contradicting the
unwritten, as the written word; Now if we practice what the first Disciples,
and their Successors did, and what they practiced was the Law, clearly he that
contradicts our practice cannot refuse the company of the Scribes and
Pharisees: So that while by going no farther then the empty sound, you fancy
us near the gulf they were swallowed up in, your judgment, fixed upon the
thing, and not diverted by the juggling noise, will find your selves are deep in
it.

I cannot leave this Subject without admonishing you of a piece of foul play in
the Translation of the Bible, I have heard objected to your side, and which
possibly may have had one effect upon your self: It Is that Traditions being
sometimes commended, sometimes reprehended in the Scripture, though the
Original word be the same in both cases, yet the Translation varies it so, as,
when it is taken in an ill sense, to render it by the Word Tradition; when in a
good, always to make use of some other: An Artifice which, if true, argues much
want of sincerity in the Translators, and brings much hazard to the Reader; The
avoiding of which is the true reason the Church forbids the use of Scripture in
Vulgar languages.

For the rest I cannot see, but he that says, This is sufficient to salvation,
says, more then this is not necessary, and by consequence, Salvation would not
be concerned, if that more were not. What you mean by Profitable, I cannot
tell: if this that some persons find in some books what they would not in
others, then evidently those books are necessary to those persons: if only
that their Faith is confirmed, or strengthened, either this strength is
necessary to Salvation at least for some, and then again the books are
necessary for them; or unnecessary, and then what prejudice to Salvation if
they were burnt? So that I doubt your fancy was too much possessed with the
sound, to give your judgment leisure to examine the notions of the word. Your
consequence, if one be sufficient, all are more then sufficient, is certainly
good, but you know we deny, what you must next subsume, conceiving that neither
one, nor all are sufficient.

. 9. Our Savior in that 5th. of St. John, does not Reprehend the Jews (as Mr.
White seems to intimate) for seeking Salvation out of Scripture, where it is to
be had, but tacitly (by that, you think you have it there) implies, they were
mistaken, and did presume they had it, who had it not by their own fault for
want of conforming to it; David often terms the Law of God perfect, 19. Psa.
7. etc. the Law of God is perfect converting the Soul, the testimony of the
Lord is sure, making wise the simple: therefore our Savior sends the Jews to
the Scripture (which was sufficient to have taught them, had they been duly
qualified with Charity and Humility, else he should have sent refractory
Adversaries to an insufficient means in vain) to learn and be convinced of that
most material truth, that he was the Messiah. I observe Mr. Whites note on the
place, Scripture Testimony is put in the last place, not (as he) as the weakest
argument, it is not usual to set the weakest, but rather the strongest argument
in the last place, therefore the third place does not disparage Scripture; St.
Peter seems to be of a contrary mind to Mr. White, 2 Pet. 1.19. speaking before
of the miraculous voice, subjoynes, we have also a more sure word of Prophecy,
etc. Surely St Austin is clearly of this mind, as you may see hereafter, that
the written word is a surer Testimony, than Miracles.

. 9. You except here against Mr. Whites answer to the 5th. of St. John, but
wherein consists the force of the exception, and weakness of his answer,
indeed I cannot comprehend. Our Savior, say you, does not reprehend the Jews,
as Mr. White seems to intimate, but tacitly implies they were mistaken, etc.
But why should not our Savior reprehend them, whom you acknowledge by their
fault and mistake worthy of reprehension? Again what does tacitly implying
they were mistaken, and this by their own fault, differ from, at least, a
tacit, that is a seeming reprehension; so that your exception seems to consist
in saying the very same thing with him you except against. But, what is of more
importance, what is all this to the purpose? The place is brought to prove
Scripture sufficient, in the way mentioned, to Salvation: All that concerns the
question of this place, is that the Jews thought they had life in the
Scriptures, but so, as you acknowledge, that they were mistaken and had it not;
now let that be the Antecedent, and they must be strange Magical Chains, that
will tie the Conclusion to it, and make a good argument of this, The Jews had
not life in the Scriptures, ergo Scriptures are sufficient to Salvation. 'Twas
indeed their own fault they had it not, and I doubt not but an humble and
charitable diligence would have found in them the important truth our Savior
was insisting on; But to make good the conclusion, it is not enough one point
may appear to industry and piety, but that all may so appear as to be
victoriously maintained against obstinate and crafty peevishness.

The Attributes of perfection given by David, none doubts to be justly due to
the Law of God: But what is justly due to it, I conceive injustice to attribute
to any thing which is not it. Now Scripture contains, but is not the Law: and
as we are far from the Blasphemy of suspecting any imperfection in the Law it
self, so the place is as far from any opposition to us; for our question is not
of the perfection of the Law, (none but Atheists or Infidels question it,) but
of the perfection of the Letter in order to determine Controversies. This we
deny, and deny also these places concern our difference. For Mr. Whites note, I
conceive the place of an Argument too inconsiderable a dispute to take up many
thoughts: only this is clear, that our Savior, before he mentions Scripture,
appeals to the Testimony of John, and his Father, and seems to reprehend the
Jews for not yielding to them: which argues the consideration of Scripture was
brought in more for superabundant condescendence, than necessity. And for. St.
Peter, it would be easy, by explicating the sense of the place, to show he is
far from being of a contrary mind to Mr. White: but, it being not proper for an
Answerer, to go farther than his Opponent leads him, till you express where
his seeming contrariety lies, give me leave to assure you there seems no such
thing to me; and in the mean time to desire your serious reflection on the
words next following, that Scripture is not of private interpretation, lest
while you pretend St. Peter contrary to Mr. White, your self become contrary to
St. Peter. S. Austines mind, when you make good your promise to show it me, I
promise you shall see mine concerning it.

SECT. IV. The two places, 20. Jo. and 1. Luke. No proof that the written word
is a sufficient means for the Salvation of Mankind.
. 1. THe first place of Scripture which Mr. White cannot hinder proving the
Scripture a sufficient means for Salvation and Rule to decide all necessary
Controversies, is the 20th. chap. and two last verses of the Gospel of St.
John, where be gives us an account of his Gospel, I say of his Gospel, and how
could he entitle it the Gospel, if it were but a part of the Gospel of Christ;
does he delude the world in the very first word and title, to call that the
Gospel which is but a little part of it; if there be not all the essential
parts of the Doctrine necessary to Salvation, in each of the Evangelists, as
St. Matthew, and St. Mark, The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, Mat. 1.1.
It was not his whole business to set down the Genealogy, that is but the 8th.
part of the Book, but the Life and Doctrine of our Lord and thus S. Mark
begins, The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and so he goes on to lay
down all the necessary actions and doctrines of salvation; Can you imagine they
should set themselves to write half a Gospel, John 20. latter end, S John
confesses there were many other things done by our Savior which he had not
written, because they were too many to be written, but he has taken as many of
them as are sufficient for us, if we make the right use of them to bring us to
salvation.

1. You argue next from the word Gospel, and pretend the world would be
deluded, if all the essential parts of the Doctrine necessary to salvation,
were not contained in every one of the Evangelists. But, I beseech you delude
not your self into a belief that the word signifies more then it does. I am not
Critic enough to derive the English word, which however would prove little
more then impertinent labor; but I have been taught the Latin, or rather Greek
word Evangelium, signifying Originally, no more then good or happy News, or
rather the reward given to whosoever brought such news, is by Ecclesiastical
use appropriated to the best and happiest, Viz. that of the way to eternal
happiness; now I beseech you, cannot a man tell news, except he te^l all he
know? Or is not that to be called new, which leaves untold any thing belonging
to the same subject? To argue therefore, that because S. John's Book contains
news concerning the way to Heaven, therefore it contains all that concerns our
way to Heaven seems very unreasonable; but what is more, it is also nothing to
the purpose: For were it granted that all things necessary to salvation were
contained in every of the Gospels, it would not follow they were so contained
as is necessary, that is, accompanied with evidence enough to guide mankind
securely through all vicissitudes to happiness, and yet no less is requisite to
make Scripture the only rule of faith.

To the Question you make in the last place, whether the Evangelists can be
imagined to have written half a Gospel? I conceive your very next words are an
answer; for I beseech you, had S. John written those many things which their
multitude made him omit, had they not all been Gospel? So that whatever
proportion they bear of, or or to the things written, this is certain, he did
not write all the Gospel he knew. Yes, but he writ say you, all necessary to
salvation, you say so, but will not take it amiss, if your bare Assertion have
not the force to oblige every one to think so, against the plain signification
of the word you ground it upon: For, necessary to salvation, is not, as I said
before, that which the word Gospel imports.

. 2. Mr White answers to the place first, S. John's writing was not to make a
complete History of our Saviors acts and doctrine; but only to specify such
particulars as prove that Christ was the true consubstantial Son of God; to
assert is not to prove S. John intended only, etc. It may be as easily denied,
as affirmed; that's like an obstinate Sophister, that intends not truth, but to
say somewhat only to stop his adversaries mouth, a sign of a bad cause; It is a
sufficient confutation of any new Assertion to prove it has no ground, I see
none imaginable Mr White builds his Assertion on, unless he has some he does
not express, which would be strange in this weighty matter, but possibly that
Assertion of S. John's sole intent to prove Christ's Diety (without which back
door he cannot evade the force of the Argument) is built upon the 31 verse of
that 20 Chapter, but these things are written (by me for this intent) that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God; but if you will give me
leave I will prove the contrary with as much probability (and I think
certainty) out of the same Text not dis-jointed (as Mr White makes use of it to
force a false confession) but taken wholly those things are written (by me for
this end) to bring you to salvation by your believing or entertainining the
Gospel, that Christ is the Messiah, for which end I have given you here those
things that are requisite to beget such a saving faith in you, although I might
have written more, I have not, contenting my self with those which are
sufficient, for what end? ^. To show you only in a speculative way that Christ
is God? No, that would not save, but that you may believe Jesus is the Christ
the Son of God, and that believing you might have life through his name; their
having life seems rather to be his chief end because it is in the last place,
quod est ultimum in executione est primum in intention; or if you will begin
at the other end, the words do not show it St. John's chief design, to prove
Christ the Consubstantial Son of God, for thus they run, that ye might believe
that Jesus is the Christ ( or Messiah) the Son of God, that is the Savior of
the World, who was to come, that you may be saved by him.

. 2. You next except against the answer Mr. White gives to the 20th. of John;
and first, that he asserts, but proves not, which you say is a sign of a bad
cause, a trick of an obstinate Sophister, etc. But pray recollect your self,
and remember an Answerer that goes about to prove, goes beyond his bounds: To
affirm, deny, or distinguish, is the whole Sphere of his activity. And when you
say it is a sufficient confutation of a new assertion to show it has no ground;
you say very true; but pray take along with you, that your assertion of
Scriptures sufficiency to the effect we speak of, is the new assertion, unheard
of in the world before Luther; and an interpretation of this place in favor of
it, every jot as new; no such sense having ever been thought of, till the
necessity of justifying an unreasonable Tenet, forced as unreasonable an
explication. If you please, prove your ground, and do not take it for granted
till it be disproved. When you have done so, show this, which you call a new
assertion of Mr. Whites, has no ground; for before, sure you ought not to think
it, sufficiently confuted. Till then I cannot see why it should be a sign of a
bad cause to believe the Apostle, and take his word when he tells us the design
of his writing was that we might believe the Divinity of the Son. But you can
prove the contrary with as much probabilities out of the same Text: if you do
no more, Mr. White has done as much as he should do* for if both explications
be probable, his Adversary has concluded nothing against him. But you think you
can prove it with certainty; let us see whether it be rational for me to think
so; and first, after you have quarrelled with Mr. White for dis-jointing the
Text, (as I conceive very ungroundedly, when, except this word, Christ, which
is not any way material, he cites the verse truly) your self, instead of
setting it together again, deliver, not the Text, out of which you undertake to
conclude, but a large Paraphrase upon it, and this without telling us whether
it be your own, or recommended by any authority, or in fine any ground why we
should accept it, and, of which, nothing is certain, but that it is not the
Text; and This you call certainty. Pray Sir Remember, to assert, is not to
prove, Remember it may be as easily denied as affirmed, Remember obstinate
Sophistry, and signs of a bad cause.

Next, all the use you make of your Paraphrase is to establish this conclusion,
whose certainty too is by this time relented into seeming, that their having
life seems to be his chief end. Be it so, as I conceive the end of all the
Apostles, not only in their writings, but both their and their Masters end, in
all his actions was the life of Christians: Sure it will not follow their life
needed no other either sustenance or Physic then this Gospel. Be it granted it
is a principal means to this end; that it is the only, or whole means, the
place does not so much as offer any likelihood of asserting; nay, I see not how
the Apostle can, without manifest violence to the Text, be made, to mean more
than the one point he expresses, and the fruit resulting from it; for certainly
it is not to expound, but wrest a Text, when the same word is repeated in the
same period, wilfully to give it one sense in the former, another in the later
place; which, yet, is the case here; for in the first part of the period, the
word believe is so restrained by the Apostle, that it cannot, without
unpardonable guilt, be doubted what it was he meant should be believed, when he
plainly tells us, it is this, that Jesus is Christ the Son of God: and the word
believing presently following, in the same context, and linked to the former
with a conjunction, sincerity cannot imagine it should be meant of any other
belief, than that which, so immediately before, was plainly expressed, that to
repeat it, had been Tautologie. If words therefore can make any thing clear, I
see not what place of doubt there is left, but that this is the Apostles
meaning, that the Book was written to the end we might believe the Divinity of
the Son, and, by that belief, have life, as much as depends upon that one
point; which being the foundation of all our Faith, may perhaps be therefore
said to give us life, because whatever contributes to our life, has dependence
on it; for if Christ be no Son of God, then no sufficient teacher of mankind,
and if no sufficient teacher, then nothing sufficiently taught. Though
otherwise, sure life is not promised more expressly to this faith, then
Salvation to eating his flesh, which nevertheless, I believe you will not say
is enough to Salvation, and consequently should not that, this is enough to
life.

What you say in the last place, that the words do not show it St. John's chief
design to prove Christ the Consubstantial Son of God, how do you prove? The
word Christ, which is all the Text has more than what Mr. White cites, alters
not the case, These two expressions. That Jesus is the Son of God, and that he
is Christ the Son of God, not having any considerable difference, since nothing
is more evident, then that he that believes him to be Christ the Son of God,
believes him to be the Son of God. But I apprehend all this business to be
nothing but the confusion raised in our thoughts, by the equivocation of the
word end, which may either signify what S. John intended to do when he set
himself to write that Book, which I conceive was to show the Consubstantiality
of the Son, or else what fruit he designed from it after it was written, and
this seems to be the life of his Readers.

3. They, to whom he wrote, owned Christ as the Savior, yet he writes to them,
that they might have full knowledge, and a standing monument to preserve that
knowledge. But besides that Mr White has no ground for that fancy, S. John's
design was only to specify such particulars as prove Christ's Dietie, I think
it an unanswerable Argument to show from one Chapter another of the Gospel, how
many particulars there are, that are nothing at all to this only purpose of S.
John, yea more particulars that do no way prove it then that do, as any one
may see that reads over the Gospel; I wonder then how Mr White could shift off
the place by this groundless false Assertion, if it be, as to me it is evident,
then S. John making here (as it is manifest) a recapitulation of all those
Doctrines and Precepts in his Gospel concluding from all, shows us, that his
Book is a sufficient rule to salvation in all things absolutely necessary, the
expression, that believing that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, must needs
be understood as ordinarily it is thorowout the Scripture. He that believes
shall be saved, etc. not of a naked assent of the understanding, but of the
consent of the will too, as the same S. John himself, c. 1.12. As many as
received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God (and now
expounding that receiving of Christ for (...) and Savior, adds) to them that
believe in his name: For this capital truth or Act is big with, or virtually
contains all the rest S. John had delivered in his Gospel, it were improper for
S. John being to comprize all in few words, in this Conclusion to particularize
all, that were to write over the Gospel again; besides its known verba
intellectus denotant affectus else neither this, nor many other expressions of
the like nature in Scripture could be true seeing bare assenting, as Devils do,
saves not.

3. Whether Mr White have any ground for what you call his fancy, I am so
confident of your sincerity, that I dare appeal to your second thoughts, if
you please to reflect, the word only, which you insist upon, seems not more
severely used by Mr White then to signify chiefly, or principally, which may
well consist with many, perhaps the greater number of, other particularities;
as Sir Kenelm Digbies Book was intended only to prove the immortality of the
Soul, and yet far the greater part is spent in the consideration of bodies. And
yet truly I believe, tha^ were S. John's Book examined from Chapter to Chapter,
little would be found but what does either directly prove our Saviors
Divinity, or is subordinate to that end; some accidentals excepted, which the
nature of such discourses requires should be weaved in, and which hinder not
but that the other is the only design.

To proceed, I must take leave to wonder in my turn, you persist to call Mr
Whites Answer a shift, false and groundless, and say no more then you do to
make it appear so. What you next affirm to be evident and manifest, that S.
John making here a recapitulation of all those Doctrines and and Precepts in
his Gospel, concluding from all, shows us, that his Book is a sufficient Rule
to salvation in all things absolutely necessary, if I understand what it is to
recapitulate, and to conclude, is evidently neither manifest, nor true, for
what words are there, that can bear the sense of recapitulating, and concluding
in these short periods: Many other things here are which I have not written,
but those I have, I writ to the end, etc. To recapitulate signifies to sum up
the chief Heads of what was said before, and to conclude is to gather something
from others that went before, and here are neither heads, nor premises, but a
bare Historical Narration informing us what the Apostle did, and why, which
differs as much from recapitulating and concluding, as History does from
Logic. But, what is of more importance, how came you to be so clear sighted,
as where none else can perceive any Conclusion at all, to discover this, That
his Book is a sufficient rule to salvation in all things necessary? That
belief, or faith is to be understood of saving faith (which is all I can
perceive you drive at to the end of the Paraph) is so far from it, that I do
not believe any violence will make a premise of it; for be it as you desire
that the Apostle writ, that we might beleev in Christ the Son of God with a
saving faith, and I dare say no Arithmetic would comprehend the number of
intermedial links necessary to fasten this Conclusion to it, that what he writ
is a sufficient rule to salvation.

4. But what need I trouble my self or you, with writing all I could, I
remember an ingenuous confession of yours, when we were one night discoursing
of this place that you thought the whole Book was not only sufficient for
salvation, but even some parts of it, if a man had no more, which is as much as
I desire.

4. The answer to this Paraph depends upon the memory of that person who made
such a confession: I conceive it true thus far, that even some parts might be
sufficient for the salvation of some single person, extraordinarily dispoposed,
and circumstanced, which in all likelihood was his meaning. But this is nothing
to our Question, whether it be sufficient for the conduct of all dispositions
found in mankind, through all circumstances the Church will be in from the
Resurrection to the day of Judgment.

5. The second place I look upon as a sufficient proof of Scriptures
sufficiency, is the beginning of S. Lukes Gospel, compared with the beginning
of the Acts; In Mr Whites Apology p. 165, 166. where he affirms there is not a
word that this Book should serve for a Catechism, to teach him and all the
world the entire body of Christianity, I think there is, that thou may know
the certainty of those things thou have been taught, or as the Greek word is,
have been Catechized in. So then S. Lukes Gospel contains a perfect sum of all
these Doctrines and duties which Theophilus a Christian already had learnt. To
me this proves S. Lukes Gospel to be a body of Divinity, or a Systeme of all
necessary truths of Christianity, so that S. Lukes Gospel is more then a naked
History of Christ's life, containing his Doctrine too, or else he had not given
Theophilus a full account of all he had been instructed in* To say (as Mr
White) S. Luke speaks but by the by of our Saviors Doctrine, or (as his
words are) some of his excellent sayings, is quite contrary to those words of
the first of the Acts, out of which he gathers his saying, for there he speaks
thus of his Gospel. The former Treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that
Jesus began both to do and to teach, which is more then (as Mr White) some of
his excellent sayings: I lay the stress upon these two words, all and teach,
which Mr White passes over as Commentators do hard places, although it be the
chief thing to be answered: Another thing I observe in Mr Whites translation,
he omits the word perfectly or exactly in the third verse of the Gospel, which
is very pertinent. By all things Jesus did and taught, must be meant the
substance of Christian Religion, the chief Doctrines and duties which were
necessary to salvation, for if any material point were omitted by S. Luke, he
could not allege his exact knowledge in all things which he promises, nor say
as he does in the Acts, that he had delivered all Christ did or taught; from
whence I must conclude (and you too, unless you can show sufficient cause to
the contrary) that S. Lukes Gospel, much more the whole Bible, has sufficient
truth in it, and contains all points necessary to salvation, and may be a
sufficient means, though we have no traditions. The Covenant between God and
man is clearly enough laid down there, and in other Books besides, with all
those things, without which no salvation.

. 5. The second place you insist upon is the beginning of Saint Lukes Gospel,
compared with the beginning of the Acts: which, with your favor, I conceive
you have not brought home to our question; for admit all you say were true,
even the conclusion it self, viz. that Saint Lukes Gospel has sufficient
truths in it, and contains all points necessary to salvation, and may be a
sufficient means, though we have no Traditions; your cause is far from being
evicted, For our question is not so much whether sufficient truths be containd
in scripture, as whether they be contained sufficiently that is with evidence
enough to carry away a clear victory from malicious and obstinate Criticism: So
that it consists very well, that all necessary truths may be contained, which
is all you do say, and yet not so contained as in necessary for that effect,
which is what you should have said. Again, since the same means may be
sufficient for one person, which are not for another, or for all, and
sufficient at one time, not so at another; Your Conclusion that this Gospel may
be a sufficient means without Tradition, comes far short of what it should be,
that it is sufficient to all persons, in all circumstances.

Now I presume the Evangelist writing to Theophilus, with design to instruct
him particularly, the sufficiency you speak of, cannot fairly be stretched
farther then his intent, and be construed to belong to more then Theophilus
himself: And certainly, since every body in the Church is not Theophilus, to
deserve a Gospel should be writ to him, it cannot be expected what was
sufficient for him, should be sufficient for every body else. You see then how
strongly soever your Canon is charged, I conceive the Conclusion safe, as
placed beyond its level. But yet to try the force it has, The first thing you
say against Mr White is, that you think the place shows, the Book was intended
for a Catechism to teach him, and all the world, the entire body of
Christianity, moved by these words, that thou may know the certainty of
these things thou have been taught or catechized in. I beseech you, how does it
appear, that by those things must be understood a body of Christianity? You see
Mr White understands no more by them, then reports he [Theophilus] had heard,
and tells you, if you will urge another sense, you must first justify it
against this. Now evidently writing to let Theophilus know the certainty of
those reports he had heard, is far enough from writing a body of Christianity.
As for the word Catechized, which you seem to rely upon, its original
signification, (if good Grecians have not misinformed me) being most properly
rendered by insono, or infundo, imports no more then a delivery of something by
word of mouth; though since, by Ecclesiastical custom it has almost been
appropriated to the delivery of Christian doctrine:

Now this being since S. Lukes time, what it was that was so delivered to
Theophilus, cannot be gathered from the word. But if that be true, which you
say of Theophilus, that he was already a Christian, I do not see the words can
be brought to bear your sense, since manifestly he could not have been so,
without already being certain of the body of Christianity. So that your
Exposition, makes the Evangelist, very wisely, take a great deal of pains, in
writing a book, to inform Theophilus certainly, of what he certainly knew
before. Mr. Whites interpretation therefore seems much the more genuine, and
yet, even admitting yours, I cannot, as I said before, imagine any approach to
our difference: For St. Luke, expressly confining his design to the instruction
of Theophilus, he that extends it to more, acts manifestly without any Warrant
from him.

You urge afterward the first of the Acts, which, you say Mr. White passes
over as Commentators do hard places. Truly, your severity is beyond what I have
ever met with, and you are the first example of expecting a man should answer
more then is objected: Mr. White is speaking to the Gospel, and these words are
in the Acts, and yet you except against him for taking no notice of them. As
for the difficulty it self, since those words cannot be taken in their proper
natural signification, St. John plainly telling us, the world would not be able
to contain the books which might be written; I do not see any ground you have
to understand by them the substance of Christian doctrine. With submission to
better judgments, I apprehend that by All is meant, all he thought fit to
communicate to Theophilus, that sense seeming to flow naturally from the places
compared together: But whether that interpretation be true or no, I am sure
nothing appears why a man should accept of yours. For whereas you would prove
it out of St. Lukes exact knowledge, that is manifestly nothing to the purpose,
every body seeing it follows not, because S. Luke knew all, therefore he
delivered all.

And for the quarrel against Mr. White, for leaving out the word exactly,
besides that, as I come from saying, it is far from being very pertinent, exact
knowing being much a different thing from exact teaching all he knew, Mr. White
puts in stead of it, that he was present almost at all things, etc. which, in
matters of fact is the most exact knowledge that can be: And for the second
proof, that otherwise he could not say he had delivered All Christ did or
taught, I have already told you, though that word cannot be taken properly, to
signify truly All, yo^ do it wrong to take it so improperly as you do, the
substance of Christian doctrine being a strange English of the Latin word Omne.
But be all this given to the respect of the person, which suffers me not to
pass by any thing you say, without taking notice of it, though otherwise your
Conclusion, which I am now come to, does not any way prejudice the Tenet I am
maintaining; To contain sufficient truths, and to be a sufficient means to
salvation, (which may possibly be true in respect of some persons and
circumstances) being quite another thing, then to decide all quarrels carried
on by factiously litigious persons, and this in all times and cases.

For a conclusion, I beseech you to accept of this observation, that a serious
reflection on what you do your self, would satisfy you, whether party Truth
takes in this question; for whatever force, custom, and a prepossest fancy has
on your words, to make them maintain St. Lukes Gospel alone sufficient, nature
contradicts them so powerfully, that your actions speak the clean contrary, and
plainly prove it is not sufficient: for since you cannot hold, that a sufficient
means to you, which you do not sufficiently know to be a means, and this
sufficiency of the Gospel you do not know without the Acts, which nature forces
you to rely upon, even while you are maintaining you need them not; you see
plainly your words and actions agree not, and that while you would by the
former persuade the sufficiency of the Gospel alone, the later unresistably
convince something else, viz. the Acts, is necessary to its sufficiency, that
is, that it alone is not sufficient.

SECT. V. Answer to those Fathers who are brought for the sufficiency of
Scripture.
MY next Argument for Scriptures sufficiency shall be out of the Fathers, which
Mr White p. 175. thinks improper for us, who will not rely on their Authority
for any one point; what though we receive not from them any authoritative
testimony, yet we embrace a rational one from any, not because they say it,
therefore it is true, but because we see no reason to dis-beleeve, or have
sufficient reason to believe they testify truths, as a Judge collects a truth
from Witnesses, every one of which is a fallible man, yet, by beholding
circumstances, sees their concurrent Testimonies cannot be false; here we have
ground enough to believe, that Scripture was a sufficient rule to them, because
they say and confess it was. I am ready to believe any Tradition as well as the
Bible, provided we have as good ground to believe it came from the Apostles, as
I have of the Bible. Suppose it be not a sufficient argument for us, who
besides have Scripture on our side, yet it is a sufficient Argument against
you, who pretend to derive your Religion from them who went before you, whom
you include in your Church; (as Mr White) If the Bible had once that authority
we plead for, in your Church, it should have it still, the contrary being a
Novelty; therefore I must count your Doctrine false, till you have solved this
Argument. That which was the Rule must be, but Scripture was the Rule, Ergo,
etc.

. 2. First, I must take out of the way your Objections out of those Fathers I
make use of, that they were of your opinion, which you gather out of several
expressions of theirs, as that of Austin (whose and others their words, I have
of late read in your Authors pleading thus your cause) I would not believe the
Gospel, unless the Authority, etc. In which, and all other of their
expressions, we must understand (unless we will say through heat of dispute
they sometimes contradict their own sense plainly delivered at other times)
according to their intent, and so I see not any thing that makes against us, as
that mentioned; Either S. Austin means the Church of all ages, or that present
in which he lived: If that precisely, abstractly without consideration of the
antiquity of it, and its doctrinal succession from the Apostles, his doctrine
had been nothing available against the Manichees, against whom he disputes, for
they might have alleged the authority of their Church, with as good ground
against him, therefore when he alleges the authority of the Church or
Tradition to be a sufficient proof of that which is not contained in Scripture,
he means the universal Tradition of all ages, which was as evident as that of
Scripture tradition, or as clearly derived from the Apostles by universal
Tradition, as the Scripture it self, and such a Tradition I am ready to
embrace: It is clear how high he valued the Churches authority in that lib. 2.
de util. cred. c. 14. This therefore I believed by fame, strengthened by
celebrity, consent, antiquity, so that he did no more than we, who
notwithstanding are of a contrary mind to you.

3. First we believe the things of Religion, because they are published and
held in that Church or place where we live, yet not sufficiently, for that, not
a sufficient ground of belief, because of fame, till the universal celebrity,
consent and antiquity, do strengthen it. He sees not Christ has recommended
the Church for an infallible decider of emergent controversies, but for a
credible witness of ancient Tradition; whosoever therefore refuses to follow
the practice of the Church (understand of all places and ages) in things
clearly descended from Christ, let him be looked upon to refuse Christ; But if
he be understood any where asserting only the present Churches authority
sufficient to determine, it must be in things that are not matters of faith,
that which he proves by tradition, he does not affirm it necessary to
salvation, or things contained in Scripture, for his (Austins) words are
evident.

4. In iis quae aperte posita sunt in sacris scripturis omnia ea reperiuntur
quae continent fidem moresque vivendi, Aug. de doct. Christiana, lib. 2. c. 9.
Nemo mihi dicat, O quid dexit Donatus, aut quid dexit Parm. aut Pontus, aut
quilibet eorum? quia non Catholicis Episcopis consentiendum est, sic ubi sort
fallantur, ut contra Canonicas Scripturas aliquid sentiant. Aug. de unitate
Eccl. c. 10. Again, Ecclesiam suam demonstrarent si possunt non in sermonibus
and rumoribus Afrorum, non in conciliis Episcoporum suorum, non in literis
quorumlibet disputatorum, non in signis and prodigiis fallacibus (quia etiam
contra ista verbo Domini cauti redditi sumus) sed in scripto legis, in
prophetaru^ praedictis in cantibus Psalmorum, in ipsius Pastoris vocibus, in
Evangelistarum praedicationibus and laboribus; hoc est in omnibus Canonicis
Sanctorum librorum authoritatibus, Eodem lib. c. 16. Utrum ipsi Ecclesiam
teneant, non nisi divinarum Scripturarum Canonicis libris ostendant; quia nec
nos propterea dicimus credi debere, quod in Ecclesia Christi sumus; aut quia
ipsam commendavit Optatus Ambrosius vel alii innumerabiles nostrae communionis
Episcopi; aut quia nostrorum colligarum conciliis predicata est, aut quia per
totum orbem tanta mirabilia Sanctorum fiunt, etc. Quaecunque talia in Catholica
fiunt ideo approbantur, quia in Catholica fiunt, non ideo manifestatur
Catholica, quia haec in ea fiunt. Ipse Dominus Jesus cum resurrexit a mortuis,
and discipulorum oculis corpus suum offerret, ne quid tamen fallaciae se pati
arbitrarentur, magis eos testimoniis legis and Prophetarum and Psalmorum
conformandos esse judicavit. Ibidem. Non audiamus haec dico, sed haec dixit
Dominus. Sunt certae libri Dominici quorum authoritati utrique consentimus, ibi
quaeramus Ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam nostram, Eod. lib. c. 23. Chrysostom.
in Act. Hom. 33. Take from Heretics the Opinions which th^^ maintain with the
Heathen, that they may defend their Questions by Scripture alone, and they
cannot stand. Tertullian de Resurrectione carnis. Hierom on Matthew. 23. writing
of an Opinion that John Baptist was killed, because he foretold the coming of
Christ, says thus; this because it has no authority from Scripture, may as
easily be condemned as approved. I might here add Aquinas his words, 1a quest.
36. art. 2. ad 1m. confessing what he had proved out of Dionisius, We are to
affirm nothing of the Holy Ghost, but what we find in Scripture. Thus you will
have Scripture alone (some of you as Mr White confesses) to be the Rule for
some truths, though not for others, which indeed are humane inventions; but I
shall not urge you to maintain all your Doctors affirm (which notwithstanding,
you who build upon authority, have more cause to do then we) Only observe the
Fathers were against you. I proceed to give you more proofs of it.

1, 2, 3, 4. I come now to your Testimonies from the Fathers, and beg leave
before I enter upon them to pause a while upon the State of the Question
betwixt us, that our eye being strongly fixed upon it, may not be diverted by
that variety of Objects, which the many notions found in Testimonies will
present it. You assert, We deny Scripture to be the rule of Faith; Every of
which words deserves its particular reflection, For first, by Scripture is meant
either the words or sense; that is, the words containing a sense, so as that
another may be found in the same words; or else a sense expressed accidentally
by such words, and which might have been expressed by other. By a Rule since
it is our belief must be regulated, and our belief is of things, not sounds, is
understood either a determinate sense, or certain means to arrive at it. We say
then that Scripture, taken the first way cannot be a Rule, nothing being more
evident then that words, merely as such; without due qualifications, which are
not found in all words, are neither sense, nor means to arrive at a determinate
one, since the same words may comprehend many senses. Take Scripture the second
way, and the question is quite changed; none denies the sense of it to be the
word of God, by which all our belief and actions are to be regulated; our
Dispute then in that case, is not whether it be a Rule, but how it is known;
whether by the bare words in which it is couched (which we deny, because other
senses are couched in the very same words) or by the Churches authority
interpreting it by Tradition, which you conceived unnecessary. To Scripture
interpreted by Tradition, or the sense of Scripture acknowledged by Tradition,
we submit all our thoughts and actions, but deny the title of a Rule can belong
to Scripture, taken for the mere words, unsenc't, that is, Characters; and
conceive the sense of Scripture cannot be sufficiently discovered by the bare
scanning of the words, which after all, being capable of many senses, leave it
undetermined which is the true one.

Faith is to be considered either in respect of one, or some few men, or in
respect of a multitude; for since the same cause produces not the same effect
upon different subjects, it is not possible that to every of those many, who are
comprehended in a Church, the same knowledge should be necessary: That there is
a rewarder of good, and punisher of evil, may for ought I can tell be enough
for some extraordinarily disposed creature to know, but mankind requires the
knowledge of much more. Again outward circumstances extremely vary the
disposition of the subject. We live both in calms and storms, and to day a
washing boul will ferry me over the Thames, which Oars perhaps will hardly do
to morrow: Now since he that meets with no rubs seldom stumbles, if the way be
smooth and even, every thing overcoms it; if rugged or deep, it is not passed
without much labor and difficulty. And so the faithful, who live in a deep
peace, need not that strength of certainty, which is necessary for those, who
are assaulted by the outward wars of Heresy, or intestine broils of Schism.

Observe then, if you please, what your witnesses to gain your cause, should
depose for you. That Scripture, taken for the words, teaches the Church, that
is, mankind the way to salvation, so as not to need the assistance of
Tradition, or any other Interpreter, to secure them against all possible
assaults of all possible adversaries; or taken for the sense, that the sense of
Scripture is so known by the bare words, without the help of Tradition, or
other Interpreter, that no subtlety or malice can weaken the certainty it gives
of as much as is necessary for the salvation of mankind. This is what they
should say; What they do, let us now examine. But first you tell us, you
receive not their Testimony as authoritative, but embrace both their and any
other as rational; which is a piece of learning, I should have been not sorry
to have met in an Adversary I had desired to treat like one. To you I can only
say, your difference to those, who mint such adulterate coin, is much greater
then the blind obedience with which we use to be reproached.

Of the two ways of moving assent, Authority and Reason, the one is
distinguished from the other in this, that the first relies upon the credit of
the Proposer, whom, if we be satisfied he is so wise as to know what he says,
and so good, as not to say against what he knows, it is rational to believe, and
lay hold upon the truth he presents us, which we see, with his eyes, not our
own. The second carries us, by the evidence of truth it proposes, barefaced,
and without any consideration of the Proposer, in which way we rely upon our
own eyes, not another man's credit: Wherefore if you will proceed the first way,
by Testimonies, they are only, and so far valuable, as their Author has
authority, and must be either authoritative, or of no force at all: If the
second, it is impertinent to cite an Author for what is considerable, only in
respect of what it is, not in respect of him that said it, for reasons have
weight from their inward virtue, and are neither greater in the mouth of
Aristotle, nor less in the mouth a Cobbler. Neither therefore can authoritative
be separated from testimony, nor rational joined to it; a rational Testimony in
true English, saying a Testimony, which is not a Testimony, but a reason.

Your 3 Paraph too has a very pretty distinction in these terms, that the
Church is is no infallible decider, but a credible witness, whereas these two,
are at least in our subject matter inseparable. For since not infallible says
fallible, and fallible says that which may deceive, and credible says what it is
rational to believe, and nothing is more irrational then to believe what may
deceive the believer, plainly if the Church be not infallible, neither is she
credible. Besides, her power of deciding, in things of this nature, is founded
upon her power of witnessing, she being therefore able to decide, because she
is able to witness what it was which Christ and his Apostles taught her, and
she has till now preserved: in which, if she can credibly, that is, infallibly
witness, she can also infallibly decide; if her testimony be fallible, she
cannot be credible. The rest of what you say, till you come to the Testimonies
themselves, although I do not allow, yet I think not necessary to meddle with,
apprehending the concern of our dispute to be very independent of it. But now
St. Austin tells us, non Catholicis Episcopis consentiendum est, sicubi forte
fallantur, ut contra Canonicas Scripturas aliquid sentiant. Very true, and sure
no body, at least no Catholic Bishop ever pretended to be believed against
Scripture, that is, its sense, concerning which, our contest is how it is known,
and to that the witness says nothing. Again, Ecclesiam suam demonstrent non in
sermonibus, etc. sed in Canonicis librorum authoritatibus: And, utrum ipsi
Ecclesiam teneant non nisi divinarum Scripturarum Canonicis libris ostendant:
Lastly, non Audiamus haec dico, sed haec dixit Dominus, etc. ibi quaeramus
Ecclesiam, etc. In which three places he challenges his Adversaries, to prove
their cause by Scripture, a course, not only commendable in him, but practiced
daily by us. Several of our Books will witness for us, we are so far from
thinking our cause lost by Scripture, that we know it infinitely superior even
in that kind of trial: but what is this to the purpose? Because St. Austin then,
and we now, know the advantage Scripture gives us above all our Adversaries,
does therefore either he or we think the bare words of it are our Rule of
faith, or that its sense needs no other means to be found out, but the bare
words? These Sir are our only Questions, but not so much as thought on by the
Judges you bring to decide them. The place you bring from his Doct. Christ.
seems more to the purpose, but yet comes not home; it being violence to extend
it farther then private Readers, and these qualified, as he expresses, with
piety, humility, and fear of God: pietate mansuetis, (as his words are) de
timentibus Deum, piously meek, and fearing God. And of these it is also Mr.
Whites opinion, that the Scripture is plain enough to make them perfect
believing Catholics. But that it is able to contest with captious frowardness,
and those crooked dispositions which accompany Heresy, or satisfy the nice
sharpness of sincere, but piercing wits, or that the plainness, he speaks of,
ought to be understood with respect to the exigencies of the Church, that is
mankind, which may be true in respect of such excellently disposed persons as
he mentions, are things, however necessary, yet not at all touched.

St. Hieroms authority is wider; all it says being thus much, that where there
is but one authentic History extant of the Subject to be spoken of, what is
not found there, has no sufficient ground to keep it from being unblamably
rejected. Which is his case: for there is no authentic History of the actions
of St. John Baptist, but the Bible; wherefore, since they are no subject of
Traditions, they must either deny their ground from thence, or have no ground
at all.

Tertullians words are plainly changed: for whereas you make him tie and, as it
were, challenge Heretics to defend their cause by Scripture, his words are: ut
de Scripturis solis questiones suas s^stant, That they may, not defend, but
present, or handle their Questions, not by, but of Scriptures alone, in which,
though by the odness of the Phrase, the sense be a little dark, yet this is
clear, that the expression is common to proving and defending, and therefore to
restrain it to defendin^, is in the mildest language, manifest injustice: For
my part, I conceive the sense no more but this; That Heretics cannot prove
their cause by Scripture. But I must wonder at the proceedings of your men, and
by what charm they get the credit of misleading people, when it is manifest they
choose to grope in the dark, when they might walk in the open light. To hook in
the authority of Tertullian to their party, they take advantage here of a
place, whose obscurity renders the sense hard to be determined, and easy to be
wrested (but not enough to their purpose neither, without plainly changing the
words) when they cannot be ignorant he has delivered his judgment directly
against them in as express terms as words can frame in his prescription against
Heresies. I shall only transcribe two short places, and recommend the whole
excellent Work to your serious perusal. He tells us we are not to dispute with
Heretics out of Scripture, which they have nothing to do withal, it being
forbid by the Apostle amongst other Reasons, Quoniam nihil proficiat congressio
scripturarum, nisi plane ut aut stomachi quis ineat eversionem aut cerebri;
because bandying of Scriptures is good for nothing at all, but to turn either
the stomach or the brain: And a little further, Ergo non ad Scripturas
provocandum est, in quibus aut nulla, aut incerta victoria est, aut parum
certa: Wherefore we are not to appeal to Scriptures, in which the victory is
either none at all, or uncertain, at least not certain.

Now I beseech you, where is the sincerity of those men who would make us
believe Tertullian held Scripture the only rule of Faith? Or because there is a
wrestible place to be found in one of his Books, it is his judgment of the
point in question, either doubtful, or possible to be unknown to whoever
desires to know it, and much less to any that lays claim to the title of
learned? S. Thomas of Aquine says indeed, that nothing is to be affirmed of
God, which is not expressed in Scripture; but how? either according to the
words, or according to the sense: which is to say, that some things, as in
particular, the question in hand of the Holy Ghost are so in Scripture as not
to be efficaciously discovered by the words; and so he brings a place to prove
the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, very far from unavoidable. But I
forbear to urge his authority against you, imagining by your nice wariness in
mentioning him, you are sufficiently satisfied he is far from your opinion in
this point, and proceed to the rest of the proofs you give a promise of.

5. It appears Christian people looked upon the Bible, as the rule of Faith, by
these words of the Council in Socrates his Ecclesiastical History, 2. l. c. 29.
Nomen substantiae quoniam a patribus simpliciter positum a populo autem
ignoratum, offensionem propterea multis concitat (mark) quod Scripturis minime
sit comprehensum [they would not have been offended if the Scripture had not
been their Rule) visum est ipsum tollere, and omnino nullam mentionem hujus
verbi substantia, eum de Deo loquimur, de reliquo fieri quia literae sacrae
omnino substantiae vel Filii and Spiritus Sancti neutiquam meminerint filium
tamen Patri per omnia similem dicimus: quippe cum sacrae Scripturae illud
asserant, doceant. And that expression of Constantine to which all the Bishops
(except those friends of Arius) did consent when he came first into the Council
of Nice, after the Bishops had taken their places exhorting them to concord: A
quo (Eustachia) cum esset peroratum, Imperator omni genere laudis
illustrissimus, verba facere de concordia and consensu animorum in memoriam eos
redigere tum crudelitatis tyrannorum, tum praeclarissimae pacis suis temporibus
divinitus Ecclesiae decretae.

Ostendere etiam, quam grave esset, imo vero quam acerbum hostibus jam
profligatis, and nemine ex adverso se opponere audente, ut ipsi se oppugnarent
mutuo, and laetitiam inimicis, atque adeo risum praebereat; praesertim cum de
rebus divinis disputarent, haberentque doctrinam sacratissimi spiritus
literarum monumentis proditam. Nam libri (inquit) Evangelistarum and
Apostolorum, quin etian veterum prophetarum oracula nos evidenter docent, quid
de divino numin^ sentiendum sit^ Omni igitur sedition contentione depulsa,
literarum divinitus inspiratarum testimoniis res in questionem adductas
dissolvamus: Theodoret Eccles. History, l. 1. cap. 7.

Many more expressions I might bring, but I do not see what can be clearer,
then these words or what sense possibly you can put upon them; the Emperor
seems to exaggerate it as a most unreasonable and strange thing that they
should dissent in matters of Faith, while they have them evidently laid down in
Scripture, which he bids them take for their rule to decide the controversy
by, and accordingly the Author tells us they did, and in their leters and forms
of Faith; I find all along Scripture Arguments. I think this deserves your
serious consideratition.

6. I think your own Reason (if you will impartially give it leave to act and
declare it self) will tell you this clear Argument deserves a clear answer, not
a conjecture without ground, as Mr. Whites p. 93. etc. will appear to any
unbiassed man. We have ground (says he, and yet does not give any ground, which
therefore is as easily denied as asserted) to believe that some learned men in
the Court, were prevented by Arius, and solicited into a secret favor of this
error, from whom it is likely (it is not likely) proceeded that motion of
Constantine to the Council, for determining the point out of Scripture. Did not
Constantine know the truth before? Mr White proves he did by his own Argument
97. unless a man be so perverse as to affirm Christians did not use the form of
Baptism prescribed by Christ, there can be no doubt of the blessed Trinity: the
very words of Baptism carrying the truth (I say) in themselves: and is that
likely the Emperor would betray the truth, or favor an Heretic to whom he
writes sharply, and of whom he speaks bitterly in his letter to the Church of
Alexandria, against whom chiefly he had even called the Council. Mr White
confesses the Council followed the Emperors words, and there was magna
conquisitio, turning of Scriptures, etc. though not to that end to which the
Emperor proposed it; so then he grants the Emperor proposed it, as I make use
of his words: But the Council did not follow his words for that end; the
historian says, Maxima pars ejus verbis obtemperavit. I cannot gather one
syllable hence nor from any other place for Mr White; Unless there be a proof,
it is but Sophistry, and a sign of a desperate cause. It is likely, is it not?
that grave wise Assembly that came to confute an obstinate adversary, would
make use of a Lesbian rule (if they did not count it sufficient and the chief)
which their Adversary would make nothing of, as long as one place can explicate
a hundred opposed, so Mr. White speaks.

. 7. Yet it is plain they did make use of this Rule, and did conclude by it,
(that same truth which they had before that learnt out of it, as Eusebius in
his Epistle to his own people confesses. Socr. l. 1. c. 5. yea, stick and keep
to Scripture-expressions, in the form of their determinations, as much as they
could, which Mr. White himself calls a good way to govern their expressions by:
and therefore I cannot imagine the possibility of the truth of his words, (p.
98.) that the Council at last was forced to conclude out of Tradition, he
brings Theodoret to prove it, but names not the place where, I have read all I
can imagine should show it, but find not one word: a necessity, says he,
which the Rules of Saint Irenaeus, etc. justifies; I have not the other be
mentions, without citing the place; as for Irenaeus, I am sure it is false, he
has no such Rule in his whole book, the only place in him that glanceth at it,
is not a proof (I speak of it elsewhere) if it were, it would prove Irenaeus an
egregious fool, to spend above 600 pages to no purpose in Scripture-Argument,
and then in one page do all the work by your imaginary only Argument, I expect
a better Solution, or a deserved consent to the contrary truth.

. 8. Mr. White p. 95. seems to make the Bishops to set upon this Resolution of
their own accord; if that be true also, then both Bishops and People were of
the same mind his words are; But the same Bishops consented to excommunicate
the Contradicters, to hinder men from unwritten words: and was not that a
proper and prudent remedy to prevent the inconveniences that easily arise from
confusion and incertaintie of language: when every one phrases the mystery
according to his private fancy (and are not all your Traditions, which you say
depend not upon words subject to these inconveniences, pray tell me
ingenuously) and governs not his terms, by some constant and steadie Rule, and
the Writings of the Apostles or ancient Fathers. What now! does Mr. White turn
his tale, and call Scripture a constant steadie rule, which before he made a
nose of wax.

5, 6, 7, 8. There follows a Citation from a Council out of Socrates, which to
a Person disposed to make use of it affords a fair advantage: But as my aim is
your service, not victory, I shall only desire you to reflect they were
Heretics, who by the Artifice of that pretense, sought to draw the Council of
Ariminum to subscribe a new form of Faith, in prejudice of what had formerly
been established at Nice: A slight which the Catholics rejected with this
Answer: We came not hither as though we wanted Faith and belief (for we retain
that Faith which we have learned from the beginning) but we are come to
withstand Novelties; if those things which you have now read, neither savor,
nor tend to the establishing of Novelty, accurse and renounce the Heresy of
Arius in such wise as the old and ancient Canon of the Church has banished all
Heretical and Blasphemous Doctrine. Now consider, if you please, who they were
that pretended Scripture, who they that rejected it, and adhered constantly to
what they had learned from the beginning, and observe which party your Position
takes, and which mine.

Next, is an expression of Constantines in his Oration to the Council of Nice,
insisted upon, to my no small wonder, through 4. Paragraphs. For how comes it
that a man bred up wholly to the Arts of War and Government, and so lately
become a Christian, that he wanted even time, had his other employments been no
Obstacle, to advance beyond the degree of a Learner, should yet be looked upon
by you as so great a Doctor, that an expression of his (which according to the
custom of such persons too, has more of oratory, then severe discourse in it,)
should wholly sway you in a point of Religion, whose judgment I dare say, in a
point of Politics, in which he was much better versed, would not be of half
that credit with you? what if he did not so much as understand the thing? and
if he did, what if he spoke rather according to his occasions then his
judgment? For Princes you know, do, and ought to govern their actions by other
rules then private men, and speak sometimes more what it is fit they should be
heard speak, then what they truly think. In either of these cases, both which I
take to be, not only possible, but so far probable that I think them true, how
weak a support is this Testimony you so much rely upon? And yet I think these
advantages so unnecessary, that the place it self faithfully consulted needs no
assistance to conclude plainly against you; For since you make Constantine
satified of the truth of the Question, before the calling of the Council, it
cannot with any color be imagined he meant to put that to trial which, before
the trial appointed, was already known, and resolved on. The Question
therefore in Issue, could not be which was Faith, which Heresy, neither does
that use to be, or indeed can be a Question among those that know their own
Faith: but how the oppositions made against the known Faith might be answered.
And this (besides that after a man is satisfied of the truth of one part of the
Question, there can be no more dispute concerning the same Question, but how to
answer the Objections of the opposite) is clear from the very words: For
dissolvere does not signify to give sentence in a Question, (he that should
English it so, would wrest it strangely) but to solve an Argument, its natural
signification, to loose or untie, being applied by Scholars to the knots of
Sophistry. That Phrase therefore imports the answering an Objection, not the
determining a controversy, and the sense of the place is this: Let us by
Scripture show the Arguments of Arius brought out of Scripture fallacious and
unconcluding.

I beseech you then to accept of this short Answer to your long Discourse;
First, that whatever were Constantines opinion, it is of no extraordinary
importance either way, he being a man wholly bred up to other Arts then
Divinity, and by the course of his life disabled from attaining a mastery in
such abstruse points. Secondly, that yours is so far from appearing to be his
Opinion, that you cannot force it upon the words you cite without manifest
violence, and which their own genuine signification, and the consideration of
circumstances plainly refuse.

As for that part of your seventh Paraph, where you deny the Council was forced
to conclude out of Tradition the desire of serving you makes me wish my self a
better Historian then I am: But I think the Epistle of S. Athanasius to the
Africans, which you will find in Theoderet lib. 1. c. 8. will sufficiently
clear that Truth to you, since 'twill inform you, that whatever words the
Fathers of the Council could choose out of Scripture to express the Catholic
Faith in, the Arians knew how to elude, by showing the same words to have other
senses in other places; which at last forced the Fathers to invent a new word,
and gave occasion to the Arians of murmuring, that they were condemned by
unwritten words; that is, not by Scripture, but by Tradition.

Since, what has formerly been said, will I hope, be an ingenuous Answer to the
question of your eighth Paraph, and satisfy you that Tradition is not subject
to the same inconveniences with words; there remains no more but to vindicate
Mr White from the inconstancy you charge him with, to which there will I think
no more be needful, then barely to represent the case to your second thoughts:
Our faith, you know, must be both believed and expressed; the expressions, he
conceives it sit, should be uniform, and that the best way in order to it, is
to make use, as much as may be, of those which the Holy Ghost in Scripture has
before made use of. But since expression supposes the knowledge of what it is we
would express, he holds there is some other way to come to this knowledge
besides looking upon the expressions which are consequent to the knowledge;
whereas the way to it is before it, and that the expressions naked of
themselves, and left unguarded of other helps are not sufficient to preserve
and secure the truths they contain; the Positions then are both true, That the
Scripture is the best Rule to govern our expressions by, and yet not sufficient
to regulate our Belief; and the contradictions you fancy between them, proceeds
not from his inconstancy, but your inadvertence.

9. Of late I have read over Iraeneus, diligently endeavoring to see the Rule
he takes for to confute the Errors he writes against, and cannot see but you
are out: One or two places indeed I have found seeming to favor you, which
since I find your Writers make use of, yet if I understand any thing he is your
enemy. He says indeed in his fifth Book, cap. 4. What if the Apostles had not
left us Scriptures, ought we not to have followed the order of Tradition which
they delivered, etc. But does not this imply, we need not use crutches, seeing
we have legs; some Nations he says had no written Word, yet had the same
Doctrine which was written: What then? As long as they have and retain the
Doctrine purely, whether in writing or in their hearts, it is well, but though
the Apostles did leave some Nations the Gospel without Writing, it does not
follow that they would have always retained and kept it in succeeding ages
purely; where is there any particular Church under heaven, that has to this
day kept the doctrines of salvation from the Apostles entirely without any
writing? He might challenge his Adversaries to show their doctrine came from
the Apostles by Tradition, living presently after those times wherein some that
conversed with the Apostles lived, and when all Churches agreed (as in Iraeneus
his time) in matters of Faith, and that unity was then a good assurance, they
all came from one fountain; but the case is altered, those ancient Churches
afterward were divided, and then whom must a man believe, when each say they
have the way to heaven?

9. I am sorry your opinion and mine disagree so much about Irenaeus, whom
though I cannot profess to have read so exactly as you do, yet I dare say I am
not mistaken, as I think you are, in the sense of those places I have read: And
first, the edge of those two, you bring in our behalf, seems not at all taken
off by the Answers you give them. For since in case no Scriptures had been
left, he refers us to the order of Tradition, plainly supposing Tradition would
have done our business, and that we had not, even in that case been left
without a rule (it had been nonsense to refer us to a rule, which would not
have been a rule when tried, and had he thought so, he would certainly have
told us, there had been in that case no rule at all) and if so, then pray why
is not Tradition as much a rule with Scriptures as without them? They may add
to its force by their testimony, but take away nothing of its efficacy. For,
that the truths, which the Apostles taught, were written, sure makes them no
whit the less truths, and if it may be known what 'twas they taught (as you
see Irenaeus is of the opinion it may by Tradition) I hope the security is
equal whether it were or were not commended to writing. This place then (which
by the way is not in the fifth but third Book) makes it very evident Irenaeus
held another rule besides Scripture, that is Scripture not the only Rule,
which is your Tenet.

Again, since some Nations had the Doctrine, but had no Scriptures, does it not
follow undeniably that there was another means besides Scripture to preserve
the Doctrine amongst them? and further that the Apostles trusted not to writing
the preservation of the Doctrine they taught them? which had they intended for
a means, much more the only means of doing it, they cannot be imagined to have
omitted. I learn therefore from this place, both the efficacy of Tradition,
which actually did preserve the Apostles doctrine without writing, and the
judgment of the Apostles, who left their doctrine in these Nations not to
Scripture, but Tradition, to be preserved. But it follows not, say you, they
would have retained their doctrine pure in succeeding ages, although they did
so till Irenaeus's time. And pray why does it not follow? provided they would
still make use of the means by which they retained pure doctrine till that
time: and what time shall be assigned in which the same cause shall leave off
producing the same effect? since confessedly tradition did preserve the
Doctrine till then, you should prove, not barely affirm, it could do so no
longer. But the truth is, and your own clear thoughts will certainly show it
you, that rule was so far from a likelihood of betraying the truths committed
to her, that it cannot be contrived into a possibility that it should betray
them; for since the Apostles left them the truth, as long as they retained what
they received from the Apostles, and admitted nothing else, which is the method
of Tradition, pray what door could Error find to creep in at? 'Twas not
therefore possible for them to make shipwreck of their faith, till they had
first thrown their rule overboard, and they would not only have preserved their
doctrine pure to succeeding Ages, by the same means they had preserved it till
then, but they could not preserve it pure, while they retained the same means
which had preserved it till then.

To the following question I answer, the Church, of which by Gods mercy I am a
member, has preserved the doctrines of salvation entire, not without writings
indeed, but without making them her Rule to preserve them by, neither had she,
or could she have preserved them, had there been no other means left her then
words. For what you say next, I refer you to the third Dialogue, to see, since
it is the same thing in point of certainty, to receive a truth immediately,
through two hands, or through twenty, provided we be sure there be no deceit
in the intermediate Conveyers, all possibility of deceit removed from them,
and consequently our certainty equal with that of those who lived nearer the
Apostles times. As for the unity of the Churches in the time of Irenaeus, it is
true there was an unity, and still is amongst all those that stuck to Tradition,
but then, as now, some were divided, and by the same means as now, viz. by
preferring their private Interpretations of Scripture before the doctrine they
had been taught. This divided the Valentinians in the time of Irenaeus, the
Arians in the time of St. Athanasius, the Donatists in Saint Austins, in all
Ages some, and divides you now. And the way to know whom a man must believe,
when each say they have the way to Heaven, was then, as now, to keep fast to
what had been taught, to follow those Churches that do so, and those that build
upon private Interpretations to reject; so that the case is not at all altered,
the method of arriving to the knowledge of saving truths, being the same
anciently and now.

. 10. That Irenaeus apprehended all those truths necessary for salvation, were
contained in Scripture, which some places for a while have had without writing,
is clear by what follows, and that the Scripture is a sufficient rule to
salvation, and was to him and the Church in his days which enjoyed it: he
tells us, the Apostles left the same in writing, in lib. 3. cap. 1. edit.
Basil. His words are, Non enim per alios depositionem salutis nostrae
cognovimus, quam per eos, per quos Evangelium pervenit ad nos. Quod quidem tunc
praeconiaverunt, postea vero per Dei voluntatem in Scripturis nobis
tradiderunt, fundamentum and columnam fidei nostrae futurum. Is not this clear
against you? The Scripture then was not written by chance, but by the Will of
God, for this end, that it might be a standing rule, and pillar or foundation
of our faith. And lib. 2. cap. 46. shows this is a clear certain way for every
one, Cum itaque universae Scripturae and propheticae, and Evangelicae, in
aperto and sine ambiguitate, and similiter ab omnibus audiri possunt, He was
blaming Heretics drawing errors from obscure Places and Parables, when they
might have seen the light in clear places, by which the darker are to be
understood. God (says he) has given power to honest religious minds that are
desirous of truth to see it, Haec prompte meditabitur and in ipsis proficiat
diuturno studio, facilem sententiam efficiens. Sunt autem haec, quae ante
oculos nostros occurrunt, and quaecunque aperte, and sine ambiguo ipsis
dictionibus posita sunt in Scripturis, and ideo Parabolae debent ambiguis
adaptari; sic enim and qui absolvit, sine periculo absolvit, and parabolae ab
omnibus similiter absolutionem accipient, and a veritate corpus integrum, and
simili adaptatione membrorum, and sine concussione perseverat. Sed quae non
aperte dicta sunt, neque ante oculos posita, copulare absolutionibus
parabolarum, quas unusquisque prout vult adinvenit, sic enim apud nullum erit
regula veritatis. And so says he there, (If we do not with sober unbiast minds
take the plain Scripture for our guide) a man shall be always seeking, but
never come to the truth, yet the Scripture does clear it, though all do not
believe one God, etc. sicut demonstravimus ex ipsis Scripturarum dictionibus.
Quia enim de cogitatione eorum qui contraria opinantur de patre, nihil aperte,
neque ipsa dictione, neque sine controversia in nulla omnino dictum sit
Scriptura, and ipsi testantur dicentes, in absconso haec eadem Salvatorem
docuisse non omnes, sed aliquos discipulorum, qui possunt capere, etc. Quia
autem Parabolae possunt recipere multas absolutiones, ex ipsis de inquisitione
Dei affirmare, derelinquentes quod certum and indubitatum and verum est, valde
praecipitantium se in periculum, and irrationabilium esse, quis non amantium
veritatem confitebitur. And in the next Chapter, Habentes itaque regulam ipsam
veritatem, and in apertum positum de Deo testimonium, non debemus quaestionum
declinantes in alias atque alias absolutiones ejicere firmam and veram de Deo
scientiam, etc. Si autem omnium quae in scripturis requiruntur absolutiones non
possumus invenire, alterum tamen Deum praeter eum qui est non requiramus;
impietas enim haec maxima est. Credere autem haec talia debemus Deo, qui and
nos fecit, rectissime scientes, quia scripturae quidem perfectae sunt, quippe a
verbo Dei and Spiritu ejus dictae. Si autem in rebus creaturae quaedam quidem
eorum adjacent Deo, quaedam autem and in nostram venerunt scientiam, quod mali
est, si and eorum, quae in scripturis requiruntur, universis scripturis
spiritualibus existentibus quaedam quidem absolvamus secundum gratiam Dei,
quaedam autem commendemus Deo, and non solum in hoc seculo, sed and in futuro;
ut semper quidem Deus doceat, homo autem semper discat. Si ergo secundum hunc
mundum, quem diximus, quaedam quidem quaestionem Deo comiserimus, and fidem
nostram servabimus, and omnis Scriptura a Deo nobis data consonans nobis
invenietur, and parabolae his quae manifest dicta sunt consonabunt, and
manifest dicta absolvent Parabolas, and per dictionum multas voces unam
consonantem melodiam sentiet. By which you see clearly what may be judged the
way, and held the only way to decide all controversies, plain Scripture, and
thinks it no absurdity for us to be ignorant, of what God is not pleased to
teach us in Scripture, and that you may see yet more clearly, he held
Scripture, as his word, was perfect, containing the whole doctrine of the
Gospel, which is our question.

. 10. After these exceptions taken to what he says in our favor, you examine
Irenaeus for your self: and first produce these words, Non enim per alios, etc.
the sense of which I take to be, that the Gospel or doctrine of Christ, which
was to be the foundation of our faith, was by the Will of God delivered to us
by writing, as well as preaching. In which, what branch there is that does so
much as concern us, truly I see not; for no body doubts but the doctrine of
Christ is the foundation of our faith, that it was written as well as preached,
and this not by chance, but by particular Providence and instinct of the Holy
Ghost, any of which positions when I contradict, I will acknowledge Irenaeus is
against me: In the mean time I appeal to the very Rules of Syntax, whether he
be not against you: and whether Scripturis fundamentum will agree, that
Scripture be the foundation, which the construction plainly attributes to
Evangelium; that is, the doctrine or points of faith, that is, the sense of the
Letter, not the letter to be senc'd; which is the Tenet you maintain, we oppose.

There follow two long citations out of lib. 2. cap. 46. and 47. which you say,
show clearly, that plain Scripture may be judged the only way to decide all
controversies: and this I deny not, for supposing Scripture to be plain enough
for that effect, I see not why it should not produce it: But do the places say
it is plain enough? What you think I know not; but I will assure you I am so
far from thinking that question determined here, that no part of either of them
prompts me to suspect the Father did so much as think of it. His business in
these chapters, as far as I apprehend, is, in the first to show the absurdity
of opposing a fancy drawn from an obscure Parable, to an acknowledged
doctrine, and even in Scripture plain to religious Lovers of truth: and in the
second, to teach the impossibility of attaining to all knowledge in this life,
and the necessity of being content to know as much as God is pleased we
should, and be ignorant of the rest. Now, if by deciding those questions, he
has given sentence in ours, from which it is impossible any two should be
farther removed, and that by teaching Parables are not to be reli'd on, nor our
thirst after knowledge satisfied in this life, he has taught Scripture is plain
enough to decide all controversies in all times and cases. He has done both
what he never thought to do, and what I think impossible he ever should do.

. 11. In his third book, cap. 14. Si autem Lucas quidem, qui semper cum Paulo
praedicavit, and dilectus ab eo dictus est, and cum eo evangelizavit, and
creditus est refer nobis evangelium, nihil aliud ab eo didicit, sicut ex
verbis ejus ostensum est, quem admodum hi, qui nunquam Paulo adjuncti fuerunt,
gloriantur abscondita and inerrabilia didicisse Sacramenta? Quoniam autem
Paulus simpliciter, quae sciebat haec and docebat, non solum eos, qui cum eo
erant, verum omnes audientes, seipsum fecit manifestum. In Mileto convocatis
Episcopis and Pre^byteriis, (repeats those words, Acts. 20.17. and so on) non
subtraxi uti non annuntiarem vobis omnem sententiam Dei. Sic Apostoli
simpliciter and nemini invidentes, quae didicerant ipsi a Domino, haec omnibus
tradebunt. Sic igitur and Lucas nemini invidens, ea quae ab eis didicerat,
tradidit nobis, sicut ipse testificatur dicens, quemadmodum tradiderunt nobis,
qui ab initio contemplatores and ministri fuerunt verbi. Observe, I pray you,
and impartially weigh the truth, Irenaeus is professedly disputing against the
Valentinians throughout his whole book, confutes them all along by Scripture,
answers their objection, (which is the very same with yours against us) the
Scriptures do not contein all divine truths and mysteries, and there fore they
would not be judged nor confuted by it (as you at this day.) Irenaeus first
proves out of Scripture, that the Apostles delivered freely, plainly, the whole
mystery or doctrine of salvation to all, envying the knowledge of it, or any
part of that knowledge, to none great or small, therefore not to S. Luke who
was a continual companion of the Apostle Paul, and a beloved fellow laborer;
So that he S. Luke must needs know all, and out of S. Lukes words (the very
same I have before made my Argument, the beginning of his Gospel and the Acts)
shows he did faithfully relate all he had received and learnt of the Apostles,
not envying us any one truth [what is the meaning of that expression] he
himself had learnt. Besides what force could there have been in Irenaeus his
Argument; or indeed to what purpose would his whole Book have been, proving
from Scripture all along his Adversaries to be out, and their Tenet to be
false, because the Scripture does not teach them: if the Scripture be not such
a perfect Rule, which contains the whole Mystery of salvation, and doctrine of
the Gospel.

Thus I think (if I am not mightily mistaken) I have proved the Minor
Proposition which only can be questioned of that Syllogism, which destroys Mr.
Rushworths second Dialogue. That which has been the rule in the Primitive
Church must still be.

But the Written word, which we enjoy was the rule, as appears by what has
been said.

Ergo, The Scripture still is, etc.

11. The last is out of the fourteenth Chapter of the third Book, which to make
strong against us, you assume two things, and I conceive neither true: First,
That he confutes them all along by Scriptures; which I do not see, how it would
advantage you were it admitted; for because he saw it convenient to dispute out
of Scripture, will it therefore follow, no other way of disputing is either
lawful or possible: We dispute with you every day out of Scripture, yet hold
another a surer, nay the only rule; but I wonder the diligence you profess
should so far deceive the candor you are master of, as to offer it for true,
which cannot but have observed the first Chapters of this very Book are
employed in confuting them by Tradition, and that Scripture is made use of, not
for necessity (I cannot speak more of the abundant efficacy of Tradition then
he does) but out of abundance, ut undique resistatur illis si quos ex his
retusione confundentes ad conversionem veritatis adducere possimus, as he says
in the 2d Chapter of this Book, which you see is an expression not of
necessity, but charity. And if I am not mistaken, for I have not the means to
study it exactly, his whole second Book is so filled with Arguments from
reason, That Scripture is hardly so much as mentioned, unless sometimes by the
by.

Secondly, you assume with as much injustice, as mistake, that their Objection
is the same with ours, and the Answer given by him to them, the same you give
to us: Our Tenet (for objection, while we are upon the defensive, we make none)
is that Scripture is not the rule of Faith; That of the Valentinians, that I
mean which Irenaeus speaks to in this place, was, as you may see in the
beginning of the thirteenth Chapter, that none but S. Paul was acquainted with
the truth, as having only received it by revelation, whereby all his Arguments
in the precedent Chapter, from the authorities of S. Peter, S. Stephen, S.
Philip, etc. had been overthrown; to strengthen them, he proves in the
thirteenth chapter, that not only S. Paul, but the rest of the Disciples also
understood the Mystery of Salvation; and in the 14 particularly S. Luke and
these two, Viz. Scripture is not the sole rule of Faith, S. Paul alone was
acquainted with the Mysteries of Salvation, an exact studier of Irenaeus, and
impartial lover of truth, would have to be the same. As to the place it self;
this I conceive to be your Argument, S. Paul delivered all he knew to S. Luke,
S. Luke writ all was delivered him; therefore S. Paul knew all that was
necessary to salvation, S. Luke writ all was necessary to salvation. To which I
have already answered, that though I should admit the Conclusion, little would
be advanced in order to our Question, since we deny not but all may be containd
in Scripture some way or other, particularly, or under general heads, but that
all is so contained, as is necessary for the salvation of mankind; to which
effect we conceive certainty, and to that evidence requisite, neither of which
are within the compass of naked words, left without any guard to the violent
and contrary storms of Criticism.

But I conceive you do the Saint wrong, and understand the word all in a sense
far different from what he did; for having learnt from S. John, so little a
Book as S. Lukes could not hold truly all, till you can prove he meant his Book
for a rule of Faith, and intended to deliver in it all things necessary to
salvation, I must believe it is no ordinary violence that can force such a sense
upon it, as has neither a likely, nor any ground; but since your own
profession, and large citations, show both a confidence and esteem of Irenaeus,
give me leave with that serious earnestness, which the concern of eternity, for
no less is in Question, requires, to press your own words upon you, and desire
you to observe and impartially weigh the Truth, while I represent the
proceedings of Irenaeus to you, and make you judge whether of us take part with
the Father, whether with his Adversaries. The Error of the Valentinians, was
built upon certain obscure places of Scripture, or rather indeed upon certain
deceitful reasonings in Philosophy (as your denial of Transubstantiation, for
example is, and a denial even of the B. Trinity, if you pleased might be) but
perceiving the Rules of Christianity did not allow that for a foundation of
Faith, they endeavored to support the edifice by Scripture, bragging, no
doubt, among their followers, it was clearly on their side, but being pressed
to a Trial, giving in evidence the obscure places mentioned.

Against this, Irenaeus contends that Parables, because capable of many
Solutions, are not to be relied upon, and consequently, since only the true
sense of Scripture is Scripture, that Scripture is vainly pretended, where the
many senses leave us uncertain which is the true one. Then examining the places
for his side, and showing them both in clearness and number to overbalance
the other, he overthrows their pretense, and preserves the majesty of Scripture
to his party: The same do we to you, who, building most of your mistakes in
Faith, upon mistakes in Philosophy, pretend plain Scripture, and when it comes
to trial, bring places capable of as many senses, as the Valentinian parables
were of solutions. We answer, as he did, that there is no relying upon such
places: And, examining those we conceive to be of our side, and comparing them
with yours, both in clearness and number, conclude your senses not true, and
Scripture not only not for you, but against you. Yet all this while neither he,
nor we think Scripture, for this disputing out of it, the only rule of Faith,
whether it be, or no, being not in these cases, our question. But since as the
Valentinians did then, you will now undertake to prove Scripture is against us,
and as Irenaeus then, so we now acknowledge nothing is to be held against
Scripture, we do, as he did, show you cannot make good your undertaking.

Next, The Valentinians, by the privilege of their neerness to the Primitive
times better acquainted with the grounds of faith then you, would have
justified their Interpretations by Tradition: an evident proof what it was
which those first Ages held the Interpreter of Scripture, and that so
undeniably, that even Heretics pretended to it. What says Irenaeus to this?
Does he answer as you do, that Tradition is not to be regarded, but the cause
to be decided by Scripture, and that the only Rule? by no means: but carefully
and diligently proves Tradition to be against them: Which he also declares to
be, not what they pretended, by abuse of those words, Sapientiam loquimur inter
perfectos, whispering corner conveyances of one to another (such as the Cabala
you object to us) but the open, plain profession of those Churches to whom the
Apostles left their doctrine and its practice, and among which, he conceives
that of the Roman Church alone sufficient.

This public Testimony, as he, so we lay claim to, and profess with him, would
be sufficient, even though there were no Scriptures at all; which nevertheless
since Gods infinite goodness has provided for us, we do not understand the
force of the former impaired by the addition of a new force. But, that
belonging to another question, give me leave to end the present one with this
confidence, that you cannot but see we follow the Fathers steps, and you those
who follow the Valentinians, and that it appears by what has been said, your
Minor neither is, nor, since you have failed, in likelihood ever will be proved.

PART II. Tradition the Rule of Faith.
SECT. I. 1 Certainty of Tradition.
1. IN the third Dialogue, the certainty of your Traditions (having endeavored
to take away the certainty of Scripture, I think in vain) is endeavored. I was
glad of the promise, to do the work only by reason and common sense, without
any quotations of Authors, because I want that vast knowledge in Antiquity,
which is requisite for the deciding of this Question by it; but I see my hopes
are frustrated, for your cause neither is here, nor can be proved by reason
alone, without that reading which yet I want. The Reasons here or any other,
that may be managed without quotations of Authors, I am ready to see and
examine, and as ready to subscribe unto, if they convince me; but I think it
unreasonable for you to pretend to prove your Religion infallible, and yet
bring no positive Arguments that are of themselves sufficient to convince, but
only to stand upon your guard; that's all Mr White does; a subtle Turk might
the same way prove as well his false religion, true.

PART II. SECT. 1. 1.
BEing now arrived at the second Part of your Discourse, I find nothing in the
first Paraph necessary to be taken notice of but the last words, Viz. That it is
unreasonable to pretend to prove our Religion infallible, and yet bring no
positive Arguments, etc. In the first Branch of which saying you are not much
amiss; nothing being more unreasonable, then that a Church, which confessedly
was once the true one, should be put to prove she is now no false one, when all
the Maxims of common sense, and proceedings of nature, suppose her innocence,
till the contrary be, not by surmises and probabilities, but plainly and
undeniably proved. Whoever therefore says she has failed, ought to prove it,
and not expect she should prove the impossibility of the contrary. It Is true,
the condescendence of charity has prevailed to undertake so unreasonable a Task
here, but not without protesting against the necessity of doing it, as you see
in the second Paraph of this Dialogue. But the second is so injurious, that,
had all men been of your temper, perhaps it would have been well done to have
stood wholly upon that sure guard you reproach Mr White withal, and which the
advantage of his cause gives him, and never meddled with positive Arguments,
which though unanswered, and for ought I can imagine, unanswerable, since I do
not believe any man can say more then you have done, you would yet deny to be
so much as Arguments.

That persuasion of yours too, which thinks so much reading necessary to your
Information, I cannot allow of, but because you produce no reason for it, can
oppose it no otherwise, then by professing my dislike of it.

2. In his first Encounter he gives a Compendium of the Argument, page 8. Her
doctrine is received from Christ and still handed along to the present time:
Suppose I say, for example, in the eighth Age an Error crept in: He Will reply,
it entered not in, because that Age held nothing was to be admitted as of Faith,
except that was delivered to it by the former, therefore seeing that was then
first believed, it was not delivered by the former, therefore not received. I
answer, no new opinion, when first it creeps up, is entertaind by any as a new
thing which was not before, but as forgotten, or not discerned, or lost before;
do you think the Arians looked upon their Doctrine as new, which was never
believed before, or that was contrary to what the Apostles taught? If they did,
they would have cast off all Christianity, and held nothing with the Orthodox.
Mr White brings in our Objection, The Church did not stand upon that same
traditional ground formerly, as Rome now. He replys, If this principle did not
always govern the Church, it was introduced in some Age, the eighth for
example, either (says he against this) the Church had assurance in that eighth
Age, all she held was descended lineally, as we speak, from the Apostles, or
not; if she had, then questionless she held her Doctrine upon that Maxim: If
not, then she wilfully belied, and damned, etc. voluntarily taking up this new,
etc. Is this the Demonstration?

2. Your stating, and opposing Mr Whites Argument, making me suspect you did
not yet perfectly comprehend it; I beg leave to put you in mind, there are two
things he endeavors to prove. 1. That if the Church always relied upon the
Maxim of immediate delivery, she could admit no error into her Faith: 2. That
she did always rely upon that Maxim. The first he proves thus, if an Error
came in, it came in at some time, let that time be the eighth Age, and if the
Church then admitted nothing but what she had received, and this she had not
received (for you put it then first to come in) she did not admit it then, nor
by the same evidence could admit any error in any age* To the second we shall
speak in the fourth Paraph; to this you answer, no new opinion is entertained,
as a new thing which was not before, but as forgotten, or not discerned, or
lost before: An Answer which I dare not profess a perfect comprehension of, not
seeing to which of the premises it is directly opposed by a plain grant, denial,
or distinction, one of which ought always to keep company with every answer:
but conceive the force of the Argument is not any thing empair'd by it; for let
it be entertained as lost, as forgotten, or how you will, so it were not
immediately delivered, either the Rule must be broken, or it could not be
entertained. And this I think evident, even by your very terms: for if it were
entertained as forgotten, then 'twas entertained as a thing which some former
Age forgot to deliver, then some former Age did not deliver it, then, if
nothing were entertained but what was delivered, pray how could this find
entertainment?

To your question of the Arians, I answer it is very likely the Ringleaders
among them persuaded their followers such fine things as you say, That their
doctrine was not new, etc. but nothing could blind them so far as not to see,
'twas not taught them by their immediate forefathers. And though conceit of
Arius's virtue and learning prevailed with the more ignorant, as ambition and
interest with the more subtle, not to value and to desert this Rule, yet 'twas
impossible they should be ignorant that they did desert it. They would then
have cast off all Christianity, say you, and truly the experience of my own
Country makes me believe they would, had they continued unopposed long enough
to have pursued their principle, whether it would have led them. But nature
endures not an immediate passage from one extreme to another; a consideration,
which being touched before, I now say no more to, and pass to your next
difficulty, which, by your acknowledging is brought in by Mr. Whites
objection, I perceive, is levelled against the second not the first Conclusion:
our business now therefore is to examine, whether the Church has always
adhered to this maxim, there being no dispute, but that (if she has) she
could not admit of any Error in her Faith.

3. This I am sure of, that either I do understand nothing of it, or there is no
force in it: By assurance I suppose he means not absolute certainty; if he do,
the second horn of the Dilemma upon which we fall, does us no hurt; I conceive
he means thought; if the eighth Age thought all she held was descended lineally
from the Apostles, then she held her Doctrine upon that Maxim: But she thought
all she held was descended lineally from the Apostles (is not that the Minor to
be supplied, if we turn the first part into a Catagorical Syllogism) therefore
she held her Doctrine upon that Maxim. This I think is the Conclusion, for I do
not clearly discern his meaning, suppose only I grant the Conclusion; me thinks
he does not conclude what he was to prove, which should be this, therefore that
Age was not the first that held her Doctrine upon that Maxim. But to the other
part of the Dilemma more fully.

. 3. You choose to fall upon the second horn of the Dilemma, whose sharpness we
shall presently try, after I have assured you, that by assurance, he means
absolute certainty; which there is no denying but that she either had, or had
not. In the first Case his Discourse runs thus: she had assurance in the eighth
Age, before she took up the Maxim said to be new, therefore she had the
Maxim, by which she had assurance, before; this Maxim could be no other then
Tradition, nothing else being able to give her assurance, therefore she had the
Maxim of Tradition before, therefore that Age was not the first she took it up
in: which is what you desire should be the Conclusion.

4. If not (says he) then she wilfully belied her self, etc. I wholly deny this
wilfulness will follow; thus the 8th Age entertained that principle first of
all, suppose she might think it true, when it was not, and so no wilfulness;
might not the Church think all she held descended to her through the
interjacent Ages by the Bible which is handed still to her, and yet not think
all she received descended lineally in your sense? I pray Sir, make my dull
capacity see this absurdity, which I profess I cannot; I think if your
Argument prove any thing, it proves against all Errors in general any where,
that they could not have come into the world, and then I wish exceedingly your
Argument were true. The Heretic held no Error, because he held nothing was to
be embraced but truth; Is not this the very same Argument? Mr White says some
of yours maintain Tenets in other terms, that are condemned; might I not prove
the contrary by his own Argument; the Error could not enter into them, because
they held nothing was to be entertaind, as of Faith, except what was delivered
to them by the former; this is the very Argument: To say the case is not the
same in respect of universality is not to the purpose; for there is no
universality mentioned in the Argument, the stress is not yet put in that; If
the argument be true in one, I see not why it should not be in another.

4. But you take the second Part, in which case he presses you deny, an
unadmittable wilfulness: Let us see; The Supposition puts the Church not
assured whether her Doctrine were lineally descended, or no; The Maxim makes
her oblige her Posterity, under pain of damnation too, to believe it was so
descended, that is to believe what she knew not to be true, that is, what for
ought she knew was false, and yet you discover no wilfulness. Pray can reason
justify a command to accept that for true, which the Commander knows may be
false, and for ought he knows is so? and is there any other principle of
action, besides reason, but will? I but she might think her Principle true,
when it was not; but what if no greater wilfulness can be imagined then to
think so? for you must mean it true, either in respect it had conveied the true
faith to her, or would convey the true Faith to her posterity. The first is
Nonsense, for that Age being supposed the first in which she took up the
Principle, the faith she had must of necessity have been conveid to her by some
other. The second is as bad or worse, for if that principle be the Test of true
Faith, her own, not being received by it, must needs be thought not to be true,
and that being the Faith she commended to the principle to be conveid, could
even wilfulness make her think that principle would convey a true Faith to her
posterity, which had received a false one to convey?

But she might, say you, think her Doctrine true, as taught by the Bible, which
Bible was handed down to her, though her Doctrine were not: If she did but
think so, she did not know it to be true; therefore it was not certain to her,
therefore but probable; therefore to recommend it as true and certain, which to
her was not so, was to do what she had no ground for, that is to act wilfully.

Again, if she thought her self to have received the true faith from the Bible,
she must needs think the Bible a means to convey the true faith to her, that is
a true rule, then to desert that which she thought a true one, and impose
another as the only true one, besides which, she thought, even when she
imposed the second, the first also to be true, pray what name can it own but
wilfulness? Thus which way soever we turn, nothing appears but impossibility;
which also a little reflected on, would be discovered much greater, and far
deeper plunged into contradiction: For were it possible a Council, for example,
should be so maliciously wilful, as to consent to the damnation of all
posterity; mankind has rooted in it a greater desire of its own good, then to
be so cheated into everlasting misery, especially so openly that it could not
be ignorant of the juggle. But neither is it proper for me to dilate that am an
Answerer, neither is it necessary to one that sees day so soon as you do.

To go on then, you think the Argument proves against all Errors, if any thing,
but why you think so, you do not say, and indeed I cannot guess: One only
supposition seems able to give the fancy any color, Viz. That our Savior,
besides those necessary to Salvation, taught also all manner of other truths
whatsoever, in all Arts and Sciences, etc. All which, being equally recommended
to Tradition, flow down in the same great channel to us; but this me thinks is
too wild a fancy to suspect you of. Next, you parallel our Argument with one
you frame in behalf of an Heretic in this manner: He holds nothing is to be
embraced but truth, therefore what he embraces is truth; put your Heretic to
have a right method of arriving at truth, and faithfully to pursue it, and
there is no doubt but your Conclusion is strong, and so strong that it quite
overthrows the Supposition, for he cannot in that case be an Heretic; but that
he has any such method, or makes any use of it, we must seek elsewhere then in
your Argument, which out of this that the thing should be done, concludes it is
done. By the sincerity you profess, and ow to the concern of eternity, do we
argue in that manner? Do not we prove both that our method cannot fail us, and
that we never failed to make use of our method? The first under penalty of this
evident contradiction, that the same thing must be believed before, and not
before the same time; the second by the impossibility that mankind should
conspire notoriously and unconcealably to cheat their posterity into
everlasting damnation. And is this to say the Conclusion over in the
Antecedent, and then infer it in the Consequent: Beseech you, Sir, restrain
those sallies of wit, to things less dangerous to be played upon then salvation.

Lastly, you object Mr Whites saying that several condemned Tenets are
maintained in other terms by some Divines, and assume that these Divines,
holding nothing as of Faith but what was delivered by the former age, would
have no Error. And that is true, meaning Errors in Faith, but Divines proceed
upon other Rules when they err, and their Errors concern no Faith but Divinity.
It may indeed so happen, that these Errors in Divinity do also contradict some
point of Faith; but that the equivocation of terms hinders them from seeing, in
which case the Position is erroneous, and against Faith, the belief of the
maintainer, who sees not so much, very good and unblameable. Now, if I
understand the Position right, it is no more then this, that some Divines
understand not the force of terms used by themselves, which rigorously scanned
may happen to contain an error unperceived by him who uses them, but dives not
so far into them. Remember then, if you please, the case is of Divines, that is
of persons working according to the rules of science, not of faithful
proceeding upon grounds of Faith, after which I hope you will not infer an
Error in the rule of Faith,, because there be errors in things concluded by
other Principles.

5. And truly if I have eyes, Mr Rushworth does not more then show a kind of
possibility, that all points of faith could have been handed down, the first
delivered them to the second Age, the third heard them of the second, the
fourth of the third, etc. But is this a proving of it, that it was so, or that
no material corruptions could have crept in, why else does he object against
himself what is most obvious to be seen, A posse ad esse non valet
consequentia? That cuts the throat of his Arguments, so that yet there is no
certainty proved, that which he answers is indeed reasonable, you should think
they were, because they might be so handed; but go no further yet, till you
prove more, and seeing you conceive a possibility of such descent, Remember
the contrary possibility (much more probable) that there may be errors crept
in; but till you see, you will not believe they are, I shall not entreat you
out of your Religion, only I beg and wish you hold no more then your Arguments
prove, only a possibility, but it is easier to deviate from the straight rule
of truth, then always to keep to it.

. 5. When you writ this Paragraph, your thoughts certainly were so fixed upon
the place in which your objection is brought in, that the next leaves, almost
the next lines, escape their observance. The least advance would have suggested
to them, that not only a possibility of preserving truth, but a plain actual
indefectibility is aimed at. Not but that a possibility is enough, such a
possibility I mean, or power, as we speak of, that is, such as has the nature
of a proper cause to its effect, that is, which should have done the effect.
Since if our Rule be proper to convey the truth to us, no body can rationally
affirm it has not done, what it is granted, 'twas of its own nature apt to do
without evidencing what he says. Let those therefore, who, upon pretense of
errors, refuse communion with us, take it to heart, and either plainly evince
him, or tremble at the horror of living in a continued and obstinate schism.
As for the edge of that maxim, A posse ad esse non valet consequentia; The
Dialogues show it is taken off by this other, frustra est potentia quae nunquam
reducitur in actum, the power in this case being but to one effect, and to
repeat what they say, which is all I have to do, seems unnecessary.

To guess at what the following discourse aims, which puts a possibility of
truth, and a possibility of error, this indeed the more probable, but no more
then probable, I am quite at a loss. Would you have no certainty in Religion,
that is, no Religion at all in the world? For with what steadiness can I act in
order toward Heaven, if my thoughts be perpetually checked with this doubt, for
example, that perhaps there is no Heaven at all; and if I be uncertain of it,
is it possible to shake off the doubt? Till I comprehend your design therefore,
I shall only desire you to reflect, that if the possibility of error be only
the more probable, then it is but probable, then the contrary, though less, is
yet probable too; then it may be there are no errors in the Church you refuse
communion with. Therefore, since to divide, is as much as lies in the divider,
to destroy the Church, and to destroy the Church is to take away all hopes of
salvation, (for since we cannot know the way to Heaven of our selves, if we
lose our mistress that should teach it us, there can remain no ground of hope,)
and this from all mankind, consider, if you please what it is to continue a
separation, and at the same time acknowledge, that perhaps there are no errors,
that is, no ground why you should do so. But we will believe no errors till we
see them; no indeed, we will not contradict nature so much, which supposes
every man innocent till he be proved guilty.

In return to your civility of not entreating me out of my Religion, I will
entreat you not to be out of it neither, and to remember, that your soul being
equally concerned with mine, it is your obligation as well as mine, not to
believe any errors, where you see there may be none, till you see they are
there, and that not probably, but with undeniable evidence, when, as you will
be able to show them, I promise you, I will be ready to desert them.

. 6. But Mr. White would fain prove more from the natural inclination of truth
and happiness: this I think if it prove any thing, proves man will needs be a
groping after some Religion or other, but that it should be after the true, or
make him preserve the true Religion, (I shall give Account why I will not
assent unto) without corruption, I see not, or why it should not prove as well
that every particular man, in whom there is such an inclination, should
preserve the truth.

My Reason why that inclination spoken of does no way prove the Point, is from
the fall of Adam, if there were no such thing as the corruption of man's nature,
Mr Whites Reason would have more likelihood in it, and hereby appears the
weakness of your cause, in that you are fain (the acutest of you) to have
recourse to such Bulrushes to make weapons of, as the corrupt nature of man
ready to uphold (what, the pure Oracles of God?) No, the contrary rather. The
natural man or man by nature is blinded, and sees not the things of God, they
are contrary to him, rather inclines to Superstition then the true Worship of
God, is naturally more steady in Idolatry then the pure service of God; will
you not take my word for this? Read Jer. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. seee if there be
such a thing; Has a Nation changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods; but my
people have changed their glory for that which does not profit.

6. I think you mistake Mr Whites Argument here: And first whereas you put a
natural inclination to truth and happiness; His words are, that hopes and fears
in the will, ignorance and the conceit of another man's knowledge in the
understanding, are the Parents of Religion: And I presume you mean the same
thing, but speak contractedly. Now I conceive it is not from this barely, he
proves the preservation of true Religion, as you seem to suppose, but from
hence, that man being not to be wrought upon but by reason, authority, or
power, none of the three can be imagined to have place, where the Religion is
supposed once true, and largely dispersed: So that you seem to take a part of
the Argument for the whole.

As for the difficulty from the corrupti- of nature in man, it is that
corruption which makes him deceivable by the ways mentioned for were his nature
entirely sound, neither power nor authority could be imagined forcible enough
to prevail with him against his own good, and reason cannot be supposed
opposite to truth. So that were there no corruptions, there would be neither
necessity of nor place for the Argument, which contends, That since there are
but three ways, even in this state of misery, to work upon a man, and that none
of them can be effectual in our case, the divine goodness ha-provided even
against the defects of nasture, and placed the security of our faith, beyond
the reach of its corruptions; for however vice may by as a man in opinion by
hindering the faithful working of his Reasons it, withal its malice, cannot
hinder him from using his eyes and ears in plain matters of fact, which is all
our Rule of Faith requires; the fall of Adam then makes not the Argument weak,
but necessary.

But perhaps it may contribute to your satisfaction to observe, that nature is
spoken of man in different significations; for sometimes by that word is meant
Reason, sometimes that frame of corporeal Instruments which concur to its being
an Animal: Now when you hear of the bad Inclinations of Nature, and natural
men, it is to be understood of the disorder occasioned principally in the body
by the sin of Adam, and by the union of it with the soul, drawing her into
evils, which are therefore such, because they are against nature, it being
unpossible that should be ill, which to nature is conformable: Man is therefore
truly drawn against his nature, even when he follows those which you call his
natural inclinations to sin; for since he is animal rationale, if Reason be not
his nature, he is no more a man. Now the Argument proves that natural
disorders, taking nature in the second sense, have not the power to prevail
upon his nature, taken in the first sense, either to lose all Religion, or
change the true one in the Circumstances accompanying our case: For it being
natural to man, that his words should flow from his thoughts, and conformably
to them, when a lie is told, that is, words are brought forth dis-formable to
the thoughts of the speaker, it is plain that nature is crossed, and design
works, that is artifice, that is not nature. And so we see that those, who are
not in a condition to use design, as fools and drunken men, always tell truth.
Further, those who lie, design, or aim at, some end attainable by lying, thus
force their nature, unless the design be only mirth, rising from the odness of
the lie, must either hope to cloth it with an appearance of truth, and conceal
it from being known to be what it is, or despair of compassing their design,
nothing being more evident, then that no man will be persuaded by a known
untruth.

Put then the Tenets of Religion to be universally dispersed, and visible in
practice, and the people strongly possessed of the truth of them, is it not
undeniable that who would go about to persuade them, either that the former
Tenets were not held and practiced, or that some new invention was formerly
held and practiced, must be known by every body, to tell an open manifest lie,
that is can have no hopes of concealing it, nor consequently of prevailing with
it, or compassing any design by it, that is, if he have wit enough to see the
impossibility, such a lier must act without a motive (for none acts for a thing
held clearly impossible) and so the action be directly carried out of the
sphere of whole rational nature which is obliged to act for some end or motive
good or bad. You see then, that in both cases rational nature, taking original
sin, and the corruptions flowing from it into the bargain, is destroyed and
overthrown by such an action, even of one single man, to which if we add the
multitudes, the millions that must conspire to this unnatural lie, since
otherwise their authority can never over-bear the counterpoize of those who
will adhere to manifest and known truth, the impossibility swells to a
proportion so monstrous, that it seems beyond the power even of Arithmetic it
self to comprehend it. And so much, though but little in respect of the
latitude of the subject, and strange advantages our rule of Faith bears with
it, for man's inclination to truth, that is, as he has an understanding power in
him.

Let us see what follows from his inclination to happiness, which is so the
object of his will that it cannot act without an aim at some good, either real
or apparent. Put men strongly to conceit their beatitude, or eternal
well-being, and that it depends wholly upon the Tenets which make up their
Religion, is it not evident, this conceit still remaining, which is our case,
that there cannot be imaginable any greater hopes or fears, (that is, greater
motives to the will) then certainly believed enjoyment of heaven, or punishment
in Hell, and this for all eternity? which being so, it is as certainly
demonstrated, that a multitude of men, thus affected, shall not be biased to
prevaricate from so concerning truths, and propagate so prejudicial falsehoods,
as they look upon those to be which contradict their Religion, as it is that a
straw cannot weigh down a thousand pounds.

Now put the Religion to be true, to be universally dispersed, and this the
Test of it, to admit nothing into it, but upon the account of inheritance from
immediate Fathers, as from the first deliverer, and this so, as that it be all
one to be not inherited, and to be not Religion (which three things though the
present business do not require they should be urged, are yet manifest in our
case, the two last being visible, almost to blindness, and the first undeniable
to Christianity, since it cannot be doubted, but that the Religion which Christ
delivered was true) and you may if you please perceive that the fall of Adam is
so far from necessarily occasioning a fall from true Religion, that mankind,
once possessed of the truth, and this method to preserve it, must plainly fall
from its nature, and degenerate into beast, or something worse, if it be not as
steady in the pure service of God, and preservation of the truth, as of it
self; the props which uphold the former being full as strong, if not more then
those which sustain the later.

. 7. The Inclination you speak of to underprop your tottering infallibility, is
very steady to uphold corruptions, and superstition as we accuse you of, not so
the pure Worship of God. Again, I pray tell me, since you have only proved, or
rather shown a possibility of your Doctrines succession, Is it not more
possible to deviate from the right line then to keep close to it? This
probability is stronger against you then any (I cannot see they are any more
then probabilities) you bring for your selves, that there could be no error
universally spread over your Church: Shall I give you an instance to prove the
possibility. The Jews Church, when their Forefathers were brought out of Egypt,
had not the whole Nation every man of them sufficient Instruction in and
confirmation of the true worship of God, so many wonders and signs as they
had, yet did they not corrupt the worship? I hope 40 years is sufficient (Mr
White thought three years enough for the Apostles to be in one place) to teach
the ways of God, and all those miracles they had to confirm them after they
were settled in the land of Canaan, how could they lose any points of Doctrine
received, or their Traditions be corrupted, if your Arguments hold: Was it not
possible (seeing it has been) they should afterward again, bring in their
Traditions for Truths, by which they made void the Law of God, as our Savior
speaks, and those Traditions (as Mr. White p. 124.) went among the Jews for
current sound Law, and afterward continued; ask them in one of those after
Ages, whether it came from Moses, (suppose one of those false Traditions) he
may answer (says Mr White p. 126.) he received it from their Predecessors, but
they can yield no account why any Age may not have changed that, but why may
not the Jew ask in what age (as you do us) or year their Doctrine was
corrupted; but (says Mr. White) If I assign an age or year, can they acquit
themselves in point of proof? (and so I say of you) clearly they cannot: for
since there was no Register, nor visible effects of this Doctrine; and so
unless you can show a Register or effects for every age and year, you cannot
prove there have been no corruptions among you, and so all your infallibility
depends upon uncertainty; what if there be not Histories and Records of all
passages of the Church (as likely there are not) how can I be sure there have
been no such changes as are possible? and where now is your certain proof?

. 7. The nature of man then, being reason, see not why you should so
confidently affirm, he is naturally more steady in idolatry then the pure
service of God, unless you will make the disorder of reason more his nature
then reason it self. What follows is an odd perseverance of yours, when by
taking so much pains to show he has not demonstrated, you cannot but
acknowledge he pretends to have done so. Your question, whether it be not more
possible to deviate from, then to keep close to the right line? will find an
answer in this reflection, that if a thing be made to keep us in a right line,
and to guide mankind so powerfully by it, that the line cannot be deviated
from, without a deviation from nature, (and this I have shown to be our case)
'twill be harder to deviate from, then to keep in it: as it is very difficult
to force a falling Port-cullis into a crooked line, which by the nature of its
weight, and directions of Art is determined to a straight one.

The rest of this Paragraph, and the whole following one presses the failing of
the Jews, an example against which there lie innumerable exceptions: for first,
they were a particular Nation, subject to be wrought upon by hopes and fear,
when any of their Princes went about to make his own wickedness National; from
which spring most of their failings were derived. Again, there wanted in their
breasts that great fire of Pentecost, which together with Christian Religion,
planted in their hearts that received it, an unspeakable esteem of it, and a
certain persuasion that all things, even life it self were to be neglected for
it, the advantage of future goods infinitely overvaluing all possible evils in
this world. Whereas, as far as I can perceive, the conceit, which the Jews had
of the next world, was very weak and slothful, being led, even to the keeping
of the Law, by hopes of temporal goods promised to the observers, the mystical
Land of Promise being generally apprehended but feebly.

But, what most imports, you say nothing, and I think can say nothing to prove
Tradition was their rule. Their Law was delivered immediately to Moses, and by
him left in writing, whose Interpretation was reserved to the High Priest, what
has this proceeding to do with Tradition? Or would you have it preserve them
from failing, who neither made use of it, nor had it to make use of? if
Tradition were not their rule, which that it was I do not see how it can be
asserted, pray what does their failing concern us? If not that, but the written
Word was their Rule, which I do not see how it can be denied, pray what hinders
your Discourse to be conclusive against your self, and their failing an
evidence, that the written Word is no preservative against Errors? This you
would do well to reflect upon: Mean while your Argument against the security we
pretend to by Tradition stands thus; the Jews had errors who followed it not,
therefore we, who do, cannot be without them: A discourse which as I should
never have expected from you, so I know not whether your second thoughts will
think fit to own.

But to descend to particulars: Had not the whole Nation of the Jews every man
sufficient instruction in, and confirmation of the true Worship of God, yet did
they not corrupt the Worship? How far the instruction of the Jews was derived
to particular men, I am not able to answer, and I doubt you do but guess. This
I see that those things which were commended to the practice of the multitude,
as their Feasts, Circumcision, etc. remained entire among all their failings,
though they were but a particular Nation, and wanted that inward fire of
charity infused by the Holy Ghost, together with Christianity into the hearts
of the first believers. And you speak of the corruption of their Traditions,
that is, private Interpretations of their Law, so far from being understood and
practiced by the multitude, that being delivered with the seal of secrecy,
they were not so much as known to them.

To answer your Argument then, what do you mean by sufficient instruction? that
particular men were instructed by the Law sufficiently to go to Heaven, I
conceive true: but that the instruction of particular men was sufficient to
preserve the Law from being corrupted, I cannot grant; since I think there is
not, in a particular Nation, force enough to defend it self from the numerous,
and violent a^saults, which the corruption of nature, you just now insisted on,
will be sure to make upon it. But how could they lose any point of doctrine if
Mr. Whites Argument hold? Pray does his Argument secure those, who neither make
use of Tradition for their Rule, nor have it to make use of? I, but was it not
possible they should bring in their Traditions to make void the Law of God? See
how weak a thing it is to dispute out of words. The Traditions you speak of are
no more Traditions* then Jews are Christians. These private Cabalistical
interpretations of Scripture, made by unknown Authors, and handed privately
from one confident to another, as Doctors among the Vulgar upon the authority
of private men, are what their word signifies, and our Savior reprehends. And
because these made void the Law of God, shall therefore the thoughts and
actions of an universality of people, in which there can be no juggle, nothing
concealed, and which have nothing at all common with the former, undergo the
same condemnation.

After this you retort Mr Whites answer to the Jew upon himself, and urge that
unless we can show a register, and visible effects for every age and year, we
cannot prove there has been no corruption among us. If this will content you,
'twill not be very difficult to give you satisfaction; for I beseech you are
not the actions of mankind visible effects of the persuasion from whence they
flow? if you find people going to Mass, adoring the holy Sacrifice, assisting
at Dirges, reverencing Images, etc. will you doubt of their faith concerning
these particulars? Behold then the visible effects of Religion, which if you
assign any Age in which they were introduced, we thus acquit our selves,
without the help of History or Records in point of proof. It being much more
impossible things of that notorious publikeness could be introduced without
notice being taken that they were so, then for a Tumbler to show tricks from
Paul's to Westminster, and no body regard him, the age you assign could not but
know they were then brought in: But the principle of that Age being to receive
nothing but what was delivered by her Forefathers, she could not admit of these
things, which it is manifest she was conscious were then first begun, and by the
same evidence, they could be begun in no Age, but that of their author, Christ,
by whom, since they are now received, it is very clear they were delivered.

See now how this will fit the Jew, whose Traditions, there being no such
principle to keep them out, may, for ought he can tell, be brought in in any
Age, and whom in so suspicious and fallacious a secrecy, as accompanied them,
it is impossible ever to satisfy, that the Masters he relies upon, either have
not deceived him, or are not deceived themselves.

8. Those Traditions, which went among the Jewish people for sound Law, (as Mr
White p. 124.) which the Pharisees taught them, have continued since with them,
in their several Countries where they have been scattered; although they have
no Sanhedrims, seeing they agree among themselves in them, May they not prove,
with your Argument, such Traditions came from Moses, they have been handed
still to them from father to son, and that in diverse places, so that they could
not meet together to compose this forgerie: so that it is no such impossible
thing, as to leap over Paul's steeple (though Mr White etc.) as for your false
Traditions to have first spread themselves very largely and by degrees, and
then being so spread to continue long, and yet to be false, there is example of
its possibility in the Jews, and likewise in the Turks, etc.

8. Here you argue in this manner: The Jews now, in the time of their
dispersion into several Countries, agree in those false Traditions, which had
formerly been taught them by the Pharisees, and which passed among them for
sound Law, therefore our discourse proves they came from Moses. Of which
argument I doubt your Antecedent has more of confidence then ground: for where,
or how does this agreement of the scattered Jews to these Traditions appear? By
as much as I can learn, from the small commerce I have had my self, and
intelligence I could get from others, they are far enough from an uniformity in
their opinions. Neither do I know their agreement is general in any thing, but
what the natural force, there is in Tradition, preserves in them, as the times
and manners of celebrating their Feasts, their circumcision, the ornaments for
their Synagogues and whatever else the obstinacy of perpetual practice suffers
them not to disagree in. Now this seems so far from weakening, that it strongly
confirms the force of Tradition, which if it have, even unawares, such an
effect upon them, I do not see why it should be denied its efficacy upon us.

You may perhaps think these things are preserved by writing: But I conceive it
follows not, that if a thing be written, it does not owe its preservation to
Tradition, and that both these things, and writing and all, have been preserved
by it. Nay, I believe that when you have examined the business well, you will
find little agreement in any thing, whether written, or not, that does not
proceed from this method. Though, were your Antecedent admitted, I do not see
how it justifies your consequence. For though such an agreement may argue the
dissent of what they agree in from the time of their dispersion, it will not
reach one jot farther, nor afford any show of reason, why some one of the
Rabbis, in the intermedial Ages, betwixt Moses and the dispersion, may not
have begun and dispersed the doctrine pretended to descend from Moses.

9. One thing more I shall take notice of p. 29. where he defends your
additions in Religion, an evident way both how error came into your Church, and
spread it self over the whole face of it; by your authoritative determinations
of new points not formalie (as you must confess) received at first, that which
you determine once must stand as an infallible truth, and what wonder such
spread themselves over that great part of Christendom, which you had set your
selves over, seeing all that were under you, must receive all decisions from
you for certainties, and these shall be derived to following Ages, and so
Traditions of later date go for Apostolic. God forbids not the Doctors out of
two truths delivered to gather a third, nor those that are no Doctors to do the
same if they can; but who gives the Doctors of your Church power to command
their people to believe all their decisions certainly true without any more
ado: Whether they be true or no it matters not, as long as they are uncertain
to any one, he is not bound to believe them certainly true, p. 31. Mr White
demands whether the refuser have a demonstration against those truths, he
refuses to give absolute assent unto? no, what then? must he therefore assent?
Is it not a sufficient ground not to assent? because he has no sufficient to
assent? I think it is, and I pray do you show the contrary, if I mistake.

10. A hundred Mathematicians only tell me there is another world besides this,
just such another; they are satisfied, but give me no ground to know the same;
must I needs swear it is so, and assent to that I know not as a certain truth
(thus you suffer your selves to be led by the noses into a thousand
absurdities) though the man by his probabilities is not to conclude rashly all
the Doctors determinations to be false, yet though he had no probability
against their decision, he must deny assent only upon this ground, that he has
not sufficient evidence to conclude their determinations certain. I ask of you
when a Council of yours meet, and from two truths received arrive at the
discovery of a third Tenet; can the Council err in this Deduction or no? I see
no reason to say they cannot, there is no promise for it, they are all every one
of them singly taken one by one fallible men as well as others. Nay, Mr White,
p. 227. says they may, when he denies any Fathers saying, a sufficient proof of
a point, no, (says he) not the chiefest of them, no not 300 of them together,
for so many Bishops in a Council have erred; well then, it is possible they
should err, though I will suppose it less probable, then that one man should
err, well but still it is possible they should err, and with what candor can
Mr White call it an obstinate and malepert pride, not to subscribe to a
fallible judgment, as infallible or certain, I call it blind folly to do it,
must I believe that true, which I have no sufficient ground for, I have it not
because their bare Assertions or judgment, who may be mistaken, are fallible,
so then I should believe a lie morally, if not logically, to me, though not in
it self, because it is uncertain.

11. Now consider, is this a trifle? uno absurdo concesso mill sequuntur,
though the first uncertainty, which they concluded a certain truth, be but a
small falsehood (as it is possible) afterward more must needs follow being built
upon the former, and so what wonder that Church swarms with Errors, where such
a principle is admitted.

Yet this way must be taken, the certain word of the eternal God, shall be
thrown aside, and fallible men that are parties too in the cause shall ascend
the throne, and make their word a Law, there is difference between keeping quiet
and not contradicting, and between being forced to subscribe to what a man
knows not certainly, this is wickedness in them that force it, it is forcing
often to sin, what is not of faith is sin. But besides, though Mr White say one
single man cannot have a demonstration against that which is determined true,
though we suppose it rare, it is possible for one man to find out what all the
world besides is ignorant of, as many have, Mr Whites own instance of Des
Carts is sufficient, who found out more then many learned Clerks, with twice
the poring, and will you force all to subscribe notwithstanding?

9, 10, 11. The Discourse in your following Paragraphs is strong, and worthy
your self, and though by mistake of our Tenets, not concluding against us, yet
full of excellently deduced truth. And first to defend Mr White, who only
maintains the addition of Truths, why do you so confidently call that an
evident way how Error might enter, and spread it self in the Church? Is Truth
and Error all one? or does it follow that because men are content to admit of
what they see to be true, they will not check at what they either see is false,
or do not see is true? Will it ever follow out of Mr Whites Position, that
there is no harm in adding of truths, that the mischief of adding errors cannot
be avoided?

Now, because I conceive the mistake your whole Discourse runs upon, is
occasioned by a wrong apprehension of the infallibility of Councils, I find it
necessary to observe that, though some of our Doctors speak of Councils so
indistinctly, that they beget such an opinion of their infallibility and
authority, as I perceive you fancy, yet the best Divines, with whom Mr White
agrees, do not allow any power in the Church of making new Articles of Faith,
that is, of making that to be faith to day, which was not faith yesterday, and
the day before, and always, which it could not be, without being taught by
Christ and his Apostles: whence it is evidently consequent, that if they cannot
make any new thing to be faith, neither can they oblige any to receive, and
believe it, as faith. Their power therefore of imposing Faith upon us (whatever
fancies the confusion of some Discourses has raised) extends no farther then
to such things as both were, and were known to be faith before their
Imposition: And sure no danger can be suspected from an Authority of commanding
that which the whole world sees whether they have authority to do or no. And so
much for faith.

As for truths collected from Premises; First, it appears they have no power to
introduce them into the Catalogue of faith; I except such as appear plainly at
first sight, and need no skill at all to their deduction, which, though in
rigor they be not properly faith, are yet in a moral estimation accounted the
same, and so by the world (which in such plain things cannot be deceived) are
indifferently believed. Secondly, A Council, being an Assembly of the learned
men in the Church, cannot be denied to see into consequences far enough to know
whether they be truly deduced or no; so that if they engage for the truth, of
any one, as it cannot be exalted into faith, so neither can it be imagined
falls without some prejudice crossing the disposition of nature, which moves us
to believe every one in his trade. Neither do I think, whatever you say of your
hundred Mathematicians, in which science being your self a Master, to trust is
improper, but that if half a hundred Carpenters should agree such a piece of
timber would fit such a house, or as many Surveyers that such a piece of ground
contained so many Acres, your heart could not choose but think it true, what
ever opposition the strength of your wit might make against it: So that Mr
White had reason to say, he that refuses to believe the Church, if his thoughts
be thoroughly sifted, will find in them a proud preference of his own private
fancy, before the wisdom of the Christian world.

Nevertheless to comply with the wayward humors of her children, I believe she
will exact no more in things of this nature, then a quiet submission, which
your self cannot but see absolutely necessary for government, and a not
opposition without evidence, leaving you the freedom of your inward thoughts,
to assent no farther then you see reason (which yet if you be learned, you may
have by looking into the reason her self goes upon, if you be unlearned, you
have no reason for any principle that governs the most important of your
actions of comparable weight to her authority) nay perhaps even to dissent, if
a case contrivable only, as I conceive, by a wild roving fancy, should be put
actually to have been, Viz. That evidence be producible against her, so it be
proposed with the moderation and submission necessary to the quiet and peace of
all governments. since I hope this Explication of these points will rectify
the mistakes interwoven through your solid Discourses in these Paragraphs. I
shall without a more particular examination pass on to the next Section.

SECT. II. Authority of Fathers; Transubstantiation.
1. LEt us come to Particulars Transubstantiation, there cannot be a more
absurd Tenet imagined, that could be fuller of Contradictions, as plain as any
contradiction in the world, that the Sun should shine and not shine at the same
time, that Christ should begin to be, and not to be at the same time, broken
and yet not broken at the same time, in one place, and yet in hundred
thousands; so many that you your selves are fain to look off, and confess you
are not able to solve, yet for this what ground have you? the Word of God? No,
your own Authors confess, you have no more cause to understand, Hoc est corpus
meum literally, then those the Lamb is the Passover, Christ is a door, a rock,
a way.

1. Which opposes the point of Transubstantiation, but so gently that the
difficulties which you would have impossible to Omnipotency, are (almost) as
familiar and ordinary events as any we converse with. But for the first, That
Christ should begin to be, and not to be, how do you verify either part? or
infer from our doctrine there is a time when Christ is not? Which is necessary
to the truth of your Proposition: It Is true, that this half hour he is not upon
the Altar, the next he is; but sure it could not escape you, that, not to be
upon the Altar, and not to be are two very different things. Now I am sure you
do not wonder to see a Wart or Pimple to grow and perish; which nevertheless,
while they live, have no distinct being from the being of the man they grow
upon, that is, are that man, and yet cease to be, without causing the man to do
so. And for those that follow, that Christ is broken, and not broken, in one
place, and in ten thousand, pray consider that the multiplicity of forms our
Savior vouchsafes to put his sacred Body under, is to his body, as quantity or
extension to substance. A man is but one thing and no more; his hands, his
feet, and whatever else go to the making up of man, being not several things,
but entering all into the unity of this truly one man; and this man by one of
his feet is in one place, by another, not in that, but another place: Cut his
hair, or nail, he is truly divided (that is, according to that part which is
truly he) and truly remains one.

Now raise your thoughts, and consider how very little more faith this great
mystery requires of you, no more then that you will permit the Author of nature
to do that by the multitude of forms, with which he is pleased to cloth his
body, which nature does every day by means of quantity, and see whether it be
not very unjust (to say no more) to deny that to omnipotence, which the
ordinary course of causes does so perpetually bring forth, that it never
concerns your wonder, and seldom your notice. You will find some disparity in
these similitudes, and so you must, for nullum simile est idem, but if I
mistake not you will find the very knot of the difficulty the same in both,
though the manner of tying be different; and however it be a little reverence
and submission to that power which extends to all things, should easily prevail
with us to believe, he is able to do more then we to comprehend.

For the rest, in what you say we confess, viz. innumerable contradictions
unsolvable, and which we are fain to look off from, certainly you must either
mistake our Authors or they themselves: none, that understood what he said,
ever granting a true contradiction in this mystery; neither do I believe they
meant any more then that the depth of it is not to be fathomed by the shortness
of our understanding; a conceit, even to a moderate sense, of that vast Abyss
of power, as well as wisdom and goodness, so far from unreasonable, that I know
not how the contrary can be excused from impious. And for what you make our
Authors say, that we have no more cause to understand the words of Consecration
literally, then other expressions acknowledged to be metaphorical; those who
truly say so [if there be any such, which truly I much doubt] are then pitiful
Authors; none, even among those that are far from the desert of being Authors,
being ignorant, That Tradition is the best Interpreter of Scripture, and that
it teaches us to follow the letter in one place, and not in another.

2. Have you derived this Interpretation all along from the Apostles? No your
Scotus and Bellarmine confess that, Ante concilium Lateranse transubstantiatio
non fui dogma fidei. And as plain it is the first Ages of the Church, though
they highly reverenced the Eucharist, and possibly by some hyperbolical
expressions gave way to your Error, yet were clearly against you. Irenaeus l.
4. c. 34. Panis terrenus accepta vocatione a verbo Dei, non amplius est
communis panis (yet bread still) sed efficitur eucharistica quae constat ex
duabus terrena (therefore it is bread still) and celesti. Tertullian l. 4.
contra Man. Acceptum panem and distribuentem discipulis suis, corpus suum illum
fecit: (how?) hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est, figura corporis mei.
Basilius in Liturg. and Greg. Nazianz in orat. de pas. both call the Bread and
Wine antitypa corporis Christi. Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 5. haec oblatio est
figura corporis and sanguinis domini, August. contr. didim. c. 12. Non
dubitavit Dominus dicere, Hoc est corpus meum cum signum corporis sui daret;
And Judam adhibuit convivium in quo corporis and sanguinis sui figuram
discipulis suis commendavit and tradidit. Si sacramenta quandam similitudinem
earum rerum, quarum sacramenta sunt, non haberent omnino sacramenta non essent.
Ex hac autem similitudine plerunque etiam ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt. Sicut
ergo secundum quendam modum sacramentum corporis Christi, corpus Christi est:
sacramentum sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christi est; Ita sacramentum fidei fides
est. Sicut ergo, caelestis panis, qui caro Christi est, suo modo vocatur corpus
Christi, cum revera sit sacramentum corporis Christi, illius viz. quod
visibile, palpabile, mortale, in cruce positum est: vocaturque ipsa immolatio
carnis, quae Sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio, mors, crucifixio, non rei
veritate, sed significante mysterio: Sic sacramentum fidei, quo Baptismus
intelligitur, fides es. Theodoret Dialog. 1. Servator certe noster nomina
commutavit, and corpori quidem idem, quod erat symboli ac signi, nomen
imposuit, symbolo autem, quod erat corporis. Causa mutationis manifesta est
iis, qui sunt divinis mysteriis initiati: Volebat enim eos, qui sunt divinorum
mysteriorum participes, non attendere naturam eorum quae videntur sed propter
nominum mutationem, mutationi, quae fit ex gratia credere. Qui enim quod natura
est corpus, triticum and panem appellavit, and vitem seipsum rursus nominavit,
is symbola, quae videntur, appellatione corporis and sanguinis honoravit, non
naturam quidem mutans, sed naturae gratiam adjiciens. So Marius Monachus says,
the Bread and Wine are offered in the Church, as the Antitypes of his flesh and
blood, and they that partake of the Bread which appears, do spiritually (not
bodily then, as you grossly) eat the flesh of the Lord.

From all those and many more I might name, I conclude that, instead of Mr
Whites malepertness, page 31. the contrary is a madness, seeing a man must shut
his eyes, first against the Sun, then obstinately resolve, come on it what
will, to embrace not only uncertainties for certainties, but gross falsehood for
clear truth.

2. You next make this Question; if we have derived this Interpretation all
along from the Apostles? which supposes the foundation of all our Doctrines to
be an Interpretation of Scripture, a Position disownd, as you know, by us; but
if the Question be, as I presume you meant it, Whether we have derived this
Doctrine all along from the Apostles. I answer yes, and appeal even to your
self, whether it were in the power of the Council of Lateran, which you
generally take to be the first, which settled that doctrine, or any other
authority upon the face of the earth, to impose, upon whole nations, tenets,
damnable to themselves and posterity, and impossible not to be seen to be so;
what is there beyond the power of humane nature, if this be not, That mankind,
brought up in a belief, that the Blessed Sacrament is no more then plain bread,
made to signify higher things indeed, but only to signify them, should of a
sudden unanimously run to Mass, there adore the holy Sacrifice, and by vast
Alms acknowledge it propitiatory for both quick and dead? Observe how slowly and
warily the Council, of Trent has been admitted into the several Provinces of
Christendom, into all which, even the Catholic ones, it has not yet, nor
perhaps ever will, as to decrees of manners, gained an entire entrance, and
confess the nature of humane things endures not so extravagant a power, even
in Councils, as to change the faith of the world, which it professes with this
persuasion, that eternal happiness depends upon it, according to an arbitrary
determination, and that the making of a new word should make new truths, nay
make that true to day which was false yesterday.

There Sir are impossibilities in nature, and may enter into a large fancy, but
never pass from thence into a sober Judgment, nothing being more certain,
then that, as great as the Power of a Council is, it is so far from being able
to introduce a new faith with a new word, that it could never have introduced a
new word which had not been found agreeable to the old faith.

Before I speak to your Fathers, who, you say, are so clear against us, give me
leave to speak a little to your self; and put you in mind that you and I are
now disputing, not of an obscure piece of Criticism, or unconcerning point of
Philosophy, in which a mistake is of no greater concern than the credit of the
mistaker, but of Religion, that is the way to Heaven, in which, if we miss, we
have the same hopes of coming thither, that he has of getting to his journeys
end by night who travels all day in a wrong road. Our Souls therefore, and
their Salvation being concerned in this contest, no plea ought to be produced
but such a one, of whose efficacy we are so far persuaded as to venture them
upon it.

Now by the great candor you profess, have the Fathers you cite, so much
authority with you? are you content so to submit your judgment to theirs, as,
when it appears what the path is they walked in, to quit all others for it, and
constantly pursue it to eternity? such, and only such a disposition may make
the pains requisite to so great an effect, as clearing the sense of the Fathers
in all points of controversy, rationally charitable: but if you have it not,
the whole business is turned into a wit-combat, and the Question no more but
this, whether of us two are better versed in Antiquity? and truly, me thinks,
the concern of eternity deserves to be treated a little more seriously, then,
if what is alleged, prove true, nothing is advanced, if false, nothing lost;
which yet I take to be your case; for if the Fathers say, as you would have
them, you profess not to rely upon them, if otherwise, not to regard them.

But I am afraid your manner of treating the Fathers is more liable to
exceptions, then your treating them. For, (to omit the want of rigorous
exactness in some of your Testimonies, which uses to accompany those citations
which are perfectly your own,) you have brought a Quotation from S. Austin,
which you make look like an entire Text, that proves, when examined, a
collection of several sentences, some not so much as his, scattered through
several books, in several Tomes, and cite for it a book never written, at least
by him. This proceeding, I dare say, is not yours, and I would entreat you,
since you refuse to rely upon the Fathers, not to hazard your own, or eternal
happiness, or eternal misery, upon the credit of, you know best whom, but in
all likelihood, (besides their being men, that is, in your principles, not to
be relied on, because fallible) engaged by interest or affection into a
partiality, which should be more suspicious to you, then the bare fallibility
of such men as the Fathers; and whoever they be, I may safely say, not
comparable either in learning or virtue to those great ornaments of the Church
of God. If ever you think fit to look into them, take my counsel, and look with
your own, not other men's eyes; It Is your self are concerned; and I conceive it
injustice to yield a submission to any body else, which you deny the Fathers;
Next do not only read them, by starts I mean, as an occasional citation invites
you, but study them, and persevere with diligence from the beginning to the end
of that piece you desire to be Master of; and then if you be truly
unprejudiced, and bring a willingness to embrace what you find, I am as
confident you will find the truth this way, as I think it extremely difficult,
not to say impossible, you should come to it by any other.

It would perhaps, not have been improper to consider a little in this place
the nature of Arguments drawn from Fathers; for neither do we hold this
consequence necessary; A father affirms this, therefore this is true. But
having been already lonlonger then I intended, give me leave to refer you for
that point to Mr Whites Controversy Logic, and only propose you this short
reflection; that since a Father is a Father, in as much as he propagates that
kind in which he is a Father, that is in our case, the Church, and the Church
is a company of faithful, and who are faithful, is to be known by the rule of
faith, that point must first be settled, before any claim can be made either to
father, or Church, since without it you can neither affirm of any man that he
is a Father, nor of any company of men, that it is a Church.

Farther, since a Father as such, is not a Doctor or deducer of Consequences,
(for so every Doctor of Divinity would be a Father) nor a Homilist, nor
Commentator, for the same reason, you will find the word, strictly looked into,
imports a propagator of Christian faith, by witnessing what the Church held in
the time for which he witnesses; but so as that the witness, by reason either
of his eminency in learning, dignity of place, or both, or by being an avowed
Champion of the Churches Doctrine against her enemies cannot be conceived
ignorant of the Churches sense in his days. To go therefore properly to work,
your Testimonies from Fathers, should be from men thus qualified, speaking as
witnesses, the words, though of the same men, if under other capacities, being
not properly the words of Fathers, but of Scholars, Preachers, or what other
capacity they speak in. And to these just bounds, would you, as you ought
confine your quotations, alas, how small a show would Antiquity afford you?
perhaps not four in her whole extent. Your present appearance will, I doubt, by
this reflection, be discovered to be made out of false Musters; nevertheless in
condescendence to you, let us now examine what you say, and let me wonder what
you say; first, viz. That the first Ages were clearly against us. Pray what
have you, or can you have to justify an Assertion of that sound? perhaps you
will say the writings of these times. But I should think that those who do not
write, are infinitely more considerable in number, and no less in value, then
those who do; and do not believe you can assign a reason why the Title and
credit of so glorious a title as an Age should be taken from them who certainly
best deserve it, but of whose sense you have no account at all, to be given to
those few who have given an account of their sense, but do not at al deserv the
title.

Again, even of those few who have written, how many are lost, and never
descended down to us, who for any thing we know to the contrary, may not have
been of the same opinion with those whose writings we have. If I should write
now, and you write against me, but so as my Book have the fortune to be
preserved, yours not: Will you not think the Age wronged, if a thousand years
hence they conclude that to be the sense of it which they find in my Book? Cast
up your accounts therefore faithfully, and you will find the sum total of your
Age to be two or three Writers in every hundred years, who are so far from
making the sense of the first Ages to be against us (for they are of our side
too) that they do not so much as make it appear what it was: Yet since you seem
to put a confidence in them, let us see to whom they will be more favorable.

Your first from Irenaeus, we look upon as so far from being clearly against
us, that we use to produce it on our behalf; conceiving it expresses very
clearly that what was common Bread before consecration, does by virtue thereof
(accepta vocatione) cease to be what it was, and becomes Eucharist, in which
are both earthly qualities, color, taste, etc. and heavenly substance, the
body of Christ. A second view will, I am confident, show you this to be the
sense of the place, and cause you to agree in this particular with Luther, who,
in his Defens. verb. Coen. is of opinion that the vocare Dei did make the
things to be what they were called, and that Irenaeus used the word in that
sense.

The next from Tertullian is accompanied with as great, though a more easy
mistake; his obscurity being very often not penetrable but to laborious and
obstinate industry; but if you please to look upon the place and thoroughly
consider it, you will find his meaning was, not that this, which he says our
Savior made his body: was only a figure of his body, but that what anciently
was a figure of his body, he then made his body; for his whole design being to
prove that our Savior fulfilled the figures of the Old Testament, the place
objected provs particularly the fulfilling that of Bread which being by the
Prophet, conjiciamus lignum in panem ejus, used for a Figure of his body, he
says is the reason why he took rather Bread then any other thing to change into
his sacred body.

The following ones, all but Theodorets, have the same difficulty, all
witnessing the Blessed Eucharist to be an Antitype a figure, a sign, etc. of
the body and blood of Christ; and that it is so, and usually, and well called
so, we agree, but that the Fathers ever meant it so a Figure, or sign as to
exclude the thing signified, we deny, and conceive it impossible you should
prove. In what sense they called it so you may, if you please, learn from the
last words of your Testimony attributed by you to S. Austin contra Didim. who
never wrote any such Book that I know of, but found in the Canon, Hoc est de
Consecr. and said indeed to be taken out of him. These now affirm the
consecrated Bread to be truly the flesh of Christ, and yet a Sacrament also, or
sign of his Body. How? observe, illius, viz. quod visibile palpabile mortale in
cruce positum est; that is, this body now immortal, now invisible signifies or
brings into our mind this same body as mortal, as visible, etc. being it self
in a different form a sign of it self. Vocaturque ipsa immolatio carnis the
sacrifice, mark you, of what? Of flesh) quae sacerdotis manibus fit, that is,
the Mass, Christi passio etc. non rei veritate sed significante mysterio; for
the Priest does not truly crucify, truly kill our Savior, but mistically
represent to us by sacrificing his now impassible body, that great, and only
once performed Sacrifice offered upon the Cross in the same body when passible.
Both actions, truly Sacrifice, both Victims, truly body, and the same body, but
one, under one form, a Sacrament, or sign of it self under another.

Now that the same thing in a different relation, may be a sign, or figure, or
image of it self, I hope will not appear strange to you, if you reflect, that
God the Son is the image of his Fathers substance, and the same substance was
made into the likeness of man, and yet truly man, etc. And your Argument, it is
a sign or figure, therefore not substance, is common to you with the
Marcionites, who argued Christ, because in Image, therefore not in truth a
servant, no man, because in likeness a man; and because in figure, therefore
not in substance a man; for which they are reprehended and confuted by
Tertullian lib. 5. cont. Marc. c. 20. So that your Argument, were it good,
proves more then you intended, and perhaps imagined, and not only takes away
our Saviors body from the blessed Eucharist, but leaves him none to take
away; for certainly the same Argument is the same, whether in Marcions mouth or
in yours, and there is no remedy but you must either relinquish it, or cannot
relinquish him. In short what wonder, that it is called a sign, when it cannot
be a Sacrament without being so? all our Question is, Whether it be a mere
sign? This the Testimonies should express, and not leave to the Readers gloss.

There remains Theodoret, saying, the nature is not changed, but grace added to
it. But what is meant by nature, then which a more equivocal word seldom
accurs, is the Question. In our ordinary speech very often, and in the Fathers
most frequently, the proper qualities of a thing use to be called natural, and
nature; and that Theodoret meant no more by the word here, ( viz. that the
nature, that is, the taste, color, shape, etc. of bread was not changed) I am
induced to believe, both from this very place, which tells us we are not to
look to the nature, or outward appearances of what is seen, but, for the change
of names, to believe the change made by grace, which change I conceive to be a
real, not moral only change, of substance, not office; since then the Bread by
consecration should become a sign of Christ's body (which if you will believe
Tertullian it was before) is no such mystery as to deserve a change of names
to require our faith, and be manifest only mysteriis initiatis. But more by
what he says in his second Dialogue, where he plainly tells us the mystical
signs are understood to be that which they are made, and are believed, and
adored as being the things which they are believed. Now what think you, was
Theodoret of your opinion that maintains such a change by virtue of
consecration as brings in adoration with it? May bread be adored, let it
signify what it will? unquestionably therefore, he held such a change as made
the bread to be no longer bread, but a fit object of adoration. And that it may
appear the rest of the Fathers were of his mind, and the interpretation, I make
of their sayings, not obtruded upon them, but purely their own true sentiments:
I shall present you with a short taste of their judgment, leaving you in case
it stir your appetite to desire it, for a fuller meal, to the large store of
their own writings, which if you please to fall upon, I am confident you cannot
bring a hunger, which will not meet with full satietie.

S. Ambros. de iis qui mist. init. c. 9. Quantis igitur utimur exemplis ut
probemus non hoc esse quod natura formavit, sed quod benedictio consecravit,
majoremque esse vim benedictionis quam naturae. How many examples therefore do
we use to prove it is not what nature framed, but what the blessing has
consecrated, and that the force of the blessing is greater then that of nature.
And in his Treatise de Sacram. l. 4. cap. 5. Antequam consecretur panis est,
ubi autem verba Christi accesserint corpus est Christi. Again, and ante verba
Christi calix est vini and aquae plenus, ubi verba Christi operata fuerint ibi
sanguis efficitur qui plebem redemit. Ergo videte quantis generibus potens est
sermo Christi universa convertere. Deinde ipse Dominus Jesus testificatur nobis
quod corpus suum accipiamus and sanguinem, nunquid debemus de ejus fide and
testificatione dubitare? Before consecrated, it is bread; as soon as the words
of Christ are added, it is the body of Christ. Again, and before the words of
Christ, it is a Chalice full of Wine and Water, as soon as the words of Christ
have operated, blood is made there, that blood which redeemed the people.
Behold therefore how many ways powerful the speech of Christ is to change all
things. Moreover our Lord Jesus himself testifies to us that we do receive his
body and blood; is it for us to doubt of his credit and witness?

S. Greg. Nyss. orat. Catec. cap 37. Oportet considerare quomodo fieri
potuerit, ut unum illud corpus, quod tam multis fidelium millibus in universo
orb terrarum semper distribuitur, totum per partem sit in un^quoque, and ipsum
in se totum maneat: Which having discoursed, he concludes, Haec autem dat
virtute benedictionis in illud transelementata eorumquae apparent natura. We
are to consider how it could come to pass, that that one body which is
perpetually distributed to so many thousands of faithful through the whole
world, is whole in every one in particular, and remains whole in it self. But
these things he gives by virtue of the blessing, having trans-elemented, the
nature of those things which appear unto it. And Orat. 1. de Resur. Qui enim
potestate sua cuncta disponit, non ex proditione sibi impendentem necessitatem,
non Judaeorum quasi praedonum impetuus, non inquam Pilati sententiam expectat
ut eorum malitia sit communis hominum salutis principium and causa; sed
consilio suo antevertit, and arcano sacrificii genere quod ab hominibus cerni
non poterat, seipsum pro nobis hostiam offert, and victimam immolat, sacerdos
simul existens, and agnus Dei, ille qui mundi peccatum tollit. Quando id
praestitit? cum corpus suum discipulis congregatis edendum, and sanguinem
bibendum praebuit, tunc aperte declaravit agni sacrificium jam esse perfectum.
For he, who by his power disposes all things, does not expect the necessity now
nearly approaching from his betraying, expects not to be set upon by the Jews
like Thieves, expects not, I say, the sentence of Pilate, that their malice may
be the beginning and cause of the common safety of mankind: but by his
providence prevents them, and by a hidden kind of sacrifice, which could not
be discerned by men, offers himself an Host for us, and immolates a Victim,
being himself both Priest and Lamb of God, that Lamb which takes away the sin
of the world. When did he perform this? when he gave his body to be eaten, and
blood to be drunk, to his Disciples gathered together, then he openly declared
the Sacrifice of the Lamb to be now accomplished.

S. Hierom. ep. ad Hedib. q. 2. Nec Moses dedit nobis panem verum, sed Dominus
Jesus: ipse conviva and convivium ipse comedens and qui comeditur. Neither did
Moses give us the true bread but our Lord Jesus; himself both guest and
banquet, himself both eating and eaten.

Cyril. Al. l. 10. in Joan. c. 13. Non tamen negamus recta nos fide
charitateque syncera Christo spiritualiter conjungi, sed nullam nobis
conjunctionis rationem secundum carnem ejus illo esse, id profecto pernegamus
idque a divinis scripturis omnino alienum dicimus. An fortassis putat ignotam
nobis mysticae benedictionis virtutem esse, quae quum in nobis fiat, nonne
corporaliter quoque facit communicatione carnis Christi, Christum in nobis
hahitare. Vnde considerandum est non babitudine solum quae per charitatem
intelligitur, Christum in nobis esse, verum etiam and participatione naturali.
Non credis mihi haec dicenti Christo, te obsecro, fidem praebe. Nevertheless we
do not deny that we are joined spiritually to Christ, by a righs faith and
sincere charity, but that we are not at all joined to him according to the
flesh, that we utterly deny, and affirm it to be altogether against the Divine
Scriptures. Does he think we are ignorant of the efficacy of the mystical
blessing, which when it is performed in us, does it not make Christ dwell in us
even corporally too by communication of the flesh of Christ? Whence is to be
considered that Christ is in us, not habitually only, that is, by charity, but
also by a natural participation too. You believe not me in these matters; I
beseech you believe Christ. Cyril Hier cat. mist. 4. Cum igitur Christus ipse
sic affirmet, atque dicat de pane, hoc est corpus meum: Quis deinceps audeat
dubitare? ac eodem quoque confirmante and dicente, hic est sanguis meus: Quis
inquam dubitet, and dicat non esse illius sanguinem; aquam aliquando mutavit in
vinum, quod est sanguini propinquum, in Cana Galileae sola volunta^e; and non
erit dignus cui credamus quod vinum in sanguinem transmutasset. Ne ergo
consideres tanquam panem nudum, and vinum nudum: Corpus enim est and sanguis
Christi secundum ipsius Domini verba; quamvis enim sensus hoc tibi suggerit,
tamen fides te confirmet, ne ex gustu rem judices, quin potius habeas ex fide
pro certissimo, ita ut nulla subeat dubitatio, esse tibi donata corpus and
sanguinem. Hoc sciens, and pro certissimo habens panem hunc qui videtur, non
esse panem, etiamsi gustus panem esse sentiat, sed esse corpus Christi; and
vinum quod a nobis conspicitur tametsi sen^ui gustus vinum esse videatur, non
tamen vinum sed sanguinem esse Christi. Since therefore Christ himself affirms
it, and says of Bread, This is my body, who dares from thenceforth doubt it?
himself also confirming and saying, This is my blood; who, I say, is there can
doubt, and say it is not his blood? In Cana of Galilee, he did heretofore by
his only will change water into wine, which approaches to blood; and will he
become not worthy to be believed that he has changed wine into blood? Do not
therefore consider it as bare bread and bare wine, for according to the words
of our Lord himself, it is the body and blood of Christ; for although sense do
suggest this unto thee, yet let faith confirm thee, that thou do do not judge
of the thing by thy taste, but rather hold by faith for most certain, so that
there be no place for doubt that what is given thee is body and blood. Knowing
this, and holding for most certrin, that this Bread which is seen is not Bread,
although the taste judge it to be so, but the Body of Christ, and the Wine
which is seen by us, although to the sense of taste it seem Wine, yet is not
Wine, but the blood of Christ.

S. Aug. Ep. 162. Tolerat ipse Dominus Judam, Diabolum, sunem, and venditorem
suum, sinit accipere inter innocents discipulos, quod fideles noverunt pretium
nostrum. And in Psalm. 33. con. 1. Ferebatur in manibus suis. Hoc vero fratres
quomodo posset fieri in homine, quis intelligat? Quis enim portatur manibus
suis? manibus aliorum potest portari homo, manibus suis nemo portatur. Quomodo
intelligatur in ipso David secundum literam non invenimus, in Christo autem
invenimus; ferebatur enim Christus in manibus suis, quando commendamus ipsum
corpus suum, ait, hoc est corpus meum Our Lord himself endures Judas a Devil, a
Thief, who sold him; he suffers him to receive amongst his innocent Disciples
that which the faithful know to be our price. Again, upon these words of Psalm.
33. And he was carried in his own hands. But this brethren, how it may be
verified in man, who can understand? for who is carried in his own hands? in
the hands of another, a man may be carried, no man is carried in his own. How
this may literally be understood of David we do not find; of Christ we do, for
Christ was carried in his own hand^, when recommending his own very body, he
said, This is my body.

S. Chrysostom. in Matthew. 26. Hom. 83. Credamus itaque ubique Deo, nec repugnemus
ei, etiamsi sensui, and cogitationi nostrae absurdum esse videatur quod dicit:
superet and sensum and rationem nostram sermo ipsius, quod in omnibus, and
praecipue in mysteriis facia^us, non illa quae ante nos jacent solummodo
aspicientes, sed verba quoque ejus tenentes; nam verbis ejus defraudari non
possumus, sensus vero noster deceptui facillimus est; illa falsa esse non
possunt, hic sepius atque saepius fallitur; Quoniam ergo ille dixit; hoc est
corpus meum: nulla teneamur ambiguitate, sed credamus, and oculis intellectus
id perspiciamus. O quot modo dicunt vellem formam and speciem ejus, vellem
vestimenta ipsa, vellem calceamenta videre; ipsum igitur vides, ipsum tangis,
ipsum comedis. Veniat tibi in mentem quo sis honor honoratus, qua mensa
fruaris, ea namque re nos alimur quam Angeli videntes tremunt, nec absque
pavo^e, propter fulgo em qui inde resilit, aspicere ^essunt. Let us therefore
believe God and not withstand him, although what he says seem absurd to our
sense and understanding; let his words surmount both our sense and our reason,
and this let us do in all things, and principally in the mysteries, not looking
only upon those things which lie before us, but minding also his words, for by
them we cannot be deceived, it is very easy to impose upon our sense: It Is not
possible they should be false, this is deceived over and over again, since
therefore he has said, This is my body, let us not doubt at all but believe and
look upon it, with the eyes of our understanding. O how many are there now who
say I would fain see his shape and beauty, nay but his cloths, his shoes? why
thou see his own self, touchest himself, eatest himself: Consider what an
honor it is which is done thee, at what a Table thou art fed, for we are
nourished with that very thing which the Angels tremble in beholding, and are
not able to look upon without dread for the glory which issues from it.

And Hom. 24. on 1 Cor. Id quod est in calice, est id quod fluxit e latere, and
illius sumus participes. Hoc ^^^^us, etiam jacen^ in praesepi, reveriti sunt
magi. And, cum multo metu and tremore adorarunt: Tu autem non in praesipi
vides, sed in altari; non foeminam eum tenentem, sed sacerdotem astantem. Nos
ergo ipsos excitemus, and formidemus, and long majorem quam illi Barbari
ostendamus reverentiam. That which is in the Chalice is that which did flow
from the side, and of that we are partakers. The wise men did reverence to this
body lying even in a Crib, with much fear and trembling adored it: But thou
see it, not in the Crib, but on the Altar; thou see not a woman holding
him, but a Priest assisting: Let us therefore stir up our selves and fear, and
show much more reverence then those barbarous men.

Again, Hom. 17. ad Heb. Eundem enim semper offerimus: non nunc quidem alium,
sed semper eundem. Quoniam multis in locis offertur, multine sunt Christi?
nequaquam, sed unus ubique Christus; qui and hic est plenus, and illic plenus
unum corpus: Pontifex noster ille est qui illam obtulit hostiam quae nos
mundat. Illam nunc quoque offerimus quae tunc fuit oblata, quae non potest
consumi. For we always offer up the same; not another, even at this time, but
the same; because he is offered (or sacrificed) in many places, are there
therefore many Christ's? by no means, but one Christ every where: who is entire
here, entire there, one body. He is our Bishop who offered, that Host which
cleanses us: We also do now offer that Host which then was offered, which
cannot be consumed. And lib. 3. de Sacerd. c. 4. O miraculum! O Dei
benignitatem! qui cum patre sursum sedet in illo ipso temporis articulo omnium
manibus pertractatur, ac se ipse tradit volentibus ipsum excipere ac complecti.
O miracle! O goodness of God! He, who sits with his Father above, is in the
same instant of time, hand, led by us all, and himself gives himself to those
who are willing to receive and embrace him.

I shall conclude with two, but those so evidently express in the point of
Adoration, that they seem of themselves enough to conclude the Controversy.
The First is from S. Ambrose l. 3. de spir. sanct. c. 12. Itaque per scabellum
terra intelligatur, per terram autem caro Christi, quam hodie quoque in
mysteriis adoramus, and quam Apostoli in Domino Jesu, ut supra diximus
adorarunt: By a footstool therefore let earth be understood, by earth the flesh
of Christ, which even at this day, we adore in the mysteries, and which the
Apostles, as I said before, adored in our Lord Jesus.

The next from S. Austin, explicating the same words in Psalm. 98. Suscepit enim
de terra terram, quia caro de terra est, and de carne Mariae carnem accepit;
and quia in ipsa carne hic ambulavit, and ipsam carnem nobis manducandam ad
salutem dedit, nemo autem illam carnem manducaverit, nisi prius adoraverit,
Juventum est quomodo adoretur tale scabellum pedum Domini, and non solum non
peccemus adorando, sed peccemus non adorando. For of earth he took earth,
because flesh is of earth, and of the flesh of Mary he took flesh; and because
he walked here in that flesh, and gave us that flesh to be eaten unto
salvation, and none eats that flesh without having first adored it; We have
found how such a footstool of the feet of our Lord may be adored, and how we do
not only not sin in adoring it, but sin in not adoring it.

These few I have chosen out of many, enough, I hope to satisfy you, that it is
very far from plain, that the first Ages were clearly against us. And that
those whose forward confidence has persuaded you to think so, have very much
wronged the confidence you put in them; it being not possible, for our selves
at this day, to express more plainly then those great lights of the Church have
done before us: That our senses are not in this matter, to be trusted; that
they may, but the Word of God cannot deceive us; that what we see in the
blessed Eucharist is not what nature framed; not Bread and Wine, though to our
senses it seem so; but the body and blood of Christ, that blood which redeemed
the people, that very thing which did flow from his side; which the Sages saw
and adored in the manger; that at which the Angels, in beholding, tremble, nor
are able to look upon without fear; that which no man received without first
adoring, and which, in fine, it is sin not to adore.

SECT. III. Prayer to Saints.
But to proceed, page 103. Mr. White strives to answer the Objection of Prayer
to Saints, alleged as an Innovation, and so a proof of the uncertainty of
Traditions, and their corruptions; the first Argument from the opinion of the
Fathers, who held that the souls of Saints were not admitted into heaven before
the day of Judgment, Mr. White only says, he does not believe it their opinion,
but he should have proved they did not, I wish the Arguments brought were set
down by Mr. White, but supposing they held Saints were not admitted, he sees no
consequence, which I exceedingly wonder at, what? Eagle-eyed Mr. White not see
it? No wonder indeed, when he changes the very question, which with what
ingenuitie it is done, I leave to you his friend to judge: the Question was in
the first line of the page, Prayer to Saints, he says suppose they were not,
may they not nevertheless pray for us? I pray Mr. White, Is there not a great
vast difference between these two, the Saints pray for us, and we may pray to
the Saints, suppose the Saints not yet in heaven pray for us, the Church of God
in general, not knowing every ones particular condition, may they not do it
without Superstition or Idolatry? For a particular man here, may and should
pray for the welfare of the Church beyond Sea, but can the Church beyond Sea,
all the members of it, in whatsoever place or time by night or day, pray unto
the particular man here in England, to pray to God for them, without Idolatry,
seeing the man here they all pray to must know the prayers they make whether by
night or by day, whether he be asleep or awake, whether many of them pray
together in several places, or only one at once, and is it not Idolatry?
Suppose every man of you in England, upon every occasion you had should pray to
the Pope, to get help for you from God; one in this Town is a praying for
health; another at the same hour in Wales for deliverance from Robbers, another
at midnight, when the Pope is asleep, prays for pardon of sin, I think you will
say this is Idolatry, making a God of a man, whom you suppose by praying, to
hear and know your particular conditions; but it is a quite other matter, if
the Pope should pray for all of you in general, (as we do for the whole Church)
though he knew not your particular wants: The Consequence then which admirable
Mr. White cannot see, is strong and good, for if you grant, the Fathers held
Saints were not admitted into heaven, they held they were not to be prayed
unto; because before admission, they could not know every man's condition, that
laid it open to them in prayer, what say you? could they not yet be admitted,
know every man's condition or not? If not, why do you pray to them that cannot
hear you? If they know (which Mr. White seems to hold in bringing Jeremiah
praying for the people) then indeed the Consequence is not forcing, and indeed
unless Mr. White think so, be does but fumble, as bad as your Seraphim of
Divines (so yours call Aquinas) about this very question, which by reason of
the badness of his Tenet contradicts himself in the compass of two leaves.

1. This Section treats of Prayer to Saints, and the first Paraph is employed
in making good a consequence, which you acknowledge little importing whether
true or no, since Mr. Whites second Answer is, as you confess, that which he
relies upon, nay which you acknowledge to be not forcing, that is not good, and
none in that opinion which Mr. White maintains for true, Viz That Saints even
before admission into Heaven know every man's condition. I cannot tell therefore
whether reason will justify my pains in examining, what before I begin is
confessed to be nothing to the purpose; and yet the bitter confidence of your
close, which calls Mr. Whites Discourse trifles, and signs of a rotten cause,
etc. prevails with me to let you see those terms do not become an Argument,
whose Premises besides being untrue, are also many ways nothing to the purpose.

First then I observe, that in the very place you charge Mr. White with want of
ingenuity, you would have much ado to defend your self, from a severe
Adversary; pray, if I should urge it, what reason could you assign of changing
his Objection, That diverse Fathers held non-admission before the day of
judgment, into this expression, that the Fathers held it, which signifies all,
or the universality of them, his, importing but a few. But, though you give me
occasion I will not be rigorous, and proceed to tell you, it is both unjust and
irrational, to exact the proof you do. Let those prove the Fathers held the
opinion, who say they did, else a bare denial is a sufficient Confutation of a
bare Assertion; the proof as you know very well, belonging to the Plaintiff,
not Defendant. But besides Mr. White disclaims meddling with the point, and it is
a strange severity in you to quarrel at the want of a proof where there is not
so much as an Argument, and to be angry for not finding what you are told
beforehand is not there to find; yet if your curiosity persevere, you may, if
you please, see the ground of Mr. Whites opinion in his Middle state of Souls,
Acc. 4.

In the mean time we must see what is to be said to the alteration you accuse
him to have made of the Question: which first, I will hope, you look not upon
as design, for no man plays foul play but for advantage, and it is the same
thing to him whether Saints hear us, or hear us not before admission. You see
he maintains the opinion of non-admission to be false, and therefore cannot be
concerned what happens, in case it be, for argument sake, supposed true.

Next, though it seem but odly spent time, which is employed in guessing, and
besides himself no body can do more, at the reason of the accident, yet I
believe from the experience I have of him, I may confidently affirm this
passage to be one of those obscurities, which his great intentiveness upon
sense, and small care of expression makes every body complain of in him.
Neither is this the first time that his overmuch minding the thing he would
discourse of, has made him forget some link necessary to the chain of his
discourse; which had it been made in this manner, the Saints whether admitted
or not admitted, may pray for us, and do know whether we pray to them,
therefore the Objection is of no force; your self would have, and have allowed.

Now that second Proposition is to him so clear a truth, holding that our
blindness here is from the cloud of matter which darkens every thing, and which
the soul being freed from, finds no obscurity impenetrable to her natural
activity, that he never reflected other people would find a difficulty where
himself saw none; I beg leave therefore to add it for him, and undertake to
defend it against the assaults your next Paraph makes upon it; though I
apprehend my self not otherwise obliged to so much, then by the desire I have
to proceed according to the rules, not of strict disputation, but civility: For
would I insist upon it, how could you justify your cleer-sightedness, and this
consequence, which, though Mr. White could not, you saw was good; if the
Fathers held non-admission, they held no prayer? because, say you, they knew
not, before admission every man's condition. This you see I have denied; but,
put case I had not, I am afraid you would come short of your account.

S. Austin and other Fathers are alleged by Veron, an excellent French
Controvertist, to maintain prayer to Saints, even while they doubted whether
these Saints heard the prayers made to them: And you may reflect, that prayer
to Saints, is a part of Tradition rivetted into our hearts by an universal and
undeniable practice; but whether souls, freed from the commerce of bodies,
receive intelligence of what passes among bodies; and this again either from
the nature of their state, or divine revelation: Whether the return of our
prayers to Saints be from their mediation, or only from the goodness of God
making use of our affection to creatures like our selves, to give us those
benefits, which otherwise we had never demanded, and so never received, and the
like, are School questions, in which speculative wits, according to the
difference of their learning and study, have met with either truth or error,
but acting all the while as Scholars, and never doubting the lawfulness of the
practice, which occasioned all these disputes, and which they saw firmly settled
upon a more solid foundation then all their School-learning, for had they done
so, they had disputed it, as well as the rest.

To take then all parts of your Argument, it is false, the Fathers held
non-admission is false, that non-admission imports ignorance of our condition;
lastly, it is false, that non admission and ignorance both of them exclude
prayers to Saints, that is, in the Fathers judgment (for the Question is not
what is true or false, but what they held to be so) since they prayed to them
even then when they doubted whether they were heard or no. Now I beseech you
reflect, if to reject such arguments be a sign of a rotten cause, what it is to
be persuaded by them, and persuaded in matters of no less concern then eternity?

2. Suppose that be Mr. Whites meaning, the Saints know what we pray to them
before they are admitted into heaven, is that your Tenet? To what purpose else
does he bring Jeremies praying in the Macchabees, to say that he prays in
general (as we do for the whole Church, though we know not its particular
state) is nothing to the purpose, the Question is, Whether we may pray to the
Saints, and in order to our praying to them, whether they can know every
particular man's prayer; if you say they do, you and your Apocriphal Book,
contradict the undoubted Word of God, by his Prophet, Isai 63.16. Abraham knows
us not, and Isaac is ignorant of us, which your S. Thomas can no otherwise
solve, then by imagining the Saints before Christ were not yet admitted to
Heaven.

3. Here comes your convincing, as you think, Argument against the knowledge of
Saints, from the Prophet Isaiah; Araham knows us not, and Israel is ignorant of
us: but I would beg of you not to put so much confidence in words without a
full mastery of their sense; for it is the sense of Scripture is truly
Scripture. You have found indeed the word ignorant, and knows us not, but what
is meant by that word, (and what that is, is the whole difficulty) you settle
not. You know that word, Luke 13.25, 27. is applied to the Master of the House,
Mat. 25.12. to the Bridegroom; and I hope you will not, from it, argue any
ignorance in that Master, and that Bridegroom, Mark 13.32. The knowledge of the
day of judgment is denied to that Son, who being so man that he is also God,
cannot, sure, at any time be imagined to want his omniscience. Since therefore
it is manifest those words have in Scripture many senses, what possibility is
there by the bare sound without further inquiry to conclude any one? The
Context, and your own later Translations, which for ignorant put acknowledge
not, persuade me they have here the same sense, as when God is said not to know
impious persons. But it is not for me to prove, but to show you have not done
so; and in the mean time to wonder so excellent a wit should make such a
bravado with a Bulrush, which nevertheless I impute to the weakness of your
cause, whose armory affords no better weapons.

3. That which Mr. White proves out of the parable of Dives, praying to
Abraham, is as ridiculous, for if it be a proof, it is either nothing to the
Question, or contrary to that Scripture named. But the principal answer (for
the former are but trifles, signs of a rotten cause) Saints are admitted to
Heaven before the day of Judgment, therefore seeing God, and so all things,
know our prayers, and so sit to be prayed unto. But seeing this naked,
groundless, not proved Assertion, is the principal answer, how chance not a
word to the Argument that prevented and utterly destroyed it, the Fathers did
hold the contrary? Is this a satisfaction to the Argument, only to say I do not
believe it? Be Judge your self and give a better.

3. You call Mr. Whites touch upon the Parable of Dives ridiculous, and say
it is either nothing to the Question, or contrary to the Scripture named; but
since you do no more then say so, you will pardon me if I have not that
captivation of my understanding to your words, which you refuse the Church; and
give me leave to put you in mind you cannot affirm it contrary to that
Scripture, till you be assured what that Scripture is; and farther, since
Scripture cannot be contrary to it self, it is lawful for me to believe, you may
as soon miss the sense of it, as Mr. White, whose principal Answer, you in the
next place, call a naked, groundless, not proved Assertion, and for naked, I
think you mean want of either proof or ground, for sure you will not except
against the want of Rhetoric, and then it is the same with one of the other
expressions: To the first of which I reply he has expressed the ground of it,
Viz. Tradition; and to the second, that being the Defendant, it was not his
part to prove. But how chance no word to the Argument? According to the small
insight I have in Logic, no argument either requires, or can have a fuller
answer, then a plain denial of its premises, which I take to be done here.

The Argument is this, Diverse Fathers, you say the Fathers, held non-admission
before the day of judgment, wherefore they must also hold no prayer to Saints:
Now, if I aver the admission of Saints before the day of Judgment is taught by
Tradition, I think I say also, that it was taught by the Fathers, and
consequently deny they taught the contrary and must believe, till I am better
instructed in the Laws of Disputations, when thus much is said to an Argument,
more ought not, and perhaps cannot be said. Let me add nevertheless in this
place, that were the antecedent true of diverse Fathers, if the Consequent be
recommended by Tradition, we must either reject the Apostle, or refuse to admit
of any Plea, not only of Fathers, but even Angels against it.

4. But to consider this principal Assertion by it self, what ground for it?
Can you prove the Fathers held so gross absurdity, and show clearly this
Tradition came from the Apostles, that Saints departed have an infinite
participation or omniscience communicated to them from God, as is necessary to
make them fit objects to be prayed unto, knowing all prayers of every one,
every where that are offered up to them? I much desire to see this proved.

4. You next demand the ground of this Assertion, and whether the Omniscience
of Saints be descended by Tradition from the Apostles? No Sir, I have told you
already it belongs not to Faith, but Divinity, where, if you please to take the
pains necessary, you may find it proved true, but not of faith; such things
belong to the School, not the Church, who will not refuse Communion to any for
refusing to believe it. The practice of praying to Saints, Tradition has, by
immemorial custom, settled her in possession of; how that practice is
reconciled to Philosophy, whether by the omniscience of Saints, by divine
revelation, or other disposition of providence, is disputed in the Schools:
while her aim of bringing her Subjects to the esteem and practice of virtue, by
the esteem of those whom the practice of it has made so glorious, is perfectly
attained without those subtleties, which have no other influence upon our
actions, then as fences or outworks, which it belongs to Divinity both to
maintain and enlarge; but so as that an Error in it does not weaken her hold
which is built upon a much stronger foundation: Mean time while you ask, if the
Fathers held so gross absurdities; if you mean omniscience of Saints, you see I
maintain it to be no absurdity, but a great and certain truth; if you mean non
omniscience, I hope you will hereafter be less earnest in maintaining what your
self call a gross absurdity, in either case give me leave to tell you, that for
diverse Fathers (for that expression, the Fathers, which imports them all, fair
dealing will not receive into its place) to hold an opinion in matters of
learning, which after ages discovered unmaintainable, I take to be a conceit
very far from absurdity.

5. Have not the holy Angels the same sight of God as Saints? whether Saints
are admitted or no, is not so certain as that the Angels are in heaven, may
they not as well be prayed unto? you must confess there is no reason against the
one that holds not against the other, and I think your Michael- Masses show you
allow both, and so run quite blanck against that Word which proves your
Tradition here false; 2 Col. 18. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a
voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels, intruding in those things which
he has not seen vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind.

5. That Holy Angels may as well be prayed to, as Saints, I freely grant, and
to what you object out of Col. 2.18. I answer, it is against those who so
relied upon the mediation of Angels, that they denied the meditation of Christ,
as S. Chrysostom upon this place testifies; Sunt quidam qui dicunt non oportere
per Christum adduci, sed per Angelos. S. Chrysostom. Col. 2.
there are some who say we must not be reconciled, and have access to God the
Father by Christ, but by Angels: An Heresy which I think, is attributed to
Simon Magus, and called in his followers the Religion of Angels. But the Text
seems to need no other Comment then a faithful scanning of it: for it does not
barely admonish the Colossians to beware of such as endeavored to seduce them
into the worship of Angels, but so as not to hold the head; that is, such a
worship as took away, or denied the head, and (...) ^^consistent with our
duties to it. Which words, being immediate to those you cite, had in my opinion
been proper for your consideration before you had settled your judgment upon the
place which is imperfect without them.

6. I cannot see but your Tenet is point blank contrary to the Scripture
howsoever you palliate it over, and blind your eyes with new coined
Distinctions. S. John Apoc. 22.8, 9. went to worship the Angel, who, in the
19th chap. verse. 10. had told him he was one of his brethren the Prophets that
kept the sayings of that Book himself, surely he could not look upon him now as
God, yet was forbidden to worship him with that Religious Worship you offer to
Saints. Or did Cornelius, Acts 10.25, 26. look upon Peter as God, when he fell
down before him? the Devil in Matthew. 4. did not bid our Savior fall down and
worship him as God, he had confessed God to be, and in saying, all these are
given me, employed God greater then himself; yet our Savior allegeth Scripture
to prove such an action unlawful, It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve, These words are nothing to the purpose,
according to your doctrine, for the Devil might have replied, I, You may
worship God and me too; thus you make void the Law of God by your Traditions.

6. Your next Paraph passes from the invocation of Saints, to their veneration,
and in the first place reprehends some answers, it seems you have met with,
under the name of new coined distinctions. And how to justify them, or know
whether they are justifiable, except you had expressed them, I cannot tell: but
in general, to quarrel at the use of distinctions, seems extremely unjust, it
being impossible, without them, to arrive at any certainty by the means of
words; for there being few, perhaps not any, which are not used in many senses,
what imagination can fancy a possibility of fixing upon any one sense by a
sound, which is common to many, till they are distinguished one from another,
and the particular signification applied to the general word?

Now let us see how you come to be so strongly persuaded of the opposition of
our Tenet to Scripture: You say S. John in the Apocalips was forbidden to
worship the Angel with that religious worship we offer to Saints, but have no
warrant from the place, to say so, where there is no word to inform us what
kind of worship it was which the Saint offered, and the Angel refused, and you
know how dangerous additions or diminutions are: there appears no more then
barely worship offered and refused; whereof you are so intent upon the latter,
that you quite forget the former, which nevertheless seems important enough to
deserve a reflection; for if worship were offered, and offered by S. John, that
illuminated and beloved Apostle, and this when, as you say, he was aware it was
an Angel to whom he offered it, I cannot see but to deny Angel-worship is to
say that great Apostle either knew not what was lawful, or acted what he knew
unlawful; two Assertions, which to embrace, I think, nothing but the necessity
of defending an ill cause, can engage a man; For my part I must desire none
will take it amiss, if I regulate my actions by those of the beloved Disciple,
and think allowable whatever he thought so.

But to look nearer on the place, the worship there mentioned being of
necessity to be supposed either due or not due; I know several things are said
to render a reason why the Angel might refuse it, in the first Supposition; and
the Saint be mistaken to offer it in the second; but either I understand
nothing, or neither Supposition affords ground enough to raise a battery
against us; for if it be put due, whatever the reason might be of the Angels
refusal, we shall be very unjustly quarrelled at, for giving every one what is
their due. Paying of of debts, sure, will not become opposite to Scripture, if
not due, what wonder if the Angel refused it? And whatever might be the reason
of the Apostles mistake, this is certain, that out of this, that an undue
honor was refused, it will never follow that a due one may not be given. That
which we give must be first proved undue, and unlawful, before it can be
concluded against by the refusal of one which was so. For, that some worship is
due, sure none, but a Quaker, will deny, since certainly an Angel is as good a
person as a Justice of Peace, to whom nevertheless, I hope, by the grace of
God, we may say without Idolatry, if it please your Worship. And for Religious
Worship, which seems to stick with you, I doubt there is a mistake, but know
not how to rectify it, if you bar the use of distinctions, whose service if
you had pleased to make use of, so far, as to have looked into the several
notions of the Word, my service would have been needless to you.

Religion then signifies the worship of God, and Religious by consequence,
appertaining, or relating to the worship of God, and this in several, and
unequal respects; as when we say a religious man, house, book, demeanor, etc.
we mean those persons, or things have relation, though differently, to the
service of God. Now the best and most proper sent of Religiousness, is in a
soul, and since no quality can be more, or so much, esteemable, we conceive the
soul, which has it to be valuable, or to have worth; the acknowledgment of
which, we call worship, that is testimony of worth.

Farther this worship, being founded, not on the worth rising from natural, or
acquired parts, from eminence of dignity, or any civil consideration, but
purely on supernatural, or religious endowments, we call religious worship, and
mean by it an acknowledgment of worth, springing from this, that the persons to
whom we give it, are highly in the favor of God, merely as such, without
mixture of any other consideration. This kind of worship then, is therefore
called religious, because it aims at God, being given to persons highly dear to
him; and purely upon the score, that they are so, and nothing is more plain
from common sense, then that he who honors a person, purely as loving another,
does by that act heartily honor that other.

From the action of Cornelius what you would infer, I am left to guess, all the
use you make, being to ask whether he took S. Peter for God? to which after I
have replied, that I conceive he did not, I know not what more to say: but me
thinks Catholic Religion has a strange Fate, that no act of Christian
modesty, and humility can pass without being straind into an opposition to it.

The last place is Matthew. 4. whence you would prove the Devil did not desire to
be worshipped as God, because he confessed God: Good Sir, does the Devil act
according to his knowledge? and can you be ignorant his misery consists in
obstinate adhesion to things against reason, and which he sees to be so? Has he
changed his mind, think you, since the fatal Ero similis altissimo? This was
strangely argued, but to wrest the place against our Tenet, is, I think,
stranger; it being to say men may not honor (venerari) Angels, because God
refused to adore the Devil. How little consultation did you use with your own
thoughts in this Paragraph? but you reply, in behalf of the Devil, our Savior
might have worshipped him, and his Father both: Which seems to me to evince,
past dispute, that the worship desired by the Devil was such a one as was due
to God: for had he meant only a testimony of that excellence which was in him,
do you think him ignorant of it who created it? or backward to express his
knowledge of it in necessary circumstances, who is justice it self? Evidently
therefore the Devil desired what belonged not to him, and ought not to hinder
those happy spirits from receiving Veneration to whom it does belong; and yet
we are so unfortunate as to evacuate the Law of God by true Traditions, while
you have the happiness to preserve it by untrue Interpretations.

7. Page 104. Mr. White has a most ingenious evasion of the second Argument,
confessing the Objection would have force if they did really doubt; I think it
is clear they did. Origin l. 2. in ep. ad Romans says, Whether the Saints that
are with God do any thing for us and labor; let this also be reckoned amongst
the secret and hidden things of God, which may not be committed to writing. So
Austin (de cur. mor. c. 39.) leaves it undetermined, whether the dead Martyrs
do help us or no, and adds that these things pass our understandings, and in
Chap. 13. of the same Book affirms, That the souls of the departed never know
what we do here upon earth, and does bring for proof thereof, Isai. 63.16. and
that of the Kings 2.22.20. I will gather thee to thy Fathers, etc. That place
which Mr. White mentions (I suppose by what I find in some, for Mr. White
mentions not the Authors he answers) is Nazianzen, Invec. 1. in Julianum. Hear
O thou soul of great Constantine. (Jacobi Billi annot. 2. in hanc orat.) if
thou have any sense, etc. What is this O thou most divine Emperor? for I am
forced to expostulate with him, as if he were here present, and heard me,
though indeed he he with God; and in his second Invective he calls unto
Julian being dead and damned in Hell. So that for 200 years after Christ, there
was no Invocation of Saints, as they affirm who have perused all the Monuments
of these times. Origin and others after him speaks so as it appears, they could
not teach it for a truth, seeing they profess themselves ignorant of the Saints
conditions, others flatly deny they know what we do, yet I perceive there was a
custom taken up among some to commemorate the deceased Martyrs, yet without
that impiety which afterward crept in. Austin, de vera Relig. cap. 55. says,
Let not our Religion be to worship the dead; we are to honor them for
imitation sake, but not to worship them for religion sake. This exhortation of
his implies, a superstitious custom then taken up, by some against which he
speaks. Et de civitate Dei l. 22. c. 10. He says we do not build Temples unto
our Martyrs as unto Gods, but we set up Memorials for them, as for men departed
whose souls do live in rest with God, nor do we set up any Altars to sacrifice
unto them, but we offer up our Sacrifice unto one only God, both theirs and
ours; at which sacrifice they are named in their order, as men of God, who have
conquered the world by confessing him, but they are not invocated of the Priest
that sacrifices: But afterward as Mr. White cannot deny, p. 105. It was
crowded into the Liturgy by Petrus Gnaphaeus an Heretic: Thus the private
devotion of superstitious men became first public, which some of the Fathers
plainly speak against, as Ambros. in expos. epist. ad Romans Solent quidem misera
uti excusatione, dicentes per justos posse ire ad Deum, sicut per comites
(therefore he accuses them, not for worshipping Saints as God, as supreme
being; but just as you pretend yet to do) pervenitur ad Regem. Euge: nunquid
tam demens est aliquis, and salutis suae immemor, ut honorificentiam Regis
vindicet comiti, cum hac de re, si qua etiam tractare fuerint inventi, jure ut
res damnentur majestatis? and isti non putant reos, qui honorem nominis Dei
deferunt creaturae, and relicto domino adorant conservos, quasi sit aliquid
plus quod servetur Deo. Nam and ideo ad Regem per tribunos and comites i^ur,
quia homo, utique Rex, and nescit quibus debeat remp. credere. Ad Deum autem,
quem utique non latet (omnium enim merita novit) promerendum, suffragatore non
est opus, sed mente devota. Vbicunque enim talis locutus fuerit nihil
respondebit.

7. This Paragraph is made up of Quotations, but so odly used, to say no worse,
that I cannot but conclude you took them upon trust, and take the liberty to
represent again to you the extreme injustice you do your own soul, to take it
upon pretense of the fallibility of men, and insecurity of blind obedience, and
implicit faith, out of the conduct of the Catholic Church, in whose faithful
bosom innumerable millions are secure, to subject it to a truly blind and
implicit obedience of some one or few cried up, not by desert but faction, and
if living, perhaps little known beyond the bounds of a Parish, I dare say not
reverend enough to sway an entire one, and who not only may, but do deceive
you. I should beg of you this Point might find admittance to your most serious
and quiet thoughts, but that eternal happiness or misery is a concern of that
importance, that where it pleads, prays, and whatever else the desire of
serving a worthy person can suggest, may, and perhaps ought to be silent.

But, to begin with Mr. White, I doubt you stretch his grant beyond his
intentions; for I cannot believe he meant the same force which he allows the
Argument, great enough either to overthrow, as you seem to suppose, or so much
as stand in competition with Tradition, so as that we should be uncertain which
to follow, the doubt of the one, or certainty of the other; but only that the
case, when proved, would also prove some Father held an Opinion in matter of
learning, not faith, which in its consequence was opposite to Tradition, but
because this was not yet penetrated into the opinion only, not the maintainer,
blameable.

To come now to your Citations: The first is from Origin, lib. 2. in Ep. ad
Romans where one half of the period is quite cut off, and the sense of the
remaining half, fixed upon one part of the words, the rest being suppressed*
Just as if, out of this Period, I will go to London on horsback, one should
leave the last words, and prove, out of the former, I meant to go on foot. The
sentence in Origin lies thus: Jam vero si extra corpus positi vel sancti, qui
cum Christo sunt, agunt aliquid and laborent pro nobis, ad similitudinem
Angelorum qui salutis nostrae ministeria procurant; vel rursum peccatores etiam
ipsi extra corpus positi agunt aliquid secundum propositum mentis suae,
Angelorum nihilominus ad similitudinem sinistrorum, cum quibus in aeternum
ignem mittendi dicuntur a Christo; habeatur ho^ quoque inter occulta Dei neque
chartulae committenda mysteria. Compare now the citation with the place cited,
and judge of the sincerity of the Quoter. The words have long since been
examined by Bellarmine, who lodges Origens doubt, not upon assistance or not
assistance, but upon this whether the assistance be ad similitudinem Angelorum,
or no, that is, by way of office and special deputation.

There follows S. Aust de cur. mort. who is so far from leaving it
undetermined, whether the dead Martyrs help us or no, (as you put it) That I
will yield my claim to him, if your study can furnish you with plainer and
more express words to signify in the very place you urge the Question was, not
whether, but how, those Martyrs do help those, quos per eos certum est
adjuvari, says he, whether by themselves, by the Ministry of Angels, or other
disposition of the Divine providence. Nay, his sense in that point is so very
clear, that I am at a loss how to contrive a way, being very unwilling to
impute it to wilfulness, by which he should be mistaken. For the Question
disputed in that Book, being, whether it avail a dead man, that his body be
interred near the shrine of a Martyr; S. Austin maintains the Affirmative upon
this ground, That such a Position causes the man to be more often and more
lively recommended to the assistance of that Martyr by the prayers of the
living; and how he, who justifies the choice of place in burial, by the
advantage received in being recommended to the assistance of a Martyr, should
be imagined to doubt whether there be any assistance or no, and think it
unlawful to demand it, the shortness of my sight cannot discover.

He is indeed (in his 13h chap.) of opinion, that Souls departed are not, by
the condition of their state, any longer acquainted with the passages of this
life; but tells us presently, that defect is supplied, either by intelligence
from such as newly die, or from Angels, or it may be from God himself; however
it be, he most evidently and undeniably asserts the custom in his time of
praying for the dead, and praying for them to Saints. To make an end of this
authority, there being in this matter, as in all others, to be distinguished
what is Faith, from what is Learning; the first being no more then barely, that
it is good and profitable to have recourse to the assistance of Saints: To the
last belonging many Questions, in some ages more doubtful, in some, as truth
opens to time and industry, more settled, but still remaining points of
learning, not faith; I only desire of you that you will please to be of that
Faith in this Point which S. Austin plainly and unquestionably delivers in this
very Book, which being insisted on by your self, I do not see you can offer
less, and promise I will expect no more: Marry, because in a point of
School-learning he maintains an opinion now generally disallowed; to infer, he
was against the practice of the Church, because his Position, in which he was
wrong, may be conceived opposite to it, when he both plainly attests, and
approves the practice, and uses much diligence and study to reconcile his
Position to it, is a proceeding I had rather you should correct, then I censure.

There follow two passages out of two Invectives of S. Greg. Naz. which I see
are examples of Prosopopoeia, and no more in them; but doubt whether the
following Assertion be stranger, or the Connection of it, with a so that, as if
because S. Gregory above 300 years after Christ, made use of a Rhetorical
figure, therefore in the first 200 years, there was no Invocation of Saints. To
the thing it self, I shall say no more; then humbly desire you to beware of
blind obedience and implicit faith, of condemning and practicing the same
thing, and if you will believe fallible men, to believe the Fathers themselves,
and not what more fallible men tell you of them. I would gladly know also what
those, you give so much credit to, do bring to justify themselves, and their
saying, that in that time there was no Invocation. I do not believe they
produce any plain place which deny such practices were, or were lawful to be
used; and conceive, they either argue from the silence of some of them, that
there was no such thing, because they say nothing of it, which (besides that it
wildly supposes whatsoever was writ in these Ages, came safely down to us) is
as much as to expect, that whatever subject a man chooses for his Book, he must
treat of all things in it; or else make use of, perhaps their Errors, in School
points, as the ignorance of souls departed, the impossibility of commerce
betwixt the next world and this, etc. to overthrow what they might, as S.
Austin long after clearly did, held true, even while they held these errors,
and this, (to say nothing of the injustice it does the Fathers, to extend a
mistake of theirs in a point of learning, without sufficient ground, to their
faith too,) is in stead of discovering error, by its opposition to truth, to
take the error for truth, and then conclude the truth to be the error: This
kind of proceeding has strange luck, to gain credit with so nice and piercing a
judgment as yours.

What S. Austin says, in the two following Citations, is the very thing the
Church believes, and practices at this day, and what whoever professes, she is
ready to embrace in her sacred Communion; it being the custom, even at this
day, that Saints are not invocated at the Holy Sacrifice, all the prayers there
being purely addressed to God.

And for Petrus Gnaphaeus, since you produce no reason why I should not, I
cannot see but Mr. Whites Observation is satisfactory beyond Reply; Viz. That
since his authority, how great soever it were, could not preserve him from
being condemned of Heresy; this fact could not have failed to peep among the
rest of his Heresies, had the Church not found it consonant to her faith.

The last is from S. Ambrose, then which I never saw any thing more wretchedly
mangled. The place is an explication of v. 22. cap. 1. ad Romans saying
themselves to be wise, they became fools; This he attributes to the vain power
upon the course of the Heavens and stars, who, by challenging an opinion of
wisdom from the knowledge of such glorious creatures, were lost in the folly of
staying there, and not passing on to the Creator. Selent tamen, says the Book,
pudore passi neglecti Dei, misera uti excusatione dicentes per istos, etc.
where first the word tamen is changed into quidam, which makes the sense
absolute, whereas the first evidently restrains it to what went before, viz.
Those vain Philosophers: Then pudore passi neglecti Dei, which are also
relative, are quite left out, and to complete the work, the word istos, is
turned into justos, which can no more fit the place then Giant, or Castle; for
he being to explicate the Apostles meaning, and the Apostle plainly speaking of
the vanity of humane Philosophy, would he not have hit his sense finely to make
him talk of Saints worship? Can those men's excuse be imagined so miserable, as
to allege, in justification of their not glorifying God, that Saints are to
God, as Courtiers to Princes, that never thought of Saints, nor if they had,
were one jot nearer their excuse: This is a kind of dealing which our
obedience, as blind as you conceive it, would not endure: But I forbear to
press it farther, then in behalf of your own happiness, to beseech your own
calm thoughts may work freely and impartially upon it.

SECT. IV. Images.
PAge 176. Mr White answers the Objection of the second Commandment, that if it
binds now, then the whole Ceremonial Law does, but I cannot see that
prohibition is a Ceremony? It is not repeated in the new Testament, therefore
it does not bind, I see no force in that Argument neither, many precepts of the
old are not repeated in the new, which notwithstanding bind us now: as, not to
lie with beasts, not to remove ancient landmarks, etc. Where is the tenth
Commandment repeated in so many words? But is there nothing of the second in
the New Testament? I shall remember you of one, and that is in the 17th of the
Acts, where S. Paul is preaching the Gospel to the Athenians: confutes their
(and your) superstition of worshipping the unknown (which was the true) God, by
bodily representations in the 29th verse; we ought not to think that the
Godhead is like unto gold or silver graven by art and men's device, God is not
like unto any similitude the art of man can devise, therefore ought not to be
worshipped by similitudes, therefore no pictures or representations of him are
to be made, whether it be of man, or birds, or four-footed beasts, or of
creeping things (as the words are, Romans 1.25.) whereby some, instead of
glorifying God, have dishonored him, and changed his glory, as if there were
not a greater evil (because of the greater disproportion between the infinite
Majesty of Heaven and Earth, and any finite thing) to worship or represent God
in a shape infinitely below him, then there would be for a subject to go and
fall down to a Toad under him, for to worship and honor his King in it. That
reason of the Apostle in Acts 17. is the very same with that Isai. 40.18. where
God speaks against his being worshipped under shapes; First, in many
expressions describes his own greatness and Majesty; the Nations of the Earth
all are but as the drop of a Bucket to him, etc. concludes from all, To whom
then will you liken God, or what likeness will you compare to him? The workman
melts, etc. What Mr. White says, p. 110. of the marks of the Church, as
apparent enough out of Scripture, I say of this point, If there want not will
in the seeker to acknowledge them. Lactantius says, Just. l. 2. c. 19. where
Images are for Religions sake, there is no Religion. The Council of Elibera,
Can. 36. decreed, that nothing should be painted on the walls of Churches,
which is adored of the people. Origin cont. Cells. l. 7. We suffer not any to
worship Jesus at Altars, Images and Temples; because it is written, Thou shall
have none other Gods, etc. Epiphanius epist. ad Joh. Hierus. says, It is
against the Authority of the Scriptures, to see the Images of Christ, or of any
Saints, hanging in the Church. In the seventh Council of Constantinople, those
words of Epiphanius are cited against the Encraticae; be mindful beloved
children not to bring Images into the Church, nor set them in the places where
the Saints are buried, but always carry God in your hearts; neither let them be
suffered in any common house, for it is not meet that a Christian should be
occupied by the eyes, but by the meditation of the mind.

1. You reply to Mr. Whites answer to the usual Objection from the Decalogue,
that you cannot see that prohibition is a Ceremony; but what is this to the
purpose? There is no distinction in Mr. White of Ceremonial, or not Ceremonial,
but a plain Consequence authorized by the Apostle, that who receives, as of
obligation, any part of the Law in virtue of the Law, be it Ceremony, or what
else it can be, is bound, in pursuance of that action, to receive the whole
Law. If you derive your Tenet from the Law of Nature, as your mentioning
Ceremonies seems to suppose, what do you cite the Decalogue for? prove the
Prohibition contrary to the Law of Nature, and you have done your business: But
cease to object the Jews Law, in virtue of which you either receive it not, and
then cannot press it, or else are obliged to receive the whole Law with it.
This Consequence too, that if it be not repeated in the new Law, it binds not,
you do not see: I cannot tell what dimness has of a sudden overcast as clear a
sight as I have met with; but me thinks nothing can be plainer, then that if
the whole Law be abolished, no part of it can be binding, but in virtue of some
other Law in which it is inserted.

For the examples you allege, of Precepts unrepeated, and yet binding, The
first is clearly against the Law of nature, and in virtue of that, not the old
precept, to be avoided. The second, how do you prove obliging, farther then the
municipal Laws we live under exact it? But what makes you demand a repetition
of the tenth Commandment in so many words? Cannot the same thing be commanded
in several words? or would you determine the command to the words, not what is
meant by them? But you have found this command repeated in the New Testament in
these words of S. Paul We ought not to think the Godhead is like to gold or
silver, graven by art and men's device; and if you can make these two
Proposition, God is not like an Image, and Thou shall not make an Image to
adore it, to be the same, I shall think that though Images are not, your power
in reasoning is, in something, very like the Godhead; for 'twill be omnipotent.

Then you discourse in this manner: God is not like unto any similitude the art
of man can devise, therefore ought not to be worshipped by similitudes. If
nothing can be like him and consequently nothing be a similitude, sure you need
not fear that worship which can never be, since it supposes a thing which can
never be. But I suppose you mean, by similitudes, Images, whether like or
unlike; and then pray how does it follow, no Image can be like him, therefore
no honor can redound to him, that is, no benefit to us, by Images. To worship
these Images, so as to believe them either him, or like him, which are the
things I conceive, the Apostle speaks against, we do abhor with the height of
detestation; but if they induce us to worship him oftener, and more ardently
then we should without them, how can it be but that to oppose them is to oppose
his worship? Therefore no Pictures or Representations of him are to be made.
Beseech you Sir, what Law is there against making Pictures which are not like?
Sure you would be very severe to ill Painters. But the truth is, the Pictures
which are made of God are indeed no more then signs, which present him to our
memory, and called pictures of him with no more justice, then a Bush would be
called the Picture of Wine. For the nature of a Picture consisting in
representing to the eye, the same proportion, color, and figure of parts, up-a
piece of cloth, or wood, which we see in the Original, I refer my self to your
own candor to judge whether we be guilty of the impiety of believing, parts, or
color, or any thing which the art of painting is able to reach, to be in God;
for painting is only of bodies, and those gross ones too; to express wind, or
those smaller parts which affect the Smell, Taste, etc. is beyond her Sphere. So
that none, who is in his senses, can imagine us so damnably senseless, as to
believe it is in its power to frame any representation of God, which, with any
propriety can be called a Picture of him. These, which we have, by custom,
warranted, and perhaps begun, by authority of Scripture, bring, by the shapes
they represent, the Divinity into our memories, and adoration of it, not of the
pictures, into our hearts: and, except it be unlawful to remember and adore the
Deity, I cannot imagine it should be unlawful to use means which conduce to
that end.

By this, I presume, you already see the disparity of the Comparison of
pictures to a Toad; but first, what mean you by worshipping God in a shape? if
you mean, that we hold, either that shape to be his, or he to be in it, more
then his ubiquity makes him present to all things, you either mistake, or wrong
us: and what else that expression should signify, I see not. Next, what is
there of common betwixt these Pictures, and the Toad, whether you look upon the
end, or means? The end of our Pictures is the Adoration of God, a duty, which,
since you cannot deny to be often necessary, and never unfit, you should deny
us no occasion that prompts us to perform it. And for the means: We conceave,
that, as no notion can be attributed to God, but with much impropriety, so we
cannot choose a better than what the Scripture attributes to him in the vision
of the Prophet Daniel, viz. antiquus Dierum. We use therefore, to put us in
mind of God, a Picture, which presents to our eyes the reverence of Age, which,
if you have any quarrel to, blame the Scripture in which we find it, and which,
by an universal custom, was, without memory of its beginning, and therefore, if
St. Austins rule hold, like to descend from the Apostles, presently conveys to
our Soul, an apprehension first, and then an adoration of God. For the Toad,
what has it, either from nature, or custom, to do with the King, that he that
falls down to it, should be thought to honor him? and what can hinder it from
being judged, even by the King himself, pretended to be honored by it, a most
ridiculous and unworthy action?

What you say next, of the conformity of the reasons brought in the Acts, to
those in Isay, I shall not examine; since the conclusion, you make, being no
more, then that nothing like to God can be made, I hold it as great impiety to
deny it, as I conceive there is impossibility of deducing from that truth any
thing to the prejudice of this other, which I am maintaining.

The rest are Quotations, so carelessly gathered, to say no more, that I know
not whether I should more blame your Credulity (for I am sure they owe not
their birth to the Candor you profess) in giving your self up to the conduct
of others, who are so able to guide your self or pity your misfortune that
those you honor with so much confidence, should so little deserve it. The
words of Lactantius are these, Quare non est dubium quin Religio nulla est,
ubicunque Simulacrum est. where by Simulacrum, is plainly meant an Idol, as by
the whole intent of the book, which is contra Gentiles, by his subsequent
proof, and by these words almost immediately preceding, Non sub pedibus quarat
Deum, nec a vestigiis suis eruat quod adoret, evidence past dispute. And had
you seen the place, you could not have doubted but his Simulacrum is a figure
believed to be God, and so adored, which, till we maintain lawful, Lactantius
is very unjustly brought to oppose us.

The 36 Can. of the Council of Elibera runs thus: Placuit picturas in Ecclesia
esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur, in parietibus depingatur; A
decree which may as well be made now, as then, did Circumstances require it
from the wisdom of our Governors. For we say not, that It Is unlawful not to
have Pictures in Churches, but, that it is not unlawful to have them. Now
because the prudence of those Fathers judged them inconvenient in those times
of persecution, and that place (for this Council of no more then 19 Bishops
concerns only Spain;) Can any Candor infer they judged them absolutely
unlawful, and unpermittable to any Place, Time, or Circumstance? Besides, as
far as probability may be allowed to interpret this Prohibition, it proceeded
from the reverence had of Sacred Images, which it therefore forbad, lest they
should run the hazard of being disgracefully or unhandsomly defaced in those
unsettled times, either by the moisture of the wall, on which they were painted,
or the malice of their Persecutors, impossible to be avoided while they were
fixed to the Fabric. For what else can Ne in parietibus quod colitur,
depingatur, signify? for so it is, and not as you cite it, That nothing be
painted which is adored. Which, if true, as it is much the likelyest to be so of
any thing hitherto suggested to my thoughts, It will be very fine, that their
care to preserve Images, should be turned into an Argument to overthrow them.

I cannot find any such words as you mention in Origin, nor do believe any else
will; having read the place you cite with some diligence.

That piece of the Epistle of Epiphanius is looked upon as a foul, and manifest
forgery; The reasons you may see in Bellarmin de Imag. lib 2. c. 9. And for the
last passage, attributed, by you to the 7th. Council of Constantinople, it
happened in the 7th. general Council, viz. the 2d. of Nice; and the words are
imposed upon Epiphanius by Gregorius, who disputed for the Heretics, but
plainly denied to be his by Epiphanius Diaconus, who argued for the Catholics.
Pray take care what credit you give to persons, who cloth a manifest forgery,
openly detected in a general Council, with the authority of such a man, as
Epiphanius; and so openly detected, that it is impossible your Author, who ever
he be, should be ignorant of it.

SECT. V. The Conclusion.
1. FRom all I have said I cannot but conclude; 1st. that Scripture is a
sufficient Rule to Salvation. If you ask me how I know Scripture, to be the
word of God? I answer, I have no cause to doubt it, no more than whether
Tully^^ (...) Aristotle's works be theirs; yea less, I see (...) evident by
universal tradition, in respect of place and time, All Monuments of Antiquity
sufficiently prove it, by comparing passages and circumstances of all times
since those books were first written. If the only Argument to move me to this
Assent, were only your present Churches assertion, I confess, what you use to
urge, I must receive all she says. But then I think, I must as well receive the
Alcoran to be the word of God, because the Mahumetan Church says so.

1. FRom what has been said, I cannot but conclude that Scripture is so far
from being a sufficient Rule to Salvation, (meaning, by Rule, such a one as we
have all this while been talking of) that to rely upon it, with no better an
Interpreter of the Letter, then the Letter it self, is the way to destroy all
means first, and then all hopes of Salvation: That principle being the true
gate, through which all the Sects, which, with their numerous swarms,
over-burden and afflict Christianity, have entered. For what the Protestant
Prelacy alleages to justi^^e their Schism from their Catholic ^uperiors, the
very same is a plea for Presbytery against Prelacy, for Anabaptism against
Presbytery, for Independency against all; and how far the Chain may be
stretched, which already reaches to the 5th. Monarchy, and Quakerism, none
knows; But this I am sure of, that every linck is as strong as the first.

For the reason you give, why you believe Scripture to be Scripture, viz.
because you have no reason to doubt it; it is an invincible demonstration of the
force of prejudice, and more of reason I see nothing in it. Had your mind been
in the same temper it was in the first Sect. of this part, would have been
reason sufficient, not only to doubt, but to reject it, that you had not
evidence of its certainty. For there a man must plainly deny assent to what
even all Doctors determine, though he have no-so much-as-probable Objection
against them, upon this only ground, That he has not evidence their
determination is certain, and here he must yield assent, because he has not
evidence the thing he assents to, is not certain. Which is want of evidence
must at one time produce dissent, at another assent, as it suits with your
inclinations to the case it is apply,d to. Besides, if all parts of Scripture
have been doubted of, Vid. Hierom. de Scrip. Eccl. in Petro, Jacobo, Juda,
Paulo. Spondan. ad an. 60. and 98. Com. Laod. etc.
and denied too, nay some, which you receive, by several even of the Fathers,
Why should not you think you have reason to doubt, as well as those who lived
nearer the Primitive times, and should know more? who shall satisfy a Critical
Soul, that all their doubts were ever fairly answered, and they not more
oppressed by strength, then satisfied by reason? and this also destroys your
pretense to universal Tradition of time and place; since that could not, in
your grounds, be delivered with universality, which by some has been denied.

And for your Monuments of Antiquity, I beseech you pretend not to prove it
that way, for I think I deal liberally, if I allow you to have examined ten
Authors of every age, and what proof are ten of the sentiments of 1000000? Then
what do you find in these Authors? certain places of Scripture cited out of
such books, as we still have; but whether those books contained then the same
number of Chapters and Verses they do now, you will find very few to speak to.
Nay I do not believe you will find ten in all Ages that give you a Catalogue of
the Books themselves, much less of the Chapters and Verses: So that your
conspiracy of all Monuments of Antiquity will not amount to ten men in fifteen
Ages. I must desire you not to mistake what I have said, as if I also doubted
of Scripture, which I acknowledge to be the Word of God, reverence it as such,
and know the denyers of it were, for the most part, Heretics. All I aim at, is
by an Argument ad hominem, to show the power of prejudice, to which what is
reason, when of one side, ceases to be reason when on the contrary. If,
therefore, you faithfully pursue your own Principles, what ever you think, the
true ground why you receive Scripture is the present Churches Authority, and
you should, as you rightly infer, receive the sense, as well as words from her.
And for your fear of the Alcoran, you will need no other security then your own
thoughts, if you reflect that all, which the testimony of the Mahumetan Church
(if that name be tolerable) concludes, is, That what she says was delivered by
Mahomet, was truly delivered by Mahomet; and to so much I think you will allow
her testimony good, believing you do not doubt but that Mahomet was truly
Author of the Alcoran; and so much if you allow her, you cannot deny the
Testimony of a Christian Church; Viz. That what she affirms was delivered by
Christ, was truly delivered by Christ, and farther Tradition reaches not. Now
the Minor, necessary to a conclusion of Religion, that what was delivered by
Mahomet, was inspired by God, I am sure you hold as great impiety to grant, as
Blasphemy to deny that which we subsume; viz. that what was delivered by Christ
did truly proceed from God. Tradition then of the Alco^an, and Tradition of
Christian doctrine, agree in this, that they prove, the one to have descended
from Mahomet, the other from Christ, but Christianity endures not either that a
delivery from Mahomet should, or that a delivery from Christ should not argue a
necessity of obedience, to what was so delivered, as to sacred and heavenly
truth.

2. Secondly, I say, if you can prove or produce any Tradition for any revealed
truth not contained in the Bible, as clearly universal for time and place, as
that Tradition which assures me, the Bible is the Word of God, I must embrace
it.

2. Secondly I conceive there is no point of our faith, but has, not only as
clearly an universal Tradition, but a much clearer both for time and place then
the Scripture, a truth which since you may find in the first Sections of
Rushworths second Dialogue: I shall only wonder here, you see not that the very
Arguments which you make against the universality of Tradition for some points,
as that they have been doubted of, and rejected by some, are every whit as
forcible against Scripture, whereof there is no pa^^ which has not been both
doubted of, and rejected too; by Heretics indeed (at least for the most part,
for some also of the Fathers have doubted even of some Books, which your selves
receive) but so also were they who rejected the points in question, whose
opposition, if it be not allowed against Scripture, cannot be valid to any
thing, but prejudice against points of doctrine: Be true therefore, if you
please, to your own reason, and embrace that principle, and the Communion of
those who own it, which alone can, with certainty, convey to you these sacred
Truths which are necessary for your happiness.

3. Thirdly, I cannot grant your Church was the only one before Luthers time,
there is the Greek, Abyssen, and others there may be in several parts of the
world that I know not of.

3. Thirdly, What you mean here by our Church, I cannot tell; if only, that
number of Orthodox Christians, who live within the Precincts of the Roman,
either Diocese or Patriarchate, I know no body maintains, I Am sure I do not
believe, the number of the faithful is confined to that Pale. But to answer of
every particular place where Christians live, till it be agreed what they held;
and of what may be too, as well as what is, seems unreasonable eifor me to
undertake, or you to exact; thus much is true in general, that whatever company
of men, wherever they live, hold this only principle of unity both in faith
and government, so as to be a Church, are, not another, but our Church; and who
hold it not, are no Church at all.

4. Fourthly, I see no necessity, that any one particular Church should
continue uncorrupted, or that it is necessary, the greatest number of
Professors of Christianity should have uncorrupted Religion. In the days of
Elijah the Prophet, there were but 700 that had not bowed the knee to Baal,
which the Prophet, that thought himself alone, knew not of.

4. That there is any necessity a particular Church should always remain
uncorrupted, or that the greatest number of professors of Christianity should
have uncorrupted Religion, are two Propositions, which, since any body does, I
am sure no body is bound to maintain, I am glad they impose upon me no
necessity of contest with you in this Paragraph. But least you should think, it
would follow thence that Tradition were uncertain; I must affirm that, not only
a particular Church, but scarcely a particular family, that is, well
instructed, can possibly err, if they stick to Tradition, and that the
universality of the Church, though ten thousand times more dispersed then it
is, cannot secure it from error, if they desert it.

5. Lastly, I see no proof of your infallibility, sure I am, it is a safer way
to preserve truths in writing then to be transmitted by the various
apprehensions and mmories of multitudes, and truly I believe you would not have
retained so much truth as you have, had it not been for the Bible, and other
writings, and so I see not how you prove any thing has been entirely
transmitted only by Tradition. Much less how it is proved, there could creep
no error into your Faith.

. 5. Lastly, I would fain flatter my self, with hopes of success, in the design
I have had to serve you; but however that proves, must needs take the liberty
to think, if you do not yet see the proof you mention, the fault is not in the
object. Only I presume there is no mistake in the word Infallibility, which
placed singly, may speak an Attribute too much approaching to Divinity to
belong to any thing of mortal, but by extraordinary privilege, since it
extends it self to all subjects whatsoever* whereas with us it is confined to
matters of Faith, and signifies but this, that we can neither be deceived in
what we hear, nor deceive our posterity in what we relate concerning these
matters. Now it being the nature of man to speak truth, and the number of men
being, in this case beyond all temptations, whether of hopes, fears, or
whatever else may be imagined should prevail with them to contradict their
nature, I cannot see but a little reflection must needs make you acknowledge
it is beyond the power of imagination it self to put any deceit in their
testimony, since it will be to put an effect, whose cause, the putter sees,
neither is, nor, can be.

That Truths may be preserved in writing I doubt not; nay, even better, then by
the various apprehensions, and memories of multitudes: But if there be no
variety in their apprehensions, nor dependence on their memories, continual
practice, overweighing the defects of nature, I cannot see but it is much easier
to beat a man from a sense whereof he has no other hold then a word, appliable
to another sense, then to beat a multitude from the judgments which they are
in possession of, and confirmed by the daily actions of their whole lives.
Besides, while the writings preserve the truth, who shall preserve the writings
from false copying, and all the errors which both negligence and knavery
threaten them withal? and if the Vessel be tainted, what shall keep the Wine
pure?

For the rest, I conceive, that whatever you think of us, your selves would not
have the truths you have, had not nature maintained that Tradition in your
practice, you deny in your words; Your faith of the Blessed Trinity is right,
because no interest has yet moved you to follow your principles against it: But
give an Arian the same liberty against it, you take against us, and if you
convince him, you will as much deceive me, as I think you do your selves to
believe you can do it. The same I say of Baptism, of Prelacy, and the rest of
those truths you profess, all which, while you pretend Scripture, it is
Tradition which has truly conveyed to you, and you have kept since because no
body has opposed them, but when they do, have no more hold then of those you
have deserted. Neither is it possible for your principles to convince an
Adversary that makes advantage of them, neither just to condemn him, for it
will be to condemn your selves and that plea, which, if it justify you, must
absolve him.

That faith has been so transmitted by Tradition, that it has not been written,
is not Mr. Whites tenet; but that writing, at least the writings we have, is
not able so to transmit it, as is necessary for the Salvation of mankind,
without Tradition. This being the security of whatever writing faith is
contained in; if it be Scripture, we know the sense by Tradition: if a Father,
he is of authority, in as much as what he writes is consonant to Tradition; if
any thing be found to disagree, that not having any weight.

6. First, I ask whether an Error cannot overspread the face of the greatest
Church visible? It has done so in the Arians time, In our Saviors time.

Secondly, whether an Error once spread cannot continue? Arianism continued
most universal for many years: Mahomets Errors and Blasphemies for many Ages:
Jewish Suppositious Traditions, longer yet then they. What security then can a
man have, that Errors could not creep into the the Church? while it is your
Principle to embrace any thing your Councils shall determine.

6. To your first Question I answer, if that may be called a Church, which
wants the only principle which can make a Church, I conceive an error may very
easily overspread the face of the greatest visible; There being no more to do
then to desert this Rule, and then truth will, not only easily, but almost
certainly desert her; without adhering to Tradition, I know no security, any
number of men, be it never so great, can have of truths above the reach of
natural reason, such as are the Maxims of Religion; But let the Church, you
speak of, adhere to Tradition, and be largely diffused, and I conceive it as
impossible that Error should overspread it, as that it should be ignorant of
what it does every day.

To the second, since the supposal of an Er^^^s being spread, supposes a
destruction of that fence, which only could keep it out, viz. cleaving to
Tradition, I conceive an Error once spread not only may, but will continue
without extraordinary Providence of Almighty God. Arianism, which you
exemplify in, was plainly brought in by preferring the interpretations, which
Arius made of Scripture, (as you do those of Luther, etc.) before the Doctrine
delivered by their Forefathers, neither was there any cure for the disease,
till they purged themselves of novelty, and rested in the ancient Doctrine.
Mahomet also took the same course, and all those, whom his impieties will bring
to Hell, will owe their damnation to the deserting of this principle, which had
his followers not first been cozened from, it had not been possible for him to
have undon so great a part of the world. Jewish Traditions I have already
spoken of, and hope I need not again put you in mind, they have nothing common
with Tradition but the name. This principle then, and only this of adhering to
Tradition, gives a man all imaginable security that Errors neither have, nor
could creep into our Church.

As for blindly embracing what ever is determined by Councils, I doubt you are
not Master of our Doctrine in that point. For the Rule, even of Councils
themselves, is Tradition, and were it possible They should contradict it, we
are taught to adhere to Tradition against both them, and Angels too. Whether
the case can ever happen I know not, and conceive nothing, but the roving of a
wild fancy, will make it possible: but if it do, I have told you our Doctrine.

7. What though you have Tenets of a 1000 years standing, they are never the
truer, seeing Errors have been so long, and longer ago, and some are known to
have been propagated as far from Father to Son, it is all one as if they
yesterday begun, seeing the succeeding age has nothing of Divine truth, which
was not in the precedent. Now how can you assure us, every one of yours were
clearly throughout every one age. The Reason page 8. ( which Mr. White makes
his Demonstration) to me is a mere Sophism the 8th. age suppose, could not
entertain any new Opinion or Error^ because its principle was, by which it was
to judge of truth; Nothing is to be admitted as of Faith, except what was
delivered to it by the former, the Reason of the Consequence is, because then
they would contradict themselves. What then? Is it impossible for a man to take
up a new Opinion, and think it true (though he be mistaken) because of some
principle he holds, which proves it false, if discerned; How is that argument
clear convincing of it self, without the help of other considerations (reason,
common sense, and experience, tell me the contrary?) If it be sufficient, why
does not Mr. White keep to it alone (I find him scarce ever after making use of
it) without any other to salve all Objections by? as he might if it were
universally true and evident. All he says is to evade the Arguments, and only
keep to this; That no age did adm^t any new point de facto, which way I
confess sufficient for you to keep your hold, if satisfactorily done; but then
you must not pretend to infallibility, for you only prove seemingly)
posse^sion, but I see nothing proves the impossibility of the contrary, suppose
one grant you the possession: I see the largeness of your Territories, is that
wherein your chief strength does lie. Mr. White often denies the possibility of
any corruption, because it would have bred such a combustion as would have been
known; this is the only appearance of Reason or Proof, that to my best
Apprehension, I find in both him, and Mr. Rushworth. But without quotation of
innumerable Authors which he promises to perform only by Reason) he can never
give any positive sufficient Proof, that there was never in any age such
commotions as did give way to any one innovation. I use Mr. Whites own
Argument, p. 117. For a man not to Act, not to turn from your Religion, it is
enough to have no Reason; but to Act, to prove that your Rellgion is
infallible, or to a Pagan, that it is the true uncorrupted, you ought to have a
positive cause.

7. I agree with you that the age of Errors, gives them no approach to Truth;
and that one of 1000 years is no less an Error, then one of but a day old. But
you must also agree with me, that it is a great prejudice against its being an
Error, if a Tenet have with constancy and generality been held so great a space
of time. For what subtlety can obscure it from the eyes of the world, that in
so long time it should not be discovered? Prove therefore, but do not suppose,
our Tenets to be Errors; and as then Age will afford them no patronage, so till
then it makes the presumption of truth to be clearly on their side; This being
most evident in our case, that Truth cannot be without Age, nor Novelty with
Truth. For the assurance you desire that every part of our faith was clearly
throughout every age, you may receive it by reflecting that it is clearly
through the present age, which, because of the forementioned principle* could
not be, without its having been so through the last. Now what your eyes show
you in these two Ages, your Judgment (if ye suffer it to sway you, and nothing
to sway it) will assure you must have happened in every age, the case being
perfectly the same in all.

You think Mr. Whites Argument a Sophisme, because a man may take up a new
opinion, and think it true, though he be mistaken. But can he think his new
opinion, which he takes up, was delivered him by his Forefathers, that is, not
new, and not taken up? Till he do this, which is palpable contradiction, let
him think his Opinions never so true, his thoughts will bring no prejudice to
the Argument. For to be True, and to be of Faith, are two quite different
things: This, supposes being delivered, and your opinion is supposed newly
taken up, that is not delivered, that is not of Faith, and seen not to be so;
now if reason, common sense, and experience tell you that who thinks a thing
true, must therefore think it of Faith, when, by (...) it also, that is, prove
it; but then we must not pretend to Infallibility, I think no body does
pretend, that who has proved no Errors have come in, has proved no Errors can
come in; we endeavor to prove this too, when we pretend to prove
infallibility. For you only prove seemingly the possession, I do not know who
does so much as seem to go about the proving of that which is apparent in it
self beyond the evidence of proof: That Luther was a Member of the Catholic
Church, till he set himself to oppose it, and that till he changed his
profession, he professed what the Church then did, and has ever since
maintained, (and what I instance only in Luther, I understand of all
introducers of Novelty that ever deserted the Church) are things beyond either
the necessity, or rather power of proof, for I am yet to learn in what Mood and
Figure that Syllogism must be, which must prove the Sun shines at noon.

I see the largeness of your territories is that wherein your chief strength
lies. It Is indeed universality which renders nature true and constant to her
self, whereas in a particular she may be defective; one man may be born lame,
or blind, but not all. That corruption would have bred a combustion, which must
have been known, you acknowledge has some appearance of reason, though nothing
else has: Thanks be to God at least for so much, which if you would please
fairly to own, and make a step to a further progress, without diminishing it
into appearance of reason, when I must take the liberty to think, nothing
appears reason you can oppose against it, you were in a hopeful way to your
satisfaction; but not to admit a truth, seen to be so, is a weakness, which
destroys all possibility either of advance in your self, or success in the
pains which are taken for you; for what more can be done; then to deliver a
truth with that plainness that no reason can be found out to encounter it? But
quotations are necessary to make up Mr. Whites proof; if it were so, eternal
happiness might well deserve a little labor; but must Authors be quoted to
show, that, if the corruption be taken notice of, it could not come in
unawares, and if not unawares then openly; and this either by reason, which is
to change the natures of truth and falsehood, or force which to overcome the
extent of the Church, and continue so many ages as is necessary to the
plantation of Errors of this importance, nature, without looking into Books,
tells us the impossibility of.

The Argument you make in the last place, I beseech you make against your self,
and since it is in a matter of no less concern then eternal either happiness or
misery, make it faithfully. Consider that if, not to act, no reason is
requisite, to act there must be reason; you have acted, and though not actually
begun a separation, yet actually follow, and adhere to those who did begin it,
and do continue it. This action in a case of such importance as S^^ism,
requires such reason as is fit for salvation to depend on. Examine therefore
your reasons, but severely, and so as your Conscience be willing and secure to
own them at that Judgment where the sentence is eternity, and if you find them
to have near the force of those of ours, which you say have no force, I shall
think either your judgment strangely biased, or mine strangely blind. This to
you, but to a Pagan I acknowledge he is not to be put upon the proof; you may if
you please, for your experience, reflect what yourself would say to one, and
see whether you can say any thing stronger to him, then we do to you; if your
thoughts be faithful to you, I doubt, what you deny reason against your self,
must either be reason against him, or you will have much ado to keep your
Arguments from being unreasonable. I have had some proof of this, in a Divine
of yours, famous, and I think deservedly, as any of your side; whose discourse
upon this Theme makes experience join with my reason to strengthen the
confidence I have of the truth of what I say.

8. I cannot see, how you that take away the distinction of Fundamental, and a
non-Fundamental in points of faith, can evade that of the Quartadecimans
proving the chief part of Christians to have been mistaken in this Traditional
way, holding by it contradictions, while each part pretends this title, and so
shows it, not an infallible way, to say it was a small point received in some
Churches. In answer, to the gradual receiving of the Cannon, you confess one
Province may have sufficient evidence of that one truth, which from it must be
spread over the rest of the Church.

I think those things which I have written prove not only your way not only
fallible, but false in many points. Several other things I have observed in Mr.
White which do not satisfy me; but because I want those Authors necessary to
make my Objections clear, I choose rather to be silent in them, then not to
speak to purpose.

Had I time to write these over again, I might make what I say cleerer, but I
doubt not but your ingenuity will discern my meaning, and according to promise
grant me a candid answer, which I shall gratefully embrace, and if convincing,
as readily acknowledge.

In the mean while I rest, Yours to serve you in what I may.

8. As for your distinction of fundamental and not fundamental in points of
faith, the words possibly may be taken in such a sense that it may be
tolerable; but if by fundamental you mean necessary, this being plainly a
relative word, it ought to be expressed to whom they are necessary, if you say
to mankind, it is evident no point is not-fundamental, since so God would have
taught us what is unnecessary, that is, done a needless action; if to a single
man, then they can never be assigned, since they vary according to the several
exigencies of several persons.

The instance of the Quartadecimans, being, I conceive, fully answered by Mr.
White p. 44. I have no more to do, after I have referred you thither, where you
will find the point it self was no subject of Tradition, but a practice, which
according to the different circumstances of different places, was by the wisdom
of the Apostles, who saw what was convenient for the time and place they lived
in, practiced differently, and afterward, by the wisdom of the Church, those
circumstances ceasing, reduced to an Uniformity.

For the rest, I hope, what I have written, will satisfy you, that neither
falsity, nor fallibility of Mr. Whites way appears in your Exceptions. It had
been easy and perhaps necessary, had the piece been intended for more then
your self, to have woven it something closer; but a sight that pierces so far
into the bracks of an Argument, can be no less sharp in discovering its
fastness; and I think your eye too strong to need spectacles or glasses, or
whatever helps are invented for weaker Organs. I am only to make Apology for
the delay of this Reply, occasioned by a little business, and a great deal of
sickness, and to profess, that if this Answer be not such a one as you desire,
it is the misfortune of many a good cause, to suffer by the badness of its
Advocates.

Your very Humble Servant J. B.

FINIS.

