To the LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament Assembled.
A Supplement to the Proposal for a College of Industry, Showing a Regular
Constant Employ for the Poor, is the best Foundation of Trade, and the greatest
Improvement to the Nation, and Consequently support to the Government, whilst
the want of it tends to the Poor's Misery, Poverty of the Rich, and Governments
Weakening.

SUpposing there are seven Millions of People in the Nation, and that one in
fourteen, either will not work, or want it; That is, five Hundred Thousand Men,
Women and Children.

And Reckoning they might Earn one with another Sixpence a Day, a Head, it
comes to Twelve Thousand Five Hundred Pound a Day; which is Seventy-five
Thousand Pound a Week.

That makes Three Millions Nine Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year, the Nation
loses by Idleness, besides our loss in Land Unimproved by it, which is no
small Sum.

To which add but two pence a Head a Day, the Nation is at Charge in Parish
Rates, and other Gifts to the Poor, comes to one Million Three Hundred Thousand
Pound a Year; which Account in the whole makes the Loss and Charge to the
Nation to be,

Five Millions Two Hundred Thousand Pound a Year. Though the Parish Rates be not
much above eight Hundred Thousand Pound a Year for the Poor, yet the Gifts
otherwise given them, make, I suppose, near as much more.

Now if one or two Millions of this may be saved by the Idle and Indigent, (and
they better Maintained and Bred) what Profit may be further added to the
Nation, by the several Millions of other Laborers that might be Employed, in a
better Method then they are? A Regular Constant Employment, as much Excelling
an Irregular Uncertain One, for Profit, as a well Disciplined Army in Order,
excels in Strength and Conduct, an Ignorant Scattered Multitude.

It Is the Raising more then we Spend by the Industry and Labor of the People,
must strengthen the Nation to support the Government; all other ways and means
mounting to no more then how to Tax them equally, and with least sense to the
People.

Some Reasons for joining Husbandry to Manufactures for employing the Poor, as
proposed for a College of Industry.

1. HUsbandmen are as useful, and wanted as much as any Mechanics, much Land
wanting People to Manage it, and more People want Bread than Clothing, and as
our Food is double the Value of our Apparel, and of more necessity, (the Back
may be promised, but the Belly must be fed) if we will employ more People in
Manufactures, or Clothing, than there is need for, and want them in raising
Food, our Cloth may Motheat for want of vent, whilst the Poor pine for want of
Bread.

2. They will less Clog any Market with their Manufactures, some of their Hands
being upon Husbandry, and also the People in Husbandry will take off a good
part of their Manufactures.

3. As they will make less to Clog the Market, so they will not be under a
necessity of selling to buy Bread (having Food enough of their own) nor of
selling under or before a Market offers.

4. Whatever is raised or spent in the Nation, the fewer Hands it goes through
between the Raiser and User, is for the Advantage of the Public, the Raiser
having the better Price, or the Spender buys it the Cheaper, or both, and it
being sent abroad to Foreign Markets, it may be afforded the Cheaper, either to
the keeping an Old, or gaining a New Trade with Strangers.

And though Idle or Lude Poor are (like a Man's Limbs out of joint) Chargeable and
Vexatious; yet when Industrious, they support the Rich, and the more we have of
them, the stronger the Nation; for if a City is of more Value than a Village,
London than Islington, the People cannot be too Numerous, if every employ be
but in a due Proportion one to the other, Husbandmen with other Mechanics.

But the want of Proportioning our Laborers, is what makes the complaint
against a Multitude of them, and many Industrious Poor groan, under, a dull
Commodity for want of vent, especially adding the increase of Foreigners, who
increase our Manufactures ( and not our Husbandry) and with hard Living and
cheap Working, bring our Poor Mechanics to their rate of Working and Living
(ours have not been used to) or else stand still and Beg, which makes them hate
the Poor Afflicted Strangers (that Fly hither from Misery) as Eating the Bread
out of our Poor's Mouths.

Whereas in this Colledge-Method I Propose (Consisting of Temperance, Industry,
and a due Proportioning of all Trades and Employments (like a due quantity of
Various Materials in Building, whilst too many of one thing, and too few of
another will make the Building Lame, if not useless) we may employ and
plentifully provide all Conveniences of Living, for our own Poor with Profit,
and when we have seen the Experience from that Copy, with the same Improvement
we may Employ all the Foreign Poor that will come, who will be a Treasure to
the Nation, if well ordered (with this advantage also, that it will leave
Foreign Princes the fewer Hands to hurt us) whose Children (though not their
Parents) will become Natives of England, many of our Nobility and Eminent
Gentry, and Citizens (true English Men) being the Off spring of Strangers.

And such a Regular Employ of our People that brings a due Proportion and
Plenty of all things, will Encourage their Marriage and the coming hither of
Strangers (we having Land enough to Employ and Maintain double our Number,
especially a well managed Fishery being added) and the increasing of our
People, is the best Improving of our Land and Fishery, and increasing of our
Trade and Seamen (Transplanting as much as may be all Foreign Growth, to grow
in our own Plantations.)

Therefore I pray you will permit a Bill to be brought in to Incorporate (with
other suitable Incouragments to) any Persons that shall be willing to set on
Foot such a College of Industry.

John Bellers.

FINIS.

