Soul-Prosperity, In Several SERMONS.

BY That Eminent Servant of Christ Mr. WILLIAM BENN, late of Dorchester in
Dorset-shire.

LONDON, Printed for Awnsham Churchil at the Black Swan near Amen-Corner. And
William Churchil Bookseller in Dorchester, 1683.

To the Worshipful THOMAS GROVE Esquire; Of Fern in the County of Wilts.
THe Author of this Treatise was a person that greatly honored you, and one
whom you highly esteemed, and loved. I therefore presume (as being one
entrusted by the Author to publish what was prepared for the Press) to tender
it to your Patronage. The Subject speaks its own worth, the present Season its
usefulness. As for your Self, you are a Gentleman so universally known, that
you are above my Character. That the God of all grace would give you a great
increase of grace, and peace in your Old Age, and bless your House, is the
hearty Prayer of

SIR, Your much Obliged Servant, Joshua Churchil.

TO THE READER.
NEither the Author of the ensuing discourse does stand in need of any
testimony from me, among those to whom he was known, nor will the discourse it
self need any recommendation unto them that shall peruse it, provided they be
any ways serious in Religion. It is therefore rather for compliance with the
request of others, then from any inclination in my self, that I prefix these
few lines unto what does ensue. But yet I must say also, that the high esteem
which I had of the Author whilst he lived, for the gifts and graces of God that
were Eminent in him, and the Seasonableness of the subject matter treated of in
this discourse, made me more willing to this compliance then otherwise I should
have been. I shall therefore offer a few things to the Reader, which he may
esteem or reject as he shall see cause. The Author of this discourse (as is
well known) is some while since entered into his rest, and he is so, after his
painful, faithful, and successful labor in the Vineyard of Christ for above
fifty years. And I shall say no more concerning him, but that as he was
eminently furnished with all ministerial abilities, so it is but a joint
testimony of all that knew him, that his singular and almost unparllel'd
perseverance in Prayer, as for all other concerns for the Church of Christ, so
for the success of his own Ministry, was that which both strengthened him to
his work, and gave him success in it amongst whom he labored. And I mention
this only as an encouragement to a just expectation of use, and fruit from this
part of his labors, in that it had an eminent share in those fervent Prayers,
wherewith all his endeavors in this kind were accompanied. The subject matter
here insisted on by him, is of the highest importance unto all, whose design
and business it is to live unto God. For it is not any one single grace whose
exercise is directed, nor any one single duty which is pressed and exhorted
unto, but the entire management and acting of the principle of Spiritual Life
in our whole walk before God, is declared and expressed in this discourse. For
in these things do our Souls live, in them does their prosperity consist. No
Soul can prosper but in the due exercises of all graces, whereby the habit of
them are strengthened, and the due performance of all those duties wherein they
are exercised. To have a guide in these things, such a guide as evidenced
himself went before every step in the way, directing and encouraging others to
accompany and follow him in the same course and way, is of great concernment
unto such humble, teachable Souls, as design a prosperous condition in the
profession of Religion, wherein we are engaged. And the design of this
discourse, with the management of it, to direct unto a Soul's prosperity, have
weight added to them from the season, wherein by the guidance of Divine
Providence they are now published. For we are fallen into a time, wherein the
Spiritual diseases, decays and thriftlesness of many professors of Religion do
evidence themselves to the World, and complaints of the want of
Soul-prosperity, is heard from the most who sincerely inspect the inward state
of Religion this day, in themselves and others. It cannot therefore want that
beauty which season gives unto a word of truth. The manner of handling both
Doctrine and Application in this discourse is such as becomes both the Author
of it, and the Subject treated on, for it is done with that gravity and
soundness of speech as cannot be reproved; with that plainness and perspicuity,
which as it excludes all countenance from ornament of Speech, so there is
nothing in it that may be exposed to contempt amongst them that understand
Spiritual things, or know in any measure, how they ought to be taught. And that
which gives life to the whole, is an open evidence that the Author did both
express his own experience, and gives the Character of his own mind, in the
endeavor after Soul-prosperity, wherein his seize and success were
eminent above the most. And if the Reader be one who is engaged in the same
design, he will find, that as face answers unto face in water, so his heart
will answer the heart of the Author in his expressions of his own experience
and practice, and it is nothing but the Edification of Believers in faith and
holiness that is aimed at, without the least alliance unto any of those
controversies in Religion, wherewith the profession of it are perplexed in the
World. For though these and such things as these here treated of, are despised
and reproached by Men of corrupt minds and profane Spirits, unto whom the
whole practice and power of godliness, with the manner of its Declaration
according to the Scripture, is folly and matter of contempt; yet none have yet
supposed, that it will admit of a question in Christian Religion, whether
Believers ought seriously endeavor the spiritual prosperity of their own
Souls. But with such as by whom these things are either despised or neglected,
we are not now concerned; as for those who would endeavor to be found of
Christ in peace, in what way soever he shall please to visit his Church, or the
World, the Season wherein we live, the whole power of temptation, which we are
exercised withal, the state present of most Professors, all circumstances and
calls of Providence, do make the subject matter of the duty proposed in this
discourse, more then ordinary necessary for their more serious consideration.

JOHN OWEN.

Advertisement.
IF this Treatise find acceptance, Mr. G. H. and J. C. friends of the Reverend
Author, entrusted with his Papers, and who attest these to be his own, will be
ready to publish other of his Tracts.

SERMON I.
3 Epist. of John, verse. 2. (...), Beloved, I wish above all things that thou
may prosper, and be in health, even as thy Soul prospers.
THere are two things, among many others, both which are infallibly certain,
and exceeding comfortable to all those that live by Faith, and fear before the
Lord. The one is, That the Lord knows them every one by name. The other is,
That he has a perfect knowledge of all their concernments; How it is with
them, both in respect of their Souls, and in respect of their Bodies; and what
they stand in need of, for the welfare both of the one, and of the other.

We have both these exemplified in this Epistle, written to one single person,
Gaius by name. Who this Gaius was, whether it was Gaius of Macedonia, spoken of
Act. 19. Or Gaius of Derbe, spoken of Act. 20. Or Gaius of Corinth, spoken of 1
Cor. 1.14. cannot, I think, be absolutely determined. However, it is certain,
The Lord knew well, which of them it was. And the Lord did know, that this
Gaius to whom this Epistle was written, was an eminent godly person, one that
had a gracious, vigorous, active Soul for God, in a weak and consumptive Body.
And upon that account, he directs his Servant John to write this Epistle to
him; that he might know, how much he did live in his Care, and what observation
he made of him, and his Condition.

This is a very great matter, that an entire portion of Canonical Scripture (as
this Epistle is) should be written for the instruction, and consolation of one
good man. But we may wonder the less at it, if we look a little backward, we
shall find such a portion written to one good woman; but she was, besides her
eminent godliness, a person of honor in the World; she was a Lady, That Is the
second Epistle of John. And that we may know, that in these matters, God is no
respecter of persons, we have a third instance of this, in the Epistle to
Philemon, witten in the behalf of Onesimus, a mean person, comparatively. A
servant he had been, and one that miscarried in his service, and ran away from
his Master. But now having a saving work of God begun in him, whereof Paul had
good experience, he writes that Epistle to Philemon, on his behalf, that he
might receive him, not only into Service, but into Favor; not only as a
Servant, but as a beloved Brother in the Lord. ver. 16. It was a great
privilege, that God vouchsafed these three Persons, above others. It Is true,
we find more Epistles written to particular Persons, as two to Timothy, and one
to Titus; but they were written on a more public, and general account. And the
substance of those three Epistles, may be found in that to Timothy, where Paul
says, He wrote, that he might know, how to behave himself in the Church of
God, the House of the living God. However, though this was such a great matter,
with respect to these three Persons; yet we know very well, that God had not
respect to them alone; for Romans 15.4. the Apostle tells us, Whatever is
written, is written for our learning: what is written to Gaius in this Epistle,
and what is in this single verse, is written for our learning: The Lord give us
to learn, what may be learnt by it.

In these words we have observable three parts.

1. Something expressed. It was exceeding well with Gaius, in respect of his
spiritual condition. He was like to have a very comfortable journey to Heaven:
His Soul prospered.

2. We have something implied, sc. That it was not altogether so well with
Gaius in his outward condition, especially in respect of his health. Though he
was a very godly man, he was none of the strongest men. He was weak, and sickly.

3. We have something desired.

(1.) In general. That he might prosper; indefinitely spoken; that he might
prosper in all his concernments, within doors and without.

(2.) That he might be in health. He prays that he might have a healthy
constitution.

And both these, as desired, are amplified.

1. By the manner thereof, very heartily. I wish above all things.

2. By the measure, or degree, or pattern, according to which he desires this
prosperity might be proportioned, and that is, according to the degree, and
measure of his Soul-prosperity. [That thou may prosper, as thy Soul
prospers.]

It is not unfit to give you an account, in a word or two, of the choice of
this Text. Ye may remember that the subjects of some foregoing Exercises were
these two things.

1. Concerning a dead Religion. Many Professors of the true Religion, as it is
professed by them, it is a dead Religion; and their works, in, and about it,
are dead works.

2. We came to speak of a dying, withering, languishing Religion. The
observation was this.

A living Christian, yet alive to God (and that is all) may, in respect of his
Christianity, be in a dying, withering languishing condition.

Because what follows in that Epistle, in Revel. 3. did not give so fair a
foundation, to build that upon, which I am now to speak of, concerning a
thriving, and prospering Religion, I have made choice of these words. And the
observation which I shall, as the Lord shall enable me, insist most upon, will
be this.

Doct. That of all prosperity, Soul-prosperity is the most desirable
prosperity.

But before I come to speak of that Point, it will be requisite, not only to
show how the Text bears it, but it may be convenient to point out some few
Observations, which the words afford, which I shall, as briefly as may be, pass
through; and the first is this.

1. Obs. Concerning the person of this Gaius, who he was. I told you it could
not be absolutely determined; but it seems to be very probable, that it was
Gaius of Corinth, of whom the Apostle makes mention, Romans 16.23. That he was
Paul's Host, and the Host of the Church. i. e. He was one that either
Entertained the Brethren that went up, and down, to preach the Gospel gratis,
at his own charge, or else that he had the chief oversight of that public
house, that was for their entertainment there. And that which may well lead us
to this conjecture, is that which we have verse. 5, 6. of this Epistle; where
John gives him this testimony; That whatever he did to the Brethren, and
Strangers, he did it faithfully, and they bare witness of his charity. So that,
either this was that Gaius, or else, as he had the same name, so he had the
same disposition. He was charitable, and hospitable. And this let him very
deeply into John's affection. He loved him dearly, calls him, His beloved, (the
same word is rendered, Dearly beloved) and prays for him.

Note. Persons of public Spirits, that do good with what they have, according
to their ability; especially for the promoting of Religion, are most likely to
have, and it is fit they should have, most prayers put up to God, for their
welfare and prosperity, in every respect.

It is said Job. 31.20. that The loins of the poor blessed him. They had no
blessing to dispose of: but the meaning is, They heartily prayed for a blessing
upon Job, and all that he had. We read Act. 9.31. of a good woman, her name was
Dorcas. She was full of good works. Peter finds a great many about her Corpse,
weeping, and telling him, what good she had done, whilst among them, and showed
him, not her own Wardrobe, but the Coats she had made for them. Doubtless, she
that had so many Tears shed for her, when she was dead, had many prayers put up
for her, while she was alive. Perhaps, they were not like to find another
Dorcas. It might be then, as it is now. All seek their own, none the things of
Christ. All look after their own particular interest. These are like to be, as
that wicked Prince, 2 Chronicles. 21.20. who lived undesired, and dyed unlamented.
What will persons say of such? Psalm. 49.19. They will bless them while they
live, in hope to get something by them; but when they dye, farewell they. They
were good for none, but themselves. But it was not so with Gaius, it was not so
with Dorcas. It is Calvin's note: He thinks God raised Dorcas to life, out of
respect to the poor people.

2. Observe our Translation. [I wish] (...). It is in the margent [I pray] And
the word is indifferently rendered. Act. 27.29. -- (...). They wished for day.
But 2 Cor. 13.7. (...). I pray God, that ye do no evil; and yet verse. 9. (...).
I wish your perfection. Paul's wishes, were his Prayers.

Note. That it is no inconsiderable part of a Christians wisdom, to be wary,
and well advised, in what they wish; for Wishing is like Praying.

We find in Scripture, that very much guilt has been contracted, and very much
folly expressed, by wild, and extravagant wishes. I shall instance in the
miscarriages of good people, this way. Job wishes that he had never been born,
chap. 3. Jeremy wishes that either, he had never been born, or dyed by and by,
chap. 20. Jonah wishes he were dead, and as much under ground, as he was above
ground, chap. 4.9. David wishes, that he had dyed for Absalom. But the saddest
wish is that of Joshua, chap. 7. v. 9. He was at prayer, but forgate himself
sadly. Would God (says he) we had not come over Jordan. He wishes, that God
had never made good his Promise, of their coming into the Land of Canaan. There
is much folly expressed hereby. Many persons please themselves, if they may
have liberty of wishing. That they might wish for what they would have, and
have what they wish for, then they would be in a brave condition. A fond, and
foolish conceit this is, Eccles. 6.12. Who knows what is good for himself in
this life? The words are spoken questionwise, and we are to understand them
negatively. That is only good for us in this life, which is improved in order
to our Eternal life. Now God can carry on that course to bring us to Eternal
happiness, which he has chosen his people to, by adversity, as well as
prosperity. Therefore this is the duty, and wisdom of the people of God, to
leave it with God, as it is Psalm. 47.4. Thou shall choose our inheritance for
us. Wisdom is required to make a good choice in any thing. God is the only wise
God, he will choose well.

Note this farther. In three things God has set us bounds: Bounds to our
Faith, what to believe. Bounds to our Actions, what to do: And bounds to our
Prayers, what to desire, and what to ask. And why should our Wishes be
unbounded, since they are like Prayers? Idle wishes are, at least, as bad, as
idle words, which no man can give account of, Matthew. 12.36. Many have gotten
their death, and destruction, by getting what they wished for. They wished, they
might dye in the Wilderness, and they did so. Number. 14.

Farther, John here wishes, That Gaius might prosper; John's wish was a prayer
to God for him. From hence we may take this note.

Note. The well-being, and prosperity of every man's outward condition, is
wholly at God's disposing. Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord build the house, etc.
It is neither the care of the Master, nor the faithfulness of the Servants, nor
any thing else, that can do any thing at all, if God say Nay. If God does not
make the house to grow (as David uses the expression 2 Samuel 23.5.) certainly,
it will wither. The Estate, the House, the Family will decay; and, in time,
come to nothing. I note this, that we may be all stirred up, to acknowledge
God, to be the Fountain, and Spring of all outward Blessings whatsoever. And
accordingly.

(1.) As we desire any thing should succeed, that we take in hand, relating to
our worldly affairs, engage God in all, that he may work with us therein. We
have Warrant, in every thing to make known our requests to God. Phil. 4.6. In
every thing, be it never so small, engage God to be with us therein; and say as
Abraham's Servant did, Genesis 24.11. Lord send me good speed every day.

(2.) As we desire to prosper, so serve the Providence of God; wait upon him,
and keep his ways, and believe his promises. David gives his Son this counsel;
Keep the charge of the Lord, that thou may prosper, and have good success, 1
Kings. 2.3. And he had so, while he did so. It is spoken of such a person,
Psalm. 1.3. Whatsoever he does, shall prosper: It shall turn to good, in order
to the furtherance of the Soul's prosperity.

(3.) When the Lord is pleased to bless the labor of our hands, to make our
going out, and our coming in, the beginning, and ending of what we go about
successful, give God the praise. Sacrifice not to your own Net, as that worldly
person, Psalm. 49.18. who blessed himself: No, give God the glory, though the
matter be never so small. Ruth. 2.18, 19, 20. Naomi being brought into a low
condition (though she had been a woman of fashion) when her daughter-in-law had
sped well in gleaning; O blessed be the Lord, says she. Truly, this would be
well thought of, Psalm. 73.4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give
thee thy hearts desire. When God has given us our hearts desire, we should
delight our selves in the Lord: And the Mercy of God, should raise us up to
rejoice in the God of our Mercies: This would make every days Mercies to reach
our Souls.

(4.) I wish, that thou may prosper, etc.] It was well with Gaius already:
He prospered with the best prosperity; but John wishes, that he might be
royally blessed. That mercy might compass him about on every side. Hence,

Observe, That though it be a just, and measured truth, That that Man is a
blessed Man, whose Soul prospers, in what outward condition soever he be, yet
outward prosperity (Soul-prosperity going before) is a superadded blessing, and
may be sought for at the hands of God, with submission to the will of God, for
our selves, and in the behalf of others.

It is without all controversy, Though a Man's outward condition were as low
as Job's in the Old Testament, and as Lazarus's in the New Testament, yet he is
blessed, whose Soul prospers. For as it is said, of every Man in his civil
capacity: In his best estate he is altogether vanity. Psalm. 39.5. He is subject
to changes, none can tell what a day may bring forth: Here we have no
continuing City, Heb. 13.14. So it may truly be said of a person, whose Soul
prospers, whatever his outward condition be, he is altogether blessed. Psalm.
94.12. Blessed is the Man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of
thy Law. When instruction hearkened to, goes with correction, the Soul
prospers; he is a blessed Man. In Job. 1. we have a description of Job's
prosperous estate: First, it is said, That he was a Man fearing God. But we
have farther, as it were, an Inventory given in, of his outward condition: He
had so many Sheep, so many Oxen, so many Asses, so many Camells, etc. These
were a superadded blessing to Job. This is set down, to show the praise of
Job's patience, who bare such a change so as he did: It Is very true, a Man may
easily over-rate and overvalue his worldly estate. Verily, if Soul-prosperity
do not go before outward prosperity, outward prosperity is but like a Cipher,
and signifies nothing, if a figure don't go before it: A Man may write a sheet
of Paper full of Ciphers, but all do not make One: When Soul-prosperity goes
before, God has done much for such persons. They have the Earth, they shall
have Heaven. They have the Nether Springs, they shall have the Upper Springs;
so that if it were asked them, as Christ did his Disciples, Luke 22.35. Lacked
ye any thing? They must answer (if they will speak, as the matter is) as the
Disciples did, They want nothing. God has not dealt so with all those, that
have shot the gulf, and are past danger for Eternity. Many of them are cut
short; yea, they may say many times, as Peter did, Luke 5.5. We have fished all
night, and caught nothing; Labored hard, and caught not so much as a Sprat for
their breakfast. Many a Man that labors all the week, has very much ado to
bring both ends together, his Gettings, and his Expenses. The wants of some are
so many, that they often know not what to do; and the wants of others are so
few, that they want nothing, but to know how to improve, what they have. To
know how to abound, is a far greater blessing then to abound. Eccl. 3.14.
whatsoever God does, is for ever. If God give a Man an outward worldly estate,
it is for ever: What, to enjoy it for ever? No, things seen are but for Time:
But in respect of the use, or abuse of them, they are forever.

Now, to speak to that, which in particular John desires for his friend Gaius,
That he might be in health. Gaius was not sick now, that is clear from verse. 6.
He did not keep his Bed, nor his Chamber, nor his House; for John advises him
to bring the Brethren on their way, after a godly sort: But he was a sickly Man.

Note. Those that have much of the heart of God, and live much in the love of
God, may feel much of the hand of God; as in other troubles, so in long
continued bodily weaknesses.

That they may be sick, is no marvel, for they must dye; but we speak of long,
continued weakness: Timothy was such a Man, 1 Timothy 5.23. It is observed of
Calvin, that in his latter days, he was very sickly, and weak, contracted, as
'twas thought, by eating too much Aloes: Thuanus says, he was so seven years
before his death. We find, Job observed this in his days, Job. 21.25. One dies
in the bitterness of his Soul, never eats his bread with pleasure. [One dies.]
What one? Even one good Man, as well as one bad Man: He speaks indifferently of
either; all things fall alike to all. The good Man dies in bitterness, and
pain, seldom made a good meal. Thus ye see it has been: And I note this, only
for this purpose; that we may see, that no new thing befalls them, with whom
God deals so at this day; but that which has been the lot of those whose
Souls have prospered. 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you, but
such as is common to Man.

2. Gaius was very well with respect to his Spiritual state, but he was weakly,
and sickly; therefore John prays that he might be in health: Hence note,

Note. A healthy constitution of Body, though a Man may be blessed without it;
yet in it self is a very great and desirable blessing: It is a comprehensive
blessing: It is the Epitome and Abridgment of all outward blessings: It is like
Salt, that Seasons every Meat. It is too true, this is not so feelingly
acknowledged, as it ought to be, by those that do enjoy it. But when (as it is
in Job) a Man's bones are chastened with a multitude of pains, and a Man is
worn away with pining sickness; it is rare to find such a person, that does not
set an higher price on health, then he did before. And, verily, it is a very
great blessing; whether it be by preservation from sickness; or by recovery out
of sickness.

(1.) If it be by preservation from sickness, prize it as a very great mercy.
It is left upon Record, as a very signal Providence, and gracious Privilege,
vouchsafed to the people of Israel, when they were in Egypt, where there was so
much Sickness, Plague, and Death: Yet ( Psalm. 105.) there was not one feeble
person among them when they came forth; for it is said Exodus 12.27. they were
able to come for thon foot, six hundred thousand Persons. And ought it not to
be esteemed at this day, in this place, as a great mercy, by those Families
which God is pleased to preserve from those sicknesses, that some are under? If
ye do not labor to improve this so, that God may not repent, that he has
spared you, ye do not well.

(2.) It is a very great mercy to have health, by recovery from sickness, and
weakness; Hezekiah judged it so, Isa. 38.19. The living shall praise thee, as I
do this day. David speaks to this, Psalm. 103.5. My Soul praise thou the Lord.
He renews thy strength as the Eagle: The Eagle (as it is said all Birds of prey
do) casts her feathers once a year; new feathers grow up again, and then she is
fresh, and lusty; and mounts up as high as before.

Now that health, is so great a blessing, will appear in this, because while
the Lord gives it, he puts a very great price into the Man's hands, that has
it, to further his Soul-prosperity. A weakly, sickly person is under many
disadvantages, as to that. For observe,

(1.) Weakness, long continued infirmity, often deprives a person of the
public Ordinances. Possibly, some may, at this day, by weakness be deprived of
such Meetings as this; which we are to reckon public Ordinances, not in
respect of the Place, but Administration, Isa. 38.22. What shall be the sign
that I shall go up to the house of the Lord? while he was sick, and weak, he
could not do it.

(2.) It very much indisposeth a Man for the solemn performance of the private
Duties of Religion. We have a clear instance of this, Jam. 5.13. Is any
afflicted? Let him pray: Is any sick? Let him send for the Elders of the
Church. Is not sickness a great affliction? It is: Why then should not the sick
pray? Sickness, and weakness indispose a person for the solemn performance of
that duty.

(3.) Persons subject to long, continued weaknesses of body, are often in much
darkness of mind, apt to question the grace of God in them, and the love of
God, toward them. For sickness, and weakness indispose a Man's mind: He cannot
infer comfortable conclusions from his former experiences of God. He is full of
confusion, like a skain of Silk, that a Man can neither wind, nor draw. So it
is with an infirm Man. Psalm. 80.3. Heman, when his life did draw nigh to the
grave, he says, His Soul was full of trouble. It is a sad case, a weak Body,
and a troubled Soul too. Satan is very skilful at his work: He knew this, and
therefore he reserved this as his last temptation for Job, hoping that would
stick, to afflict his Body.

Now to Apply this.

1. Let all such as God is pleased to bless with any competency of health, and
strength, keep their hearts under the obligation, that this lays upon them.
Deuteronomy. 8.16. The Lord gave them Manna, to humble them. We say, Oh, if we were
fit for Mercy, God would give it: Thus Folks talk, that never endeavor to be
more fit. If we should never have a Mercy, till we were fit, it would be long
enough before we should have any. God many times gives a Mercy first, and makes
a people humble afterward. Well then, considering that life, and health, and
strength are given to every Man, for the same end, and purpose, for which Paul
improved them, Phil. 1.21. To me, to live is Christ. Therefore we should every
one of us, while we are well, set about doing of that, which it will be very
well, if it be done, before we are sick; but it is of absolute necessity to be
done, before we dye; even, what we have, 2 Pet. 3.14. Give all diligence to be
found in Christ Jesus, in a state of union with him. If a Man be not in Christ,
while he lives, he cannot live to Christ, nor shall he dye to Christ, when he
dies, Col. 1.27. Christ in us, is the hope of glory.

Consider then.

1. Though health, and strength be a very great blessing, yet it is a blessing
quickly blasted: Job observed it in his days, Job 21.23. One dies in his
full-strength: God gives him no warning at all. Alas, (says James) what is a
Man's life? A vapor, a little warm breath turned up and down in the nostrils;
when that is stopped, a Man dies.

2. Consider this: Say God should give us warning; and do with us, as he did
with Jezabel, cast us upon a bed of sickness, and give us space to repent; yet
times of Bodily sickness, and weakness, are ill times to begin to look after a
neglected Soul, and to do neglected Duties. Sicknesses and weaknesses bring a
Man under many disadvantages of looking after Soul-concernments, 2 Samuel 25.35.
God smites Nabal, he was sick ten days, that was more time then many persons
have; yet he could no more repent then the very stone; his heart dyed within
him: Therefore what we have, Joh. 9.4. should be laid to heart; The night will
come, when no Man can work. Do the work, that God calls to, while it is called,
To day.

(2.) If so be, health and strength be so great a blessing, then let all that
do enjoy it, take heed, how they do any thing that may prejudice their health;
and do, what God would have them do, for the preservation of their health; and
not stick at any due charges, suitable to what they are able to bear.

1. Take heed of prejudicing your health. They are very much to be blamed, that
will ride wind, and weather, to get money, Matt. 6.25. The Body is more then
Raiment: Health and strength are better then riches. Much more do they
transgress, that prejudice their health to gratify a sensual lust, For no Man
ever yet hated his own flesh, Ephesians. 5.29. I have read of one Theotinus, who was
very much given to drinking, and had very sore eyes; his Physician told him, he
must either leave his drunkenness, or lose his eyes: Then (says he) farewell
sight. He would rather lose his sight, then leave his sin.

2. Do what may be done, to preserve health: Therefore the Apostle says to
Timothy, Drink no longer Water, but use a little Wine, for thy stomachs sake,
and thine often infirmities. The poor Woman ( Mark. 9.) spent all she had upon
the Physicians. This is worth observation: That we must so mind the welfare of
our Bodies, for the preserving of health, and strength, when we have it; and
recovery of it, when it is lost; for the preservation of the health, and
welfare of our Souls. It is an hard matter to do those things out of
obedience to God, from a principle of grace, which a principle of nature
inclines a Man to. Tit. 2.4, That they may teach the young Women to be sober,
to love their Husbands, to love their Children.

Now, for the Amplification of this wish.

1. For the manner. It was heartily. [Above all things.]

Observe, It is the duty of every gracious person, to be hearty, and real in
his prayers, desires, and wishes for the prosperity of the people of God, and
for the health of those that are sick, and weak.

The Apostle speaks to the praise of them, Col. 1.4, That they loved all the
Saints of God. Ruth. 4.11, The Elders said to Boaz, The Lord bless thee, and
this Woman. How heartily did the good Women bless God for their old neighbor
Naomi? Ruth. 4.14. It is a rare thing to find such a spirit. Corruption does
narrow, and straighten Men's hearts: Their eye is evil, because God is good.
Corruption streightens, but Grace enlarges a Man's heart. It is a brave
spirit, To rejoice with them that rejoice, and to mourn with them that mourn.

Observe again, Who it is that desires this so heartily: It is John, the
beloved Disciple, who pressed hearty love upon others. 1 John 3.18. And he
expresses it to Gaius. Hence note,

Note. It is the duty of every Minister to labor, to exemplify in his
practice, the Duties he presses upon others. The Prophet ( Hab. 2.4.) speaking
of those sad times in the captivity of Babylon, says, The just shall live by
faith. But they might reply, Can you do so your selves? And he answers, Yes.
Hab. 3.17, 18, Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, yet will I rejoice in
the Lord; I will joy in the God of my Salvation.

2. Consider the pattern, measure, and degree, according to which John desires,
this outward prosperity might be proportioned; and that is, his
Soul-prosperity. Surely this Gaius was a very rare Man: It is hard to find such
among all those, that bear the honorable name of Christians. How many are
there, Christians in profession, and it may be, according to some measure,
indeed, and in truth, who prosper in their Estates, and prosper in their
Bodies? They are well, and lively (as David's Enemies were, Psalm. 38.19.) but
they have poor, lean, withering Souls. So that we may very well, in the behalf
of many, invert the Apostle's wish; and wish that their Souls might prosper, as
their Bodies prosper, and as their Estates prosper. If we should pray for some,
that their Bodies might be, as their Souls are, we should curse them, instead
of praying for them: We must say, let their Bodies be filled with noisome
Diseases, and let them pine away, for so their Souls do.

But it was not so with Gaius. Hence observe,

Note. Though a person of a sickly and weak constitution be under many
disadvantages, yet under them all, it is possible his Soul may thrive, and
prosper. 2 Cor. 4.16, Though our outward Man perish, yet our inward Man is
renewed day by day.

Here take notice, that when I say such a Man is under some disadvantages, I
mean in respect of the outward Duties of Religion, but not as to the inward,
and spiritual Duties; as living by Faith, exercising the Love of God, and the
Fear of God; and desires after the enjoyment of God: Herein consists true
Religion. Woe be to that Man, that has no more Religion, then can be seen.
Religion is not all Outside, the Lining is the best part of it. The Text bears
the Doctrine (mentioned in the first place) thus, John wishes that Gaius might
prosper in all things, as his Soul prospered; we must understand him in
subordination to Soul-prosperity. John wishes that Gaius might prosper in all
things, so that his Soul might still prosper. If Gaius's Soul had received
prejudice, John had wished him a great loss: So that the observation is clear:

That of all prosperities, Soul-prosperity is the most desirable prosperity.

SERMON II.
I Now proceed to that Observation I first intended, in the choice of the
words. But take notice first; That the Text gives a fair, and full occasion, to
speak to it, though perhaps not discerned at first. John, ye see, wishes all
prosperity to his friend Gaius: but this must be understood in a way of
subserviency to the prosperity of his Soul: Otherwise, he had wished him far
more hurt, then good. If he had wished him any thing, that, in the least, had
been to the prejudice of his Soul. It is then beyond all controversy, That as
he wished that he might prosper, in all things as his Soul prospered, he would
be understood, that his desire was, That his Soul always might prosper. Hence
observe,

Doct. Of all prosperity, the prosperity of the Soul, is the most desirable
prosperity.

For the Explication, three things are to be spoken too.

1. What the Soul is in its natural constitution, and what it is in its
unregenerate state by reason of Original corruption.

2. Wherein the prosperity of the Soul consists, and when it may be said to
prosper.

3. What are the Reasons, whereby it may be made to appear, that the prosperity
of the Soul is the most desirable prosperity.

For the first of these, there are two things to be taken into consideration,
and to be spoken to apart.

1. What the Soul is, in its natural constitution.

Ans. It is hard to tell you, for it is a thing which no Man ever saw: But this
I may say, that it is that, which the Scripture sometimes calls, The Spirit of
Man which is in him, 1 Cor. 2.11. Sometimes, and indeed most frequently, The
heart of Man. Prove. 23.26, My Son give me thine heart: The inward Man, 2 Cor.
4.16. The hidden Man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. The Candle of the Lord, Prove.
20.27. And this I may say farther; That it is a most excellent piece of God's
Workmanship, and indeed well worth the tongue, and pen of an Angel to describe
it. The Body of Man, though it was of mean extraction; made, at first, but of
the Dust of the Earth, and liable every moment, when God will, to tumble into
the grave, to rot, and putrify, and to be resolved into its first original:
Dust thou art, and unto Dust shall thou return again, Genesis 3.19. Yet that it is
a very curious piece: David speaking of his Body, Psalm. 139. says verse. 13,
14, That he was fearfully, and wonderfully made. When I think thereof, says
he, (as I do sometimes) it strikes me with astonishment, yea with a dread, and
fear of the incomprehensible wisdom, and power of God manifested therein. This
my Soul knows full well; yet this is but the Case, the Cabinet: The Soul is the
Jewel that is in it: If that be as the Ring, this is the Diamond in the Ring. I
shall not undertake an exact definition of it, but only this description.

It is a Spiritual, Immortal substance united to the Body, yet existing, when
it is separated from the Body; capable of doing more service unto God, and of
receiving more good from God, then all the Creatures that ever God made, the
glorious Angels, and the Human Nature of Christ only excepted.

I shall not insist upon the proof of the particulars of this description. Some
of them may, possibly come to be spoken to, hereafter: Only, for the present,
take notice that it is endued with three most excellent Faculties, which will
go far, if no more should at any time be said, in proving this to be so.

1. With the faculty of Understanding, capable of knowing Good from Evil; Truth
from Falsehood; of knowing God in Christ, the knowledge of whom is Eternal Life.
Job. 32.8. There is a Spirit in Man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives
him Understanding. Every Soul has this faculty, though this faculty in every
Soul be not so furnished, yet it is capable of the inspiration of the Almighty,
so as to know the truth as it is in Jesus, and every truth, as it ought to be
known; without which, Man were no more capable of such knowledge then the
Beasts of the field; as Elihu expresses himself, Job. 35.11. Who teaches us
more then the Beasts of the Earth; and makes us wiser then the Fowls of
Heaven. Therefore Nebuchadnezer, upon the highest grounds of reason, praises,
and magnifieth God, for restoring his understanding unto him. Dan. 4.34.

2. Endued it is with the admirable faculty of Conscience, which has a power
to make a Man stand in awe of God, though he does not see him; yea, and of
himself too, when no Body knows where he is, nor what he is doing. For it
takes knowledge, and can, or, at last day, will bear witness what a Man has
thought, or spoken, or done; even from his Cradle to his Grave: So that no Man
need to call for a Candle, to see what he has done in the dark. Though the
darkness of the night may hide us from others, and the darkness of our mind may
hide us from our selves (for Conscience may be hardened, it may be seared, but
it can never be blind) yet still it has an eye open, to see into our most
retired thoughts, which no eye can see, but his, who sees all things. And
farther, this is a faculty full of power, that it can acquit, or condemn,
torment or comfort a Man as the matter requires, say all the World what they
can to the contrary, Romans 2.14.15.

3. It is endued with the faculty of the Will, which has a liberty of choosing
what is good, and refusing what is evil, so that nothing can hurt us without
our own consent. Matthew. 10.28, Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not
able to kill the Soul. Satan cannot make any of his Fiery darts stick, unless
we will our selves. He did not by his power (for he could not) force Eve to eat
the forbidden fruit, though he found her alone, without her Husband: but by his
subtilty he beguiled her. It is true, he is said to have filled the heart of
Ananias, so as to lie to the Holy Ghost, but he could blame none but himself
for it. Act. 5.3. -- Why is it, says Peter, that Satan has filled thine
heart, to lie to the Holy Ghost? He could not deny, but that it was his own
doing: The Devil only pulled the Latch, and he opened the door himself.

These are excellent endowments: Now of a Soul endued with all these excellent
faculties, in respect of its original constitution, in every living Man, even
the poorest Cast-out (like that infant Ezekiel. 16.5.) upon that account only, not
considered as beautified with the excellencies of the new Creature it is, that
our Savior says, Matthew. 16.26. That it is far more worth then the whole
World. That the gaining of the one, would not recompense the loss of the other.
Now as we say of a poor child, idling and begging about the Streets, that is of
a good Complexion, has a good wit, and a healthy constitution, That it is a
thousand pities that such a lovely, hopeful Child should be undone for want of
breeding, and education. So we may say much more, and that upon many accounts,
That it is sad, exceeding, unspeakably sad, that such an excellent Creature as
the Soul of Man is, should perish, eternally perish, and become the most
miserable thing that ever God made, (next unto the Devil) for want of good
looking to; and that the welfare and prosperity thereof, should never be
minded. It were a blessed thing, if Men did but know the worth of their Souls,
and value them accordingly: David indeed did so. He counted it his Darling, his
only One, Psalm. 22.20. He was so choice, and tender of it, as knowing the
welfare thereof did so much concern him, that he would trust none but God with
it. Psalm. 31.5. Into thy hand, I commit my Spirit. But for the generality,
though called Christians, yet, for this, deserve not the name of Men, that they
deal worse with their Souls, than Joshua did with the Gibeonites. He made them
but hewers of Wood, and drawers of water, but it was for the service of the
Tabernacle. But they cause their Souls to attend the service of the World, and
that in the basest drudgery; and to spend, and wear away their strength, in
making provision for the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the Eye, and the pride
of life. (But this I may speak to, if the Lord please, in the Application.)
Only, I would ask, Who is he that can think of it, without sadness, that so
noble a Creature should be so basely abused? That being so Spiritual in its
Constitution, it should be so Sensual, so Carnal, in its Operations?

This is all that I shall say of the first branch, of the first thing that was
proposed; What the Soul is, in its original constitution. Unless this be well
considered, we shall never be convinced, That of all prosperity, the prosperity
of the Soul, is the most desirable prosperity.

2. I now proceed to the second branch; In what case it is, in its unconverted
state, by reason of original Corruption. If I should say no more then this, it
were enough: That it is in as bad a case, as sin can make it, having lost the
image of God, the favor of God, and all communion with God; as it is set forth
unto us, in that threefold Parable, Luke 15. of the lost Groat, the lost Sheep,
and the lost Son. But this is not all; for what by reason of original sin
imputed, I mean the first sin of Adam in eating of the forbidden fruit, and
believing the Father of Lies, before the God of truth. This is charged upon
every Soul, because the common Soul of Mankind was then in Adam: And even for
this, every Soul in its unregenerate state, is a cursed Soul. And then farther,
by reason of original sin, communicated, and imparted, the very image of Satan
is engraven upon it; so that it is full of unrighteousness, a very Seed-plot of
all ungodliness. I shall farther amplify this, in speaking a little, and but a
little, of that woeful desolation, that is made hereby, in all those faculties
of the Soul, mentioned but now. Something of this had need be said, and well
considered of; otherwise, a Man will never be convinced of the absolute
necessity, of minding the prosperity of the Soul, above all other prosperities.

1. It is undeniable, that a woeful desolation is made in the understanding, for
it is filled with vile, and unworthy apprehensions, and misapprehensions of
God. Psalm. 50.21, Thou thoughtest, that I was altogether such a one as thy
self. That he looked upon the most notorious sins, but as Human infirmities, for
so the man spoken of there, did; not any light at all in it, to seek after
Reconciliation with God, in that way, wherein it may be found. Romans 3.11, There
is none that understands, there is none that seeks after God. Full of
Pride, and fleshly Reasonings it is, and contradictions against the truth. No
more able to discern Divine, and Supernatural Truths, as they ought to be
discerned, then a Beast can discern the things of Man. 1 Cor. 2.14, But the
natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are Spiritually
discerned. It is said Col. 2.23. to be a fleshly mind: So that though every one
be not born a Natural Fool, yet every one is born a Spiritual Fool. The most
refined, unregenerate person is no better. Those Virgins Matthew. 25. that made
so fair a profession, are said to be foolish Virgins, contenting themselves
with Lamps without Oil. Thus the eye of the Soul is darkened; How great then
(as our Savior says, Matthew. 6.23.) is the darkness of the whole Soul? So
great it is, that it is wholly thereby estranged from the life of God. Ephesians.
4.18.

2. No less desolation is made in the Conscience: As the Mind, so the
Conscience is defiled, Tit. 1.15. This is very sad, if we consider either the
Office the Conscience is designed for, or the particulars wherein the
defilement of it, consists.

1. Its Office. It is the Candle of the Lord, by which a Man should be directed
in the way wherein he ought to walk. Indeed, God having given it such a power,
and command over Man, that nothing but God is above it: therefore it is, that
though a Man may do that sometimes, which is against his will, and against his
affections, and not sin; yet he ought not to go against his Conscience, though
it be Erroneous, because Conscience witnesses for God; so that to go against
Conscience, though the thing be not materially sinful, yet formally it is;
because the authority of God is contemned: therefore it is said Romans 14.23, He
that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of Faith: for
whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

2. For the defilement of Conscience, I shall instance only in two branches.

1. It is defiled with ignorance: Such a thick vail of darkness is grown over
it, as though it observes every thing that is done; yet it often most
shamefully mistakes Evil for Good, and Good for Evil. I told you, that it
should be to a Man's actions, as the Pilot to the Ship, to Guide and Steer it
right, by a right Rule, to a right End. But having no light, it leads a Man
down to Hell, when he thinks he is in the high way to Heaven. As a Pilot having
lost his Compass, or the use of it, in a dark night, runs upon the Rocks, when
he thinks he is entering into the Haven. Joh. 16.2, -- The time comes, that
whosoever kills you, will think he does God service. Act. 26.9. I verily
thought, with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of
Jesus of Nazareth.

2. It is defiled with stupidity, and unsensibleness. 1 Timothy 4.2, -- having
their Conscience seared with an hot Iron. It is true, the Apostle speaks there,
of an habitual hardness, grown upon Men by long continued custom of sinning;
till they sin, and know not; till they sin and care not: Yet it is originally
in the Conscience at first, and does not so much come into it, as grow out of
it; as that sprigg of an Oak, which at first (when it first appears) is very
tender, easily turned this way, or that way; but grows at last, and that by its
inbred quality, into a hard and stubborn bough; so it is here. It is worth our
observing to this purpose, that what the Prophet David, Psalm. 14.3. and 53.3.
speaks of some Men, that they are altogether become filthy, the Apostle Romans
3.10, 12, 13. applies to all, in their unregenerate state. So what is spoken of
the unsensibleness of some Men's Consciences, may be applied to all, in their
unregenerate state: for the longer they continue in that state, the sooner they
grow to that degree of stupidity, to be (as they Ephesians. 4.18.) past all feeling:
Conscience in their Breasts, is, as it were, in a dead sleep; it suffers them
to live in a state of sin, and go on in a way of sin, without any check, or
any, that is to any purpose regarded; like a Serpent that is charmed, and
neither stings, nor bites. Genesis 37.25. And they sat down to eat bread, after
they had cast their Brother into a pit. In this sad case is the Soul, in
respect of the Understanding, and the Conscience.

3. But in some respects, the most woeful desolation of all, is made in the
Will. It is true that original corruption frets like a gangrene through the
whole Soul, but the poision of it chiefly has infected the Will. All that the
Scripture speaks of the hardness of the heart, and of the stiff neck, and the
Iron-sinew, is little or nothing else, but the obstinacy, and frowardness, and
perverseness of the Will. Much might be said to this: But I shall instance only
in this; that it is full of contrariety to the holy, and righteous will of God.
I would, says God, and ye would not, as he often complains in the Scripture,
Matthew. 23.27. Psalm. 81.11. This is the misery of an unregenerate Soul: for the
will of God is not only absolutely good in it self, but it is also Relatively
good to every Soul, that in godly sincerity submits to it. Mich. 6.8, He has
showed thee, O Man, what is good (good for thee) Deuteronomy. 6.24, The Lord commanded
us to do all these Statutes, to fear the Lord our God, for our good always. So
that the Will of Man is absolutely cross to the happiness of the whole Man, in
being so cross to the Will of God. It may truly be said of every Man, That
nothing stands so much in the way of his Salvation, as his own Will. Joh. 5.40,
And ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. I might farther
exemplify this, in showing how corrupt, and naught it is in all its
operations, in choosing what it ought to loath. Prove. 21.10, The Soul of the
wicked desires evil. Isa. 66.3, -- their Soul delights in their
abominations. And in loathing what it ought to choose. It is charged upon them,
Levit. 26.43. That their Souls abhorred the Word of God; would not suffer it to
come near their hearts, but cast it behind their backs, Psalm. 50.17. Neither is
this out of Distemper only, as a Man when he is sick may loath the meat, which
he loves when he is well; but out of antipathy, and inbred enmity, which may be
mortified, but can never be reconciled. Nay, it is farther charged, Zech. 11.8.
That their Souls abhorred God himself; though not as an universal good, and the
giver of every good thing: but as a particular good, and cross to their lusts,
and carnal interests: When it comes to that, then they say, as Job. 21.14.
Therefore, they say to the Almighty, depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. Of such things, they are willingly ignorant 2 Pet. 3.5.
I shall shut up this sad discourse with this: That the will of every
unregenerate Soul, is called, The will of the Flesh, Ephesians. 2.3. And the will of
the Flesh, is the very same with that which is called, The will of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.26.

Thus ye have something spoken, to both the branches of the first thing that
was proposed for the explication of the Point.

(1.) What the Soul is in respect of its original constitution. This is fit to
be considered; otherwise it will be (I think) impossible to convince a Man of
the truth of the Doctrine. That of all prosperities, the prosperity of the Soul
is the most desirable prosperity.

(2.) In what case it is, in its unregenerate state, by reason of original
corruption: Otherwise, it will be as hard to convince a Man, of the absolute
necessity of minding, as he ought, the welfare and prosperity of his Soul. In
respect of the former, one would think it were impossible, that a Man believing
this to be true, and that his Soul must live with him, when he is dead, either
in Eternal happiness, or Eternal misery, should suffer such an excellent thing
to be lost, and perish through his own default. In respect of the latter, one
would think it impossible, that such a vile, such an abominable thing as sin
has made it, should ever come to be good, and prosper. And, indeed, it is
beyond the power of Men, or Angels to effect it. The recovery of a lost Soul is
more precious then so. But to this it may be said, as our Savior said to his
Disciples, Mat. 19.26, With Men, it is impossible, but all things are possible
to God.

2. I proceed to the second thing proposed, to show, wherein the prosperity of
the Soul consists, and when it may be said, to prosper?

By way of Answer to this, we must take notice, that Soul-prosperity, comes
under a double consideration. 1. In respect of its Rise. 2. In respect of its
Growth.


1. In respect of its Rise, and first Foundation. This must be considered two
ways. (1.) Either as looking, after it, upward, without us: (2.) Or looking
after it, inwardly, within us.


1. If we look after it, upward, we shall find its first foundation laid in
God's Eternal, Electing Love.

2. If we look after it inwardly, within us, then we shall find, that it begins
in that day, and hour, when by the word and spirit of Christ the whole Man,
both Body and Soul, is brought into a state of Fellowship, and Union with
Christ. Which is done, and not done any other way (I speak not of Elect
Infants, dying in their infancy) then by obeying the call of Christ, to come to
him, and abide with him, and in him, resigning our selves to him, to be ruled,
and saved by him, in his own way: Thus understand it.

1. God's Eternal love, is God's Eternal purpose, to work in the Soul, in his
appointed time, that good thing, which he knows, will put it into a capacity of
prospering, Ephesians. 1.9, He made known to us the mystery of his will, according to
his good pleasure, as he had purposed in himself. ver. 11, In whom (that is, in
Christ) we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the
purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his own will. This
Eternal purpose, ye see, to do so and so, for to work so and so, in such, and
such a Soul, is his Eternal love to those Souls.

The time when this purpose takes effect, is then, and not till then, when the
Soul obeys the call of Christ. Then it is, that an actual Application of that
good thing, which was intended, is made. This is exemplified in the Lord's
dealing with Paul. He was a chosen Vessel, from all Eternity, Act. 9.15. But
then was not this good thing wrought in him, by the improvement whereof his
Soul might prosper, until he obeyed the Call of Christ: For till then, he was
a Persecutor of the Church of God, and that beyond measure. But when it pleased
God to call him by his grace, and to reveal his Son in him; then, that good
thing was wrought in him, according as God had purposed, as he declares, Gal.
1.13, 14, 15, 16, Immediately, he conferred not with flesh, and blood. But (as
Act. 9.20.) he straitway Preached in the Synagogue, that Christ was the Son of
God; for as he tells King Agrippa, Act. 26.19, He was not disobedient to the
heavenly Vision. Now, if ye ask what this good thing was, which he received in
obeying this call, in improvement whereof, his Soul began presently to prosper?
I shall give it you in a word: It was a Heaven-born principle of Spiritual
life. 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son, has Life, and he that has not the
Son has not life. Then (as he says, Ephesians. 2.5.) He was quickened, who before
was dead in sins, and trespasses. Then, his Soul was in a way of thriving. As a
Tree, when there is life in the Root, it is capable, if well ordered, of
prospering, and bringing forth fruit.

Thus it is evident, that if we look upward, we find the first foundation of
Soul-prosperity is laid in God's Eternal, Electing Love. But if we look inward,
it is then laid, when once, we are effectually called, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has
saved us, and called us with an holy calling: That is, He has brought us into
a state of Salvation; which is the only state wherein the Soul prospers. And
there it shall prosper. Romans 8.28. And we know that all things work together
for good, to them that love God, to them that are called according to his
purpose. verse. 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and
whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also
glorified. When this Call is first obeyed, the Soul begins to prosper, for the
Understanding begins then to be savingly enlightened. 2 Pet. 1.9, But he that
lacks these things is blind, and cannot see far off. In that day of God's
power, the Soul is made willing, Psalm. 110.3. And then the Conscience begins to
be purged from dead works, Heb. 9.14. And this good thing, thus, in this day
begun, shall, one day, be made perfect, in full and absolute Soul prosperity. 1
These. 5.23, The very God of peace sanctify you wholly. So prays the Apostle
for them, and is confident his prayers shall be heard, verse. 24, Faithful is he
that calls you, who will also do it. He says to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.8,
9. Who shall confirm you to the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our
Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship
of his Son Jesus Christ.

I might now dismiss this point, concerning the first Rise, and Foundation of
this Soul-prosperity; and proceed to show the growth and progress of it. But I
must first speak a few words, to prevent, if possible, all mistakes by any
thing that has been said. It cannot be denied, but in some, that never yet
heartily, and unfeignedly obeyed the call of Christ, what by one means, what by
another, they living under the ministry of the Gospel, there may be wrought not
only a fair Reformation of the outward Man, but likewise some inward work upon
the Soul; and that in each of the three forementioned excellent Faculties,
which have an appearance of very great tendency to Soul-prosperity, but indeed
come very far short of it, as to the truth, and reality of the matter.

1. In the Understanding, there may be much light in the things of God. We read
Matthew. 7.22. that not only one or two, but Many shall say, we have Prophesied
in thy Name. Some think they lied in saying so, as if none were partakers of
such excellent gifts in their unconverted state, but the Scripture is clear to
the contrary, Heb. 6.4, -- Those who were once enlightened, and tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost. -- If they shall fall
away, etc. Yet here was nothing really wrought, for the prosperity of the Soul.
They had none of those good things, which do accompany salvation. verse. 9. But,
beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that do accompany
Salvation. Thus it is with many; they know much, but their Souls are not fully
brought under the power, and authority of what they know: still, upon the
account of some lust, or other, they are under the power of darkness, spoken of
Col. 1.13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness.

2. In the Will, there may be some light touches of the Spirit, inclining it to
cleave to the outward and visible part of Religion; together with some workings
in the motions, and outgoings thereof in several affections, Matthew. 13.20, --
the same is he that hears the Word, and anon with joy receives it. 1 King.
21.27. Ahab rent his Clothes, and put Sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted,
and lay in Sackcloth, and went softly. verse. 29. See thou how Ahab humbles
himself before me? And these stirrings of heart may work some resolutions, and
something may be done in pursuance of those resolutions. Psalm. 78.34, 36, 37,
When he slew them, then they sought him, and they returned, and enquired early
after God, etc.

3. The Conscience likewise may be so awakened; and so much may an unregenerate
Man stand in awe of it, that he dare not go against the light thereof. Thus was
it with Paul, he was so exceeding zealous, and made such Conscience of obeying
the Tradition of the Fathers, that he durst not but do as he did. Act. 26.9. I
verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the
Name of Jesus. And he had great peace in so doing, Romans 7.9, For I was alive
without the Law once. So had Abimelech, in that he did nothing, but what in
conscience he thought to be Lawful. Genesis 20.6. For this reason, so many among
the sober sort of the Heathen commended a good Conscience.

All these things seem very fair, but lay them all together, and let one and
the same Man be thus qualified in all these respects, yet they are not in the
least, any true evidence, that true, and real Soul-prosperity is begun in them.
For all the light in his understanding, his portion, at last, will be utter
darkness. And for the workings in the Will, and the Conscience, though they may
seem to be not far from the Kingdom of God, as Mark. 12.34. Yet all is but as
the Grasshoppers, which (as ye may observe) make many a leap, as if they would
mount up to the skies, and then presently fall down to the Earth again. Still,
one thing is wanting: They are not effectually called: Nor, by all this, can
any prove, that they are called into a state of Union with Christ: Therefore
they have no Spiritual life. This Understanding is still dead, the Conscience
dead, the Will dead, the whole Soul spiritually dead: For he that has not the
Son, has not life, 1 John 5.12. So that they are not yet in the right way of
Soul thriving. As whilst a dead Tree is a dead Tree, it cannot prosper, nor
bring forth fruit. This we may see in those that had most to show for
themselves: So much, that the Scripture calls it, seeking and enquiring after
God: Remembering that the most High was their Rock, etc. Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36.
Yet there was no Soul-prosperity begun. verse. 37. all this while, their hearts
were not right; they were Spiritually dead. Therefore as ye desire to find any
Evidence within you, of the Foundation of Soul-prosperity: Give diligence to
make your calling sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. This makes it sure, that ye are within the
compass of Electing love, and that God has wrought in you according to his
purpose.

SERMON III.
I Proceed now to the second particular. To show wherein the prosperity of the
Soul especially consists: and when it may be said, to thrive, and prosper.
This is the principal thing, the Text, and Doctrine engage to speak unto. And,
indeed, to speak unto it, is exceeding necessary: You may well remember what
was laid down in a Doctrine, not long since handled. That a living Christian,
though alive to God, yet in respect of his Christianity, and Religion, may be
in a withering, languishing condition; as far from prospering, as those Trees
are, whose leaves fall off, the boughs wither, and the root decays. It is so
with many. As it is much talked on, that these times have brought forth many
broken Merchants: So they have many broken, or almost broken Professors. Good
beginnings (it is too often found) are not always seconded with suitable
proceedings. Too many are too like the New Moon in its first quarter, then it
gives much light, but it is down again, and it is dark again all over before the
Morning light. It was a sad question, which the Apostle put to the Galatians,
chap. 5. v. 7, Ye did run well, who did hinder you? It was a question, with a
very sharp rebuke in it; and it withal imports, that no satisfying reason could
be given, why they should make such a halt.

Now in speaking to this necessary point, I shall first mention some things in
general, wherein the prosperity of the Soul consists. And then something, which
may more particularly demonstrate the truth, and reality of it.

1. In general. I shall premise; That as the first Rise, and Foundation of
Soul-prosperity (as to any possibility of Evidence, that such a thing is begun)
is laid in those principles of Spiritual life, which are received by virtue of
Union with Christ: So the growth and progress thereof consists in their
increase. As they increase, so the prosperity of the Soul increases, and no
otherwise. It is possible a Man may grow in gifts, and be very forward in
exercising them, and yet the Soul not thrive. It is said of the Corinthians,
they came behind in no gift, 1 Cor. 1.7. but their grace did not thrive
answerably to their gifts. No, they were still but Babes, and very carnal. 1
Cor. 3.1, 2, 3.

2. I farther premise this: That there is a natural tendency in the principles
of this life to grow, as there is in the best Seed, that is cast into the
ground to grow, and to bring forth fruit according to its kind: For they are
the Seed of the living God; there is life in them, and every living thing grows
according to the measure, which the God of its life has appointed. The Picture
of a Child does not grow: it has the same dimensions now, which it had twenty
years ago. But the living Child, to which these principles are compared, that,
by receiving kindly nourishment, grows, 1 Pet. 2.2, As new born Babes desire
the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. And certain it is, that
no work of the Spirit is designed for glory, but that which is growing. 2 Cor.
3.18, But we all with open face, beholding as in a Glass, the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the
spirit of the Lord. Gifts may wither, but grace will grow into glory.

These two things premised, I come now to speak (and that first of those things
in general, which are undeniable evidences of Soul-prosperity.)

1. When this thriving and growth is universal: The Body prospers, when there
is a healthy constitution all over: When the Head is well, the Stomach is well,
and all the vital parts are sound within: But in Children that have the
Rickets, the Head is only growing, the inferior parts of the Body being weak,
and feeble: When it is so, we say; the Child prospers not. It is oftentimes so
with the Soul: It may seemingly prosper in some things, when it does not really
prosper in other things, or indeed in any thing. It was so with many in the
Church of Ephesus: Their zeal was warm in externals, in a high and mighty
opposition against false Teachers, Errors, and Heresies, these they could not
endure, Rev. 2.6. But it was not so in other things, in the best things, there
was a great decay in the inward Man, in the vitals of Godliness, in those
graces that accompany Salvation, ver. 4, 5, I have something against thee,
because thou have left thy first Love. Remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen, and repent, and do thy first works. This is as far from true
Soul-prosperity, as a Tradesman from thriving, who gains by some one pedling
commodity, and loses thrice as much in greater matters. The Soul prospers,
when it grows up in all things. Ephesians. 4.15. But speaking the truth in love, may
grow up in all things, in him who is the Head, even Christ. It were endless
almost to reckon up the thriving and prospering in every grace. I shall
therefore instance in 2 things, by the thriving whereof, we may take an
estimate of the rest.

1. When the Soul thrives in those two graces, which by experience are found to
have as great an influence on the health of the Soul, as Natural heat, and
Radical moisture, (so Physicians say, and Reason says so too) have upon the
health of the Body. The just temperament of these, is that which preserves
life, and health, and strength. So when these two graces, that of Faith, which
is as the Natural heat, and that of Repentance, which is as the Radical
moisture, are thriving, and growing toward their full height, then the Soul is
in a very prosperous way.

1. When Faith grows, which is the Natural heat, as it did, 2 These. 1.3, --
because that your Faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of
you all, toward each other abounds.

Now this growth is best discerned.

1. When it grows in depth. So as the Soul is more and more settled, grounded,
rooted, and built up in Christ. Col. 1.23, If ye continue in the Faith,
grounded, and settled. And chapter 2.7, Rooted, and built up in him, and stablished
in the Faith. So that the heart is fixed, and is at peace within, when all
without is shaken, and the foundation of all Creature Comforts turned upside
down. As a Tree, whose Root does remain firm, when the top does shake. Psalm.
56.3, What time, I am afraid, I will trust in thee. He could keep his faith
above his fears, Psalm. 112.7. He shall not be afraid of evil Tidings, his heart
is fixed, trusting in the Lord. Job. 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust
in him. As if he had said: Though I read a sentence of Death upon what concerns
this Life; yet I have somewhat to trust him for, beyond this Life. No danger,
nor death shall beat me off from the holdfast of my faith in God, through
Christ Jesus: When it is thus, that promise will be made good, Isa. 26.3, Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusts in thee.

2. When it grows in breadth, so as it gives a firm, absolute, unlimited assent
to the whole truth of God, and receives the testimony of God, as in one thing,
so in every thing, which it apprehends to be of God; and that purely, because
God says so, whatever Sense and Reason, can object to the contrary. So Act.
24.14. But I confess unto thee, that after the way, which they call Heresy, so
worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the
Law, and the Prophets. Joh. 3.33, He that believes his testimony, has set to
his Seal that God is true, (in every thing.) I speak this of justifying faith,
not only considered in its most eminent act, which is to receive Jesus Christ,
and rest upon him alone, for whatsoever may give a title to, or a fitness for
eternal Salvation; but in its most full, complete, and perfect act, assenting
to whatsoever is historically delivered in the word; believing every Command,
every Threatening, every Promise, both of this life, and the life to come. So
as whatever is recorded in the word, is so believed, not without some gracious
effect upon the Soul. Observe it in four particulars.

(1.) A growing, thriving faith so believes what is Historically delivered
concerning the Creation of the World, as nothing is too hard for it. Although
the things believed do not yet appear; yet that hinders not a full assurance of
their future existence; seeing the same power of God, which created the World
of nothing, can give a Being to whatever he has said, shall be, when it seems
good unto him. Psalm. 121.2, My help comes from the Lord, which made Heaven and
Earth. As if he had said; I will never distrust his power for whatever I stand
in need of, who could erect such a stately Fabric from nothing.

(2.) A growing, thriving faith believes every Command of God, Psalm. 119.66, --
I have believed thy Commandments. He believes them to be holy, just, and good,
and brings down every thought more and more in subjection unto them all. Thus
Abraham's faith growing, and thriving has many eminent acts of obedience
ascribed to it. Heb. 11.8. By Faith Abraham, when he was called of God, to go
into a place which he should afterward receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and
he went out, not knowing whither he went. A hard trial: For as it is in the
Proverb; The smoke of a Man's own Chimney, is as good as the fire of another's.
So that Command, which was yet more hard, of offering up his only begotten Son,
that is, of his wife Sarah, the Son of the Promise, in whose Seed all the
Nations of the Earth should be blessed, yet he submitted to it. Heb. 11.17.
though he had but short warning, Genesis 22.2, 3. He received the Command
overnight, and went about it next Morning.

(3.) A growing, thriving Faith believes the threat'nings of the Word; and this
belief makes the Soul to stand in awe of them. Psalm. 119.161, -- my heart
stands in awe of thy word. So Heb. 11.7. Noah's Faith takes warning at the
threatening: He was moved with fear, and prepared an Ark to the saving of his
House. This is not too low for the best grown Faith to act, nor be acted upon.
God thought it not unmeet for Adam to make use of, in Innocence, Genesis 2.17. Job
found it in himself, chap. 31.23, Destruction from God was a terror unto me:
and by reason of his Highness, I could not endure.

(4.) A thriving, growing faith, with all thankfulness, accepts the Promises,
and with all heartiness relyes upon God for the performance of mercy promised.
Resting upon the promise, when he has nothing else to avouch it; when there is
neither Sense, nor Reason to second Faith. So Abraham, Romans 4.17, 18, etc. He
believed God, who quickens the dead, and calls things that are not, as if
they were: Who against hope, believed in hope. And being not weak in faith, he
considered not his own Body now dead, etc. He staggered not at the promise of
God, through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God; being
fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able to perform, 2 Cor. 5.7,
We walk by faith, and not by sight. i. e. By the sensible enjoyment of what God
has promised, but by faith, believing, and waiting for the accomplishment:
Notwithstanding all the real improbability, and seeming impossibilities that
are in the way: When faith thus grows, the Soul prospers exceedingly. Now the
heart will be kept more sweet, and clean then ordinary, Act. 15.9, -- purifying
their hearts by faith. The World will be Conquered. 1 John 5.4, And this is the
victory that overcomes the World, even your faith. And hereby Satan himself is
trodden under foot.

2. When Repentance grows (which is as the Radical moisture) then the Soul
prospers. Now Repentance grows,

(1.) When there is a growth and increase in the necessary adjunct of
Repentance; in that which is as inseparable from it, as heat is from the fire;
and that is in an hearty grief, and godly sorrow for sin. This is necessary,
that the Soul may experimentally know the bitterness of sin, and taste, as it
were, the Gall, and Wormwood that is in it. Jer. 2.19, Thine own wickedness
shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore,
and see that it is an evil thing, and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord
thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of hosts. And it
is inseparable, for it cannot be rationally imagined, that a Man whose Eyes are
opened, to see what great provocation there is in the least sin, as it is
against the most high, and most holy God; it is impossible that it should be
without some pricking of the heart, as they felt Act. 2, 37. Now, when this
grows, and increases, so as it reaches not only Beams, but Motes, not only
Camels, but Gnats; melting the heart with godly sorrow before God, for the
least vain word proceeding out of the mouth; yea for sinful silence, in not
speaking, when and what we ought to speak: and for the least sinful thought in
the secret of our Souls, when this brings us upon our knees before God, and
that with the first opportunity after the first discovery of it, as it did
David, 1 Samuel 24.5. And it came to pass, that afterward David 's heart smote
him. When it is thus, the Soul is in the high way of prospering. For, what
tenderness, what watchfulness, what humility, what high prizing of Christ, are
likely to thrive, and prosper in such a Soul, when it sees how it forfeits all
its hopes every day, and therefore has such need of Christ every day, that the
forfeiture may not be taken:

(2.) The Soul prospers when there is a growth, and increase in the Essential
parts of Repentance, and they are these two: (1.) Turning from sin, and (2.)
Turning to God. Herein the very Essence and Nature of this grace does consist.
To work this was the scope of the Apostles ministry. Act. 26.18. And this is
that, which sorrow for sin (if it be godly sorrow indeed) does work, 2 Cor.
7.10. For godly sorrow works Repentance to salvation.

(1.) For the former of these: When the heart is heated with holy indignation
against the least sin; and against it self, for being, through its own
carelessness, surprised by it, and defiled with it, as Job was, chap. 42.6.
Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. And when holy and
humble resolutions, in the strength of Christ, are more hightened to keep
himself that the wicked one touch him not, 1 John 5.18. so as to leave any of
his polluting impressions upon him. Psalm. 17.3, -- thou have tried me, and
shall find nothing. I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. Psalm.
39.1, I said, I will take heed unto my ways, that I sin not with my tongue.
Hos. 14.8, Ephraim shall say, What have I any more to do with Idols. Isa.
30.22, Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven Images, of the ornament
of thy molten Images of Gold: Thou shall cast them away, as a menstruous cloth;
thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence.

(2.) For the latter part: Turning unto God; it is evident, that this is an
Essential part of Repentance. For every sin, so far as it prevails, turns the
heart from God. Jam. 1.14, Every Man is tempted when he is drawn away of his
own lust, and enticed. Jer. 32.33, And they have turned to me the back, and not
the face. Now the repenting sinner, that prizeth the loving kindness of God as
better then life, then life with all its fillings up with earthly comforts,
cannot but set himself to turn unto God; as they did, Hosea. 6.1, Come and let
us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us. Turn unto God,
and that,

(1.) As the chiefest good, out of an unfeigned desire to have his good will,
to live in his love, and to enjoy Communion with him. Psalm. 4.6, 7, -- Lord
lift up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thou have put gladness in my
heart, more then in the time, that their Corn, and their Wine increased. Psalm.
73.25, 26, Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth that I
desire besides thee. My heart, and my flesh fails, but God is the strength of
my heart, and my portion for ever.

(2.) As our utmost end; reckoning upon it, that therefore we live, that we may
exalt him, and sanctify his holy name in our hearts, and please him in all our
ways, still endeavoring, that in all things our end may fall in with his. Romans
6.11, Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive
to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 14.7, 8, For none of us lives to
himself, and no Man dies to himself: For whether we live, we live unto the
Lord, and whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord, whether we live therefore or
die we are the Lords.

Thus ye see when Repentance may be said to grow; and that in the growth
thereof, the Soul exceedingly prospers. Ye have likewise, the first evidence of
universal growth, namely the growth of Faith, and Repentance; when these two
grow in the Soul, which are as necessary for the welfare of the Soul, as the
Natural heat, and Radical moisture are for the welfare of the Body, then the
Soul prospers. The God of all grace, bless us all with this prosperity: This
is prosperity indeed.

But with sadness of heart, it may be said of these two graces, what is
observed of some Outlandish fruits, that though with much cost, and care they
are transplanted into this Country, yet they thrive not, as they do in their
native Soil, because of the coldness of the Climate. Even so it is with Faith,
and Repentance, though they are much spoken of, yet they thrive not: Though in
respect of their Root, they may be in the Soul, yet what through the coldness,
deadness, sluggishness, and unmortifiedness of our hearts, they prosper not;
and therefore our Souls prosper not, neither can they ever prosper, while these
are neglected.

2. I proceed now to the second instance of universal growth: and that is, when
that blessing laid up in that promise recorded, Hos. 14.5. is given forth; when
the God of all grace is as the dew to the Soul; so that it grows as the Lilly,
and as the Cedars in Lebanon. The dew, ye know, is a very sweet refreshing
moisture, to the dry, and thirsty ground; which soaking into the Earth, makes
it bring forth its fruits, and the fruit thereof to grow. So the dew of
Heavenly influences, and Divine supplies of grace, when they fall upon the
Soul, they make the Root of Divine principles to bring forth fruit, and the
fruit to grow. And when it grows as the Lilly, and as the Cedar, then the Soul
prospers.

(1.) When it grows as the Lilly. The Lilly, ye know, is a very lovely Plant.
Solomon in all his glory, was not like it. Now, the Soul grows as the Lilly,
when it grows in those lovely graces mentioned, Col. 3.12, Bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering. Forbearing one another,
forgiving one another. What a lovely sight is it to see (so far as Man can see)
a Soul clothed with these graces? Lovely they are in the eyes even of those,
that are strangers to the life, and power of Religion; they cannot skill of the
mysteries of Faith, of Communion with God, of the life of Faith, of the
comforts of the Holy Ghost; but of these things they can judge, and cannot but
commend. All commended Cranmer, that holy Martyr for his meekness; and
kindness, even to those that had wronged him, that it grew to a Proverb, Do him
an ill turn, and he will be your friend for ever. So likewise, it grows as the
Lilly, when it grows in gentleness, peaceableness, and easiness, to be
entreated; when there is an ingenuous facility, either to be persuaded to what
is good, or dissuaded from what is evil, though in those things that are
contrary to our former apprehensions, according to that in Jam. 3.17, But the
wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated. -- This is lovely as the Lilly. Some there are who are guilty of
that which is condemned, 2 Pet. 2.10, Selfwilled; that will not let go their
prejudices; as if to change their mind in what they are once engaged, were a
disparagement to them. This is very unlovely, for this is the greatest folly,
not to give place to right Reason. This has not been the way of those whose
Souls have prospered. David hearkened to the counsel of Abigail, and thought it
no disparagement unto him; yielding to the strength of her reasons, to alter
his mind; and blessed God that he so happily met with her, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. It
is Prophesied, Isa. 11.6, The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, etc. When Souls
prosper under the Government of Christ, they will be so far subdued, and
changed through the Spiritual efficacy thereof, that those who, by nature, were
as fiery, as violent, as untamed, and untractable, as Wolves, and Leopards, and
Lions, shall be so ductile, teachable, and perswadeable to what is good, that a
little Child shall lead them, and prevail with them, to alter their mind,
bringing Scripture and Reason with them. This is lovely; when these Principles
of grace grow in the Soul, the Soul grows as the Lilly.

(2.) The Soul then prospers, when it grows, not only as the Lilly, but as the
Cedars in Lebanon, which are much spoken of, in the Scripture. Of all Trees,
these shoot up highest, and endure longest: The Timber whereof not being
subject to rot, as other Timber. So that the Soul grows as the Cedar, when that
deep, inward, rooted respect to things below, which rules in an unmortified
heart, is so far mortified, that a Man's Treasure is changed: We now lay up our
Treasure in Heaven, and set our affections on things that are above, mounting
up as the Eagles, Isa. 40.31. Looking after the things that are not seen, as
the things our Souls delight in, having chosen them for our portion; preparing
for, longing after, and rejoicing in hope of enjoying them. When things that
are seen afford us but little, but matter of care, and grief, trouble, and
sorrow: When the Soul creeps on the Earth life a Snail, and is up in the things
of the World, as an Eel in the Mud, then it never prospers.

2. When a lasting durable frame of godliness is attained, and preserved, then
likewise it grows as the Cedar. As it said of Enoch, Genesis 5.21. That he walked
with God 300 years together. So it may be said, that our best works are at
last: as Rev. 2.19, I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and
thy patience, and thy works, and the last to be more then the first. And that
our Salvation is nearer, then when we (first) believed. Romans 13.11. But when
good impressions wear off, and hardly come on again, when inward meltings
quickly dry up, as the morning dew; when the Soul is as it were sick of the
Staggers; now goes forward, and then goes backward, it is far from prospering
as it ought.

This is all, I have to say to the first Particular, that in the first Rise,
and Foundation of Soul-prosperity, as to any possible evidencing that such a
thing is begun, is laid in those first principles of Spiritual life, which are
received by virtue of our union with Christ; so the growth, and progress
thereof consists in their increase, and then, this increase, where this
thriving is, is universal, when growth in one principle is added to another, as
when Men add house to house, and field to field, they are said to prosper in
the World. Isa. 5.8. So when Faith, which is as the natural heat, is added to
Repentance, which is as the Radical moisture, and the growth of the Cedar is
added to the growth of the Lilly, then the Soul prospers.

I now proceed to the second Particular, As the Soul prospers, when growth in
gracious principles is universal, so much more, when gracious principles are
kept in exercise. The Scripture speaks much of this, more then, perhaps, is
taken notice of. For all those commands we have up and down in Scripture, to
love the Lord, to fear him, to believe in the Lord Jesus, do not so much
require the first principle, as the acting and exercising of that principle: As
for instance, 1 John 3.23. Commands the exercise of Faith and Love. We read of
the work of Faith, 2 These. 1.11. The work, and labor of love. Heb. 6.10. The
perfect work of patience, Jam. 1.5. Of walking in the fear of the Lord, Act.
9.31. Of walking in love, Ephesians. 5.2. Of walking by faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. Of living
by faith, Gal. 2.20. All these expressions note, the actual exercises of these
graces, each of them being busied in, and taken up with their proper work. This
is of absolute necessity unto Soul-prosperity. Bodily exercise may be so used,
as that it may be a great means of preserving Bodily health, but this is of far
greater use for preserving the health of the Soul; for something else,
sometimes, at least as to some persons, may supply the want of Bodily exercise,
so as a person may do well enough without it: But nothing can supply, for the
good of the Soul, the neglect of the exercise of grace. Yea indeed, it is all
one, as to Soul-prosperity, for the time, when it is not exercised, as if there
were no grace in the Soul at all. We have many sad instances of this, that it
has been so: when the contrary principles of corruption have choakt, as it
were, oppressed, and bound up, the gracious principle from stirring, and
moving, to make any opposition, to any purpose. Isa. 64.6, -- our iniquities
like the wind, have taken us away. This we see in David, without any wrong to
the memory of Joseph, I suppose it may be said, that he had more grace, then
Joseph had, yet David not exercising it, fell (as it is said of Saul, 2 Samuel
1.21.) among the uncircumcised; the Shield of the Mighty, wherewith he might
have quenched the fiery Darts of Satan, was vilely cast away, as if he had
never been anointed, with the anointing of the Spirit of God; whereas Joseph
stood like a Conqueror in the hour of temptation, when it came upon him, with
so much violence, and advantage. What was the reason of this, but that Joseph,
at that time, had his Loins girt, his Lamp burning, his grace in exercise, as
we find, Genesis 39.9? But it was not so, in that sad hour, with David, he was
slothful, and did not stir up himself to resist, but gave place to Satan. In a
word, Joseph was awake, and David was asleep. Nay, at another time, David was
overcome, when Saul resisted, and overcame a temptation of the same kind.
Compare 1 Samuel 25.21, 22. David resolved to revenge himself, when he took
himself to be affronted by Nabal; with 1 Samuel 10.27. The Children of Belial
said of Saul: How shall this Man save us? And they despised him, and brought
him no present; but Saul held his peace. We see by this, that the having of
much grace, avails not to the prosperity of the Soul, if it be not exercised.
It is, for that present, all one to speak of, as if there were none. It is very
observable to this purpose, what we have in three Evangelists, concerning
Christ's reproving of his Disciples, when they were so afraid of being drowned,
Matthew. 8.26, Why are ye so fearful, O ye of little Faith? In Mark, it is
otherwise related, chap. 4.37, How is it that ye have no faith? Luke's
expression, chap. 8.25. is in a different way from both: Where is your Faith?
Yet here is no such difference, but what is easily reconciled. They had a
little faith, as it is in Matthew: No faith, as it is in Mark. Luke takes up
the difference, Where is your Faith? Says he: Their little faith was to seek,
when they had need of it; therefore their Souls were as much out of order, and
their fear as great, as if their hearts had been full of unbelief all over.

It is then clearly thus: The Soul prospers so much, and so long only as grace
is exercised according as the matter requires. This we have exemplified in
Gaius, whose Soul prospered, at so high a rate. Truth was in him, and he walked
in the Truth, ver. 3. of this Epistle: In godly sincerity, as Paul did, 2 Cor.
1.12. He walked with God as Noah did, Genesis 6.9. He walked humbly with God, as
Mich. 6.8. And all that do so, shall walk with God in White, Rev. 3.4. (as
doubtless Gaius does now;) an expression that holds forth that unconceivable
glory, wherewith that Soul shall, one day, be clothed; yea, and their Bodies
too, at last, when made like unto the glorious Body of Christ. When his Face
did shine, and his Raiment was white as the light, Matthew. 17.2.

3. The Soul prospers, when, in all these things, it prospers daily. One day
after another; and one day as well as another; when more and more is daily
done, and more and more daily received, in the forementioned particulars. This
Paul could say, 2 Cor. 4.16, -- though our outward Man perish, yet the inward
Man is renewed day by day. The Body of Man, though it be of as healthy a
constitution as any in the World; yet it grows but to such an age, then it
comes to a consistency, standing at a stay; and after it has done so a while,
it begins to decay. But as it may be so, yet it should be otherwise with a
prosperous Soul. Phil. 3.12, 13, 14, Not as though I had already attained,
either were already perfect, but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that,
for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus, etc. It was now 25 years since
Paul's Conversion; for this Epistle to the Philippians was written the same
year with that to the Ephesians; and both of them in that time mentioned, Act.
28.30, 31, When Paul dwelt two years ( at Rome) in his own hired house, and
received all that came unto him. He had been so long a Man in Christ, done and
suffered so much for Christ, and received so much from Christ, yet he is
exceeding hungry, and thirsty to receive more (spiritually, he was very poor in
his own opinion) that so he might do more, where he was called. Though
perfection (as he well knew) was not attainable in this life, yet he aimed at
it, hoping he might come nearer to it, then yet he was. [I follow after, that I
may apprehend.] What? Even that perfection which was then wanting. This was a
prosperous Soul. I say no more to this, then as our Savior said in another
case to the Lawyer, Luke. 10.37, Go, and do likewise.

4. Then the Soul prospers, when in conjunction with all these, it is more
and more Rooted in Christ. So as notwithstanding all our growth in grace, and
all our exercise of grace, the life we live, so far as it is gracious (and it
ought to be so, in all things) is more in Christ, and from Christ, and what we
expect to receive from Christ, then in, and from our selves, when we think with
our selves as the Apostle said, Gal. 2.20, Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God. Therefore interest Christ in all that ye do. Look unto
him for assistance in every thing ( Phil. 4.13, I can do all things, through
Christ which strengthens me.) and for acceptance of all, 1 Pet. 2.5, Ye also
as lively stones are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood to offer up
spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ. Let us go on, thus
leaning upon our Beloved. The heart of Christ was much upon this, that all that
are in a state of Union with him, should learn this, and live under the actual
consideration of it, Joh. 15.4, 5, Abide in me, and I in you; as the Branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine; no more can ye,
except ye abide in me. I am the Vine, ye are the Branches; he that abides in
me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without me, ye can do
nothing. And the more this is learned, and accordingly reduced into practice,
the more the Soul will prosper. It is worth our noting that true growth is
noted by our growing in Christ. Ephesians. 4.15, But speaking the truth in love, may
grow up into him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ. 2 Pet. 3.18,
But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ.
As if to grow in parts, in duties, or any thing else, without growing in him,
were a swelling, rather then a growth. The swelling of the Leg, or Arm, is no
good sign that the party grows stronger. It is thus indeed: whiles we are full
of our own strength, our Souls prosper not, 1 Samuel 2.9, -- for by strength
shall no Man prevail. Therefore a prospering Soul, though it has, and when it
has put on the whole Armor of God, yet it is not to trust thereto, but to be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10. Certainly, the
more deeply this principle is engraven in our hearts, and the more we act
according to it, the better it will be with us. He that labored more
abundantly then they all, that could say, He had finished his course, fought
the good fight, and kept the faith, was he that said, Not I, but the grace of
God that was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. Happy are those Souls, and more happy they
are like to be, that are so trained up in a continual sensibleness of their own
insufficiency, as to what is spiritually good, that still there is a looking up
for more supplies, that we may exercise what we have, Phil. 1.19, -- and the
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. What Paul prayed for the Thessalonians, 2
These. 3.5, The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and the patient
waiting for Christ. i. e. into the exercise thereof. A Soul that would prosper,
must pray for it self. Yea, and for that which Paul desired others to pray on
his behalf, Ephesians. 6.18, 19, Praying always with all Prayer, and Supplication,
-- that utterance may be given unto me. Paul had already a great gift of
utterance, and memory, and had great experience of Gods presence with him, in
the exercise thereof, having preached so well, and so long, now twenty five
years together, yet desires their prayers, not only for the continuance of
these gifts, but also for the actual exercise of them, so often as ever there
was occasion of using them. And no doubt Paul did pray thus for himself, as
often as he was to preach, and as little doubt there is, but that he did his
work so much the better for it, and with the better success.

Thus ye have, what I have to say, concerning the first thing proposed: What
concerns the prosperity of the Soul in general, wherein it consists, and when a
Man may be said to prosper.

SERMON IV.
I Now proceed more particularly to demonstrate, that in truth, and reality,
the Soul does prosper, according to the degree, and measure, wherein the Soul
abounds in them.

1. The Soul prospers, when it is full of Praises to God: So kept, from day to
day, under the Law of thankfulness, that it abounds in thanksgiving to God.
Col. 2.7, Abounding therein with thanksgiving. It is possible, some may think
otherwise, that this is no such great matter; but let these following
particulars be duly considered, and I hope ye will acknowledge it to be as I
say. Consider then,

1. Though it be true, that there are some solemn Seasons, which call for
solemn Praises, when God has abounded in the expressions of his love to us,
and Fatherly care for us, in some special favor, bestowed upon us, giving us
to experience the truth of what David found, Psalm. 31.7. I will rejoice, and be
glad in thy mercy, for thou have considered my trouble, and known my Soul in
adversity. Though, I say, this be true, yet we are under express obligation, to
make it part, and a great part of our business every day, Heb. 13.15. By him
therefore, let us offer the sacrifice of Praise to God continually, that is the
fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name. It was David's resolution to keep
his heart under the power, and authority of this Law, Psalm. 145.2, Every day
will I bless thee; and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever.

2. Though it be true likewise, that there be some days when the Lord calls to
mourning: As Isa. 22.12. Yet the saddest hours, that the all-disposing
Providence of the most wise God, brings us into, bring no discharge from this
duty. Neither need we look for it, for these two duties are very well
consistent together. Otherwise, we may be sure, that God, who gives a command
sometimes to Mourn, would never have given us a command always to Rejoice; if
these two had been contrary one to another. And besides, even in those days,
when divine Dispensations call for mourning, when things go most cross to our
desires, and affections, yet we have matter of Thanksgiving; if it were but for
this, That it is never so bad with us, but it might be worse. Paul
acknowledges this to be a mercy, that he had less cause of sorrow, then he
might have had, Phil. 2.27, For indeed, he was sick nigh unto death, but God
had mercy on him, and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have
sorrow upon sorrow. Psalm. 118.18, 19, The Lord has chastened me sore: but he
has not given me over unto death. Open to me the gates of righteousness: I
will go in to them, and I will praise the Lord. This needs not seem strange at
all, for even then, when the Providence of God have very much appearance of
contradiction to the Promises, and are therefore most sadly cross to our hopes,
and expectations, a gracious person, if his Soul prosper, and be kept in a
gracious frame, may, by the eye of Faith, foresee the good hand of God, working
even then, for good unto him: David, in one of the saddest days that ever
befell him, as dark as it was with him, had a glimmering of this, 2 Samuel 16.12,
Let Shimei alone, said he, let him curse, it may be the Lord will look upon
mine affliction, and will requite me good for his cursing me this day. I can
tell you of one, whose spiritual sight was clear in this matter: One, that when
sad tidings were brought him, that cut deep, and went near his heart: Well,
says he, I will go, and bless God for that good, which, in due time, I believe
he will work out, by the heavy burden now laid upon me. He did believe there
would Honey be found, at the end of that Rod. These persons knew full well,
that all things that do befall the Lords Covenant people, are either blessings
in their own nature, or are turned into blessings, in the Issue. Psalm. 25.10,
All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his Covenant,
and his Testimonies. He always has, and ever will so order all things, as that
they shall all work to bring electing love, and glorifying love together. This
Jacob experienced. Compare Genesis 42.36, -- Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and
will ye take Benjamin away? All these things are against me, with Genesis 48.16,
The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the Lads. And David did hope
to find it so, when his condition was very low, and his spirit very much sunk,
and fallen, Psalm. 42.11, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the
health of my countenance, and my God.

Thus ye have the first Particular; that it is our duty every day. Though, we
are sometimes called to Mourning, yet we are always called to Thansgiving,
therefore we ought to resolve with David. Psalm. 34.1. I will bless the Lord, at
all times; his praise shall continually be in my mouth.

2. When the Soul is always habitually prepared, and, as the matter requires,
abounds in the actual performance of this duty; it is in a prosperous, and
spiritually thriving frame.

This will appear, if we enquire into the nature of Religious Thanksgiving. For
these three things we shall find necessarily required to the essence of it.

(1.) A Cordial acknowledging of God alone, as the Supreme cause, and first
mover in all the good we have, of what kind soever it be; by what hand soever,
it is conveyed unto us. This is necessary, for we shall never pay our Rent to
him, whom we do not acknowledge our Landlord. We have cause to say of every
thing, the least thing we receive, as Psalm. 118.23, This is the Lords doing.

(2.) A real sensibleness that it is the Almighty goodness of God, and that
alone, that sets his all-disposing Providence on work to give forth any thing,
the least thing unto us, that may be any way useful unto us: And this, in
conjunction with an humble sense of our own unworthiness, to live in the
thoughts of such a God, who has all the World to care for, for our good, even
the least good. Thus did Jacob, Genesis 32.10, I am not worthy of the least of all
the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou have showed unto thy Servant.
Genesis 33.5, -- The Children, which God has graciously given thy Servant.

(3.) An hearty, and humble resignation of our selves to live unto God, because
of his goodness unto us. This is the Law of thankfulness; and so far as a
thankful heart lives under this Law, so far he must be able to say, as Paul
did, Phil. 1.21, To me to live, is Christ.

These thing are essential to the acceptable discharge of this duty; and so far
as Men fail in any of them, so far they come short in the due performance
thereof. And this being duly considered, it is very evident, that that work of
praising God, so as to give him the praises due unto his name (as the
expression is, Psalm. 29.2.) is so humbling, so melting, so self-abasing, so
God-exalting; taking all from Self, and giving all to God; so heart-engaging,
and obliging, that it cannot be otherwise, but that the Soul does prosper, yea
exceedingly prosper, when it is faithful therein. Read 2 Samuel 7. verse. 10. to
the end: And 1 Chronicles. 29. from verse. 10. to the end of the 19th. And ye shall
find in both those Chapters, that David's heart was never more after Gods own
heart, nor ever did his Soul more eminently prosper, then at that time, when it
was so warm in this duty. And this would be farther taken notice of, that we
never read in all the Scripture (so far as I can find) that any, whose Soul was
not at least in a capacity of prospering, whatever they might do formally, did
ever set themselves seriously about it. We find Saul sometime sacrificing, and
now and then enquiring after God. We read of Ahab humbling himself, and walking
in Sackcloth, but not a word of Praising God, either by the one, or by the
other. No marvel; for pure need may drive a Man to his prayers: As Jon. 1.5,
Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every Man to his God. But it is pure
Grace that makes a Man thankful (as thankfulness has been described in its
Essential parts) Formal thanksgivings are common, and with some, more common
then formal prayers: But neither the one, nor the other signify any thing with
God, Job. 35.13, Surely, God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty
regard it. A mouthful of words, is but a mouthful worth; no more with God, then
a mouthful of wind. It is certain, there is no more real thankfulness, then
there is a real resignation of our selves to God, to live unto him. 2 Timothy 3.2,
Unthankful, and unholy are conjoined. Though they may be somewhat
distinguished, yet they are not divided, Ephesians. 5.4, Neither filthiness, nor
foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient, but rather giving of
thanks. Ye may collect from thence, that a thankful Soul, is a mortified Soul.
It is true, we read that the Pharisee began, with, a Lord I thank thee, Luke
18.11. but he stumbled at the Threshold; for read over all that he says to the
end, and ye will find that he does not so much praise God, as commend himself.
I shall conclude this with Ephesians. 5.19, 20, Speaking to your selves in Psalms, --
Giving thanks always, for all things to God, and the Father, in the name of our
Lord, Jesus Christ. These two verses speak fully to that, which I aim at: for
observe the connection between them, and ye will find the Apostle, makes giving
of thanks always, for all things, an effect and evidence of being filled with
the Spirit: Without all doubt, a Soul full of the praises of God, is so far
full of the spirit of God, and so far begins the work of Heaven upon Earth. And
therefore it is without all controversy, that a truly thankful Soul, so far,
and so long, as it continues so, is really a prosperous Soul.

2. The prosperity of the Soul, as it is very much promoted, so it is, and may
be, as much evidenced, by the right Government, and due ordering of our
Affections, of Likeing, and Disliking. Of Liking, as Love, Joy, Delight,
Desire. Of Disliking, as Fear, Sorrow, and Grief, Anger and Wrath. This is a
large point: I shall endeavor therefore, to give you as much as I can, in a
little. Consider then.

(1.) Affections, especially those of Liking, were planted in the nature of Man
at first, to be to the Soul, as Wings to the Bird, which make her flight so
easy: So were these, to make our approaches to God, more delightful, that it
might be as meat and drink to us, to do the Will of our Father. And such a
sweet harmony there was in Adam's Soul (whilst he was as God made him) that he
could judge of things as they were, affect things as he judged of them, and act
according as he affected: Being made perfect after the Image of God, he had all
his affections, at command, according to the Will of God.

(2.) By reason of Original corruption, as those noble Faculties, the
Understanding, Will, and Conscience (as I have lately showed you) so the
Affections are most horribly polluted, and are become so many fleshly, and
deceitful lusts. They are as another Antichrist in the Soul, ruling over
Conscience, which should rule all, under God. For as corrupt as they are, every
Man, in his corrupted state, is led by them, more then he is by any thing else.
For as they Affect, so they Judge; so they Do, what seems good in their own
Eyes without considering any other rule, as they did, Judge. 21.25. till, at
last, God give them up unto them: As Romans 1, 24, Wherefore God gave them up to
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts. verse. 26, For this cause,
God gave them up to vile affections. The case of such is very sad: For as it is
one of the greatest blessings, where grace is rewarded with grace. As Psalm.
119.55, 56, I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy
law. This I had, because I kept thy precepts. So this is one of the greatest
curses, when God punishes sin, with sin, leaving Men to do what they will. As
Psalm. 81.11, 12, But my people would not hearken to my voice; Israel would none
of me. So I gave them up, unto their own hearts lust, and they walked in their
own counsels.

(3.) To mortify the inordinacy of these Affections, that they may be fixed
upon their proper Objects. So as to Love, what they ought to love, and Hate
what they ought to hate, etc. To keep them so in order, that they be not moved,
but when there is cause; and when there is cause, not without measure. To do
this, is one of the greatest, and hardest works, that a Christian has to do.
It is said, Gal. 5.24, And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh,
with the affections and lusts. i.e. They are about it, and make it their daily
work, and the better success they have in this work, the more their Soul
prospers.

It is said Prove. 16.32, He that is slow to anger, is better then the Mighty:
and he that rules his spirit, then he that takes a City. Not, he that is
never angry (for the anger of the new Creature is a duty, Ephesians. 4.26, Be angry,
and sin not) but, he that is slow to anger, is of greater excellency then he
that conquers a City. He is more set by in the sight of God, for the strength
of his Soul, whereby he conquers himself, then ever any Man was, or will be for
his Bodily strength, whereby he conquers others. It is more honorable to be a
Paul, then an Alexander, Prove. 14.29, He that is slow to wrath, is of great
understanding: but he that is hasty of spirit, exalts folly. He that is slow
to wrath, is a Man of understanding; much resolution being requisite, to keep
that, or any other affection, especially when it is stirred, within its due
bounds, Jam. 3.13, Who is a wise Man, and endued with knowledge amongst you?
let him show out of a good conversation, his words with meekness of wisdom. And
great need there is to exercise this wisdom, when occasions are given, which
may kindle that affection, to preserve the spirit, in a meek and quiet frame.
For as sanctified affections are as a gentle wind to the Soul, whereby it moves
aright toward God, with a calm, and well-composed warmth, in every duty. So
unruly affections are as a storm, a very Hurricane to the Soul; so as like a
River, in a great tempest, the Banks are over-flown, and much mud, and slime
are left behind. He that can prevent the rising of such a storm, or can
speedily allay it, is a Man of understanding indeed.

4. The Soul is then spiritually thriving, and prosperous, when the inordinacy
of the affections is mortified, so as,

(1.) Every affection acts as a saving grace in the Soul, when the affection of
Love, is renewed by the spirit of God, into the grace of love, and so fixed
upon God in Christ, that other things are respected only in subordination
thereunto: When the affection of Fear is renewed into the grace of Fear, so as
to keep the heart under an holy awe of God, as David's was, Psalm. 119.161, --
My heart stands in awe of thy word. So when the affection of sorrow is
renewed into the grace of sorrow; into that godly sorrow for sin, which the
Apostle says, works Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10. In a word, when Love, Joy, and
Delight open the heart unto God, as unto the chiefest good; and Fear, Grief and
Sorrow, shut the heart against sin, as the greatest evil.

(2.) When that which is unmortified (as still something of the flesh remains
in them, when they are sanctified) is so far subdued by that which is wrought
by the spirit in them, that they are kept in a suitable plyableness, to all the
Dispensations of God to every Providence, wherewith we are exercised;
rejoicing, when he would have us to rejoice, and as he would have us to
rejoice: Mourning, when he calls us to mourning, and as he would have us to
mourn: Being angry, when God would have us to be angry, and so far as he would
have us to be angry: Angry as Christ was, Mar. 3.5, And when he looked round
about them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts. When
this is the business the Soul labors in, and strives to attain unto, more and
more, and is really humbled before God, when any defects are observed, and
pardon pleaded, and resolutions increased in the strength of Christ, to keep a
stricter watch for the future, The Soul, at least, begins to thrive.

(3.) When though we let out our affections to this, or that, as sometimes we
may lawfully do, and in duty ought to do, about the things of this life, and
what concerns us in our outward condition, yet we can take them off again, as
the matter requires; as when we are to address our selves to God, in any act of
worship. This is hard work. Moses was very angry, as there was cause, Exodus
32.19, etc. But it was the morrow after, before he prayed for them, verse. 30.31
But when we can do with our affections, as Abraham did with his Servants, Genesis
22. Leave them at the foot of the hill, when we go to be with God, in the
Mount. The more, and oftener, this is done, the more and better the Soul
prospers. I shall conclude all that I have to say in this matter, with this,
which every one of you, that have any spiritual experience, what it is to
converse with God, will acknowledge: That the Soul prospers, according to its
Communion with God; and Communion with God, on our part is both preserved,
maintained, and enjoyed, by the well governing and exercising of sanctified
affections, of Love, Fear, Joy, and Sorrow, Trust and Desire. These are the
motions of the Will, and the outgoings of the Heart: As 1 These. 2.8, Being
affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not
the Gospel of God only, but our own Soul, because ye were dear unto us. They
are said also to be the Feet of the Soul. Eccles. 5.1, Keep thy foot, when thou
go to the House of God. i.e. See, that thy heart be fixed, and thy
affections composed. By these, the Soul draws nigh to God in Christ, closes
with him, and abides in him from day to day. And the more it does so, the more
it prospers; for God draws nigh to such, Jam. 4.8, Draw nigh to God, and he
will draw nigh to you. And he never comes empty handed. If the Father go out to
meet the repenting, returning Prodigal; the poor young Man finds the affection
of a Father: Therefore what S. James speaks, of bridling the tongue, is true
also of governing the affections: He is a perfect Man, he can bridle the whole
Body. And after this perfection we should strive, as ever we desire that our
Souls should prosper.

Thus much of the second Particular.

3. The Soul prospers, when the principles of spiritual life are so kept in
exercise, that in times of doubtful expectation, we can cast upon all events,
with an humble resignation of all into the hands of God, being willing to
submit to his determination, whatever it be. And when the matter is out of
doubt, so as the evil which we feared, and perhaps worse, is actually upon us,
and a sentence of death and desolation is passed upon all Creature comforts, we
can then find rest, and satisfaction in the exercise of faith on the promises
of God. Here two things are to be considered. A little to each of them.

(1.) When in times of doubtful expectation, such as besides what any one of us
may be in, with respect to his own particular condition, we are all of us in,
upon a public account, we can cast upon all events, with an humble resignation
of all into the hands of God, and with a willing mind submit to his
determination. Thus it was with David, 2 Samuel 15. If ye read the Chapter, and
consider the story, ye will acknowledge it was a time of great sadness: he
could not but be full of fear, of what might befall him, God was now reckoning
with him for his sin; so he had reason to think. His own Son, and a great Body
of his people were up in Arms against him: He was at great uncertainties, what
God would do with him: He fore cast, what might be, this way, and that way; and
not being able to foresee the event, he refers all to God's disposing; leaving
all his troubled thoughts, fears, and doubts with him. verse. 25, 26. If not so,
then thus. If so, then so. He is in either way at a point. Here I am, let him
do (says he) what he pleases. This was a Heaven-born frame of Spirit, to be
able to perish, and to be undone in his outward condition, if God would have it
so. Such a Man may be beggared and butchered, sooner then hurt. Surely David's
Soul now prospered; for never was his Kingdom more shaken; yet never was his
heart more fixed. It was not so with David, at all times. 1 Samuel 27.1, And
David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day, by the hand of Saul. --
Psalm. 73.2, But as for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh
slipped. verse. 13, Verily, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands
in innocence. He was upon the point of repenting, that ever he had repented.
This is not to be marvelled at, though it be to be lamented; as (if the Lord
will) I may show in the Application of the point, That it is a rare sight, and
seldom, or never seen, that any Man's Soul prosperity is always alike. Thus
much of the first Particular.

2. When the matter is out of doubt, and as bad, or worse, then what we feared
is come upon us, yet that Soul is in a prosperous frame, that can even then, in
that dark, and sad hour, find sufficient satisfaction in the exercise of faith,
in the promises of God, as Hab. 2.4, -- but the just shall live by his faith.
Then, even then, when the spirits of other Men, in the like case with him, fail
and sink, and even dye within them, he is upheld in comfort: When his faith is
unto him, like the Cork that is upon the Net; though the Lead on the one side,
sink it down, yet the Cork on the other side, keeps it up. When the eye of
faith looks upward, and sees the hand of the only-wise God, in all that befalls
him, who makes every thing beautiful in his time; a righteous God, and can do
no wrong; a good God, and will do no harm, when faith believes all this, that
it is but to humble him, and try him, and to do him good in the latter end: As
Deuteronomy. 8.16. And sees love, and faithfulness in all, and hopes to find, what
David found, and thankfully acknowledged, Psalm. 119.75, I know that thy
judgments are right, and that thou, in faithfulness, have afflicted me. That in
all the trouble that came upon him, God was therein faithful to the interest of
his Soul, (a thing, which without much difficulty may be obtained of reason) to
bear up under all, whilst we are persuaded, that all is done, in love, and
faithfulness for our good. As for instance, though it troubles a Man to be in a
Town, and forced to stay there, when it is besieged by a potent Enemy, yet the
same Man can be content, when need requires, that his Physician should confine
him to his Chamber, because he believes, that he does it out of love and care
for his health. And surely, those Souls, who when they are under the lash of
Divine Rods, and are tossed with storms, and tempests (perhaps more then any
they know of) can thus exercise their faith, and find satisfaction in the
promises of God, so as to rejoice in tribulation, in hope of a good issue,
surely they are prosperous Souls. Thus the Soul of Habakkuk prospered, when he
exemplified his own Doctrine, That the just should live by faith, in the time
of the Invasion of the Babylonians, by his own practice, Hab. 3.17, 18,
Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, etc. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I
will joy in the God of my Salvation. It is observable, what I have read to this
purpose ( Magdeburg. Cent. 5. cap. 10.) that when Attila King of the Huns, came
into France, Lupus Bishop of Troges, met him, and asked him who he was, that
made such spoil, and devastations in the World: He answered, Dei se esse
flagellum; That he was the scourge of God, whereupon he commanded the
City-Gates to be set open unto him, and welcomed him with these words, Fauste
ingrediatur flagellum Dei, Whilst the Rod is in Gods hand, there is no danger.
If this were so (as it related by good Authors) the Man's heart was in a good
frame: his faith was above his fears: This is the third Particular.

4. The Soul prospers, when grace is so exercised, that it grows more and more
clear in point of Covenant Interest.

Observe here, these two things.

(1.) When it grows into such a wellgrounded hope, and comfortable apprehension
thereof, as, ordinarily, it prevails over fears, and doubts, though it does not
wholly silence them, nor free the Soul from them. This is that, which the
Apostle calls, The joy of Faith, Phil. 1.25. Arising from the solid
satisfaction, which the heart receives, by a firm adhering to Christ, in whom
all fullness dwells, for perfecting the work of Redemption, and Salvation, who
is a faithful, and merciful High Priest, and able to save, to the uttermost,
all those that come to God by him. This is surely Soul prosperity.

(2.) Much more when the joy of faith, grows into the joy of spiritual Sense,
which is called, Full joy, Joh. 16.24. -- Ask, and ye shall receive, that you
joy may be full. 1 John 1.4, These things write we unto you, that your joy may
be full. When the love of God is shed abroad in the heart, as Romans 5.5. When
the spirit does tell us a thing in the Ear (as the expression is 1 Samuel 9.15.
It is said there, The Lord told Samuel in his Ear.) that we are sealed to the
day of Redemption, witnessing unto us our Adoption; so as the Soul knows it is
no delusion, but the very voice of the Spirit of God; as Abraham knew that it
was God himself, that spoke to him, and commanded him, to go and sacrifice his
Son, and no temptation from Satan; so as the Soul can say, as Psalm. 116.7.
Return to thy rest, O my Soul, the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. Now I
see, the invisible God is my God. All the Greatness and Goodness, all the Truth
and Faithfulness, all the Power and Wisdom, yea all the Holiness and Justice of
the Eternal and Ever-living God, are the things which are the portion of my
Soul. Now I see that all the Eternal counsels of God, wrought from all
Eternity, to make me Eternally happy. Now I know that Jesus Christ came from
the bosom of the Father for me, and my Salvation. That my sins are put upon his
account; and his righteousness is put upon my account. Now I know my place,
where I shall stand, in the great day of the Lord; even at the right hand of my
Savior, and hear that joyful sentence, Matthew. 25.34, Come, ye blessed of my
Father. This is, in some sense, I think, the uttermost hight of the Souls
prosperity.

For when ever the Soul is thus high, in point of Comfort, it is as high in
point of Holiness. Whilst this continues, the Soul can do, and suffer any thing
for God, which he calls unto. As the believing Hebrews whilst they knew their
interest in the enduring substance, Heb. 10.34, -- Ye took joyfully the
spoiling of your Goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven, a
better, and an enduring substance. The heart being thus enlarged, it goes not a
foot-pace, but runs the way of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.32, I will run the
way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. That which we have
Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. is clear to this purpose. The Apostle prays, on their
behalf, that they might know the breadth, and length, and depth, and highth of
the love of God. And why did he pray so? It was that they might be filled with
all the fullness of God; according to the uttermost measure attainable in this
life, and in full, and absolute perfection in the life to come.

Thus I have given you all that I shall say, concerning those things, which
particularly demonstrate the truth, and reality of the Souls prosperity: Only I
desire to leave these two things with you, in the conclusion, to prevent
mistakes.

1. That none ought to argue against themselves, that their Souls do not
prosper, because, as yet they come short, it may be, at sometimes altogether
short of what has been laid down in this fifth and last particular. They are
seldom so clear in point of their Covenant interest, as to feel the joy of
Faith, much less the joy of Sense. To endeavor to be clear in this matter is
every ones duty. 2 Pet. 1.10, Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to
make your calling, and election sure. To attain it is part of our Reward. But
when it is not attained, yet the Soul may be thriving, and prospering, for all
that. Moses his face did shine, and he did not know it, Exodus 34.19. This was
at his second being with God in the Mount: We read of no such thing, at the
first time. We may see by this, that God does not communicate himself in the
same measure, at all times alike, to any of his Servants. It has been so of
old, and is so now. Many partake much of the quickening presence of God, when
they have but little, or none at all of the comforting presence of God, Isa.
50.10, Who is among you, that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his
Servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? etc. Hence it is, that
they oftentimes as sadly complain as Zion did, (but all without cause.) Isa.
49.14. But Zion said the Lord has forsaken me; and my Lord has forgotten me.
q. d. I am cast out of his love, not only forsaken, but forgotten: when it was
neither so, nor so, as ye see, verse. 15, Can a Woman forsake her sucking Child?
etc. They may forget, yet will I not forget thee.

2. Though all that has been hitherto said, concerning Soul-prosperity, are
such things, as are wrought in, and laid up in the hidden Man of the heart: yet
these things are in the Soul, as the Candle in the Lanthorn, to shine forth in
a holy, and blameless conversation; and in the constant performance of the
visible part of Religion, and that in conjunction with others, as opportunity
is offered. For though frequency therein, does not infallibly prove, that the
Soul does prosper; yet in the neglect thereof, the Soul never did, nor will
prosper. We read Joh. 20.24, 25. What a very bad frame did grow upon the Soul
of Thomas, by the neglect of one good meeting. Whether it was out of too much
fear, of what mischief might befall him, from the Council that condemned his
Lord, and Master; or from too much care to settle his own private concernments,
it is hard to determine; but certain it is, that his Soul was thereby brought
into a sad condition. Therefore, as we desire our Souls should prosper, we
should attend daily at the gates of Wisdom, Prove. 8.34. He that refuses
instruction, despises his own Soul, Prove. 15.32. It is no easy matter for a
Man to prosper in the World. Prove. 10.4, He becomes poor, that deals with a
slack hand: So it is here; therefore as Deuteronomy. 4.9, Keep thy Soul diligently,
lest thou forget. --

SERMON V.
I Now proceed to the third and last Particular: The reasons for the confirming
of the truth of the Proposition.

1. The first is this. Soul prosperity is so far all in all, both to the
prosperity of every Man's outward condition in general, and of the health, and
welfare of the Body in particular; that it is absolutely impossible, that
either the one, or the other should truly, and really prosper, but in
conjunction with Soul-prosperity. There are two branches in this reason, and if
both of them be made good, then the proposition is so far made good: That of
all prosperity, Soul-prosperity, is the most desirable prosperity. And it is
easy, to make them both good by Scripture.

(1.) That there is no true and real prosperity to any Man's outward condition,
without Soul-prosperity. This is true; yet it must be granted that very many
whose Souls are poor, and blind, and naked, that lie dead, yea rotting in the
lusts of ungodliness, do divide the good things of this World among them. Their
portion is made fat, Psalm. 73.12. Insomuch that the Prophet Jeremy was
astonished at it, Jer. 12.1, -- Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper?
Wherefore are all they happy, that deal very treacherously? But this is far
from true prosperity; for all this while, as their Persons, so their Prosperity
is under the curse of God, Mal. 2.2, I will even send a curse upon you, and I
will curse your blessings. That which was threat'ned of old, Deuteronomy. 28.17. lies
sore, and heavy, upon such to this day; though they neither see it, nor fear
it, nor feel it: Cursed is their Basket, and cursed is their Store. This will
be demonstrated more fully under another head, after I have made this good,
That outward prosperity truly so called, and as it is a blessing, depends
wholly upon Soul-prosperity. And that it does so, is evident by this, That as
all those, so only those whose Souls do prosper, are within the compass of the
Promise of prospering in their outward condition. The two first verses of the
first Psalm give a fair character of a prospering Soul, and the third verse
gives the Promise, That whatsoever such a Soul does (according to the rule of
the Law, wherein it delights) shall prosper, so far as is consistent with
Soul-prosperity. Beyond that the Promise cannot reach it, neither does any
truly prosperous Soul desire it.

Here note two things.

(1.) That this was most eminently made good in the Old Testament: Where under
that dark Dispensation of Spiritual Truths, and Blessings, the promises ran
most upon externals. The only-wise God, saw it best of all so to encourage his
then Infant Church as I may call it) to their duty. We read in Deuteronomy. 28. that
after God had engaged himself upon serious minding their Soul prosperity, in
this, and that, and other particulars. In verse. 8. he engages for all whatever
in that kind, could be desired; assuring them, that he would command a blessing
upon them, in all their Storehouses, and in all that they should put their
hand unto; and accordingly, this was made good. Whilst Solomon kept the charge
of the Lord, all things went well with him. 2 Chronicles. 7.11. It is said, whatever
he took in hand, he prosperously effected. Thus God always dealt with that
Nation, while Religion flourished; and Soul-work prospered, then all things
prospered. Hag. 2.19. God calls upon them there, to observe, that their outward
prosperity should bear date, from that day forward, that they began to mind the
good of their Souls. In the Second of Jeremy, God challenges them to produce
one instance, at any time, to the contrary; but it was more, then they could
do. There in verse. 31. of that Chapter, thus the Lord speaks unto them: O
generation! -- have I been a barren wilderness unto you? O generation! Of what?
Nay, that is not expressed, but a void space is left, that any thing might be
written of them, that was naught. O generation of Vipers, of Monsters, that
might have prospered, and would not. Well then, thus far it is clear, that
Soul-prosperity, had the promises of outward prosperity, and under that
Dispensation, eminently made good.

(2.) As it was eminently so, then, it is really so, now; even at this day. All
they whose Souls do prosper, as they are Heirs of all those ancient promises,
so they have promises superadded of a later date, 1 Timothy 4.8. -- Godliness is
profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come. Matthew. 6.32, 33, Your Heavenly Father knows that ye have
need of all these things. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. And sometimes as,
Prove. 28.10, -- the upright shall have good things in possession. A full share
of outward blessings is given unto them, suitable to persons of their
condition, beyond what, once, they could have expected, or, it may be, did
desire; so that they have just cause thankfully to acknowledge, as David did,
that their Cup runs over.

(3.) When the only wise God, sees it good, either to preserve their Souls in,
or to bring them into a more prosperous frame, then they are; to exercise them
with some straights, and to keep them short, yet even then they may say that
which David says, Psalm. 23.6. (even then when their Cup is low) That the
loving kindness of God follows them, so far, that what they have not, they want
not, having learned to want; being satisfied with that which they have of their
own, within, Prove. 14.14, -- A good Man shall be satisfied from himself:
Experiencing the workings of the heart of God toward them, in his Fatherly care
for them, remembering them in their low estate: and the workings of their own
hearts toward God, in that, through grace, they are enabled to reckon upon it,
That God's allowance is best for them; and that by faith, they can live upon
him for their livelihood, when they have little in sight, to live upon. So that
they can subscribe to what the Apostle says. 1 Timothy 6.6. (as a true saying,
and worthy of all acceptance) That godliness, with contentment, is great gain.
They have the clear gain of a quiet, and well-composed spirit; so that their
Souls dwell at ease, as Psalm. 25.13. And is not this real prosperity? Verily it
is so. Are not these prosperous persons? Surely they are so.

Thus, we see, the first branch of the first reason is confirmed: That the
prosperity of Men's outward condition, in the general, depends upon
Soul-prosperity.

2. The other branch will be as clearly made good, That the health, and
welfare of the Body, stands upon the same bottom. No Man therein, ever did or
ever shall truly, and really prosper, but in conjunction with Soul-prosperity.
This may seem at the first mentioning, as great a Paradox, as the former. But
it is a just, and measured truth, and cannot but be acknowledged to be so, if
we consider the state of the Body, either in reference to this World, or the
World to come.

(1.) In reference to this World. Though it be true, that many whose Souls are
death-struck, sinfully sick unto death, the second death, eternal death; in
respect of their bodily health, live to a great old age, in great health,
scarce knowing, for a long while together, what a days sickness means: As Job
observed in his time, Job 21.23. One dies in his full strength, being wholly
at ease, and quiet; yet Bodily health as a blessing is certaninly annexed to
Soul-prosperity, Prove. 3.7. 8, -- fear the Lord, and depart from evil. The Soul
prospers that does so, and while it does so. And what then? It shall be health
to thy Navel, and marrow to thy Bones. Now, according to the store of marrow,
which moistens, and feeds the Bones; so is the strength of the Body. And then,
it shall be health to thy Navel. This is expressed, because (as Physicians say)
Bodily health, in a natural way, depends chiefly on the vital parts, and
entrails; which are comprehended under the Navel, because there, they are knitt
up, and fastened. The meaning then is this: Fear the Lord, and depart from
evil, and thy Body shall be strong, and healthy. This shall be health to all
thy flesh, as Prove. 4.22, For they are life unto those that find them, and
health to all their flesh. Thus it is, and will be, till sickness and weakness
be better for the well fare of the Soul; as it was to Gaius, in the Text, whose
Soul prospered the better, under his Bodily weakness. And when sickness and
weakness grow upon us, the gracious workings of a healthy, and prosperous Soul,
are, in some sense, the best Physic, and the most cherishing Cordials, to a
weak, and languishing Body. When the Soul can say, as Psalm. 73.26. My heart,
and my flesh fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for
ever. Isa. 38.2, 3, Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the
Lord, and said: Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked in
truth before thee, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good
in thy sight. It is observable what ye may read in the Book of Martyrs,
concerning Mr. Saunders, that whilst he was in examination, before the Bishop
of London, he felt a most ravishing sweetness from every part of his Body, come
together to the place, and seat of his heart; and from thence, it did ebb and
flow, to and fro, to every part of his body, to his mavelous consolation.
This he told to one of his friends.

Thus far this branch of the reason is made good, That the health and welfare
of the Body, as it is a blessing, may be expected; and cannot otherwise be
expected, then in conjunction with Soul-prosperity. Whatever Men think of it,
this is true: That though Nature be an enemy to Grace, yet Grace, especially
thriving, and prospering, is a friend, the best friend to Nature.

(2.) In reference to the World to come, the well-being of the Body, to all
Eternity, depends absolutely upon the well-being of the Soul. That fares, as
the Soul fares. If the Soul perish, and be undone, the Body is undone, and
perishes too. We read Luke 16.24, 25. that when the Soul of the rich Man was
in Hell, not the least refreshment could be had for his Body, not a drop of
water to cool his Tongue. Therefore as Job 27.8, He has no hope of all that he
has gained, when God takes away his Soul. But if the Soul prospers, while it
is in the Body (as it does when it does lay up its treasure in Heaven, and has
its conversation in Heaven) then the Body when it is laid in the Grave, as it
is still a Member of Christ, death does not dissolve that union, It sleeps in
Jesus, 1 These. 4.14. And by virtue of that union, it shall be raised up, and
made like the glorious Body of Christ.

Thus ye have the first reason made good, in both the branches of it, that
Soul-prosperity is so far all in all, etc.

2. Of all prosperities, Soul-prosperity is the most desirable prosperity,
because it is made up of the most desirable materials. Those goods whereof it
consists are the best things, the most desirable blessings. It Is true, the
materials whereof Worldly prosperity consists are good things too. We read,
Luke 16. that the rich Man's purple Garments, and fine Linen, which were his
every-days-wearing, and his sumptuous fare wherewith his Table was furnished
every day, and his great estate which maintained all this, were good things in
themselves (and might have been good to him, if he had used them well.) So they
are said to be, verse. 25. But what are these things to the principles of
Spiritual life, thriving and increasing in the Soul? Verily, great heaps of
Gold, and Silver, are but great heaps of Dust, and Dirt, to the least grain of
grace: The price of it is far above rubies, Job 28.18. The Apostle speaking of
one particular grace, the grace of Faith (one of these choice materials which
make up soul prosperity) says, That the Trial of it (when it is exercised) is
much more precious then Gold. 1 Pet. 1.7. No marvel then, if Solomon (who knew
the worth of every thing, as much as ever any Man did) says of it, That the
Merchandise thereof is better then Silver, and the gain thereof then fine Gold.
But of the excellency of the materials of Soul-prosperity, I need say no more
then what has been said in the explication of the point; only I shall show you
a little, of that exceeding much, which the Scripture speaks of the materials
of Worldly prosperity, by way of undervaluing them, to abate the esteem of
them, and, if possible, to beat down their price.

In Eccles. 1.1. ye find Solomon the King, to be Solomon the Preacher; and as
he had a large heart, so he took a large Text to Preach upon; no less then the
whole World, with all its honors, profits, and pleasures, which raise up.
Worldly prosperity to the highest Pinnacle, that is imaginable: And (which is
exceeding observable) after he had thoroughly studied his Text, and taken as
exact a survey of it, as unwearied diligence in searching, joined with
incomparable wisdom, could attain unto, he could, with all his skill, raise but
this one Doctrine, That all is vanity, vanity of vanities; extreme vanity all
over. This was all he could make of all the fine things, that the World, in its
best dress, (so far as he could see) did afford. And as he says by way of
question, Eccles. 2.12, What can that Man do, that comes after the King? after
such a King? If any Man will try whether he may have better success, then
Solomon had, I shall tell him what he shall find. This he shall find, and let
him make his best of it.

(1.) That whatever reality he thinks that he finds, he will, after a while,
find to be slight, and superficial: That they only please the carnal, and
sensual part. This was all their predecessor found, Luke 12.19, I will say to
my Soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, eat, drink, and be
merry. Neither will they do this always, but a little disappointment (the pride
and passion of his own heart mingling with it) does for the time, while the fit
lasts, embitter all, as Esth. 5.13, Yet all this avails me nothing, so long
as I see Mordechai the Jew sitting in the King's gate.

(2.) That even in this, whatever he finds, affords no lasting satisfaction,
Eccles. 1.8, All things are full of labor, Man cannot utter it. The eye is not
satisfied with seeing. The eye may be satisfied, and wearied with the Act of
seeing, but the lust of the eye is not satisfied. The eye sees this, and that,
more then once, he thought he should ever have seen, which he could have called
his own: but yet still the eye would see more. And it cannot be otherwise; for
all that can be seen, is too little for a Man's heart. They may be a belly
full, Psalm. 17.14. but they cannot be a heart full. There is no proportion,
between the heart, and them; and therefore there can be no satisfaction.
Besides, They cannot satisfy, because they are always found to be less in the
Enjoyment, then in the expectation: Gehazi found them so, 2 King. 5.26. He
thought of purchasing a great Farm, and of stocking it himself; but he found an
evil disease cleaving to himself, and to his posterity; and that for more
years, then his Farm should be either in his or in their possession. And yet
farther he will find, that they cannot satisfy, because as they increase; so
the heart is more and more let out unto them. And impossible it is, for that
desire ever to be satisfied, which grows, by the increase of the thing desired.
And yet more, say an earthly, narrow Soul may say, he is satisfied, yet Men may
choose whether they will believe him or no. However, this he will find, that
though what he has, may raise his esteem in the World, yet no real worth is
added unto him thereby. It is well, if they do not make him worse. The
valuation of Gold is raised sometimes from twenty, to twenty four, or twenty
five shillings, yet the piece is the same still. Dan. 11.21. And in his estate,
shall stand up a vile person. Prove. 10.20, -- The heart of the wicked is little
worth. What therefore, if the Man St. James speaks of, comes in, with a
Gold-ring; if that be his best, wherein is he to be esteemed? Many things more
might be said to this purpose, but this is enough to show, that in respect even
of the choicest materials thereof, Worldly prosperity is no way desirable, in
comparison of Soul-prosperity. If that be all a Man has to rejoice in, he
rejoiceth in a thing of naught, Amos 6.13. It may be said of all such, as Psalm.
39.6. They walk in a vain show, and surely disquiet themselves in vain, heaping
up riches (which are accounted, the chiefest materials of Worldly prosperity)
when he knows not who shall gather them, a wise man, or a fool. For any Man
then to prejudice his Soul-prosperity, in the pursuit of these things,
contracts that guilt charged upon them, Jon. 2.8, They follow lying vanities,
and forsake their own mercies.

3. A third reason is this. Of all prosperity, Soul-prosperity is the most
desirable prosperity, because the effects, and consequents thereof, are the
best, and most desirable effects; far beyond the effects of Worldly prosperity,
separated from Soul-prosperity: For then they are both, sad, and sinful. It is
seen to be so, in respect of the effects thereof, in this World, and it would
be found to be so, for the future, in the World to come.

(1.) In this World: Thereby, the wickedness that is in the heart appears; half
whereof would not have been lomanifest, if they had not prospered so much in
the World. It proves but fuel for their lusts; drawing out multiplied acts of
sin, which is charged upon them, Jam. 2.7, Do not they (rich Men) blaspheme
that worthy name by which ye are called? Riches beget pride, Luke 16.19. There
was a certain rich Man, which was clothed in Purple, and fine Linen, and fared
sumptuously every day. Pride begets casting off trust in God, 1 Timothy 6.17,
Charge them that are rich in this World that they be not high minded, nor trust
in uncertain riches, but in the living God. Carnal boasting, with contempt of
others, Jer. 9.23, -- Let not the rich Man glory in his riches. Carnal
confidence, Psalm. 62.10, -- If riches increase, set not your heart upon them.
Oppression, Jam. 2.6, Do not rich Men oppress you? These are some of those evil
fruits, which a prosperous state produces, when Men's lusts are not subdued,
and mortifyed by Soul-prosperity. Men being charged to take heed of them, that
shows their proneness to them. So that if the Angels were called to give such
an account, as they were, Zech. 1.10, 11. doubtless they would give this
account, that they never observed more notorious neglect of what is of
everlasting concernment, never more savouring the things of the flesh, never
more prodigious Riot in some, never more fordid Earthliness in others; the
Earth they tread upon getting so into their hearts, that they are more Earthy
then the Earth it self. Such an account of these, and such like abominations,
the Angels would give, that they never saw more of these impieties, then among
those that prosper in the World, whose Worldly prosperity is separated from
Soul-prosperity. This is their way, as is said, Psalm. 49.13. and this is their
folly. These are the effects of it, that are seen in this World. Not that all
these sad effects are seen in every one, but some in one, and some in another.

(2.) The effects will be found to be as sad in the World to come. It is a sad
sight to see Men undo themselves with their own mercies, as Bees that are
drowned in their own Honey: but so it is, Prove. 1.32, -- The prosperity of
Fools shall destroy them. i.e. with everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord. It is evident from Scritpure, that but few shall be saved, Matthew.
22.14, Many are called but few are chosen. And it is as evident, that but few
of those few, will be found among the rich, and prosperous, 1 Cor. 1.26, For ye
see your calling, Brethren, that not many wise Men after the flesh, not many
Mighty, not many Noble are called. Yea, it is yet more evident, that the Spirit
of God speaks in the Scritpure, as if Salvation had been almost impropriated to
the meaner sort of people; and that those who prosper in the World, had been
almost excluded. Jam. 2.5, -- has not God chosen the poor of this World, rich
in faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love
him. The Church is called the Congregation of the poor, Psalm. 74.19. Such as
were of the lower rank, destitute of Worldly advantages. But for the rich, and
prosperous, see Luke 6.24, 25, Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received
your consolation. Woe unto you, that are full, for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you
that laugh now, for ye shall mourn, and weep. Jam. 5.1. Go to now, ye rich Men,
weep and howl, for the miseries that shall come upon you. The Apostle speaks
not by way of advice and counsel, to prevent their judgment by godly sorrow.
The exercise of that grace it not expressed by howling: but he speaks by way of
threatening, and denouncing wrath, and vengeance. They had their good things in
this life: their pleasure upon Earth, verse. 5. Rev. 18.7, By how much she
glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment, and sorrow give
her. Yet this is not to be understood, as if God would condemn the rich,
because they were rich, no more then he will save the poor for their poverty:
But he will condemn the rich for their sin, and save the poor for their faith,
and piety, through Jesus Christ.

Much more might be said, to show that Worldly prosperity separated from
Soul-prosperity, is by no means, a prosperity to be desired. It is but Eternal
misery at a little distance: Much less is it to be compared with
Soul-prosperity. This ye may judge by those effects of it, which are seen to be
so, in this World; and will be found to be so in the World to come.

(2.) But now if we consider the Effects, and Consequents of Soul-prosperity,
we shall find, they are every way most desirable, whether we consider the
effects thereof for the present, in this life; or for the future, in the life
to come.

(1.) In this life. When the Soul prospers, and the divine welfare thereof
is kept, in its heavenly temper, by divine influences from above; then there is
such a glory and beauty in it, as is much set by, in the sight of God, Psalm.
45.11, So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty. It is a lovely sight to see
any thing grow, so as to thrive, and prosper; Corn on the ground, Cattle in the
field, Fruit on the tree. Children in the house, growing up as Olive Plants
about the Table. But the growth, and prosperity of the Soul is much more
lovely. Indeed there is much spiritual beauty and loveliness in the very first
principles of spiritual life, wherein, (as I have showed you) the first
Foundation of Soul-prosperity, as to our discerning it, is laid. These are much
of the same nature, and bear the same name with that perfect state of
happiness, which is enjoyed in Heaven. As that is called, Glory, so are these,
2 Cor. 3.18, But we all with open face, beholding, as in a glass, the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the
spirit of the Lord. And if so; then where all these lovely principles thrive
and prosper, the spirit of glory rests upon such a Soul, as 1 Pet. 4.14. This
is so; but that which I shall specially instance in, as most comprehensive of
the blessed effects of Soul-prosperity in this life, is that sweet peace
within, and heavenly serenity of spirit, which a prosperous Soul, so long as it
does prosper, may, and (if it know its own happiness) usually does enjoy.

1. Much sweet peace, because of that sweet agreement which there is between a
Man's Conscience, and Himself. Conscience we know, if enlightened, presses to
duty; which, if neglected in its season, will wound and sting. A prosperous
Soul is more afraid of this, then to be threat'ned with a fiery Furnace, Dan.
3.13. That did not affright them at all; but a Man may say as Job 27.6, My
righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: My heart shall not reproach
me so long as I live. He was not afraid of those rebukings, and upbraidings.
Now, when grace is kept in exercise, as it is in a prosperous Soul, this keeps
peace, and that when troubles, and trials come upon us, as an armed Man. 2 Cor.
1.12, Our rejoicing is in this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in
simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the World. This evidenced the prosperity
of his Soul, and that was his rejoicing. That prayer of the Apostle for others,
Gal. 6.16. was heard for himself. As many as walk according to this rule, peace
be on them, and mercy.

(2.) Much sweet peace; because there is a sweet agreement, between a Man's
affection, and his condition. A prosperous Soul living, and desiring to live in
the enjoyment of God, is where it would be; and is willing to be, what God will
have him to be, in the darkest hours that befall him, Rejoicing in hope of the
glory of God, Romans 5.2. This subdues his affection to his condition; when his
condition otherwise would not be according to his affection. Being clear in the
point, of his interest in God, he can say, how barren soever his condition be
of outward comforts, The Lord is my portion: I have a goodly heritage, Psalm.
16.5, 6. Making God his Heaven, and his Earth too, Psalm. 73.25.

(3.) A sweet peace: because a sweet agreement between a Man's Hope and his
Reason. When the foundation of Soul-prosperity is first laid, being quick'ned
with principles of spiritual life, it is born again to a lively hope of the
heavenly inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. And when the Soul prospers, according to
the knowledge it has of its own state, it is able to give a reason of its
hope, as the expression is, 1 Pet. 3.15. A reason grounded upon the free
promise of God, Romans 2.7. If ye continue in well-doing: and nothing is well
done, where grace is not exercised. But if it be so, ye look for glory and
immortality, and eternal life. Then following after righteousness, holiness,
etc. Eternal life is as it were within reach; we may lay hold on it, 1 Timothy
6.12. Thus Paul had reason on his side, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. A good sight well
managed, a good course well finished, a good faith well preserved. Henceforth
is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness: Not because of this, but because of
the free promise of God; for though a Man's Soul prosper to his dying day, yet
eternal life is the gift of God, Roman. 6.23. Rev. 2.10.

(4.) Much sweet peace: Because there will be a sweet agreement between a Man's
Resolutions, and his Performances; both in respect of Doing, and Suffering the
Will of God.

(1.) In doing what God requires. The principles of spiritual life, the first
day they are received, so incline the heart heavenward, that such resolutions
are taken up, as Psalm. 39.1, I said, I will take heed to my ways. Now, when
grace is not exercised, and the Soul prospers not, then there is no keeping up
this resolution, good purposes are broken off. That divine principle which
should keep the heart from backsliding, is kept under, and oppressed by the
contrary working of corruption. Such a Soul deals with God, as that Son did
with his Father, to whom, he promised, to go, but went not. But now, so far as
the Soul prospers, Performances will be answerable to Resolutions. See Paul's
resolution, Act. 24.16, And herein, do I exercise my self to have always a
Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward Men. Heb. 13.18, Pray for us;
for we trust we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to live honestly.
And see his performance, Phil. 4.12, I know how to be abased, and I know how to
abound. It must needs be so; for the more the Soul prospers, every work of
Religion will be the better performed, with more delight, with less wearyness;
with more constancy, and less destraction.

(2.) Sweet peace; because of sweet agreement between a Man's resolutions, and
his performances in respect of suffering what God imposes, and inflicteth;
whether upon a Man's own personal account, or upon the common account of
Religion; when the first principles of Soul-prosperity are infused, the Soul is
inclined to comply with Christ's injunction, Luke 9.23. If any Man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and follow me. And
the more the Soul prospers, the more the Will is melted down, into the Will
of God, to suffer what God will, and that in submission to his Will, Psalm.
39.9, I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. Or upon the
common account of Religion. Heb. 11.35, -- others were tortured, not accepting
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. Know then, that all
unquiet workings in our Spirits, and all sinking discouragements, in such a
day, and hour of trial, come not from our condition, how sad soever it be, or
in how great danger soever, we may apprehend our selves to be, of losing all we
have; as from our Corruption, because our Souls prosper no more. It is
observable, what we have to this purpose, in Matthew. 5, Blessed (says our
Savior) are the poor in spirit, verse. 3. The meek, the mourners, the pure in
heart, and those that hunger and thirst after righteousness, in the following
verses. And then, verse. 10, Blessed are they that are persecuted, for
righteousness sake. And why is this put in the last place, but to show unto us,
that now the Soul prospers? There is poverty of spirit: there is purity of
heart; there is meekness, and hungring and thirsting after righteousness. Now
suffering in these, is such as becomes a Christian. This is enough to prove
this, That the more the Soul prospers, there will be the more peace, because
the more agreement betwixt a Man's Resolution, and Performance, both in respect
of Active and Passive obedience. A prospering Soul makes this his business, To
magnify Christ, whether it be by life, or by death, Phil. 1.20.

(5.) There is much sweet peace in a prospering Soul, because of that sweet
agreement which there is between God, and such a Soul; which, if it be felt,
passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. and therefore, all expression. But
possibly, this Peace may not be proclaimed, so as every prospering Soul may
hear it, and believe it, rather often doubting, that it is not concluded. But
for certain it is, and in due time God will let them know it, Psalm. 85.8, I
will hear, what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace to his Pecple,
and to his Saints. And it is as certain, such Souls are at peace with God, for
then they follow hard after God, as Psalm. 63.8. desiring nothing more then
reconciliation with him; their eyes dropping down tears, as Lam. 1.16, --
because the Comforter, which should relieve my Soul is far from me. Blessed are
such mourners, for they shall be comforted, Matthew. 5.4.

Thus we have some of the desirable effects of Soul prosperity, in this life.

(2.) For the effects, and consequents of Soul-prosperity for the future, in
reference to the World to come, thus in a word; it has a most blessed
influence into Eternity: Then Soul-prosperity is perfected in holiness, Heb.
12.23, -- The Spirits of just Men made perfect. Ephesians. 5.27, Without spot, or
wrinkle. And perfected in happyness, in the full enjoyment of God. It sees God
so far, as seeing imports enjoying; Then it may be said without a figure to
such a Soul, as Isa. 60.1, Arise, and shine, thy light is come, the glory of
the Lord is risen upon thee.

Thus ye have the reasons of the point.

SERMON VI.
IF this be so, That of all prosperities, Soul-prosperity, is the most
desirable prosperity. Then from hence, we may infer: That it is the most
rational thing in the World, for all those, that believe they have immortal
Souls, in mortal Bodies, to mind the welfare, and prosperity of their Souls,
above all things else in the World. This is certainly to act, according to the
best, and highest principles of reason, that ever any Man did from the
beginning of the World to this day.

It may be supposed, by what ye have heard, that ye are now fully satisfied in
the truth of the Doctrine, and believe that nothing prospers in your hand,
with prosperity truly so called, and as it is a blessing, but when, and where
the Soul prospers; therefore none to be minded like that, none but in
subordination to that. And seeing it is a principle planted by the God of
Nature, in the heart of Man by Nature, to mind that above all things else,
wherein he firmly believes his happiness, above all things, does consist. And
withal, seeing to Prosper, and to be happy, though the words be two, are but
one and the same thing: And that ye are persuaded, a Man is only so far really
happy, as his Soul prospers: These things being so, one would think, I might
forbear to press any thing farther, and might say concerning this duty of
minding Soul-prosperity, as the Apostle does of Brotherly love, 1 These. 4.9. ye
need not that I should write any more concerning it.

But considering what a deep, inward, rooted respect for, and reaching after
the things of the World, there appears to be in some, who yet profess, they are
fully convinced of the vanity thereof, and such a strong bias in others,
turning them aside into ways that are not good: So far it may be charged upon
them, as Romans 1.18. They hold the truth (they believe) in unrighteousness; not
suffering it to exercise its authority in their Consciences: And feeing it is so
difficult a thing, yea impossible, without the Almighty power of the Spirit of
God, to raise up a drosly, earthy spirit, sunk into the world, to look after
things that are not seen; to mortify the deeds of the flesh, and to set their
affections on things that are above; or to six a vain, light spirit, so as to
reduce it, to a sober and serious consideration of the things of Eternity; and
yet both the one, and the other must be done by all those, that resolve to mind
the prosperity of their Souls above all other prosperity. I shall to what has
been said already, (before I come to show the great work that is to be done for
the welfare of Souls) first give you some Arguments to prove the Inference,
That if Soul-Prosperity, be the most desirable Prosperity; Then is it the most
rational thing in the world, to mind it above all things else.

(1.) It is a rational thing (ye must all grant it) for any man to part with
any thing, except the Peace of his own Conscience, and to do any thing that is
possible to be done, except sinning against God, for the preservation of
natural life. It is a Scripture expression, Prove. 6.26. that Life is precious.
It is indeed the most precious thing in Nature. Matthew. 6.25. Is not the life
more than meat? Act. 27. They cast away the Lading of the Ship, in hope to save
their lives, Esth. 7.2, 3, 4, Let my life be given me at my petition. For we
are sold, I and my people to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. If we
had beensold for Bondmen, and for Bond-women, I had held my tongue. See how
she pleaded for her life; he valued not the one half of 127 Provinces, in
comparison of that. And we read of a poor woman, that had spent all that she
had, in hope of health, which is a degree below life, Mar. 5. Now if it should
be asked, as Jam. 4.14. What is this life, that is so much valued? we must
answer, as he does, That it is a vapor which appears for a very little time,
and then vanishes away. The frailty whereof is set forth by heaps of
similitudes in Scripture, from the most perishing things that come under
observation. It is but a little warm breath, turned in, and out at our
nostrils, a narrow passage, and soon stopped, Isa. 2.22. Cease from Man, whose
breath is in his nostrils, and wherein is he to be accounted of?

Now if it be so agreeable to reason, by all lawful means to serve the
Providence of God, for the preservation of such poor, and frail things as our
lives are; (as indeed we are bound in obedience to God's command) Is it not
much more rational, to do whatever God would have us to do, for the life and
welfare, of our immortal Souls? Certainly if Nature teach a Man to prize his
life above the World, Grace should make a Man to prize his Soul above his Life.
Believe it, To save our Lives, and to save our Souls, are two things. This we
find in Scripture, that those who have learned to value their Souls, according
to their excellency, and have understood how much their own happiness is
concerned in them, have willingly run the hazard of their lives, to save their
Souls, not only as Paul, 1 Cor. 9.27, I keep under my Body, and bring it into
subjection, lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self
should be a castaway; but also as they, Revel. 12.11, -- they loved not their
lives unto the death. They did not so love their lives, as out of inordinate
care to preserve them, and so to escape death, when God called them, by their
open profession to give in their testimony for Christ, and his Gospel, against
the Antichristian Generation. So Dan. 3.19, etc. The three Witnesses chose
rather to be thrown into the fiery Furnace, then to worship the Golden Image.
Heb. 11.35, Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance. Yea so careless
have some of the Saints of old, been of their Bodies, in comparison of their
care for the welfare of their Souls, as if they had been other folks Bodies,
and not their own. We read Act, 7, that when the sentence of death was passed
upon Stephen, he prays not for the mitigation of his Enemies rage, he is
totally silent concerning his burial. (It Is true, there were some good Men took
care of it, Act. 8.2. but not at his entreaty that we read of) but that which
his thoughts were most taken up withal, ye read verse. 59. They stoned Steven,
calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. So the Lord Jesus
left his Body in the hands of Pilate, but he commended his Spirit into his
Father's hands, Luke 23.46. It is observable, what we have Psalm. 141.7, 8. when
some of David's followers, were hackt, and hewed in pieces, and left unburied,
or (as some think) when their dead Bodies, after they were buried, were dug
up, and their bones were scattered about the Grave's mouth: When David saw, or
heard of this, see what he had most in his thoughts: Lord, leave not my Soul
destitute.

Thus ye have one argument to make good the Inference: That it is the most
rational thing in the World, to mind the welfare of our Souls, above all
things else, because it is very rational, above all outward things, to mind the
preservation of our lives. And that though it be so, those that have been wise
to Salvation, have minded the saving of their Souls, above the saving of their
Lives, there being indeed no comparison between this Natural life, and the
Spiritual life of the Soul.

(2.) It is every way most rational, agreeable to the best, and highest
principles of reason, to mind that most, which Jesus Christ (in whom dwelt all
the Treasures of Wisdom) minded most. This none will deny, but that as it is
the highest pitch of our holiness, that our Ends in all things fall in with
his: So it ought to be our greatest business, that in all things we should be
of the same mind with Christ. Now that this was, and still is the greatest work
that Jesus Christ did, and still does mind in our behalf, will appear by these
particulars.

1. This was the great work, next to the glorifying of his Father (and therein
he did glorify his Father) that was in his heart to accomplish; in, and by
that mysterious work of his Incarnation, in taking upon him Man's nature, and
for which he made himself of no reputation in the World; for which he suffered
so much, and still does so much by his intercession in Heaven, to this day,
that (as Isa. 53.11.) he might see the Travel of his own Soul, and be satisfied
in the complete, and Eternal prosperity, of all their Souls, which God the
Father gave unto him, and for which he engaged himself. John 6.38, 39, 40, For
I came down from Heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent
me. And this is the Fathers will which sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again, at the last day. In 1
Pet. 2.25. Christ is said to be the Shepherd of Souls. Now a faithful Shepherd,
though he will be ready to do his Master, what good service he can, in any
thing; yet his chiefest care is for his Master's flock. Such a faithful
Shepherd is Jesus Christ, he highly minds the meanest thing, wherein any of his
are concerned: Satan (to his own great vexation) cannot overlook this, Job
1.10, Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all
that he has, on every side? And we know, that when he was visibly in the
World, he was exceeding helpful to the Bodies of Men, yet his chiefest care was
over his peculiar flock, as the Shepherd of Souls. He laid down his Natural
life, to procure their Spiritual life: That dead Souls might live, and living
Souls prosper. That they might have life, and live in abundance. Joh. 10.10,
11. For this end he ever lives to make intercession for those that come unto
him, that they might be saved to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25. And as the effect of
his intercession (according to his promise, Joh. 16.16.) he sends the Spirit of
Grace into their hearts, to work in them all the graces, that accompany
Salvation. And to abide in them, to preserve what he has wrought, that in
believing, their Souls might be saved, Heb. 10.39. And that they might receive
the end of their Faith, the Salvation of their Souls, 1 Pet. 1.9.

This is the first thing, that Jesus Christ minded this most, in our behalf,
that for this cause he came into the World, to seek, and to save lost Souls,
Luke 19.10.

(2.) This is the great end, he aims to carry on by all his Ordinances. The Law
of God (that is the whole Doctrine revealed in the word) is for the Conversion
of Souls, Psalm. 19.7. And for Edification of Souls, Act. 20.32. I commend you
to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up. The
Sacraments are Spiritual Food for Souls. 1 Cor. 10.3, 4, And did all eat the
same Spiritual meat. And did all drink the same Spiritual drink. Yea,
Excommunication (that dreadful Ordinance, so it be managed according to the
mind of Christ) for it is a delivering a Man to Satan, yet it is with reserence
to the good of his Soul, 1 Cor. 5.5. To deliver such a one unto Satan, for the
destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus. For this end, he appointed the Ministry to be a standing Ordinance unto
the end of the World, that they might watch over Souls, Heb. 13.17. This was
that which the Apostles aimed at, according to their Commission from Christ.
Paul says, That he was made all things to all Men, that by all means, he might
save some, 1 Cor. 9.22. In his removal from one place to another, he aimed at
the conveying of some Spiritual gift, where ever he came, for the good of
Souls, Romans 1.11, For I long to see you, that I may impart to you, some
Spiritual gift. In all his prayers, for those to whom he wished all the good
that might be, this was the great thing he desired in their behalf, that their
Souls might prosper, Ephesians. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, That he would grant you, according
to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might, by his Spirit, in
the inner Man. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith, etc. Gal. 6.18,
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your Spirit. Prospering Souls were
his joy, and Crown, Phil. 4.1.

3. This was, and is the great end of all his Providential Dispensations. They
are, or may be, all them, either Food, or Physic for the Soul. Thriving in
holiness, as ye have heard, is Soul-thriving. Now this is the end, that all
comforting, desirable Providence seem to drive on, Obad. verse. 17. But upon
Mount Zion, there shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness. All
afflicting, saddening Providence, are for the same purpose, Heb. 12.10, God
chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. Yea
for this very cause, it often goes very ill with many of those that live highly
in the love of God, in their outward condition, that their spiritual condition
may prosper, and flourish, Isa. 27.9, By this therefore shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin: Which is the
sickness, and otherwise would be the death of the Soul, and its destruction,
Psalm. 119.71, It is good for me, that I have been afflicted, that I might learn
thy Statutes. And therefore he acknowledges to the praise of the wisdom, and
rich grace of God, that in very faithfulness to the interest of his Soul, the
hand of the Lord had been upon him, so as it was.

Now lay all this together: That this was the great end of Christ's
Incarnation, Death, and Suffering, and Intercession: The great end for which
all Ordinances, and Providence are appointed to be subservient unto, and it
will evidently appear, that this was, and is, above all things else, most upon
the heart of Christ, in our behalf, that our Souls might prosper; therefore it
ought to be most upon our hearts, and it is most rational, it should be so.

3. It is every way most agreeable to the best, and highest principles of
reason, with all possible diligence, and seriousness to mind that, the neglect
whereof, will be our utter undoing, to all Eternity, and bring both Body, and
Soul under the most absolute, and unavoidable woe, and misery, that ever befell,
or possibly can befall any Creature, that ever God made, next unto the Devil
himself. That principle of self-preservation planted in the heart of Man by
Nature, if improved, cannot but teach him this; That it is most rational for
him to mind that, the neglect whereof would bring this ruin upon him. Now what
woe, and misery is laid up for a neglected, perishing, unprospering Soul, ye
have fully expressed, beyond what can be conceived, in one verse, Matthew. 25.41.
whereof I shall mention but these two particulars, which are of all others,
most dreadful, and terrible.

(1.) Such a Soul is designed to be driven away from God; with his curse upon
them, Never to see his face, To be Eternally separated from those everlasting
joys, which Souls that live and prosper, in a most absolute fullness do enjoy,
in the enjoyment of God, whilst the everlasting God enjoys his own blessed
self. If this were all, the misery were unspeakable: It is said, Act. 20.37,
38. that when Paul took his leave of his friends at Ephesus; it was a very sad
partting; They all wept very sore, fell upon Paul 's neck, and kissed him,
sorrowing most of all, for the words, which he spoke unto them, that they
should see his face no more. If this were such an heartbreaking unto them, it
must needs be impossible for any, that ever tasted, in any measure, how
gracious the Lord is, to bear so much as a thought of never seeing, of never
enjoying God more. Ye know, for a Man to lose his sight were very sad, though
he should have no pain in his eyes, Solomon says, Eccles. 7.11. Truly light is
sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun: So that a Man would scarce
think, that the greatest Worldly prosperity were enough to repair that loss.
What then would this blind person think of his condition, if besides the loss
of his sight, one should stand by, and continually be dropping scalding Lead
into his eyes? Yet so it is here. For,

(2.) A lost, unprosperous Soul is not only designed to be thus driven away
from God, but it is designed to the same misery, and the same torment with the
Devils; and this they can neither escape, nor endure. None can answer that
question, Ezekiel. 22.14, Can thine heart endure, or thine hands be strong, in the
day when I shall deal with thee? No, it cannot. For who knows the power of
thine anger: even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath, Psalm. 90.11. None is
able to express, yea nor to conceive, what a dreadful thing it is, to be
buried, as it were, alive, under the Tombstone of the infinite wrath of the
ever-living God, Heb. 10.31, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17, -- They shall hide themselves in the Dens,
and in the Rocks of the Mountains. And say to the Mountains, and Rocks, fall on
us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand? This is that which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor can
possibly enter into the heart of Man to conceive. Ye find up and down in the
Scripture, that whatever is most terrible to sense, is made use of, to express
the terribleness of it, and yet comes far short of it. Let but this one
argument sink into your hearts, and be, if but once a week, seriously thought
on, and possibly, this alone may convince you of the truth of what I say. That
it is the most rational thing in the World, for all those who believe they have
immortal Souls, in mortal Bodies, to mind the welfare, and prosperity of their
Souls, above all things else in the World.

4. Let me add one argument more. It is the most rational thing in the World,
for every Man seriously to mind that, which above all things else, best answers
God's great end in giving him his Being, and with it, all that is needful for
support, together with more understanding then the Beasts of the field: And if
ye ask, what this is? ye have an answer, Prove. 16.4, God made all things for
himself: For the glorifying of his own blessed name. Romans 11, For of him, and
through him, and to him, are all things: To whom be glory for ever, Amen. Now
as no Man dishonours God, but in doing that which tends to the ruin and
destruction of his own Soul. So no Man does any thing, or possibly can do any
thing, which really tends to the will-fare of his own Soul, but therein he also
glorifies God. For instance, To live in the exercise of Repentance; confessing,
and humbling our Souls in the sight of God, for our daily failings. To live in
the exercise of Faith, applying our selves to Jesus Christ, as interceding, in
our behalf for grace, and mercy, suitable to our daily necessities, resting
upon his truth, and faithfulness in his promises, notwithstanding all
difficulties appearing in the way of accomplishment: Walking in the fear of the
Lord, and fruitfulness in every good work: These are all great fartherers of
Soul-prosperity, Josh. 7.19, My Son, give glory to God, and make confession to
him. Revel. 16.9, -- They repented not, to give glory to God. Romans 4.19, 20, --
but was strong in faith, giving glory to God. Isa. 8.13, Sanctify the Lord of
Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. Joh. 15.8,
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. This is as certain, as
that Jesus Christ glorified his Father, in finishing the work of Redemption,
and Salvation, for lost sinners. Joh. 17.4.

Thus ye have the Inference made good.

is the most desirable prosperity; and that it is therefore (as ye have heard)
the most rational thing in the World, to mind it, above all things else. Then
be persuaded (as the Prophet Isa. advises, chapter 46.8.) To remember this, bring
it again to mind, resolve upon it, and show your selves to be Men; that act
according to principles of reason, and not Brutes. Let that sink into your
hearts, which ye may read, Hos. 11.4. The Lord there aggravates their unworthy
dealing with him by this, That though he knew their aversness to what he had
required of them, yet he had not drawn them to their duty, by violence, as
unruly Bullocks to the yoke, but in a way singularly obliging, suitable to
rational Creatures, He had drawn them with the Cords of a Man, with arguments
from his bounty, and goodness, which of all others, carry the highest grounds
of reason with them, why God should be obeyed. This, I say, should be seriously
considered, that reflecting on our selves, and finding that God deals thus with
us, draws us with the Cords of a Man, in an argumentative way to persuaded us
to this great duty: O then let us be persuaded to stir up our selves with the
uttermost bent of our endeavors, from this day forward, to mind it as the
great business of our lives, and pray (as Genesis 9.27.) that God would enlarge
our hearts, and fill them with desires, and resolutions about this matter, and
diligently hearken to the counsel, which God, in his word, prescribes you in
this great affair.

To make way to acquaint you with what that is, I must mind you a little of
that which was more largely spoken unto, when we first entered upon the
explication of the point. Two things were then endeavored to be cleared unto
you.

1. Wherein the prosperity of the Soul consists, and when it may be said to
prosper. I told you then, that the prosperity thereof is to be considered both
in its first rise, and foundation: Or in its growth, and progress. As to the
first rise of it, it was proved, that if we look upwards, we shall find it
begin in God's Eternal, Electing love, which is without beginning. But if we
look inwardly, so as to discern it in our selves. The first foundation of it is
laid in that day, and hour (though the very day and hour has, I think, not
been discerned by many, though perhaps by some.) But however discerned, or not
discerned, in that day and hour, it begins, when by the word of Christ, and by
the Spirit of Christ, the whole Man, both Soul and Body is brought into a state
of Union with Christ. For then the Soul receives the first Seeds of Heavenborn
principles of Spiritual life, and then begins to be in a capacity of prospering.

2. As the first foundation is laid in these principles: So the growth and
progress thereof consists in their increase. As they increase, so the
prosperity of the Soul increases. So that if ye give up your selves to be
guided by right reason, your work for the substance of it, is first to see that
your Souls are Spiritually alive. And secondly, that they thrive and prosper in
that wherein they live.

In reference to the former of them, I have two things to say,

(1.) To all, and every one of you, that you would set some time apart,
seriously to debate the matter, between God, and your selves alone, and none
else with you: whether ever ye felt the day of God's power upon your spirits,
to prevail so far upon you. As,

1. To cast you down from the good opinion, which ye had of your selves, by a
thorough conviction of the woeful mistake wherein ye were, about the state of
your Souls. That ye thought them alive, when they were (as now ye see) dead in
sin, pleasing your selves with the Religion of your Education, as Paul did
before his Converson. That ye thought, ye had good hearts toward God, whereas
now ye see, that (as Psalm. 5.9.) your inward parts were very wickedness. That
whereas ye thought not of any danger ye were in of the wrath to come, now ye
see, ye are condemned by a holy, and righteous Law. And that, what by reason of
your Actual sins, and what by reason of your Original sin, ye utterly despair
of Salvation in that state wherein ye pleased your selves, and see clearly that
outward Reformation will not serve your turn, but ye must be inwardly changed
into the Image of God, and be born again by the Spirit of God, else ye can
never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This is such a casting down, as Paul
experienced when he said, Sin revived, and I died, Romans 7.9.

2. Whether, besides this casting down, ye have also experienced the day of
God's power, so far to prevail upon you, as to raise up your hearts, to a
willing, and hearty acceptance of Christ, to all intents and purposes, in order
to Salvation. To kill, and destroy that enmity which you find in your hearts,
against the ways of God, so as to bring you into a state of Reconciliation with
God, and to all the means of conformity to him, and Communion with him, to
impute unto you the merits of Christ's death, for a full and free discharge
from the guilt of all your sins, and to impute unto you his Righteousness, that
ye may be accepted as righteous, unto Eternal life. To mortify all your
corruptions, to quicken your dead hearts, with the principles of Spiritual
life; those principles of true holiness, without which, ye know, ye shall never
see God; with a sincere resolution, in his strength to wait upon him, and keep
his way. That he would do all this for you, and work all this in you; and that
ye are humbled for defects in living no more upon him, that he might be all
this unto you. Verily, so far as any person can really assert this, that thus
he has been cast down, and thus he has been, and is raised up; though he may
sometimes be in the dark, as to the safety of his estate for Eternity; he has
good Scripture ground (tho he may not see it) to believe that he is called into
fellowship with Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. And that his Soul begins to live, and is in
a capacity of prospering: For when the Soul (it may be, after a long shutting
up under unbelief) thus opens to Christ, then Christ comes into the Soul, as
Rev. 3.20. And when he comes, he brings the principles of Spiritual life with
him, 1 John 5.12, He that has the Son, has Life.

This is the first Particular. A word to all.

2. I have a word to some, to those I mean, that know nothing, as yet, what
either this casting down, or lifting up, means. And it is a word of advice,
That as ever they desire their Souls should live, and be in a capacity of
prospering, that they would break off, from all their dead works, and resolve,
for this end, that they may be thus cast down, and lifted up, To be swift to
hear, as Jam. 1.19. And to attend unto the words of this life, so as it is said
to be, Joh. 5.20. The word, whereby dead Souls are quickened, Joh. 5.25, -- the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. And
that in order hereunto, ye would take the right way of working what ye hear
upon your hearts; thus, or to this purpose, reason the case with your selves.

(1.) Soul-prosperity, I am now convinced, is the most desirable prosperity:
And if my Soul prosper not, all the sooner, possibly, it may never prosper,
for, this night, it may be taken from me. And if it do not prosper, nothing
will prosper with me, so as to turn to good, whilst I live: and when I am dead,
I shall be one of the most woeful, and miserable Creatures, to all Eternity,
that ever God made, next to the Devils.

(2.) If my Soul be, as I have reason to be asraid it is, still in its
unregenerate state, then it is spiritually dead in sin; and while it continues
so, it is in no more capacity of prospering, then a dead Tree, while it
continues dead, is in a capacity of bringing forth ripe fruit. This I now
clearly see, though I did not so much as think on it before.

(3.) If I do not so receive Jesus Christ, as that Jesus Christ may receive me,
into a state of Union with himself, my Soul can never live, for so I hear from,
1 John 5.12. He that has not the Son, has not life.

(4.) If I would so receive Jesus Christ, as that he may receive me, into Union
with himself, and I receive life from him, I must so receive the word, as to be
so cast down, and so lifted up, as I have heard. Therefore, by his help, I
resolve for this end to hear, yea as I am commanded, Isa. 55.3. diligently to
hear, to hearken, and to incline mine Ear: And to make application to my self,
of what may be for my casting down, and for my lifting up; that, according to
the promise, in that Text, my Soul may live.

This do, and Live.
SERMON VII.
HAving spoken something to the first Particular: That every one ought to see
it, who desires that his Soul should prosper, that he be Spiritually alive.

I now proceed to the second, wherein two things are to observed: That if
indeed ye are spiritually alive, then to see to it. 1. That your Spiritual life
be lively, and prosper. 2. That when it begins to be better, than it has been
with you, in the inward Man, then to take heed that ye lofe not the things ye
have wrought, 2 Ep. of Joh. verse. 8.


I shall enter upon the former of these, at present.

1. To see to it, that your Spiritual life be lively, and prosper; for therein
the prosperity of your Souls consists. And, because every thing almost, that I
have to speak unto, in handling this great, and necessary Doctrine, needs much
enforcement, because much neglected, I shall, before I come to the Directions,
speak something, by way of argument, to heighten your endeavors herein.

Consider then.

(1.) A Soul, that is alive to God, though burdened with a weak, Consumptive
Body, and with a considerable fullness of outward blessings (both which, many
times, are great disadvantages) yet may prosper. We see it exemplified in
Gaius; He was but of a weak, and crasie Constitution, that is employed in the
Text. And he was withal, a Man of some Estate, in the World: That Is employed
verse. 6. Which have born witness of thy charity, before the Church. Yet neither
the one, nor the other hindered, but that his Soul did prosper. It was as John
said; for doubtless John was as far from giving flattering titles, as Elihu
said, he was, Job 32.22.

(2.) Our Souls ought to be as dear unto us, as the Soul of Gaius was to him.
If Gaius made Religion his business, minding, above all things, that one thing
which is necessary. If he kept his heart above all keeping, So that neither
Corruption from within, nor Temptation from without, could set his
Salvation-work backward. If he laid up his treasure in Heaven, valuing both the
best things, and the worst things of the World, as something, or as nothing
unto him, farther then as they might be improved to promote the Eternal
welfare of his Soul. All which, without doubt, in a great measure he did, and
more then all this too; otherwise, he had never received this testimony from
such a Man, as John was; which, to his honor, has stood upon Record, these
1600 years, and shall do to the end of the World. For as our Savior said of
Mary, Matthew. 26.13. So wherever this Epistle shall be read in the whole World,
this that Gaius did, shall be told, for a memorial of him, That his Soul did
prosper. Therefore, as our Savior says, Luke 10. We ought to go, and do
likewise. For he was under no more obligation to do what he did, then we are:
And our Souls ought to be as dear to us, as his was to him.

3. There is not one word to be found to the contrary in all the Scripture, but
that how short soever, we come of this pattern, at present, yet if we set our
selves to do, as he did, our Souls may prosper as much, as ever his did. Jesus
Christ, we are sure, can make them prosper, Joh. 10.10, -- I am come that they
might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. 2 Cor. 9.8. For
ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he were rich, yet for
our sakes he became poor, that we by his poverty might be made rich. Ephesians. 3.20,
-- He is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask, or think,
according to the power, that works in us. Neither, (which is much to be
observed) does he speak of his absolute power; by which he is able to do more,
then he will do, but of his Ordinary working power, for so it is, in the latter
end of the verse. [According to his power that works in us.] So that we may
conclude, that he has not out-acted the greatness of his power, in, or for the
prospering of any Man's Soul; but he can work as much again, for another. Ephesians.
4.10, He that descended, is the same also that ascended up, far above all
Heavens, that he might fill all things. As he filled up the whole work of his
Mediatorship, which was to be done upon Earth: So he ascended up to Heaven, to
fulfill what remains, and that is, for ever to fill even all the living members,
of his mystical Body with the Principles of Spiritual life, so that every one
shall receive according to his measure, Ephesians. 4.7, But unto every of us is given
grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Neither does he tell any
Man, that he has given him so much, that he will give him no more. No Man
knows, how great his measure may be; The grace that Christ intends to give, he
gives not all at once; so that a Man may hope, his works may be best at last;
as was said of them, Rev. 2.19. For,

(1.) There is no particular grace, though it be in the Soul, at present, but
as smoking Flax, but it may by daily exercise, and good usage, grow to a great
eminency.

(2.) There is no Corruption, though more deeply Rooted then others, in a Man's
natural Constitution, but that, in time, by walking in the Spirit, bringing it
to the Law of Christ, to the death of Christ, and to the love of Christ, and
joining his own endeavors to the Spirit of Christ, he may get an eminent
victory over it, and see it, by degrees, fall down before him.

(3.) There is no particular duty, how backward, and indisposed soever he may
be to it, at present, or has been, a long time heretofore against it, but he
may grow to an eminency in the practice of it.

(4.) There is no one temptation, of what kind soever, or how often soever he
has been overcome by it, but by taking to himself the whole armor of God; and
strengthening himself in the strength of the Lord (which is every ones duty to
do) but he may so resist it, and conquer it, that the Devil shall fly before
him.

(5.) There is no condition, how many snares soever, it may be compassed about
withal, but through the exercise of grace, it may be managed to such Spiritual
advantage as may exceedingly promote Soul-prosperity.

(6.) There are no doubts, no fears, no sinking discouragements, arising from
what spring soever, but they may be answered, and scattered as a mist before
the Sun, shining forth in its full strength.

By all this we see that it is as I have said: That as there is no reason for
any Man absolutely to conclude, though he apprehend himself, at present to be
Spiritually dead, that his Soul shall never live: So there is no sufficient
reason for any Man to doubt, who is really, though weakly alive to God, but
that waiting upon God, and keeping his way, his Spiritual life may grow to be
lively, and his Soul may prosper as much as ever the Soul of Gaius did.
Therefore, let us up, and be doing, and the Lord will be with us, Phil. 2.12,
13, Work out your own Salvation, with fear, and trembling. For it is God, that
works in you, both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure. This is that
which slackens many Men's endeavors, that because they think they shall never
attain to such an height of Soul-prosperity, as others have attained unto;
therefore they stir not up themselves, to reach after any prosperity at all; as
is charged on them, Isa. 64.7, There is none that calls upon thy name, that
stirs up himself to take hold of thee. As some poor Men, because they think,
they shall never get beforehand, as many of their Neighbors do; whatever
others get, they shall never be worth a Groat, and therefore mind no more then
to live from hand to mouth. But we have not so learned Christ. This is all that
I shall say by way of argument, to persuade.

I now proceed to speak of the former of those two Particulars, mentioned but
now: That those that are spiritually alive, ought to see to it, that their
Spiritual life be lively, and prosper, because therein the prosperity of their
Souls consists. The great matter to be enquired into, is to show what is to
be done, in order to the carrying on, of this holy, and blessed design. In
speaking unto it, Let this be considered. That there is a Rule for, and a
Regiment of Health for the Soul, as there is for the Body. And what in a
natural way, may be prescribed, and ought to be made use of, for the welfare
of the one, may be prescribed, and ought to be made use of, in a Spiritual way,
for the welfare of the other. Of this kind, there are five several things,
which I shall speak to in order.

1. In reference to Bodily health, upon good advisement, the seasonable use of
Physic is necessary. This is an Ordinance of God, and ought to be used in
faith, and obedience to God. Sometimes, for preventing of Diseases, which
otherwise might prejudice our health, and sometimes for curing, and removing of
them, which otherwise may endanger our life. Answerably to this, we find in the
Scripture (which is the Magazine, and Storehouse for all Spiritual Receipts)
Physic prescribed for the Soul, by Jesus Christ himself, the great Physician
of Souls; without the due, and seasonable use whereof, it is impossible, the
Soul should prosper.

Before I tell you what it is, it is fit to premise these three things.

1. That the Soul of every Man, Spiritually alive to God, is as subject to
Spiritual Diseases, as the Body of any living Man is to Bodily Diseases. And it
is sin alone, and nothing else but sin, which is the sickness of the Soul, and
which if it be not cured, will be the death, and destruction of the Soul. It is
the resemblance by which it is frequently set forth in the Scripture; and that
most fitly, as all Scripture resemblances are. For as sickness hinders the
operation of Nature, wasting, and consuming, by degrees, both the Natural heat,
and Radical moisture, often changing, and altering a Man's countenance, as Job
2.12, And when they lift up their eyes afar of, and knew him not. Often causing
much pain, so as the sick Man grows worse (and unless happily recovered, by the
blessing of God, upon the use of Means) until death seize upon him. So that
sickness, upon this account, is truly said, to be contrary to Nature, an Enemy
to Nature. Even such a thing is sin to the Soul: It is contrary to the
welfare, and prosperity of it. It Wars against it, 1 Pet. 2.11. It hinders
the gracious actings of it, Romans 7.21, I find a Law then, that when I would do
good, evil is present with me. It puts even living, and good Souls under such a
disguise, that they neither speak, nor do like themselves. As Job's Wife,
(though it is believed, that she was a good Woman) yet she spoke (as her
Husband told her) as one of the foolish Women, Job 2.10. So 1 Cor. 3.3. Their
unmortified lusts put them under such a disguise, that they walked as Men; as
those that were still dead in sin, and never had received any principle of
Spiritual life. And farther, As sickness causes pain; so guilt following of
sin, often causes intolerable pain, in the anguish, and chargings of
Conscience. In a word, sin being indulged consumes, and wastes what is of God,
in the Soul; so (as it is said of the worst of Men, 2 Timothy 3.13.) it grows
worse, and worse; and if not happily prevented, it ends, at last, in Eternal
death, Romans 8.13, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye.

2. As in all these respects, sin is such a thing to the Soul, as sickness is
to the Body: So, that we may be the more affected, and take the more notice of
it, It is fitly expressed by the same name. As Pride is fitly compared to a
Tympany; Earthly-mindedness to a Dropsy; Carnal security to a Lethargy; Unruly
passions to a Frenzy; Apostasy, and Back sliding from the ways of God, to the
Falling Sickness; Envy, to a Consumption; An unquiet, discontented Spirit, to
the grief of the Bowels: Sore Diseases, all of these are. And besides all
these, Original sin is as a Leprosy, over-spreading the whole Soul. This evil
Disease, which is, indeed, all Diseases in one, cleaves unto all Adam's
posterity, as Gehazi's Leprosy did to all his Seed; for his Son (if he had
any) and his Son's Son, and so from generation to generation, were all Lepers,
2 Kings 5.27.

3. Though this be generally acknowledged, That sin is the sickness of the
Soul; therefore the Soul prospers only so far as it is well rid of it; yet this
would be farther observed, That though sin have such evil effects upon the
Soul, as Diseases have upon the Body: and that the names of Bodily Diseases, do
so fitly resemble the Diseases of the Soul: yet the difference is great, as to
that which is required, to dispose the sick in Soul, and the sick in Body,
toward a recovery. In the Diseases of the Body it matters not much (it may
perhaps something, but much it does not) whether the sick Man know the name or
nature of his Disease; so he have a faithful, and skillful Physician: Nor
whether he know the virtue of what is prescribed him, or the composition of it.
Or whether he be able to judge of the increase, or declining of his Disease, by
the beating of his Pulse: Though perhaps, some insight into these things, might
afford to some persons at least, some satisfaction; yet they are left specially
to the care, and wisdom of the Physician, who often conceals the danger, lest
the sick Man's fears, and fancy might do him more hurt, then his Physic does
him good. But it is otherwise in Soul-sickness; a clear insight into the
Disease, is of great use, that every one should understand (according to that
expression, 1 Kings 8.38.) the plague of his own heart; and what strength it
has got over him; how long it has been growing upon him, and by what means,
and occasions, he fell into it. These are good steps toward spiritual health.
This is required in order to cure, Jer. 3.13, Know, and acknowledge thine
iniquity. And then, distinctly to understand the way of cure, and to follow
those directions, which Jesus Christ the great Physician of our Souls,
prescribes, is a far greater, and better step.

Having premised these things, I shall now lay before you what is prescribed by
him.

(1.) When the Body is full of corrupt humors, there is need of Purging
Physic. Even such need has the Soul, when it is overgrown, and oppressed,
with corrupt lusts, which are the noisome steams of Original corruption. It was
well with them, of whom it is said, 1 Pet. 1.22. that they had purified their
Souls. This is commanded, Jam. 4.8, Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify
your hearts ye double-minded. 2 Cor. 7.1, -- Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh, and spirit. This is absolutely necessary; for as sin
is to the Soul, as sickness is to the Body; so the purging out of these corrupt
lusts, is to the Soul, what this purging Physic is to the Disease, Joh. 15.2,
Every branch in me (says Christ) I will purge, that it may bring forth more
fruit. In Mal. 3.3. it is prophesied, That God will sit as a Refiner, and as a
Purifier of Silver; and purify the Sons of Levi, that they may offer unto the
Lord, an offering in Righteousness. Now this purging, and emptying the heart of
the evil treasure that is in it, is all one with mortification; and wherever,
and in whom soever this is neglected, that necessary and commendable practice
of abounding in the External duties of Religion, avails nothing, to
Soul-prosperity: Ye see this exemplified in the Pharisees, Matthew. 6. Nay,
though the Soul be alive to Christ, yet if this be neglected, the Soul prospers
not. This is evident in those Church members in Corinth. Paul supposed them to
be in Christ: Yet their unmortified lusts, clearly proved it against them, that
they did not thrive, their Souls did not prosper. They were but Babes in
Christ: They were in a comparative sense, in respect to what they ought to have
been, and might have been, but very Carnal still, 1 Cor. 3.2, 3. This then
ought to be taken notice of, that besides the real foundation of universal
mortification, that is laid in at first, in the Soul's Conversion to Christ,
wherein the absolute, and un-interrupted Reign of Original sin is broken; yet
the continual exercise of mortification, is to be minded, and taken up,
otherwise it is not like to go well with the Soul. For it is in this case, as
it was with the Monarchies, Dan. 4.12. Though their Dominion was taken away,
yet their lives were continued for a season. So it is here; for Original sin is
like Leaven, which being mingled with the Dough, the Bread will always, more or
less, taste of it. So that the most mortified Christian has still more
mortifying work on his hands, which he must dispatch. Those that are in Christ,
Romans 8.1. and savor the things of the Spirit, verse. 5. Yet are pressed to a
further progress in this duty, verse. 13, -- but if ye, through the Spirit, do
mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live.

This in general.

2. When by communing with our own hearts, and observing the outgoings of our
own Spirits, we clearly see that we are among the transgressors, not among the
righteous; I mean, among the sick, and not among the sound, then speedily and
seriously to set our selves to the use of such purging, and mortifying means,
as Christ has prescribed in his word.

And here I desire you to note, that the means appointed, in this case, to be
used, come under a double consideration.

(1.) Some there are, which we may not desire, nor adventure upon, but as the
Providence of God, according to the condition we are in, calls us to make use
of.

(2.) There are other means, which, whatever our condition be, we ought,
immediately, and daily, to apply our selves, to make use of, as the matter
requires; and upon special occasions, in a manner more then ordinary.

For the former of these, they are of two sorts. (1.) The Evil of Affliction.
And (2.) The Evil of Sin.


1. The Evil of Affliction, of what kind soever it be, or for what cause
soever, it comes to be our portion, whether upon our own Personal account; or
upon the Common account of Religion. These are the means, that God makes use
of, Dan. 11.35, And some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them, and
to purge, and to make them white. Isa. 27.9, By this therefore shall the
iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away their sin.
And they are fit means, for they have a great tendency to awaken the
Conscience, as Genesis 42.21, And they said one to another, we are verily guilty
concerning our Brother. To break the unruliness of our Spirits, and to make us
willing to hearken to what God speaks unto us, in his word, Hos. 5.15, I will
go, and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my
face: in their affliction, they will seek me early. And therefore, when God is
pleased to exercise us this way, we ought to improve them for this end. And it
is a great aggravation of sin, and a great evidence of an heart greatly
unmortified, not to do it, Isa. 57.17, For the iniquity of his covetousness, I
was wroth, and smote him; I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly, in
the way of his heart. Therefore, Hear the Rod, and who has appointed it, Mic.
6.9. Yet for all this, we may not desire to come under the lash of any of God's
Rods, when we are free, in hope that we may thus improve them: For who knows
aforehand, but that when he has his desire, and is under the Rod, that it
will not either be with him, as it was with Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22, And in the
time of his sickness, he did trespass yet more against the Lord. This is that
King Ahaz. Or otherwise with him, that it was with Nabal, whose heart was as
unsensible in him as a stone, during the time of his sickness, 1 Samuel 25. This
we are sure of, that there needs an Almighty power to work with them, to make
them have any effectual influence, to purge out so much as one of those lusts,
which hinder the welfare, and prosperity of the Soul. And what ground we have
to hope that God will put forth any such power, with any of his Rods,
especially, when we our selves, without any call from God, have called for
them, and desired them, would be well considered of.

2. As the Evil of Affliction is not to be desired for this end, but only to be
made use of, for this end, when God brings it upon us: So it is with the Evil
of Sin. God is pleased often to make use of his peoples miscarriages, to work
much this way, bringing Soul-health out of Soul-sickness. Thus God wrought with
Peter. Compare Matthew. 26.33. with John 21.15. And with Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles.
32.26, Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart. And thus he wrought
with David. That great sin of his, through the mighty working of the Spirit of
God upon his heart, occasioned as great exercise of his Repentance, and of his
Faith, as ever he gave any evidence of, in the whole time of his life, from the
first day of his Conversion, to the time of his Death. So that incestuous
Corinthian, his sorrow was so deep, that he was in danger to have been
swallowed up by it.

Thus the Lord is pleased to work; as we have heard that skilful Physicians,
according to the rules of Art, can temper poisonful ingredients into wholesome
Medicines. But this is proper for them only to meddle withal, that are skilful
in their Art. So this is a divine skill proper only to the great Physician of
Souls. But this we may not apply our selves unto: I mean, not to give way to
sin in hope that Faith and Repentance may thereby be set on work, and our Souls
prosper the better after it. No: No Man ought to give way to the least sin,
though he had the greatest ground of hope that might be, that he might be
preserved thereby from a greater sin. It Is true, in respect of the evil of
suffering, when there is no remedy, but one of them must be chosen, the less
may be chosen to avoid the greater. But in respect of the evil of sin, we ought
not to swallow a Gnat, in hope thereby to avoid a Camel. Not to take up a Moat,
in hope thereby to shift off the Beam, but stand out against all, and leave the
success to God, Romans 3.8. I once met with a godly Man, who being in great
heaviness under the sense of the hardness of his heart, was tempted to
adventure upon some great sin, and then his heart would melt, and break
presently: But the Lord graciously preserved him, and wrought in him that
tenderness, in a great measure, which he desired; whereas yielding to that
temptation, had been the way, to have been hardened, by the deceit of sin; as
that young Man Dr. Preston speaks of, who being in much anguish of spirit, for
his wicked course of life, and often resolving upon a course of Reformation,
was tempted to do but once more as he had done, and then he should never be
troubled more: He yielded to the temptation, and he was never troubled any more
as he had been, but was given up, to work all iniquity with greediness. We see
then, it is God's sole Prerogative to bring Good out of Evil; and (as I said)
Soul-health, out of Soul-sickness. But this way we ought to abhor: Only, when
this comes to be our sad condition, we ought to do as Manasses did, 2 Chronicles.
33.12, 13, When he was in Affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly, -- And prayed unto him. He besought the Lord, and he prayed,
that is, he prayed, and he prayed, and humbled himself greatly. So did Peter,
Matthew. 26. ult.

Thus ye see, there are some means we ought not to adventure upon, in hope to
make use of them, for the prospering of our Souls.

2. There are some other means, which ought immediately, and daily (though at
some times more solemnly then others) to be made use of, according as we find
that we have contracted any guilt, or defilement upon our Souls, either great,
or small, more or less, and that is in the renewed exercise of Repentance, and
Faith, to apply our selves to the Lord Jesus Christ, that he would wash us, and
purge us both from the one, and the other.

(1.) In the renewed exercise of Repentance, and godly sorrow, reallizing the
sad consequences, that may possibly follow, and are very likely to follow the
least sin that is slighted, and indulged. Thus Job 42.6, Wherefore I abhor my
self, and repent in dust, and ashes. He was no vile person, he had not
committed any gross sins; but guilty he was of many unadvised speeches; of some
mixture of that corruption, which is contrary to that grace, wherein he was so
eminent, I mean of impatience; and of distrustfulness, as to God's delivering
him. These were his failings, and for these he renewed the exercise of his
Repentance, even to abhorring himself, so as he was vile in his own eyes,
whilst he was precious in the eyes of God. This is a great Purger, 2 Cor. 7.11,
For behold this self-same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carefulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, etc. Jam. 4.8,
Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double-minded.

2. In the exercise of Faith, that draws, and purges. Hereby virtue is drawn
from Christ: As that Diseased Woman said, and found it by experience, when she
touched him. It was the touch of Faith, by which her fountain of blood was
stopped, Mark 5.28, 29. Thus faith also purifies, Act. 15.9. That which we have
Mal. 4.2. is very considerable to this purpose. Christ is said to be the Sun of
Righteousness: And when he arises, and shines, upon the Soul, he arises with
healing in his wings. What are these wings? The wings of the natural Sun, are
the beams of the Sun, whereby light and heat are conveyed from the Sun. And the
wings of the mystical Sun, the Sun of Righteousness, are the Gospel of Christ,
and the Spirit of Christ. These are the healers, Ezekiel. 47.8. There were the
waters of the Sanctuary, which healed the waters of the Sea. When these waters
have free course (according to what the Apostle prayed for, 2 These. 3.1.) so as
they meet with no stop in the mouths of the Ministers, nor in the hearts of the
people, their healing efficacy will evidently appear. It is said indeed in the
forementioned chapter of Ezekiel. v. 11. that the miry places were not healed.
In such places, where the water has not its free course, but stops, it mingles
with the softer parts of the Earth, and makes Mire. So the truths of the
Gospel, though they meet with no stop in the mouths of the Ministers; yet if
they meet with obstructions in the hearts of the hearers, so as the motions of
the Spirit are not observed, and the operations of the Spirit resisted: Then
corruption mingles even with the word it self, turning the freeness of the
grace of Christ into wantonness, and the efficacy of his grace into laziness.
This makes a miry, polluted, dirty Soul. Therefore as ever we desire that our
Souls should prosper, and thrive as a watered Garden, according to that
promise, Jer. 31.12. See that these waters have a free passage: Let faith be
exercised upon those truths, which hold forth the freeness, and riches of the
grace of Christ: For those are the truths, the Prophet saw in his Vision,
represented by those waters. And let this be in conjunction with the exercise
of Repentance. This is the way, by the Spirit of grace, working with these
truths, whereby Souls are healed and purged, 1 Pet. 1.22, Seeing ye have
purified your Souls, in obeying the truth, through the Spirit. These were the
truths, by obedience whereunto, their Souls were purified.

This is the way, whereby the Lord first begins to heal, and purge the Soul.
For this I shall give you but one place of Scripture, but it is a place to be
taken notice of. It is 2 Corinthians. 5.19. Wherein note three things.

(1.) God intending, according to his Eternal purpose, to heal some sick,
quicken some dead, save some lost Souls, declares his purpose to do it, by way
of Reconciling them to himself. This he will do, before they shall be possessed
of that Salvation, he has chosen them unto. His method is first to purge their
Souls, mortifying that enmity that is in their hearts, both against his ways,
and their own good, and so to reduce them to terms of Reconciliation with
himself, and make them willing to be Reconciled unto him.

(2.) How God will do this, [God was in Christ.] The Divine Nature assumed the
Human Nature, and so in, and through Christ, God-Man, in one Person offers
terms of Love, and Peace to them, as the most effectual way to prevail upon
them, and to bring their Souls about to him.

(3.) But in what peculiar way will he more transcendently manifest this grace,
and mercy? The Text tells us, he will do it [in not imputing their iniquities;]
proposing, and promising a full, and everlasting pardon, of all sin, never to
be called in, if his terms be accepted of: And the sinner being made willing to
be Reconciled unto God. Thus he subdues the heart, conquering it by Love. And
thus the work of purging, and cleansing the Soul is begun, Luke 7.47, Her sins,
which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much. And as thus it is begun, so
upon a failure, it is renewed, and continued. When a Soul that is Diseased, and
polluted, is awakened to apply himself to Jesus Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness, in the exercise of Faith, and Repentance, making way, that the
waters of the Sanctuary, the Spirit of grace, and the Gospel of grace may not
be stopped in their course, but have a free passage into the Soul, the hope of
Reconciliation with God is raised greatly, and that stirs up the Soul to
purify himself, 1 John 3.3, Every one that has this hope, purifieth himself.
Observe that [He purifies himself.] This is necessary: For as Physic is most
effectual to purge out corrupt humors, when Nature works with it (for it is to
no purpose to give it to a dead Man, and when Nature is quite spent in a sick
Person, it comes too late.) So it is here. The Soul that thus applies it self
to Christ, will find his blood to be a healing, purging, sin-mortifying blood.
But in applying our selves thereunto, our own thoughts, and affections; our own
endeavors, and resolutions against all occasions of sin, against the first
risings of sin; and we must apply our selves to what mortifying means we find
prescribed, and have been found to be of use to others. All these we must set
on work, and then the Spirit of God, will work with us, Romans 8.13, -- if ye
through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live. And doing
thus, we may be said, To purge our selves, as 2 Cor. 7.1. 2 Timothy 1.21. If we do
thus, We shall be Vessels of honor, fit for the Master's use: That is, our
Souls shall prosper.

This is the first thing, that I have to commend unto you, as ye mind the
welfare, and prosperity of your Souls, to mind this. There is another kind of
Physic, to be made use of, as the matter requires, and that is Cordials; for
the healing of a fainting Soul. This may be spoken unto hereafter; when I have
first spoken unto what is, most times, to be made use of, betwixt this of
Purging, and that of Cordials.

SERMON VIII.
2. THe next thing that I shall take notice of, as necessary for the health,
and welfare of the Body (which as the Lord shall enable me, I shall apply to
the point in hand) is the observing of a good Diet; with respect to the choice
of meats, such, as by experience, have been found, best agreeable to the
Nature, and Constitution of the Body; and in proportion, suitable to the
natural heat of our stomachs, for Concoction, and Digestion. This is a great
means of health, especially for such as are naturally weak, and infirm. For,
usually, as is our Food, so is our Blood; as is our Blood, so are our Spirits;
and as are our Spirits, so are our Bodies for health, or sickness; for
strength, or weakness. Now, as I told you, what in a natural way is for the
health and welfare of the Body, is, in a spiritual way, applicable to the
health, and welfare of the Soul. I showed you, that it was so, in that which
I spoke last unto. I am now to show, it is so in this. In order hereunto, we
must take notice, that as God has provided (and that, with great variety) Food
and nourishment for the preservation of the Natural life of our Bodies: So he
has, for the preservation of the Spiritual life of our Soul; and that suitable
to the degree that our Souls have attained unto. Heb, 5.13, 14, Milk for Babes,
Meat for strong Men. Food that endures to Eternal life, Joh. 6.27. Such Food as
is a Feast, whereupon the Soul may feed, and fare deliciously every day, Isa.
25.6, -- a Feast of fat things, a Feast of Wine on the Lees, etc. This is a
matter we are much concerned in. That we know both our Privilege, and our Duty
herein, something must be said to each of these four Particulars. 1. What that
Food is, which God has provided, for the health, and prosperity of our Souls.
2. What those Means are, whereby that Food is conveyed unto us. 3. Something,
by way of argument, to quicken our Spiritual Appetite after it. 4. Something by
way of Direction, how to feed upon it, so as to receive that nourishment from
it, which our Souls stand in need of.


1. For the first of these. That Food which God has provided for us, is Jesus
Christ himself; but Jesus Christ especially as Crucified.

(1.) This Food is Jesus Christ himself. For the proof of this, consider, that
Jesus Christ is said to be The tree of life, Revel. 2.7. And the Hidden Manna,
verse. 17. Both which were Types of Christ.

(1.) He is said to be The tree of life, in allusion to that tree, Genesis 2.
which was called the Tree of Life, not for any Natural, or Physical excellency
in it, to preserve life, more then other Trees, but only as it was a Seal of
the Covenant of works; a conditional Seal of that Eternity of Life, which Adam
might with all fullness of confidence have expected, if he had persevered in
faithfulness to what was required of him. But it is upon another account, that
Jesus Christ is called, The Tree of life, because he has life in himself, and
quickens whom he will, Joh. 5.26. And with the Food that he affords,
nourishes, and preserves that life (where he has quickened it) unto Eternal
life, so that it never runs into death. Revel. 22. He is said to be a Tree of
Life, on both sides of the River of the Water of Life. But one Tree, yet
reaches to both sides of the River; so that all, from what quarter soever they
come, may receive Food, and nourishment from him. And though but one Tree, yet
it bare twelve kinds of Fruit, which sets forth the variety of Spiritual
privileges, and graces, which Jesus Christ has to give forth for the
prosperity of the Soul, according to all its concernments. Thus as he is the
Tree of Life, he is for the Food of our Souls.

(2.) He is so, as he is said to be, The hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17. Manna, ye
know, was their Bread in the Wilderness forty years together. It is said,
Psalm. 78.25. to be Angels Food, whether for the excellency of it, that it was
for them to have fed upon, if they had stood in any need of it: Or whether it
was prepared for them, by the ministry of Angels; This need not be disputed.
This is certain, it was a Type of Christ, who says of himself, That he was the
living Bread that came down from Heaven: And he is said to be, The hidden
Manna; possibly alluding to that Pot of Manna, which was hidden in the Ark of
the Testimony, pointing at Christ, as hidden Food, altogether unknown to the
unbelieving World, who never had so much as a real taste of the unsearchable
riches of his grace, of the efficacy of his Death, or the power of his
Resurrection. But as it was in reference to Manna: All those that in the
exercise of Faith did eat of it, under that consideration, as a Type of Christ,
it was spiritual meat to them. So the water out of the Rock, to all those that
in the same manner, under the same consideration, did drink of it, was
spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. Even so is Jesus Christ, at this day, and will
be to the end of the World; his flesh will be meat indeed, and his blood will
be drink indeed, to all those that feed upon him by faith. And this leads me to
the second Particular.

(2.) That Jesus Christ is this Food, which is appointed for the nourishment of
the Soul, as he is a Crucified Savior. Even as we read of the Manna, Numb.
11.8. that it was prepared to be eaten, by being first ground in the Mill, or
beaten in a Mortar, and so baked in a Pan. And as the Rock was smitten with the
Rod of Moses, before the water gushed out, so it was, at first, by God's
appointment, Exodus 17.6. And the Paschal Lamb was roasted at the fire, before
it was eaten. Even so Jesus Christ was wounded for our transgressions, smitten
of God unto death, that so he might be spiritual Food for Souls, according to
the Father's appointment. This was the ground of Paul's resolution, He
determined, to know nothing, ( i. e. to make known unto them nothing,
comparatively) but Jesus Christ, and him Crucified. And indeed the first
comfortable sight that a humbled sinner has of Christ, when his heart works
after him, for the life and Food of his Soul is, as he was clothed with his
Garments of Blood, made a Curse for sinners, as obedient unto death. This was
always the scope of Paul's preaching, first to set forth Christ as Crucified,
Gal. 3.1. So he preached him, and so he desired that those who were his hearers
might receive him. So the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, wherein spiritual
Food is administered to a believing Soul, the scope thereof is to show forth
the Lord's death, till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. And this upon the highest ground
of reason, for as Jesus Christ, by his blood redeemed our Souls from a state of
spiritual death, to a state of spiritual life, breaking down the
partition wall, not only between Jews, and Gentiles, but also between God and
Sinners, Ephesians. 2.13. So he purchased thereby, not only a full discharge from the
guilt of sin, by the imputation of his own righteousness, but power to
communicate, from his own fullness, continual supplies of spiritual life, for
the daily progress of Soul-prosperity. For whatever we receive for our All, is
to be received from Christ, as rising again from the dead, as ascending into
Heaven, as making intercession for those that come to God by him, and whatever
influence Christ in his Offices, as King, Priest, and Prophet has into the
life, and nourishment of our Souls, the foundation of all was laid in this,
that Christ was a Crucified Savior. His intercession is effectual, because his
blood speaks, Heb. 12.23. As the great Prophet of his Church, he reveals the
counsel of his Father, in all that is necessary to be known, to make us wise
unto salvation, for that he merited this by his blood, Rev. 5.5, 6. Because the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah was the Lamb slain, therefore he prevailed to open
the book of God's secret Council, which no man else was found worthy to open,
or to read, or so much as to look upon, so Romans 4.24. His resurrection is for
the declaring of our justification; but that is, because he first dyed for our
sins.

Thus you have the second particular under the first head, proved unto you.
That as Jesus Christ himself is appointed for the food of our Souls, so Jesus
Christ specially as crucified. Even as at this day, those living creatures,
which by God's allowance we feed upon, must first lose their own lives before
they can be for support to ours; Even so it is here. No life from Christ, but
by the death of Christ. Therefore says Christ, Joh. 6.53. Verily, verily, I
say unto you, that except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you.

I now proceed to what in the second place, was proposed, which was to show.

2. What are the ways and means, by which Jesus Christ conveys this spiritual
life unto the soul, that it may live and prosper.

Ans. It is by the powerful working of his Holy Spirit, sprinkling all
Ordinances, all Providence, and the Soul it self that receives nourishment
from Christ, with the merits, and efficacy of the blood of Christ.

(1.) All Ordinances, in the use of them he is said, to set meat before us,
Hos. 11.4. Meat which is compared to those things that are nourishing to the
Body, Isa. 55.2, 3, Wherefore do ye spend your Money for that which is not
Bread? etc. The word is compared to Honey ( Psalm. 119.103, How sweet are thy
words to my taste? yea sweeter then honey to my mouth) and preferred before it.
Solomon says, Prove. 24.13, My Son, eat thou honey because it is good, and the
honeycomb, which is sweet to thy taste. And it is found by experience, that
Honey is good, and the Honeycomb is sweet to the taste. But the word is
sweeter then the Honey, which of its own accord drops from the Honeycomb,
without any pressing, which is reckoned the sweetest of all. What is
particularly, is said of the Promises, in a sense, is true of all the
Ordinances, Isa. 38.16. In these things we live, in them is the life of our
Spirits. The whole word is said to be The word of life, Act. 5.20. Thus the
Lord feeds the Soul, according to that promise, Isa. 58.14. I will feed them
with the heritage of Jacob their Father. What was that? It was the good things
of the Land of Canaan; but not with them alone, but with that whereof they were
a Type, the Heavenly inheritance, together with all things relating thereunto;
the Promises, not only of this life, but also of the life to come. They were
part of Jacob's heritage, Psalm. 147.19, 20, He showed his word unto Jacob, his
statutes, and his ordinances unto Israel, etc. This is one way, whereby food
for the Soul is conveyed from Christ. Therefore it is, that Pastors, in their
administrations, are said To feed the Church. It is upon that account, that
they are called Pastors. Jer. 3.15. Act. 20.28. But this is only so far, as
they are sprinkled with the blood of Christ. Otherwise, as there is a vanity in
the Creatures, when God withdraws himself from them; so there is in Ordinances,
Isa. 1.13, Bring no more vain oblations. As the merits of Christ purchase our
Spiritual life, so they purchase a blessing upon that food, which is for
nourishment of it: Rebecca may dress the Venison, but Isaac gives the blessing.
So it is here, Exodus 20.24, In all places, where I record my Name, I will come
unto thee, and bless thee. Gal. 2.8, He that wrought effectually in Peter, to
the Apostleship of the Circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the
Gentiles.

2. As in all his Ordinances, so in all his Providence, when sprinkled with
the blood of Christ, there is likewise meat laid before us, even in every one
of them, of what sort soever. Observable to this purpose, is that which we have
Joh. 10.9, They shall go in, and out, and find pasture. Going in, and out,
according to Scripture expression, set forth all the turnings, and various
passages of a Man's life. So we understand that promise Deuteronomy. 28.6, Blessed
shall thou be, when thou come in, and blessed shall thou be, when thou go
out. Which is renewed again, Psalm. 121.8, The Lord shall preserve thy going
out, and thy coming in. There is good feeding to be had in all these, even
where it might be least looked for, Mic. 7.14. God promises, That he will feed
the flock of his heritage with his rod. This is hard feeding; but blessed be
the Lord, it has proved, and will prove again, good and wholesome nourishment,
when sprinkled with the blood of Christ: for thereby he has purchased a
fruitful, and sanctified use of the Rod. Christ being a Mediator in reference
to the rod, as well as in reference to the word: when it is so, then dark and
cloudy Providence falling down in showers, which (as we say) wet a Man to the
skin, nay even reach the very heart, coming near unto it, and cutting deep into
it, yet they drop fatness, and though they make the way foul, yet they make the
Land fruitful, Heb. 12.10, God chastens us for our profit, that we may be
partakers of his holiness. Then meat is found in the eater, comfortable
nourishment in the cross, when we can say, as Psalm. 23 4, -- thy rod, and thy
staff comfort me.

3. As both in Providence, and Ordinances thus sprinkled, nourishment is
conveyed to the Soul: So the Soul that receives this nourishment, must be
sprinkled with the same blood. There must be (as Heb. 12:23.) a coming to the
blood of sprinkling, in the exercise of Faith; for thereby it is, that food, or
virtue to feed, is distributed into them all, and so conveyed unto the Soul.
Even as the Root of the Tree draws sap from the Earth, and then concocts it,
and sends it forth to all the boughs, and branches, which if they receive not,
they wither; so it is here. It is not any one Providence, or Ordinance; no, if
we take them all in conjunction together, that either in whole, or in part,
convey any nourishment to the Soul, but as sprinkled with the blood of Christ;
and made use of, as subordinate means in his hands, and as made effectual by
the exercise of Faith, drawing in all our expectations of any Spiritual
nourishment, from any of these, into Christ alone, 1 Cor. 10.4, They all drank
the same Spiritual drink (for they drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed
them, and that Rock was Christ) They did all eat the same meat. Some had the
food, but not the nourishment; they had not this sprinkling, for ver. 5, With
many of them, God was not well pleased. So it may be with any of us, at this
day: Though we have cause, with all thankfulness, to acknowledge, as David did,
in another case, Psalm. 23.5, Thou preparest a Table before me, in the presence
of mine enemies. To their great grief, and vexation, who thought they had shut
the Door, so as no Man should have opened it: but God has opened it, so as
none of them can, as yet, shut it; so that we are not scanted in provision for
our Souls; yet as Pharaoh's lean Kine did not prosper ever the better for their
feeding in a Meadow, and eating up the fat Kine: Even so will it be with our
Souls, unless we feed upon Christ. In the use of Pasture, and all other means
of feeding, they will still be lean, and ill-favored. So that, if we were
sensible of it, we should see cause to complain, as Isaiah does, My leanness,
my leanness, Isa. 24.16. God will deal with us, as he did with them, when he
gave them the food they lusted after, though they had it, yet he sent leanness
into their Souls: Instead of nourishing them, a deadly consumption came along
with it, as Number. 11.33. Pray that we may be delivered from this Judgment, that
we may not (as it is said in our common Proverb) starve in a Cook's shop. And
this leads me to the

3. Third Particular: What arguments are there to quicken our Spiritual
appetite to this food? Of many that might be given, I shall only mention these
three.

(1.) This is food, that may easily be compassed. Many are put hard to it, for
a subsistence for themselves, and their Families. Eccl. 6.7, All the labor of
Man is for his mouth, and yet the appetite is not filled. But it is not so
here; this is prepared, ready for us, Matthew. 22.4. I have prepared my Dinner:
mine Oxen, and my Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready. And freely
offered, it is but, Come, and eat, Isa. 55.1, 2. It Is true, we are commanded to
labor for this food, more then for any thing else that the World affords, what
need soever we stand in of it, Joh. 6.27, Labor not for the meat that
perishes, but for that meat which endures unto everlasting life, which the
Son of Man shall give unto you. But it is with a labor like that of Adam in
Paradise, sweet, easy, and delightful. The very laboring after it, affords
more content, and satisfaction to the Soul (truly so called) then any
Creature-comfort whatsoever, Prove. 3.15, 16, 17.

(2.) There is no other food for our Souls but this; we must feed upon it, or
starve. Any thing that God appoints, may supply the want of bodily food. Deuteronomy.
8.2, 3, -- Man does not live by Bread alone, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of the Lord, does Man live. But nothing can supply the want of
Christ. They that feed upon any thing else, expecting any Soulnourishment, do
but (as they Isa. 44.20.) feed on ashes. And indeed the complexion of some Men's
Souls, shows what their diet is, so Earthly, etc. As young folks under some
bodily Distemper, eat Chalk, or Lime, etc. How ill do they look? Make the best
of it, To feed upon any thing else is but perishing food, Joh. 6.27. And as
well may we think that fishes of the Sea may live in the Air, or the beasts of
the Field in the bottom of the Sea, as that the Soul may live, and prosper by
any thing, either Providence, or Ordinances, without feeding upon Christ in
them.

(3.) There needs no other food, Joh. 6.55, For my flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed. And as all the sweetness, desirableness, and matter of
nourishment that is in the meat, is for the health, and welfare of the Body:
So whatever is in Christ, and whatever Christ is, (and Christ is altogether
lovely) quantus, quantus est, all is for the life and health, strength and
prosperity of the Soul. Joh. 10.10. It is said, He came into the World, that is
to live, and dye in the World, to do and suffer, what was to be done, and
suffered, that dead Souls might live, and living Souls have life in abundance;
that is, might live, and prosper.

Whether we consider Christ in his Person, or in his Offices, we shall see in
both, that there, and there alone, food is to be had for our Souls.

Before I mention either of these, I shall first lay before you this
Proposition.

That whatsoever may encourage a doubting Sinner, experimentally under clear
convictions, that there is no possibility of Salvation, in an Unregenerate
state, and fully satisfies him, that all Salvation is to be had in Christ, and
without him, no Salvation at all; whatsoever I say, may encourage such a
Person, under great uncertainties, whether Christ will accept of him, or no, to
come unto him, to cast himself down at the footstool of his grace, into the
arms of his mercy, to depend upon him, and abide in him for all, that may give
him a Title to, and a fitness for Heaven. And

(2.) Whatever may establish such a Perfon, having thus adventured his Eternal
estate in the hands of Christ, in a good hope, through grace, that he shall
receive such help and assistance from the Spirit of Christ, that he shall
persevere unto the end, both in the love that God bears unto him, and in the
grace that he has wrought in him, so as the good work begun in him, shall be
perfected: Where that is to be found which has an influence into all this;
there, certainly, food is to be had, for the life, health, and prosperity of
our Souls. This needs no proof, ye will all assent to it.

Now, that all this is to be found in Christ, and in him alone, will appear,
whether we consider him in his Person, or in his Offices.

(1.) In his Person, as God and Man in one Person. This is the great mystery of
Godliness, as has been, heretofore, at large opened unto you, from 1 Timothy
3.16, Of all Gospel-mysteries, this is the greatest. That a lost sinner should
have such a Savior, that is as verily Man, as God, and as verily God, as Man.
That the Divine and Human Nature, that were, at first, at such a distance,
should meet in one person. The serious consideration of this, has much of
Spiritual nourishment in it. It will appear to be so, when we have weighed
these two things.

(1.) What the work was, which Christ came into the World to do. It was to be a
Mediator between God, and Man. A Mediator of Reconciliation between a most
holy God, most highly provoked: and Rebellious sinners, still continuing in
their provocation. This was his great work, that was upon his hands, 2 Cor.
5.19, To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them.

(2.) That this affords great encouragement, so to come to Christ, as being,
upon this account, able to save to the uttermost. Hereby we see, that what he
either did, or suffered, though but in his human Nature, though but for a
little while, the whole time of his continuing visibly in the World, being but
33 years (rather to speak exactly, but 32 years, and a half) was of infinite
value and efficacy; which did arise from the Union of his two Natures; because
the Person, though in the form of a Man, was the mighty God, that Did such
things, and Suffered such things. Now this is a great relief to Faith; yea such
may be the temptation, that a humbled sinner may be under, that nothing else
can relieve, or afford any nourishment, so much (as we use to say) to keep
Life, and Soul together. For suppose this to be the case, Mr. John Hardy of
Symondsbury.
as once it was, of a godly Minister in this County, who dyed but this last
Summer. I had the Relation of it from himself, who was, for a time, in a great
Agony, and this was his temptation: Why, said Conscience (and Satan too, who
stood behind the Curtain) Thy sins deserve an infinite punishment, for thou
have sinned against an infinite God, and thou deservest Eternal death. And that
Christ, in whom thou trustest, he being Man, and suffering only in his human
Nature, he could suffer only that which is finite. And the time of his
suffering was but short. How then can he by suffering so short a time, deliver
from infinite suffering, and Eternal death? This, as he told me, was the
temptation that lay upon him, and how he was relieved. Even thus; The Lord
brought it to his remembrance, and set it home with a Divine impression upon
his Spirit: That though Christ suffered only in his Human Nature; and though
therefore all his sufferings were but finite; yet because the Human Nature was
United, in one Person, to the Divine Nature; hence, what the Human Nature did
suffer, though but for a time, was of sufficient value to ransom from Eternal
death. In such a case, nothing else could have done it. Nothing else can
support any Soul, in such a condition. But this may, and this will, if
believed, and wrought upon the heart, that the Lord has laid help upon one
that is mighty, Psalm. 89.19.

2. Consider Christ, in his Offices.

(1.) In his Priestly Office. He is a great High Priest, Heb. 4.14. Great, both
in respect of his Satisfaction, and of his Intercession; which are the two
special parts of his Priestly Office. From both which, much Spiritual Food, for
the nourishment of the Soul, unto the highest degree of prosperity it is
capable of, may be received.

1. From the satisfaction he has made, to the justice of God, for all the
wrong that sin has done him, by the sacrifice which he offered, which was
Himself, unto death. With this, God was well pleased, Ephesians. 5.2. And for this,
he shall see the Souls of all his Seed to prosper, Isa. 53.10. Hereby his flesh
became meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed. This clearly manifests, that
Christ is such an object for Faith to rest upon, as we may safely adventure our
Eternal state upon. For let any Man conceive himself in as sad a condition, as
the fears of an awakened Conscience can suggest. Suppose he sees the guilt of
all his sins before him, with all their aggravating circumstances, and
apprehends God coming out against him, to require satisfaction, to his justice,
for them all. This is a dreadful sight, but in the midst of all the height,
and depth of that terror, which this may impress upon his Spirit; if God give
in a sight of Christ, as the great High Priest, as he made his Soul an Offering
for sin; this is enough to draw forth an hearty act of dependence upon him, as
able to save to the uttermost. This supported David, when he was in great
depths, that he had a sight of him, that in the Lord was plenteous Redemption,
Psalm. 30.1, 2. with verse. 6, 7. This was the relief of the hunger-bitten
Prodigal, That in his Father's house was bread enough, Luke 15.17. And it was
the speech of a gracious Woman, of whom I have heard not long since, that upon
her Deathbed, being under great uncertainties, as to her Eternal condition.
Did not ye tell me, said she, to those that stood by her, that the blood of
Jesus Christ cleanses from all sins? And with that her Spirit Revived, and she
slept sweetly in the Lord. This, indeed, may well satisfy Conscience, for it
satisfies God himself; yea so far satisfy Conscience as to go boldly to the
Throne of Grace, for what grace, or mercy soever is necessary, for the life,
and health, welfare, and prosperity of the Soul, Heb. 4.16, Let us therefore
come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to
help in time of need.

2. As from Christ's satisfaction, which he made to the justice of God, whilst
he was upon Earth; so from the other act of his Priestly Office, his
Intercession which he makes in Heaven for sinners, much Spiritual Food for the
nourishment of our Souls may be had. What should hinder the receiving of it,
but our daily repeated failings, and often renewed infirmities? But against the
guilt of these, Christ's appearing in Heaven for us, prevails, that even when
the Law is broken, the Covenant is not broken; so that what Food for our Souls
may be had from the Covenant (and there it is all to be had, 1 John 2.1, 2, If
any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the
righteous. And he is the propitiation for our sins.) His intercession is as
effectual as his satisfaction, for he intercedes in the merits of his blood,
Heb. 12.24, The blood of Christ speaks.

2. To show further, That all in Christ is for the food and nourishment of the
Soul, much, yea very much may be said of that, which his Kingly Office affords,
and likewise his Prophetical Office.

For his Kingly Office, he has an absolute Sovereignty over all, both Men, and
Devils, Ephesians. 1.21, 22. Far above all Principalities, and Powers, etc. He has
all things under his feet. He is head over all things to his Church. Understand
it of the Invisible Church especially, which is his Mystical Body, whereof he
is the head. Ephesians. 5.23, For the Husband is the head of the Wife, even as Christ
is the head of the Church: And he is the Savior of the Body. This is full of
Spiritual Food. I will instance only in three things, by which the prosperity
of the Soul is exceedingly farthered.

(1.) As he has power over Satan. This affords great relief to a conflicting
Soul, that he both can, and will break the Serpents head, and tread him under
foot, Romans 16.20. That in Manlius is memorable to this purpose, Satan (as he
tells the story) appeared to a godly Man that was sick, in the habit of a
Priest, with Pen, Ink, and Paper in his hands, and told him that he must
confess all his Sins to him, he would write them down, and then he would
absolve him. The Sick Man was stricken with fear (and no marvel) but
recollecting himself, and perceiving who he was; If thou will write, says he,
write this first, The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, and with
that, the Devil vanished.

(2.) As he has Sovereignty over the Heart. He can take away the heart of
stone, and give an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. A great relief this, when the
Soul is mourning over the hardness of his heart, to remember that Christ is
exalted to be a Prince, to give Repentance, Act. 5.31.

(3.) As he has the Keys of Hell, and Death, Rev. 1.18. A great relief to a
troubled Soul, that is under the fear, first of Death; and then of dropping
into Hell, when he is dead. Those that have obeyed the call, and are still
obeying the call of Christ, they shall none of them dye, till it be better for
them to dye then to live, for death is theirs, 1 Cor. 3.22. And for dropping
into Hell, Christ has secured them against that, Joh. 6.39, 40. Every one that
believes on him shall have Everlasting life, and Christ will raise him up at
the last day.

3. The Prophetical Office of Christ, is likewise a fruitful, food-bearing
Office. He is engaged by Office, to make all his Seed wise unto Salvation, Isa.
54.13. All thy Children shall be taught of God. And he is faithful, who has
promised it, 1 John 2.27, But the anointing which ye have received of him,
abides in you: and ye need not that any Man teach you, but as the same
anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie. Joh. 17.26,
I have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare it.

This affords sweet, refreshing nourishment, I will instance only in two Cases.

1. When many things are heard, something at one time, and something at another
from the word. And it may be something at this time, which is not understood,
at least, not so understood, as that the heart is affected with it. Here is
relief to be had; he can, and undertakes to teach the heart, Jer. 24.7, And I
will give them an heart to know me, -- for they shall return unto me, with
their whole heart. Thus he taught David, Psalm. 51.6. -- In the hidden part,
thou shall make me to know wisdom.

(2.) When a Person walks in darkness, under many sad fears, whether ever the
foundation be well laid for Soul-prosperity, whether ever he were brought into
a state of Union with Christ, so as to receive the first principles of
Spiritual life from him. Here from this Office of Christ, which is to reveal
his Father's mind, in all things that we are concerned to know, there is relief
to be had, Joh. 14.19, -- but ye see me. They were in Christ, their Union was
begun, but they did not know it; but Christ undertakes, so as they will leave
it to him, to take his own time, that one day they shall know it.

Thus I have showed you more largely, then at first I intended: That there
needs no food for the Soul to feed upon, so as to prosper, but Christ alone.
For as all that is nourishing in the meat, is for the health and welfare of
the Body; so all that is in Christ, is for the health, and welfare of the
Soul. I have very few words more to speak.

4. Of the fourth and last Point. Something by way of direction: How to feed
upon this food, so as to receive that nourishment, which our Souls stand in
need of. I shall only mention these four Particulars.

(1.) We are to apply our selves to this Spiritual food, with a Spiritual
appetite. Natural life desires Natural food. Appetite unto it, is called
Hunger, as it desires meat, and Thirst as it desires drink. So it ought to be,
where there is Spiritual life, after this Spiritual food, wherein we have both
Spiritual meat, and Spiritual drink, Joh. 6.55, For my flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed. And our appetite after it ought to be quick, and
strong: We should be able to say as Isa. 26.9, With my Soul have I desired thee
in the night, and with my Spirit will I seek thee early. i. e. I have most
affectionately desired thee, in my most retired thoughts, and so I resolve to
do. That Is the sense: For when the Soul is said to do that, which nothing else
but the Soul can do, it imports the strongest and highest actings of the Soul
in doing it. Now, though that which has been said already might be sufficient
thus to quicken this appetite. That there is no other food for our Souls but
this; That they must feed upon it, or starve: Yet I shall farther add this:
That we deliberately consider with our selves, What work God requires of us,
every day; and that we labor, with our hearts, to do it as we ought. The work
of every day is great, in respect of the inward exercises of grace, when not
clothed with any outward duty: As, To live by faith: To sanctify God in our
hearts: To walk in the fear of the Lord: And when we awake, to be still with
God; setting the Lord always before us, etc. The external work of every day, is
great also: The duties of Religion: The duties of our particular Callings, and
Relations. All these ought to be done, so as to approve the sincerity of our
hearts to God, and find acceptance with his Majesty. 2 Cor. 5.9, Wherefore we
labor, that whether present, or absent, we may be accepted of him. The Apostle
speaks of Epaphras, that he labored earnestly in his Prayers; Col. 4.12. And
we are required, To do with our might, whatsoever our hand finds to do,
Eccles. 9.10. Now hard labor gets a Man a stomach, makes him both hungry, and
thirsty. It will do so, in a spiritual sense, when we set our selves to make
something of Religion: To work, and walk with God every day, as we ought; we
shall be even constrained to cry out, Who is sufficient for these things? We
shall see, we need more spiritual food, for the nourishing, and strengthening
of our Souls. This will quicken our spiritual Appetite after Christ, That we
may be more and more strengthened in our inward Man by his Spirit, Ephesians. 3.16.
That we may be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10.

(2.) That in applying our selves to this food, we manage the matter for our
Souls, as discreet persons do, in making provisions for their Families, when
the Market Day comes: They consider whether there be Bread-corn enough in the
House, or whether any thing else that is necessary be wanting; and so,
according to their ability, they provide. So ought we to do in this case, we
ought to consider what our Souls stand most in need of, that they may prosper.
Some days we may find, we most of all want strength against one corruption;
some days more strength against another. Some days we stand in more need of one
grace, and sometimes of another: suppose of Faith, or Repentance, Meekness or
Patience; and accordingly we ought to apply our selves to our spiritual food,
the Lord Jesus, for nourishment, and strength in that particular. Christ
expects this, that we should be sensible of our particular wants: We read Luke
18.35, 36. that a blind Man hearing that Christ passed by that way, cried out,
Have mercy upon me, O Son of David. And verse. 40, 41. Christ asks him, what he
would, that he should do unto him. Christ knew what he would desire; but he
would have him to particularize his wants. Thus we ought to apply our selves to
Christ, with a sense of what we want in particular. And because (as I told you)
all in Christ is some way or other, for our spiritual food, both Christ in his
Person, and Christ in his Offices: We should apply our selves to that in
Christ, which may most of all relieve our faith in seeking after that
particular supply, which, for the present, we see we need, whether it be in his
Person, or in his Offices, either as Priest, or Prophet, or King. When we know
there is such a thing in such a Cupboard, when we go to it, the next way to
find what we seek for, is to go to the Box, wherein it is.

(3.) What dispensation soever we are under; what mercy soever we have
received, or are receiving; what cross soever we are exercised withal, or is
likely to come upon us; what Ordinances soever we address our felves to God in,
we may spread the matter before God, and tell him our case, and our dependence
upon him; and pray most for the sprinkling of the blood of Christ upon all,
that for the merit of his blood, it may be blessed unto us, so as it may afford
some spiritual nourishment for our Souls; the power of his Holy Spirit working
with them, and in them, and by them. It is he alone that teaches to profit,
Isa. 48.17. David knew this, and therefore he prayed, That he might feel the
power of God in all, Psalm. 62.1, 2, 3.

(4.) Do this daily, as the matter requires; Nature will decay, if not daily
repaired. The Egyptian who had eaten nothing for three days, and three nights,
was faint, but when he had eaten, his spirit came to him, 1 Samuel 30.12. So it
will be with the new Nature, as Rev. 3.2. The things that are ready to dye, if
not fed with fresh supplies, Phil. 1.19. It was a sore affliction, which made
the Church forget to eat her bread, Psalm. 102.4. It is some strong corruption,
that makes us forget our spiritual bread, as they did forget their resting
place, Jer. 50.6.

I conclude all with this. Our needs, if we be sensible of them, we cannot but
acknowledge, are very great, every day. That invitation, and encouragement is
for every day, which we have, Prove. 9.5, Come, eat of my bread, and drink of my
wine: And Cant. 5.1, Eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved.
Therefore, come and eat every day, as we desire that every day our Souls should
prosper.

SERMON IX.
A Third thing which I shall take notice of, as necessary for the health and
welfare of the Body, which I intend now (as the Lord shall assist) to apply
to the Point in hand, is this; That we be well clothed. God has given to every
living Creature some kind of clothing, or other: Even to the Birds of the Air,
and the Beasts of the Field. They could not endure the extremity either of
heat, or cold without it. Adam and Eve when they were at first created, needed
no clothing, but their own innocence; when they needed it, God provided it for
them, before they did for themselves, Genesis 3.22. Cold, if extreme, is very
prejudicial to Man's health, and may be so to his life. Paul reckons it among
his great sufferings, 2 Cor. 11.27, -- in cold, and nakedness. Therefore up and
down in the Scripture, we find it spoken of, as a commendable act of charity,
To cloth the naked, Isa. 58.7. Act. 9.30.

This is one thing then we ought specially to mind, as ever we desire our Souls
should prosper, that (as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.3.) we may not be found
naked. Now, the Scripture tells us, what the Garment is, wherewith the Soul
that prospers, must be clothed, Rev. 19.8, And it was granted unto her (the
Bride, the Lamb's Wife) that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and
white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints. This fine
Linen, this Righteousness ((...)) comes under a double consideration.

1. The Righteousness which is wrought for the Soul by Jesus Christ himself, in
his own Person, and is imputed to every Believer.

2. The Righteousness that is wrought in the Soul, by the Spirit of Christ, and
is inherent in every new Creature. The one may be called, The outer garment,
the other, The inner garment of the heart. So far as the Soul is clothed with
this double garment of Righteousness, so far it prospers, and no farther.

Something must be said to each of these.

1. Of that garment of Righteousness, which Christ has wrought for the Soul.
This is that White garment Rev. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me, -- white
raiment, that thou may be clothed. This is the only garment that gives a
title to Heaven, Isa. 61.10, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my Soul shall
be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he
has covered me with the robe of righteousness. This is not like Readiness Armor,
that was not fit for David; it will fit every Soul, that really feels the want
of it, and indeed, and in truth, is willing to put it on; and therefore, we are
exhorted, Romans 13.14, To put on the Lord Jesus Christ.

In prosecuting of this Point, a few words to each of these Particulars. 1.
Consider the materials whereof this garment is made. 2. That it is of absolute
necessity that it be put on, else the Soul cannot prosper. 3. How it is to be
put on. 4. What influence it has into Soul-prosperity, when it is put on.


(1.) For the first of these, the materials whereof it is made, briefly thus.
It is the Obedience of Christ, as Mediator, in doing, and suffering what God
the Father appointed, and which he accepts in the behalf of all those, who are
clothed with it; so as, upon that account, they are delivered from the sentence
of Eternal Death, which they had righteously deserved; and are accepted as
righteous, unto Eternal Life, of which they were utterly unworthy.

Observe then these two things.

1. That God the Father accepts it, as full and perfect satisfaction to his
Justice, for what ever was appointed for them to suffer by way of punishment,
and curse for sin. It is said, 1 Pet. 2.24. That Christ his own self bare our
sins in his Body, on the Tree. i.e. The punishment and curse due for sin. With
this God the Father is well pleased, so that the Sentence of Condemnation shall
never be executed upon the Soul that is clothed with it. And this he accepts
as a valuable consideration for all the wrong that their sins have done him,
Ephesians. 4.32, -- forgiving one another, even as God, for Christ's sake, has
forgiven you. It is said, 1 Pet. 4.8. that love to our Brethren covers a
multitude of sins. i.e. It does not strictly take notice of, but in silence
passes by many failings of others; especially those that concern our selves.
But this covers All, so that no notice is taken of them, so as (according to
the sentence of the Law) to curse, and condemn such a Soul, Jer. 50.20, In
those days, and at that time, says the Lord, shall the iniquity of Israel be
sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not
be found; for I will pardon them whom I reserve. The book is crossed, all the
black bill, that otherwise would have been brought in against it, whereof it
could not have answered one of a thousand ( i.e. none at all) is crossed. Well
then might David say, Psalm. 32.1, Blessed is the Man whose iniquity is covered.

2. God accepts it, in the behalf of all those that are clothed with it, for
all that is required by way of perfect obedience to the Moral Law. It is said,
Romans 10.4, Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness. Christ, i.e.
Christ, and his Righteousness is the end of the Law, i. e. the perfection of
the Law. Now the end of the Law was, to invest those that perfectly fulfilled
it, with a Righteousness that would give a true right, and title to Eternal
Life. But this the Law cannot do, by reason of Man's weakness, being utterly
unable to fulfill it; so that it is become a killing Letter, the ministration of
death, and condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. Now Jesus Christ by his obedience, has
brought about this perfection of the Law, perfectly fulfilling the
Righteousness, which the Law required; for love is the fulfilling of the Law.
Now Jesus Christ loved the Lord with all his heart, and with all his might, and
his neighbor as himself. He failed not in the least of what was due either to
the one, or the other. This he did, and none but he could do it; For though one
sinful act in thought, in word, or deed, did break the Law, yet it is not
fulfilled, but by perfect conformity unto it; and such a conformity there was
in the obedience of Christ, Joh. 8.29, -- I do always those things that please
him.

This is the first Particular. The Materials whereof this garment of
Righteousness is made; with which, if the Soul be not clothed, it cannot
prosper, as we shall see by and by.

2. The Soul that is not clothed with this Righteousness, cannot, while it
remains so, possibly ever be in a capacity of prospering. For sin has made
such a dreadful breach between God and Sinners, that he stands upon this: That
though he will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy; the motive is only from
the good pleasure of his own Will. Eternal Life, with all that is antecedent to
it, and preparative for it, is his own gift: Yet, I say, God is absolutely
resolved upon this, that he will have his Justice satisfied for all the wrong
that sin has done him. He has also magnified his Law, and made it honorable,
Isa. 42.21. Therefore he will have all the demands of the Law fully answered;
and obedience thereunto perfectly fulfilled; else no spiritual good shall be
given forth to any Soul, so as to make it live, much less to prosper, Isa.
59.2, Your iniquities have separated between you, and your God. Jer. 5.25, --
your sins have withheld good things from you. Now this is done, by Christ's
Righteousness alone. Therefore, it is of absolute necessity that it be put on,
else the Soul cannot prosper.

3. The Garment of Righteousness is put on, only by a believing Soul, Romans
3.22, Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto
all, and upon all them that believe.

(1.) Upon every believing Soul, that being acquainted with the way of God, in
bringing Sinners into a state of grace, and mercy; and knowing that God is
just, and Righteous, as well as Merciful; knows that he cannot find acceptance
with God, but he must be righteous, Hab. 1.13, Thou art of purer eyes then to
behold evil --

(2.) Upon every Soul that knows, that every righteousness will not serve the
turn, but it must be such, as the pure eyes of the glorious Majesty of God can
see no defect in, Gal. 3.11, That no man is justified by the Law, in the sight
of God, it is evident.

(3.) Upon every Soul that knows and bewails the imperfection of his own
righteousness; and knows he has reason to do so; though he were sure he had as
much of all the graces that accompany Salvation, as ever Abraham, or Isaac, or
Jacob had. If this were all, this Soul knows, it would not avail him to stand
before the Righteous God. No, his infinite wrath would come upon him, for all
that, and confume him, Job 15.14, What is Man, that he should be clean, or he
that is born of a Woman, that he should be righteous? 1 Samuel 6.20. Who is able
to stand before this holy Lord God?

(4.) A Soul that knows all this in some measure, and that the Righteousness is
such a Righteousness as God will accept of, and so adventures his Eternal state
upon the merits thereof; resolving, however Christ deal with him, in his
strength, to keep fast his hold there, and to live and dye adhering unto, and
depending upon him. This Righteousness is upon every such a believing Soul.
This Faith (though it may be more then a believing Soul knows) has put on this
righteousness, therefore it is called. The righteousness of faith, Phil. 3.9.
The sins of a Believer are put upon Christ's account, and Christ's
righteousness upon his, 2 Cor. 5.21. Faith being the only grace that receives
it, as being peculiarly fitted for it; for no Man was ever accepted as
righteous before God for that, which he did himself; but by receiving that
which Christ did for him. And Faith is the only receiving grace. Love lays out,
but Faith receives, Joh. 1.12, To as many as received him, etc.

4. The clothing of the Soul with this Righteousness, has a great influence
into Soul prosperity. For consider,

1. This is that Righteousness alone, that answers all doubts, and fears, for
want of such a righteousness, as might give acceptance with God, as to Eternal
Life, so as to that, how vile soever they have judged themselves, yet being
clothed with it, they stand without blame before God, Col. 1.22, In the Body of
his flesh through death, to present you holy, and unblameable, and unreprovable
in his sight. This alone satisfies Conscience; and well it may, for it
satisfies God himself. In this, all the Scripture-Saints, in all Ages, have
rested, being clothed with it. Abraham before the Law, Romans 4. David, under the
Law, Psalm. 32. And Paul under the Gospel, Phil. 3.9.

2. This is that garment alone, in which there may be access with boldness,
into the presence of God, even at the last day, 1 John 2.28, And now, little
Children, abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and
not be ashamed before him, at his coming. Therefore much more in this day, Ephesians.
3.12, In whom we have boldness, and access with confidence, by the faith of
him. For this is a Righteousness wherewith (we may warrantably say so) God is
more highly pleased, and which (of the two) finds more acceptance in Heaven,
then the righteousness of the blessed Angels, that never sinned. For their's is
but the righteousness of a Creature; This is the Righteousness of God, Jer.
23.6, -- This is his Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our
Righteousness.

3. This is Everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9.24. In this, Christ ever has
appeared, and ever will appear in Heaven, in behalf of all those, that come to
God by him; and remains still of the same Eternal efficacy, for the applying,
and forth-giving of all the price of his Blood, all that thereby is purchased,
for the health, welfare, perfect and Eternal prosperity of the Soul, 1 John
2.2. And he is the propitiation for our sins, etc.

Now lay all these together, and let them be well weighed, and it will be
granted, because it will be found, that when once the Soul comes to have any
degree of good hope, through grace, of its interest in it, and that it is
clothed with it, that Soul will experimentally find, that this, above all
things else, has a powerful influence into its spiritual welfare, and
prosperity. For this keeps life in faith, and heart in hope; and enables the
Soul to live in the exercise of them both, and in the exercise of Repentance,
and keeps the heart warm with love to Christ. In the exercise of which graces
(as has been showed) Soul-prosperity does consist, and is much promoted, 1 John 3.3, And every one that has this hope, purifieth himself, as he is pure.
Zech. 12.10, I will power -- the spirit of grace, and supplication, and they
shall look on him, whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him. --
Luke 7.47, -- Her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much. 2
Cor. 5.14, 15, For the love of Christ constrains us, etc.

Therefore, as ever we desire that our Souls should prosper, let us be much in
the meditation of the Materials whereof the garment of this Righteousness is
made, that we may distinctly understand it; and let every humbled Sinner,
wrestling against the workings of his unbelief, and making out after an
interest in Christ, adventure to apply it, and to receive it, as that which is
freely offered unto him, Rev. 22.17, And the Spirit, and the Bride say, Come:
and let him that hears, say, Come. And let him that is athirst, Come; and
whosoever will, let him take the Water of life freely. And so put it on, though
by a weak and trembling faith; and continue still to do it, that so in due
time, when the only-wise God sees it best for us, we may know we have it. This
is the way to find rest to our Souls.

For consider but these two things.

(1.) That as the imputation of Adam's sin, was the original of all
ungodliness, and the undoing of all our Souls; so the imputation of this
Righteousness to the Soul, and the clothing of the Soul with it, is the
original of all the principles of godliness, which are the life, and prosperity
of the Soul; for by the merit of his death, Christ purchased them all; and by
his intercession, and pleading this, he applies them all.

(2.) Consider this: That it is as great, yea and greater satisfaction to
Christ himself, to see an humbled, conflicting Soul receive it, put it on,
apply it, and plead it, for what grace and mercy soever it stands in need of; I
say it is a greater satisfaction to Christ himself to see such a Soul do it,
then it is to the Soul it self, that does it; though he know he has done it,
so as is accepted, Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the travail of his Soul, and be
satisfied. He accounts all the travails of his Soul, all his sufferings, all
his obedience to the Law satisfied for, in this.

And thus much of that Garment of Righteousness which is wrought for the Soul,
by Christ himself.

2. The Soul that prospers must be clothed with the Garment of Righteousness,
wrought in the Soul, by the Spirit of Christ. The righteousness wrought in the
Soul, is the same with that which is called Saving grace, and true holiness. It
is called Righteousness, because it is the impression of God's Righteousness
upon the Soul, in the exercise whereof, the Soul works unto God, as the
chiefest good, and utmost end, by a right rule set in the Word: and therefore
often expressed by Vprightness, and Sincerity. Every Soul that is clothed with
the outward garment, the Garment of Righteousness wrought for him; is also
clothed with the inward Garment of Righteousness wrought in him; though all are
not so well clothed with it, as some are; but in some measure All are. For
these two garments though they are distinguished, yet they are always worn
together, and never divided. Where Christ is Righteousness to the Soul, he has
wrought this Righteousness in the Soul. He that puts on Christ, puts on The New
Man, which after God, is created in righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians.
4.24. Hence it is, that when those, whose Souls did prosper, are said to be
righteous Persons, as Noah, Genesis 7.1. Abel, Matthew. 23.35. Abraham, Isa. 41.2.
Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. And Lot, 2 Pet. 2.8. his Soul is said to be a
righteous Soul. And when it is said, That the righteous shall shine as the Sun
in the firmament, Matthew. 13.43. And enter into Eternal Life, Matthew. 25.46. We
must understand it, that they were clothed with both these Garments, both that
of Righteousness wrought for them, and that of Righteousness wrought in them.
And whereas it is said, 1 Cor. 6.9, That no unrighteous person can enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. We must understand it of those, who have not the double
clothing of Righteousness: He that has not both, has neither: And he that
has the one, has the other. And so far as a Man knows, that he is clothed
with the One, so far he knows that he is clothed with the Other: and he that
questions either, will question both. He that is in doubt that he has not the
One, is in doubt that he has not the Other.

In the prosecuting of this point, something had need to be said to each of the
four Particulars. 1. I shall show what the garment of Righteousness wrought in
us, is; The materials whereof it is made. 2. I shall show, that without this
garment, whatever profession is made of interest in that other Garment of
Righteousness, which is wrought for us, the Soul cannot prosper. 3. That the
better the Soul is clothed with this garment, the more it does, and the better
it will prosper. 4. Some Directions in reference to the clothing our selves
with, and well using of this Garment.


(1.) What this Garment of Righteousness wrought in us is, or the Materials
whereof it is made. Ye may take this brief description of it.

It is that Heaven-born Principle of spiritual life, which contains in it, the
whole seed of God, the universal principle of godliness, enclining the heart
seriously to endeavor, that every known truth may be heartily submitted unto;
every gracious principle exercised, every corruption mortified, every duty
performed, every infirmity bewailed, the conversation in all things rightly
ordered, every Providence improved, and all as in the sight of God.

Ye see this garment is made up of several pieces, I can do no less, and I
shall do more then speak a little to each of them.

(1.) It is that Heaven-born principle of spiritual life, which contains in it
the universal principle of godliness. As Original sin is a universal principle
of Corruption, levening throughout the whole lump of Man's nature: So this
principle of Righteousness wrought in the Soul, graciously renews the whole
Man, though not wholly. The new Creature is born at once, though it grows by
steps and degrees: Therefore every one that thinks, or desires to be clothed
with it, must put on the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.10. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7,
Giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue, etc. Col. 3.12, 13, Put on as
the elect of God, -- bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, etc. That Is health, when the whole Body thrives.

2. It is such a principle, as inclines the heart seriously to endeavor to
submit to every known truth, though contrary to former apprehensions, Act.
11.18, When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God,
etc. Joh. 1.47, -- Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. Weigh it
well, and I suppose you will find the reason of it to be this, why Christ so
highly honors him. Philip came and told him, We have found the Messiah.
Nathaniel being possessed with prejudice, argues against it: Can any good thing
come out of Galilee? Come, and see, says Philip; and he did so. He took the
right way to be informed: And notwithstanding his prejudice, is glad to find
out the truth; and accordingly acknowledged it. That Christ indeed was the
Messiah. This was a Man in whom the Heaven-born principle wrought according to
its nature, endeavoring to submit to every known truth.

(3.) That every grace may be exercised in its season. Herein, as in all things
else, it willingly complies with the whole Will of God, which when the
principle is infused, commands the exercise, 1 John 3.23, And this is his
commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and
love one another. It is the exercise of faith, and love that is there enjoined.

(4.) Every Corruption mortified, Gal. 5.24, They that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh, with the affection, and lusts. They are said, To have done
it, because it is part of their every days work.

(5.) Duties performed: Of our general Calling, what relates to the worship of
God, so as God may be served acceptably, Heb. 12.28, -- Let us have grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence, and godly fear. And Duties
of our particular Calling, and that with diligence. The same principle that
inclines, To be fervent in Spirit, (in duties of worship) inclines not to be
slothful in the business of our Calling, Romans 12.11. And not only with
diligence, as some are; They work hard, but do not pray hard. This is not
diligence upon principles of Conscience. But this Heaven-born principle we are
speaking of, inclines to diligence, upon a Religious account, that we may abide
with God, in our Calling, 1 Cor. 7.24, Doing the work thereof heartily, as unto
the Lord, Col. 3.23.

(6.) Conversation rightly ordered. When the root of it is in the heart, but
the fruits of it are to be expressed in our conversation, Phil. 1.11, Being
filled with the fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, etc. Those
that have this principle within, have this character, That they are upright in
their conversation, Psalm. 37.14, -- to slay such as be of upright conversation.
This is that which the Apostle means, by walking with a right foot, Gal. 2.14.
Ordering our steps aright, Prove. 4.26, Making even paths for our feet, Heb.
12.13. That is, that one action bear proportion to another, and all good,
according to the rule, Gal. 6.16. Not turning aside to any crooked path. Psalm.
125.4, 5. In order to this, those that do indeed mind their Soul-prosperity
will, or should propound to themselves these three questions. 1. An liceat? May
I do this, and not sin? 2. An deceat? Is this becoming a Christian? May I do
this, and not wrong my profession? 3. An Expediat? May I do this, and not give
offense to others?


This Heaven-born principle, let it have its full liberty of working, it will
incline the heart to this. And this is the way to order the conversation
aright: So as to inherit that promise, Psalm. 50.23, To him that orders his
conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.

(7.) Providence improved. Psalm. 107.43, Whosoever is wise, and will observe these
things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Puzzled, and
astonished such a Soul may be sometimes, at the strange dispensations of God,
but not offended, so as to face about. Still he holds on his way, in the paths
of Righteousness, Mic. 6.9, The Lord's voice cries unto the City; and the Man
of wisdom shall see thy Name; hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.

(8) All this in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 2.17, But as of sincerity, but as of
God, in the sight of God, speak we in Christ. That God may be pleased, 1 These.
4.1. And we approve our selves to God, 2 Cor. 5.9.

2. It is impossible the Soul should prosper, or be indeed in any capacity of
prospering that is not clothed with it: For where this Inner is not, the other
Outer garment is not. It is so, as I told you, that this Garment of
Righteousness wrought in us, and that the Righteousness wrought for us, are
never separated the one from the other, so that the Soul that is altogether
destitute of it, is in a Christless state, naked, and destitute of all
spiritual clothing, Rev. 3.17. God, at first, sent forth Man into the World
completely apparelled with it, being created in righteousness and true
holiness: but Satan, by his subtilty, stripped him of it, and he became naked,
Genesis 3.7. And thus he continues, till by the powerful Word and Spirit of
Christ, his heart is made willing to come unto Christ, to receive him, rest
upon him, and abide in him. Till then, he is utterly destitute of all the
materials of this garment. Some indeed, of whom there may be some hopes that
they have obeyed the Call, and are come to Christ, are but poorly clad, even
half naked, which is a sad sight. But these have none at all, they are naked
all over, though insensible of it. They have no life at all, nothing of this
principle, 1 John 5.12, He that has not the Son, has not life.

3. The better the Soul is clothed with this garment, the more it does, and the
better it will prosper. For consider.

(1.) The more we have of this Garment of Righteousness, the more the Soul is
brought into and preserved in its right temper: The health of the Body consists
much in its right constitution, when it is not so oppressed with corrupt
humors, but that it can relish its ordinary food, and can do that work that is
to be done, by God's appointment, wherein it is set, and is not indisposed, by
sickness, or weakness. Into such a right temper, this righteousness, when the
principles of it are exercised, does bring the Soul. This prevails against the
ill humors the Soul is subject unto. It prevails against those noisome lusts
that war against the Soul, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 2.11. It is compared
Ephesians. 6.14. to a Breast Plate, which if it be good, preserves the principal
parts of the Body; the Breast, wherein the vital parts of Man are closely
coucht together. So this righteousness preserves the principal part of a
Christian, it keeps the Conscience pure, the Soul undefiled; so far as it is
exercised, it will keep a Man from his own iniquity, Psalm. 18.23. That which by
nature he was more prone unto, then to others.

(2.) The more we have of it, and the better we are clothed with it, the more
the Soul will be carried after God. It raises the heart above all worldly
enjoyments, so that it cannot settle upon them, as others do, Psalm. 4.6, 7,
There be many that say, who will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light
of thy countenance upon us. When David's heart was brought into its right
temper, he could really, and truly, and ^^th much warmth, and strength of
affection, say, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth,
that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.25, 26.

(3.) The more we have of it, the more the Soul is fitted for Communion with
God. By the first principles of it, a man is brought into a saving relation to
God: but by their exercise and increase of it, it is fitted for a more sensible
Communion with God. There must be a suitableness between neighbors that enjoy
Communion together. Now the more we have of this, the more suitableness there
is in us, to the holy nature of God, 1 John 1.7, But if we walk in the light as
he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another.

(4.) The more we are clothed with it, the greater worth and excellency is put
upon all natural, and civil righteousness. Every action, so much as of this
principle is exercised in it, so much it turns to the welfare, and prosperity
of the Soul. Duties of the second Table are turned, as it were, into duties of
the first, as Heb. 13.16. To do good, is a duty of the Second Table; and
Sacrifice (whilst it was a part of God's worship) a duty of the First. But
when in doing good to others, we act upon principles of Religion, and what we
do to Man, is out of ^^ve to God, and out of respect to his authority over us,
and to testify our thankfulness for his goodness unto us; it is through
Christ, acceptable to God, as an act of Religion, and so as advantageous to
keep the Soul, in a thriving, prospering frame, Jam. 1.27, Pure Religion before
God and the Father is this, to visit the Fatherless, and Widows in their
affliction --

(5.) The more we have of it, the better evidence we have for Heaven; True,
though we had as much as any Man living, it could not be our Plea for Heaven.
The honor of that is reserved to the righteousness which Christ has wrought
for us: But it is our evidence, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8, I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness. And when we are under the apprehensions of death, next
unto the Righteousness of Christ; this will be of greatest use unto us, when
all things else fail us, Isa. 38.3, Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect heart --

4. A few words of the last part. Some Directions in reference to the
well-clothing of our selves with, and well using of this garment. Consider:

1. The desires of our Souls should be working still after this clothing. There
is a blessing promised to them that hunger, and thirst after Righteousness,
Matthew. 5.6.

(1.) These desires ought to be unlimited. Our desires should be stinted as to
what is necessary and comely for the clothing of our Bodies, but not so, after
this clothing for our Souls, we should be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, as the phrase is, Phil. 1.11. This is the most genuine property
of this principle, To desire (as we are still under the command) to grow, 1
Pet. 2.1, 2, -- That ye may grow thereby.

(2.) These desires ought to be ruling desires. Whatever in the World the Soul
desires with greatest earnestness, our desires after this Righteousness must
rule it. If desires after any thing else be prejudicial to these desires, they
ought to be mortified, as irregular desires. Yea a gracious heart will bless
God, if he cross them in it, as heartily as ever David did, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33,
Blessed be the Lord -- which has sent thee this day to meet me: And blessed be
thy advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from coming to
shed blood -- Still maintaining that resolution, that we ought not, we cannot,
we dare not do any thing against this Righteousness; but for it, 2 Cor. 13.8.

(3.) These desires ought to be constant, and not as some (as we say) when they
are in a good mood; but as David says, Psalm. 119.20, My Soul breaks for the
longing that it has unto thy judgments, at all times. The righteousness of
many is but like the morning dew, Hos. 6.4.

2. This garment should be put on, and worn every day; otherwise, the moths
will eat it; the corruption that is in the heart, will spoil the beauty,
comeliness, and usefulness of it. Therefore, though it was a vanity in that
rich Man to cloth himself in Purple and fine Linen every day; yet it is our
duty, that our Souls be clothed every day, with the best garments we have, Luke
1.75. That we should serve God, In holiness and righteousness, all the days of
our life: And then, every day to our dying day; that so they may be best at
last: For this garment is like the garments of the Children of Israel in the
Wilderness, which were never the worse for wearing; no more is this: For to him
that uses well that which he has, more shall be given, Matthew. 25.29.

3. If at any time there be any rent made in this garment, it must be
immediately stitcht up, and mended, else the rent will be made worse. Thus
understand me. If there be any rent made in our humility by pride; in our
meekness by our passionate Distempers; the like may be said of every piece of
this garment, of every particular grace; this must be made up, by humbling our
selves before God; applying our selves to Christ both for pardon, and more
supplies from his fullness. So David, when his faith failed in the exercise, as
he confesses, Psalm 73.2, My feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh
slipped. He had lost his standing by faith, and judged by sense, ver. 2. For
this, (immediately upon the discovery) he humbles himself, ver. 21.22, Thus my
heart was grieved -- so foolish was I -- And this made up the rent, and then
his heart was carried out, as strongly after God, as ever, verse. 25.26, Whom
have I in Heaven but thee, etc.

4. By way of encouragement, To get all we can, and to preserve all we get, and
to make the best use of it, every day, consider,

(1.) Though this garment be not such a covering, as that garment of
righteousness, which Christ has wrought for us, for that covers from the guilt
of sin, yet this is a covering garment too.

(1.) From that dis-respect, which meanness of Birth, or breeding, which
deformity of Body, or a poor, and low condition in the World, may, and often
does, expose a Man unto, especially with those that value Men by the outside.
See what a covering this is, Prove. 12.26, The righteous is more excellent then
his neighbor. Heb. 11.38, Of whom the World was not worthy; though they were
worth little, or nothing in the World.

(2.) Though this garment covers not the guilt of sin before God, yet it covers
the nakedness caused by sin, before Men. Sin makes a Man naked to his shame, in
the eyes of Men: as Exodus 32.25, And when Moses saw the people that they were
naked (for Aaron had made them naked unto their shame, before their Enemies.)
As whatever deformity there is in a Man's Body is seen by those that see him
naked. This garment when it is worn, as it ought to be every day, covers this
nakedness. As Humility covers the nakedness of Pride; Meekness, the nakedness
of rash, and unadvised Anger, stirred up, either without cause, or when there
is cause, without measure. Sobriety, the nakedness of Intemperance; A free, and
liberal disposition, the nakedness of Earthlyly-mindedness, and Covetousness.
Self-denial the nakedness, of Self seeking, etc. Rev. 16.15, Blessed is he that
watches, and keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and Men see his shame.

(3.) In some sense, it covers the nakedness caused by sin, from the eyes of
God; so far, that though he hates the sin, and often corrects severely for it,
yet when he sees this garment, he is not extreme to mark against such, Psalm.
130.3, The most righteous Soul sins in many things. Yet, If any Man sin, we
have an advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the Righteous, 1 John 2.1.
It is this righteous Soul, clothed with the garment of this Righteousness
wrought in us, over which Christ will cast the Garment of that Righteousness,
which he has wrought for the Soul, Psalm. 32.2, Blessed is the Man, to whom the
Lord imputes not iniquity. But, who is this Man? The next words tell us, In
whose spirit there is no guile. i. e. That has this righteousness, which
Christ works in the Soul. Therefore as we desire, that our Souls should
prosper, let us gird this garment close about us; and follow after this
righteousness while we live, and we shall be able to lay hold upon Eternal
Life, when we dye, 1 Timothy 6.11, 12. And then Soul-prosperity will be perfected.

SERMON X.
4. THere is yet one thing more for the preservation of Bodily health;
especially for those that lead a sedentary life, and that is moderate exercise,
for the motion, and stirring of the body. For thereby Natural heat is stirred
up, and increased: Ill humors abounding, are lessened, and spent: Concoction,
and distribution of meats farthered. The contrary evils, by excessive neglect
thereof, coming upon many, like an armed Man.

Answerable to this, there is an exercise, which is exceeding profitable, and
every way much more necessary for the welfare, and prosperity of the Soul. It
is the exercise of godliness, that is good for all things: upon that account,
the Apostle exhorts Timothy unto it, whose Soul he desired might prosper, even
as his own, 1 Timothy 4.7, -- Exercise thy self rather unto godliness.

I have, several times, touched on this point, already, since this subject was
entered upon, and somewhat largely, in the third Discourse upon it. And very
often heretofore (as there has been occasion) for several years bypast, as
possibly, some have taken notice of. And to use the words of the Apostle, 2
Pet. 1.13. I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up,
by putting you in remembrance of it: For this, in a manner, is all in all, for
the welfare, and prosperity of your Souls: which I should rejoice to be, in
the least, instrumental, to promote, among you. I think I may say it (and say
it truly) that if any thing, at any time, saddens my thoughts of death, which
my age, and many infirmities give me warning of, and command me to prepare for;
this is like to be it, To think that I leave no more of you (for ought can be
discerned) to be spiritually alive; and therefore in no present capacity to be
prospering in your Souls. And of those that are (as it may be hoped)
spiritually alive, they are so few, that mind this, as the one thing necessary,
that the principle of Spiritual Life in them, might be lively, active, and
vigorous, that so their Souls might prosper, one day after another, one day as
well as another, and most of all at last. Ye may think of this, when I am with
you no more. Ye will pardon this short digression, and not take that with the
Left Hand, which is offered with the Right;

But to speak to that, which is now to be spoken to, I mean, The exercise of
godliness; which (as I said) will be really found to be all in all, for the
promoting of Soul-prosperity. Though something has been said to it, since I
entered upon this Text: yet the fuller handling of it, I reserved on purpose
till now, conceiving it would most properly fall under this head.

The Particulars to be spoken to are these. 1. What the exercise of godliness
is, and wherein it does consist. 2. Wherein it ought to be exercised. 3.
Wherefore we ought to be so much in the exercise of it, if we desire our Souls
should prosper. 4. Then a few things by way of argument, to quicken us, to be
up, and doing in this matter, as we desire the Lord should be with our Souls,
either while we live, or when we dye.


1. For the first of these. What it is.

Ans. It is the setting of every principle of godliness about, and keeping it
close unto its proper work, that so it may bring forth its proper and peculiar
fruit in the season thereof. As it is said of every Man, that God appoints him
his proper work, Mar. 13.34. So he has for every principle of godliness, and
the highest acting thereof, is the perfect work of that grace.

I shall give you some instances.

1. In Patience, Jam. 1.4, Let patience have its perfect work. The proper work
of that grace, is quietly, willingly, and cheerfully, to submit to the holy,
and righteous will of God, in all afflicting Providence. Where, and when there
are no trials, nothing to be suffered, nothing to be endured, there is no work
for patience: As there was none in the state of Innocence, and will be none in
the state of Glory. But in this present state, God has several ways to
exercise, and several ways does exercise this grace in his people; so as there
are few or none, but fall into diverse trials, and temptations, as is more then
intimated, Jam. 1.3. As that poor youth in the Gospel, fell sometimes into the
fire, and sometimes into the water. So God changes his dispensations: The
trial is sometimes in this, and sometimes in that. Now, I say, the proper work
of Patience under them all, how many soever they be, of what kind soever they
be, how near soever they come, how deep soever they cut, and how long soever
they continue, is to keep silence before the Lord, to sanctify his name in
all, as holy and righteous, faithful and gracious; believingly waiting for a
blessed issue to all. This is the proper work of patience, and in doing this
consists the exercise of patience as we see it exemplified in Job cap. 1, etc.

(2.) Faith has its peculiar work, 2 These. 1.11, The work of faith, with
power. And the proper work of faith, is to receive Jesus Christ, and rest upon
him, and his righteousness, for a full discharge from the guilt of every sin,,
and for acceptance with God as righteous, unto Eternal Life: And to carry the
Soul to Jesus Christ daily, for supplies of grace, for strength against
temptations from the World, the Flesh, or the Devil; and for ability to perform
what is daily required of us, in those relations wherein we stand, and in that
condition, wherein we are, so as we may be enabled to hold on cheerfully, and
comfortably in the race that is set before us, notwithstanding all the
difficulties, we meet with in our way: Thus it was Prophetically promised of,
and to the believing Jews, Hab. 2.4, The just shall live by his faith; and to
all believers to the end of the World: Still keeping heart in their hopes, for
the accomplishment of whatever God has promised; notwithstanding all the real
improbabilities, and seeming impossibilities, that be in the way. This is the
proper work of faith, and in doing of this, consists, the exercise of faith.
Thus did Abraham, Romans 4.19, 20. For we walk by faith, not by sight, 2 Cor.
5.7. We do not enjoy all that is in the promise but in the exercise of faith,
we wait for it.

(3.) Repentance has its proper work too; which is to bring forth fruits meet
for Repentance, suitable to the nature of such a gracious principle, Matthew.
3.8. Such as heart-humbling, and afflicting the Soul with godly sorrow, for
sin; joined with the turning of the heart against every known sin, so as we may
attain to the sense of God's reconciliation with us, and keep our hearts in a
reconciled frame toward his holy Will in all things. This is proper work for
this grace, and in doing hereof, consists the exercise of Repentance. See this
exemplified, Jer. 31.18, 19, -- turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou
art the Lord my God. Surely after I was turned, I repented, etc. And Psalm. 51.

(4.) Self-denial has its proper work. To deny self-will, self ends,
self-interest in all worldly concernments whatsoever, and how far soever they
stand in oposition unto, or in competition with, the command, interest, and
glory of Jesus Christ. And are inconsistent with the Conscience of that duty,
which we owe unto his Majesty. This is the work which God has appointed unto
this grace, Luke 9.23, If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself. And
in doing of this work, this grace is exercised. See it exemplified in Moses,
Heb. 11.24, By faith Moses, when he came to years, refused to be called the Son
of Pharaoh 's daughter.

(5.) The grace of Fear, has its proper work, to keep the heart in an holy awe
of God, sensible of his all-seeing eye upon us, regulating all our thoughts,
words and actions, as becomes the presence of so holy a God. This is the proper
work for the fear of God, Prove. 8.13, The fear of the Lord is to hate evil. And
in doing of this work, consists the exercise of this grace, 2 Cor. 7.1, -- Let
us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh, and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. i.e. In the exercise of this grace. See this
exemplified in Joseph, Genesis 39.9, How can I* do this great wickedness, and sin
against God. And in Nehemiah, chap. 5.15, But, so did not I, because of the
fear of God.

(6.) The grace of Meekness has its proper work: And that is in the just
moderation of the passion of anger; preventing, or quickly cooling, and
subduing, all undue heats; so as this unruly passion may never be moved without
cause, or when there is cause, not without measure, to walk in the exercise of
this grace. And because there are so few examples of it among the proud,
froward, unbroken-hearted generation of Men, we are called upon to learn it of
Christ, Matthew. 11.29, Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly of heart. This
being such a grace, as no Christian, without the exercise of it, can possibly
walk worthy of his Calling, Ephesians. 4.2, I -- beseech you, walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness, and meekness.

(7.) The grace of Charity has its proper work: Ye have it described, 1 Cor.
13.4, 5, 6, 7. In doing this work, the grace of Charity is exercised, and the
command of Christ so far fulfilled, who commands us, To walk in love, Ephesians. 5.2.
And requires it of us, 1 Cor. 16.14, That all our things be done in charity.

These few instances show, what it is to live in the exercise of godliness. Ye
see, here are gracious principles in the heart, and gracious actings, suitable
thereunto, and issuing from them. And these are the things wherein the
prosperity of the Soul consists.

2. Wherein ought we to exercise our selves unto godliness?

Ans. In every thing we do: Whether we eat, or drink, or whatever we do, we
ought to do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Though we are necessitated
often to change our Actions, yet we ought never to change our End. This must be
always the highest, and most supreme End. And this can never be done, but in
the exercise of the principles of godliness. It cannot be expected, that I
should instance in every thing. I shall instance in those things that may be
most comprehensive. Consider then,

1. That these principles ought to be exercised in those spiritual outgoings,
and holy actings of the inward Man, which are immediately acted upon God, and
raise the heart Heavenward; though not drawn forth in acts of instituted
worship.

(2.) As they are drawn forth, exercised, and, as it were, clothed with the
external duties of Religion; or any thing else, wherein the visible part of
Religion (as far as it may be visible to Man) does consist.

1. For the former. In the spiritual outgoings, and holy actings of the inward
Man. So as to do something toward the performance of that great duty injoined,
both in the Old Testament, and in the New. Isa. 8.13, Sanctify the Lord of
hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. 1 Pet.
3.15, But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts. But how is this? That God, who
is the God of all grace, should sanctify all those whom he sets apart for
himself. And that he should sanctify his own name, in vindicating it, from
those low, and unworthy thoughts that Men have of him: This is somewhat easy
to be apprehended: But how shall a poor Creature laden with many infirmities
do it? For the present, I cannot think of any better way then this, even in the
spiritual outgoings, and actings of the principle of godliness, immediately
upon God himself, so as to compose our affections, thoughts, purposes, desires,
resolutions, and all the inward workings of our hearts in a suitable proportion
to those glorious discoveries, that God has made of his name, as infinitely
holy, wise, just and gracious, present every where, seeing all things,
observing all things, ordering all things according to the counsel of his own
will. The instance, the Prophet Isaiah gives, makes for this: For when he had
called them to their duty, To sanctify God in their hearts, he directs them
how to do it. [Let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.] Thus the
Prophet Habakkuk sanctified God's Name, in his heart, drawing in all his hopes,
and all his comforts, into God alone, resolving to rejoice in him, when he had
nothing else to rejoice in, Hab. 3.17, 18. according to Phil. 4.4, Rejoice in
the Lord always: and again I say, Rejoice. This is that which is required in the
first, and great Commandment; wherein indeed (if we consider it well) we shall
find all the other Commands wrapped up; for always before we do any thing amiss
against God, we either think amiss of God, or think not of him at all.
Therefore as ever we desire our Souls should prosper, let us be careful, at all
times, in all places, thus to sanctify God's Name in our hearts. And whatever
our condition be, how sad soever it be with us, still both think well, and
speak well of God, as such a God ought to be spoken of, and thought of. Satan
has baffled many eminent Persons, when they have been under trial, with
temptations contrary to this. Jeremiah, in his distress, lets fall such sad
words as these, Chap. 15.18, Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable,
which refuses to be healed? Will thou be altogether unto me, as a liar, and as
waters that fail? And David being (as we say) under hatches, said in his haste,
(though upon second thoughts, he called in his words again) that he had served
a hard Master, and that all his exercising himself unto godliness, had been in
vain, Psalm. 73.13.14. It concerns us therefore, (as we desire our Souls should
prosper) so to exercise the principles of godliness, we have received, that
even when the dealings of God with us, are most contrary to our desires, and
hopes, to think of God according to that representation which he makes of
himself, Exodus 34.6, 7, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, etc. We
may observe, that David, (when he acted like a Man after God's own heart) did
so, Psalm. 119.68, Thou art good, and do good: Yet how it was with him, in
his outward condition, we see verse. 61. The bands of the wicked have robbed me:
and verse. 28. My Soul melts for heaviness. So Psalm. 31. aster he had
expressed his sad condition, verse. 9, 10, I am in trouble; mine eye is consumed
with grief: My life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing: Yet he
breaks out into admiration; verse. 19, O, how great is thy goodness, which thou
have laid up for them, that fear thee? And yet he saw but little of it laid out
upon him; Psalm. 52.1, -- the goodness of God endures continually.

This is the first way proposed, wherein we ought to exercise our selves unto
godliness.

2. I proceed to the second thing proposed. How these principles of godliness
ought to be exercised, as they are to be drawn forth, and clothed, as it were,
with the External duties of Religion, or any thing else wherein the visible
part of Religion (so far as it may be made visible to Men) does consist.

And here note two things, as to External duties of Religion. 1. That we ought
to exercise our selves in them all. 2. That these principles of godliness ought
to be exercised in them all.


1. For the former. Those that really mind, as we all ought to mind the
prosperity of our Souls must compass them all, and take them all in, in their
walk, though not all at once, nor all, it may be, every day, but all in their
Season. It is a dangerous, yea a desperate thing, To perform one duty, that we
may dispense with our selves in the neglect of another. As to perform duties in
conjunction with others; and give our selves, on that account, a dispensation
to neglect personal, and private duties. It is our duty (as 1 Timothy 5.21.) to do
all things without partiality; especially all things in Religion. This I desire
may be considered. There is no Duty or Ordinance of Gods own appointment, which
he has not blessed at one time, or other; to some one or other, of his People;
so as sometimes they have found him in one, when they have not found him in
another. As for instance, God has been found in Prayer, private Prayer, Psalm.
34.6, This poor man cried unto the Lord, and he saved him out of all his
troubles. In praying with others, Act. 4.31, And when they had prayed, the
place was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. In private
reading of the word, as the Eunuch, Act. 8.27, 28. In hearing the word, Act.
2.37. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. While the two Disciples that went to Emmaus, were
discoursing of Christ, Christ himself drew near to them, and went with them,
Luke 24.15. And their hearts burned within them, while he talked with them by
the way, and opened the Scriptures to them, verse. 32. So in singing, 2 Chronicles.
20.22, And when they began to sing, the Lord set ambushments against the
children of Ammon, etc. That is, He cut them off suddenly, as when Men are cut
off by their enemies that lie in ambush against them; and so accomplished what
was foretold, verse. 17, Ye shall not need to fight in this battle, stand still,
and see the Salvation of the Lord. Memorable is that story of the Protestants
of Mountaban in France, who, when they were besieged (being compelled to take
up Arms in their own defense) always when they went out to fight, went out
singing of Psalms, which was so terrible to the Enemy, that, in the end, when
they heard them singing, which they usually began, before the Portcullis was
drawn up, and the Gates opened, their hearts failed them, and away they would
run, crying out, They come, they come. And as this is true, that there is no
duty, but that at some time, or other, God has been found in it, by some or
other; so they have sometimes found him in one, when they could not find him in
another. Cant. 3.1. compared with ver. 4, She sought him in private duties, and
found him not; then she went to the public, and found him whom her Soul loved.
Daniel was, certainly, a Man of much prayer, Dan. 6.10. and no doubt found very
frequently, sensible acceptance with God; but yet it seems God reserved the
fullest manifestation of his love to him, till, to his daily prayer, he added
extraordinary prayer, with fasting. Dan. 9.3. compared with verse. 23. And it
was so with Cornelius, as ye may see, Act. 10.39.

Thus we see the encouragement is great to take up every duty in its Season.
Experience tells us, that the efficacy of coordinate means is in conjunction.
As for the preservation of bodily health, there must be both Food, and Raiment,
and Rest, and the use of Physic sometimes, as the matter requires; no one of
these is sufficient. So it is here. Let none think, his Soul will prosper,
though he use this, or that Duty; if any one known to be a Duty, be willingly
neglected in the season thereof. It is the policy of Satan to separate one duty
from another, that so we may not be uniform in our endeavors. Few are so bad,
as to use no means at all, and few are so faithful to God, and their own Souls,
as conscienciously, to use All. This half-doing, proves many a Souls undoing.
Therefore as we desire that our Souls should prosper, we should, as Caleb,
follow fully after God. And in all, as Psalm. 63.8, Follow hard after God. As
thriving Children do suck, and draw hard sometimes at one Breast, and sometimes
at another.

2. As we ought to exercise our selves in them all; so we ought to exercise the
principles of godliness in them all. A few words to this.

1. In general thus. The principles of godliness ought to be exercised in them
all, so far as God's gracious ends, and purposes in, and by them (so far as
they are revealed to us) may be answered, and attained. I shall instance in
these two.

(1.) This God has revealed as one great end to be carried on, in and by them
all, that this holy and blessed name may be sanctified in them all, Lev. 10.3.
This is done, when the inward frame of our hearts is such, when we address our
selves unto God, as that God himself may thereby see that we believe him to be
a great God, a gracious God, a God in all respects infinitely glorious. This is
due unto him, Psalm. 89.7, God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the
Saints: and to be had in reverence of all them that are about him. And this
David resolves upon, Psalm. 5.7, But as for me, I will come into thy house, in
the multitude of thy mercy: and in thy fear, will I worship toward thy holy
Temple. So far as our hearts attain this temper, so far we answer God's end.
This is to serve him acceptably, Heb. 12.28.

(2.) This likewise God has revealed as his intent, and purpose, that thereby
he may communicate unto the people of his choice, those spiritual gifts and
graces, whereby they may be enabled, to that work he has appointed them, and
be prepared for that happiness, he has promised them. Exodus 20.24, In all
places where I record my Name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.
Psalm. 133.3. For there the Lord commanded the blessing, and life for ever-more.
The attainment of this end should be so deeply engraven upon our hearts, that
as the Be moves from one flower to another, to gather materials for Honey: So
should we from one Duty to another, for supplies of grace, suitable to our
present necessities. This was David's end, Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3, O God thou art my
God, early will I seek thee, etc. For this end, principles of godliness should
be exercised to attain the forementioned end: And if so, we are so much the
more likely to attain this end, the more grace we bring in exercise to a duty,
the more grace we are like to receive in, and by that duty, Matthew. 25.29, Unto
every one that has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance. Thus, in
general.

2. As we desire our Souls should prosper, principles of grace should be
exercised in all the forementioned duties. I will instance only in one, and
that is the duty of Prayer; both because that is, and ought to be our every
days work: We ought in every thing, both great and small, to make known our
requests to God, believing his universal Providence; that as there is nothing
so great that is above his Power, so there is nothing so little that is below
his Care. This we are injoined, Phil. 4.6, Be careful for nothing; but in every
thing, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving; let your requests be made
known unto God. And also, because the better this duty is performed, the better
all other duties will be performed: It has an influence upon them all, and is
often put for the whole worship of God, Romans 10.12, 13, Whosoever shall call
upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved. And besides, all the Providence of
the day are sanctified by it, 1 Timothy 4.5, For it is sanctified by the word of
God, and Prayer. But then we must know this, that if we desire prayer may be a
sanctifying duty to us, our hearts must be sanctified for it, and grace must be
exercised in it. I shall not mention now, what graces must be exercised, but
only in general, so that the heart may be wrought off from all evil frames, and
composed, and fixed, the inward thought thereof gathered in, and the affections
raised, so as feelingly, and awfully, believingly, fervently and sincerely we
may power out our desires unto God, and be able to say, as Lam. 2.18, Their
heart cried unto the Lord. And Psalm. 119.145, I cried with my whole heart, hear
me, O Lord. This is one thing intended in that expression of Praying in the
spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. The spirit of a Man is an active thing, and whatever it
does, good, or bad, it does to purpose. Such gracious workings of the Soul in
prayer, are the very Soul of prayer; and then the Soul prospers by prayer,
Jude, verse. 20, And ye, Beloved, building up your Souls in your most holy
faith, praying in the Holy Ghost. Then are our Souls edified, when we thus
pray, in the exercise of the graces of the Holy Ghost.

This is all I shall say to the former of the two last things proposed. That in
order to Soul-prosperity, grace ought to be exercised, in all the External
Duties of Religion.

I now proceed to the latter. As ever we desire our Souls should prosper, the
principles of godliness ought to be exercised in all other things, wherein the
visible part of Religion, so far as it may be made visible to Men, does consist.

And here I shall only speak a little to three particulars.

1. In all Providence. It is seldom or never seen, that any of the people of
God continue in the same condition, as to the things of this World, any long
time, without some alteration, more or less. God is pleased, many times, to
bestow many good things upon them, which he never intended they should always
enjoy, Psalm. 102.10, -- Thou have lifted me up, and cast me down. Now, as we
desire our Souls should prosper, principles of godliness should be so
exercised, as to bear all such changes, so as to avoid the snares, and
temptations accompanying them. To this height St. Paul attained, that he could
thus manage all conditions, Phil. 4.12, I know both how to be abased, and I
know how to abound, etc. Want, or no want; having nothing, or possessing all
things, make no change of the frame of my heart. So he says, I am instructed
in every thing. This is the excellency of the principles of godliness, That
though truths, and falsehood; things morally good, or morally evil, are at such
a distance, that the same principles cannot turn to either side: yet Poverty
and Riches, a full Estate, and a poor and mean Estate, liberty or restraint are
not at such a distance, but that the same gracious principle can apply it self
to both the one, and the other; and may be exercised so as the Soul may
prosper, and may be spiritually a gainer, both by the one, and by the other.
And as we desire our Souls should prosper, these principles ought to be
exercised, that we may find it so. For so far as corruption mingles with the
Providence we are under, so far, if there be any grace in the heart, it will
be so far from thriving, that it will wither, and decay. It is observed, that
when things go well with a Man in his outward condition, if corruption be not
kept at a distance from it, the Man will grow proud, and passionate; high, and
self conceited: Earthy, and Selfish, impatient of being crossed in any thing;
having, as he finds, wit enough for every thing else, and that therefore every
one must stoop to him. And so, when things go cross, and, as the usual phrase
is, The World frowns upon him; if his corruptions be not kept at a distance
from his condition, the Man will grow fretful, discontented, unthankful for
what he has, envious at those, with whom it is better then with himself: And
(to speak all in a word) sin will sit light, when crosses fit heavy. Therefore,
it is of absolute necessity, that, as ever we desire our Souls should prosper,
this (with the uttermost of our care) should be looked unto.

1. That when the good hand of God is for us, so as all our Goings out, and
Comings-in, the beginning and ending of every thing we undertake, succeeds
well, according to our desires, that then these principles of grace ought to be
exercised, that nothing come betwixt Jesus Christ, and our hearts, but that the
more we have of the World, the more our hearts may be in Heaven. As Jacob was
then desirous to be in Heaven, when God had given in the unexpected sight of
his lost Son, his best Son, and that as great as he was good, Genesis 46.30, And
Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me dye, since I have seen thy face. Jam. 1.10,
Let the rich Man rejoice in that he is made low, because as the flower of the
grass he shall pass away. [when he is made low.] i. e. When his heart is low
and meek, humble and patient, when his condition is full, and high; though
perhaps not so in it self, but as compared with others, who had the same
opportunities for the World, that he had; reckoning of all that he has, but as
food that perishes; but as a flower that fades: accounting this as the
chiefest excellency of the plentifulness of his Estate, that he has a larger
opportunity of doing good; and of doing more for God, then he could have had,
if his portion had been as little, as once it was. Thus to exercise grace, To
bear such full a cup without spilling, argues not only the truth, but also the
strength of grace; and is the way to make the Soul prosper, as fast as the
Estate.

2. In all our civil converse with Men, principles of godliness must be
exercised, with righteousness, and sobriety, Tit. 2.12, Yea with all courtesy,
and kindness. 3 Epist. of John, v. 6. Gaius is exhorted, in his kindness to the
Brethren, that traveled up and down, about the affairs of the Gospel, when he
brought them onwards on their Journey, to do it after a godly sort. That which
the Apostle presses on aged Women is the duty of all, both old, and young,
Tit. 2.2, That the aged women be sober, grave, temperate. Zech. 14.20, 21, In
that day shall be written upon the Bells of the horses, Holiness to the Lord:
And every Pot in Jerusalem shall be holiness to the Lord. This was written upon
the Highpriests Mitre, as he was a type of the great High Priest, the Lord
Jesus, who was holy, and undefiled. That which Men are thereby taught is this,
That the meanest things of common use, should be holily used: In all we do, we
should act as persons consecrated to God; that are not our own, and therefore
we ought to glorify God, with our Bodies, and with our Spirits, which are
God's, 1 Cor. 6.20. Even in our natural actions, Whether we eat, or drink, or
whatever we do, we should do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Now I have
told you already (and I told you the truth) that God is not glorified (it will
appear so one day) but when the principles of godliness are exercised. Neglect
hereof, even in these natural actions, is charged upon Men, as their sin. Jude,
ver. 12. That they did feed without fear.

3. In all companys: So as where ever we are, we always keep our hearts under
the awe of God, Ephesians. 4.29, Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your
mouth. Col. 4.6, Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with Salt. But
of this, more under another head, in the next use of this Point.

SERMON XI.
I Come now to the third Particular; The reasons why these principles of
godliness ought to be stirred up: So as to be set about, and kept close to
their proper work; that they may bring forth their proper, and peculiar fruit,
in due season, and that in order to Soul-prosperity.

1. This is that which specially falls under the authority of Command. Observe
it, and you will find, that when the Scripture speaks to professing Christians,
the principles are supposed to be infused; and the exercise is specially
required, as Ephesians. 4.24, Put on the new Man, says the Apostle. Not by
Conversion, that is supposed; for he owns them as faithful Brethren in Christ,
Chapter 1. verse. 1. But put them on, for operation, for exercise. The new Creature,
the first day of its birth, is a new Man: It is born at once, though it grows
up by degrees; and every particular principle of godliness is a member of this
new Man. Put them on so, as ye may have them ready, and nothing may be wanting,
when Providence calls for their exercise; so that Your loins be girded about,
and your lights burning, Luke 12.35. Thus also, Ephesians. 6.10, Put on the whole
armor of God. Be ready furnished to break through whatever snares, and
temptations ye may meet withal, in running that race, which God has set before
you. Several instances were given, wherein this is required of us, in the third
exercise upon this subject.

2. They are given for this very end, Ezekiel. 36.27, I will put my spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my statutes. Therefore that inference is
rational, Gal. 5.25, If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.
These spiritual principles are that spiritual stock, which God has given us,
to drive on our spiritual trade withal, for converse with God, which cannot be
attained, unless they be exercised. As unless principles of Reason be
exercised, which are for making human society useful, there can be no dealing,
nor profitable converse between Man, and Man. 1 Samuel 21.14. What shall I do
with a Madman, said Achish, for so David feigned himself to be; and therefore
he drove him away. This should be seriously considered of, for these two things
we find.

(1.) That for neglect of this, in not answering God's end herein, that those
that have lived most highly in the favor of God, have met with many a brush
from the hand of God, Luke 1.20, Thou shall be dumb, and not able to speak --
because thou believe not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.
Number. 20.12, Because ye believed not me, to sanctify me in the eyes of the
children of Israel: therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into the
Land, which I have given them. It was not for want of faith, either in the one,
or in the other, that the hand of God was so heavy upon them, but for want of
the exercise of faith.

(2.) This we find, That though it be true, God will reward every good Man, for
every good work: And he has a Book of Remembrance, for that purpose, Mal. 3.16.
Yet this is true, That how good soever, a Man's actions be, in their own nature,
and for the kind of them, there is no reward to be expected from God, farther
then grace is exercised in them. Almsgiving, Prayer, and Fastings are good
works, and commanded of God, but if these principles of godliness be not well
exercised in them, see what becomes of them, Matthew. 6.2, 5. And on the
contrary, Whosoever shall give to drink, unto one of these little ones, a cup
of cold water only, in the name of a Disciple; Verily I say unto you, he shall
in no wise lose his reward, Matthew. 10.42. This should have some weight with us,
that God will call us to account, what spiritual Trade we have driven with our
spiritual stock, Luke 19.15.

3. The neglect of this exercise is that which Satan watches for, and will be
sure to improve to his advantage, and our prejudice, Matthew. 13.25, While Men
slept, his enemy came, and sowed tares among the wheat. It seems he knows our
slumbering fits, yea without doubt he does: for he knows not only what orders
Men observe in their walks abroad, what company they keep, what discourse they
have with them, and how they spend their time, but also, much of what they do
within doors: For though he have not a key to the heart (that is God's
prerogative) yet he stands, as it were, in the Room by. Though he knows not our
thoughts, yet when they are clothed with words, as when we are at Prayer, he
observes our Petitions, and Confessions; and can make a shrewd guess thereby,
what the frame and temper of our hearts are. It cannot be denied, but that he
may know as much by us, as any Man may do, and more too. Now Solomon says,
Prove. 20.5, Counsel in the heart of man is a great deep. i. e. The thoughts,
designs, intentions, and purposes of Men are a great deep, like deep waters,
where it is a great way to the bottom; a Man cannot easily dive into them, to
find out what they are; but an understanding Man, by prudent and constant
observation of them; of what they do, and what company they keep, of the words
that fall from them, and of their looks, and gestures, may give (and sometimes
have given a conjecture not much amiss of them. And if so; then Satan much
more, who goes about continually, studying always as he goes, observing, and
diligently considering Men's temper, and dispositions, Men's calling and
conditions; and as he finds things, so he casts about what is fit to be done to
such or such a Person; how to fit the Key for the Lock, and which way he may
assault him so, as his temptation may take; and where he may have most
advantage against him. And this he knows, that so far as he can discern that
spiritual slothfulness creeps upon a Man, and that the exercise of these
principles is neglected, so far the day is his own. He knows there is nothing
but this armor of God, whereby he can be resisted; and this too as put on, and
kept in exercise, Ephesians. 6.13. Upon this account, unless we are willing to betray
our Souls unto him, that was a murderer from the beginning; we ought to be
constant in this duty, and put on this armor of God, both on the right hand,
and on the left, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 6.7.

4. It is in the exercise of these principles, each of them, in their season,
that the protecting, supporting, comforting presence of God, may (upon
Scripture-grounds) be expected, and enjoyed in every condition, so as our Souls
may prosper in it, and by it, whatever it be. We read, Jer. 9.24. That the Lord
exercises Loving Kindness, Judgment, and Righteousness in the Earth, and
that, in these things he delights. Now those whose hearts are most busied in
this exercise, have the clearest grounds from the word, that he will exercise
them in their behalf, 2 Chronicles. 16.9, The eyes of the Lord run to, and fro,
through the whole Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose
heart is perfect toward him. His Providential eye is over them, Job 36.7, He
withdraws not his eyes from the righteous. He looks to them by night, and by
day, that no evil touch them, Job 5.19, He shall deliver thee in six troubles;
yea in seven shall no evil touch thee. i.e. So as to hurt thee. Psalm. 105.15,
Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. i.e. In their spiritual
estate, and what concerns, the welfare of their Souls. That Is secured to them
that live in the exercise of the love of God. That Is the good that Text speaks
of, Romans 8.28, All things shall work together for good, to them that love God.
The good whereby their Soul prospers. But let a Man through the prevalency of
his corruptions, disuse himself from this exercise, and suffer these principles
of godliness to lie, as it were, Bedridden, choked, and oppressed by the
principles of ungodliness, and his own Conscience (if it be awake) will give
check to his hopes, if he expect that God should favor him with success,
either in his goings out, or comings in, the beginning or ending of any thing
he takes in hand: God may do it, and often does it; but it is more then any
such person has ground to expect, or can expect, with any good hope to speed,
or plead with God for. It is observable, what we have in the forementioned
place, 2 Chro. 16.9. in the latter part of the verse. Herein, says the Prophet
to the King (to King Asa it is that he speaks) thou have done foolishly:
Henceforth, thou shall have wars. Now wherein was it, that he had done
foolishly? See ver. 7. It was in this, that he had not exercised his faith,
that great principle of godliness, in relying upon the God of Israel, but had
relied upon the King of Syria.

5. There is no way like this, for the growth and exercise of these principles,
wherein, as I told you in the explication of the point, the prosperity of the
Soul consists especially: It is well known, they do not always prove the
richest Men, that set up with the greatest stocks, but those tha^ exercise
themselves with diligence, honesty, and integrity in their Callings, though
they begin with little. And likewise, The best Wits do not always prove the
best Scholars, unless their study be answerable to their parts. It is even so
in this case: For certain it is, that less degrees of grace, well managed in
daily exercise, will thrive and grow, when greater measures neglected will
wither, and decay, Prove. 10.29, The way of the Lord is strength to the upright.
Via ad pietatem est intra pietatem. But for this, I refer you to what was
spoken in the third Exercise, on this subject. Only I add, that as Natural life
becomes more lively by action, even so are the principles of spiritual life,
Joh. 1.49, Believe thou for this? Thou shall see greater things then these,
said Christ to Nathaniel. This is according to Luke 19.17. Thou have been
faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten Cities.

6. The reality of the in-being of these principles in the Soul, is by this
means best discerned; if ever they be sensibly felt, it is when they are most
in exercise. When is a Man more likely to know that he has faith, and that he
has Repentance, then when he is actually believing, and repenting? Consider
well, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 9, 11. In the fifth and sixth verses, he exhorts not only
to add more degrees, but also to exercise those principles they have received.
In ver. 9. he tells them, that if they do not, they may, in all probability, in
a little while, not be able to see any thing of God, that is sanctifying and
saving in their Souls; they may forget that ever they were purged from their
old sins, and question all again. But if they add the exercise to the
principle, then (as verse. 11.) an entrance may be administered to them
abundantly into the Kingdom of Heaven. It is worth our noting, that the
Scripture speaks of some that are far from the Kingdom of Heaven, touched with
no care of Religion at all, but, like Gallio, care for nothing of that nature,
Ephesians. 1.13; Ye who were sometime afar of, are made nigh. Of others, that come
near, but never enter, taking up with a half-conversion, Mar. 12.34, Thou art
not far from the Kingdom of God. Of others that enter, but with great
difficulty, 1 Pet. 4.18, And if the righteous scarcely be saved -- they make a
hard shift to get thither. But others, as ye see, in this of Peter enter in
with full Sail, triumphantly laying hold on Eternal Life. They are those
(though perhaps all those may not) that add the exercise to the principle. They
know in themselves by what they find working, stirring, and acting in their
Souls, that as it is said of those, Heb. 10.34, -- knowing in your selves, that
ye have in Heaven a better, and an enduring substance: that they have a right
and title to Heaven, and when they dye, they go to take possession of it.

Thus I have given you, what I had to say, as to the reasons, why we ought to
exercise our selves to godliness, and that by this exercise, Soul-prosperity is
promoted, and that it cannot possibly prosper without it. I shall only add two
words more.

1. For the time past, we may, if we look back, see the reason, why though
these principles be of a thriving, growing nature, yet for all that, they do
not prosper as they ought. It is either because we deceive our selves, and
think we have them, when there is no such matter, or that we neglect the
exercise of them, so as not to do that work, and bring forth those fruits they
were given for; but we do with them, as that slothful Servant did with his
Talent, Matthew. 25.18. he dug in the Earth, and hid his Lord's money: For
which he received his deserved doom, verse. 28, Take the Talent from him.
Professing to live in the spirit, but walk only as Men, who have nothing but
nature in them, as the Apostle charge it upon them, 1 Cor. 3.3. This is the
great reason, if not the only reason, why they thrive no more. For to him that
has (i.e. uses what he has) shall be given, Matthew. 25.29.

2. For the time to come. If all that has been spoken on this point, prove not
like water spilt on the ground; if there be no cause to complain, as Isa. 49.4.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught. But that some
good impressions are made, and abide upon your hearts, as I hope there do, at
least upon some; and that ye really and heartily mind your Soul-prosperity,
then, in the strength of Christ, resolve upon this exercise: And that ye may
make something of it, and have good success in your endeavors, resolve, every
day, to apply your selves to Christ, and pray as seriously, awfully, sincerely,
affectionately, and believingly for ability to do it, as ye would do for
Salvation it self; for the enjoyment of him in Heaven, whom your Souls love.
Even as David (or whoever it was that composed the 137 Psalm) resolved to pray
for Jerusalem, ver. 5.6, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, etc. Better forget to
pray for our daily bread, then for this. That Is but for the welfare of our
Natural life, this is for the welfare of our spiritual life.

Consider therefore.

1. That these spiritual principles, and spiritual ability to exercise them,
are distinct mercies, and separable the one from the other; as ye have heard
from the instances given of Zachary and Moses. Moses so eminent for meekness,
Job for patience, Abraham for faith; though they abounded in the principle, yet
sometimes they came short in the exercise.

2. That a heart, and ability to exercise them, is to be had from Christ; and
from him alone, Joh. 15.5, For without me, ye can do nothing. We read Psalm.
51.14. what David engages unto; My tongue shall sing aloud of thy
righteousness: And ver. 15. we may see where he looks for strength to make good
his engagement, O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy
praise. Here Paul had it, Phil. 4.13, I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me. And he exhorts all, that when they have put on the whole
armor of God, and have every grace ready for exercise, yet then to Be strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10, 11.

3. Let this be thought on too: That though we ought to rest upon Christ, for
his assistance herein, as if he were to do all, and we our selves were to do
nothing at all, yet we ought so to stir up our selves, and exercise our most
serious thoughts, and endeavors herein, as if no help at all were to be
expected from him, Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your salvation with fear and
trembling. For it is God who works in you, both to will, and to do.

Thus I have showed you (the expressions in the Text leading me that way) that
what in a natural way is necessary for the health, and welfare of the body,
that, in a spiritual way, is as much necessary for the health, welfare, and
prosperity of the Soul. And this I have showed in four Particulars. I told you,
when I entered first upon this use: That when, in the use of these means, all
begins to be well within, the Soul begins to thrive and prosper. Yet it may,
possibly, have its fainting fits; sometimes by reason of continued afflictions;
sometimes from a deep sense of invincible infirmities. For the more of these
gracious principles there are in the heart, and the more they are exercised,
the more sad impression the least failing makes upon the heart. No marvel if it
be with such as it was with Jonah, when the waters compassed him about, and the
reeds were wrapped about his head; then, he said his Soul fainted within him,
Jon. 2.5, 6, 7. And David had like to have done so, when false witnesses were
risen up against him. I had fainted, says he, unless I had believed to see the
goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living, Psalm. 27.12, 13. Now, as when
Nature is almost spent, and bodily strength fails, there is need of relief by
some comfortable Cordials. As that poor Man, 1 Samuel 30.12. being faint, David's
Men gave him something, and then his spirits came to him, which, it seems, were
departing from him. Now, as the Lord Jesus was very tender over those, that
came from far to hear him, and had been three days with him, lest they should
faint in their way homeward, and therefore he wrought a miracle to relieve
them, Matthew. 15.32. So without doubt, he is as tender to prevent Soul-fainting,
Isa. 57, 15, 16, -- to revive the Spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones. For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always
wroth, for the spirit should fail before me, and the Souls which I have made.
Something therefore must be said to this. Therefore, though I cannot descend to
particulars, (that would be too great a work) I shall only give some general
rules, which may be indifferently applied to all cases. Let then every Soul
that is ready to faint:

1. Do as Jonah did, in the place before quoted, chap. 2. ver. 7, My Soul
fainted within, and I remembered the Lord. Remembrance implies dependence, Psalm.
20.7, But we will remember the name of the Lord our God. This is prescribed for
a fainting Soul, Isa. 50.10, Who is among you, that fears the Lord, and
obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light?
Let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Now we must know
that the Name of the Lord, may have reference to that name, Exodus 34.5, 6, 7,
The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, etc. This is very chearing. For
a fainting Soul may sometimes take encouragement from an Attribute of God, when
he doubts whether he may touch with a promise, or no. Or it may have reference
to that name, Jer. 23, 6, The Lord our Righteousness. Certainly, when a Soul
sees nothing in it self whereby it can challenge any interest, in any ground
of comfort: yet because there is grace, and mercy enough in the name of God,
and merit, and righteousness enough in the Son of God; such a Soul may see
ground enough to resolve, as Isa. 8.17, I will wait upon the Lord, that hides
his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. Psalm. 34.5, They
looked to him, and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed. Though all
the clouds were not presently scattered, yet they had some light. And a little
Candle in a dark room, in a very dark night, though it do not make it day, as
the Sun does, yet it is some reviving, till the day do appear.

2. Let it be well considered, what God imposes upon fainting Souls, as one
great part of their work, in such a season, Psalm. 55.22, Cast thy burden upon
the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall never suffer the righteous to be
moved. When thou art ready to faint under thy burden, cast it upon me, says
the Lord, Matthew. 11.28, Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden.
Do then, as David did, he hears the command, speaking in general unto all,
Psalm. 27.8. Seek ye my face; and sees himself concerned in it, and therefore
resolves, Thy face, Lord, will I seek. It is observable, that when Christ
commanded the blind Man to come unto him, Mar. 10.49, Be of good comfort, say
those that were bystanders, the Master calls thee. Such commands, in this
case, may sometimes be of greater use then promises; and more effectual for the
silencing of doubts, and discouragements. For the best are apt, when in the
dark to dispute their interest in the promises, till they have disputed
themselves out of all heart to close with them. But Commands are not to be
disputed, but obeyed: See Luke 5.5. There was discouragement enough: They had
fished all night, and caught nothing; nevertheless, say they, at thy word, we
will let down the Net.

3. Taking it for granted, that a fainting Soul, in obedience to the command of
Christ, is willing, if able, to come to Christ, and to close with him: And if
the question were put to him, as it was to Rebecca, Genesis 24.58, Will thou go
with this man? He would answer, as she did, I will go. And hearing the terms,
whereon he promises to be ours, can, and does yield unto them, as heartily as
Laban did to Jacob's, and desire as he did, Genesis 30.34, I would it might be,
according to thy word. Then let every fainting Soul know his right, and claim
it, and know his duty upon this account, and set about it.

1. Know his right, and claim it. What Is that? Even the promises of God, as his
inheritance; for those that yield to Christ's terms, are received into the
number of his adopted Children, Joh. 1.12. And if Children, then Heirs, Romans
8.17. Heirs of what? See Gal. 3.29, And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
Seed, and Heirs according to the promise. We read that Naboth would not part
with his inheritance, neither for the good will, nor ill will of King Ahab. Let
Souls ready to faint, do so in this case, with the Promises, which in Christ,
are their undoubted inheritance, 2 Cor. 1.20, For all the promises of God, are
in him, yea, and in him. Amen.

2. Let Souls subject to fainting, know their duty upon this account, and set
upon the performance of it.

(1.) They ought to acquaint themselves with the promises. They are so great,
and precious, as the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 1.4. that there is not one of those
that really close with Christ, though they be of the lowest form, but may find
that which is most suitable to their condition, in some promise or other that
is within their reach, though some may seem to be above him. Though a little
Man upon low ground cannot reach the top of the Tree, yet he may get hold on
some of the lower branches, and there may find some fruit, which may somewhat
relieve him. As suppose, he cannot find comfort in that promise, Rev. 2.7, To
him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Tree of Life. No, he is afraid
of being overcome, that promise is too high for him, it is above his reach; yet
he may reach that, Rev. 22.17, And let him that is athirst, come. And whosoever
will, let him take of the Water of Life freely. If not that, Matthew. 5.8,
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Yet they may reach that,
ver. 6, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be filled. And that, Joh. 6.37. All that the Father has given unto me,
shall come unto me: and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.
And let every fainting Soul know this, that so far as he has an interest in
any one promise, so far he has an interest in every promise, as to that
blessing in it, which is absolutely necessary to salvation. For as there is a
chain of duties, Matthew. 22.37, 38, 39, 40, Thou shall love the Lord thy God --
This is the first and great Commandment, and the second is like unto it, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self: On these two Commandments hang all the
Law and the Prophets. Not this or that; but this and that too. So there is a
chain of Privileges, Romans 8.30, Whom he did predestinate, them he also called;
and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also
glorified. And a chain of Providence, Romans 8.28, All things work together for
good to them that love God. So there is a chain of Promises; they are all bound
together in one bundle in the Covenant. That great, and precious promise [I
will be thy God] comprehends them all. Therefore it is said, Rev. 21.7, He that
overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my
Son.

(2.) Let them plead the Promises, Psalm. 119.49, Remember thy word unto thy
Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope. Especially that particular
promise, which contains that particular blessing, which if it were as sure in
their hand, as it is in the promise, the fainting Soul thinks, it would
satisfy. Thus did Jacob, Genesis 32.9, 10, 11, O God -- which said unto me,
return into thy Country -- Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my Brother
-- Thus every fainting Soul ought to do. The promise is that Bond, wherein God
has made himself a Debtor, if not to his Vovenant People, yet to his own
truth, and faithfulness, which requires it of him, that what he has promised,
be fulfilled, and therefore they ought to plead them. This is God's method; he
expects to hear from them, before they can expect to hear from him, Psalm.
50.15, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee.

(3.) Let them patiently wait for the fulfilling of what is promised. If the
thing be of absolute necessity, it shall be given in kind. And so it shall be,
though in it self it be not, yet if God in his infinite wisdom sees it will be
subservient thereunto, and will better promote it, then the want of it will; it
shall also certainly be made good. The Scripture speaks as if God had promised
us nothing, but Eternal Life, 1 John 2.25, And this is the promise that he has
promised us, even Eternal Life. But it is, because all things absolutely
necessary unto Eternal Life are comprehended therein. Therefore wait for it,
because it will surely come, Hab. 2.3. It Is true, there may be silence in
Heaven, and that for a great while, to the prayer of faith; as there may be a
silence very often to the provocations of the generation that is abhorred by
God. But as he will arise in due time to execute his vindictive justice upon
the one, Psalm. 50.21, 22. So he will arise to make good his promises of grace,
and mercy to the other. For God never said to the Seed of Jacob, that they
should seek him in vain, Isa. 45.19. I shall conclude this with that of the
Apostle, 2 These. 3.5, The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and
into the patient waiting for Christ. He had laid down great grounds of comfort
for them, in the former Chapter, verse. 13, 14. And assures them, verse. 3. of
this Chapter, that God was faithful, and would stablish them. They should not
miscarry, nor fail of that which God had chosen them unto; but knowing the
difficulty of waiting, when expected supplies were delayed, especially when
Providence seem contrary to Promises, he prays that the Lord would direct them
into the love of God, and patient waiting for Christ. This is the third
particular, which it concerns fainting Souls to take special notice of.

(4.) Fainting Souls, or Souls often subject to fainting, should endeavor
after a distinct knowledge of the great, and fundamental Doctrine of
Justification.

(1.) In the Meritorious cause of it, which is the obedience of Christ, as
Mediator, in doing, and suffering what God the Father appointed, and which he
accepted in the behalf of all those, to whom it is imputed; so as to discharge
them from the curse of the Law, which they had deserved to be executed upon
them to the uttermost: and to accept them, as righteous unto Eternal Life, of
which they were utterly unworthy.

(2.) That it is God which justifies, Romans 8.33, Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies.

(3.) That the moving cause is Gods free love, Romans 3.24, Being justified
freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus.

(4.) That the means of receiving it, is Faith, Romans 3.22, Even the
righteousness of God, which is by faith of Christ Jesus, unto all, and upon all
them that believe: for there is no difference. These things being well
digested, are great Cordials. For whom he justifies, he glorifieth, Romans 8.30.

(5.) Let such also think of the nature, and efficacy of Christ's Intercession;
and that with thought upon thought. He appears in Heaven for us, Heb 9.24. And
who those are, ye find, Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he is able also to save them to
the uttermost that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them: For what? To give forth unto us, and to apply what he
has purchased, 1 John 2.1, 2. And we may be sure of it, that his Intercession
is as effectual, and can no more be rejected, then his satisfaction, because
both are acts of his Priestly Office.

SERMON XII.
I Now proceed to the third, and last branch of the Use, that has been so long
insisted upon. To exhort those (if there be any such, and I have reason to hope
there are some such) whose Souls do prosper, with whom it begins to be better,
with respect to the frame, and temper, of the hidden Man of the heart, then it
has been: To exhort them, to give all diligence, that it may continue so with
them: That they may not lose the things they have wrought, but receive a full
reward, 2 Epist. of John verse. 8. But keep them in that holy frame, whereinto
the exercise of godliness has brought them.

But before I show what in order thereunto is our duty; I shall premise five
things to be considered.

1. That an absolute settlement of the Soul in the same highth and degree of
this spiritual prosperity, that is by some attained, s rarely, if ever,
preserved for any long time together. There is a tincture of that madness which
Solomon speaks of, Eccl. 9.3, (yea, also the heart of the Sons of Men is full
of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live.) that remains, and
always will remain in the hearts of the best, when they are at best. Paul found
it so, Rom 7.21, I find a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with
me. And Madmen seldom continue in any one temper, any long time together.
Therefore as it is with Men in respect of their outward condition, though all
things may prosper with them, and that for some considerable time together; as
it was with Job; He had his months wherein the Candle of God did shine upon
him, and the secret of God was upon his Tabernacle; when the Almighty was with
him; when his Children were about him, Job 29.2 3, 4. But in all these, we
know, he underwent a great, and sad change; the clouds gathered upon him, and
darkened all his Sunshine. David found it so; his fair weather (as we use to
say) did not last always, Psalm. 30.6, 7. He thought himself settled in his
Kingdom, above danger of opposition, but he found it otherwise; God was
offended with him, hid away his face, and then such troubles came upon him, as
he never dreamed of. Even so it has been, with most thriving and growing
Souls, when they thought they could have said, as David, Psalm. 108.1, O God, my
heart is fixed, I will sing, and give praise: Yet they have found, that even
then it was with them, but as with a Ship at Anchor, which though it be not
driven into the Maine, nor split against the Rocks, yet it is often tossed up
and down, and reels to and fro. Many sad instances we have of this in the
Scripture, that the most gracious persons have not always kept their principles
of godliness in exercise, at the same height; no not those, wherein they have
been most eminent. Neither Abraham his Faith, nor Moses his Meekness, nor Job
his Patience. Even Abraham's Faith, and Moses his Meekness, and Job's Patience,
had their ebbings and flowings. And at this day, the more any Man studies his
own heart, the more he will tell you, that in his own experience, he finds it
so; for many such changes are wrought by the hand of the most high: As in
respect of our natural state, Job. 14.2, He comes up as a flower, and
continues not: So very often in respect of his spiritual frame.

2. As many have experienced strange, and unexpected turns of Providence, in
respect of their outward condition: So no less suddenly or unexpectedly have
they experienced as great changes in their spiritual condition. There are
those, no doubt, can tell you, That having been brought under the influences of
divine grace, and love, so as they have found much inward longing after more
and more enjoyment of God, even then when they found much sweet delight in what
they did enjoy; and this joined with serious resolutions, of keeping more close
to God; and have thereupon hoped, that the worst had been past, that it would
never any more be with them, as it had been. Never should they live (so they
hoped) at such a distance from God, as they had done; nor should their hearts
wander from him, as in times past: Yet after all this, very unexpectedly, like
an instrument in change of weather, have they found themselves, as we say, out
of tune again. As those that dwell by the Seaside do see, that though the tide
be now out, and it be low water, yet upon a sudden all is overflown again.
Besides experience, we have sad instances of this in Scripture, Jer. 20.13.
Having in the words before professed his assurance of God's presence with him,
and protection of him, he now rowseth up his Soul, from his former damp't, and
dumpish condition, to a high degree of lightsomeness of spirit, praising God
for his deliverance from the hands of Pashur, and the rest of his Persecutors
(before he was delivered) out of an hopeful expectation of it, as if he had
already received it. But how long does this last? See ver. 14, Cursed be the
day wherein I was born. A strange alteration, and sudden downfall from such an
height of confidence in verse. 12. and such a degree of comfort, verse. 13. to
such a low dejection of spirit, and strange distemper of mind, as
inconsiderately to curse the day of his birth; and those that brought his
Father the report thereof. A lively pattern this is, of the truth of that which
we are speaking of. An instance not much unlike to this we find in Elijah.
Compare 1 King. 18.18. where he told Ahab with so much resolution; I have not
troubled Israel, but thou, and thy Father's house.] with 1 King. 19.3. when
being threat'ned by Jezebel, He arose, and fled for his life.] What a sudden
change was this? He that durst say to Ahab's face, Thou, and thy Father's house
have troubled Israel; that could fetch down both Fire and Water from Heaven by
his prayers, that durst command the slaying of 450 Priests of Baal: yet he
shrinks at the threats of a Woman, and wishes to be rid of his life, because
he was afraid to lose it. This was a strange turn in that holy Man's spirit.
But so it has been, and so it is, that the pulse of a sick Man, does not more
vary, then the temper of the Soul of a sound, and upright Man: This day,
perhaps, some Communion with God, some drawings nigh in holy duties, some good
hopes, through grace, of acceptance with God, unto Eternal Life: yet within a
while, overcome again with deadness, and darkness, strange flatness and
coldness growing upon the face of the whole Soul again, so as it is nothing the
same it was. Thus we see, that though the state of grace be sure, 2 Timothy 2.19.
yet the workings of grace are variable. The nature of it is unchangeable, but
the degrees of it are subject to many changes, the operations of it to many
alterations. So that though the principles of godliness be always like
themselves, yet the most godly Souls, that prosper most, are not always like
themselves.

3. As there may be such a sad, and sudden change in the most prosperous Soul
that lives; so that may be lost in such a change, which will not be recovered
but with very much difficulty. A Ship may easily be born down the stream, but
it is hardly fetched up again. A Man may lose more strength in a few days
sickness, then can be recovered in many days. I have read of Henry the First,
King of England, a sober, and temperate Prince, that he surfeited with eating a
Lamprey, which cost him his life. Thus one intemperate meal may overthrow the
temperance of a Man's whole life: for the same History says of that King, that
he did seldom or never eat, but when he was hungry; or drink, but when he was
thirsty, yet thus he came to his end. Thus it may be in this matter, which we
are speaking of. Even the Soul that mounts aloft, by the supplies of grace, as
upon Eagles wings, if spiritual drowsiness creep by degrees upon it, and that
it begins to dally with duties, or to dally with sin, it may cost much
spiritual wrestling, and striving with God, much heart-humbling, and mourning
in the sight of God, before it recovers its former height, and heavenly temper.
If a Watch be let fall, and receive a bruise, it must be all taken asunder,
before it be brought to its former exactness, and evenness of motion. Read the
5 chapter of the Canticles, at the beginning; there ye may perceive what hard work
the Church had, in seeking after Christ, before she found him again: We read of
David's first days, as his best days, 2 Chronicles. 17.3. And though it may easily
be proved that he recovered his former stature both in grace, and comfort: yet
it may as easily be proved, that he found it no easy matter to recover either
the one or the other. And this his 7 penitential Psalms do sufficiently prove.

4. Yet for all this, much may be done this way, so as a prospering Soul may
continue in its prosperous state; more then the most careful Man in the World
can do, for the continuance of the prosperity of his worldly estate: A Man may
be looking to, and taking care for the well managing of his estate, and yet
whilst his eye is upon it, he may see it upon the wing, and flying away from
him, as the Eagle toward Heaven, far enough out of his reach. See Job 1.14.
Job's Servants with great care and diligence attended their Master's business,
for the securing his Cattle, and improving his ground, each of them according
to their place, and yet ye know, how suddenly all was lost, so that it came to
be a Proverb, As poor as Job. But there is more certainty of God's prospering
serious endeavors in minding Soul-prosperity. For if the occasions of sin be
watched against one day as well as another; if the first risings of sin be
checked, and suppressed; if grace be exercised suitable to the Providence of
the day; and Communion with God, in the duties of Religion, be made our great
business of the day, so far, and so long as it is so, so far and so long the
Soul will continue to prosper. And why all this may not be done one day as well
as another, no reason can be given. The promise of the assistance of the spirit
for all this, is ready one day as well as another: And God is a God hearing
prayers for all this, one day as well as another. And therefore, what is done
one day, may be done another. It is said of Enoch, Genesis 5.22. That though the
age he lived in were very corrupt, yet he walked with God, and lived in some
degree of eminency in the exercise of the principles of godliness, above others
of the Servants of God, that were his contemporaries, and he had this
testimony, the Spirit of God witnessing, together with his Spirit, That he
pleased God, Heb. 11.5. And it is well known, that the blessed Apostle Paul, as
he began, so he continued, fighting a good fight, finishing his course, keeping
the faith, and living by faith, to his dying day, as he says, Gal. 2.20. 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, And though his outward condition was, for the most part, very low,
yet his spiritual condition was very thriving, and flourishing; though the one
perished daily, yet the other was renewed, 2 Cor. 4.16.

5. Our labors, and endeavors, how much soever we abound therein, will not be
in vain, but be abundantly recompensed, in the blessed fruits, and effects
thereof. When a prospering Soul is carried on with a full gale in its holy
course, the precious influences of the Spirit of God, in, and by the Ordinances
of God, will be fixed, and the word will be an abiding word, and not like those
human Ordinances, the Apostle speaks of, Col. 2.22. which perish in the using.
And as the matter requires, the word which ye hear at one time, will be brought
to remembrance at another time, as Joh. 14.26. and put the Sword of the Spirit
into your hands, so as to resist the assaults of Satan, and discover a
temptation in time of temptation, before the heart be ensnared by it.

(2.) To keep the heart humble, and heavenward, under a confluence of all
worldly comforts. To keep it calm, and well-composed under all provocations
from Men, and afflictions from God, so as to run with patience the race that is
set before us; holding on, till our course be finished. To be much above
distracting fears, in time of danger; all of them being mightily subdued in the
reverential fear, and awe of God; yea to have our thoughts of death full of
comfort, and our hopes of Eternal happiness, full of well-grounded confidence:
To be able to live to God, whilst we live, and to dye to God, when we dye.
These, and many such like, are the effects, and blessed consequences of this,
so far as it prospers. So as all such whose Souls do prosper, see cause daily,
not only to bless their God, but also as it is Isa. 65.16. To bless themselves
in their God, whatever their condition be: Therefore let not these consolations
of God, seem small unto us; but engage us, according as we are commanded, Deuteronomy.
4.9. To keep our Souls diligently, lest we forget the things which our eyes
have seen, and lose those things which our hearts have wrought. These things
being premised, I proceed to the Directions, necessary (as I suppose) to be
observed in this case.

1. Souls that prosper, being through the assistance of the quickening presence
of the Spirit of God with them, well recovered out of that spiritual deadness,
and benummedness their hearts were sunk into, must take heed of Relapses. Sin
(as ye have heard) is the Souls sickness. Therefore as ye ought to take heed,
that there be not any unmortified root of bitterness in you, as Heb. 12.15. So
take heed of relapsing into that sin, or those sins, whether of Omission, or
Commission, whatever they were, which brought your Souls into, and kept them in
that unprospering, and unthriving condition; under which ye groaned, and from
which ye find your selves now, in some good measure, so happily recovered.
Those that are recovered out of a dangerous Disease, if they be not very
careful, may relapse again. And Relapses, though they are not always mortal,
yet they are always dangerous. It is so with the Soul. In Levit. 13.18, 19, 20.
we read, that out of a bile that is healed, there may spring up a Leprosy, a
Disease far more dangerous then the former.

It is a sad, but a true charge upon the Lord's professing People of old, Hos.
11.7. that they were bent to backsliding. And this proneness has been, as is
too often, reduced into the act. And no marvel, for whatever is naught, and
reigns in the hearts of the worst Men, there is still a remainder of it, in the
best of Men. Now it is as certain, as that two and three make five, that if the
most prosperous Souls be not well looked unto, according to the suitableness of
the temptation, every old, ill quality will break forth again. For every thing
that is natural (as all ill qualities are to the Soul, and this of relapsing,
and backsliding, as natural as any) will return to their state, if special
care be not taken, to hinder it. As a stone that is thrown up into the Air,
will fall down again, when the force of the Arm that threw it up, is spent: And
water will have its course downward, when once the damm, that stopped it, is
broken down.

This particular then is necessary to be spoken to, and that somewhat largely,
which shall be recompensed in speaking more briefly unto those other Directions
that follow. For if this be neglected, none of the rest will be observed.

Consider then,

1. That relapsing, and backsliding in its general nature is directly, and in
a special manner contrary to the exercise of those principles of godliness,
which have the same influence into the health, and welfare of the Soul, as
natural heat, and radical moisture have into the health, and welfare of the
Body; I mean Faith, and Repentance. By the exercise of Faith, we come to
Christ, Joh. 6.37. All that the Father has given me, shall come unto me. And
by the exercise of Repentance, we turn unto God, Joel 2.12, Turn ye unto me
with all your heart. Now, relapsing and backsliding is a departure from God,
Heb, 3.12. a drawing back, Heb. 10.38.

2. To bring this yet more closely to the matter, I am speaking unto, we must
take notice, that this relapsing, or back sliding comes under a double
consideration.

(1.) There is a relapsing or backsliding which proceeds from the want of the
principles of godliness. This is to be charged upon those that after
illumination, and conviction, having given up their Names to Christ, and
engaged in the profession of Religion: Fall first from the practice, and, it
may be, at last from the very profession of Religion. First from all appearance
of exact and circumspect walking, to vanity, and looseness; and then, it may be,
to open profaneness, as they, 2 Pet. 2.20, If after they have escaped the
polutions of the World, through the knowledge of the Lord, and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled, and overcome, the latter end is worse with
them, then the beginning. These do not fall from the grace they had, but do
indeed discover, that they never had any. For every one that has the true
principles of godliness in his heart, shall persevere in his gracious state:
The Seed of God will remain in him, though he do not always remain, in his
gracious frame. The newborn Christian is born a Conqueror; his victory bears
date from his birth, 1 John 5.4, For whosoever is born of God, overcomes the
World -- and shall at last be more then conqueror, Romans 8.37.

(2.) There is a relapsing, and backsliding through weakness, or rather, as
the truth is, for want of the exercise of the principles of godliness, whereby
the heart is drawn sometimes one way, and sometimes another way from God.

(1.) Sometimes through violence of temptation, and the unmortified inclination
of the heart, into some outward act of sin, which may come under the
observation of others, as we may see in Peter: several times he was surprised
with selfish fears, which brought forth sad effects. Once, when he tempted
Christ, not to hazard himself at Jerusalem, Matthew. 16.21, 22, 23. This was from
his fear, lest if it should go ill with his Master, it would not go well with
him. This appears by Christ's thereupon pressing upon him, and all that would
be his Disciples, the duty of Self-denial, and the Doctrine of the Cross, ver.
31. And then after that, when Christ was arraigned, Matthew. 26.70. And after
both these, we find him falling into a grudging of the same Disease, Gal. 2.11,
12. So John, the beloved Disciple was twice surprised, so far to forget
himself, as twice to give that worship to the Creature, which was due to God
alone, Rev. 19.10. and chapter 22.8. There are other gross corruptions, which (as
the Apostle says) are manifest works of the flesh. It would be an astonishing
thing, if any that ever were alive to God, much more if any whose Souls did
ever prosper, should back-slide so far, as into such dead works: This were a
high degree of quenching the Spirit; for Gal. 5.16, This I say then, walk in
the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

2. There is a backsliding through weakness, or rather through want of
exercise of the principles of godliness, into many inward and spiritual evils,
which no eye sees, but the eye of the most holy God, who sees all things,
such as spiritual dullness, and listlesness unto that which is good, as Isa.
64.7, There is none that calls upon thee, that stirs up himself to take
hold of thee: So as private duties are either omitted in their Season, or
shuffled up in a slight, and formal manner. Though God be the object of the
duty, yet the enjoyment of God is not made the end of the duty: when the heart
grows vain, goes in and out, constant in nothing but inconstancy, assuming unto
it self a lawless liberty, as if there were none to observe it, none to judge;
easily drawn away to forgetfulness of God, sliding away, without any
observation, from under the power of all obligations to the contrary. Relapses
of this nature, though they do not presently make any great noise, in the
World, yet it will not be long, before they will be seen in sad effects, and be
discerned in more visible miscarriages. If they be indulged, they are great
enemies to Soul-prosperity; and will prove the very bane, and break-neck of
that thriving, and prosperous frame, the Soul was grown, or growing into. This
is then seriously to be considered of, by all those whose Souls begin to
prosper, and when it begins to be better with them, then it has been, in
respect of their inward frame, and temper of the hidden man of the heart; as
ever they desire they may continue so, and lose the things which they have
wrought, to beware of relapses. Ye have heard that ye are not exempted from
them, nor exempted from a possibility, Heb. 3.12, Take heed, Brethren, lest
there be in any of you, an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the Living
God. As if the Apostle had said; That which I speak to one, I speak to another,
I speak to all; therefore let every one take heed.

Now that which I find in Scripture pressed upon us, for preventing such
relapses, is to have a watchful eye over, and a constant hand upon all the
inward workings, and stirrings of the inward Man, for from thence they have
their rise, as ye may observe in several sorts of Trees, their decay is first
observed in the withering of the boughs, but it begins in the root, which fails
in sending up sap into them, as formerly. Even so it is here; which way soever
relapses, are discovered, they begin from within, Psalm. 44.18, Our heart is not
turned back: neither have our steps declined from thy way. Professors first
fall from their apprehensions of the necessity of circumspect walking; their
convictions of the goodness of the ways of God, wear off, and their affections
decay: and the works of the flesh break forth, and manifest themselves by
degrees. Therefore as ever we desire to hold fast what we have received, be
sure to keep the heart with all diligence, as Prove. 4.23. Where, (1.) Our
personal care is required, Keep thy heart. (2.) Our principal care, Keep it,
with, or above all keeping.


As it is with the heart, naturally considered, if that begin to tremble, or be
in fear, or apprehension of danger: the blood and spirits (as it is observed)
will forsake the outward parts, and run to that, to guard and succor it, the
least wound therein being mortal, if it be but with the pricking of a Pin. Thus
the heart is kept in its natural capacity; but the matter we are speaking of,
is touching the keeping of the heart in its spiritual capacity; and keep it we
ought with all diligence; watch it by night, and by day; at home, and abroad;
when we are in company, and when we are alone, at all times, and in all places;
yea, as the Apostle presses it on Timothy, Watch in all things, 2 Timothy 4.5.

Now this keeping, this watching the heart, has special reference to the
inward workings, and stirrings of corruption.

(1.) To prevent (in the strength of Christ) so far as may be prevented, in
this state of imperfection, the first risings of them, of any one kind
whatsoever; however to prevent, if possible (and possible it is) that the
Corruption, and the Temptation, may be kept asunder, Matthew. 26.41, Watch, and
pray, that ye enter not into temptation. Otherwise, there will be sad work; and
the prosperity of the Soul will begin to fade, and that upon the sudden. Though
Hezekiah, as holy a Man as he was, and how much soever his Soul did prosper,
(and prosper it did exceedingly) yet he had always a root of pride in him:
which though it did not stir him to show his Treasures to every body, yet when
he fell into the temptation, by occasion of the visit he had, from the King of
Babylon, by his Ambassadors; then the Corruption, and the Temptation did meet,
and ye may read, in the history, how much the welfare of his Soul was
prejudiced by it. So it was with David; he had, though a Man after God's own
heart, the same root of the same corruption in him, yet it did not break forth,
so as to abate any thing of his Souls prosperity, till the temptation met with
it, To have his subjects numbered: neither had it then, if he had watched, as
Peter did, to keep the temptation and the corruption asunder. See Act. 8.20,
Thy money perish with thee, said Peter to Simon Magus. The temptation was
suitable, for Peter was out of money. Act. 3.6, Silver and gold have I none.
And Peter was not so perfect, as to be beyond the power of the temptation; but
he kept the temptation from mingling with what corruption soever was in his
heart; and so the gracious frame of his heart continued untoucht by it. So
David, 2 Samuel 16.10, And the King said, what have I to do with you, ye Sons of
Zerviah? so let him curse, etc. He was subject to the same passions with other
Men, but by the assistance (no doubt) of the Spirit of God, he kept the
temptation, and the corruption asunder; and so his Soul prospered the better
for that trial.

2. If there should be (as there is great danger there may be) a sad meeting
(so it is, and so it will be found) betwixt the corruption, and the temptation,
then endeavor, by the assistance of the spirit, that your own spirits may
immediately rise up in indignation, against it, and after some hearty
ejaculations for the present, with the first opportunity, with hearty loathing,
and inward self abhorrency, bring forth the temptation, and the corruption to
the law of God, and see them there condemned, and to the blood of Christ, and
see them there pardoned; and to the spirit of Christ, that thereby all may be
subdued, and mortified. Really, a Soul that desires to prosper, and to continue
to prosper, should as kindly work in a heart-melting, and a heart-humbling way,
for these sinful stirrings of the heart, before God, as for sinful words, and
sinful actions before Men, Psalm. 73.22, So foolish was I, and ignorant, even as
a beast before thee. It is, or should be with the Soul that prospers, as it is
with the eye, if a small dust get into it, it will never leave twinkling, and
watering till it be out, 2 Chronicles. 32.26, Hezekiah humbled himself greatly for
the pride of his heart. Romans 7.24, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death. He speaks of the law in his members, warring
against the law of his mind. verse. 23. This is the way to prevent relapses into
sin, which is the Soul's sickness, and if not prevented, or timely healed, will
overthrow the prosperity of prospering Souls.

SERMON XIII.
2ly. AS Souls that begin to prosper, and have any desire to continue so, ought
to keep themselves under the greatest obligations that are imaginable to beware
of Relapses: So they ought with as great care, and constancy, to realize the
presence of God with them, day by day. For it is, without all controversy,
true, that the exercise, and so, by consequence, the growth, and increase of
the principles of godliness, wherein Soul-prosperity specially consists, is
founded upon, and preserved by the due consideration (...) God's presence with
us, and his all s^eing eye upon us. This is that which is specially
comprehended in that expression of walking with God, and walking before God.
And this is as specially to be observed, That those that did so, whilst they
did so, their Souls prospered. We have it exemplified in Enoch, Genesis 5.22. And
he had this testimony, that he pleased God, Heb. 11.5. So Noah, Genesis 6.9, Noah
was a just Man, and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God. So
David, Psalm. 26.3, I have walked in thy truth. Psalm. 119.168, I have kept they
precepts, and thy testimonies, for all my ways are before thee. This was the
best testimony, that Solomon his Son could give of him, when he was dead, 1
King. 3.6, Thou have showed unto thy servant David my Father, great mercy,
according as he walked before thee, in truth, and righteousness, and in
uprightness of heart with thee. This is that which God gives in charge to
Abraham, and that upon this account, Genesis 17.1, -- walk before me, and be thou
perfect. As thou desire (and I know thou desire) to hold fast thine
integrity: Let me live in thy thoughts, and see to it, that thou so live, so
think, so speak, and so do, as remembering thou art always in my sight. This is
that which has a very great influence, to draw, as it were, the draught of the
Image of God, day by day in our Souls, in more and more lively colors. For in
the state of glory, the glorified Saints that are with the Lord, and always
behold his face are like him, and see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. Even so it is
in the state of grace, so far as this duty is conscientiously observed, and
discharged, 2 Cor. 3.18, We all with open face, beholding as in a glass, the
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even
as by the spirit of the Lord. It is true, it is not said of Moses, that his
face did shine the first time, that he had been with God in the Mount, but when
he had been with him the second time, Exodus 34.29. This then is that we ought
to have deeply engraven upon our hearts, as ever we desire not to lose the
things we have wrought, to do as David did, Psalm. 16.8, I have set the Lord
always before my face. [Always] that implies that we ought to make it our daily
work: what a Man does every day, he is said to do Always. And [Always] i. e.
one day as well as another, to our last day. This is no more then is expressly
required, Prove. 23.17, Be thou in the fear of the Lord, all the day long. And 1
Pet. 1.17, -- pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. It is the exercise
of the fear of God, which has a very great influence upon Soul-prosperity, 2
Cor. 7.1, -- perfecting holiness in the fear of God. And it is this realizing
the presence of God, which has the great influence into the exercise of the
fear of God. Hence it is, that true child-like fear is said to be, fearing
before God; that is, out of an awful respect unto, and due consideration of his
All-seeing eye, Eccl. 8.12, -- it shall be well with them that fear God, that
fear before him. This is that then, which above all other things, ought not to
be omitted, for the very sinews of all heart-godliness are, as it were, cut in
sunder, so far as this is neglected. For there is nothing left then, which has
any power over the inward man, the hidden man of the heart, but it enjoys a
lawless liberty, as if there were none to observe it, nor to judge it. 3 Epist.
of John ver. 11, Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is
good. He that does good is of God, but he that does evil, has not seen God.
Deuteronomy. 32.18, Of the Rock that begat thee, thou art unmindful, and have
forgotten God that formed thee. All their wickedness is charged upon that.

I shall say no more to this Second general Direction, but only these Three
things.

(1.) That until the Soul be spiritually alive to God, and so in a capacity of
prospering, there is neither delight, nor desire to entertain any thoughts of
God, Romans 1.28, And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge.
They cast the notions of God out of their minds, as of no use to them, Psalm.
10.4, God is not in all his thoughts. i.e. Not in his thoughts at all, Job
21.14, They say to the Almighty, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. Some say so in words at length, and all of them say it
in their hearts. Tho God says, Woe unto you, when I depart from you, Hos. 9.12.
Yet they think it best when he departs from them; and the farther the better.
This frame of heart is the very blackness of Hellish darkness. It speaks the
very language of Satan, Matthew. 8.29, What have we to do with thee, thou Jesus,
the Son of God; art thou come to torment us before the time? Thus it was of
old, Isa: 30.11, Cause the holy one of Israel to cease from us.

(2.) Though the Soul be alive to God, yet so far as the Image of the old Adam
is unmortified, and any particular lust indulged, so far God and the heart will
be strangers. Not only the beam but even such a moat in the eye, will make such
Souls, to shun, what they can, the presence of God, and the presence of those
who, they think, will speak the mind of God unto them; as Ahab did the presence
of Micaiah, 1 King. 22.8. Such Souls are far from prospering. This is the very
image of old Adam, Genesis 3.8, He heard the voice of God, and hid himself from
the presence of the Lord.

3. Even those whose Souls do live, and in some measure, may be said to
prosper, though they dare not omit any external duty of Religion, yet they do
too often, and too easily slip over this, without timely observation, till they
take a review of their hearts, and then they see they have cause to say, as
Psalm. 36.11. Unite my heart to thee, that I may fear before thee, all the day
long: Or unite my heart within it self, that it may not be diverted, or
distracted, not carried this way, and that way, but that I may be able to say,
It is fixed, it is fixed. Thus I say it is, and that too often with Souls that
prosper according to their measure. Therefore we ought to charge our selves
with this duty, and renew the charge from day to day. To set our selves under
the actual consideration of God's All-seeing eye; who has absolute Sovereignty
over us; to whom alone we must stand or fall; who can tell us all our thoughts,
and will render to every Man according to his works; and therefore has a Book
of remembrance for those that think upon him, and fear his name, Mal. 3.16. And
has a bag for iniquity, wherein he does, as it were, seal up men's sins to
bring them forth as Evidences, and charge them upon every one as the matter
requires. And as God is said to have a Book, and a Bag, so he is said to have a
Bottle, Psalm. 56.8, Put my tears into thy bottle, are they not in thy book?
This, I say, we should charge upon our hearts, and renew this charge from day
to day, till we have some power over them. For though it be true, that God
alone has the Sovereignty over, and is the great disposer of our hearts, yet
under him, we may do much. What Man is there, whose conscience will not tell
him, if he consult with it, that when his heart is flat, and dead, alienated
from all serious thoughts of the presence of God with him, that this is his own
neglect, his own willful neglect; for he knows that when he has a business to
manage of any considerable concernment for his outward estate, he can easily
command his heart to think on it, yea and cannot put it out of his mind, when
he would; so that The abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep, Eccl.
5.12. Therefore let us not neglect any longer to exercise that authority, which
God has given us over our hearts, if we desire our Souls should continue to
prosper: We must serve him in righteousness, and holiness all our days, and
every day: But all we do will come very far short, not only of what it ought to
be, but of what it might be, unless we do what we do, before him, as in his
sight, Luke 1.75.

Thus of the Second Direction.

3. Spiritualize the Providence of every day: I mean, improve them to some
spiritual advantage; so as thereby some gracious impressions may be wrought
upon your hearts; that thereby the duties of the day may be better performed;
principles of godliness more seasonably exercised; and the workings, and
stirrings of corruption more timely checked, and thoroughly mortified. This will
exceedingly help (scarce any thing more) to preserve the Soul in its thriving,
and prospering frame. Consider then, that every day, in respect of the
Providence of God, it is filled up withal, is either one of those two days
mentioned, Eccles. 7.14. Either a day of Prosperity, or a day of Adversity. Or
else like that day, mentioned, Zech. 14.6. Neither clear, nor dark, but mixed;
mercies given in, one part of the day, and crosses taking their turn in the
other. Now, it has been experienced to be a great means of promoting and
preserving Soul-prosperity, to spiritualize both the one, and the other.

(1.) If the day be a day of Prosperity, i. e. if no evil befalls us, but that
according to the promise, Psalm. 121.7, 8, The Lord shall preserve thee from
evil: The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in. When God
blesses the beginning, and ending of what we undertake; this has enough in
it, to raise up in our hearts, high thoughts of God, that he should load us
with benefits, Psalm. 68.19. Such as may be very effectual to keep us under
those obligations, which his bounty, and goodness lays upon us. Thus it wrought
in David, Psalm. 116. He is reckoning up the mercies of God toward him: Then
ver. 5. He exalts God in his heart: And ver. 7. His Soul retires into God,
and takes up its rest, and satisfaction in him alone: And ver. 9. He heightens
his resolution. Thus it was with David, and thus it may be with us: Especially,
when the thriving prospering Soul has ground and reason enough to see the
present mercies, of what kind soever they be, as having relation unto, and
being pledges of Eternal mercies. This sweetens them, and heightens them, how
little soever, how common soever they be; that they may say as David, 2 Samuel
7.18, Who am I, and what is my father's house? This makes them more
heart-melting, more heart-obliging, then otherwise they would be, or possibly
can be to any Soul, that is either dead in sin, or in a dying, withering,
languishing condition. Six pence received only as a six pence, does not affect
the heart like that which is received as an earnest of a greater Sum, which
shall certainly upon such a day be given to us; so it is here, when we can
conclude, that he who kept us this day from evil, that it has not grieved us,
as Jabes prayed, 1 Chronicles. 4.10. and has given us quiet, and comfortable rest
this night; can, and certainly will keep us by his mighty power, through faith,
unto salvation: and this night's rest is a pledge unto us of Eternal rest, in
those heavenly mansions above, in our Father's house. And this conclusion,
though no Man else can, yet thriving, and prospering Souls may make.

2. If the day be a day of Adversity, a day filled up with sad tidings, or sad
events, yet the Providence of such a day may be spiritualized, to the
spiritual advantage of the Soul. By a believing consideration from what hand
they come; as Job did chapter 1. ver. 21, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away. For what cause? A man for the punishment of his sin, Lam. 3.39. What God
aims at therein, sc. our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
From what principle? David believed, that it was in faithfulness to the
interest of his Soul, that God afflicted him, Psalm. 119.75. A believing
consideration, I say, of these things, in such a sad and dark day, will conduce
to preserve the Soul in a prospering frame: By melting down the will into the
will of God, and by raising up the heart in the exercise of faith, hope, and
patience; quietly to wait for support under, benefit by, and, in due time, such
a deliverance from them all, as they shall be able to say, to the praise of
God's free grace, truth, and faithfulness, as Jacob, notwithstanding all his
troubles in his lifetime, which were neither few, nor small, did on his
Deathbed: That the Lord delivered him from all evil, Genesis 48.16.

3. If the day be a mixed day, as most days are, some comforts, some crosses,
some things going for us, and some things against us; these parti-colored
Providence may be spiritualized for our Souls advantage; and be unto us as the
side-wind to the Ship, that best fills all the Sails, variety of gracious
principles may be exercised. In such a day we find enough to humble us, enough
to make us thankful, and thoughtful what to render unto the Lord. That it is no
worse, That it is so well, as the King of Spain said, when he heard of the
miscarriage of his Fleet in Eighty eight, whether he said so, or no, depends
upon the credit of the Historian. But I am sure the Prophet Jeremiah said, Lam.
3.22, It is of the Lords mercy, that we are afflicted, and not consumed: cast
down, but not cast off. Look to that place once again, Eccles. 7.14, In the day
of adversity, consider. What should we consider? Why consider this, and mark it
well, that both these days, with all their fillings up, are from the Lord. That
it is he, who thus sets the one against the other; that we may see that his
account will be so balanced, that our receipts when they are least, will
balance our sufferings, when they are most. And that therefore we have enough
to reason our selves both into a submission, and into a thankful frame, Job
2.9, 10, Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive
evil? And would not these, think ye, keep our Souls in a thriving, and
prospering frame? It would sure.

4. Besides all these, we meet with daily passages, in what we hear, and see,
which though they do not immediately touch us, yet may be thus spiritualized.
Every Creature of God is a Text for our hearts to raise some Doctrines, some
spiritual Meditations from. We have a Proverb, That there is never an outside,
but it has an inside. Understand it thus: There is nothing that comes under
our observation, but there may be extracted from it, some inference or other,
to employ our thoughts about, and that to good purpose; even to keep our Souls
in their good frame: For as a Be can suck honey out of many a flower, where a
fly finds no such thing as wanting a principle for it: So a prospering,
spiritualizing Soul may, and therefore ought, to endeavor to extract some good
out of every thing; even out of its own, and other Men's failings, as we may
read, Pro. 24.30, 31, 32, I went by the field of the slothful -- I looked upon
it, and received instruction. Upon this ground, among others, the principles of
godliness are called, a partaking of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. For as God,
according to his infinite power, and wisdom, brings light out of darkness; good
out of evil: Even so may the principles of godliness much more, out of every
good thing, though of a very mean concernment. And would not this help to
preserve it in its prosperous frame? It would sure. That Man is like to thrive,
who gains by every thing he deals in: And that Soul is like to continue to
prosper, which raises Earth into Heaven, and fetches Heaven out of Earth; as
every one does, so far as he is faithful in the forementioned particulars. And
besides, it is one of the best helps that I know of, to make improvement of
that portion of our time, which runs between one solemn duty and another, which
otherwise would lie upon our hands, and be rendered useless, as to
Soul-concernments.

4. Another great work which prospering Souls have to do, in order to the
preserving of themselves in a prospering frame, is this: To preserve a deep
sense of their spiritual poverty, when it is best with them, in respect of
Soul-prosperity. The Apostle Paul from the first day after his conversion, to
the day of his dissolution (for ought we read, or have any appearance to
suspect to the contrary) did thrive, and prosper in his spiritual estate. His
inward man was renewed daily, 2 Cor. 4.16. Yet what he thought of himself, we
find by what he speaks of himself, Romans 7.23, 24, I find another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind -- O wretched Man, that I am --. 2
Cor. 3.5, Not that we are sufficient to think any thing as of our selves --.
Ephesians. 3.8, Unto me who am the least of all Saints, is this grace given --. This
is as needful a direction, as any of the rest. For it is a hard matter to
starve this sin of pride, and self-exalting thoughts, because it will feed
almost, upon any thing. Nothing so good, yea nothing so mean, but pride will
feed upon it. Absalom was proud of his long locks, he wore his hair so long,
that when he polled it, it weighed about four pound in weight, 2 Samuel 14.26.
But I speak not now of this kind of pride: but of that kind of pride, which,
without special care, may breed out of those excellent things, which are found
in prospering Souls; as pride of gifts: There is the root of that pride in a
prospering Soul, which Solomon speaks of, Pro. 18.2, A fool has no delight in
understanding, but that his heart may discover it self. Of that in the
Pharisee, Luke 18.11, God, I thank thee, I am not as other men are. Joh. 7.49,
This people which knows not the law, are accursed. Pride of Grace: Though
corruption that is in the heart, hates the grace, that is in the heart, yet it
is apt to be proud of it, when it is taken notice of. Grace cannot be proud:
but he that has it, may be proud of it. As Paul was in danger of being lifted
up, and exalted above measure, through the abundance of revelations, which were
given unto him, 2 Cor. 12.7. Now, which way soever pride works, ye will find it
like the wind, sometimes at one door, sometimes at another. Resist it, for God
resists that Man, that does not resist it, Jam. 4.6. He gives more grace to
those that walk humbly with him, but he resists the proud, by abating, and
lessening what he had given. So far as the heart begins to be lifted up, so far
it is naught, how good soever it was before, Hab. 2.4, Behold, his Soul which
is lifted up, is not upright in him. Therefore whenever the inward man begins
to be renewed, and that it begins to be better in the frame and temper of the
heart, then formerly: Then watch, and pray that ye do not fall into this
temptation. And consider, when it is at best with us, how much we come short of
the holiness of that rule we ought to walk by, and of the holiness of that God
which is proposed for our pattern; 1 Pet. 1.15, As he which has called you is
holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. Let us compare our selves
with that Rule, and with that Pattern, and the bright-shining beams of the Sun
will not discover more motes in the Air, then the holiness of God, and his law,
would convince us of sin to be in us. And when it is at best with us, would
make us to see reason to complain of our selves as Paul did, Romans 7.14, The law
is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin: And to pray as, Psalm. 143.2,
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no Man living
be justified. And in the strength of Christ to resolve, as Phil. 3.13, 14, I
count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are
before: I press toward the mark --. As knowing that the Soul never prospers so
much, but it may prosper more; for no Man knows when he has all the grace he
shall have: And if we do not endeavor that we may prosper more, things will
not prosper long, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18, Beware lest ye also being led away with the
error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness; But grow in grace -- If
If ye grow not, ye will fall from your stedfastness which ye have attained unto.

5. As we should realize the presence of God with us daily, and keep our Souls
under God's eye: So put them over, and their welfare, and prosperity into
God's hands, to preserve them. We know that Job prospered in his outward
estate, so long as God kept up the hedge about him, and all that he had, Job.
1.10. So it is with our Souls, They, and the gracious principles that are in
them, are preserved in, and by his hand, Jude v. 1. Sanctified by God the
Father, and preserved in Christ Jesus. 2 Chronicles. 32.26, Hezekiah humbled himself
for the pride of his heart. When David's Soul was in a prospering frame; see
how he prays, 1 Chro. 29.18, O Lord God -- keep this for ever in the
imaginations of the thoughts of thy people -- i. e. That those gracious
impressions might not wear off. It is worth our observing, that the Lord Jesus
knew what extraordinary gifts and graces the Apostles were to receive; yet all
this would not do, if God should let them go out of his hand, Joh. 17.6.

6, And lastly: Because there will be remisness in observing this, and what
other Directions ye may have from the word, whereby the welfare of the Soul
may be endangered, as by Communing with our own hearts, we shall find, be sure,
that ever now and then, as the matter requires, we set time apart for more
serious examination, humiliation, and renewing the exercise of repentance,
faith, etc. Such times are like scouring times, which Vessels stand sometimes
in need of, though washed every day. This is the way, if there be any defect,
to set all things right again, Rev. 2.5, Remember whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do thy first works.

Thus I have showed you, what the work is, that prospering Souls have to do, if
they desire (and they ought to desire it with all their might, and all their
strength) that they may prosper still. It is a work that never must be at an
end, while the Soul is in the Body. I say no more to it, but conclude with that
1 Cor. 10.12, Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall. If any think that
these Directions are too many, I suppose that upon farther consideration, those
that do think so, may see reason to think otherwise: For so far as I can
apprehend, not one of them can be spared; they one help another. Those that
understand nothing of a Watch, may, possibly, wonder, what need there should be
of so many Wheels, so near one another, and that they will but hinder one
another; but those that have understanding in things of this nature, do know,
that one Wheel helps forward another. It is so here.

This is all I have to speak upon this branch of the Use. I now proceed to a
few words to each of those two Cases, mentioned the last day.

1. How a Man may manage the business of his calling, and all his worldly
affairs, so as to promote his prosperity in the World, and not prejudice, but
thereby farther his Soul-prosperity?

Ans. 1. It is, without question, not only lawful, but every Man's duty, to be
diligent in his calling, and to manage it with honesty, and integrity to his
best advantage, that he may prosper in the World; in reference to those ends,
for which Callings were ordained. That he may eat the labor of his hands,
Psalm. 128.1. and not eat his fingers ends, as it is said of idle persons. That
with quietness he work, and eat his own bread, 2 These. 3.12. And be helpful to
others, Ephesians. 4.28. Therefore, he ought to be diligent to know the state of his
flock, and to look well to his herds, Prove. 27.23.24. Not to leave all to the
care of his servants. Under this one particular, a provident care over Men's
estates in every other Calling, is likewise injoined, that so nothing be lost,
Joh. 6.12.

2. But though this be true, yet every one that desires, that above all things,
his Soul may prosper, ought not to make Religion a complement, as too many do;
but his chief business. The Lord Jesus owed, and paid respect, and subjection
to his parents, Luke 2.57. Yet he declared, that he must attend his heavenly
Father's business, ver. 49. Thus David, Psalm. 119.38, -- thy servant, who is
devoted to thy fear. As a Scholar who devotes himself to his study, makes
learning his business: So we ought to mind this one thing as most necessary,
Luke 10.42. It Is true, it may be with a Christian that seriously minds the
prosperity of his Soul, as it is with Mariners at Sea, they are bound for such
a Coast, but whilst they are sailing, they may meet with a cross Wind, which
may drive them the quite contrary way: but as soon as the storm is over, they
recover themselves, and get into the right way, wherein they Sailed before. So
a Christian (one that is so indeed) is bound for Heaven, and the holy word of
God is the Compass he sails by. Yet, a contrary wind of temptation blowing, he
may be driven back; but he recovers himself again by the exercise of Faith, and
Repentance, and sails on constantly toward his heavenly Port. Thus he that
minds, above all prosperities, the prosperity of his Soul, ought to make
Religion his business; he is devoted unto it: To him to live is Christ, Phil.
1.21.

3. Both these being true: That every Man has, or ought to have a Calling to
follow, which he ought with prudence, providence, and diligence to attend, for
the support of his outward estate, according to the condition, wherein God has
set him. Every Man has, or ought to have a Calling to follow, which he ought
to manage with all his heart, all his might, and all his strength, as that
which is for the most desirable prosperity, the prosperity of his Soul,
therefore he ought to manage the former, in subordination to this; God never
intended them otherwise. Still he would have us to abide with God in our
Calling, 1 Cor. 7.24. That a Man so drive his Trade for the World, as not to
hinder his Trade for Heaven. His home-trade within doors, his Shop, his
Warehouse, his Working-house, his Oxen, or his Farm, must not rob his Closet,
nor indispose him, much less take him off from those private duties of
Religion, whereby Communion between God, and his Soul, may be preserved, and
increased. Nor yet must his foreign Trade hinder him from walking as becomes
the Gospel, in all his converse with others, but that he may, as the matter
requires, show forth the graces of Christ, 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 These. 5.14, 15, Be
patient to all men, not rendering evil for evil to any man, but ever follow
that which is good. So far as any Man does thus manage his worldly affairs, for
his prosperity in the World, he shall not prejudice, but thereby farther his
Soul-prosperity.

And in order hereunto, consider these few things.

1. Remember that of Solomon, Pro. 28.20. Make not haste to be rich. Do not
grasp more of the world into your hands, then ye may manage without
distraction. This cannot any more be for the prosperity of the Soul, then to
eat more meat, then the natural heat of the stomach can well digest, can be for
the health of the body. Therefore in such a case, it is a man's duty, interest,
and wisdom to do, as the Seamen do, when the Ship is overladen, cast out some
of the burden, lest they hazard the loss of their lives. Otherwise, that will
be found a truth, when it may be too late to prevent it, what the Apostle
says, 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich (that are set upon it) fall into
temptations, and snares, and into many foolish, and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in a Whirlpool of destruction and perdition.

2. Remember that though ye ought to be diligent in your calling, yet it ought
to be with a holy indifferency of Spirit, not as Rachel, Genesis 30.1. Give me
Children, or I dye, but as David in that great strait wherein he was 2 Samuel
15.26. Let the Lord do with me, as it seems good in his sight. Thus it ought
to be, and thus it may be, if we desire our care for prosperity in this world
may not hinder the prosperity of our Souls. The strongest, and highest workings
both of our heads and hearts, should be after our Soul concernments. Thus did
David Psalm. 63.8. My Soul follows hard after thee. 2 Samuel 6.14. David danced
before the Lord, with all his might. But when a man's eyes, and his heart (as
the expression is concerning Jehojakim Jer. 22.17.) are but for the world, i.
e. he does greedily affect it, and most eagerly pursue it, as if that Judgment
were befallen him, which literally befell Korah, and Dathan, the earth swallowed
them. However such may hold up, and rub on, in a formal profession, and that it
may be with some seeming forwardness, yet their Souls can never prosper. It is
impossible they should. Therefore, labor not for that meat which perishes,
but for that which endures to everlasting life, Joh. 6.27.

3. Remember this, That there is no absolute necessity of it, upon one account,
or other, that a man should be as rich, as other rich men of the same calling.
That is necessary which cannot be supplied, with something instead of it. As
the light of the Sun is necessary for the day. All the Candles in the world
cannot supply the want of that. No, it will be night, when the Sun is set, for
all the Stars. Now, the wealth, and great things of the world may be supplied
by something else; for neither man's life, nor the comforts of his life consists
in abundance, Luke 12.15. so Psalm. 4.6, 7. There be many that say, who will
show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, thou
have put gladness in my heart, more then in the time, that their Corn and their
Wine increased. But all the world cannot supply the want of Soul-prosperity,
Matthew. 16.28. What can it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and
lose his own Soul. Therefore that is the only thing necessary, Luke 10.42.

4. Remember this, That we manage the business of our calling, with a holy
fear, and jealousy, lest we should prejudice the welfare of our Souls. Job was
afraid, lest his Children, whilst they were refreshing their bodies, should
have wronged their Souls, Job 1.5. there is as much reason to be afraid, in
this case, for the world is defiling, Jam. 1.27. to keep himself unspotted from
the world. It his hard to touch Pitch, and not to be defiled. This was in the
thoughts of Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them
out of the world, but that thou should keep them from evil.

5. Remember this, That the ruling, predominant, chief, and principal end in
laboring for the things of this world, should be in reference to the world to
come, when David prayed for life, it was not principally that he might live;
but that he might live and praise God, Psalm. 119.17.175. So in laboring after
all the things of this life, we should desire them; not as stops, but as steps
in our way to heaven, and so accordingly use them, reckoning this, though not
the only, yet as one of the chiefest advantages we have by them, that we have a
price put into our hands, whereby we may be the more useful; and our light
shine so much the more before Men, that they may glorify our Father, which is
in heaven, Matthew. 5.16.

6. Remember this, That it is our duty, and we ought to prepare for it, by
keeping the things of the world at a distance from our hearts, to run the
hazard of the loss of all, when the keeping of them is inconsistent with the
conscience of that duty, and subjection, we owe to Christ; when it comes to
that, we should suffer joyfully the spoiling of our goods, as they did, Heb.
10.34. though we should go as naked out of the world, as ever we came into the
world. He that will keep what he has, in a way that God does not approve of,
may keep the thing, but he will lose the comfort of it. Even as they, Exodus
16.20. that would keep Manna beyond the time, that God allowed them, they had
the Manna, but it did them no good; it had worms in it, and did stink. Thus we
have something toward the answering of that question; and I do believe, that ye
will find that so far as these rules are observed, the world will not prejudice
your Souls.

FINIS.

