Love Letters Between a NOBLEMAN And his SISTER.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationer's Hall.
MDCLXXXIV.

TO THO. CONDON; Esquire
SIR,
HAving when I was at Paris last Spring, met with a little Book of Letters,
called L' Intregue de Philander and Silvia, I had a particular fancy, besides
my inclinations to translate 'em into English, which I have done as faithfully
as I could, only where he speaks of the ingratitude of Caesario to the King, I
have added a word or two to his Character that might render it a little more
parallel to that of a modern Prince in our Age; for the rest I have kept close
to the French.

The Letters art soft and amorous, and besides my esteem and obligation to you,
I think it no where so proper to address so much ^ender passion, as to a man
whom Heaven and Nature has so well formed both for dispencing and receiving of
Love as your self, you having all in your person that is acceptable to women
and desired by men, and when you please can make your self as absolutely the
joy of the one as the envy of the other; to this is joined a Virtue, such as I
believe the World has rarely produced in a Man of your Youth, Fortune and
Advantages; you have all the power of the ^ebauchery of the Age, without the
will, you early saw the Follies of the Town, and the greatness of your mind
disdaining that common Road of living, shunned the foppish practice; your
well-judging pride chose rather to be singular, and sullenly retire, than heard
with that noisie Crowd, that eternally fit out business enough to stock the
Town with Wit and Lampoons, and the Stage with Fops, Fools and Cowards: if I
might give my real judgment, you are above flattery, and one can almost say no
good or generous thing that one cannot justify in you, no Virtue you cannot
lay a claim to; many your modesty hides from the World, and many more you have
which envy will not confess; for that just value you set upon your self by
shunning the public haunts, Cabals and Conversations of the Town, in spite of
all your Wit and Goodness gives occasion for malice to revenge it self on you a
thousand little ways; witness a late mistaken story of an Amor of yours, so
often urged with heat, and told so much to your disadvantage, by those who have
not the hap^piness of knowing your true principles of honor, your real good
nature, your common justice, or sense of Humanity, to be such, as not to be
capable of so base, silly and unmanly a practice, and so needless and poor a
design: For my part, Sir, I am vain and proud of the belief that I have the
capacity and honor to know and understand your Soul, (did I not too well the
story also) and am well assured it has not a grain, not a thought of so foolish
a principle, so unnecessary and dishonest: and I dare affirm that since the
imposition of the late Popish* Plot upon the Town, there has not so ridiculous
and nonsensical a History past for authentic with unthinking man; but you
should give 'em leave to rail, since you have so vast advantages above 'em.

Sir, I would fain think that in the Character of Philander there is a great
resemblance of your self as to his Person, and that part of his Soul that was
possessed with Love: he was a French Whigg, it is true, and a most apparent
Traitor, and there, (...) confess, the comparison fails extremely; for sure no
man was ever so incorrigible so hardened in Torism as your self, so fearless, so
bold, so resolute, and confirmed in Loyalty; in the height of all dangers and
threatenings, in the blessed Age of swearing, and the hopeful Reign of
evidences, you undaun^ed held forth for the royal cause, with such force of
reason and undeniable sense as those that were not converted, at least were
startled; and I shall never forget the happy things I have heard you say on
that glorious subject, with a zeal so fervent, yet so modest and gentle your
argument, so solid, just, so generous and so very hearty, as has begot you
applauses and blessing round the board: a thousand instances, a History I could
wri^e of your discourses and acts of Loyalty; but that even your Enemies allow,
and I will spare it here, and only say you are an honor and a credit to the
Cause that is proud to own you.

In this you are far distan^^ to my amorous Hero; but at least for my own
satisfaction, and that I may believe Silvia truly happy, give me leave to
fancy him such a person as your self, and then I cannot fail of fansying him
too, speaking at the fee: of Silvia, pleading his right of love with the same
softness in his eyes and voice, as you can do when you design to conquer;
whenever you spread your nets for Game, you need but look abroad, fix and
resolve, though you, unlike the forward youth of this Age, so nicely pursue the
quarry; it is not all, or any Game you fly at, not every Bird that comes to net
can please your delicate appetite; though you are young as new desire, as
beautiful as light, as amorous as a God, and wanton as a Cupid, that smiles,
and shoots, and plays, and mischiefs all his fond hours away: Pray Heaven you
be not reserved like our Hero for some Sister, it is an ill sign when so much
beauty passes daily unregarded, that your love is reserved to an end as
malicious as that of our Philander's.

Perhaps you will be out of h^mour, and cry, why the Devil did thou dedicate
the Letters of a Whigg to me (...) but to make you amends* Sir, pray take
notice Silvia is true Tory in every part, if but to love a Whigg be not crime
enough in your opinion to pall your appetite, and for which even her youth and
beauty cannot make an atonement; commodity, which rarely fails in the Trade of
love, though never was so low a Market for beauty of both Sexes, yet he that is
fortified and stored like happy you, need never fear to find his price; for wit
and good humor bear still a rate, and have an intrinsic value, while the
other is rated by opinion and is at best but a curious picture, where one and
the same dull silent Charms make up the day, while the other is always new, and
(to use your own expression) is a Book where one turns over a new leaf every
minute, and finds something diverting, in eternal new discoveries; it elevates
ones Spirits, charms the Soul, and improves ones stock; for every one has a
longer date of hearing than seeing, and the eyes are sooner satiated than the
ear; therefore do not depend too much on beau^ty, it is but a half conquest you
will make when you show the Man only, you must prove him too; give the soft Sex
a sight of your fine Mind as well as your fine Person; but you are a lazy
Lover, and ly fallow for want of industry, you rust your stock of hoa^ded love,
while you gaze only and return a single sigher; believe me, Friend, if you
continue to fight at that single weapon, there will be no great store of wounds
given or taken on either side; you must speak and write if you would be happy,
since you can do it so infinitely to purpose; who can be happy without Love?
for me, I never numbered those dull days amongst those of my life, in which I
had not my Soul filled with that soft passion; to Love! why it is the only
secret in nature that restores Life, to all the felicities and charms of
living; and to me there seems no thing so strange, as to see people walk about,
laugh, do the acts of Life, and impertinently trouble the world without knowing
any thing of that soft, that noble passion, or without so much as having an
in^^treague, or an amusement, (as the French call it) with any dear she, no
real Love or Cocettre; perhaps these Letters may have the good fortune to rouse
and make you look into your heart, turn over your store and lavish out a little
to divert the toils of life; you used to say that even the fatigues of love had
a vast pleasure in 'em; Philander was of your mind, and I (who advise you like
that friend you have honored me with the title of) have even preserved all the
torments of love, before dully living without it; live then and love, thou gay,
thou glorious young man, whom Heaven has blessed with all the sweets of life
besides; live then and love; and what is an equal blessing, ^ive and be beloved,
by some dear Maid, as nobly born as Silvia, as witty and as gay and soft as
she, (to you, who know no other want, no other blessing) this is the most
advantageous one he can wish you who is,

Sir, Your obliged and most humble Servant, etc.

The ARGUMENT.
IN the time of the Rebellion of the true Protestant Hugonots in Paris, under
the conduct of the Prince of Condy, whom we will call Caesario) many
illustrious persons were drawn into the Association, amongst which there was
one, whose Quality and Fortune (joined with his Youth and Beauty) rendered him
more elevated in the esteem of the gay part of the World th^n most of that Age.
In his tender ye^rs (unhappily enough) he chanc^d to fall in Love with a Lady,
whom (...) will call Mertilla, who ^ad ch^rms enough to engage any heart, she
h^d (...) the advantages of Youth and Nature, a Shape excell^nt, a most
agreeable stature, not too tall and far from low, delicately proportioned, her
f^ce a little inclined to round, soft, smooth and white, her Eyes were blew, a
little languishing, and full of Love and Wit, a Mouth curiously made, dimpled
and full of sweetness; Lips round, soft, plump and red; white teeth, firm and
even; her Nose a little Roman; and which gave a noble grace to her lovely Face,
her Hair light brown; a Neck and Bosom delicately turned, white and rising,
her Arms and Hands exactly shaped; to this a vivacity of Youth engaging, a Wit
quick and flowing, a Humor gay, and an Air unresistably charming, and nothing
was wanting to complete the joys of the young Philander (so we call our amarous
Hero) but Mertilla's heart, which the illustrious Caesario had before
possessed; however, consulting her Honor and her Interest, and knowing all the
arts as Women do to f^ign a tenderness, she yields to (...) him: while
Philander, who scorned to owe his happiness to the commands of Parents* or to
chaffer for a Beauty, with her consen^ steals her away, and marries her; but
see how transitory is a violent passion, after being satiated, he slights the
prize he had so dearly conquered; some say the change was occasioned by her too
visibly continued Love to Caesario; but whatever 'twas, this was most certain,
Philander cast his Eyes upon a young Maid, Sister to Mertilla, a Beauty whose
early bloom promised wonders when come to perfection; but I will spare her
Picture here, Philander in the following Epistles will often enough present it
to your view: He loved and languish'd long before he durst discover his pain;
her being Sister to his Wife, nobly b^rn, and of undoubted fame, rendered his
passion too criminal to hope for a return, While the young lovely Silvia (so we
shall call the noble Maid) sight out her hours in the same pain and
languishment for Philander, and knew not that 'twas Love, till she betraying it
innocently to the o'erjoy'd Lover and Brother, who soon taught her to
understand 'twas Love -- he persues it, she permits it, and at last yields;
when being discovered in the criminal intrigue, she flies with him; he
absolutely quits Mertilla, lives some time in a Village near Paris, called St.
Denice, with this betrayed un^fortunate; till being found out and like to be
apprehended, (one for the Rape, the other for the flight) she is forced to
Marry a Cadet, a creature of Philander's, to bear the name of Husband only to
her, while Philander had the entire possession of her, Soul and Body: S^^ll the
League went forward, (...) all things were ready for a War in Paris; but it is
not my business here to mix the rough relation of a War with the soft affairs
of Love; let it suffice, the Hugonots were defeated and the King got the day,
and every Rebel lay at the mercy of his Sovereign; ^hilander was taken
Prisoner, made his escape to a little Cottage near his own Palace, not far from
Paris, writes to Silvia to come to him, which she do^s, and (...) spite of all
the industry to res^ize him he got away with Silvia.

After this flight, these Letters were found in their Cabinets, at their house
at St. Denice, where they both lived together for the space of a year, and they
are as exactly as possible pl^c'd in the order they were sent, and were those
supposed to be written toward the latter end of their Amors.

LETTERS
To Silvia.
THough I parted from you resolved to obey your impossible commands, yet know,
oh charming Silvia! that after a Thousand conflicts between Love and Honor, I
found the God (too mighty for the Idol) reign absolute Monarch in my Soul, and
soon banished that Tyrant thence. That cruel Councellor that would suggest to
you a Thousand fond Arguments to hinder my noble pursuit; Silvia came in view!
her unresistable Idea! with all the charms of blooming youth, with all the
Attractions of Heavenly Beauty! loose, wanton, gay, all flowing her bright
hair, and languishing her lovely eyes, her dress all negligent as when I saw
her last, discovering a Thousand ravishing Graces, round white small Breast's,
delicate Neck, and rising Bosom, heaved with sighs she would in vain conceal;
and all besides, that nicest fancy can imagine surprising -- Oh I dare not
think on, lest my desires grow mad and raving; let it suffice, oh adorable
Silvia! I think and know enough to justify that flame in me, which our weak
alliance of Brother and Sister has rendered so criminal; but he that adores
Silvia, should do it at an uncommon rate; it is not enough to sacrifice a single
heart, to give you a simple Passion, your Beauty should like it self produce
wondrous effects; it should force all obligations, all laws, all ties even of
Natures self: You my lovely Maid, were not born to be obtained by the dull
methods of ordinary loving; and it is in vain to pres^ribe me measures; and oh
much more in vain to urge the nearness of our Relation. What Kin my charming
Silvia are you to me? No ties of blood forbid my Passion; and what is a Ceremony
imposed on man by custom? what is it to my Divine Silvia, that the Priest took
my hand and gave it to your Sister? what Alliance can that create? why should a
trick devised by the wary old* only to make provision for posterity, tie me to
an eternal slavery. No, no my charming Maid, it is nonsense all; let us (born for
mightier joys) scorn the dull beaten road, but let us love like the first race
of men, nearest allied to God, promiscuously they loved, and possess'st, Father
and Daughter, Brother and Sister met, and reaped the joys of Love without
control, and counted it Religious coupling, and 'twas encouraged too by Heaven
it self: Therefore start not (too nice and lovely Maid) at shadows of things
that can but frighten fools. Put me not off with these delays! rather say you
but dissembled Love all this while, than now it is born, to let it die again with
a poor fright of nonsense. A fit of Honor! a fantome imaginary and no more;
no, no represent me to your soul more favorably, think you see me languishing
at your feet, breathing out my last in sighs and kind reproaches, on the
pityless Silvia; reflect when I am dead, which will be the more afflicting
object, the Ghost (as you are pleased to call it) of your Murdered Honor, or
the pale and bleeding one of

The lost Philander. I have lived a whole day and yet no Letter from my Silvia.


To Philander.
OH why will you make me own (oh too importunate Philander!) with what regret I
made you promise to prefer my Honor before your Love.

I confess with blushes, which you might then see kindling in my face, that I
was not at all pleased with the Vows you made me, to endeavor to obey me, and
I then even wished you would obstinately have denied obedience to my just
commands; have pursued your criminal flame, and have left me raving on my
undoing: For when you were gone, and I had leisure to look into my heart, alas!
I ^ound whether you obliged or not, whether Love, or Honor were preferred, I,
unhappy I, was either way inevitably lost. Oh what pityless God, fond of his
wondrous power, made us the objects of his Almighty vanity? oh why were we two
made the first presidents of his new ^ound revenge? for sure no Brother ever
loved a Sister with so criminal a flame before: At least my unexperienced
innocence never met with so fatal a story: And it is in vain (my too charming
Brother) to make me insensible of our Alliance; to persuade me I am a stranger
to all but your eyes and Soul.

Alas your fatally kind Industry is all in vain. You grew up a Brother with me;
the title was fixed in my heart, when I was too young to understand your subtle
distinctions, and there it th^iv'd and spread; and it is now too late to
transplant it, or alter its Native Property: Who can grant a flower on a
contrary stalk? The Rose will bear no Tulips, nor the Hyacinth the Poppy; no
more will the Brother the name of Lover. O spoil not the natural sweetness and
innocence we now retain, by an endeavor fruitless and destructive; no, no
Philander, dress your self in what Charms you will, be powerful as Love can
make you in your soft argument, -- yet, oh yet you are my Brother still, -- But
why, oh cruel and eternal Powers, was not Philander my Lover before you
destined him a Brother? or why being a Brother did you malicious and spightful
powers destin^ him a Lover! oh take, either title from him, or from me a life
which can (...) since your cruel laws permit it not for Philander, nor his to
bless the now

Unfortunate Silvia. Wednesday Morning.


To Philander.
AFter I had dismissed my Page this morning with my Letter, I walked (filled with
sad soft thoughts of my Brother Philander) into the Grove, and commanding
M^linda to retire, who only attended me, I threw my self down on that bank of
grass where we last disputed the dear but fatal business of our souls: Where
our prints (that invited me) still remain on the pressed greens: There with Ten
Thousand sighs, with remembrance of the tender minutes we past then, I drew
your last Letter from my Bosom; and often kissed and often read it over, but oh,
who can conceive my Torment, when I came to that fatal part of it, where you
say you gave your hand to my sister, I found my soul agitated with a Thousand
different passions, but all insupportable, all mad, and raving; sometimes I
threw my self with fury on the ground, and pressed my panting heart to the cold
earth, then rise in rage and tear my hair, and hardly spare that face that
taught you first to love: then fold my wretched Arms to keep down rising Sighs
that almost rend my breast, I traverse swiftly the conscious Grove; with my
distracte^ show'ring eyes directed in vain to pityless Heaven, the lovely
^ilent shade favoring my complaints, I cry alowd, oh God! Philander's Married,
the lovely charming thing for whom I languish is Married! -- That fatal word's
enough, I need not add to whom. Married's enough to make me curse my Birth, my
Youth, my Beauty, and my eyes that first betrayed me to the undoing object:
Curse on the Charms you have flattered, for every fancied Grace has helped my
ruin on; now like flowers that wither unseen and unpossest in shades, they
must die and be no more, they were to no end created since Philander's Married:
Married! oh fate, oh Hell, oh torture and confusion! tell me not it is to my
Sister, that addition's needless, and vain: To make me eternally wretched there
needs no more than that Philander's Married! than that the Priest gave your
hand away from me; to another and not to me; tired out with life I need no
other pasport than this Repetition, Philander's Married! it is that alone is
sufficient to lay in her cold Tomb

The wretched and despairing* SILVIA. Wednesday night, Bellfon^.


To Silvia.
TWice last night, oh unfaithful and unloving Silvia! I sent my Page to the old
place for Letters, but he returned the object of my rage, because without the
least remembrance from my fickle Maid: In this Torment, unable to hide my
disorder, I suffered my self to be laid in bed; where the restless torments of
the night exceeded those of the day, and are not even by the languisher himself
to be expressed; but the returning light brought a short slumber on its Wings;
which was interrupted by my attoneing Boy, who brought Two Letters from my
adorable Silvia: He waked me from Dreams more agreeable than all my watchful
hours could bring, for they are all tortured -- And even the softest mixed with
a Thousand despairs, difficulties, and disappointments, but these were all
love, which gave a loose to joys undeny'd by Honor! and this way my charming
Silvia you shall be mine, in spite of all the Tyrannies of that cruel
hinderer; Honor appears not my Silvia within the close drawn Cur^ains, in
shades and gloomy light the fantom, frights not, but when one beholds its
blushes, when its attended and adorned, and the Sun sees its false Beauties; in
silent Groves and grotto's, dark Alcoves, and lonely recesses, all its
formalities are laid aside; 'twas then, and there, methought my Silvia yielded!
with a faint struggle and a soft resistance; I heard her broken sighs, her
tender whispering Voice that trembling cried -- Oh can you be so cruel. -- Have
you the heart -- Will you undo a Maid because she loves you? Oh will you ruin
me because you may? -- My faithless -- My unkind, then sigh't and yielded, and
made me happier than a Triumphing God! but this was still a Dream, I waked and
sigh't and found it vanish all! But oh my Silvia, your Letters were substantial
pleasure, and pardon your Adorer if he tell you, even the disorder you express,
is infinitely dear to him, since he knows it all the effects of Love, Love my
soul! which you in vain oppose; pursue it, Dear, and call it not undoing, or
else explain your fear, tell me what your soft, your trembling heart gives that
cruel title to? is it undoing to Love? and love the Man you say has Youth and
Beauty to justify that Love? a man that adores you with so submissive and
perfect a resignation; a man that did not only Love first; but is resolved to
die in that agreeable flame; in my Creation I was formed for Love, and destined
for my Silvia, and she for her Philander: And shall we* can we disappoint our
Fate, no my soft Charmer, our souls were touched with the same shafts of Love
before they laid a being in our Bodies, and can we contradict Divine Decrees?

Or is 't undoing, Dear, to bless Philander with what you must some time or
other sacrifice to some hated loathed object, (for Silvia can never love again)
and are those Treasures for the dull conjugal Lover to rifle? was the beauty of
Divine shape created for the cold Matrimonial embrace? and shall the eternal
joys that Silvia can dispense, be returned by the clumsey Husband's careless
forced insipid duty's; oh my Silvia shall a Husband (whose insensibility will
call those Raptures of joy! those Heavenly Blisses! the drudgery of life) shall
he I say receive 'em? While your Philander with the very thought of the excess
of pleasure, the least possession would afford, saints over the Paper that
brings you here his eternal Vows.

Oh where my Silvia ly's the undoing then? my Quality and Fortune are of the
highest rank amongst men* My Youth gay and fond, my Soul all soft, all Love;
and all Silvia's! I adore her, I languish for her, I am sick of Love and sick
of Life, till she yields she is all mine!

You say my Silvia I am Married, and there my happyness is Shipwrecked; but
Silvia I deny it, and will not have you think it; no, my Soul was Married to
yours in its first Creation; and only Silvia is the Wife of my sacred, my
everlasting Vows; of my solemn considerate thought, of my ripened Judgment, my
mature considerations. The rest are all repented and forgot, like the hasty
folly's of unsteady Youth, like Vows breathed in Anger, and die Perjured as soon
as vented, and unregarded either of Heaven or Man. Oh why should my Soul suffer
for ever, why eternal pain for the unheedy short-lived sin of my unwilling
Lips; besides, this fatal thing called Wife* this unlucky Sister, this
Mertilla, this stop to all my Heaven, that breeds such breeds such fatal
differences* in our (...) Affairs, this Mertilla I say, first broke her
Marriage Vows to me; I blame her not, nor^ is it reasonable I should, she saw
the young Cesario, and Loved him* Cesario, whom the envying World in spite of
prejudice must own, has unresistable Charms; that Godlike form, that sweetness
in his face, that softness in his Eyes and delicate Mouth; and every Beauty
besides that Women (...) and Men envy* That lovely composition of Man and
Angel! with the addition of his eternal Youth and Illustrious Birth, was formed
By Heaven and Nature for universal Conquest! and who can love the charming Hero
at a cheaper rate than being undone: And she that would not venture Fame,
Honor, and a Marriage Vow for the Glory of the young Cesario's heart, merits
not the noble Victim; oh* would I could say so much for the young Philander,
who would run a Thousand times more hazards of life and Fortune for the
Adorable Silvia, than that amorous Hero ever did for Mertilla, though from that
Prince I learned some of my disguises for my thefts of Love, for he like Jove
courted in several shapes, I saw 'em all, and suffered the delusion to pass
upon me; for I had seen the lovely Silvia? yes I had seen her, and I loved her
too* But Honor kept me yet Master of my Vows; but when I knew her false, when
I was once confirmed, -- When by my own Soul I found the dissembled Passion of
^er's, when she could no longer hide the blushes or the paleness that seized at
the approaches of my disordered ^ival, when I saw Love dancing in her eyes and
her false heart beat with nimble motions* and soft trembling seize every (...),
at the approach or touch of the Royal Lover, then I thought my self no longer
obliged to conceal my flame for Silvia; nay e're I broke silence, e're I
discovered the hidden Treasure of my heart, I made her falsehood plaine^ yet:
Even the time and place of the dea^ assignations I discovered; certainty! happy
certainty! broke the dull heavy chain, and I with joy submitted to my shameful
freedom, and caressed my generous Rival, nay and by Heaven I loved him for it,
pleased at the resemblance of our Souls, for we were secret Lovers both, but
more pleased that he Loved Mertilla, for that made way to my passion for the
adorable Silvia!

Let the dull hot-brained jealous fool upbraid me with cold Patience: Let the
fond Coxcomb whose Honor depends on the frail Marriage Vow, reproach me, or
tell me that my Reputation depends on the feeble constan^y of ^ Wife, persuade
me it is Honor to fight for (...) and unval^^'d Prize, and that because my
Rival has taken leave to Cuc^old me, I shall give him leave to kill me too:
Unreasonable nonsense grown to custom. No* by Heaven! I had rather (...)
should be false, (as she is) than wish and languish for the happy occasion, the
Sin's the same, only the Act's more generous: Believe me my Silvia, we have all
false notions of V^rtue and Honor, and surely this was taken up by some
desp^ring Husband in Love with a (...) (...) Wi^^, and then I ^ardon him: ^
should have done as much: for only (...) that has my Soul, can only engage my
Sword, she that I love, and my self only commands and keeps my stock of Honor:
For Silvi^! the Charming the distracting Silvia! I could sight for a glance or
smile, expose my heart for her dearer fame, and wish no recompense, but
breathing out my last gasp into her soft white delicate bosom. But for a Wife!
that stranger to my Soul, and whom we Wed for ^nterest and necessity, -- A
Wife, a light loose unregarding Property, who for a momentary Apetite will
expose her fame, without the noble end of loving on, she that will ^buse my
Bed, and yet return again to the loathed conjugal embrace, back to the Arms so
hated, that even strong fancy of the absent Youth beloved, cannot so much as
render supportable* Curse on her, and yet she kisses, fawnes and dissembles on,
hangs on his Neck, and makes the Sot believe: -- Damn her, Brute; i will whistler
off, and let her down the Wind, as Othella says. No, I adore the Wife, that
when ^he heart is gone, boldly and nobles persues the Con^queror, and
generously owns the Whore, -- Not poorly adds the nau^ious sin of Jilting to it:
That I could have born, at least commended; but this can never Pardon; at worst
then the world had said her Passion had undone her, she loved, and Love at
worst is pity. No, no Me^tilla, I forgive your Love, but never can your poor
dissimulation. One drives you but from the heart you value not, but the other to
my eternal contempt. One deprives me but of thee Mer^illa, but the other intitles
me to a Beauty more s^^pr^sing, renders* thee no part of me, and so leaves* the
Lover free to Silvia, without the Brother.

Thus my excellent Maid I have sent you the sense and truth of my Soul in an
affair you have often hinted to me, and I take no pleasure to remember, I hope
you will at least think my ^version reasonable, and that being thus
undisputably freed from all obligations to Mertilla as a Husband, I may be
permitted to lay claim to Silvia as a Lover, and marry my self more effectually
by my everlasting Vows, than the Priest by his common method could do to any
other Woman less beloved, there being no other way at present left by Heaven,
to render me Silvia's

Eternal happy Lover and PHILANDER. (...)


To Silvia.
WHen I had sealed the enclosed, Brilljard told me you were this Morning come
from Belfont, and with infinite impatience have expected seeing you here; which
deferred my sending this to the old place; and I am so vain (on Adorable
Silvia!) as to believe my fancied silence has given you disquiets; but sure my
Silvia could not charge me with neglect, no she knows my Soul, and lays it all
(...), or some strange accident, she knows no business could divert me. No were
the Nation sinking, the great Senate of the world confounded, our Glorious
Designs betrayed and ruined, and the vast City all in flame; like Nero
unconcerned I Would sing my everlasting Song of Love to Silvia; which no time or
Fortune shall untune. I know my Soul and all its strength and how it is
fortified, the charming Idea of my young Silvia will for ever remain there, the
original may fade, time may render it less fair, less blooming in my Arms, but
never in my Soul, I shall find thee there the same gay glorious creature that
first surprised and enslaved me, believe me Ravishing Maid I shall* Why then*
oh why my cruel Silvia! are my joys delayed? why am I by your rigorous commands
kept from the sight of my Heaven* my eternal bliss? an Age my fair Tormentor's
past, Four tedious live long days are num^er'd over since I beheld the ^bject
of my lasting Vows, my eternal wishes, how can ^ou think, oh unreasonable*
Silvia! (...) I could live so ^ong without you, and yet I am live I (...) it by
my pain, by ^^rments of fears and jealou^^es insupportable, I languish (...) go
downward to the ^^arth, where you will shortly see me laid without your
recalling mercy; it is true I move about this unregarded* world, appear every
day in the great Senate House at Clubs, Caballs, and private consultations (for
Silvia knows all the business of my Soul, even its politics of State as well
as Love) I say I appear indeed, and give my Voice in public, business, but o^
my Heart* more kindly is employed* that and my thoughts are, Silvia's! Ten
Thousand times a day* I breath that name, my busy fingers are eternally
tracing ou^ those Six mystic Letters, a Thousand ways on every thing I touch,
form words, and make 'em speak a Thousand things, and all are Silvia still; my
melancholy change is evident to all that see me, which they interpret many
mistaken ways, our Party fancy I repent, my League with 'em, and doubting* I Will
betray the Cause, grow jealous of me, till by new Oaths, new Arguments I
confirm 'em* then they smile all* and cry I am in Love! and this they would
believe, but that they see all Women that I meet or converse with (...)
indifferent to me, and (...) can fix it no where* (...) thus while I dare not
tell my Soul, no not even to Cesario, the stifled flame burns inward and
torments me so, that (unlike the thing I was) I fear Silvia will lose her Love,
and Lover too; for those few Charms she said I had, will ^ade, and this fatal
distance will destroy both Soul and Body too, my very reason will abandon me,
and I shall ^ave to see thee; restore (...) restore me then to Bellfont, happy
Bellfont still best with Silvia's presence! permit me oh permit me into those
^acred Shades, where I have been so often (too innocently) blessed! let me survey
again the dear characters of Silvia on the smooth Birch; oh when shall I sit
beneath those Boughs, gazing on the young Goddess of the Grove, ^earing her
sigh for Love; touching her glowing small white hands, beholding her killing
eyes languish, and her Charming bosom rise and fall with short-breathed
uncertain breath; breath as soft and sweet as the restoring breeze that glides
or the newblown flowers. But oh what is it! what Heaven of Perfumes, when it
inclines to the ravi^h^ Philander, and whispers Love, it dares not name aloud!

What power withholds me then from rushing on thee, from pressing thee with
Kisses, folding thee in my transported Arms, and following all the dictates of
Love without respect or Awe. What is it oh my Silvia can d^tain (...) Love so
violent and raving, and so wild; admit me sacred Maid, admit me again to those
soft delights; that I may find if possible, what Devinity (envious of my bliss)
checks my eager joys; my raging flame; while you too make an experiment (worth
the Trial) what (...) makes Silvia deny her

Impatient Adorer PHILANDER
My Page is Ill, and I am obliged to trust B^ill jard with these to the dear
Cottage of their Rendevouz, send me your opinion of his fidelity: and (...) I
die to see you.




To Philander.
NOt yet? -- Not yet? oh ye dull tedious Hours when will you glide awa^? and
bring that happy moment on, in which I shall at least hear from my Philander*
Eight and Forty teadious ones are past, and I am here forgotten still; forlorn,
impatient, restless every where; not one of all your little moments (ye
undiverting hours) can afford me repose; I drag ye on, a heavy Load; I count ye
all; and bless ye when you are gone; but tremble at the approaching ones, and
with a dread expect you; and nothing will divert me now, my Couch is tiresome,
and my ^lass is vain; my Books are dull, and conversation insupportable, the
Grove affords me no relief; nor even those Birds to whom I have so often
breathed Philander's name, they sing it on their perching Boughts; no nor the
reviewing; of his dear Letters, can bring me any ease. Oh what face's reserved
for me; for thus I cannot live; no^ surely thus I shall not by. Perhaps
Philander's making a trial of Virtue by this Silence. Pursue it, call up all
your reason my lovely Brother to your aid, let us be wise and silent, let us
try what that will do toward the cure of this too infectious flame; let us, oh
let us my Brother sit down here, and pursee the crime of Loving on no further.
Call me Sister -- Swear I am so, and nothing but your Sister: and forbear, oh
forbear my Charming Brother to pursue me farther with your soft bewitching
Passion, let me alone, let me be ruined with Honor if I must be ruined -- For
oh! were much happyer I were no more than that I should be more then
Philander's Sister; or he than Silvia's Brother: Oh let me ever call you by
that cold name, till that of Lover be forgotten: -- Ha! -- Methinks on the
suddai^ a fit of Virtue informs my Soul, and bids me ask you for what sin of
mine my Charming Brother you (...) pursue a Maid that cannot fly Ungenerous and
unkind! why did you take advantage of those Freedoms I gave you as a Brother, I
smiled on you, and sometimes kissed you too; -- But for my Sisters sake. I played
with you, suffered your Hands and Lips to wander were I dare not now; all which
I thought a Sister might allow a Brother and knew not all the while the
Treachery of Love: Oh none, but under that intimate title of a Brother, could
have had the opportunity to have ruined me; that, that betrayed me: I played
away my Heart at: a Game I did not understand; no knew I when '^was lost, by
degrees so subtle, and an authority so lawful, yo^ won me out of all. Nay then
too, even when all was lost, I would not think it Love. I wondered what my
sleepless Nights, my walking eternal thoughts, and slumbring Visions of my
lovely Brother meant, I wondered why my Soul was continually filled with wishes
and new desires; and still concluded 'twas for my Sister all: till I discovered
the cheat by jealousy, for when my Sister hung upon your neck; kissed and
^a^rest that face that I adored, oh how I found my color change, my Limbs all
trembled, and my blood enraged, and I could scarce forbear reproaching you:
Orcrying out, Oh why this fondness Brother. Sometimes you perceived my concern,
at which you would smile, for you who had been before in Love, (a curse upon the
fatal time) could guess at my disorder; then would you turn the wanton play on
me: When sullen with my jealousy and the cause, I fly your soft embrace, yet
wish you would pursue and overtake me, which you never failed to do, where
after a kind quarrel all was pardoned, and all was well again: While the poor
injured innocent my Sister, made her self sport at our delusive Wars: Still I
was ignorant, till you in a most fatal hour informed me I was a Lover. Thu^ was
it with my heart in those blessed days of innocence; thus it was won and lost;
nor can all my Stars in Heaven prevent, I doubt prevent my ruin. Now you are
sure of the fatal conquest you scorn the trifling Glory you are silent now; oh
I am inevitably lost, or with you or without you: And I find by this little
silence and absence of yours, that it is most certain I must either die or be
Philander's.

SILVIA.
If Dorillus come not with a Letter, or that my Page whom I have sent to his
Cottage for one bring it not, I cannot, support, my Life, for oh Philander I
have a Thousand wild distracting fears, knowing how you are involved in the
Interest you have espoused with the young Caesario: how danger surrounds you,
how your life and Glory depends on the frail secrecy of Villains and Rebels:
Oh give me leave to fear eternally your fame and life, if not your Love, if
S^lvia could command, Philander should be Loyal as he is Noble; and what
generous Maid would not suspect his Vows to a Mistress who breaks 'em with his
Prince and Masters, Heaven preserve you and your Glory.




To Philander
ANother Night oh Heavens and yet no Letter come! Where are you my Philander?
What happy place contains you! if in Heaven, why does not some posting Angel
bid me have after you? if on Earth, why does not some little God of Love bring
the grateful tidings on his painted Wings! if sick, why does not my own fond
heart by sympathy inform me, but that is all active, vigorous, wishing,
impatient of delaying silence, and busy in imagination; if you are false, if
you have forgotten your poor believing and distracted Silvia, why does not that
kind Tyrant Death, that meager welcome Vision of the desparing, old, and
wretched, approach in dead of Night, approach* my restless Bed, and tole the
dismal tidings in my frighted listening ears, and strike me for ever file ^t,
lay me for ever qui^t, lost to the world, lost to my faithless Charmer: But if
a sense of Honor in you, has made you resolve to prefer mine before your Love,
made you take up a noble fatal resolution never to tell me more of your
Passion, this were a Trial I fear my fond heart wants courage to bear; or is it
a trick, a cold fit only assumed to try how much I Love you? I have no Arts
Heaven knows, no guile or double meaning in my soul, it is all plain native
simplicity, fearful and timorous as Children in the Night, trembling as Doves
pursued; born soft by Nature, and made tender by Love; what, oh! what will
become of me then! Yet would I were confirmed in all my fears: For as I am my
condition is yet more deplorable, for I Am in doubt, and doubt is the worst
torment of the mind: Oh Philander be mercyful, and let me know the worst, do
not be cruel while you kill, do it with pity to the wretched Silvia, oh let me
quickly know whether you are at all, or are the most impatient and unfortunate*

SILVIA'S.
I rave, I die for some Relief.




To Philander
AS I was going to send away this enclosed (...) came with Two Letters; oh you
cannot think Philander with how much reason you call me fickle Maid, for could
you but imagine how I am tormentingly divided, how unresolved between violent*
Love, and cruel* Honor: You would say 'twere impossible to fix me any where*
or be the same thing for a moment together, There is not* ashore hour past
through the swift hand of time, since I was all despairing raging Love,
jealous, fearful, and impatient; and now, now that your fond Letters have
dispersed those Damons, those tormenting Counselors, and given a little
respit, a little tranquillity to my Soul; like States luxurious grown with ease,
it ungratefully rebels against the Sovereign power that made it great and
happy; and now that Traitor Honor heads the mutiners within; Honor whom my
late mighty fears had almost famisht and brought to nothing, warmed and revived
by the new protested flame, makes War against Almighty Love! and I, who but now
nobly resolved for Love! by an inconstancy natural to my Sex, or rather my
fears, am turned over to Honor's side: So the despairing man stands on the
Rivers Bank, designed to plunge into the rapid stream, till coward fear seizing
his timorous soul, he views around once more the flowery Plains, and looks with
wishing eyes back to the Groves, then sighing stops, and cry's I was too rash,
forsakes the dangerous shore, and hasts away. Thus indiscreet was I; was all
for Love, fond and undoing Love! but when I saw it with full Tide flow in upon
me, one glance of Glorious Honor* makes me again retreat. I will -- I am
resolved -- And must be brave! I cannot forget I Am Daughter to the great
Beralti, and Sister to Mertilla, a yet unspotted Maid, fit to produce a race of
Glorious Hero's! and can Philander's Love set no higher value on me than base
poor prostitution! is that the price of his heart? -- Oh how I hate thee now!
or would to Heaven I could. -- Tell me not thou charming Beguiler, that
Mertilla was to blame, was it a fault in her, and will it be virtue in me; and
can I believe the crime that made her lose your heart, will make me Mistress of
it: No, if by any action of here is, the noble House of the Beralti be
dishonored, by all the Actions of my Life it shall receive Additions of Luster
and Glory! nor will I think Mertilla's virtue lessened for your mistaken
opinion of it, and she may be as much in vain pursued perhaps, by the Prince
Caesario* as Silvia shall be by the young Philander; the envying world talks
loud it is true, but (...) if all were true that busy, babbler says, ^ what Lady
has her fame? What Husband is not Cuckold? Nay and a friend to him that made
him so; and it is in vain my too subtle Brother, you think to build the trophies
of your Conquests on the ruin of both Mertilla's fame and mine; oh how dear
would your inglorious passion cost the great unfortunate house of the Beralti,
while you poorly ruin the fame of Mertilla to make way to the heart of Silvia;
Remember, oh remember once your Passion was as violent for Mertilla, and all
the Vows, Oaths, Protestations, tears and Prayers you make and pay at my feet,
are but the faint repetitions, the feeble eccho's of what you sigh't out at
hers. Nay like young Paris, fled with the fair Prize; your fond, your eager
Passion made it a Rape: Oh Perfidious! -- Let me not call it back to my
remembrance. -- Oh let me die rather than call to mind a time so fatal; when the
lovely false Philander vowed his heart, his faithless heart away to any Maid
but Silvia: -- Oh let it not be possible for me to imagine his dear Arms ever
grasped any body with joy but -- Silvia's! -- And yet they did, with transports
of Love! yes, yes you loved! by Heaven you loved this false, this perfidious
Mertilla; for false she is; you loved her, and I Will have it so; nor shall the
Sister in me plead her Cause. She Is false beyond all Pardon; for you are
beautiful as Heaven it self can render you, a shape exactly formed, not too low
nor too tall, but made to beget soft desire and everlasting wishes in all that
look on you; but your face! your lovely face! inclining to round, large
piercing languishing black eyes, delicate proportioned Nose, charming dimpl'd
Mouth, plump red Lips, inviting and swelling white Teeth, small and even, fine
complexion, and a beautiful turn! all which you had an Art to order in so
engaging a manner that it charmed all the beholders, both Sexes were undone
with looking on you; and I have heard a witty man of your Party swear your face
gained more to the League and Association than the Cause, and has cursed a
Thousand times the false Mertilla for preferring Caesario (less beautiful) to
the adorable Philander; to add to this, Heaven! how you spoke* when e're you
spoke, of Love! in that you far surpast the young Caesario! as young as he,
almost as great and Glorious; Oh Perfidious Mertilla. Oh false, oh foolish and
ingrate! -- that you abandoned her was just, she was not worth retaining in
your heart, nor could be worth defending with your Sword; -- But grant her
false; Oh Philander! how does her perfidy entitle you to me? false as she is,
you still are Married to her; inconstant as she is, she is still your Wife; and
no breach of the Nuptial Vow can unty the fatal knot; and that is a Mystery to
common sense; sure she was Born for mischief, and Fortune when she gave her
you, designed the ruin of us all; but most particularly

The Unfortunate SILVIA.


To Silvia.
My Souls eternal joy, my Silvia! what have you done, and oh how durst you
knowing my fond Heart try it with so fatal a stroke; what means this severe
Letter? and why so eagerly at this time of the day, is Mertilla's Virtue so
defended; is it a question now whether she is false or not? oh poor, oh
frivolous excuse! you love me not, by all that is good you love me not! to try
your power you have flattered and feigned, oh Woman! false Charming Woman! you
have undone me! I rave, and shall commit such extravagance that will ruin
both: I must upbraid you, fickle and inconstant, I must, and this distance will
not serve, it is too great, my reproaches lose their force, I burst with
resentment with injured Love, and you are either the most faithless of your
Sex, or the most malicious and tormenting: Oh I am past tricks my Silvia, your
little arts might do well in a beginning slame; but to a lettled Fire that is
arrived to the highest degree, it does but damp its fierceness, and instead of
drawing me on, would lessen my esteem, if any such deceit were capable to
harbor in the Heart of Silvia, but she is all Divine, and I am mistaken in the
meaning of what she says: Oh my adorable think no more on that dull false
thing a Wife, let her be banished thy thoughts, as she is my Soul; let her never
appear though but in a Dream to ^right our solid joys, our true happiness; no,
let us look forward to Pleasures vast and unconfined, to coming transports: and
leave all behind us that contributes not to that Heaven of Bliss: Remember, oh
Silvia, that five tedious days are past since I ^igh't at your dear feet; and
five days to a Man so madly in Love as your Philander, is a tedious Age; it is
now ^ix a Clock in the Morning, Brilljard will be with you by Eight, and by Ten
I may have your permission to see you, and then I need not say how soon I will
present my self before you, at Bellfont; for Heaven's sake my eternal Blessing,
if you design me this happiness, contrive it so, that I may see no body that
belongs to Bellfont, but the fair, the lovely Silvia; for I must be more
moments with you, than will be convenient to be taken notice of, le^t they
suspect our business to be Love, and that discovery, yet, may ruin us. Oh I
will delay no longer, my Soul's impatient to see you, I cannot live another
Night without it, I die, by Heaven! I languish for the appointed hour; you will
believe when* you see my languid Face and dying Eyes, how much and great a
sufferer in Love I am.

My Soul's Delight, You may perhaps deny me from your fear, but oh! do not,
though I ask a mighty blessing; Silvia's Company, alone, silent, and perhaps by
Dark, -- Oh though I faint with the thought only of so blessed an opportunity,
yet you shall secure me, by what Vows, what imprecations or ty's you please;
bind my busy hands; blind my ravished eyes; command my Tongue, do what you
will; but let me hear your Angels Voice, and have the transported joy of
throwing my self at your feet; and if you please give me leave (a man condemned
eternally to Love) to plead a little for my Life and passion; let me remove
your fears, and though that mighty Task never make me entirely happy, at least
'twill be a great satisfaction to me to know, that it is not through my own
fault that I am the

Most Wretched PHILANDER.
I have ordered Brilljar^ to (...) your Commands at Dorillus his Cottage, that
he may not be seen at Bellfont: resolve to see me to Night, or I shall (...),
without order and injure both: My dear Damned Wife is disposed of at a Ball
Caesario (...) to Night; the opportunity will be l^ckey, not that I fear her
jealousy, but the effects of it.




To Philander.
I Tremble with the apprehension of what you ask, how shall I comply with your
fond desires? My Soul bodes some dire effect of this bold enterprise, for I
must own (and blush while I do own it) that my Soul yields obedience to your
soft request, and even whilst I read your Letter, was diverted with the
contrivance of seeing you: For though as my Brother you have all the freedoms
imaginable at Bellfont to entertain and walk with me, yet 'twould be difficult
and prejudical to my Honor, to receive you alone any where without my Sister:
and cause a suspicion, which all about me now are very far from conceiving,
except Melinda my faithful confident, and too fatal Councellor: and but for
this fear, I know my charming Brother, three little Leagues should not five
long days separa^e Philander from his Silvia. But my lovely Brother, since you
beg it so earnesty, and my heart consents so easily, I must* pronounce my own
Doom and say, Come my Philander, whither Love and soft desire invites you, and
take this direction in the management of this mighty affair; I would have you
as soon as this comes to your hands, to have to Dorillus's Cottage, without
your Equipage, only Brilljard, whom I believe you may trust both from his own
discretion and your vast bounty's to him; wait there till you receive my
commands: and I will retire betimes to my Apartment pretending not to be well,
and as soon as the Evenings obscurity will permit, Melinda shall let you in at
the Garden Gate that is next the ^rove, unseen and unsuspected, but oh thou
powerful Charmer have a care, I trust you with my all: my dear, dear, my
precious Honor, guard it well, for oh I fear my forces are too weak to stand
your shock of Beauties; you have Charms enough to justify my yielding, but yet
by Heaven I would not for an Empire: but what is dull Empire to Almighty Love!
the God subdues the Monarch! it is to your strength I trust, for I am a feeble
Woman, a Virgin quite disarmed by two fair eyes, an Angels Voice and form, but
yet I Will die before I Will yield my Honor; no though our unhappy Family have met
reproach from the imagined levity of my Sister; it is I Will redeem the bleeding
Honor of our Family, and my great Parents Virtues shall shine in me; I know
it, for if it passes this Test, if I can stand this Temptation, I Am proof
against all the World; but I conjure you aid me if I need it: If I incline but
in a Languishing look, if but a wish appear in my eyes, or I betray consent but
in a Sigh; take not, oh take not the opportunity* lest when you have done I grow
raging mad, and discover all in the wild fit; oh who would venture on an enemy
with such unequal force; what hardy fool would hazard all at Sea that sees the
rising Storm come rouling on; who but fond Woman, giddy heedless Woman? would
thus expose her Virtue to Temptation, I see, I know my danger, yet I must
permit it; Love soft bewitching Love will have it so, that cannot deny what my
^eebler Honor forbids; and though I tremble with fear, yet Love suggests,
'twill be an Age to Night; I long for my undoing; for oh I cannot stand the
batteries of your eyes and tongue, these fears, these conflicts I have a
Thousand times a day, it is pitiful sometimes to see me, on one hand a Thousand
Cupids all gay and smiling present Philander with all the Beauties of his sex,
with all the softness in his looks and Language those Gods of Love can inspire
with all the Charms of youth adorned, bewitching all, and all transporting; on
the other hand, a poor lost Virgin languishing and undone; sighing her willing
rape to the deaf shades and ^ ^^^tains; filling the Woods with cry's, swelling
the Murmering Rivolets with tears, her noble Parents with a generous Rage
reviling her, and her befray'd Sister loading her bowed head with curses and
reproaches; and all about her looking forlorn and sad: Judge, oh Judge my
adorable Brother, of the vastness of my courage and passion, when even this
deplorable prospect cannot defend me from the resolution of giving you
admittance into my Apartment this Night, nor shall ever drive you from the Soul
of your

SILVIA.


To Silvia.
I Have obeyed my Silvia's dear commands, and the dictates of my own impatient
Soul, as soon as I received 'em, I immediately took Horse for Bellfont, though
I knew I should not see my Adorable Silvia till Eight or Nine at Night; but oh
it is wondrous pleasure to be so much more near my eternal joy; I wait at
Dorillus his Cottage the tedious approaching Night that must shelter me in its
kind shades, and conduct me to a pleasure I faint but with imagining; it is now
my Lovely Charmer Three a Clock, and oh how many tedious hours I am to languish
here before the blessed one arrive* I know you Love, my Silvia* and therefore
must guess at some part of my to ^ment, which yet is mixed with a certain
trembling joy not to be imagined by any but Silvia, who surely loves Philander,
it there be truth in Beauty, ^aith in Youth, she surely loves him much, and
much more above her Sex she is capable of Love; by how much more her Soul's
formed of a softer and more delicate composition, by how much more her Wits
refined and elevated above her duller Sex, and by how much more she is obliged
if Passion can claim Passion in return, sure no Beauty was ever so much
indebted to a slave, as Silvia to Philander, none ever Loved like me! Judge then
my pains of Love, my Joys, my ^ears, my impatience, and desires, and call me to
your sacred presence with all the speed of Love; and as soon as '^is duskish,
imagine me (...) the Meadow behind the Grove, 'till when think me employed in
eternal thoughts of Silvia* restless, and talking to the Trees of Silvia,
sighing her charming Name, circling with folded^ Arms my panting heart, (that
beats and trembles the more, the nearer it approaches the happy Bellfont) and
fortifying the ^eeble trembler against a ^ight ^oo Ravishing and surprising, I
fear to be sustained with Life; but if I faint in Silvia's Arms, it will be
happyer far than all the Glories of Life without her.

Send my Angel something from you to make the Hours less tedious, consider me,
Love me, and be as impatient as I; that you may the sooner find at your feet
your everlasting Lover

PHILANDER. From* Do^illus's Cottage.


To Philander.
I Have at last recovered sense enough to tell you, I have received your Letter
by Dorillus, and which had like to have been discovered, for he prudently
enough put it under the Strawbery's he brought me in a Basket, fearing he
should get no other opportunity to have given it me; and my Mother seeing 'em
look so fair and fresh, snatched the Basket with a greediness I have not seen in
her before; while she was calling to her Page for a Porcellane Dish to put 'em
out, Dorillus had opportunity to hint to me what lay at the bottom; ^eaven's
had you seen my disorder and confusion! what should I do; Love had not one
invention in store, and here it was that all the subtilty of Women abandoned
me. Oh Heaven's how cold and pale I grew* lest the most impor^ant (...) of my
Life should be betrayed and ruined; but not to terr^fy you longer with fe^rs of
my danger* the Dish came, and ou^ the Strawberries were powered, and the Basket
thrown aside on the Bank where my Mo^her sat, (for we were in the Garden when
we met accidentally Dorillus first with the Basket) there were some leaves of
Fern put at the bottom between the Basket and the Letter, which by good fortune
came not out with the strawberries, and after a Minute or two I took up the
Basket and walkig carelessly up and down the Garden, Gathered here and there a
flower, Pinks and Jessamine, and filling my Basket sat down again till my
Mother had eat her fill of the Fruit, and gave me an opportunity to retire to
my apartment, where opening the Letter, and finding you so near and waiting to
see me, I had certainly sunk down on the floor had not Melinda supported me,
who was only by, something so new, and till now so strange, seized me at the
thought of so secret an interview, that I lost all my senses, and Life wholly
departing, I rested on Melinda without breath or motion, the violent effects of
Love and Honor, the impetuous meeting tides of the extremes of joy and fear,
rushing on too suddenly, overwhelmed my senses; and 'twas a pretty while
before I recovered strength* to get to my Cabinet, where a second time I opened
your Letter, and read it again with a Thousand changes of Countenance, my whole
mass of Blood was in that moment so discomposed, that I changed from Ague to
Fever, several times in a Minute; oh what will all this bring me to? and where
will the raging fit end? I die with that thought, my guilty pen slackens in my
trembling hand, and I Languish and fall over the unimploy'd Paper; -- Oh help
me some Divinity -- Or if you did, -- I fear I should be angry! Oh Philander! a
Thousand Passions and distracted thoughts crowd to get out, and make their soft
complaints to thee, but oh they lose themselves with Mixing; they are blended
in a confusion together, and Love nor Art can divide 'em, to deal 'em out in
order; sometimes I would tell you of my Joy at your Arrival, and my unspeakable
transports at the thought of seeing you so soon, that I shall hear your
charming* Voice, and find you at my feet making soft Vows a now, With all the
Passion of an impatient Lover, with all the eloquence that sighs and Cries and
tears from those lovely eyes can express; and sure that is enough to conquer any
where; and to which, course vulgar words are dull: The Rhetoric of Love is
half-breath'd, interrupted words, languishing Eyes, flattering Speeches, broken
Sighs, pressing the ^and, and falling Tears: Ah how do they not persuade; how
do they not charm and conquer; 'twas thus with these soft easy Arts, that
Silvia first was won^! for sure no Arts of speaking could have talked my heart
away, though you can speak like any God! oh whether am I driven, what do ^ say;
'twas not my purpose nor my business here, to give a character of Philander* no
not to speak of Love! but oh like Cowley's Lute, my Soul will found to nothing
but to Love! talk what you will, begin what discourse you please, I end it all
in Love! because my Soul is ever fixed on Philander; and insensibly its byas
peads to that subject; no, I did not when I began to Write, think of speaking
one word of my own weakness; but to have told you with what resolved Courage,
Honor, and Virtue, I expect your coming; and sure so sacred a thing as Love
was not made to ruin these, and therefore in vain my lovely Brother you will
attempt it; and yet (oh Heaven's! I give a private Assignation, in my
Apartment, alone and at Night; where silence, Love, and shades are all your
friends, where opportunity obliges your Passion, while Heaven knows, not one of
all these, nor any kind power is friend to me, I shall be left to you, and all
these Tyrants, exposed without other Guards than this boasted Virtue, which had
need be wondrous to resist all these powerful enemies of its purity and
repose: Alas I know not its strength, I never tried it yet; and this will be
the first time it has ever been exposed to your Power, the first time I ever
had courage to meet you as a Lover, and let you in by stealth, and put my self
unguarded into your hands; Oh I die with the apprehension of approaching danger;
and yet I have not power to retreat, I must on, Love compells me, Love holds me
fast, the smiling flatterer promises a Thousand joys, a Thousand Ravishing
Minutes of delight; all innocent and harmless as his Mothers Doves: But oh they
Bill and kiss, and do a Thousand things I must forbid Philander: for I have
often heard him say with sighs, that his complexion rendered him less capable
of the soft play of Love, than any other Lover: I Have seen him fly my very
touches, yet swear they were the greatest joy on Earth: I tempt him even with
my looks from Virtue; and when I ask the cause, or cry he is cold, he vows it is
because he dares not endure my Temptations; says his Blood runs hotter and
fircer in (...) Veins than any others does; nor has the (...) repeated joys
reaped in the Marriage Bed, any thing abated that which he w^sht, but he fea^'d
would ruin me: Thus, thus whole days we have ^at and gazed and sighed, but
durst not trust our Virtues with fond Dalliance.

My Page is come to tell me that Madam the Duchess of -- is come to Bellont,
and I am obliged to quit my Cabinet, but with infinite regret, being at present
much more to my Soul's content employed; but Love must sometimes give place to
Devoir and respect; Dorillus too waits, and tells Melinda, he will not depart
without something for his Lord, to entertain him till the happy hour: The
Rustic pleased me with the concern he had for my Philander; oh my Charming
Brother, you have an Art to tame even salvages, a Tongue that would charm and
engage wildness it self, to softness and gentleness, and give the rough
unthinking Love; it is a tedious time to night, how shall I pass the hours?


To Silvia.
SAy fond Love whither will thou lead me? thou have brought me from the noysey
hurry's of the Town, to charming solitude; from Crowded Cabals, where mighty
things are resolving to loanly Groves, to thy own abodes, where thou dwell'st,
gay and pleased, amongst the Rural Swains in shady homely Cottages; thou have
brought me to a Grove of flowers, to the brink of Purling Streams, where thou
have laid me down to contemplate on Silvia! to think my tedious hours away, in
the softest imagination a Soul inspired by Love can conceive; to increase my
Passion by every thing I behold; for every Sound that meets the sense, is thy
proper Music, oh Love! and every thing inspires thy dictates; the Winds a
round me blow soft, and mixing with the wanton Boughs, continually play and
Kiss; while those like a coy Maid in Love resist and comply by turns; they like
a ravished vigorous Lover, rush on with a transported violence; rudely embracing
its Spring-drest Mistress, ruffling her Native order; while the pretty Birds on
the dancing Branches incessantly make Love: upbraiding duller man with his
defective want of fire: man the Lord of all! he to be stinted in the most
valuable joy of Life! is it not Pity? here is no troublesome Honor, amongst the
pretty inhabitants of the Woods and Streams, fondly to give Laws to Nature, but
uncontrolled they play, and sing, and Love; no Parents checking their dear
delights, no slavish Matrimonial ties to restrain their Nobler flame. No spies
to interrupt their blessed appointments, but every little Nest is free and open
to receive the young fles^ch't Lover; every bough is conscious of their
Passion, nor do the generous pair languish in tedious Ceremony, but meeting
look, and like, and Love, embrace with their Wingy arms, and salute with their
little opening Bills; this is their Courtship; this the amorous complement, and
this only the introduction to all their following happiness; and thus it is
with the Flocks and Herds, while scanted man, born alone for the fatigues of
Love, with industrious toil, and all his boasting Arts of Eloquence, his
Godlike Image, and his noble form, may labor on a tedious term of years, with
pain, expense, and hazard, before he can arrive at happiness, and then too
perhaps his Vows are unregarded, and all his Sighs and Tears are vain. Tell me
oh you fellow Lovers, yea amorous dear Bruits tell me, when ever you lay
Languishing beneath your Coverts thus for your fair she; and durst not approach
for fear of Honor? tell me by a gentle bleat ye little butting Rams; do you
Sigh thus for your soft white Ewes? do you ly thus concealed, to wait the
coming shades of Night, till all the curled spies are folded? no, no, even you
are much more blessed than Man, who is bound up to rules fettered by the nice
decencies of Honor.

My divine Maid, thus were my thoughts employed, when from the farthest end of
the Grove where I now remain, I saw Dorillus approach with thy welcome Letter,
he tells you had like to have been surprised in making it up; and he received
it with much difficulty, ah Silvia should any accident happen to prevent my
seeing you to Night, I were undone for ever, and you must expect to find me
stretched out, dead and cold under this Oak where now I ly Writing on its
knotty root; thy Letter I confess is dear, it contains thy Soul and my
happiness, but this after story of the surprise I long to be informed of, for
from thence I may gather part of my Fortune. I rave and die with fear of a
disappointment, not but I would u^dergo a Thousand Torments and deaths for
Silvia; but oh consider me, and let me not suffer if possible; for know my
charming Angel, my impatient heart is almost broke, and will not contain it
self without being nearer my adorable Maid; without taking in at my Eyes a
little comfort, no, I am resolved! put me not off with tricks, which foolish
Honor invents to jilt mankind with; for if, you do, by Heaven I will forget
all considerations and respect, and force my self with all the violence of
raging Love, into the presence of my cruel Silvia, own her mine, and Ravish my
delight, nor shall the happy Walls of Bellfont be of strength sufficient to
secure her, nay, persuade me not, for if you make me mad and raving, this will
be the effects on it: -- Oh pardon me my sacred Maid, pardon the wildness of my
frantic Love. -- I paws'd; took a turn or two in the lone path, considered
what I had said, and found it was too much; too bold, too ^ude to approach, my
soft, my tender Maid: I am calm my Soul, as thy bewitching smiles; hush as thy
secret Sighs, and will resolve to die rather than offend my adorable Virgin;
only send me word what you think of my Fate, while I expect it here on this
kind Mossy bed where I nowly; which I would not quit for a Throne, since here I
may hope the News may soonest arrive to make me happier than a God! which that
nothing on my part may prevent, I here Vow in the face of Heaven, I will not
abuse the freedom my Silvia blesses me with; nor shall my Love go beyond* the
limits of Honor. Silvia: shall command with a frown, and fetter me with a
Smile; prescribe rules to my longing Ravished Eyes, and pinion my busy fond
Roving hands: and lay at her feet like a tame slave, her adoring.

PHILANDER.


To Philander.
APproach, approach you ^acred Queen of Night, and bring Philander Veiled from
all eyes but mine! approach at a fond Lovers call, behold how I ly panting with
expectation, tired out with your tedious Cerimony to the God of day; be kind oh
lovely Night, and let the Deity descend to his beloved Th^tis's Arms, and I to
my Philanders; the Sun and I must snatch our joys in the same happy hours!
favored by thee* oh sacred silent Night! see, see the enamored Sun is hasting
on a pace to his expecting Mistress, while thou dull Night art, slowly ling^ing
yet. Advance my Friend* my Goddess! and my confident! hide all my blushes, all
my soft confusions, my tremblings, transports, and Eyes all Languishing.

Oh Philander! a Thousand things I Have done to divert the tedious hours, but
nothing can: all things are dull without thee. I Am tired with every thing,
impatient to end, as soon as I begin 'em, even the Shades and solitary Walks
afford me now no ease, no satisfaction and thought* but afflicts me more, that
used to relieve. And I at last have recourse to my kind Pen: For while I Write
methinks I Am talking to thee, I tell thee thus my Soul, while thour methinks
art all the while smiling and listening by; this is much easier than silent
thought, and my Soul ^s never weary of this converse, and thus I would speak a
Thousand things, but that still, methinks words do not enough express my Soul,
to understand that right there requires looks; there is a Rethorick in looks,
in Sighs and silent touches that surpasses all! there is an Accent in the sound
of words too, that gives a sense and soft meaning to little things, which of
themselves are of trivial value, and insignificant; and by the cadence of the
utterance may express a tenderness which their own meaning does not bear; by
this I would insinuate that the story of the heart cannot be so well told by
this way as by presence and conversation; sure Philander understands what I
mean by this? which possibly is nonsense to all but a Lover, who apprehends all
the little fond prattle of the thing beloved, and finds an Eloquence in it,
that to a ^ense unconcerned would appear even approaching to Folly: But
Philander, who has the true Notions of Love in him, apprehends all that can ^e
said on that dear Subject; to him I venture to say any thing, whose kind and
soft imaginations can supply all my wants in the description of the Soul: Will
it not Philander, answer me? -- But (...) where art thou? I ^ee thee not, I
touch thee not; but when I have with transport to embrace thee, it is shadow
(...), and my poor Arms return empty to my Bosom why, oh why (...) it thou ^ot
why art thou cautious* and Prudently wa^test the slow-paced Night: Oh cold, oh
unreasonable Lover why? -- But, I grow wild and know not what I say: Impatient
Love betrays me to a Thousand folly's a Thousand rashnesses: I die with shame,
but I must be undone and it is not matter how, whether by my own weakness,
Philander's Charms, or both; I know not, but so it is destined, -- Oh Philander,
it is two tedious hours Love has counted, since you Writ to me, yet are but a
quarter of a Mile distant; what have you been doing all that livelong while?
are you not unkind, does not Silvia ly, neglected and unregarded in your
thoughts? hudled up confu^edly with your graver business of State, and almost
lost in the ambitious crowd? Say, say my lovely Charmer, is she not, does not
this fatal Interest you espouse, Rival your Silvia, is she not too often
removed thence to let in that haughty Tyrant Mistress? Alas Philander I more
than fear she is; and oh my Adorable Lover, when I look forward on our coming
happiness, when ever I lay by the thoughts of Honor, and give a loose to Love,
I run not far in the pleasing carier, before that dreadful thought stop me on
my way: I have a fatal prophetic fear, that gives a check to my soft pursuit,
and tells me that thy unhappy engagement in this League, this accursed
Association, will one day undo us both, and part for ever thee and thy unlucky
Silvia; yes, yes my dear Lord; my Soul does presage an unfortunate event from
this dire engagement; nor can your false Reasoning, your fancied advantages
reconcile it to my honest, good-natured heart; and surely the design is
inconsistent with Love, for two such mighty contradictions and enemies as Love
and ambition, or revenge (...) can never sure abide in one ^oul together, at
least Love can but share Philander Heart when blood and ^evenge (which he (...)
Glory) R^vals it, and has (...) the greatest part in it, methin^^ this notion
inlarges in me, and every word^ I speak, and every Minutes thoug^ o^ it,
strengthens its reasons to me, and give me leave (while I am full of the
jealousy of it) to express my sentiments, and lay before you those reasons
that Love and I think most substantial ones what you have hitherto de^^^d of
me, oh unreasonable Philan^^^^ and what (I out of Modesty and Honor denied) I
have reason to fear (from the absolute conquest you have made of my Heart) that
some time or other the charming thief may break in and rob me of, for fame and
Virtue love begins to laugh at My dear unfortunate condition being thus, it is
not impossible, oh Philander, but I may one day in some unlucky hour in some
(...) be witching moment in some spightful critical ravishing minute, yield all
to the Charming Philander and if so where oh, where is my security that I shall
not be abandoned by the Lovely Victor, for it is not your Vows which you call
sacred (and I alas believe so) that can secure me, though I Heaven knows
believe 'em all, and am undone; you may keep 'em all too, and I believe you
will, but oh Philander in these fatal circumstances you have engaged your self
in, can you secure me my Lover? your protestations you may, but not the dear
Protestor. Is it not enough, oh Philander, for my eternal unquiet and undoing
to know you are Married, and cannot therefore be entirely mine? is not this
enough, oh cruel Philander? but you must espouse a fatal cause too, more
pernicious than that Matrimony, and more destructive to my repose: oh give me
leave to reason with you, and since you have been pleased to trust and afflict
me with the secret; which honest as I am I will never betray yet, yet give me
leave to urge the danger of it to you, and consequently to me, if you pursue
it, when you are with me, we can think and talk, and argue nothing but the
mightier business of Love! and it is ^it I that so fondly and fatally love you,
should warn you of the danger. Consider my Lord you are born Noble, from
Parents of untainted Loyalty, blessed with a Fortune few Princes beneath
Sovereignty are Masters of; blessed with all gaining Youth, commanding Beauty,
Wit, Courage, Bravery of mind, and all that renders men esteemed and adored
what would you more? what is it oh my Charming Brother then that you set up
for, is it Glory? oh mistaken lovely Youth, that Glory is but a glittering
light that flashes for a moment, and then it disappears, it is a false ^^avery
that will bring an eternal blem^^ upon your honest ^ame and house; render your
honorable name, hated, detested, and abominable in story to after Ages, a
Traitor? the worst of Titles, the most inglorious and shameful; what has the
King, our good, our Gracious Monarch done to Philander? how disobliged him? or
indeed what injury to Mankind? who has he oppressed? where played the Tyrant; or
the Ravisher? what one cruel or angry thing has he committed in all the time of
his fortunate and peaceable Reign over us? Whose Ox or whose Ass has he
unjustly taken? What Orphan wronged or Widows Tears neglected? but all his Life
has been one continued Miracle, all Good, all Gracious, Calm and Merciful: and
this good, this Godlike King is marked out for slaughter, designed a Sacrifice
to the private revenge of a few ambitious Knaves and Rebels, whose pretense is
the public good, and doomed to be basely Murdered; A Murder even on the worst
of Criminals carries with it a Cowardice so black and infamous, as the most
abject Wretches, the meanest pirited Creature has an abhorrence for; what to
Murder a Man unthinking, unwarn'd, unprepared and undefended^^ oh barbarous! oh
poor and most unbrave! what Villain^^ is there so lost to all humanity, to be
found upon the face of the Earth, that wher^^ done, dares own so hellish a
deed, as the Murder of the meanest of his Fellow Subjects, much less the
sacre^^ Person of the King! Th^^ Lords Anointed; one whose awful face it is
impossible to look without that reverence wherewith one would be hold a God!
for it is mos^^ certain, that every Glanc^^ from his piercing wondr^^ eyes,
begets a trembling A do ration; for my part I Sw^^^ to you, Philander, I never
approach His Sacred Person, but my Heart beats, my Blood runs cold about me,
and my Eyes overflow with Tears of joy, while an awful confusion seizes me all
over, and I am certain should the most hardened of your Bloody Rebels look him
in ^^he face, the devilish instrument of Death would drop from his sacrilegious
hand, and leave him confounded at the feet of the Royal forgiving Sufferer, his
eyes have in 'em something so fierce, so Majestic commanding, and yet so good
and merciful as would soften Rebellion it self into repenting Loyalty; and like
Cajus Marius seem to say -- who is it dares hurt the King! -- They alone like
his Guardian Angels defend his Sacred Person, oh! what pity it is, unhappy young
man, thy Education was not near the King.

It Is plain, it is reasonable, it is honest, Great and Glorious to believe, what
thy own sense (if thou will but think and consider) wilt instruct thee in, that
Treason, Rebellion and Murder are far from the Paths that lead to Glory, which
are as distant as Hell from Heaven. What is it then to advance (since I say
it is plain, Glory is never this way to be achieved) is it to add more*
Thousands to those, E^^rtune has already so lavishly bestowed on you? oh my
Philander that is to double the (...) crime, which reaches already to Damnation*
would your Honor, your Con^^cience, your Christianity or ^ommon humanity
suffer you to inl^^ge your Fortunes at the price of another ruin? and make
the spoils of some honest Noble Unfortunate Family* the rewards of your
Treachery? would you build your fame on such a Foundation? Perhaps on the
destruction of some friend or Kinsman. Oh Barbarous and mistaken Greatness,
Thieves and Robbers would scorn such outrages, that had but souls and sense.

I^ i^ for addition of Titles? what elevation can you have much greater than
where you now stand fixed, if you do not grow giddy with your fancied false
hopes* and fall from that glorious height you are already arrived to, and which
with the honest addition of Loyalty, is of far more value and luster than to
arrive at Crowns* by Blood and Treason. This will last; to Ages last; in story
last. While the other will be ridiculed to^^ all posterity, short lived and
reproachful here, infamous and accursed to all eternity.

Is it to make Caesario King? oh what is Caesario to my Philander? If a
Monarchy you design; then why not this King, this great, this good, this Royal
Forgiver? -- This who was born a King; and born your King; and holds his Crown
by right of Nature, by right of Law, by right of Heaven it self; Heaven who has
preserved him, and confirmed him ours, by a Thousand miraculous escapes and
sufferings, and indulged him ours by Ten Thousand acts of mercy and indear'd
him to us by his wondrous care and conduct, by securing of Peace, plenty, ease
and luxurious happiness, over all the fortunate limits of His Blessed Kingdoms;
and will you, would you destroy this wondrous gift of Heaven: this Godlike
King, this real good we now possess, for a most uncertain one: and with it the
repose of all the happy Nation, to establish a King without Law, without right,
without consent, without Title, and indeed without even competent parts for so
vast a trust or so Glorious a rule: One who never obliged the Nation by one
single Act of Goodness, or Valor in all the course of his Life; and who never
signalized either to the advantage of one man of all the Kingdom: A Prince
unfortunate in his Principles and Morals: And whose sole single Ingratitude to
his Majesty, for so many Royal Bounty's, Honors, and Glories heaped upon him,
is of its self enough to set, any honest generous heart against him; what is it
bewitches you so? is it his Beauty? then Philander has a greater Title than
Caesario; and not one other merit has he; since in Piety, Chastity, Sobriety,
Charity, and Honor, he as little excels, as in Gratitude, Obedience, and
Loyalty. What then my dear Philander! is it his weakness? Ah there is the
Argument: You all propose and think to govern so soft a King: But believe me,
oh unhappy Philander! nothing is more ungovernable than a Fool; nothing more
obstinate, willful, conceited and cunning; and for his gratitude, let the world
judge what he must prove to his Servants who has dealt so ill with his Lord and
Master; how he must reward those that present him with a Crown, who deals so
ungraciously with him who gave him Life, and who set him up an happyer object
than a Monarch; No, no Philander, he that can cabal, and contrive to dethrone a
father, will find it easy to discard the wicked and hated Instruments that
assisted him to mount it; decline him then oh fond and deluded Philander,
decline him early, for you of all the ^^est ought to do so; and not to set a
helping hand to load him with Honors, that chose you out from all the World to
load with infamy: remember that; remember Mertilla, and then renounce him; do
not you contribute to the adoring of his unfit head with a Diadem, the most
glorious of Ornaments, who unadorned yours, with the most inglorious of all
reproaches. Think of this, oh thou unconsidering Noble Youth, lay thy hand upon
thy generous heart, and tell it all the fears, all the reasonings of her that
loves thee more than life, a Thousand Arguments I could bring, but these few
unstudyed (falling in amongst my softer thoughts) I beg thou will accept of,
till I can more at large deliver the Glorious Argument to your Soul; let this
suffice to tell thee, that the like Cassandria I rave and prophecy in vain,
this Association will be the eternal ruin of Philander, for let it succeed or
not, either way thou art undone; if thou pursu'st it, and I must infallibly
fall with thee, if I resolve to follow thy good or ill Fortune, for you cannot
intend Love and Ambition, Silvia and Caesario at once: No, persuade me not, ^he
Title to one or the other must be laid down* Silvia or Caesario must be
abandoned; this is my fixed resolve, if thy too powerful Arguments convince not
in spite of reason; for they can do it, thou have the tongue of an Angel, and
the Eloquence of a God, and while I listen to thy Voice, I take all thou say
for wondrous sense -- Farewell; about* Two hours hence I shall expect you at
the Gate that leads into the Garden Grove -- Adieu! remember*

SILVIA.


To Silvia.
HOw comes my charming Silvia so skilled in the Mysteries of State? where
learnt her tender heart the Notions of rigid business? where her soft Tongue,
formed only for the dear Language of Love, to talk ^f the concerns of Nations
and Kingdoms? it is true, when I gave my Soul away to my dear Councellor, I
reserved nothing to my self, not even that secret that so concerned my Life,
but laid all at her Mercy; my generous Heart could not Love at a less rate,
than to lavish all, and be undone for Silvia; it is Glorious ruin, and it
pleases me, if it advance once single joy, or add one demonstration of my Love
to Silvia; it is not enough that we tell those we Love all they love to hear,
but one ought to tell 'em too, every secret that we know; and conceal no part
of that Heart one has made at present to the person one Loves, it is a Treason
in Love not to be Pardoned, am sensible that when my story's told (and this
happy one of my Love shall make up the greatest part of my History) that those
that Love not like me; will be apt to blame me, and charge me with weakness for
revealing so great a trust to a Woman; and amongst all that I shall do to
arrive at Glory, that will brand me with sea^less* but Silvia when Lovers shall
read it, the men will excuse me, and the Maids bless me! I shall be a fond
admired president, for them to point but to their remiss reserving Lovers, who
will be reproached for not persuing my example. I know not what opinion Men
generally have of the weakness of Women; but it is sure a vulgar error, for were
they like my adorable Silvia! had they her wit, her vivacity of spirit, her
Courage, her generous fortitude, her command in every graceful look and Action,
they were most certainly fit to rule and Reign, and Man was only born robust
and strong to secure 'em on those Thrones they are formed (by Beauty, Softness,
and a Thousand Charms which men want) to possess. Glorious Woman! was born for
command and Dominion; and though custom has usurpt us the name of Rule over
all; we from the beginning found our selves, (in spite of all our boasted
prerogative) slaves and Vassals to the Almighty Sex. Take then my share of
Empire ye Gods! and give me Love! let me toil to gain, but let Silvia Triumph
and Reign, I ask no more! no more than the led slave at her Chariot Wheels, to
gaze on my Charming Conqueress, and wear with joy her Fetters! oh how proud I
should be to see the dear Victor of my Soul so elevated, so adorned with Crowns
and Scepters at her feet, which I had won; to see her smiling on the adoring
Crown, distributing her Glories to young waiting Princes; there dealing
Provinces, and there a Coronet. Heavens! methinks I see the lovely Virgin in
this State, her Chariot slowly driving through the multitude that press to gaze
upon her, she dressed like Venus richly gay and loose, her Hair and Robe blown by
the flying Winds, discovering a Thousand Charms to view, thus the young Goddess
looked, then when she drove her Chariot down, descending Clouds to meet the
Lovesick God in cooling Shades; and so would look my Silvia! ah my soft lovely
Maid, such thoughts as these fired me with Ambition: For me, I swear by every
power that made me Love, and made thee wondrous fair, I design no more by this
great enterprise, than to make thee some glorious thing, elevated above what we
have seen yet on Earth: to raise thee above Fate or Fortune, beyond that pity
of they duller Sex, who understand not thy Soul, nor can never each the flights
of thy generous Love! no my Soul's joy I must not leave thee liable to their
little natural Malice and scorn, to the impertinence of their reproaches. No my
Silvia I must on, the great design must move forward; though I abandon it,
'twill advance, and it is already too far to put a stop to it; and now I Am
entered it is in vain to retreat, if we are prosperous, 'twill to all Ages be
called a Glorious enterprise, but if we fail^ 'twill be base* horrid, and
infamous, for the world judges of nothing but by the success; that cause is
always good that is prosperous, that is ill that is unsuccessful. Should I now
retreat I run many hazards, but to go on I run but one, by the first I shall
alarm the whole Cabal with a jealousy of my discovering, and those are persons
of too great sense and courage, not to take some private way of revenge, to
secure their own stakes; and to make my self uncertainly safe by a discovery
indeed, were to gain a refuge so ignoble, as a Man of Honor would scorn to
purchase Life at; nor would that baseness secure me. But in going on, oh
Silvia! when Three Kingdoms shall ly unpossest, and be exposed, as it were,
amongst the raffling Crowd, who knows but the chance may be mine, as well as
any others, who has but the same hazard, and throw for'^; if the strongest
Sword must do it, (as that must do it) why not mine still? why may not mine
still? Why may not mine be that fortunate one? Cesario has no more right to it
than Philander; it is true, a few of the Rabble will pretend he has a better
title to it, but they are a sort of easy Fools, lavish in nothing but noise and
nonsense, true to change and inconstancy, and will abandon him to their own
fury for the next that cries Haloo: Neither is there one part of fifty (of the
Fools that cry him up) for his Interest, though they use him for a Tool to work
with, he being the only great Man that wants sense enough to find out the
cheat, which they dare impose upon. Can any body of reason believe if they had
(...) him good, they would let him bare faced have owned a party so opposite to
all Laws of Nature, religion, Humanity and Common gratitude? when his Interest
if designed might have been carried on better, if he had still dissembled and
stayed in Court: no believe me, Silvia, the Politicians show him to renders^
him odious to all men of tolerable sense of the Party, for what reason soever
they have who are disobliged (or at least think themselves so) to set up for
Liberty, the world knows Cesario render: himself the worst of Criminals by it,
and has abandoned an interest more Glorious and Easy than Empire to side with
and aid People that never did or ever can oblige him: and he is so dull as to
imagine that for his sake (who never did us service or good, unless Cuckolding
us be good) we should venture life and fame to pull down a true Monarch, to set
up his Bastard over us (...) must (...) me, if I think his Politics are
shallow as his Parts, and that his own Interest has undone him; for of what
advantage soever the design may be to us, it really shocks ones nature to find
a son engaged against a Father, and to him such a Father: Nor when time comes,
shall I forget the ruin of Mertilla. But let him hope on -- and so will I, as
do a thousand more for ought I know; I set out as fair as they, and will start
as eager^y; if I miss it now, I have Youth and Vigor sufficient for another
Race, and while I stand on Fortunes Wheel as she rouls it round, it may be my
turn to be o'th top; for when it is set in motion, believe me Silvia, it is not
easily fixed; however let it suffice I Am now in past a retreat, and to urge it
now to me, is but to put me into inevitable danger; at best it can but set me
where I was, that is worse than death when every fool is aiming at a Kingdom;
what man of tolerable Pride and Ambition can be unconcerned, and not put
himself into a posture of catching, when a Diadem shall be thrown among the
Crowd? 'twere Insensibility* stupid Dullness, not to lift a hand, or make an
effort to snatch it as it flys: though the glorious falling weight should crush
me, it is great to attempt, and if fortune do not favor Fools, I have as fair a
Grasp for it as any other adventurer.

This my Silvia is my sense of a business you so much dread, I may rise, but I
cannot fall; therefore my Silvia urge it no more, Love gave me Ambition, and do
not divert the Glorious effects of your wondrous Charms* but let 'em grow and
spread and see what they will produce, for my Lovely Silvia the advantages will
most certainly be hers: -- But no more, how came my Love so Dull to entertain
thee so many minutes thus with reasons for an affair which one soft hour with
Silvi^ will convince to what she would have it; beli^ve me it will, I will
sacrifice all to her repose, nay to her least Command, even the Life of

(My Eternal Pleasure) Your PHILANDER.
I (...) no longer pati^^ce, I must ^e coming toward the Grove, though 'twill
do me no good, more than knowing I am so much nearer my Adorable Creature.

I conjure you burn this, for writing in haste, I have not counterfeited my
hand.




To Silvia,
Writ in a pair of Tablets.
MY Charmer, I wait your Commands in the Meadow behind the Grove, where I saw
Dorinda, Dorilus his Daughter, entering with a Basket of Cowslips for Silvia,
unnecessarily offering sweets to the Goddess of the Groves from whence they
(with all the rest of their gaudy ^ellows of the Spring) assume their Ravishing
Odours. I take every opportunity of telling my Silvia what I have so often
repeated, and shall be ever repeating with the same joy while I live, that I
Love my Silvia to Death and Madness, that my soul is on the Wrack, till she
send me the happy advancing word! And yet believe me Lovely Maid, I could grow
old with waiting here the blessed moment, though set at any distance (within
the compass of Life, and impossible to be till than arrived to) but when I am
so near approach't it; Love from all parts rallies and hastens to my heart for
the mighty encounter, till the poor panting overloaded Victim dies with the
pressing weight. No more, -- You know it, for it is and will be eternally
Silvia's.

POSTSCRIPT:
Remember my Adorable, it is now seven a Clock, I have my Watch in my hand,
waiting and looking on the slow pa^'d Minutes, Eight will quickly arrive I
hope, and then it is dark enough to hide me: hinkwhere I am, and who I am,
twaiting near Silvia, and her Phila^der.

I think my dear Angel you have the other Key of these Tablets, if not they are
easily broke open: you have an hour good to write in S^lvia, and ^ shall wait
unimployed by any thing but thought. Send me word how you were like to have
been surpised* it may possibly be of advantage to me in this nights dear
adventure. I wondered at the Superscription of my Letter indeed^ ^f which
Dori^us could give me no other account, than that you were surpised, and he
received it with difficulty; give me the story now, do i^ in charity my Angel.
Besides ^ would employ all thy moments, for I am jealous of every one that is
not dedicated to Sil^ia's Philander.




To Philander.
I Have received your Tablets, of which I have the key, and heaven only knows,
(for Lovers cannot unless they loved like Silvia and her Philander) what pains
and Pantings my heart sustained at every thought that brought me of thy near
approach; every moment I ^tart, and am ready to faint with joy, ^ear, and
something not to be expre^t that s^izes me. To add to this, I have busied my
self with dressing my Apartment up with Flowers, (...) that I ^ancy the
C^rmonious business of the night looks like the preparations for the dear joy
of the Nuptial Bed, that too is so adorned and decked with all that is sweet and
gay, all which possesses me with so ravishing and solemn a Confusion that it is
even approaching to the most profound sadness it self. Oh Philander, I find I
am fond of being undone, and unless you take a more than mortal care of me, I
know this night some f^tal mischief will befall me; what it is I know not,
either the loss of Philander, my Life, or my Honor, or all together, which a
discovery only of your being alone in my Apartment and at such an Hour, will
most certainly draw upon us: Death is the least we must expect, by some
surprise or other, my Father being rash, and extremely jealous, and the more so
of me, by how much more he is fond of me, and nothing would inrage him like the
discovery of an enterview like this; though you ^ave Liberty to range the house
of B^llfont as a son, and are indeed at home there, but when you come by
stealth; when he shall find his Son and Virgin Daughter, the Brother and the
Sister so retired, so entertained. -- What but death can ensue, or what is
worse, eternal shame? eternal confusion on my honor? What Excuse, what
Evasions, Vows and Protestations will convince him, or appease Mertila's
Jealousy, Mertilla my Sister, and Philander's Wife? -- Oh God! that cruel
thought will put me into ravings; I have a thousand streams of killing
reflection that flow from that original Fountain! Curse on the Alliance that
gave you a welcome to Bellfont. Ah Philander, could you not have stayed ten
short years longer? Alas you thought that was an Age in Youth, but it is but a
day in Love: Ah could not your eager youth have led you to a thousand
diversions, a thousand times have baited in the long journey of life without
hurrying on to the last Stage, to the last retreat, but the Grave; and to me
seem as Irrecoverable as impossible to retrieve thee? -- Could no kind Beauty
stop thee on thy way, in charity or pity? Philander saw me then! and though
Mertila was more ^it for his Care^^es, and I but capable to please with
Childish prattle. Oh could he not have seen a promising ^loom in my Face, that
might have ^^retold the future Conquests I was born to make? Oh was there no
Prophetic Charm that could bespeak your heart, engage it, and prevent that
fatal Marriage? You say my Adorable Brother, we were destined from our Creation
for one another; that the Decrees of Heaven, or Fate, or both, designed us for
this mutual passion: Why then, oh why did not Heaven ^ate, or Destiny, do the
mighty work, when first you saw my infant Charms. But oh Philander, why do I
vainly rave, why call in vain on time that is fled and gone; why idly wish for
Ten years retribution? That will not yield a Day, an Hour, a Minute: No no,
it is past, it is past and flown for ever, as distant as a thousand years to me,
as irrecoverable. Oh Philander, what have thou thrown away? Ten glorious years
of Ra^ishing Youth, of unmatched Heavenly Beauty, on one that knew not half the
value of it Silvia was only born to (...) a Rate up^n't, was alone capable of
Love, such love as might deserve it: Oh why was that charming face ever laid on
any bosom that knew not how to sigh an^ pant, and heave at every ^ouch o^ so
much distracting B^^uty. O^ why were those dear Arms whos^ soft pressings that
ravish where they circle, destined for a Body Cold and Dull, that could sleep
insensibly there, and not so much as dream the while what the transporting
pleasure signified, but unconcerned received the wondrous blessings, and never
knew its Price, or thanked her stars. She has thee all the day, to gaze upon,
and yet she lets thee pass her careless sight, as if there were ^o Miracles in
view: she does not see the little Gods of Love that play eternally in thy Eyes;
and since she never received a Dart from thence, believes there is no Artillery
there. She plays not with thy Hair, nor Weaves her snowy fingers in thy Curles
of Jett, sets it in order, or adores its Beauty: The Fool with flaxen Wigg had
done as well for her; a dull white* Coxcomb had made as good a Property; a
Husband is no more, at best no more. Oh thou Charming object of my eternal
wishes, why were thou thus disposed? Oh save my life, and tell me what
indifferent impulse obliged thee to these Nuptials: had Mertila been
recommended or forced by the Tyranny of a Father into thy Arms, or for base
Lucre thou have chosen her, this had excused thy Youth and Crime; obedience or
vanity I could have Pardoned, -- But oh -- 'Twas Love! Love my Phiander! thy
raving Love, and that which has undone thee was a Rape rather than a Marriage;
you fled with her. Oh Heavens, mad to possess you stole the unloving Prise! --
Yes you loved her, false as you are you did, perjured and faithless. Loved her;
-- Hell and confusion on the World, 'twas so. -- Oh Philander I am lost --


This Letter was found in pieces torn.

To Monsieur the Count of
My Lord,
THese Pieces of Paper which I have put together as well as I could, were writ
by my Lady to have been sent by Dorinda, when on a sudden she ro^e in rage from
her seat, tore first the Paper, and then her Robes and Hair, and indeed nothing
has escaped the violence of her Passion; nor could my Prayers or Tears retrieve
them or calm her: it is however changed at last to mighty passions of weeping,
in which employment I have left her on her repose, being commanded away. I
thought it my duty to give your Lordship this account, and to send the pieces
of Paper, that your Lordship may guess at the occasion of the sudden storm
which ever rises in that fatal quarter; but in putting 'em in order, I had like
to have been surpised by my Lady's Father, for my Lord the Count having long
soll^cited me for favors, and taking all opportunities of entertaining me,
found me alone in my Chamber, employed in serving your Lordship; I had only
time to hide the Papers, and to get rid of him) have given him an Assignation
to night in the Garden Grove to give him the hearing to what he says he has to
propose to me: Pray Heaven all things go right to your Lorships wish this
Evening, for many ominous things happened to day. Madam, the Countess had like
to have taken a ^etter writ for your Lordship to day; for the Duchess of --
coming to^ make her a visit, came on a sudden with her into my Lady'^
Apartment, and surpised her writing in her Dressing Room, giving her only time
to slip the Paper into her Comb-box. The first Ceremonies being past, as Madam
the Duchess uses not much, she fell to Commend my Lady's dressing Plate, and
taking up the Box and opening it, found the Letter, and Laughing cried, Oh have
I found you making Love? At which my Lady with an infinite confusion would have
retrieved it, -- But the Duchess not quitting her hold, Cried -- Nay I am
resolved to see in what manner you write to a Lover, and whether you have a
Heart tender or cruel; at which she began to read aloud, My Lady to blush and
change Color a Hundred times in a minute; I ready to dye with fear; Madam the
Countess in infinite amazement, my Lady interrupting every word the Duchess
read by Prayers and Entreaties, which heightened her Curiosity, and being young
and airy, regarded not the Indecency, to which she preferred her Curiosity, who
still Laughing, cried she was resolved to read it out, and know the
constitution of her heart; when my Lady, whose wit never failed her, Cried, I
beseech you Madam, let us have so much complisance for Melinda to ask her
consent in this affair, and then I am pleased you should see what Love I can
make upon occasion: I took the hint, and with a real confusion, Cried -- I
implore you Madam not to discover my weakness to Madam the Duchess; I would
not for the World -- Be thought to love so passionately as your Ladyship in
favor of Alexis has made me profess under the name of Silvia to Philander.
This incourag'^^ my Lady, who began to say a thousand pleasant things of Alexis
Dor^llus his Son, and my Lover as your Lordship knows, and who is no
inconsiderable fortune for a Maid enriched only by your Lordships Bounty. My
Lady after this took the Letter, and all being resolved it should be read, she
her self did it, and turned it so prettily into Burlesque Love by her manner of
reading it, that made Madam the Duchess laugh extremely; who at the end of it
cried to my Lady -- Well Madam I am satisfied you have not a heart wholly
insensible of Love, that could so well express it for another. Thus they
rallied on, ^^ill careful of my Lovers repose, the Duchess urged the Letter
might be immediately sent away, at which my Lady readily folding up the Letter,
writ, For the constant Alexis on the outside: I took it, and begged I might
(...) leave to retire to write it over in my own hand, they permitted me, and I
carried it after sealing it to Dorillus, who waited for it, and wondering to
find his Sons name on it, Cried -- Mistress M^linda, I doubt you have mistook
my present business, I wait for a Letter from my Lady to my Lord, and you give
m^ (...) from your self to my Son Alexis* 'twill be very welcome to Alexis I
confess, but at this time I had rather oblige my Lord than ^my Son; I Laughing,
replied he was mistaken, that Alexis at this time meant no other than my Lord,
which pleased the good man extremely, who thought it a goo^ omen for his Son,
and so went his way (...) as every body was except the Countess, who fancied
something more in it than my Lady's inditing for me; and after Madam the (...)
(...) I am confident she will not depart to night, and will possible set Spies
in every corner; at least it is good to fear the worst, that we may prevent all
things that would hinder this nights assignation: As soon as the Coast is
clear, I Will wait on your Lordship, and be your Conductor, and in all things
else am ready to show my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant, MELINDA.
Silvia has order to wait on your Lordship as soon as all is clear.




To Melinda.
OH Melinda, what have you told me? Stay me with an immediate account of the
recovery and calmness of my Adorable weeping Silvia, or I shall enter Belfont
with my Sword drawn, bearing down all before me 'till I make my way to my
Charming Mourner: Oh God! Silvia in a rage! Silvia in any Passion but that of
Love? I cannot; bear it, no by Heaven I cannot; I shall do some outrage either
on my self or at Bellfont. Oh thou dear Advocate of my tenderest Wishes, thou
Confident of my never dying flame, thou kind administering Maid, send some
relief to my breaking heart -- Have and tell me, Silvia is calm, that her
bright Eyes spa^kle with smiles, or if they languish, say it is with Love, with
expecting joys; that her dear hands are no more employed in exercises too rough
and unbecoming their native softness. Oh e^^ternal God! taring perhaps her
Divine Hair, brighter than the Suns re^lecting Beams, injuring the heavenly
Beauty of her Charming Face and Bosom, the joy and wish of all Mankind that
look upon her: Oh charm her with Prayers and Tears, stop her dear Fingers from
the rude assaults, bind her fair hands: Repeat Philander to her, tell her he is
fainting with the news of her unkindness and outrage on her lovely self, but
tell her too, I dye adoring her; tell her I rave, I tear, I curse my self, --
For so I do; tell her I would break out into a violence that should set all
Bellfont in a ^lame, but for my care of her. Heaven and Earth should not
restrain me, -- No, they should not, -- But her least frown should still me,
tame me, and make me a calm Coward: say this, say all, say any thing to charm
her rage and tears. Oh I am mad, stark mad, and ready to run on that frantic
business I dye to think her guilty of: tell her how 'twould grieve her to see
me torn and mangled; to see that hair she loves ruffl'd and diminisht by rage,
violated by my insupportable grief, my self quite bereft of all sense but that
of Love, but that of Adoration for my charming, cruel, Insensible, who is
possessed with every thought with every imagination that can render me unhapy,
born away with every fancy that is in disfavour of the wretched Philander. Oh
Melinda, write immediately, or you will behold me enter a most deplorable
object of Pity.

When I received yours, I fell into such a passion that I forced my self back
to Dorillus his House, lest my transports had hurried me to Bellfont, where I
should have undone all: but as I can rest no where, I am now returning to the
Meadow again, where I will expect your aid or dye.

From Dorillus his Cottage, almost nine a Clock.

To Philander.
I Must own my Charming Philander, that my Love is now arrived to that excess,
that every thought which before but discomposed me, now puts me into a violence
of rage unbecoming my Sex; or any thing but the mighty occasion of it, Love,
and which only had power to calm what it had before ruffled into a destructive
storm; but like the angered Sea, which pants and heaves and retains still an
uneasy motion long after the rude winds are appeased and hushed to silence. My
heart beats still, and heaves with the sensible remains of the late dangerous
tempest of my mind, and nothing can absolutely calm me but the approach of the
all-powerful Philander; though that thought possesses me with ten thousand
fears, which I know will vanish all at thy appearance, and assume no more their
dreadful shapes till thou art gone again: bring me then that kind cessation,
bring me my Lysander and set me above the thoughts of Cares, Frights or any
other thoughts but those of tender Love: have then thou charming object of my
eternal wishes, of my new desires, have to my Arms, my Eyes, my Soul, -- But oh
be wondrous careful there, do not betray the easy Maid that trusts thee amidst
all her sacred store.

It Is almost dark, and my Mother is retired to her Chamber, my Father to his
Cabinet, and has left all that Apartment next the Garden wholly without Spies.
I have by trusty Silvia sent you a Key M^linda got made to the Door, which
leads from the Garden to the back-Stairs to my Apartment, so carefully locked,
and the original Key so closely guarded by my jealous Father: that way I beg
you to come, a way but too well known to Lysander, and by which he has made
many an escape to and from Mertilla. Oh Damn that thought, what makes it
torturing me, -- Let me ^hange it for those of Lysander, the advantage will be
as great as ^artering Hell for Heaven; haste then Lysander: But what need I bid
thee, Love will lend thee his Wings, thou who command all his Artillery, put
'em on, and fly to thy Languishing

SILVIA.
O I faint with the dear thought of thy Approach.




To the Charming Silvia.
WIth much ado, with many a Sigh a panting heart, and many a Languishing look
back toward happy Bellfont, I have recovered Dorillus his Farm, where I threw
me on a Bed, and lay without motion, and almost without life for two hours;
'till at last through all my Sighs, my great Concern, my Torment, my Love and
Rage broke silence, and burst into all the different compla^nts both soft and
mad by turns, that ever possessed a soul extravagantly seized with frantic Love,
Ah Silvia, what did I not say? How did I not Curse, and who, except my Charming
Maid? For yet my Silvia is a Maid; Yes, yes, ye Envying Power she is, and yet
the sacred and inestimable treasure was offered a trembling victim to the
o'rejoy'd and fancied Deity, for then and there, I thought my self happier than
a triumphing God, but having overcome all difficulties, all the fatigues and
toils of Loves long Sieges, Vanquished the mighty Fantom of the ^air, the Giant
Honor, and routed all the numerous Host of Women's little Reasonings, past all
the bounds of peevish Modesty: Nay even all the loose and silken Counterscarps
that fenced the sacred Fort, and nothing stopped my glorious pursuit: Then, then
ye Gods, just then by an over transport, to fall just fainting before the
surrendering Gates, unable to receive the yielding treasure! Oh Silvia! what
Demon, malicious at my Glory, seized my vigor? What God, envious of my mighty
joy, rendered me ashameful object of his Raillery? Snatched my (till then) never
failing power, and left me dying on thy Charming Bosom. Heavens, how I lay!
Silent with wonder, rage and ecstasy of Love, unable to complain, or rail or
storm, or seek for ease but with my sighs alone, which made up all my breath;
my mad desires remained, but all unactive as Age or Death it self, as cold and
feeble, as unfit for joy, as if my Youthful fire had long been past, or Silvia
had never been blessed with Charms. Tell me thou wondrous perfect Creature, tell
me, where lay the hidden Witchcraft? Was Silvia's Beauty too Divine to mix with
Mortal Joys? Ah no, 'twas Ravishing but Humane all. Yet sure 'twas so
approaching to Divinity, as changed my Fire to Awful Adoration, and all my
wanton heat to reverend Contemplation. -- But this is nonsense all, 'twas
something more that gave me rage, despair and torments insupportable: No, 'twas
no dull Devotion, tame Divinity, but mortal killing Agony, unlucky
disappointment, unnatural impotence. Oh I am lost, enchanted by some Magic
Spell: Oh what can Silvia say? What can she think of my sond passion? She Will
swear it is all a cheat, I had it not. No, it could not be, such Tales I Have
often heard, as often laughed at too; of disappointed Lovers; would Silvia would
believe (as sure she may) mine was excess of Passion: What! my Silvia! being
arrived to all the joy of Love, just come to reap the glorious recompense, the
full reward, the Heaven for all my sufferings, do I lie gazing only and no
more? A dull, a feeble unconcerned Admirer: Oh my eternal shame! -- Curse on my
Youth, give me ye Powers Old Age, for that has some excuse, but Youth has none:
it is Dullness, Stupid Insensibility: Where shall I hide my head, when this lewd
Story's told? When it shall be confirmed, Philander the Young the Brisk and Gay
Philander, who never failed the Woman he scarce wished for; never ba^k'd the
Amorous conceated Old, nor the ill-favored Young; yet when he had extended in
his Arms the Young, the Charming Fair and Longing Silvia, the untouched,
unspotted, and till then unwishing Lovely Maid, yielded, defenseless and
unguarded all, he wanted power to seize the trembling Prey: Defend me Heaven
from Madness. Oh Silvia, I have reflected on all the little circumstances that
might occasion this distaster, and damn me to this degree of coldness, but I
can fix on none: I had it is true for Silvia's sake some apprehensions of fear
of being surpised, for coming through the Garden, I saw at the farther end a
man, at least I fancied by that light it was a man, who perceiving the glimps
of something approach from the Grove made softly toward me, but with such
caution as if he feared to be mistaken in the person, as much as I was to
approach him: and reminding what Melinda told me of an assignation she had made
to Monsi^ur the Count -- Imagined it him; nor was I mistaken when I heard his
voice calling in low tone -- Melinda. -- At which I mended my pace, and e're he
got half way the Garden recovered the Door, and softly unlocking it, got in
unperceived and fastened it after me, well enough assured that he saw not which
way I vanished: however it failed not to alarm me with some fears on your dear
account, that disturbed my repose, and which I thought then not necessary to
impart to you, and which indeed all vanished at the sight of my Adorable Maid:
When entering thy Apartment, I beheld thee extended on a Bed of Roses, in
Garments which, if possible, by their wanton loose negligence and gaiety
augmented thy natural Charms: I trembling sell on my Knees by your Bedside,
and gazed a while, unable to speak for transports of joy and love: You too were
silent, and remained so, so long that I ventured to press your Lips with mine,
which all their eager kisses could not put in motion, so that I feared you
fainted; a sudden fright that in a moment changed my Fever of Love into a cold
Ague fit; but you revived me with a Sigh again, and fired me anew, by pressing
my hand, and from that silent soft encouragement, I by degrees ravished a
thousand Blisses; yet still between your tempting charming kisses, you would
cry -- Oh my Philander do not injure me, -- Be sure you press me not to the
last joys of Love; -- Oh have a care or I am undone for ever; restrain your
roving hands, -- Oh whether would they wander, -- My Soul, my joy, my
everlasting Charmer, Oh whether would you go. -- Thus with a Thousand Cautions
more, which did but raise what you designed to calm, you made me but the madder
to possess: not all the Vows you bad me call to mind, could now restrain my
wild and headstrong passion; my raving raging (but my soft) desire: No Silvia,
No, it was not in the power of feeble flesh and blood to find resistance
against so many Charms; yet still you made me swear, still I protested, but
still burnt on with the same torturing flame, till the vast pleasure ev^^
became a pain: To add to this, I saw (Yes Silvia not all your Art and Modesty
could hide it) I saw the Ravishing Maid as much inflamed as I; she burnt with
equal fire, with equal Languishment: Not all her care could keep the Sparks
concealed, but it broke out in every word and look; her trembling tongue, her
feeble fainting voice betrayed it all, sighs in terrupting every syllable; a
Languishment I never saw till then dwelt in her Charming Eyes, that
contradicted all her little Vows; her short and double breathings heaved her
Breast, her swelling snowy breast, her hands that grasped me trembling as they
closed, while she permitted mine unknown, unheeded to traverse all her
Beauties, till quite forgetting all I Would faintly promised, and wholly abandoning
my soul to joy, I rusht upon her, who all fainting lay beneath my useless
weight, for on a sudden all my power was fled swifter than Lightning hurryed
through my infeebled veins, and vanished all: Not the dear lovely Beauty which I
pressed, the Dying Charms of that fair face and eyes, the Clasps of those soft
Arms, nor the bewitching accent of her voice that murmured Love half smo^her'd
in her Sighs, nor all my Love, my vast, my mighty passion, could call my
fugitive vigor back again: Oh no, the more I look -- The more I touched and
saw, the more I was undone. Oh pity me my too too lovely Maid, do not revile
the faults which you alone create. Consider all your Charms at once exposed,
consider every sense about me ravished, overcome with joys too mighty to be
supported: No wonder if I fell a shameful sacrifice to the fond Deity, consider
how I waited, how I strove, and still burnt on and every tender touch still
added fuel to the vigorous Fire; which by your delay consumed it self in
burning. I want Philosophy to make this out, or faith to fix my unhappiness on
any chance or natural accident, but this my Charming Silvia I am sure, that had
I loved you less, I Would been less wretched: Nor had we parted Silvia on so ill
terms, nor had I left you with an opinion so disadvantagious for Lysander, but
for that unhappy noise at your Chamber door, which alarming your fear,
occasioned your recovery from that dear trance, to which Love and soft desire
had reduced you and me from the most tormenting silent Agony that disappointed
joy ever possessed a fond expecting heart with. Oh Heavens to have my Silvia in
my power, Favored by silence, night, and safe retreat! then, then, to lie a
tame cold sigher only, as if my Silvia gave that Assignation alone by stealth,
undrest, all loose and languishing, fit for the mighty business of the Night,
only to hear me prattle, see me gaze, or tell her what a pretty sight it was to
see the Moon shine through the dancing Boughs. O Damn my hardened dullness, --
But no more, -- I am all fire and madness at the thought, -- But I was saying,
Silvia, we both recovered then when the noise alarmed us. I long to know
whether you think we were betrayed, for on that knowledge rests a mighty part
of my destiny, I hope we are not, by an accident that befell me at my going
away, which (but for my untimely force of leaving my lovely Silvia, which gave
me pains insupportable) would have given me great diversion. You know our fear
of being discovered, occasioned my disguise, for you found it necessary I
should depart, your fear had so prevailed and that in Melinda's Night Gown and
Head dress; thus attired with much ado, I went and left my soul behind me, and
finding no body all along the Gallery, nor in my passage from your apartment
into the Garden, I was a thousand times about to return to all my joys; when in
the midst of this almost ended dispute, I saw by the light of the Moon (which
was by good fortune under a Cloud and could not distinctly direct the sight) a
man taking toward me with cautious speed, which made me advance with the more
haste to recover the Grove, believing to have escaped him under the Covert of
the Trees; for retreat I could not without betraying which way I went; but just
at the entrance of the Thicket, he turning short made up to me, and I perceived
it Monsieur the Count, who taking me for Melinda who it seems he expected,
caught hold of my Gown as I would have passed him, and Cried, Now Melinda I see
you are a Maid of Honor, -- Come retire with me into the Grove where I have a
present of a heart and something else to make you, that will be of more
advantage to you than that of Alexis though something younger. -- I all
confounded knew not what to reply, nor how, lest he should find his mistake, at
least if he he discovered not who I was: Which silence gave him occasion to go
on, which he did in this manner; What not a word Melinda, or do you design I
shall take your silence for consent? If so, come my pretty Creature, let us not
lose the hour Love has given us; at this he would have advanced, leading me by
the hand which he pressed and kissed very amorously: Judge my Adorable Silvia in
what a fine condition your Lysander was then in. What should I do? to go had
disappointed him worse than I was with thee before; not to go, betrayed me: I
had much ado to hold my Countenance, and unwilling to speak, while I was thus
employed in thought, Monsieur -- Pulling me (eager of joys to come,) and I
holding back, he stopped and cried, sure Melinda you came not hither to bring me
a Denial. I then replied, whispering, -- Softly, Sir for Heavens sake
(sweetning my voice as much as possible) consider I Am a Maid, and would not be
discovered for the world. Who can discover us? replied my Lover, what I take
from thee shall never be mist, not by Alexis himself upon the Wedding Night; --
Come -- Sweet Child come: -- With that I pulled back and whispered -- Heavens,
would you make a Mistress of me? -- Says he -- A Mistress what would thou be
a Cherubin? Then I replied as before -- I am no Whore, Sir, -- No cries he, but
I can quickly make thee one, I have my Tools about me Sweetheart, therefore
let us lose no time but fall to work: this last raillery from the brisk old
Gentleman, had in spite of resolution almost made me burst out into loud
Laughten, when he took more gravity upon him, and cried -- Come, come Melinda,
why all this foolish argument at this hour in this place, and after so much
serious Courtship, believe me I Will be kind to thee for ever; with that he clapped
fifty Guinnies in a Purse into one hand, and something else that shall be
nameless into the other, presents that had both been worth Melinda's
acceptance: All this while was I studying an evasion, at last to shorten my
pleasant adventure, looking round, I cried softly, are you sure, Sir, we are
safe -- For Heavens sake step toward the Garden door and see, for I would not
be discovered for the world, -- Nor I cried he -- But do not fear all is safe:
-- However see (whispered I) that my fear may not disturb your joys. With that
he went toward the House, and I slipping into the Grove got immediately into
the Meadow, where Alexis waited my coming with Brilljard, so I left the
expecting Lover I suppose ranging the Grove for his fled Nymph, and I doubt
will fall heavy on poor Melinda, who shall have the Guinneys either to restore
or keep as she and the angry Count can agree: I leave the management of it to
her wit and conduct.

This account I thought necessary to give my Charmer, that she might prepare
Melinda for the assault, who understanding all that passed between us, may so
dispose of matters, that no discovery may happen by mistake, and I know my
Silvia and she can find a thousand excuses for the supposed Melinda's flight.
But my Adorable Maid, my business here was not to give an account of my
Adventure only, nor of my ravings, but to tell my Silvia on what my life
depends; which is, in a permission to wait on her again this ensuing night;
make no excuse, for if you do, by all I adore in Heaven and Earth, I Will end my
life here where I received it. I Will say no more, nor give your Love
instructions, but wait impatiently here the Life or Death of your

LYSANDER.
It Is Six a Clock, and yet my eyes have not closed themselves to sleep: Alexis
and Brilljard give me hopes of a kind return to this, and have brought their
Pl^te and Violin to charm me into a slumber: If Silvia love, as I am sure she
docs; she will wake me with a dear consent to see me, if not, I only wake to
sleep for ever.




To my fair Charmer.
WHen I had sealed the enclosed, my Page whom I had ordered to come to me with
an account of any business extraordinary, is this Morning arrived with a Letter
from Cesario, which I have sent here enclosed, that my Silvia may see how
little I regard the world, or the mighty revolution in hand; when set in
competition with the least hope of beholding her adorable face, or hearing her
Charming Tongue when it whispers the soft dictates of her tender heart into my
ravished soul; one moments joy like that surmounts an age of dull Empire. No,
let the busy unregarded Rout perish, the Cause fall or stand alone for me: Give
me but Love, Love and my Silvia; I ask no more of Heaven; to which vast joy
could you but imagine (Oh wondrous Miracle of Beauty!) how poor and little I
esteem the valued trifles of the world, you would in return contemn your part
of it, and live with me in silent Shades for ever. Oh! Silvia, what have thou
this night to add to the Soul of thy

PHILANDER!


To the Count of --
I Will allow you, my Dear, to be very fond of so much Beauty as the world must
own adorns the Lovely Silvia I Will, permit Love too to Rival me in your heart,
but not out-rival Glory; have then my Dear to the advance of that, make no
delay, but with the Mornings dawne, let me find you in my Arms, where I have
something that will surprise you to relate to you: You were last night expected
at -- It behooves you to give no Umbrage to Persons who is Interest renders 'em
enough jealous. We have two new Advancers come in of Youth and Money, teach 'em
not negligence; be careful and let nothing hinder you from taking Horse
immediately, as you value the repose and fortune of

My Dear, Your CESARIO.
I called last night on you, and your Page following me to my Coach, whispered
me -- if I had any earnest business with you, he knew where to find you; I soon
imagined where, and bid him call within an hour for this, and post with it
immediately, though dark.




To Philander.
AH! what have I done Philander, and where shall I hide my guilty blushing
face? Thou have undone my eternal quiet, Oh thou have ruined my everlasting
repose, and I must never, never look abroad again: Curse on my face that first
debauched my Virtue, and taught thee how to Love! Curse on my tempting youth,
my shape, my Air, my Eyes, my Voice, my Hands, and every charm that did
contribute to my fatal love, a lasting Curse on all -- But those of the
adorable Philander, and those -- even in this raging Minute, my furious passion
dares not approach with an indecent thought: No, they are sacred all, Madness
it self would spare 'em, and should thou now behold me as I sit, my Hair
disheveled, Ruffl'd and disordered, my Eyes bedewing every word I write, when
for each Letter I let fall a tear; then (pressed with thought) starting, I dropped
my Pen, and fall to rave a new, and tear those Garments, whose loose negligence
helped to betray me to my shameful ruin, wounding my breast, but want the
resolution to wound it as I ought; which when I but propose, Love stays the
thought, raging and wild as it is, the Conqueror checks it, with whispering only
Philander to my soul; the dear Name calmes me to an easiness, gives me the Pen
into my trembling hand, and I pursue my silent soft complaint: Oh! should
thou see me thus, in all these sudden different change of Passions, thou
would say Philander I were mad indeed; Madness it self can find no stranger
motions: And I would calmly ask thee, for I am calm again, how comes it my
adorable Philander, that thou can possess a Maid with so much Madness? who
art thy self a miracle of softness, all sweet and all serene, the most of Angel
in thy composition that ever mingled with humanity; the very words fall so
gently from thy tongue, -- are uttered with a Voice so ravishingly soft, a tone
so tender and so full of Love, 'twould charm even frenzy, calm rude
distraction, and wildness would become a silent Listener; there is such a sweet
serenity in thy face, such innocence and softness in thy eyes, should desert
Savages, but gaze on thee, sure they would forget their native forest wildness,
and be inspired with easy-Gentleness: Most certainly this God-like power thou
have. Why then? Oh tell me in the Agony of my soul, why must those charms that
bring Tranquillity and peace to all, make me alone a wild, unseemly raver? Why
has it contrary effects on me? Oh! all I act and say is perfect madness: Yet
this is the least unaccountable part of my most wretched Story; -- Oh! I must
never behold thy Lovely face again, for if I should, sure I should blush my
soul away, no, no, I must not, nor ever more believe thy dear deluding Vows:
Never thy charming perjured Oaths, after a violation like to this. Oh Heaven,
what have I done? Yet by that Heaven I swear I d^re not ask my soul, lest it
inform me how I was to blame, unless that fatal Minute would instruct me how to
revenge my wrongs upon my heart, my fond betraying heart, -- Despair and
Madness seize me; darkness and horror hide me from humane sight, after an
easiness like this; -- What to yield, -- To yield my Honor! Betray the secrets
of my Virgin wishes -- My new desires; my unknown shameful flame; -- Hell and
Death! Where got I so much confidence? Where learnt the hardened and unblushing
folly? To wish was such a fault, as is a crime unpardonable to own; to show
desire is such a sin in virtue as must deserve reproach from all the world; but
I, unlucky I, have not only betrayed all these, but with a transport void of
sense and shame, I yield to thy Arms, -- I Will not endure the thought, -- By
Heaven! I cannot; there is something more than rage that animates that thought:
some Magic Spell that in the midst of all my sense of Shame keeps me from true
repentance; this angers me, and makes me know my Honor but a fantom: Now I
could curse again my Youth and Love; but Oh! when I have done, alas Philander,
I find my self as guilty as before; I cannot make one firm resolve against the,
or if I do, when I consider thee, they weigh not all one lovely Hair of thine.
It Is all in vain the Charming Cause remains Philander's still as lovely as
before, it is him I must remove from my fond Eyes and heart, him I must banish
from my touch, my smell, and every other sense, by Heaven! I cannot bear the
mighty pressure, I cannot see his Eyes, and touch his Hands, smell the perfume
every Pore of his breaths forth, taste thy soft kisses, hear thy Charming Voice,
but I am all on flame: NO, it is these I must exclaim on, not my Youth, it is
they debauch my soul, no natural propensity in me to yield, or to admit of such
destructive fires, Fain I would put it off, but 'twill not do, I am the
Aggressor still; else, why is not every living Maid undone, that does but touch
or see thee? Tell me why? No, the fault's in me, and thou art innocent. -- Were
but my Soul less delicate, were it less sensible of, what it loves and likes in
thee, I yet were dully happy; but Oh there is a nicety there so charmed, so
apprehensive of thy Beauties, as has betrayed me to unrest for ever: -- Yet
something I will do to tame this lewd Betrayer of my right, and it shall plead
no more in thy behalf, no more no more disperse the joys which it conceives
through, every (...) (cold and insensible by nature) to kindle new desires
there. -- No more shall fill me with unknown curosity; no, I will in spite of
all the Perfumes that dwell about thee, in spite of all the Arts thou have of
Looking, of Speaking and of Touching; I will I say assume my native temper, I
will be calm, be cold, and unconcerned, as I have been to all the world, -- But
to Philander, -- The Almighty Power he has is unaccountable; -- By yonder
breaking day that opens in the East, opens to see my shame, -- I swear -- By
that great ruler of the day, the Sun, by that Almighty power that rules them
both, I swear -- I swear Philander, Charming Lovely Youth! Thou art the first
e're kindled soft desires about my soul, thou art the first that ever did
inform me that there was such a sort of wish about me. I thought the vanity of
being beloved, made up the greatest part of the satisfaction; 'twas joy (...)
see my Lovers sigh about me, adore and praise me, and increase my Pride by
every look, by every word and action; and him I fancied best I favored most,
and he past for the happy fortune; him I have suffered too, to kiss and press
me, to tell me all his Tale of Love, and sigh, which I would listen to with
Pride and Pleasure, permitted it and smiled him kind returns; nay, by my life,
then thought I loved him too, thought I could have been content to have past my
life at this gay rate, with this fond hoping Lover, and thought no farther than
of being great, having rich Coaches, showing Equipage, to pass my hours in
dressing, in going to the Opera's and the Tower, make Visits where hist, be
seen at Balls: and having still the vanity to think the men would Gaze and
Languish where I came, and all the Women envy me, I thought no farther on --
But thou Philander have made me take new measures, I now can think of nothing
but of thee, I loath the sound of Love from any other voice, and Conversation
makes my soul impatient, and does not only dull me into Melancholy, but
perplexes me out of all humor, out of all patient sufferance, and I am never
so well pleased when from Philander, as when I am retired; and curse my
Character and Figure in the world, because it permits me not to prevent being
visited, one thought of thee, is worth the worlds enjoyment, I hate to dress, I
hate to be agreeable to any Eyes but thine; I hate the noise of Equipage and
Crowds, and would be more content to live with thee in some lone shaded
Cottage, than be a Queen, and hindered by that Grandeur one moments
conversation with Philander: May thou despise and loath me, a Curse the
greatest that I can invent, if this be any thing but real honest truth. No, no
Philander, I find I never loved till now, I understood it not, nor knew not
what those Sighs and Pressings meant which others gave me; yet every speaking
glance thy Eyes put on inform my soul what it is they plead and languish for: If
you but touch my hand, my breath grows faint and short, my blood glows in my
face, and runs with an unusual warmth through every vein, and tells my heart
what it is Philander ailes, when he falls sighing on my Bosom; oh then I fear. I
answer every look, and every sigh and touch, in the same silent but
intelligible Language, and understood I fear to well by thee: 'Till now I never
feared Love as a Criminal. Oh tell me not mistaken Foolish Maids, true Love is
innocent, ye cold, ye dull, ye unconsidering Lovers; though I have often heard
it from the Grave and Wise, and preached my self that Doctrine: I now renounce
it all, it is false, by Heaven! it is false, for now I Love, and know it all a
fiction; yes, and love so, as never any Woman can equal me in Love, my soul
being all composed (as I have often said) of softer Materials. Nor is it fancy
sets my Rates on Beauty, there is an intrinsic value in thy Charms, which
surely none but I am able to understand, and to those that view thee not with
my judging Eyes, ugliness facy'd would appear the same, and please as well. If
all could love or judge like me, why does Philander pass so unregarded by a
thousand Women, who never sighed for him? What makes Mertilla who possesses
all, looks on thee, feels thy Kisses, hears thee speak, and yet wants sense to
know how blessed she is; it is want of judgment all, and how, and how can she that
judges ill, Love well?

Granting my passion equal to its object; you must allow it infinite, and more
in me than any other Woman, by how much more my Soul is composed of tenderness;
and yet I say I own, for I may own it, now Heaven and you are Witness of my
shame, I own with all this love, with all this passion, so vast, so true and so
unchangeable, that I have Wishes, new unwonted Wishes; at every thought of
thee, I find a strange disorder in my blood, that pants and burns in every
Vein, and makes me blush, and sigh, and grow impatient, ashamed and angry; but
when I know it the effects of Love, I Am reconciled, and wish and sigh anew, but
when I sit and Gaze upon thy Eyes, thy Languishing thy Lovely dying Eyes; play
with thy soft white hand, and lay my glowing Cheek to thine. -- Oh God! What
Language can express my transport, all that is tender, all that is soft desire
seizes every trembling Limb, and it is with pain concealed. -- Yes, yes
Philander, it is the fatal truth, since thou have found it, I confess it too,
and yet I love thee dearly; long, long it was that I essayed to hide the guilty
flame, if Love be guilt; for I confess I did dissemble a coldness which I was
not Mistress of: there lies a Woman's Art, there all her boasted Virtue, it is
but well dissembling, and no more. -- But mine alas is gone, for over fled;
this, this feable guard that should secure my Honor, thou have betrayed and
left it quite defenseless. Ah what is a Woman's Honor when it is so poorly
guarded: No wonder that you conquer with such ease, when we are only safe by
the mean arts of base dissimulation, an ill as shameful as that to which we
fall. Oh silly refuge! What foolish nonsense, fond custom can persuade; yet so
it is, and she that breaks her Laws, los^^ her fame, her honor and esteem. Oh
Heavens! how quickly lost it is! Give me ye Powers, my fame, and let me be a
fool; let me retain my virtue and my Honor, and be a dull insensible -- But Oh
where is it? I have lost it all; it is irrecoverably lost: yes, yes, ye charming
perjured man, it is gone, and thou have quite undone me. --

What though I lay extended on my Bed, undrest, unapprehensive of my fate, my
Bosom loose and easy of excess, my Garments ready, thin, and wantonly put on,
as if they would with little force submit to the fond straying hand: What then
Philander, must you take the advantage? Must you be perjured because I was
tempting? It Is true, I let you in by stealth by night, whose silent darkness
favored your Treachery; but Oh Philander were not your Vows as binding by a
glimmering Taper, as if the Sun with all his Awful light had been a looker on,
I urged your Vows as you pressed on, -- But Oh I fear it was in such a way so
faintly and so feebly I upbraided you, as did but more advance your perjuries.
Your strenght increased, but mine alas declined; till I quite fainted in your
Arms, left you triumphant Lord of all: No more my faint denials do persuade, no
more my trembling hands resist your force, unguarded lay the treasure which you
toiled for, betrayed and yielded to the Lovely Conqueror. -- But Oh tormenting,
-- When you saw the store, and found the Prise no richer, with what contempt,
(yes, false dear man.) with what contempt you viewed the ^nvalu'd Trophy: What!
despised, was all you call a Heaven of Joy and Beauty exposed to view, and then
neglected? Were all your Prayers heard, your wishes granted, and your toiles
rewarded, the trembling Victim ready for the sacrifice, and did you want
Devotion to perform it, and did you thus receive the expected blessing -- Oh --
By Heaven I Will never see the more, and 'twill be charity to thee, for thou have
no excuse in store that can convince my opinion that I am hated, loathed, -- I
cannot bear that thought, -- Or if I do, it shall only serve to fortify my fixed
resolve never to see thee more, -- And yet I long to hear thy false excuse, let
it be quickly then; it is my disdain invites thee -- To strengthen which, there
needs no more than that you let me hear thy poor defense. -- But it is a tedious
time to that flow hour wherein I dare permit thee, but hope not to incline my
soul to love: No I Am yet safe if I can stop but here, but here be wise resolve
and be my self.

SILVIA.


To Philander.
AS my Page was coming with the enclosed he met Alexis at the gate with yours,
and who would not depart without an answer to it; -- to go or stay is the
Question. Ah, Philander! why do you press a heart too ready to yield to Love
and you! alas, I fear you guess too well my answer, and your own Soul might
save me the blushing trouble of a reply. I am plunged in past hope of a
retreat, and since my fate has pointed me out for ruin, I cannot fall more
gloriously. Take then, Philander, to your dear Arms a Maid that can no longer
resist, who is disarmed of all defensive power: She yields, she yields, and
does confess it too; and sure she must be more than mortal that can hold out
against thy charms and vows. Since I must be undone and give all away, I Will do
it generously, and scorn all mean reserves: I will be brave in Love, and lavish
all; nor shall Philander think I Love him well unless I do. Take, charming
Victor, then, what your own merits, and what Love has give you; take, take at
last the dear reward of all your sighs and tears, your vows and sufferings. But
since, Philander, it is an Age to night, and till the approach of those dear
silent hours, thou know I dare not give thee admittance: I do conjure thee go
to Cesario* whom I find too pressing, not to believe the concerns great; and so
jealous I am of thy dear safety, that every thing alarms my fears; oh! satisfy
'em then and go, it is early yet, and if you take horse immediately, you will be
there by eight this morning; go, I conjure you; for though it is an unspeakable
satisfaction to know you are so near me, yet I prefer your safety and honor to
all considerations else. You may soon dispatch your affairs, and render your
self time enough on the place appointed, which is where you last night waited,
and 'twill be at least eight at night before it is possible to bring you to my
arms. Come in your Chariot, and do not heat your self with riding; have a care
of me and my life in the preservation of all I love. Be sure you go, and do
not, my Philander, out of a punctilio of Love, neglect your dear safety -- Go
then, Philander, and all the Gods of Love preserve and attend thee on thy way,
and bring thee safely back to

Silvia.


To Silvia^
OH, thou most charming of the Sex! thou lovely dear delight of my transported
Soul! thou everlasting treasure of my heart! what have thou done? given me an
over joy, that fails but very little of performing what griefs excess had
almost finished before: Eternal blessings on thee, for a goodness so divine,
Oh, thou most excellent and dearest of thy sex! I know not what to do or what
to say. I am not what I was, I do not speak, nor walk, nor think as I was wont
to do; sure the excess of joy is far above dull sense, or formal thinking, it
cannot stay for ceremonious method. I rave with pleasure, rage with the dear
thought of coming ex^asie. Oh Silvia, Silvia, Silvia! my soul, my vital blood,
and without which I could as well subsist -- Oh, my adorable, my Silvia!
methinks I press thee, kiss thee, hear thee sigh, behold thy eyes, and all the
wondrous beauty of thy face; a solemn joy has spread it self through every
vein, through every sensible artery of my heart, and I can think of nothing but
of Silvia, the lovely Silvia, the blooming flowing Silvia; and shall I see
thee? shall I touch thy hands, and press thy dear, thy charming body in my
arms, and taste a Thousand joys, a thousand ravishments? oh God! shall I? oh
Silvia, say; but thou have said enough to make me mad, and I forgetting of thy
safety and my own, shall bring thy wild adoring slave to Bellfont, and throw
him at thy feet, to pay his humble gratitude for this great condescension, this
vast bounty.

Ah, Silvia! how shall I live till night? and you impose too cruelly upon me in
conjuring me to go to Cesario; alas! does Silvia know to what she exposes her
Philander? whose joy is so transporting great, that when he comes into the
grave Cabal he must betray the story of his heart, and in lieu of the mighty
business there in hand be raving still on Silvia, telling his joy to all the
amazed listeners, and answering questions that concern our great affair, with
something of my love; all which will pass for madness and undo me: no, give me
leave to rave in silence, and unseen among the trees, they will humor my
disease, answer my murmuring joy, and Echo's flatter it, repeat thy name,
repeat that Silvia's mine! and never hurt her fame; while the Cabals, business
and noisie Town will add confusion to my present transport, and make me mad
indeed: no, let me alone, thou sacred lovely creature* let me be calm and quiet
here, and tell all the insensibles I meet in the woods what Silvia has this
happy minute destined me: Oh, let me record it on every bark, on every Oak and
Beech, that all the world may wonder at my fortune, and bless the generous
maid; let it grow up to Ages that shall come* that they may know the story of
our loves, and how a happy youth, they called Philander, was once so blessed by
Heaven as to possess the charming, the adored and loved by all, the glorious
Silvia! a Maid, the most divine that ever graced a story; and when the Nymphs
would look for an example of love and constancy, let them point out Philander
to their doubted Swains, and cry, ah! love but as the young Philander did, and
then be fortunate, and then reap all your wishes: and when the Shepherd would
upbraid his Nymph, let him but cry, -- see here what Silvia did to save the
young Philander; but oh! there never will be such another Nymph as Silvia;
Heaven formed but one to show the world what Angels are, and she was formed for
me, yes she was -- in whom I would not quit my glorious interest to reign a
monarch here, or any bosted gilded thing above! take all, take all, ye Gods,
and give me but this happy coming night! Oh, Silvia, Silvia! by all thy
promised joys I am undone if any accident should ravish this night form me:
this night! no not for a lea^e of years to all eternity would I throw thee
away: Oh! I am all flame, all joyful fire and softness; methinks it is Heaven
wheree'er I look around me, air where I tread, and ravishing Music when I
speak, because it is all of Silvia -- let me alone, oh let me cool a little, or
I shall by a too excess of joyful thought lose all my hoped for bliss. Remove
a little from me, go, my Silvia, you're so excessive sweet, so wondrous
dazzling, you press my senses even to pain -- away -- let me take air -- let me
recover breath: oh let me lay me down beneath some cooling shade, near some
refreshing crystal murmuring spring, and fan the gentle air about me. I
suffocate, I faint, with this close loving, I must allay my joy or be undone --
I Will read thy cruel Letters, or I Will think of some sad melancholy hour wherein
thou have dismissed me desparing from thy presence: or while you press me now
to be gone with so much earnestness, you have some Lover to receive and
entertain; perhaps it is only for the vanity to hear him tell his nauseous
passion to you, breath on your lovely face, and daub your Garments with his
fulsome embrace: but oh, by Heaven, I cannot think that though! and thou have
sworn thou can not suffer it -- if I should find thee false -- but it is
impossible -- oh! should I find Foscario visit thee, him whom thy Parents
favor, I should undo you all, by Heaven I should -- but thou have sworn, what
need Philander more; yes, Silvia thou have sworn and called Heaven's vengeance
down: whenever thou gave a look, or a dear smile in love to that pretending
Fop; yet from his mighty fortune there is danger in him. -- what makes that
thought torment me now? -- begone* for Silvia loves me and will preserve my life
--

I am not able, my adorable Charmer, to obey your commands of going from the
sight of happy Bellfont; no, let the great wheel of the vast design roll on --
or for ever stand still, for I Will not aid its motion to leave the mightier
business of my love unfinished: no, let fortune and the duller Fools toil on --
for I Will not bate a minute of my joys with thee to save the world, much less so
poor a parcel of it; and sure there is more solid pleasure even in these
expecting hours* I wait to snatch my bliss, than to be Lord of all the universe
without it: then let me wait my Silvia, in those melancholy shades that part
Bellfont from Dorillus his farm; perhaps my Silvia may walk that way so
unattended that we might meet and and lose our selves for a few moments in
those intricate retreats: Ah, Silvia! I am dying with that thought -- Oh
Heavens! what cruel destiny is mine? whose fatal circumstances do not permit me
to own my passion, and lay claim to Silvia, to take her without control to
shades or Palaces to live for ever with her, to gaze for ever on her, to eat,
to loll, to rise, to play, to sleep, to act over all the pleasures and the joys
of life with her -- But it is in vain I rave, in vain employ my self in the
fools barren business, Wishing, -- this thought has made me sad as death: Oh,
Silvia! I can never be truly happy -- adieu, employ thy self in writing to me,
and remember my life bears date but only with thy faith and Love.

Philander.
Try, my Adorable* what you can do to meet me in the Wood (...) afternoon for
there I Will live (...) day.




To Philander.
OBstinate Philander, I conjure you by all your vows, by all your sacred love,
by those dear hours this happy night designed in favor of you, to go without
delay to Cesario; 'twill be unsafe to disobey a Prince in his jealous
circumstances. The fatigue of the journey cannot be great, and you well know
the torment of my fears; oh! I shall never be happy or think you safe till you
have quitted this fatal interest: Go, my Philander -- and remember whatever
toiles you take will be rewarded at night in the Arms of

Silvia.


To Silvia.
WHatever toiles you take shall be rewarded in the arms of Silvia! -- By
Heaven, I am inspired to act wonders: Yes, Silvia, yes, my adorable Maid, I am
gone, I fly as swi^t as lightning, or the soft darts of love shot from thy
charming eyes, and I can hardly stay to say -- adieu. --


To the Lady --
Dear Child*
LONG foreseeing the misery whereto you must arrive by this fatal
correspondence with my unhappy Lord, I have often, with tears and prayers,
implored you to decline so dangerous a passion; I have never yet acquainted our
parents with your misfortunes, but I fear I must at last make use of their
Authority for the prevention of your ruin. It Is not, my dearest Child, that
part of this unhappy story that relates to me, that grieves me, but purely that
of thine.

Consider, oh young noble Maid, the infamy of being a Prostitute! and yet the
act it self in this fatal Amou^ is not the greatest sin, but the manner which
carries an unusual horror with it; for it is a Brother too, my Child, as well
a^ a lover, one that has lain by thy unhappy Sister's side so many tender
years, by whom he has a dear and lovely offspring, by which he has more fixed
himself to thee by relation and blood: Consider this, oh fond heedless girl!
and suffer not a momentary joy to rob thee of the eternal fame, me of my
eternal repose, and fix a brand upon our noble house, and so undo us all. --
Alas, consider after an action so shameful, thou must obscure thy self in some
remote corner of the world, where honesty and honor never are heard of: No
thou can not show thy face, but 'twill be pointed at for something monstrous:
for a hundred ages may not produce a story so leudly infamous and loose as
thine. Perhaps (fond as you are) you imagine the sole joy of being beloved by
him, will atone for those affronts and reproaches you will meet with in the
censuring world: But Child, remember and believe me, there is no lasting faith
in sin; he that has broke his Vows with Heaven and me, will be again perjured
to Heaven and thee, and all the world! -- he once thought me as lovely, lay at
my feet, and sighed away his soul, and told such pityous stories of his
sufferings, such sad, such mournful tales of his departed rest, his broken
heart and everlasting Love, that sure I thought it had been a sin not to have
credited his charming perjuries; in such a way he swore, with such a grace he
sighed, so artfully he moved so tenderly he looked Alas, dear Child, then all
he said was new, unusual with him, never told before, now it is a beaten road,
it is learned by heart, and easily addressed to any fond believing woman, the
tattered, worn-out fragments of my Trophies, the dregs of what I long since
drained from off his fickle heart; then it was fine, then it was brisk and new,
now palled and dulled by being repeated often. Think, my Child, what your
victorious beauty me^^^s, the victim of a heart unconquered by any but your
eyes: Alas, he had been my captive, my humble whining slave, disdain to put him
on your fetters now; alas, he can say no new thing of his heart to thee, it is
love at second hand, worn out, and all its gaudy luster tarnish't; besides, my
Child, if thou had no religion binding enough, no honor that could stay thy
fatal course, yet nature should oblige thee, and give a check to the
unreasonable enterprise. The griefs and dishonor of our noble Parents, who
have been eminent for virtue and piety, oh suffer 'em not to be regarded in
this censuring world as the most unhappy of all the race of old nobility; thou
art the darling child, the joy of all, the last hope left, the refuge of their
sorrow; for they, alas, have had but unkind stars to influence their unadvised
offspring: no want of virtue in their education, but this last blow of fate
must strike 'em dead: Think, think of this, my Child, and yet retire from
ruin; haste, fly from destruction which pursues thee fast; haste, haste, and
save thy parents and a sister, or what is more dear, thy fame; mine has already
received but too many desperate wounds, and all through my unkind Lord's
growing passion for thee, which was most fatally founded on my ruin, and
nothing but my ruin could advance it; and when my Sister, thou have run thy
race, made thy self loathed, undone and infamous as hell, despised, scorned and
abandoned by all, lampoon'd, perhaps diseased; this faithless man, this cause
of all will leave thee too, grow weary of thee, nauseated by use, he may
perhaps consider what sins, what evils, and what inconveniences and shames
thou'st brought him to, and will not be the last shall loath and hate thee: For
though youth fancy it have a mighty race to run of pleasing vice and vanity,
the course will end, the goal will be arrived to at the last, where they will
sighing stand, look back and view the length of precious time they have fooled
away; when traversed over with honor and discretion, how glorious were the
journey, and with what joy the we^ried traveller lies down and basks beneath
the shades that ends the happy course.

Forgive, dear Child, this advice and pursue it, it is the effect of my pity,
not anger, nor could the name of rival ever yet have power to banish that of
sister from my soul -- farewell, remember me; pray Heaven thou have not this
night made a forfeit of thy honor and that this which comes from a tender
bleeding heart may have the fortune to inspire thee with grace to avoid all
temptations for the future, since they must end in sorrow, which is the eternal
prayer of,

Dearest Child, Your affectionate Sister.


To Philander.
ASk me not, my dearest Brother, the reason of this sudden change, ask me no
more from whence proceeds this strange coldness, or why this alteration; it is
enough my destiny has not decreed me for Philander: Alas, I see my error, and
looking round about me, find nothing but approaching horror and confusion in
my pursuit of love: Oh whither was I going? to what dark paths, what
everlasting shades had smiling love betrayed me had I pursued him farther; but
I at last have subdued his force, and the fond Charmer shall no more renew his
arts and flatteries; for I Am resolved as Heaven, as fixed as fate and death, and
I conjure you, trouble my repose no more, for if you do (regardless of my
honor, which if you loved you would preserve) I Will do a deed shall free me
from your importunities, that shall amaze and cool your vicious flame: no more
-- remember you have a noble wife, companion of your vows, and I have honor,
both which are worth preserving, and for which, though you want generous love,
you will find neither that nor courage wanting in

Silvia.


To Silvia.
YES, my adorable Silvia, I will pursue you no farther, only for all my pains,
for all my sufferings, for my tormenting sleepless nights, and thoughtfull
anxious days* for all my faithless hopes, my fears, my sighs, my prayers and my
tears, for my unequalled and unbound passion, and my unwearied pursuits in
love, my never dying flame, and lastly, for my death; I only beg in recompense
for all, this last favor from your pity; That you will deign to view the
bleeding wound that pierced the truest heart that ever fell a sacrifice to
love: you will find my body lying beneath that spreading Oak, so sacred to
Philander, since 'twas there he first took into his greedy ravished soul the
dear, the soft confession of thy passion, though now forgotten and neglected
all -- make what haste you can, you will find there stretched out the mangled
carcass of the lost

Philander.
Ah! Silvia, was it for this that I was sent in such haste away this morning to
Cesario? did I for this neglect the world, our great affair, and all that
Prince's interest, and fly back to Bellfont, on the wings of Love, were in lieu
of receiving a dear blessing from thy hand, do I find -- never see me more --
good Heaven -- but, with my life, all my complaints are ended; only 'twould be
some ease even in death to know what happy Rival it is has armed thy cruel hand
against Philander's heart.




To Philander.
STay, I conjure thee stay thy sacrilegious hand; for the least wound it gives
the Lord of all my wishes, I Will double on my breast a thousand fold; stay then,
by all thy vows, thy love, and all the hopes I swear thou have this night of a
full recompense of all thy pain^ from yielding Silvia; I do conjure thee stay
-- for when the news arrives thou art no more, this poor, this lost, abandoned
heart of mine shall fall a victim to thy cruelty: no, live, my Philander I
conjure thee, and receive all thou can ask, and all that be given by

Silvia.


To Philander.
OH, my charming Philander! how very ill have you recompensed my last soft
commands? which were that you should live: and yet at the same moment, while
you were reading of the dear obligation, and while my Page was waiting your
kind return* you desperately exposed your life to the mercy of this innocent
Rival, betraying unadvisedly at the same time, my honor and the secret of your
love, and where to kill or to be killed, had been almost equally unhappy: 'twas
well my ^age told me you disarmed him in this rancounter -- yet you he says are
wounded, some sacred drops of blood are fallen to earth and lost, the least of
which are precious enough to ransom captive Queens: oh! haste Philander, to my
arms for cure, I die with fear there may be danger -- haste, and let me bath the
dear, the wounded part in floods of tears, lay it to my warm lips, and bind it
with my torn hair: oh! Philander, I rave with my concern for thee, and am ready
to break all laws of decency and duty, and fly, without considering, to thy
succor, but that I fear to injure thee much more by the discovery, which such
an unadvised absence would make; pray Heaven the unlucky adventure reach not
Bellfont; ^oscario has no reason to proclaim it, and thou art too generous to
boast the conquest, and Silvio was the only witness, and he is as silent and as
secret as the grave; but why, Philander, was he sent me back without reply?
what meant that cruel silence -- say, my Philander, will you not obey me? --
will you abandon me? can that dear tongue be perj^^^'d? and can you this night
disappoint your Silvia? what have I done, oh obstinately cruel, irreconcilable
-- what, for my first offense? alittle poor resentment and no more? a little
faint care of my g^sping honour^ ^ou'd that displease so much? besides I had ^
cause which you shall see; a Letter that would cool love^ ho^^^st fires, and
turn it to devotion; by Heaven 'twas such a check -- such a surprise -- but you
your self shall judge if after that, I could say l^ss than bid eternally
farewell to love -- at least to thee -- but I recanted soon; one sad dear word,
one soft resenting lin^ from thee, gained love the day again, and I despised
the censures of the duller world: yes, yes, and I confessed you had overcome,
and did this merit no reply? I asked the Boy a thousand times what you said,
how and in what manner you received it, chid him, and laid your silent fault on
him, till he with tears convinced me, and said he found you hastening to the
Grove, -- and when he gave you my commands -- you looked upon him with such a
steadfast, wild and fixed regard, surveying him all over while you were opening
it -- as argued someunusual motion in you; then cried begone -- I cannot answer
flattery -- good Heaven, what can you mean? but e're he got to the farther end
of the Grove, where still you walked a solemn death-like pace, he saw Foscario
pa^s him unattended, and looking back, saw your rancounter, saw all that happened
between you, then ^an to your assistance, just as you parr^ed; still you were
roughly sullen, and neither took notice of his proffered service, nor that you
needed it, although you bled apace; he offered you his aid to tie your wounds
up -- but you replied -- begone, and do not trouble me -- Oh, could you imagine I
could live with this neglect? could you, my Philander? Oh, what would you have
me do? if nothing but my death or ruin can suffice for my atonement, I Will
sacrifice either with joy; yes, I Will proclaim my passion aloud, proclaim it at
Bellfont, own the dear criminal flame, fly to my Philander's aid and be undone;
for thus I cannot, no I will not live, I rave, I languish, ^aint and die with
pain, say that you live, oh, say but that you love, say you are coming to the
M^adow behind the Garden-grove in order to your approach to my Arms: Oh, swear
that all your Vows are true; oh, swear that you are Silvia's; and in return,
I Will swear that I am yours without reserve, whatever fate is destined for your

Silvia.
I die with impatience, either to see or hear from you; I fear it is yet too
soon for the first -- oh therefore save me with the last, or I shall rave, and
wildly betray all by coming to Dorilus his Farm, or seeking you where e're you
cruelly have hid your self from

Silvia.




To Silvia.
AH, Silvia, how have you in one day destroyed that repose I have been
designing so many years, oh, thou false -- but wondrous fair creature! why did
Heaven ordain so much beauty and so much perfidy, so much excellent wit and so
much cunning, (things inconsistent in any but in Silvia) in one divine frame,
but to undo Mankind: yes, Silvia thou were born to Murder more believing men
than the unhappy and undone Philander. Tell me, thou charming Hypocrite, why
have thou thus deluded me? why, oh, why was I made the miserable object of thy
fatal Vow breach? What have I done, thou lovely fickle Maid, that thou shoud'st
be my murderer? and why do thou call me from the grave with such dear soft
commands, as would awake the very quiet dead, to torture me anew, after my eyes
(curse on their fatal ^ense) were too sure witnesses of thy infidelity? Oh,
fickle Maid, how much more kind 't had been to have sent me down to earth, with
plain heart breaking truth^than a mean subtle falsehood, that has undone thy
credit in my soul: truth, Though 'twere cruel, had been generous in thee,
though thou were perjured, false, for sworn -- thou shou 'dst not have added to
it that yet baser sin of treachery; you might have been provoked to have killed
your friend, but it were base to stab him unawares defenseless and unwarn'd;
smile in my face and strike me to the heart; sooth me with all the tenderest
marks of passion -- ^ay with an invitation too, that would have gained a credit
in one that had been jilted over the world, flattered and ruined by all thy
cozening sex, and all to send me vain and pleased away, only to gain a day to
entertain another Lover in. Oh, fantastic woman! destructive glorious thing,
what needed this deceit? had thou not with unwo^ted industry persuaded me to
have hasted to Cesario, by Heaven, I Would dully lived the tedious day in
traversing the flowery Meads and silent Groves, laid by some murmurring spring
had sighed away the often counted hours, and thought on Silvia till the blessed
minute of my ravishing approach to her, had been a fond believing and imposed
on Coxcomb, and never had dream^t the treachery, never seen the snake that
bask'd beneath the gay, the smiling flowers; securely thou (...) coz^n'd me,
reaped thy new joys, and made my Rival sport at the expense of all my
happiness: Yes, yes, your hasty importunity first gave me jealousy, made me
impatient with Cesario, and excuse my self to him by a hundred inventions;
neglected all to hasten back, where all my joys, where all my killing fears and
torments resided -- but when came -- how was I welcomed? with your confirming
Billet; yes, Silvia, how! let Dorillus inform you, between whose Arms I fell
dead, shame on me, dead -- and the first thought my Soul conceived when it
returned, was, not to die in jest. I answered your commands, and hastened to the
Grove, where -- by all that is sacred, by thy self I swear (a dearer oath than
heaven and earth can furnish me with) I did resolve to die; but oh, how soon my
soft my silent passion turned to loud rage, rage easier to be born, to dire
despair, to fury and revenge; for there I saw Foscario, my young my fair, my
rich and powerful Rival, he hasted through the Grove all warm and glowing from
the fair false ones arms; the blushes which thy eyes had kindled were fresh
upon his cheeks, his looks were sparkling with the new blown fire his heart so
briskly burnt with, a glad, a peaceful smile dressed all his face, tricked like
a Bridegroom; while he perfumed the air as he past through it -- none but the
man that loves and dotes like me is able to express my sense of rage: I quickly
turned the Sword from my own heart to send it to his elevated one, giving him
only time to -- draw -- that was the word, and I confess your spark was
wondrous ready, brisk with success, vain with your new-given favors, he only
cried -- if Silvia (...) the quarrel -- I am prepared -- and he maintained your
cause with admirable courage, I confess, though chance or fortune luckily gave
me his Sword, which I would fain have rendered back, and that way would have
died, but he refused to arm his hand a new against the man that had not took
advantage of him, and thus we parted: Then 'twas that malice supported me with
life, and told me I should scorn to die for so perfidious and so ruinous a
creature; but charming and bewitching still, 'twas then I borrowed so much
calmness of my lessening anger to read the Billet over your Page had brought
me, which melted all the rough remaining part of rage away into ^ame
languishment: Ah, Silvia! this heart of mine was never formed by Nature to hold
out long in stubborn fullenness; I am already on the excusing part, and fain
would think thee innocent and just; deceive me prettily, I know thou can,
sooth my fond heart, and ask how it could harbor a faithless thought of Silvia
-- do -- flatter me, protest a little, swear my Rival saw thee not, say he was
there by chance -- say any thing; or if thou sawst him, say with how cold a
look he was received -- oh, Silvia, calm my soul, deceive it, flatter it, and I
shall still believe and love thee on -- yet shoud'st thou tell me truth, that
thou art false, by Heaven, I do adore thee so, I still should love thee on;
should I have seen thee clasp him in thy arms, print kisses on his cheeks and
lips, and more -- so fondly and so doatingly I love, I think I should forgive
thee; for I swear by all the powers that pity frail mortality, there is no joy,
no life, no Heaven without thee! Be false, be cruel, perjured, infamous, yet
still I must adore thee; my soul was formed of nothing but of love, and all
that love, and all that soul is Silvia's, but yet since thou have framed me an
excuse, be kind and carry it on -- to be deluded well, as thou can do it, will
be the same to innocence as loving; I shall not find the cheat: I Will come then
-- and lay my self at thy feet, and seek there that repose that dear content
which is not to be found in this vast world besides; though much of my heart's
joy thou have abated, and fixed a sadness in my soul that will not easily vanish
-- Oh Silvia, take care of me, for I am in thy power, my life, my fame, my soul
are in thy hands, be tender of the victims, and remember if any action of thy
life should show a fading love, that very moment I perceive the change, you
shall find dead at your feet the abandoned

Philander.
Sad as death, I am going toward the Me^dow in order to my approach to Silvia,
the World affording no ^^po^e to ^e, but when I am where the dear Charm^r is.




To Philander in the Meadow.
AND can you be jealous of me, Philander? I mean so poorly jealous as to
believe me capable of falsehood, of vow-breach, and what is worse, of loving any
thing but the adorable Philander? Oh, I could not once believe so cruel a
thought could have entered into the imaginations of a soul so entirely possessed
with Silvia, and so great a judge of Love! Abandon me, reproach me, hate me,
scorn me, whenever I harbor any thing in mine so destructive to my repose and
thine. Can I Philander, give you a greater proof of my passion, of my faithful
neverdying passion, than being and one for you? have I any other prospect in
all this so^t adventure, but Them, dishonor, reproach, eternal infamy, and
everlasting destruction, even of soul and body: I tremble with fear of future
punishment; but oh, Love will have no devotion (mixed with his ceremonies) to
any other Deity; and yet alas, I might have loved another and have been saved
or any Maid but Silvia might have possessed without damnation. But it is a
Brother I pursue, it is a Sister gives her honor up, and none but Cannace that
ever I read in story, was ever found so wretched as to love a Brother with so
criminal a flame, and possibly I may meet her fate. I have a Father too as
great as Aeolus, as angry and revengefull where his honor is concerned; and
you found, my dearest Brother, how near you were last night to a discovery in
the Garden: I have some reason too to fear this night's adventure, for as ill
fate would have it (loaded with other thoughts) I told not Melinda of your
adventure last night with Monsieur the Count, who meeting her early this
morning had like to have made a discovery, if he have not really so already;
she strove to shun him, but he cried out -- Melinda, you cannot fly me by
light, as you did last night in the dark -- she turned, and begged his pardon
for neither coming nor designing to come, since she had resolved never to
violate her vows to Alexis; not coming, cried he, not returning again, you
meant Melinda, secure of my heart and my purse, you fled with both: Melinda,
whose honor was now concerned, and not reminding your escape in her likeness,
blushing she sharply denied the fact, and with a disdain that had laid aside
all respect, left him; nor can i^ be doubted but he fansied (if she spoke
truth) there was some other intrigue of love carried on at Bellfont. Judge, my
charming Philander, if I have not reason to be fearful of thy safety and my
fame, and to be jealous that so wise a Man as Monsieur, did not take that parley
to be held with a spirit last night, or that 'twas an apparition he courted:
But if there be no boldness like that of love, nor courage like that of a
lover; sure there never was so great a Heroine as Silvia. Undaunted, I resolve
to stand the shock of all, since it is impossible for me to leave Philander any
doubt or jealousy that I can dissipate, and Heaven knows how far I was from
any thought of seeing Foscatio when I ^^rg'd Philander to depart. I have, to
clear my innocence, sent thee the Letter I received two hours after thy
absence, which falling into my Mothers hands, whose favorite he is, he had
permission to make his visit; which within an hour he did, but how received by
me, be thou the judge, whene're it is thy fate to be obliged to entertain some
Woman to whom thy soul has an entire aversion: I forced a complaisance against
my nature, endured his wrecking courtship with a fortitude that became the
great heart that bears thy sacred image, ^s Martyrs do, I suffered without
murmuring or the least sign of the pain I endured -- it is below the dignity of
my mighty passion to justify it farther, let it plead its own cause, it has a
thousand ways to do it, and those all such as cannot be resisted, cannot be
doubted, especially this last proof of sacrifieing to your repose the never
more to be doubted,

Silvia.
About an hour hence I shall expect you to advance.




To the Lady --
Madam,
IT IS not always the divine graces wherewith Heaven has adorned your
resplendent beauties, that can maintain the innumerable conquests they gain,
without a noble goodness, which may make you sensibly compassionate the poor
and forlorn captives you have undone^: But, most fair of your Sex, it is I alone
that have a destiny more cruel and severe, and find my self wounded from your
very frowns, and secured a slave as well as made one; the very scorn from those
triumphant stars, your eyes, have the same effects as if they shined with the
continual splendor of ravishing smiles, and I can no more shun their killing
influence, than their all-saving aspects, and I shall expire contented, since I
fall by so glorious a Fate; if you will vouchsafe to pronounce my doom from
that storehouse of perfection, your mouth, from lips that open like the
blushing rose, strow'd over with morning dew, and from a breath sweeter than
holy incense; in order to which, I approach you; most excellent beauty with
this most humble petition, that you will deign to permit me to throw my
unworthy self before the Throne of your mercy, there to receive the sentence of
my life or death, a happiness though incomparably too great for so mean a
Vassal, yet with that reverence and awe I shall receive it, as I would the
sentence of the Gods, and which I will no more resist than I would the
Thunderbolts of Jove, or the revenge of angry Juno: For, Madam, my immense
passion knows no medium between life and death, and as I never had the
presumption to aspire to the glory of the first, I am not so abject as to fear
I am wholly deprived of the glory of the last; I have too long lain convicted,
extend your mercy, and put me now out of pain: You have often wrecked me to
confess my Promethian si^; spa^e the cruel V^lture of despair, take him from my
heart in pity, and either by killing word^, or blasting Lightning from those
refulgent eyes, Pronounce the death of

Madam, Your admirng slave Foscari^.


To Silvia.
My everlasting Charmer,
I Am convinced and pleased, my fears are vanished and a Heaven of solid joy is
opened to my view, and I have nothing now in prospect but Angel-brightness,
glittering Youth, dazzling Beauty, charming Sounds, and ravishing Touches, and
all around me ecstasies of pleasure, unconceivable transports without
conclusion; Mahomet never fansied such a Heaven, not all his Paradise promised
such lasting felicity, or ever provided there the recompense of such a Maid as
Silvia, such a bewitching Form, such soft, such glorious Eyes, where the Soul
speaks and dances, and betrays Loves-secrets in every killing glance, a Face,
where every motion, every feature sweetly languishes, a Neck all-tempting --
-and her lovely Breast inviting presses from the eager Lips; such Hands, such
clasping Arms, so white, so soft and slender! no, nor one of all his Heavenly
enjoyments, though promised years of fainting in one continued cestasie, can
make one moments joy with Charming Silvia. Oh, I am wrapped (with bare
imagination) with much a vaster pleasure than any other dull appointment can
dispense -- Oh, thou blessing sent from Heaven to ease my to^ls of life! thou
sacred dear delight of my fond doting heart, oh, whither will thou lead me, to
what vast heights of Love? into extremes as ^atal and as dangerous as those
excesses were that rendered me so cold in your opinion. Oh, Silvia, Silvia, have
a care of me, manage my o'rejoy'd Soul and all its eager passions, chide my
fond heart, be angry if I faint upon thy Bosom, and do not with thy tender
voice recall me, a voice that kills outright, and calls my fleeting Soul out of
its habitation: lay not such charming Lips to my cold Cheeks but let me lie
extended at thy feet untouched, unsigh't upon, unpress'd with kisses: Oh,
change those tender trembling words of Love into rough sounds and noises
unconcerned, and when you see me dying, do not call my Soul to mingle with thy
sighs; yet shoud'st thou bate one word, one look or tear, by Heaven, I should
be mad; oh, never let me live to see declension in thy love! no, no, my
Charmer, I cannot bear the least supposed decay in those dear fondnesses of
thine; and sure none e're became a Maid so well, nor ever were received with
adorations like to mine!

Pardon, my adorable Silvia, the rashness of my passion in this rancounter with
Foscario; I am satisfied he is too unhappy in your disfavour to merit the being
so in mine; but 'twas ^ufficient I then saw a joy in his face, a pleased gayety
in his looks to make me think my rage reasonable and my quarrel just; by the
style he writes, I dread his Sense less than his Person; but you, my lovely
Maid have said enough to quit me of my sears for both -- the night comes on --
I cannot call it envious though it rob me of the light that should assist me to
finish this, since it will more gloriously repay me in a happier place -- come
on then, thou blessed retreat of Lovers, I forgive thy interruptions here, since
thou will conduct to the Arms of Silvia -- the adoring

Philander.
If you have any commands for me, this Weeder of the Gardens, whom I met going
in thither, will bring it back; I wait in the Meadow, and date this from the
dear Primrose bank, where (...) have sat with Silvia.




To Philander.
After the happy Night.
IT IS done; yes, Philander, it is done, and after that what will not Love and
grief oblige me to own to you? Oh, by what insensible degrees a Maid in love
may arrive to say any thing to her Lover without blushing? I have known the
time, the blessed innocent time when but to think I loved Philander would have
covered my face with shame, and to have spoke it would have filled me with
confusion -- have made me Tremble, Blush, and bend my guilty Eyes to Earth, not
daring to behold my Charming Conqueror while I made that bashful confession
-- though now I am grown bold in Love, and I have known the time when being at
Court, and coming from the Presence, being offered some officious hand to lead
me to my Coach, I have shrunk back with my aversion to your Sex, and have
concealed my hands in my Pockets to prevent their being touched -- a kiss would
turn my stomach, and amorous looks (though they would make me vain) gave me a
hate to him that sent 'em, and never any Mid resolved so much as I to tread the
paths of honor, and I had many precedents before me to make me careful: Thus
I was armed with resolution, pride and scorn, against all Mankind, but alas, I
made no defense against a Brother, but innocently lay exposed to all his
attacks of Love, and never thought it criminal till it kindled a new desire
about me. Oh, that I should not die with shame to own it -- ye^ see (I say) how
from one soft degree to another, I do not only confess the shameful truth, but
act it too; what, with a Brother -- Oh Heavens! a crime so monstrous and so new
-- but by all thy Love, by those surprising joys so lately experience'd -- I
never will -- no, no, I never can -- repent it: Oh, incorrigible passion, oh
hardened love! at least I might have some remorse, some sighing after my poor
departed honor; but why should I dissemble with the Powers divine, that know
the secrets of a Soul doomed to eternal Love? Yet I am mad, I rave and tear my
self, traverse my guilty chamber in a disordered, but a soft confusion; and
often opening the conscious curtains, survey the print where thou and I were
last night laid, surveying it with a thousand tender sighs, and kiss and press
thy dear forsaken side, imagine over all our solemn joys, every dear transport,
all our ravishing repeated blisses, then almost fainting, languishing, cry --
Philander! oh, my charming little God! then lay me down in the dear place you
pressed, still warm and fragrant with the sweet remains that thou have left
behind thee on the Pillow, oh, my Soul's joy! my dear, eternal pleasure! what
softness have thou added to my heart within a few short hours? but oh,
Philander -- if (as l've often been told) possession, which makes Women fond and
doting, should make thee cold and grow indifferent -- if nauseated with
repeated joy, and having made a full discovery of all that was but once
imaginary, when fancy rendered every thing much finer than experience, oh, how
were I undone! for me, by all the inhabitants of Heaven I swear, by thy dear
charming self, and by thy vows -- thou so transcend'st all fancy, all dull
imagination, all wondering idea's of what Man was to me, that I believe thee
more than humane! some charm divine dwells in thy touches; besides all these,
thy charming look thy love, the beauties that adorn thee, and thy wit, I swear
there is a secret in Nature that renders thee more dear and fits thee to my
Soul; do not ask it me, let it suffice it is so, and is not to be told; yes, by
it I know thou art the man created for my Soul, and he alone that has the power
to touch it; my eyes and fancy might have been diverted, I might have favored
this above the other, preferred that face, that wit, or shape, or air -- but to
concern my Soul to make that capable of something more than love, 'twas only
necessary that Philander should be formed, and formed just as he is, that
shape, that face, that height, that dear proportion; I would not have a
feature, not a look, not a hair altered, just as thou art, thou art an Angel to
me, and I, without considering what I am, what I might be, or ought, without
considering the fatal circumstances of thy being married (a thought that shock^
my Soul when e're it enters) or whatever other thought that does concern my
happiness or quiet, have fixed my Soul to Love and my Philander, to love thee
with all thy disadvantages, and glory in my ruin; these are my firm resolves
-- these are my thoughts. But thou art gone, with all the Trophies of my love
and honor, gay with the spoils, which now perhaps are unregarded: The
mys^ery's now revealed, the mighty ^ecret's known, and now will be no wonder or
surprise: But here my vows, by all on which my life depends ^ swear -- if ever
I perceive the least decay of love in thee if e^re thou break'st an Oath a vow,
a word, if e're I see repentance in thy face, or coldness in thy eyes (which
Heaven divert) by that bright Heaven I Will die: you may believe me, since I had
the courage and durst love thee, and after that durst sacrifice my fame, lose
all to justify that love, will when a change so fatal shall arrive, find
courage too to die; yes, die Philander, assure thy self I will, and therefore
have a care of

Silvia.


To Philander.
OH, where shall I find repose, where seek a silent quiet, but in my last
retreat the Grave! I say* not this, my dearest Philander, that I do, or ever
can repent my love, though the fatal source of all: For already we are
betrayed, our race of joys, our course of stolen delight is ended e're begun. I
chid, alas, at morning's dawn, I chid you to begone, and yet, Heaven knows, I
grasped you fast, and rather would have died than parted with you; I saw the
day came on, and cursed its busy light, and still you cried one blessed minute
more, before I part with all the joys of life! and hours were minutes then, and
day grew old upon us unawares, 'twas all abroad, and had called up all the
household spies to pry into the secrets of our loves, and thou, by some
tale-bearing flatterer, were seen in passing through the Garden; the news was
carried to my Father, and a mighty consult has been held in my Mother's
apartment, who now refuses to see me, while I possessed with Love, and full of
wonder at my new change, lulled with dear contemplation, (for I am altered much
since yesterday, however thou have charmed me) imagining none knew our theft of
love, but only Heaven and M^linda: But oh, alas, I had no sooner finished this
enclosed, but my Father entered my Cabinet, but 'twas with such a look -- as
soon informed me, all was betrayed to him; a while he gazed on me with
fierceness in his eyes, which so surpised and frighted me, that I, ^ll pale
and trembling, threw my. ^^lf at his feet; he seeing my disorder, took me up,
and fixed so steadfast and so sad a look on me, as would have broken any heart
but mine, supported with Philander's image; I sighed and wept -- and silently
attended when the storm should fall* which turned into a shower so soft and
piercing, I almost died to see it; at last delivering me a paper -- here,
(cried he, with a sigh and trembling interrupted voice) read what I cannot tell
thee. Oh, Silvia, cried he -- thou joy and hope of all my aged years, thou
object of my Dotage, how have thou brought me to the Grave with sorrow? so left
me with the Paper in my hand: Speechless unmoved a while I stood, till he
awaked me by new sighs and cries; for passing through my Chamber by chance, or
by design, he cast h^s melancholy eyes toward my Bed, and saw the dear
disorder there, unusual -- then cried -- Oh, wretched Silvia, thou art lost!
and left me almost fainting; the Letter, I soon found, was one you would sent from
Dori^^^^ his (...) this morning, after you had parted from me, which has
betrayed us all, but how it came into their hands I since have understood, for
as I said, you were seen passing through the Garden, from thence (to be
confirmed) they dogged you to the Farm, and waiting there your motions, saw
Dorillus come forth with a Letter in his hand; which though he soon concealed,
yet not so soon but it was taken notice of, when hasting to Bellfont the
nearest way, they gave an account to Monsieur, my Father, who going out to
Dorillus, commanded him to deliver him the Letter; his Vassal durst not
disobey, but yielded it, with such dispute and reluctance as he durst maintain
with a man so great and powerful; before Dorillus returned you had taken
horse, so that you are a stranger to our misfortune -- What shall I do? where
shall I seek a refuge from the danger that threatens us, a sad and silent grief
appears throughout ^e^^font, and the face of all things are changed, yet none
knows the unhappy cause but Mo^sieur my Father, and Madam my Mother, Melinda,
and my self; Melinda and my Page are both dismissed from waiting on me, as
supposed confidents of this dear secret, and strangers, creatures of Madam the
Countess, put about me. Oh, Philander, what can I do? thy advice, or I am lost;
but how, alas, shall I either convey these to thee or receive any thing from
thee, unless some God of Love in pity of our miseries, should offer us his aid:
I Will try to corrupt my new Boy, I see good nature, pity and generosity in his
looks, he is well-born too, and may be honest.

Thus far Philander, I had writ when Supper was brought me, for yet my Parents
have not deigned to let me come into their presence, those that serve me tell
me Mertilla is this Afternoon arrived at Bellfo^t; all is mighty closely carried
in the Countesses apartment, I tremble with the thought of what will be the
result of the great consultation: I have been tempting of the Boy, but I
perceive they are strictly charged not to obey me he says, against his will, he
shall betray me, for they will have ^im searched, but he has promised me to see
one of the weeders, who working in the Garden, into which my Window opens, may
from thence receive what I shall let down; if it be true I shall get this fatal
knowledge to you, that you may not only prepare for the worst, but contrive to
set at liberty.

the unfortunate Silvia.
^




This was Writ in the Cover to both the foregoing Letters to Philander.
PHilander, all that I dreaded, all that I feared is fallen upon me, I have
been arraigned and convicted three Judges, severe as the three infernal ones,
^ate in condemnation on me, a Father, a Mother, and a Sister, the fact, alas,
was too clearly proved, and too many circumstantial truths appeared against me
for me to plead, Not guilty. But, Oh Heavens! had you seen the tears, and heard
the Prayers, threats, reproaches and upbra^dings -- these from an injured
Sister, those, my ^heart-broken Parents; a tender Mother* here, a railing and
reviling Sister there -- an angry, Father and a guilty conscience -- thou
would have wondered at my fortitude, my courage and my resolution, and all
from Love! For surely I had died, had not thy love, thy powerful love
supported me; through all the accidents of life and fate, that can and will
support me; in the midst of all their clamours and their railings I had from
that a secret and a soft repose within, that whispered me, Philander loves me
still; discarded and renoune'd by my fond Parents, Love still replies,
Philander still will own thee; thrown from thy Mother's and thy Sister's arms,
Philander's still are open to receive thee: And though I rave, and almost die to
see them grieve, to think that I am the fatal cause, who makes so sad confusion
in our Family: for, oh it is pitious to behold my Sister's sighs and tears, my
Mother's sad despair, my Father's raging and his weeping, by melancholy turns:
Yet even these deplorable objects, that would move the most obdurate stubborn
heart to pity and repentance, render not mine relenting; and yet I Am wondrous
pitiful by nature, and I can weep and faint to see the sad effects of my loose
wanton love, yet cannot find repentance for the dear charming sin; and yet,
shoud'st thou behold my Mother's languishment, no bitter words proceeding from
her lips, no tears fall from her down-caft eyes, but silent and sad as death
she sits, and will not view the light; shoud'st thou, I say, behold it, thou
would if not repent, yet grieve that thou had loved me: Sure love has quite
confounded nature in me, I could not else behold this fatal ruin without
revenging it upon my stubborn heart, a thousand times a day I make new vows
against the God of Love, but it is too late, and I Am as often perjured -- Oh,
should the Gods revenge the broken vows of Lovers, what Lovesick man, what
maid betrayed like me, but would be damned a thousand times for every little
love-quarrel, every kind resentment makes us swear to love no more, and every
smile, and every flattering softness from the dear injurer, make us perjured:
Let all the force of virtue, honor, interest join with my suffering Parents to
persuade me to cease to love Philander, yet let him but appear, let him but
look on me with those dear charming eyes, let him but sigh, or press me to his
fragrant cheek, fold me -- and cry -- ah, Silvia, can you quit me -- no, you
must not, you shall not, nay, I know you cannot, remember you are mine -- there
is such eloquence in those dear words when uttered with a voice so tender and
so passionate, that I believe 'em irresistible -- alas, I find'em so -- and
easily break all the feebler vows I make against thee; yes, I must be undone,
perjured, forsworn, incorrigible, unnatural, disobedient, and any thing, rather
than not Philander's -- turn then, my Soul, from these domestic, melancholy
objects, and look abroad, look for forward for a while on charming prospects;
look on Philander, the dear, the young, the amorous Philander, whose very looks
infuse a tender joy throughout the Soul, and chase all cares, all sorrows and
anxious thoughts from thence, whose wanton play is softer than that of young
fledged Angels, and when he looks and sighs, and speaks, and touches, he is a
very God: Where art thou, oh thou miracle of youth, thou charming dear undoer!
now thou have gained the glory of the conquest, thou slightest the rifled
captive: What, not a line? two tedious days are past and no kind power relieves
me with a word, or any tidings of Philander -- and yet thou may have sent --
but I shall never see it, till they raise up fresh witnesses against me -- I
cannot think thee wavering, or forgetful; for if I did, surely thou know my
heart so well, thou can not think 'twou'd live to think another thought:
Confirm my kind belief, and send to me --

There is a Gate well known to thee through which thou passest to Bellfont,
it is in the road about half a league from hence, an old Man opens it, his
Daughter weeds in the Garden, and will convey this to thee as I have ordered
her, by the same messenger thou may return thine, and early as she comes
I Will let her down a string, by which way unperceived, I shall receive 'em from
her: I Will say no more, nor instruct you how you shall preserve your

Silvia.


To Silvia.
That which was left in her hands by Monsieur, her Father, in her Cabinet.
My adorable Silvia,
I Can no more describe to thee the torment with which I part from Bellfont,
than I can that Heaven of joy I was raised to last night by the transporting
effects of thy wondrous love; both are to excess, and both killing, but in
different kinds. Oh, Silvia, by all my unspeakable raptures in thy arms, by all
thy charms of beauty, too numerous and too ravishing for fancy to imagine -- I
swear -- by this last night, by this dear new discovery, thou have increased my
love to that vast height, it has undone my peace -- all my repose is gone --
this dear, dear night has ruined me, it has confirmed me now I must have
Silvia, and cannot live without her, no, not a day, an hour -- to save the
world, unles^ I had the entire possession of my lovely Maid: Ah, Silvia, I am
not that indifferent dull Lover, that can be raised by one beauty to an
appetite, and satisfy it with another, I cannot carry the dear flame you
kindle, to quench it in the embraces of Mertilla; no, by the eternal powers, he
that pre^ends to love, and loves at that course rate, needs fear no danger from
that passion, he never was born to live or by for love; Silvia, Mertilla, and a
thousand more were all the same to such a dull insensible; no, Silvia, when you
find I can return back to the once l^ft matrimonial (...) despise me, scorn me,
swear (as then thou justly may) I love not Silvia: Let the hot brute drudge
on (he who is ^^r'd by Nature, not by Love, whom any bodies kisses can inspire)
and ^ase the necessary heats of youth; Love's is a nobler fire, which nothing
can allay but the dear she that raised it; no, no, my purer stream shall never
run back to the fountain whence it is par^ed, nay, it cannot, it were as
possible to love again where one has ceased to love, as carry the desire and
wishes back, by Heaven, to me there is nothing so unnatural; no, Silvia* it is
(...) I must possess, you have completed my undoing now, and I must die unless
you give me all -- but oh, I am going from thee -- when are we like to meet --
oh, how shall I support my absent hours! thought will destroy me, for 'twill be
all on thee, and those at such a distance will be insupportable -- what shall I
do without thee? if after all the toils of dull insipid life I could return and
lay me down by thee, Herculean labors would be soft and easy -- the harsh
fatigues of war, the dangerous hurries of affairs of state, the business and
the noise of life, I could support with pleasure, with wondrous satisfaction,
could treat Mertilla too with that respect, that generous care as would become
a Husband, I could be easy every where, and every one should be at ease with
me* now I shall go and find no Silvia there, but sigh and wander like an
unknown thing, on some strange foreign shore; I shall grow peevish as a new
^wean'd child, no toys* no bauble of the gaudy world will please my wayward
fancy: I shall be out of humor, rail at every thing, in anger shall demand,
and sullenly reply to every question asked and answered, and when I think to
^ase my Soul by a retreat, a Thousand soft desires, a Thousand wishes wreck me,
pain me to raving, till beating the senseless floor with my feet -- I cry aloud
-- my Silvia! -- thus, thus, my charming dear, the poor Philander is employed
when banished from his Heaven! if thus it used to be when only that bright
outside was adored, judge now my pain, now thou have made known a thousand
graces more -- oh, pity me -- for it is not in thy power to guess what I shall
now endure in absence of thee, for thou have charmed my Soul to an excess too
mighty for a patient suffering: Alas, I die already --

I am yet at Dorillus his Farm, lingering on from one swift minute to the other,
and have not power to go; a thousand looks all languishing I Have cast from eyes
all drowned in tears toward Bellfont, have sight a thousand wishes to my
Angel, from a sad breaking heart -- Love will not let me go -- and Honor calls
me -- alas, I must away; when shall we meet again? ah when, my Silvia? -- oh
charming Maid -- thou wilt see me shortly dead, for thus I cannot live, thou must
be mine, or I must be no more -- I must away -- farewell -- may all the softest
joys of Heaven attend thee -- adieu -- fail not to send a hundred times a day,
if possible; I Have ordered Alexis to do nothing but wait for all that comes, and
post away with what thou send'st to me -- again adieu, think on me -- and till
thou call'st me to thee, imagine nothing upon earth so wretched as Silvia's own

Know, my Angel, that passing through the Garden this M^rning, I met Eras^o --
I (...), he saw me (...) enough to know me, and will give an ac^ount of i^, let
me know what happens -- adieu* half dead, ju^t ta king ^orse to go from Silvia.

Philander.


To Philander.
Written in a Leaf of a Table Book.
I Have only time to say, on Thursday I am destined a Sacrifice to Foscario,
which day finishes the life of

Silvia.


To Silvia.
From Dorillus his Farm.
RAving and mad at the News your Billet brought me, I (without considering the
effects that would follow) am arrived at Bellfont; I have yet so much patience
about me, to suffer my self to be concealed at Dorillus his Cottage, but if I
see thee not to night, or find no hopes of it -- by Heaven I Will set Bellfont
all in a flame but I will have my Silvia; be sure I Will do it -- What? to be
married -- Silvia to be married -- and given from Philander -- Oh, never think
it, thou forsworn fair Creature -- What? give Foscario that dear charming Body?
shall he be grasped in those dear naked Arms? taste all thy kisses, press thy
snowy Breasts, command thy joys and rifle all thy Heaven? Furies and Hell
environ me if he do -- Oh, Silvia, faithless, perjured* charming Silvia -- and
can thou suffer it -- hear me, thou fickle Angel -- hear my vows, oh
faithless Ravisher! that fatal moment that the daring Priest offers to join
your hands, and give thee from me, I Will sacrifice your Lover, by Heaven I will,
before the Altar stab him at your feet; the holy place, nor the numbers that
attend ye, nor all your prayers nor tears shall save his heart; look to it, and
be not false -- yet I Will not trust thy Faith; no, she that can think but
falsely, and she that can so easily be perjured -- for, but to suffer it is
such a sin -- such an undoing sin -- that thou art surely damned! and yet, by
Heaven, that is not all the ruin shall attend thee: no, lovely Mischief, no --
you shall not escape till the damnation-day; for I will rack thee, torture thee
and plague thee, those few hours I have to live (if spightfull Fate prevent my
just revenge upon Foscario) and when I Am dead -- as I shall quickly be killed
by thy cruelty -- know, thou fair Murderer, I will haunt thy sight, be ever
with thee, and surround thy bed, and fright thee from the Ravisher; fright all
thy loose delights, and check thy joys -- Oh, I am mad! -- I cannot think that
thought, no, thou shall never advance so far in wickedness, I Will save thee if I
can -- Oh, my adorable, why do thou torture me? how have thou sworn so often
and so loud that Heaven I am sure has heard thee, and will punish thee? how
did thou swear that happy blessed night, in which I saw thee last, clasped
in my arms, weeping with eager love, with melting softness on my bosom --
remember how thou swor'st -- oh, that dear night -- let me recover strength --
and then I Will tell thee more -- I must repeat the story of that night, which
thou perhaps (oh faithless!) have forgot -- that glorious night when all the
Heavens were gay, and every favoring power looked down and smiled upon our
thef^s of love, that gloomy night the first of all my joys, the blessed'st of
my life -- trembling and ^ainting I approach^ your chamb^r, and while you met
and grasped me at the door, taking my trembling body in your arms -- remember
^ow I fainted at your feet and what dear arts you used life -- remember how you
kissed and pressed my face -- remember what dear charming words you spoke --
and when I did recover, how I asked you with a feeble doubtful voice -- Ah,
Silvia, will you still continue thus, thus wondrous soft and fond? will you be
ever mine and ever true -- what did you then reply, when kneeling on the carpet
where I lay, what, Silvia, did you vow? how invoke Heaven? how call its
vengeance down if e're you loved another man again, if e're you touched or
smiled on any other, if e're you suffered words or acts of love but from
Philander? both Heaven and Hell thou did awaken with thy oaths, one was an
angry listener to what it knew thou would break, the other laughed to know thou
woud'st^ be perjured, while only I, poor I, was all the while a silent fond
believer; your vows stopped all my language as your kisses did my lips, you swore
and kissed and vowed, and clasped my neck -- oh charming flatterer! oh artfull
dear beguiler! thus into life and peace, and fond security you charmed my
willing Soul! 'Twas then, my Silvia, (certain of your heart and that it never
could be gi^en away to any other) I pressed my eager joys, but with such tender
caution -- such fear and fondness, such an awful passion, as overcame your
faint resistance, my reasons and my arguments were strong, for you were mine by
love, by sacred vows, and who could lay a better claim to Silvia? how often I
cried -- Why this resistance, Silvia? my charming dear, whose are you? not
Philander's? and shall Philander not command his own -- you must -- ah cruel --
then a soft struggle followed with half breathed words, with sighs and
trembling hearts, and now and th^n -- ah cruel and unreasonable was softly said
on both sides: thus strove, thus argued -- till both lay panting in each others
arms, not with the toil but rapture; I need not say what after followed this --
what tender showers of strange indearing mixtures 'twixt joy and shame, 'twixt
love and new surprise, and ever when dried your eyes with kisses, unable to
repeat any other language than -- oh my Silvia! oh my charming Angel! while
sighs of joy, and closely grasping thee -- spoke all the rest -- while every
tender word and every sigh, was Echoed back by thee; you pressed me -- and you
vowed you loved me more than ever yet you did; then swore anew and in my bosom
hid your charming blushing face, then with excess of love would call on Heaven
- be witness oh ye powers (a thousand times ye cried) if ever Maid e're loved
like Silvia -- punish me strangely, oh eternal powers, if e're I leave
Philander, if e're I cease to love him; no force, no art, not interest, honor,
wealth, convenience, duty, or what other necessary cause -- shall never be of
force to make me leave thee -- thus have thou sworn, oh charming, faithless
flatterer, thus 'twixt ^ach ravishing minute thou would swear -- and I as
fast believed -- and loved thee more -- have thou forgot it all, oh fickle
charmer, have thou? have thou forgot between each awful ceremony of love how
you cried out, farewell the world and mortal cares, give me Philander, Heaven,
I ask no more -- have thou forgot all this? did all the live-long night hear
any other sound but those my mutual vows, of invocations, broken sighs, and
soft and trembling whispers, say had we any other business for the tender
hours? oh, all ye host of Heaven, ye Stars that shone, and all ye powers the
faithless lovely Maid has sworn by, be witness how she is perjured; revenge it
all ye injured powers, revenge it, since by it she has undone the faithfullest
Youth, and broke the tenderest heart -- that ever fell a sacrifice to love, and
all ye little weeping Gods of love, revenge your murdered victim -- your

Philander.


To Philander.
In the Leaves of a Table Book.
OH, my Philander, how dearly welcome, and how needless were thy kind
reproaches? which ^'ll not endeavor to convince by argument, but such a deed
as shall at once secure thy fears now and for the future; I have not a minute
to write in, place my dear Philander, your Chariot in St. Vincent's Wood, and
since I am not able to six the ^^our of my flight, let it wait there my coming,
it is but a little mile from B^llfont, Dorillus is suspected there, remove thy
self to the high-way-gate Cottage -- there I Will call on thee -- 'twas lucky
that thy fears, or love, or jealousy brought thee so near me, since I Would
resolved before upon my flight. Parents and honor, interest and fame, farewell
-- I leave you all to follow my Phil^nder -- haste the Chariot to the thickest
part of the Wood, for I Am impatient to be gone, and shall take the first
opportunity to fly to my Philander -- Oh, love me, love me, love me!

Under pretense of reaching the Iesamin which shades my Window, I unperceived
let down and receive what Letters you send by the honest Weeder; by her send
your sense of my flight, or rather your direction, for it is resolved already.


To Silvia.
My lovely Angel,
So careful I will be of this dear mighty secret, that I will only say Silvia
shall be obeyed, no more -- nay, I Will not dare to think of it, lest in my
rapture I should name my joy aloud, and busy winds should bear it to some
o^ficious listener and undo me; no more, no more, my Silvia, extremes of joy
(as grief) are ever dumb: Let it suffice, this blessing which you proffer, I
had designed to ask, as soon as you would convinced me of your faith; yes, Silvia,
I had asked it, though 'twas a bounty too great for any Mortal to conceive
Heaven should bestow upon him; but if it do, that very moment I Will resign the
world, and barter all for love and charming Silvia. Haste, haste, my life; my
arms, my bosom and my Soul are open to receive the lovely fugitive; haste, for
this moment I am going to plant my self where you directed.

(...).


To Philander.
After her Flight.
AH, Philander, how have you undone a harmless, poor unfortunate? alas, where
are you? why would you thus abandon me? is this the soul, the bosom, these the
arms that should receive me? I Will not upbraid thee with my love, or charge thee
with my undoing; 'twas all my own, and were it yet to do, I should again be
ruined for Philander, and never find repentance, no not for a thought, a word
or deed of love, to the dear false for sworn; but I can die, yes, hopeless,
friendless -- le^t by all, even by Philander -- all but resolution has
abandoned me, and that can lay me down whene're I please in safe repose and
peace: But oh, thou art not false, or if thou be'st, oh, let me ^ear it from
thy mouth, see thy repented love, that I may know there is no such thing on
earth, as faith, as honesty, as love or truth; however be thou true, or be thou
false, be bold and let me know it, for thus to doubt is torture worse than
death. What accident, thou dear, dear man, has happened to prevent thee from
pursuing my directions, and staying for me at the gate? where have I missed
thee, thou joy of my soul? by what dire mistake have I lost thee? and where, oh
where art thou* my ^harming Lover? I sought thee every where, but like the
languishing abandoned Mistress in the Canticles, I sought thee, but I found
thee not, no bed of Roses would discover thee; I saw no print of thy dear
shape, nor heard no amorous sigh that could direct me -- I asked the wood and
springs, complained and called on thee through all the Groves, but they
confessed thee not; nothing but Echo's answered me, and when I cried Philander
-- cried -- Philander, thus searched I till the coming night and my increasing
fears made me resolve for flight, which soon we did, and soon arrived at Paris,
but whither then to go, Heaven knows, I could not tell, for I was almost naked,
friendless and ^orlorn; at last, consulting Brilljard what to do, after a
thousand revolutions he concluded to trust me with a sister he had who was
Married to a (...) of the Guard de Core, he changed my name, and made mepass
for a ^ortune he had stol^, but oh, no welcomes, nor my sa^e retreat were
sufficient to repo^e me all the ensuing night, for I had no news of Philander;
no, not a dream informed me, a thousand fears and jealousies have kept me
waking, and Brilljard who has been all night in pursuit of thee, is now
return^d succesless and distracted as thy Silvia, for duty and generosity has
almost the same effects in him, with love and tenderness and je^lousie in me;
and since (...) affords no news of thee, (which sure it would if thou were in
it, for oh, the Sun might hide himself with as (...) ease as great Philander)
he is r^solv'd to search St. (...) Wood and all the adjacent Cottages and
Groves; he thinks that you, not knowing of my escape, may yet be waiting
thereabouts; since quitting the Cha^^ot for fear of being seen, you might be so
far advanced into the Wood, as not to ^^nd the way back to the Thicke^ where
the Chario^ waited: it is thus (...) and flatters my poor (...), that fain would
think (...) -- or if thou be'st not -- but cursed be all such thoughts, and far
from Silvia's Soul; no, no, thou art not false, it cannot be, thou art a God,
and art unch^ngeable; I know by some mistake thou art attending me, as wild and
impatient as I, perhaps thou think me false, and think I have not courage
to pursue my love and fly; and thou perhaps art waiting for the hour wherein
thou think I Will give my self away to Fosc^rio: Oh cruel and unkind! to think
I loved so lightly, to think I would attend that fatal hour; no, Philander, no,
faithless, dear inchanter: Last night, the Eve to my intended Wedding Day,
having reposed my Soul by my resolves for flight, and only waiting the lucky
minute for escape, I set a willing hand to every thing that was preparing for
the ceremony of the ensuing morning; with that pretense I got me early to my
Chamber, tried on a thousand dresses, and asked a thousand questions, all
impertinent, which would do best, which looked most gay and rich? then dressed my
Gown with Jewels, decked my apartment up, and left nothing undone that might
secure 'em both of my being pleased and of my stay; nay, and to give the less
suspi^ion, I undressed my self, even to my under Peticoat and Nightgown; I
would not take a Jewel, not a Pistol; but left my Women finishing my work, and
carelessly, and thus undrest, walk^d toward the Garden, and while every one was
busy in their office, getting my self out of sight, I posted over the Meadow
to the Wood as swift as Dap^ne from the God of day, till I arrived most luckily
where I found the Chariot waiting, attended by Brilljard; of whom, when I (all
fainting and breathless with my swift flight) demanded his Lord, he lifted me
into the Chariot, and cried, a little farther, Madam, you will find him; for
he, for fear of making a discovery took yonder shaded path -- toward which we
went, but no dear vision of my Love appeared -- and thus, my charming Lover,
you have my kind adventure; send me some tidings back that you are found, that
you are well, and lastly, that you are mine, or this that should have been my
wedding day, will see it self that of the death of

Silvia. Paris, Thursday, from my Bed, for want of Clothes, or rather, news
from Philander.


To Silvia.
MY life, my Silvia, my eternal joy, art thou then safe? and art thou reserved
for Philander? am I so blessed by Heaven, by love, and my dear charming Maid?
then le^ me die in peace, since I have lived to see all that my Soul desires ^n
Silvia's being mine; perplex not thy soft heart with fears or jealousies, nor
think so basely, so poorly of my love to need more oaths or vows, yet to
confirm thee I would swear my breath away; but oh, it needs not here; -- take
then no car^, my lovely dear, turn not thy charming eyes or thoughts back on
afflicting objects, oh think not on what thou have abandoned, but what thou art
arrived to; look forward on the joys of love and Youth, for I will dedicate all
my remaining life to render thine serene and glad; and yet, my Silvia, thou art
so dear to me, so wondrous precious to my Soul, that I in my extravagance of
love, I fear, shall grow a troublesome and wearying Coxcomb, shall dread every
look thou give away from me -- a smile will make me rave, a sigh (...) touch
make me commit a murthe^ on the happy slave, or my own jealous heart, but all
the world besides is Silvia's, all but another Lover; but I rave and run too
fast away, ages must pass a tedious term of years before I can be jealous, or
^onceive thou can be weary of Philander -- I Will be so fond, so doting, and
so playing, thou shall not have an idle minute to throw away a look in, or a
thought on any other; no, no, I have thee now, and will maintain my right by
dint and force of love -- oh, I am wild to see thee -- but, Silvia, I am
wounded -- do not be frighted though, for it is not much or dangerous, bu^ very
troublesome since it permits me not to fly to Silvia, but she must come to me,
in order to it, Brilljard has a Bill on my Goldsmith in Paris for a thousand
Pistols to buy thee something to put on; any thing that is ready, and he will
conduct thee to me, for I shall rave my self into a ^eaver if I see thee not to
day -- I cannot live without thee now -- for you are my life my everlasting
charmer: I have ordered Brilljard to get a Chariot and some unknown Livery for
thee, and I think the continuance of passing for what he has already rendered
thee will do very well, till I have taken farther care of thy dear safety,
which will be as soon as I am able to rise; for most fortunately, my dear
Silvia* quitting the Chariot in the thicket for fear of being seen with it, and
walking down a shaded path that s^^ted with the melancholy, and (...) of
unsuccess in thy adventure; I went so far, as e're I could return to the place
where I left the Chariot, 'twas gone -- i^ seems with thee; I know not how you
mist me -- but possessed my self with a Thousand false fears, sometimes that in
thy flight thou might be pu^sued and overtak^^, seized in the Chariot and
returned back to Bellfont, or that the Chariot was found and seized on upon
suspicion, though the Coachman and Brilljard were disguised p^st knowledge --
or if thou were gone, alas, I knew not whither, but that was a thought my
doubts and fears would not su^^er me to ease my Soul with; no* I (as jealous
lovers do) imagined the most tormenting things for my own repose, I imagined
the Chariot taken, or at least so discovered as to be forced away without thee:
I imagined that thou were false -- Heaven forgive me, false, my Silvia, and
had changed thy mind; mad with this thought (which I fansied most reasonable
and fixed it in my soul) I raved about the Wood, making a thousand vows to be
revenged on all; in order to it I left the Thicket, and betook my self to the
high road of the Wood, where I laid me down amongst the fern, close hid, with
my Sword ready, waiting for the happy Bridegroom, whom I knew (it being the
wedding eve) would that way pass that Evening; pleased with revenge which now
had got ^ven the place of love; I waited there not above a little hour, but
heard the trampling of a horse, and looking up, with mighty joy, I found it
Foscario's, alone he was, and un^ttended, for he would ou^strip'd his equipage, and
with a lover's haste, and full of joy, was making toward Bellfont; but I (now
fired with rage) leaped from my covert, cried, stay, Foscario, e're you arrive
to Silvia, we must adjust an odd account between us -- at which he stopping, as
nimbly alighted -- in fine, we ^ought, and many wounds were given and received
on both sides* till his people coming up parted us just as we were fainting
with loss of blood in each others arms; his Coach and Chariot were amongst his
equipage, into the first his Servants li^^ed him, when he cried out with a
feeble voice -- to have me, who now lay bleeding on the ground put into the
Chariot, and to be safely conveyed where ever I commanded, and so in haste they
drove him toward Bellfont, and me, who was resolved not to stir far from it,
to the Village within a mile of it; from whence I sent to Paris for a Surgeon
and dismissed the Chariot, ordering in the hearing of the Coachman a Litter to be
brought me immediately to convey me that night to Paris; but the Surg^on
coming, found it not safe for me to be removed, and I am now willing to live,
since Silvia is mine, haste to me then, my lovely Maid, and fear not being
discovered, for I have given order here in the Cabaret where I am, if any
enquiry is made after me, to say I went last night for Paris: Haste, my love,
haste to my arms, as feeble as they are they will grasp thee a dear welcome:
I Will say no more, nor prescribe rules to thy love, that can inform thee best
what thou must do to save the life of thy most passionate adorer,

Philander.


To Philander.
I Have sent Brilljard to see if the Coast be clear that we may come with
safety, he brings you instead of Silvia, a young Cavalier that will be
altogether as welcome to Philander, and who impatiently waits his return at a
little Cottage at the end of the Village.


To Silvia.
From the Bastill.
I Know my Silvia expected me at home with her at dinner to day, and wonders
how I could live so long as since morning without the eternal joy of my Soul;
but know, my Silvia, that a trivial misfortune is now fallen upon me, which in
the midst of all our Heaven of joys, our softest hours of life, has so often
changed thy smiles into fears and sighings, and ruffled thy calm Soul with
cares: Nor let it now seem strange or afflicting, since every day for this
three months we have been alarmed with new fears that have made thee uneasy
even in Philander's arms, we knew some time or other the storm would fall on
us, though we had for three happy months sheltred our selves from its
threatening rage; but Love I hope has armed us both; for me -- let me be
deprived of all joys, (but those my charmer can dispense) all the false worlds
respect, the dull esteem of Fools and formal Coxcombs, the grave advice of the
censorious wise, the kind opinion of ill judging Women, no matter, so my Silvia
remain but mine.

I am, my Silvia, arrested at the suit of Monsi^ur the Count, your Father, for
a Rape on my lovely Maid: I desire my Soul, you (...) immediately take Coach
and go to the Prince Ce^ario, and he will bail me out; I fear not a fair trial,
and Silvia, thefts of mutual love were never counted Felony; I may die for Love,
my Silvia, but not for loving -- go, haste, my Silvia that I may be no longer
detained from the solid pleasure and business of my Soul -- haste, my loved
dea^ -- haste and relieve

Come not to me, lest there should be an order to detain my dear.

Philander.


To Philander.
I Am not at all surpised, my Philander, at the accident that has befallen
thee, because so long expected, and love and that has so well fortified my
heart that I support our misfortune with a courage worthy of her that loves and
is beloved by the glorious Philander; I am armed for the worst that can befall
me, and that is my being rend^ed a public shame, who have been so in the
private whispers of all the Court for near these happy three months, in which I
have had the wondrous satisfaction of being retired from the World with the
charming Philander; my Father too knew it long since, at least he could not
hinder himself from guessing it, though his fond indulgence suffered his
Justice and his anger to sleep, and possibly had still slept had not Mertilla's
spite and rage (I should say just resentment, but I cannot) roused up his
drowsy vengeance: I know she has plied him with her softning eloquence, her
prayers and tears to win him to consent to make a public business of it; but I
am entered, love has armed my Soul, and I Will pursue my fortune with that height
of fortitude as shall surprise the world; yes Philander, since I have lost my
honor, fame and friends, my interest and my Parents, and all for mightier
love; I Will stop at nothing now, if there be any hazards more to run, I Will thank
the spigh^full fates that bring 'em on, and will even tire them out with my
unwearied passion -- Love on, Philander, if thou dare, like me; let 'em pursue
me with their hate and vengeance, let Prisons, poverty and tortures sei^e me,
it shall no^ tak^ one grain of love away from my resolved heart, nor make me
shed a tear of penitence, for loving thee; no, Philander, since I know what a
ravishing pleasure it is to live thine I will never quit the glory of dying also
thy

^esario, my dear, is coming to be you Bail; with Mons^eur the Count of -- I die
to (...) your suffering so Silvia.

Silvia.


To Silvia.
BElieve me, charming Silvia, I live not those hours I am absent from thee,
thou art my life, my Soul and my eternal felicity; while you believe this
truth, my Silvia, you will not entertain a thousand fears, if I but stay a
moment beyond my appointed hour, especially when Philander, who is not able to
support the thought that any thing should afflict his lovely Baby, takes care
from hour to hour to satisfy her tender doubting heart. My dearest, I am gone
into the City to my Advocates, my Trial with Monsieur the Count, your Father,
coming on to morrow, and 'twill be at least two tedious hours e're I can bring
my adorable her

Philander.


To Silvia.
I Was called on, my dearest Ch^ld, at my Advocates, by Cesario, there is some
great business this evening debated in the Cabal which is at (...) -- in the
City; (...) Count, your Father, for my Silvia, I die if yo^ are taken lest, the
fright should (...), I would have (...) this evening from those Lodgings, lest
the people who are of the Royal party should be induced, through malice or
gain, to discover thee; I dare not come my self to wait on thee, lest my being
seen should betray thee, but I have sent Brilljard (whose zeal for thee shall
be rewarded) to conduct thee to a little house in the Fauxburgh S. Germans,
where lives a pretty Woman and Mistress to Chevalier Tomaso, called Belinda, a
Woman of wit, and discreet enough to understand what ought to be paid to a Maid
of the quality and character of Silvia; she already knows the stories of our
loves; thither I Will come to thee and bring Cesario to supper, as soon as the
Cabal breaks up; oh, my Silvia, I shall one day recompenso all thy goodness,
all thy bravery, thy love and thy suffering sor thy eternal Lover and Slave,

Philander.


To Philander.
SO hasty I was to obey Philander's commands, that by the unwearied care and
industry of the faithful Brilljard, I went before three a clock disguised away
to the place whither you ordered us, and was well received by the very pretty
young Woman of the house, who has sense and breeding as well as beauty: But oh,
Philander, this flight pleases me not; alas, what have I done? my fault is only
love, and that sure I should boast, as the most divine passion of the Soul; no,
no, Philander, it is not my love's the criminal, no nor the placing it on
Philander the crime; but it is thy most unhappy circumstances -- thy being
married, and that was no crime to Heaven till man made laws, and can laws reach
to damnation? if so, curse on the fatal hour that thou were married, curse on
the Priest that joined ye, and cursed be all that did contribute to the undoing
ceremony -- except Philander's Tongue, that answered yes -- oh, Heavens! was
there but one dear man of all your whole Creation that could Charm the Soul of
Silvia, and could ye -- oh, ye wise all^ seeing Powers that knew my Soul, could
ye give him away? how had my innoce^c offended ye? our hearts you did create
for mutual love, how came the dire mistake? another would have pleased the
indifferent Mertilla's Soul as well, but mine was fitted for no other man; only
Philander, the adored Philander, with that dear form, that shape, that charming
face, that hair, thos^ lovely speaking eyes, that wounding softness in his
tender voice, had power to conquer Silvia; and can this be a sin? Oh, Heavens
can it? must laws which man contrived for mere convenience have power to alter
the divine decrees at our Creation -- perhaps they argue to morrow at the bar
that Mertilla was ordained by Heaven for Philander; no, no, he mistook the
Sister, 'twas pretty near he came, but by a fatal error was mistaken, his
hasty Youth made him too negligently stop before his time at the wrong Woman,
he should have gazed a little farther on -- and then it had been Silvia's lot
-- it is fine divinity they teach that cry -- Marriages are made in Heaven --
folly and madness grown into grave custom; should an unheedy youth in heat of
blood take up with the first convenient she that offers, though he an heir to
some grave Politician, great and rich, and she the outcast of the common stews,
coupled in height of wine, and sudden lust, which once allayed, and that the
sober morning wakes him to see his error, he quits with shame the Jilt, and
owns no more the folly; shall this be called a Heavenly conjunction? were I in
height of youth, as now I am, forced by my Parents, obliged by interest and
honor to marry the old deformed, diseased, decrepid Count Antonio, whose
person, qualities and principles I loath, and rather than suffer him to
consummate his Nuptials, suppose I should (as sure I should) kill myself,
'twere blasphemy to lay this fatal marriage to Heavens charge -- curse on your
non^ense, ye imposing Gownmen, curse on your holy cant; you may as well call
Rapes and Murders, Treason and Robbery, the acts of Heaven; because Heaven
suffers 'em to be committed, is it Heavens pleasure therefore, Heaven's decree?
a trick, a wise device of Priests, no more -- to make the nauseated, tired out
pair drag on the careful business of life, drudg for the dull got family with
greater satisfaction, because they are taught to think marriage was made in
Heaven; a mighty comfort that, when all the joys of life are lost by it: were
it not nobler far that honor kept him just, and that good nature made him
reasonable provision? daily experience proves to us, no couple live with less
content, less ease than those they cry Heaven joins; who is it loves less than
those that marry? and where love is not there is hate and loathing, at best,
disgust, disquiet, ^oise and repentance: No, Philander, that is a heavenly match
when two Souls touched with equal passion meet (which is but rarely seen) --
when willing vows, with serious consideration, are weighed and made; when a
true view is taken of the Soul, when no base interest makes the hasty bargain,
when no convenience or design of drudge, or slave, shall find it necessary,
when equal judgments meet that can esteem the blessings they possess, and
distinguish the good of eithers love, and set a value on each others merits,
and where both understand to take and pay; who find the beauty of each others
minds, and rate 'em as they ought, whom not a formal ceremony binds (with which
I Have naught to do, but dully give a cold consenting affirmative) but well
considered vows from soft inclining hearts, uttered with love, with joy, with
dear delight when Heaven is called to witness; She is thy Wife, Philander, He
is my Husband, this is the match, this Heaven designs and means, how then, oh,
how came I to miss Philander? or he his

Silvia.
Since I writ this, which I designed not an invective against Marr^age when I
began, but to inform thee of my being where you directed; but since I writ
this, I say the House where I am is broken open with Warrants and Officers for
me, but being all undrest and ill, the Officer has taken my Word for my
appearance tomorrow; it seems they saw me when I went from my Lodgings and
pursued me; haste to me, for I shall need your Counsel.




To Silvia.
MY eternal joy, my affliction is inexpressible at the news you send me of your
being surpised; I am not able to wait on thee yet -- not being suffered to
leave the Cabal, I only borrow this minute to tell thee the sense of my
Advocate in this case; which was, if thou shod'st be taken, there was no way,
no Law to save thee from being ravished from my arms but that of marrying thee
to some body whom I can trust; this we have often discoursed, and thou have
often vowed thou 'lt do any thing rather than kill me with a separation;
resolve then, oh thou charmer of my Soul, to do a deed, that though the name
would fright thee, only can preserve both thee and me; it is -- and though it
have no other terror in it than the name, I saint to speak it -- to marry,
Silvia; yes, thou must marry; though thou art mine as fast as Heaven can make
us, yet thou must marry; I Have pitched upon the property, it is Brilljard, him I
can only trust in this affair; it is but joining hands -- no more, my Silvia --
Brilljard's a Gentleman, though a Cadet, and may be supposed to pretend to so
great a happiness, and whose only crime is want of fortune; he is handsome too,
well made, well bred, and so much real esteem he has for me, and I Have so
obliged him that I Am confident he will pretend no farther than to the honor of
owning thee in Court; I Will tie him from it, nay, he dares not do it, I Will trust
him with my life -- but oh, Silvia is more- think of it, and this night we will
perform it, there being no other way to keep Silvia eternally

Philander's.


To Silvia.
NOw, my adorable Silvia, you have truly need of all that heroic bravery of
mind I ever thought thee Mistress of; for Silvia, coming from thee this
morning, and riding ^ull speed for Paris, ^ was met, stopped and seized for high
Treason, by the King's messengers, and possibly may fall a sacrifice to the
anger of an incensed Monarch; my Silvia, bear this last shock of ^ate with a
courage worthy thy great and glorious Soul; it is but a little separation,
Silvia, and we shall one day meet again; by Heaven, I find no other sting in
death but parting with my Silvia, and every parting would have been the same; I
might have died by thy (...), thou might have grown weary of thy Philander,
have loved another, and have broke thy vows, and tortured me to death these
crueller ways; but fate is kinder to me, and I go blessed with my Silvia's love,
for which Heaven may do much, for her dear sake, to recompense her faith, a
Maid so innocent and true to sacred love; expect the best, my lovely dear, the
worst has this comfort in it, that I shall die my charming Silvia's.

Philander.


To Philander.
I WILL only say, thou dear supporter of ^y Soul, that if Philander dies, he
shall not go to Heaven without his Silvia* -- by Heaven and earth I swear (...)
cannot live without thee, nor (...) thou die without thy

Silvia.


To Silvia.
SEE, see, my adorable Angel, what cares the powers above take of divine
innocence, true love and beauty, oh, see what they have done for their darling
Silvia; could they do less?

Know, my dear Maid, that after being examined before the King, I was found
guilty enough to be committed to the Bastile, (from whence, if I had gone, I
never had returned, but to my death) but the Messenger into whose hands I was
committed refusing other Guards, being alone with me, in my own Coach, I
resolved to kill if I could no other way oblige him to favor my escape; I
tried with Gold before I showed my dagger, and that prevailed, a way less
criminal, and I have taken sanctuary in a small Cottage near the Sea shore,
where I wait for Silvia; and though my life depend upon my flight, nay, more,
the life of Silvia, I cannot go without her; dress your self then, my dearest,
in your Boys clothes, and haste with Brilljard, whither this Seaman will
conduct thee, whom I have hired to set us on some shore of safety; bring what
news you can learn of Cesario; I would not have him die poorly after all his
mighty hopes nor be conducted to a scaffold with shouts of joy, by that
uncertain beast the Rabble, who used to stop his Chariot wheels with fickle
adorations whene're he looked abroad -- by Heaven, I pity him, but Silvia's
presence will chase away all thoughts, but those of love, from

Philander.
I need not bid thee haste.




La Fin.
Love Letters FROM A NOBLE MAN TO HIS SISTER: Mixed With the HISTORY OF THEIR
ADVENTURES.

The Second Part by the same Hand.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of
London, 1685.

TO Lemuel Kingdon, Esquire
SIR,
I Beg you will give me leave to express my gratitude in some measure, for the
favors I have received of you, and to make an acknowledgment where I cannot
pay a debt. It Is only what was long since designed you, when possibly it might
have found something a better welcome, by its having made (as then it must
(...) done) a voyage to have kissed your hands, and might perhaps then have
contributed in some small degree to (...) diversion, in a place where there is
found so little -- In order to it I sent you the first part by one of your
Officers, of which this is a continuation. But being obliged to lay it by for
other more material business, it has had the misfortune not to approach you
till now, and to which honor it has nothing to entitle it, but that of bearing
your Name before it, which will put a value upon it to the World. And since I
never was of a nature to hord any good to my peculiar use, it is with great
satisfaction I am, by this short character of you, distributing a blessing to
that part of Mankind who have not that of knowing you. For there is an
unspeakable power and pleasure in obliging, and it is a pain to the good n^tur'd
to conceal any thing, whose communication may gratify the world, and I am
uneasy when a good man is not as well understood by every body as by myself,
and I boast that honor here, with more vanity than of any other happyness. Tho
I know, I shall be censured by your lovers for saying so little where so much
is due: But since I write to the number that do not know you* rather than those
that do, this will at least suffice to show how fine a thing man can be, so
qualified and set out by nature for eternal esteem. For, Sir, there is in you
something, besides the common virtues of your Sex, so engaging, some Art in
Nature so peculiar to your self, so insinuating into the soul, that there is
not found any thing so dull in Humankind as not to love Honor and value you:
Nor is that man born that is your Enemy, no not even amongst those Phanatical
dispositions, whose principles and opinions are so distant from those Honest
and Generous ones of yours; at least they love the Man tho they rail at his
notions, esteem the person tho they abominate the lo^allist; nor can I reflect
on the excellency of your temper, but I think you born to put the ill natured
world in to good Humor. You are all ways easy without affectation, merry
without extravigance, generous, liberal, and good without vanity, sedate and
even without constraint, cheerful and calm as innocence, tho the World storm
and reel with mad confusion, still from the serenity of your looks we read the
fair weather in your mind, which times or seasons can never discompose, while
all goes well with your King and Country. You have a greatness of Soul which it
seems as if fate durst not oppress, and he who is so truly magnificent within,
needs not trouble the World for elbow room, and who is a^bitions of more than
you possess, does but purchase an empty name at the expense of his repose and
sense, and lessens his Glory by equalling it to a Title The Sun at noon is no
wonder, but to see as great an Illumination in a Star tho of the first
magnitude, we gaze at with admiration. Title (that trifle which you can command
when you please, and which it is far greater to merit than to w^ar,) serves
rather to render vice more apparent than to elivate the virtues. ^eav^n has
made you more truly happy, and has set no blessing at too vast a distance for
your reach; but has subdued even all your wishes to your power, and left you
almost nothing to ask: having suited your fame and fortune to the greatness of
your mind

How soon at the choice of the most glorious Senate, that ever blessed the Land,
was your vallu'd name snatched by every glad and giving voice, and made the
Music of the happy day, when black exclusioners were justly damned from the
field, and only such untainted Supporters of the Royal cause, thought worthy to
bear apart in so glorious a Concern, as Giving Caesar his due! Here, Sir, you
appeared in your proper sphere dispersing that darling virtue of your Soul,
lavishly giving, generously disposing and dealing out according to your mighty
mind, and had the glory even of obliging a Monarch, than which nothing could be
a greater satisfaction to you. But, Sir, you do all things with a perfect good
grace, and even business, that toil of Life, you render soft and easy, and as
if you alone were created to manage the concerns of the World* you make
business your pleasure and diversion, and laugh at those that fat^gue them
selves with mighty affairs, and who assume like Trincilo, a dull Gravity, to be
esteemed great, wise, and busy, while you discover only the best and noblest
part of business, the effects of it, the rest, the Gentleman so handsomely
conceals, we perceive it no more than Fairy Huswifry, which is still acted in
the shades and silence of the night, when Mortals are a sleep, and who find all
fair and clean in the morning, but cannot guess at the invisible hand that did
it. I am so good a subject that I wish all his Majesty's work done by such
hands, heads and heart, so effectual and so faithful, and than we shall fear no
more Rebellions, but every man shall bask securely under^ his own Vine, that
has one* -- For my part I have only escaped fleaing by the Rebels to starve
more securely in my own native Province of P^etry, tho I am as well pleased at
our late Victory, and the Growing Glories of my King, as he that has got a
Commission by it, if I may have this happyness added to it, of still retaining
the Honor of your friendship, and ^e still numbered in the Crowd of

SIR, Your most Obliged humble Se^vant, A. B.

LETTERS FROM A NOBLE MAN TO HIS SISTER:
The Second Part by the same Hand.
The ARGUMENT.
AT the end of the first Part of these Letters, we le^t Philander impatiently
wa^^ng on the Sea shore for the approach of the lovely Silvia; who accordingly
came to him dressed like a youth, to secure her self from a discovery. They staid
not long to caress each other, but he taking the welcome Maid in his Arms, with
a transported joy bore her to a small Vessel, that lay ready near the Beach,
where with only Brilljard and two Men Servants, they put to Sea, and past into
Holland, landing at the nearest Port; where after having refresht themselves
for two or three days, they past forward toward the Brill. Silvia still
remaining under that amiable disguise; but in their passage from Town to Town,
which is sometimes by Coach, and other times by Boat, they chanced one day to
encounter a young Hollander of a more than Ordinary Gallantry, (for that
Country so degenerate from good manners and almost common Civility, and so far
short of all the good qualities that made themselves appear in this young Noble
Man. He was very handsome, well made, well dressed, and very well attended; and
whom we will call Octavio, and who, young as he was, was one of the States of
Holland; he spoke admirable good French, and had a vivacity and quickness of
Wit unusual with the Natives of that part of the World, and almost above all
the rest of his Sex: Philander and Silvia having already agreed for the Cabin
of the Vessel that was to carry them to the next Stage, Octavio came too late
to have any place there but amongst the common crow'd; which the Master of the
Vessel, who knew him was much troubled at, and addressed himself as civilly as he
could to Philander to beg permission for one Stranger of quality to dispose of
himself in the Cabin for that day: Phillander being well enough pleased, so to
make an acquaintance with some of power of that Country, readily consented, and
Octavia entered with an address so graceful and obliging, that at first sight
he inclined Phillanders heart to a friendship with him, and on the other side
the lovely person of Phillander, the quality that appeared in his face and mein
obliged Octavio to become no less his admirer. But when he saluted Silvia, who
appeared to him a youth of quality, he was extremely charmed with her pretty
gayety, and an unusual Air and life in her address and motion, he felt a secret
joy and pleasure play about his Soul he knew not why; And was almost angry that
he felt such an emotion for a youth, tho the most lovely that he ever saw:
After the first complyments, they fell into discourse of a thousand indifferent
things; and if he were pleased at first sight with the two Lovers, he was
wholly charmed by their conversation; especially that of the amiable youth; who
well enough pleased with the young Stranger, or else hitherto having met
nothing so accomplished in her short Travels, and indeed despairing to meet any
such; she put on all her gayety and charms of Wit, and made as absolute a
Conquest as 'twas possible for her supposed Sex to do over a man, who was a
great admirer of the other; and surely the lovely Maid never appeared so
charming and desirable as that day; they dined together in the Cabin, and after
dinner reposed on little Matresses by each others side, where every motion,
every Limb as carelessly she lay, discovered a thousand Graces and more and
more inslam'd the now beginning Lover; she could not move* nor smile, nor
speak, nor order any charm about her, but had some peculiar Grace that begun to
make him uneasy; and from a thousand little Modesties both in her blushes and
motions he had a secret hope she was not what she seemed, but of that Sex
whereof she discovered so many softnesses and beauties; tho to what advantage
that hope would amount to his repose, was yet a disquiet he had not considered
nor ^elt: Nor could he by any fondness between them or indiscretion of love,
conceive how the lovely Strangers were alied; he only hoped, and had no
thoughts of fear, or any thing that could check his new beginning flame. While
thus they past the afternoon, they asked a thousand questions. Our Lovers of
the Country and manners, and their security and civility to Strangers; to all
which Octavio answered as a man, who would recommend the place and persons
purely to oblige their stay; for now self interest makes him say all things in
favor of it; and of his own friendship, offers them all the service of a Man
of power, and who could make an interest in those that had more than himself;
much he protested, much he offered, and yet no more than he designed to make
good on all occasions, which they receiv^d with an acknowledgment, that plainly
discovered a generosity and quality above the common rate of Men; so that
finding in each other occasions for Love and friendship, they mutually professed
it, and nobly entertained it. Octavio told his Name and quality, left nothing
unsaid that might confirm the Lovers of his sincerity. This begot a confidence
in Phillander, who in return told him so much of his Circumstances as su^^ic'd
to let him know he was a person so unfortunate to have occasioned the
displeasure of his King against him, and that he could not continue with any
repose in that Kingdom, whose Monarch thought him no longer ^it for those
honors he had before received; Octavio renewed his protestations of serving
him, with his interest and fortune, which the other receiving with all the
Gallant modesty of an unfortunate Man, they came a shore where Octavio's
Co^ches and Equipage waiting his coming to conduct him to his house, he offered
his new friends the best of 'em to carry them to their lodging, which he had
often pressed might be his own Palace, but that being refused as too great an
honor, he would himself see them placed in some one, which he thought might be
most suitable to their quality; they excused the trouble, but he pressed too
eagerly to be denied, and he conducted them to a Merchants house not far from
his own, so Love had contrived for the better management of this new affair of
his heart, which he resolved to pursue, be the fair object of what sex soever;
but after having well enough recomended em to the care of the Merchant he
thought it justice to leave em to their rest, tho with abundance of reluctance.
So took his leave of both the Lovely Strangers and went to his own home: and
after ^ hasty supper got himself put to bed: not to sleep; for now he had other
business: Love took him now to task, and asked his heart a thousand questions.
Then 'twas he found the Idea of that fair unknown had absolute possession
there: Nor was he at all displeased to find he was a captive; his youth and
quality promise his hopes, a thousand advantages above all other men: but when
he re^lected on the Beauty of Phillander, on his Charming youth and
Conversation, and every Grace that adorns a Conqueror, he grew inflamed,
disorderd, restless, angry, and out of Love with his own attractions;
considered every Beauty of his own person and found 'em, or at least thought
'em infinitely short of those of his now Fancied Rival, yet 'twas a Rival that
he could not hate nor did his passion abate one thought of his Friendship for
Phillander, but rather more increased it, insomuch that he once resolved it
should surmount his Love if possible, at least he left it on the upper hand*
till time should make a better dicovery. When tired with thought we will suppose
him a ^leep, and see how our Lovers fared. Who being lodged all on one Stair
Case (that is Phillander, Silvia, and Brilljard) it was not hard for the Lover
to steal into the longing Arms of the expecting Silvia; no fatigues of tedious
journeys and little voyages had a bated her fondness or his vigor, the night
was like the first, all joy! all transport! Briljard lay so near as to be a
witness to all their sighs of Love, and little soft murmurs, who now began from
a servant to be permitted as an humble companion; since he had had the Honor
of being married to Silvia, tho yet he durst not lift his eyes or thoughts that
way: yet it might be perceived he was melancholy and sullen, when e're he saw
their daliances, nor could he know the joys his Lord nightly stole, without an
impatience, which if but minded or known perhaps had cost him his life: he
began from the thoughts she was his wife, to fancy ^ine enjoyment, to fancy
Authority which he durst not asume. And often wished his Lord would grow cold as
possessing Lovers do; that then he might advance his hope, when he should ever
abandon or slight her: he could not see her kissed without blushing with
resentment, but if he has assis^ed to undress him for her bed, he was ready to
die with anger, and would grow sick and leave the office to himself, he could
not see her naked charms, her arms streatcht out to receive a Lover with
impatient joy without madness. To see her clasp him fast when he threw himself
into her soft white bosom, and smother him with kisses: No, he could not bear
it now, and almost lost his respect when he beheld it, and grew saucy
unperceived. And '^was in vain that he looked back upon the reward he had to
stand for that necessary Cipher a Husband, in vain he considered the reasons
why, and the occasion wherefore; he now seeks for presidents of usurped
dominion, and thinks she is his Wife, and has forgot that he is her creature,
and Phillanders V^ssal. These thoughts disturbed him all the night, and a
certain jealousy, or rather curiosity to listen to every motion of the Lovers,
While^ they were employed after a different manner.

Next day it was debated what was best to be done as to their conduct in that
place: or whether Silvia should yet own her Sex or not, but she pleased with
the Cavalier in her self: begged she might live under that disguise. Which
indeed gave her a thousand charms to those which nature had already bestowed
on her Sex, and Philander was well enough pleased she should conti^ue in that
agreeable dress, which did not only add to her beauty, but gave her a thousand
little Privileges, which otherwise would have been denied to Women. Tho in a
Country of much Freedom. Every day she apear'd in the Toure, she failed not to
make a conquest on some unguarded heart of the fair Sex, nor was it long ere
she received Billet Deux from most of the most accomplished who could speak and
write French. This gave them a pleasure in midst of their unlucky exile; and
she failed not to boast her conquests to Octavio, who every day gave all his
hours to Love, under the disguise of Friendship, and every day received new
wounds, both from her conversation and beauty, and every day confirmed him more
in his first belief, that she was a Woman: and that confirmed his Love. But
still he took care to hid his passion with a gallantry that was natural to him,
and to very few besides; and he managed his eyes, which were always full of
Love so equally to both, that when he was soft and fond it appeared more his
natural humor than from any particular cause, and that you may believe that
all the arts of gallantry, and graces of good managment were more peculiarly
his, than another, his Race was illustrious, being descended, from that of the
Princes of Orange, and great birth will shine through, and show it self in
spite of education and obscurity, but Octavio had all those additions that
render a man truly great and brave, and this is the character of him that was
next undone by our unfortunate and fatal Beauty. At this rate for sometime they
lived thus disguised under feigned names. Octavio omitting nothing that might
oblige 'em in the highest degree, and hardly any thing was talked of but the
new and beautiful Strangers; whose conquest in all places over the Ladys are
well worthy, both for their rarity and comody to be related entirely by
themselves in a Novel. Octavio every day saw with abundance of pleasure the
little revenges of Love on those Women's hearts who had made before little
conquests over him, and strove by all the gay presents he made young Fillmond
(for so they called Silvia,) to make him appear unresistable to the Ladies, and
while Silvia gave them new wounds, Octavio failed not to receive 'em too among
the crow'd, till at last he became a confirmed slave to the lovely unknown; and
that which was yet more flrange she captivated the Men no less than the Women,
who often gave her Serinades under her Window with Songs fitted to the
Courtship of a Boy, all which added to their diversion; but fortune had smiled
long enough and now grew weary of obliging, she was resolved to undeceive both
Sexes and let 'em see the Errors of their love; for Silvia fell into a Fever
so violent that Phillander no longer hoped for her recovery, in so much that
she was obliged to own her Sex and take Women Servants out of decency, this
made the first discovery of who and what they were, and for which every body
languisht under a secret grief. But Octavio who now was not only confirmed she
was a Woman, but that she was neither wife to Phillander, nor could in almost
all possibility ever be so: That she was his Mistress, gave him hope that she
might one day as well be conquered by him; and he found her youth, her Beauty,
and her quality, merited all his pains of lavish Courtship: And now there
remains no more than the fear of her dying to oblige him immediately to a
discovery of his passion, too violent now by his new hope to be longer
concealed, but decency forbids he should now pursue the dear design; he waited
and made Vows for her recovery; visited her and found Phillander the most
deplorable object that despair and love could render him, who lay eternally
weeping on her bed, and no Counsel or persuasion could remove him thence; but
if by chance they made him sensible 'twas for her repose, he would depart to
ease his mind by new torments, he would rave and tear his delicate hair, sigh
and weep upon Octavio's bosom, and a thousand times begin to unfold the story
already known to tha generous Rival; despair, and hopes of pity from him, made
him utter all; and one day, when by the advice of the Physician he was forced
to quit the Chamber to give her rest, he carried Octavio to his own, and told
him from the beginning all the story of his Love with the charming Silvia; and
with it all the story of his Fate: Octavio sighing (tho glad of the
opportunity) told him his affairs were already but too well known, and that he
feared his safety from that discovery, since the States had obliged themselves
to harbor no declared Enemy to the French King: At this news our young
unfortunate showed a rsentment that was so moving, that even Octavio, who felt
a secret joy at the thoughts if his departure, could no longer refrain from
pity and tenderness, even to a wish that he were less unhappy and never to part
from Silvia; but soon love grew again triumphant in his heart, and all he could
say was that he would afford him the aids of all his power in this encounter,
which with the acknowledgments of a Lover, whose life depended on it, he
received and parted with him, who went to learn what was decreed in Council
concerning him. While Phillander returned to Silvia the most dejected Lover
that ever Fate produced; where he had not sighed away above an hour but he
received a Billet by Octavio's Page from his Lord; he went to his own apartment
to read it, fearing it might contain something too sad for him to be able to
hold his temper at the reading of, and which would infallibly have dissturb'd
the repose of Silvia, who shared in every cruel thought of Phillanders; when he
was alone he opened it, and read this.

Octavio to Phillander.
My Lord,
I Had rather die then be the ungrateful messenger of news, which I am sensible
will prove so fatal to you, and which will be best expressed in fewest words,
it is decreed, that you must retire from the United Provinces in Four and Twenty
hours, if you will save a life that is dear to me and Silvia, there being no
other security against your being rendered up to the King of France. Support it
well, and hope all things from the assistance of,

From the Council Wednesday. Your Octavio. Phillander


Phillander having finished the reading of this, remained a while wholly without
life or motion, when coming to himself he sighed and cried, -- Why -- farewell
trifling life -- If of the two extremes one must be chosen, rather then I Will
abandon Silvia, I Will stay and be delivered up a Victim to incensed France --
It Is but a life -- At best I never Vallu'd thee -- And now I scorn to preserve
thee at the Price of Silvias tears! Then taking a hasty turn or two about his
chamber, he pawsing cried -- But by my stay I ruin both Silvia and my self, her
life depends on mine, and it is impossible hers can be preserved when mine is in
danger, by retiring I shall shortly again be blessed with her sight in a more
safe security; by staying I resign my self poorly to be made a public scorn to
France, and the cruel Murderer of Silvia; now 'twas, after an hundred turns
and pawses intermixed which sighs and raveings, that he resolved for both their
safeties to retire, and having a while longer debated within himself how and
where; and a little time ruminated on his hard persuing fate, grown to a calm
of grief (less easy to be born than rage) he hastes to Silvia, whom he sound
something more cheerful than before, but dares not aquaint her with the
commands he had to depart -- But silently he views her, while tears of Love
and grief glide unperceivably fram his fine eyes, his soul grows tenderer at
every look, and pity and compassion joining to his Love, and his despairs, set
him on the wrack of Li^e, and now believing it less pain to die than to leave
Silvia; resolves to disobey and dare the worst that shall befall him, he yet
had some glimmering hope, as Lovers have, that some kind chance will prevent
his going or being delivered up, he trusts much to the Friendship of Octavio,
whose power joined with that of his Uncle. (Who was one of the States also, and
whom he had an ascendant over, as his Nephew and his heir,) might serve him; he
therefore ventures to move him to compassion, by this following Letter.

Phillander to Octavio.
I Know, my Lord, that the Exercise of Virtue and Justice is so innate to your
soul, and so fixed to the very Principle of a generous Commonwealths man, that
where those are in competition it is neither birth, wealth, or Glorious merit,
that can render the unfortunate condemned by you, worthy of your pity or
pardon: your very Sons and fathers fall before your justice, and it is crime
enough to offend, (tho innocently,) the least of your wholesome laws, to fall
under the extremity of their rigor. I am not ignorant neither how flourishing
this necessary Tyranny, this lawful oppression, renders your State; howsafe and
glorious; how secure from Enemies at home, (those worst of foes) and how feared
by those abroad; pursue then, Sir, your justifiable method, and still be high
and mighty, retain your ancient Roman virtue, and still be great as Rome her
self in her height of glorious Commonwealths; rule your stubborn Natives by her
excellent examples, and let the height of your ambition be only to be as
severely just, as rigidly good as you please, but like her too, be pitiful to
Strangers, and dispense a Noble Charity to the distressed, compassionate a poor
wandering young Man, who flies to you for refuge, lost to his Native home, lost
to his fame, his fortune, and his Friends; and has only left him the knowledge
of his innocence to support him from falling on his own Sword, to end an
unfortunate life, persu'd every where, and safe no where, a Life whose only
refuge is Octavio's goodness, nor is it barely to preserve this life, that I
have recourse to that only as my Sanctuary; and like an humble Slave implore
your pity: Oh, Octavio pity my Youth; and interceed for my stay yet a little
longer, Your self makes one of the illustrious Number of the Grave, the Wise,
and mighty Council, your Uncle and Relations make up another considerable part
of it, and you are too dear to all, to find a refusal of your just and
compassionate application. Oh! what fault have I committed against you, that I
should not find a safety here, as well as those charged with the same Crime
with me, tho of less quality? Many I have incounter'd here of our unlucky
party, who find a safety among you; is my birth a Crime? Or does the greatness
of that augment my guilt? Have I broken any of your Laws, committed any
outrage? Do they suspect me for a spy to France? Or do I hold any
Corrispondence with that ungrateful Nation? Does my Religion, Principle, or
Opinion differ from yours? Can I design the subversion of your Glorious State?
Can I plot, cabal, or mutiny alone? Oh charge me with some offense, or your
selves of injustice. Say, why I am denied my length of ^arth amongst you, if I
die? Or why to breath the open Air, if I live, since I shall neither oppress the
one, nor infect the other; but on the contrary am ready with my sword, my
youth, and Blood to serve you, and bring my little aids on all occasions to
yours: and should be proud of the Glory to die for you in Battle, who would
deliver me up a Sacrifice to France. Oh! where Octavio is the glory or virtue
of this Punctilio, for it is no other? There are no Laws that bind you to it, no
obligatory Article of Nations, but an unnecessary complyment made a nemini
contradicente of your Senate, that argues nothing but ill nature, and cannot
redound to any one advantage. An Ill nature that is levelled at me alone; for
many I found here, and many shall leave under the same circumstances with me;
it is only me whom you have marked out the victime to atone for all: Well then,
my Lord, if nothing can move you to a safety for this unfortunate, at least be
so mercyful to suspend your cruelty a little, yet a little, and possible I
shall render you the body of Phillander, tho dead, to send into France, as the
trophy of your fidellity to that Grown: Oh yet a little stay your cruel
sentence, till my lovely Sister, who persu'd my hard fortunes, declare my Fate
by her life or death; Oh my Lord, if ever the soft passion of Love have touched
your soul, if you have felt the unresistable force of young charms about your
heart, if ever you have known a pain and pleasure from fair eyes, or the
transporting Joys of Beauty, Pity a youth undone by Love and ambition, those
powerful conquerours of the young. -- Pity, oh Pity a youth that dies, and will
ere long no more complain upon your Rigours. Yes, my Lord, he dies without the
force of a terrifying Sentence, without the grim reproaches of an angry Judge,
without the soon consulted Arbitrary -- Guilty! of a severe and hasty Jury,
without the ceremony of the Scaffol'd, Ax, and Hang man, and the clamours of
inconsidering Crowds. All which melancholy ceremonies render death so terrible,
which else would fall like gentle slumbers upon the eyelids. And which in
field I would encounter with that joy I would the sacred thing I Love! But oh*
I fear my fate is in the lovely Silvia, and in her dying eyes you may read it,
in her languishing face you will see how near it is aproacht. Ah! will you not
suffer me to attend it there? by her dear side I shall fall as calmly as
flowers from their stalks, without regret or pain: Will you by forcing me to die
from her, run me to a madness? To wild distraction? Oh think it sufficient that
I die here before half my race of youth be run, before the light be half^burnt
out, that might have conducted me to a world of Glory! Alas, she dies -- The
Lovely Silvia clies, she is sighing out a soul to which mine is so entirely
fixed, that they must go upward together. Yes, yes, she breaths it sick into my
bosom, and kindly gives mine its disease of death; let us at least then die in
silent, quitted; and if it please Heaven to restore the languish'd Charmer, I
will resign my self up to all your Rigorous honor, only let me bear my
treasure with me, while we wander over the world to seek us out a safety in
some part of it, where pity and compassion is no crime. Where men have tender
hearts, and have heard of the God of Love; where Politics are not all the
business of the powerful, but where civillity and good nature reign.

Perhaps, my Lord, you will wonder I plead no weightier Argument for my stay than
Love, or the griefs and tears of a languishing Maid: But oh! they are such
tears as every drop would ransom lives, and nothing that proceeds from her
charming eyes can be valued at a less rate! In Pity to her, to me, and your
Amorous youths, let me bear her hence. For should she look abroad as her own
Sex, should she appear in her natural and proper beauty, alas they were undone.
Reproach not (my Lord) the weakness of this confession, and which I make with
more Glory than could I boast my self Lord of all the Universe: if it appear a
fault to the more grave and wise, I hope my youth will plead something for my
excuse. Oh say, at least, 'twas Pity that Love had the ascendant over
Phillanders soul, say 'twas his Destiny, but say withal, that it put no stop to
his advance to Glory; rather it set an edg upon his Sword, and gave wings to
his ambition! -- Yes, try me in your Counsels, prove me in your Camps, place
me in any hazard -- But give me Love! and leave to wait the life or death of
Silvia, and then dispose as you please,

My Lord Of Your unfortunate, Philander.


Octavio to Philander.
My Lord,
I Am much concerned that a Request so reasonable as you have made, will be of
so little force with these arbitrary Tyrants of State, and tho you have addressed
and appealed to me* as one of that grave and rigid number, (tho without one
grain of their formalities, and I hope age, which renders us less Gallant, and
more envious of the joys and liberties of youth, will never reduce me to so
dull and thoughtless a member of State) yet I have so small and single a
portion of their power, that I am ashamed of my incapacity of serving you in
this great affair. I bear the Honor and the name it is true, of Glorious sway;
but I can boast but of the worst and most impotent part of it, the Title only;
but the busy, absolute, mischievious Politician, finds no room in my Soul, my
humor, or constitution: And Ploding restless power I have made so little the
business of my gayer, and more careless youth, that I have even lost my right
of rule, my share of Empire amongst them. That little power (whose unregarded
loss I never bemoaned till it rendered me incapable of serving Phillander,) I
have stretched to the utmost bound for your stay; insomuch that I have received
many reproaches from the wiser Coxcombs; have had my youths little debauches
hinted on, and Judgments made of you (disadvantagious) from my Friendship to
you; a Friendship, which, my Lord, at first sight of you, found a being in my
soul, and which your wit, your goodness, your greatness, and your misfortunes
has improved to all the degrees of it: Tho I am infinitey unhappy that it
proves of no use to you here, and that the greatest testimony I can now render
of it, is to warn you of your aproaching danger. And hasten your departure, for
there is no safety in your stay. I just now heard what was decreed against you
in council, which no pleading nor Eloquence of Friendship had force enough to
evade. Alas, I had but one single voice in the number, which I sullenly and
singly gave, and which unregarded past. Go then, my Lord, haste to some place
where good breeding and humanity reigns. Go and preserve Silvia, in providing
for your own safety; and believe me, till she be in a Condition to pursue your
Fortunes, I will take such care that nothing shall be wanting, either to
recovery here, in order to her following after you. I am, alas but too sensible
of all the pains you must endure by such a separation, for I am neither
insensible, nor incapable of love, or any of its violent effects: Go then, my
Lord, and preserve the lovely Maid in your flight, since your stay and danger
will serve but to hasten on her death: Go, and be satisfied she shall find a
protection suitable to her Sex, her innocence, her Beauty, and her quality, and
that wherever you fix your stay, she shall be resigned to your Arms by my
Lord,

Your Eternal Friend and humble Servant, Octavio.


Least in this sudden remove you should want Money, I have sent you several
Bills of Exchange to what place soever you arrive, and what you want more (make
no scruple to use me as a friend) and command.

After this Letter, finding no hopes; but on the contrary a dire necessity of
departing, he told Briljard his misfortune, and asked his Counsel in this
extremity of affairs. Brilljard (who of a Servant was become a Rival) you may
believe, gave him such advice as might remove him from the object he adored.
But after a great deal of dissembled trouble, the better to hide his joy, he
gave his advice for his going with all the arguments that appeared reasonable
enough to Phil^ander. And at every period urged that his life being dear to
Silvia, and on which hers so immediately depended, he ought no longer to debate
but haste his flight, to all which council our Amorous Hero, with a soul ready
to make its way through his trembling body, gave a sighing unwilling assent.
'Twas now no longer a dispute, but was concluded he must go, but how was only
the question. How should he take his farewell, how should he bid adieu, and
leave the dear object of his soul in an estate to hazardous, he form^d a
thousand sad Ideas to torment himself with; fancying he should never see her
more, that he should hear that she was dead, tho now she appeared on this side
of the Grave, and had all the signs of a declining disease. He fancied absence
might make her cold and abate her passion to him, that her powerful beauty
might atract adorers, and she being but a Woman, and no p^rt Angel, but her
form, 'twas not expected she should want her Sexes frailties. Now he could
consider how he had won her, how by importunity and opportunity she had at last
yielded to him, and therefore might to some new Gamster, when he was not by to
keep her heart in continual play: Then 'twas that all the despair of jealous
love, the throbs and piercing of a violent passion seized his timorous and
tender heart, he fancied her already in some new Lovers Arms, and ran over all
the soft enjoyments he had had with her; and fancied with tormenting thought,
that so another would posses her: till rackt with tortures he almost fainted on
the Repose on which he was set: But Brilljard roused and endeavored to
convince him: Told him he hoped his fear was needless, and that he would take
all the watchful care imaginable of her conduct, be a spy upon her virtue, and
from time to time give him notice of all that should pass: Bid him consider her
quality, and that she was no common Mistress whom hire could lead astray, and
that if from the violence of her passion, or her more severe fate she had
yielded to the most Charming of men, he ought as little to imagine she could be
again a Lover, as that she could find an object of equal beauty with that of
Phillander. In fine, he soothed and Flattered him into so much ease, that he
resolves to take his leave for a day or two under pretense of meeting and
consulting with some of the rebel party; and that he would return again to her
by that time it might be imagined her fever might be abated, and Silvia in a
condition to receive the news of his being gone for a longer time, and to know
all his affairs. While Brilljard prepared all things necessary for his
departure, Phillander went to Silvia. From whom, having been absent two tedious
hours; she caught him in her Arms with a transport of joy; reproached him with
want of Love, for being absent so long. But still the more she spoke soft
^ighing words of Love, the more his Soul was seized with melancholy. His sighs
redoubled and he could not refrain from leting fall some tears upon her bosom
-- Which Silvia perceiving with a look and a trembling in her voice, that spoke
her fear, she cried, oh Phillander! these are unusual marks of your tenderness.
Oh tell me, tell me quickly, what they mean. He answered with a sigh, and she
went on -- It Is so, I am undone, it is your lost vows, your broken faith you
weep, Yes, Phillander, you find the flower of my beauty faded, and what you
loved before you pity now, and these be the effects of it. Then sighing, as if
his Soul had been departing on her neck, he cried by heaven, by all the powers
of Love, thou art the same dear charmer that thou were, then pressing her body
to his bosom, he sighed a new as if his heart were breaking -- I know (says
she) Phillander there is some hidden cause that gives these sighs their way, and
that dear face a paleness. Oh tell me all; for she that could abandon all for
thee, can dare the worst of Fate, if thou must quit me -- Oh Phillander, if it
must be so, I need not stay the lingering death of a feable Fever: I know a
way more noble and more sudden. Pleased at her resolution, which all most
destroyed his jealousy and fears, a thousand times he kissed her, mixing his
grateful words and thanks with sighs, and finding her fair hands (which he put
often to his mouth) to increase their fires, and her pulse to be more high and
quick, fearing to relapse her into her (abating) fever he forced a smile, and
told her, he had no griefs, but what she made him feel, no torments but her
sickness, nor sighs but for her pain, and left nothing unsaid, that might
confirm her he was still more and more her Slave; and concealing his design in
favor of her health, he ceased not vowing and protesting till he had settled
her in all the tranquillity of a recovering beauty. And, as since her first
Illness he had never departed from her Bed, so now this night he strove to
appear in her Arms with all that usual Gayety of Love that her condition would
permit, or his circumstances could feign, and leavign her a sleep at daybreak
(with a force upon his Soul that cannot be conceived) but by parting Lovers, he
stole from her Arms and retiring to his chamber he soon got himself ready for
his flight and departed. We will leave Silvia's ravings to be expressed by none
but her self, and tell you that after about Fourteen days absence Octavio
received this Letter from Phillander:

Phillander to Octavio.
BEing sa^ely arrived at Collen, and by a very pretty and lucky adventure
lodged in the house of the best quallity in the Town, I find my self much more
at ease then I thought it possible to be without Silvia, from whom I am
nevertheless impatient to hear, I hope absence appears not so great a Bugbear
to her as 'twas imagined. For I know not what effects it would have on me to
hear her griefs exceeded a few sighs and tears. Those my kind absence has
taught me to allow and bear without much pain, but should her Love transport
her to extremes of rage and despair, I fear I should quit my safety here, and
give her the last proof of my Love and my compassion: throw my self at her
Feet, and expose my life to preserve hers, Honor would oblige me to it. I
conjure you, my dear Octavio, by all the Friendship you have vowed me, (and
which I no longer doubt,) let me speedily know how, she bears my absence, for
on that knowledge depends a great deal of the satisfaction of my life, carry her
this enclosed which I have writ her, and soften my silent departure, which
possibly may apear rude and unkind, plead my pardon, and give her the story of
my necessity of offending, which none can so well relate as your self. And from
a mouth so eloquent, to a Maid so full of Love, will soon reconcile me to her
heart. With her Letter I send you a Bill to pay her 2000 Patacons, which I have
paid Vander Hanskin here, as his Letter will inform you, as also those Bills I
received of you at my departure, having been supplied by an English Merchant
here, who gave me credit. 'Twill be an Age till I hear from you, and receive
the news of the health of Silvia. Than which two blessings nothing will be more
wellcom to,

Collen. Generous Octavio, Your PHILANDER.
Direct your Letters for me to your Merchant Vander Hanskin.




Philander to Silvia.
THere is no way left to gain my Silvia's pardon, for leaving her, and leaving
her in such circumstances, but to tell her 'twas to preserve a life, which I
believed entirely dear to her, but that unhappy crime is too severely punished
by the cruelties of my absence. Believe me, Lovely Silvia, I have felt all your
pains, I have burnt with your fever, and sighed with your oppressions; Say,
has my pain abated yours? Tell me! and hasten my health by the assurance of
your recovery, or I have fled in vain from those dear Arms to save a life, of
which I know not what account to give you, till I reecive from you the knowledge
of your perfect health, the true state of mine. I can only say I sigh, and have
a sort of a being in Collen, where I have some more assurance of protection
than I could hope from those int'rested Bruits, who sent me from you, yet
Brutish as they are, I know thou art safe from their Clownish outrages. For
were they senseless as their Fellow Monsters of the sea, they durst not profane
so pure an excellence as thine, the sullen Boors would jouder out a wellcom to
thee, and gape, and wonder at thy awful beauty, tho they want the tender sense
to know, to what use 'twas made. Or if I doubted their Humanity, I cannot the
Friendship of Octavio, since he has given me too good a proof of it to leave me
any fear, that he has not in my absence persu'd those generous sentiments for
Silvia which he vowed to Philander, and of which the first proof must be his
relating the necessity of my absence, to set me well with my adorable Maid.
Who, better than I, can inform her: and that I rather chose to quit you only
for a short space, than reduce my self to the necessity of losing you
eternally. Let the satisfaction this ought to give you, retrieve your health
and beauty, and put you into a condition of restoring to me all my joys. That
by persuing the dictates of your Love, you may again bring the greatest
happyness on earth to the Arms of

Your PHILANDER.
My affairs here are yet so unsettl'd, that I can take no order for your coming
to me but, as soon as I know where I can fix with safety, I shall make it my
business and my happyness: Adieu. Trust Octavio with your Letters only.




This Letter Octavio would not carry himself to her, who had omitted no day,
scarce any hour, wherein he saw not or sent not to the charming Silvia, but he
sound, in that which Philander had writ to him, an Air of coldness altogether
unusual with that passionate Lover, and infinitely short in point of tenderness
to those he had formerly seen of his, and from what he had heard him speak; so
that he no longer doubted (and the rather because he hoped it) but that
Philander found an abatement of that heat, which was wont to inspire at a more
Amorous rate; this appearing declension he could not conceal from Silvia, at
least to let her know he took notice of it; for he knew her Love was too quick
sighted and sensible to pass it unregarded, but he with reason thought, that
when she should find others observe the little slight she had put on her, her
pride (which is natural to women in such cases) would decline and lessen her
Love, for his Rival. He therefore sent his Page with the Letters enclosed in
this from himself.

Octavio to Silvia.
Madam,
FRom a little necessary debauch I made last night with the Prince, I am forced
to employ my Page in those duties I ought to have performed my self: He brings
you, Madam, a Letter from Philander, as mine which I have also sent you
informs me; I should else have doubted it; it is, I think, his character, and
all he says of Octavio confesses the Friend, but where he speaks of Silvia sure
he disguises the Lover: I wonder the mask should be put on now to me, to whom
before he so frankly discovered the the secrets of his Amorous heart. It Is a
mystery I would sain persuade my self he finds absolutely necessary to his
interest, and I hope you will make the same favorable constructions of it, and
not impute the lessened zeal wherewith he treats the charming Silvia to any
possible change or coldness, since I am but too fatally sensible, that no man
can arrive at the Glory of being beloved by you, that had ever power to shorten
one link of that dear chain, that holds him, and you need but survey that
adorable face, to confirm your tranquillity, set a just value on your charms,
and you need no arguments to secure your everlasting Empire, or to establish it
in what heart you please, this fatal truth I learnt from your fair eyes, e're
they discovered to me your Sex; and you may as soon change to what I then
believed you, as I from adoring what I now find you; if all then, Madam, that
do but look on you become your Slaves, and languish for you, love on, even
without hope, and die, what must Phillander pay you, who has the mighty
blessing of your Love, your Vows, and all that renders the hours of amorous
Youth sacred, glad, and Triumphant? But you know the conquering power of your
charms too well to need either this daring confession, or a defense of
Phillanders virtue from,

Madam, Your obedient Slave, Octavio.


Silvia had no sooner read this with blushes, and a thousand fears, and
trembling of what was to follow in Phillander's Letters both to Octavio and to
her self, but with an Indignation agreeable to her haughty Soul she cried --
How, -- slighted! and must Octavio see it too: By Heaven if I should find it
true he shall not dare to think it; then with a generous rage she broke open
Phillanders Letter; and which she soon perceived did but too well prove the
truth of Octavio's suspicion, and her own fears. She repeated it again and
again, and still she found more cause of grief and anger; Love occasioned the
first, and Pride the last: And, to a Soul perfectly haughty, as was that of
Silvia, 'twas hard to guess which had the assendant: She considered Octavio to
all the advantages that thought could conceive in one who was not a Lover of
him; she knew he merited a heart tho she had none to give him, she found him
charming without having a tenderness for him, she found him young and amorous
without desire toward him, she found him great, rich, powerful, and generous,
without designing on him, and tho she knew her Soul free from all Passion, but
that for Philander; nevertheless she blushed and was angry, that he had thoughts
no more advantageous to the power of those charms, which she wished might
appear to him above her Sex: It being natural to Women to desire Conquests, tho
they hate the conquered; to glory in the triumph, tho they despise the Slave.
And believed, while Octavio had so poor a sense of her beauty as to believe it
could be forsaken, he would adore it less; And first to satisfy her pride she
left the softer business of her heart to the next tormenting hour, and sent him
this careless answer by his Page, believing if she appeared too angry it might
look as if she valued his opinion, and therefore dissembled her thoughts, as
women in those cases ever do, who when most angry seem the most Galliard,
especially when they have need of the friendship of those they flatter.

Silvia to Octavio.
IS it indeed Octavio, that you believe Philander cold, or would you make that
a pretext to the declaration of your own passion, we French Ladies are not so
nicely tied up to the formalities of virtue, but we can hear Love at both ears,
and if we receive not the addresses of both, at least we are perhaps vain
enough, not to be displeased, to find we make new conquests. But you have made
your attacque with so ill conduct, that I shall find force enough without more
aids to repulse you. Alas, my Lord! did you believe my heart was left unguarded
when Philander departed? No, the careful charming Lover left a thousand litgods
to defend it, of no less power than himself. Young Deities, who laugh at all
your little arts and treacheries, and scorn to resign their Empire to any
feable Cupids you can draw up against 'em. Your thick foggy air breeds Loves
too dull and heavy for noble slights, nor can I stoop to them. The Flemish Boy
wants arrows keen enough for hearts like mine, and is a Bungler in his Art, too
lasie and remiss, rather a heavy Bacchus than a Cupid, a Bottle sends him to
his Bed of Moss, where he sleeps hard, and never dreams of Venus.

How poorly have you paid your self, my Lord, (by this pursuit of your
discovered Love) for all the little friendship you have rendered me? How well
you have explained, you can be no more a Lover than a Friend, if one may judge
the first by the last: Had you been thus obstinate in your passion before
Philander went, or you had believed me abandoned, I should perhaps have
thought, that you had loved indeed, because I should have seen you durst, and
should have believed it true, because it ran some hazards for me, the
resolution of it would have reconciled me then to the temerity of it, and the
greatest demonstration you could have given of it, would have been the danger
you would have ran and contemned; and the preferance of your passion above any
other consideration. This, my Lord, had been generous, and like a Lover, but
poorly thus to set upon a single Woman in the disguise of a Friend, in the dark
silent melancholy hour of absence from Philander, then to surprise me, then to
bid me deliver! to pad for hearts! it was not like Octavio. That Octavio,
Philander made his Friend, and for whose dear sake, my Lord, I will no further
reproach you, but from a goodness, which, I hope, you will merit, I will
forgive an offense, which your ill timing has rendered almost inexcusable; and
expect you will for the future consider better how you ought to treat

SYLVIA.


As soon as she had dismissed the Page, she hasted to her business of Love, and
again read over Philanders Letter, and finds still new occasion for fear; she
had recourse to pen and paper for a relief of that heart which no other way
could find it; and after, having wiped the tears from her eyes, she writ this
following Letter.

Silvia to Philander.
YEs, Philander, I have received your Letter, and but I found my name there,
should have hoped it was not meant for Silvia: Oh! it is all cold -- Short --
Short and cold as a dead Winters day. It chilled my blood, it shivered every
vein. Where, oh where have thou lavished out all those soft words so natural to
thy Soul, with which thou used to charm; so tuned to the dear music of thy
voice? What is become of all the tender things, which, as I used to read, made
little nimble pantings in my heart, my blushes rise, and tremblings in my
blood, adding new fire to the poor burning Victim! Oh where are all thy pretty
flatteries of Love, that made me fond, and vain, and set a value on this
trifling Beauty? Have thou forgot thy wondrous Art of loving? Thy pretty
cunings, and thy soft deceivings? Have thou forgot 'em all? Or have forgot
indeed to love at all? Has thy industrious passion gathered all the sweets, and
left the rifled flower to hang its withered head, and die in shades neglected,
for who will prize it now, now, when all its perfumes fled. Oh my Philander, oh
my charming Fugitive! wast not enough, you left me like false Theseus on the
shore, on the forsaken shore, departed from my fond my clasping Arms; where I
believed you safe, secure, and pleased; when sleep and night, that favored you
and fuin'd me, had rendered 'em incapable of their dear loss? Oh was it not
enough, that when I found 'em empty and abandoned, and the place cold where you
had lain, and my poor trembling bosom unpossest of that I dear load it bore,
that almost expired with my first fears; Oh if Philander loved he would have
thought that cruelty enough, without the sad addition of a growing coldness: I
waked, I mist thee, and I called aloud, Philander! my Philander! But no
Philander heard; then drew the close drawn Curtains, and with a hasty and busy
veiw, surveyed the Chamber over, but Oh! in vain I veiw'd, and called yet
louder, but none appeared to my assistance, but Antonet and Briljard to torture
me with dull excuses, urging a thousand feigned and frivolous reasons to
satisfy my fears: But I, who loved, who doated even to madness, by nature
soft, and timorous as a Dove, and fearful as a Criminal escaped, that dreads
each little noise, fancied their eyes and guilty looks confessed the treasons of
their hearts and tongues, while they, more kind than true, strove to convince
my killing doubts: Protested, that you would return by night, and feigned a
likely story to deceive, Thus between hope and fear I languisht out a day, Oh
Heavens! a tedious day without Philander, who would have thought, that such a
dismal day should not with the end of its reign have finished that of my life,
but then Octavio came to visit me, and who till then I never wished to see, but
now I was impatient for his coming, who by degrees told me that you were gone
-- I never asked him where, or how, or why, that you where gone was enough to
possess me of all I feared your being apprehended, and sent into France, your
delivering your self up, your abandoning me; all, all, I had an easy faith
for, without consulting more than That, Thou were gone, -- that very word yet
strikes a terror to my Soul, disables my trembling hand, and I must wait for
reinforcements from some kinder thoughts. But, Oh! from whence should they
arrive? from what dear present felicity, or prospect of a future, tho never so
distant, and all those past ones, serve but to increase my pain; they favor me
no more, they charm and please no more, and only present themselves to my
memory to complete the number of my sighs and tears, and make me wish that they
had never been, tho even with Philander! Oh, say, thou Monarch of my panting
Soul, How have thou treated Silvia, to make her wish, that she had never known
a tender joy with thee: Is It possible she should repent her loving thee, and
thou should give her cause! Say, dear false Charmer, is it? But O, there is
no lasting Faith in sin! -- Ah -- What have I done? How dreadful is the Scene
of my first debauch, and how glorious that never to be regained prospect of my
Virgin innocence, where I fate enthroned in awful virtue, crowned with shining
honor, and adorned with unsullied reputation, till thou, O Tyrant Love! with a
charming usurpation, invaded all my glories; and which I resigned with greater
pride and joy than a young Monarch puts 'em on. Oh, why then do I repent? as if
the vast, the dear expense of pleasures past were not enough to recompense for
all the pains of Love to come? But why, O why do I treat thee as a Lover lost
already. Thou art not, can not, no, I Will not believe it, till thou thy self
confess it. Nor shall the omission of a tender word or two make me believe thou
have forgot thy vows. Alas it may be I mistake thy cares, thy hard fatigues of
Life, thy presant ill circumstances (and all the melancholy effects of thine
and my misfortunes) for coldness and declining Love. Alas, I had forgot my
poor, my dear Philander is now obliged to contrive for Life, as well as Love;
thou perhaps (fearing the worst) art preparing Eloquence for a Council Table,
and in thy busy and guilty imaginations, haranguing it to the grave Judges,
defending thy innocence, or evading thy guilt: Feeing Advocates, excepting
Juries, and confronting. Witnesses, when thou should be giving satisfaction
to my fainting lovesick heart: Sometimes in thy laboring fancy the horror of
a dreadful Sentence for an ignominious death strikes upon thy tender Soul with
a force that frights the little God from thence, and I am persuaded there are
some moments of this melancholy nature, wherein your Silvia is even quite
forgotten, and this too she can think just and reasonable, without reproaching
thy heart with a declining passion, especially when I am not by to call thy
fondness up, and divert thy more tormenting hours: But Oh, for those soft
minutes thou have designed for Love, and have dedicated to Silvia, Philander
should dismiss the dull formalities of rigid business, the pressing cares of
dangers, and have given a loose to softness. Could my Philander imagine this
short and unloving Letter sufficient to atone for such an absence? And has
Philander then forgotten the pain with which I languish'd, when but absent from
him an hour; how then can he imagine I can live, when distant from him so many
Leagues, and so many days? while all the scanty comfort I have for life is,
that one day we might meet again; but where, or when, or how -- thou have not
love enough so much as to divine; but poorly leavest me to be satisfied by
Octavio, committing the business of thy heart, the once great importance of thy
Soul, the most necessary devoires of thy life, to be supplied by another. Oh
Philander, I have known a blessed time in our reign of Love, when thou would
have thought even all thy own power of too little force to satisfy the
doubting Soul of Silvia: Tell me, Philadner, have thou forgot that time? I dare
not think thou have, and yet (O God) I find an alteration, but Heaven divert
the Omen: Yet something whispers to my Soul, I am undone! Oh where art thou my
Philander? Where Is thy heart? And what has it been doing since it begun my
Fate? How can it justify thy coldness, and thou this cruel absence, without
accounting with me for every parting hour? My Charming Dear was wont to find me
business for all my lonely absent ones? and writ the softest Letters -- Loading
the Paper with fond Vows and Wishes, which e're I had read over, another would
arrive, to keep Eternal warmth about my Soul; nor ^wert thou ever wearied more
with writing, than I with reading or with sighing after thee; but now -- Oh!
there is some Mystery in it I dare not understand. Be kind at least and satisfy
my fears, for it is a wondrous pain to live in doubt, if thou still love me,
swear it over a new! and curse me if I do not credit thee. But -- if thou art
declining, -- or should be sent a shameful Victim into France -- Oh thou
deceiving Charmer, yet be just and let me know my Doom; By Heaven this last
will find a welcome to me, for it will end the torment of my doubts, and fears
of losing thee another way, and I shall have the Joy to dye with thee; dye
beloved, and dye

Thy SILVIA.


Having read over this Letter she feared she had said too much of her doubts,
and apprehensions of a change in him; for now she flies to all the little
Stratagems and artifices of Lovers, she begins to consider the worst, and to
make her best of that, but quite abandoned she could not believe her self
without flying into all the rage that disappointed Women could be possessed with,
she calls Briljard shows him his Lords Letters, and told him (while he read)
her doubts and fears; he being thus instructed by her self in the way how to
deceive her on, like Fortunetellers who gather peoples Fortune from themselves
and then return it back for their own Divinity; tells her he saw indeed a
change! glad to improve her fear, and feigns a sorrow almost equal to hers:
It Is evident, says he, It Is evident, that he is the most ungrateful of his Sex!
Pardon Madam (continued he, bowing) If my Zeal for the most Charming Creature
on Earth make me forget my duty to the best of Masters and Friends, Ah
Brilljard, cried she, with an Air of languishment that more inflamed him, have
a care least that mistaken Zeal for me should make you profane a Virtue, which
has not, but on this occasion showed that it wanted Angels for its guard. Oh,
Brilljard, if he be false -- If the dear Man be perjured, take, take kind
Heaven! the life you have preserved, but for a greater proof of your revenge --
And at that word she sunk into his Arms, which he hastily extended as she was
falling, both to save her from harm and to give himself the pleasure of
grasping the lovely'st body in the World to his Bosom, on which her fair face
declined cold, dead and pale, but so transporting was the pleasure of that dear
burden, that he forgot to call for, or to use any aid to bring her back to
life, but trembling with his love and eager passion he took a thousand joys, he
kissed a thousand times her Lukewarm lips, sucked her short sighs, and ravished all
the sweets her Bosom (which but guarded with a loose Night Gown) yielded his
impatient touches. Oh, Heaven who can express the pleasures he received,
because no other way he ever could arrive to so much dareing, 'twas all beyond
his hope, loose were her Robes, insensible the Maid, and love had made him
insolent, he roved, he kissed, he gazed, without control, forgetting all respect
of persons or of place, and quite despairing by fair means to win her, resolves
to take this luckey opportunity; the door he knew was fast, for the Counsel she
had to ask him admitted of no lookers on, so that at his entrance she had
secured that pass for him her self, and being near her Bed, when she fell into
his Arms, at this last daring thought, he lifts her thither and lays her gently
down, and while he did so, in one Minute, ran over all the killing joys he had
been witness to, which she had given Philander; on which he never paws'd but
urged by a Cupid altogether malicious and wicked, he resolves his cowardly
Conquest, when some kinder God awakened Silvia, and brought Octavio to the
Chamber door, who having been used to a freedom which was permitted to none but
himself with Antonett her woman, waiting for admittance, after having knocked
twice softly, Brilljard heard it, and redoubled his disorder, which from that
of Love grew to that of surprise; he knew not what to do, whether to resuse
answering or to re-establish the reviveing sense of Silvia; in this moment of
perplexing thought, he failed not however to set his hair in order, and ajust
him, tho there were no need of it, and steping to the door (after having raised
Silvia, leaning her head on her hand on her bed side,) he gave admittance to
Octavio; but oh Heaven, how was he surpised when he saw it was Octavio? his
heart with more force than before redoubled its beats, that one might easily
perceive every stroke by the motion of his Cravate, he blushed, which to a
complexion perfectly fair, as that of Briljard (who wants no Beauty either in
face or person) was the more discoverable, add to this his trembling, and you
may easily imagine what a sugar he represented himself to Octavio: Who almost
as much surpised as himself to find the Goddess of his Vows and Devotions with
a young Endimion a lone, a door shut too, her Gown loose (which from the late
fit she was in and Briljards rape upon her Bosom) was still open and discovered
a World of unguarded Beauty, which she knew not was in view, with some other
disorders of her head Clothes, gave him in a moment a thousand false
apprehensions, Antonett was no less surpised, so that all had their part of
amazement, but the innocent Silvia, whose Eyes were beautified with a
melancholy calm, which almost fet the generous Lover at ease, and took away
his new fears, however he could not choose but ask Briljard what the matter was
with him, he look so out of countenance, and trembled so, he told him, how
Silvia had been, and what extreme frights she had possessed him with, and told
him the occasion, which the lovely Silvia with her eyes and sighs assented to,
and Brilljard departed; how well pleased you may imagine, or with what gusto he
left her with the lovely Octavio, whom he perceived too well was a Lover in the
disguise of a Friend: But there are in lovethose wonderful Lovers who can
quench the Fire one Beauty kindles, with some other Object, and as much in Love
as Brilljard was he found Antonett an Antidote that dispelled the grosser part
of it, for she was in Love with our Amorous friend, and courted him with that
passion those of that Country do almost all handsome Strangers, and one
convenient principle of the Religion of that Country is to think it no sin: to
be kind while they are single Women, tho otherwise (when Wives) they are just
enough, nor does a Woman that manages her affairs thus discreetly meet with any
reproach, of this humor was our Attonett who persu'd her Lover out half
jealous there might be some amarous intrigue between her Lady and him, which
she sought in vain by all the feable Arts of her Countries Sex to get from him,
while on the other side, he believing she might be of use in the farther
discovery he desired to make between Octavio and Silvia; not only told her she
her self was the Object of his wishes, but gave her a substantial proof on it,
and told her his design, after having her Honor for security that she would be
secret, the best Pledge a man can take of a Woman: After she had promised to
betray all things to him she departed to her affairs, and he to giving his Lord
an account of Silvia, as he desired, in a Letter which came to him with that of
Silvia, and which was thus,

Philander to Briljard.
I Doubt not but you will wonder that all this time you have not heard of me,
nor indeed can I well excuse it, since I have been in a place, whence with ease
I could have sent every Post, but a new affair of Gallantry has engaged my
thoughtful hours, not that I find any passion there that has abated one sigh
for Silvia, but a man's hours are very dull, when undiverted by an intrigue of
some kind or other, especially to a heart young and gay as mine is, and which
would not if possible bend under the fatigues of more serious thought and
business; I should not tell you this, but that I would have you feign all the
dilatory excuses that possible you can to hinder Silvia's coming to me, while I
remain in this Town, where I design to make my abode but a short time, and had
not staid at all, but for this stop to my journey, and I scorn to be vanquished
without taking my revenge, it is a sally of Youth, no more -- a flash that
blazes for a while, and will go out with enjoyment. I need not bid you keep
this knowledge to your self, for I have had too good a confirmation of your
faith and friendship to doubt you now, and believe you have too much respect
for Silvia to occasion her any disquiet. I long to know how she takes my
absence, send me at large of all that pasles, and give your Letters to Octavio,
for none else shall know where I am, or how to send to me: Be careful of
Silvia, and observe her with diligence, for possibly I should not be
extravagantly afflicted to find she were inclined to love me less for her own
ease and mine, since Love is troublesome when the height of it carries it to
jealousies, little quarrels, and eternal discontents, all which beginning
Lovers prize, and pride themselves on every distrust of the fond Mistress,
since it is not only a demonstration of love in them, but of power and charms
in us, that occasion it, but when we no longer find the Mistress so desirable,
as our first wishes form her, we value less their opinion of our persons, and
only endeavor to render it agreeable to new Beauties, and adorn it for new
Conquests, but you Briljard, have been a Lover, and understand already this
Philosophy. I need say no more then, to a man who knows so well my Soul but to
tell him I am

His constant Friend Philander.


This came as Briljards Soul could wish, and had he sent him word he had been
chosen King of Poland he could not have received the news with so great joy,
and so perfect a welcome. How to manage this to his best advantage was the
business he was next to consult, after returning an answer; now he fancied
himself sure of the lovely prize, in spite of all other oppositions: For (says
he, in reasoning the case) if she can by degrees arrive to a coldness to
Philander, and consider him no longer as a Lover, she may perhaps consider me
as a Husband, or should she receive Octavio 's addresses, when once I have
found her feable I will make her pay me for keeping of every secret. So either
way he entertained a hope, tho never so distant from Reason and probability;
but all things seem possible to longing Lovers, who can on the least hope
resolve to out wait even Eternity (if possible) in expectation of a promised
blessing, and now with more than usual care he resolved to dress and fet out
all his Youth and Beauty to the best advantage, and being a Gentleman well
born, he wanted no Arts of dressing, nor any advantage of shape or Mein, to
make it appear well: Pleased with this hope, his art was now how to make his
advances without appearing to have designed doing to. And first to act the
Hypocrite with his Lord was his business; for he considered rightly, if he
should not represent Silva's sorrows to the life, and appear to make him
sensible of 'em, he should not after be credited if he related any thing to her
disadvantage; for to be the greater Enemy you ought to seem to be the greatest
Friend. This was the policy of his heart, who in all things was inspired with
phanatical notions. In order to this, being alone in his Chamber, after the
defeat he had in that of Silvia's, he writ this Letter.

Briljard to Philander.
My Lord,
YOu have done me the honor to make me your Confident in an affair, that does
not a little surprise me: Since I believed, after Silvia, no mortal Beauty
could have touched your heart, and nothing but your own excuses could have
sufficed to have made it reasonable: and I only wish, that when the fatal news
shall arrive to Silvia's ear (as for me it never shall) that she may think it
as pardonable as I do; but I doubt 'twill add abundance of grief, to what she
is already possessed of, if but such a fear should enter in her tender thoughts.
But since it is not my business, my Lord, to advise or counsel, but to obey, I
leave you to all the success of happy Love, and will only give you an account
how affairs stand here, since your departure.

That Morning you left the Brill, and Silvia in Bed, I must disturb your more
serene thoughts with telling you, that her first surprise and griefs at the
news of your departure, were most deplorable, where raging madness and the
softer passion of Love, complaints of grief and anger, sighs, tears, and cries
were so mixed together, and by turns so violently seized her, that all about her
wept and pitty'd her; 'twas sad, 'twas wondrous sad my Lord to see it: Nor
could we hope her Life, or that she would preserve it if she could, for by many
ways she attempted to have released her self from pain by a violent Death, and
those that strove to preserve that, could not hope she would ever have returned
to sense again, sometimes a wild extravagant Raving would require all our aid,
and then again she would talk and rail so tenderly -- and express her
resentment in the kindest softest words that ever madness uttered, and all of
her Philander, till she has set us all a weeping round her, sometimes she would sit
as calm and still as death, and we have perceived she lived only by sighs and
silent Tears that fell into her bosom, then on a sudden wildly gaze upon us
with Eyes that even then had wondrous Charms, and frantickly survey us all,
then cry aloud, where is my Lord Phillander? -- Oh, bring me my Phillander,
Brilljard, Oh Antonett, where have you hid the Treasure of my Soul, then
weeping floods of Tears, would sink all fainting in our Arms. Anon with
trembling words and sighs she would cry, -- but Oh my dear Phillander is no more,
you have surrendered him to France -- Yes, yes, you have given him up, and be
must dye, Publicly dye, be led a sad Victim through the joyful crowd -- reproacht
and fall ingloriously -- Then rave again and tear her 'lovely hair, and Act
such wildness, -- so moving and so sad, as even infected the pitying
beholders, and all we could do was gently to persuade her grief, and sooth her
raveing Fits, but so we swore, so heartily we vowed that you were safe, that
with the aid of Octavio, who came that day to visit her, we made her capable of
hearing a little reason from us: Octavio kneeled and begged she would but calmly
hear him speak, he pawned his Soul, his honor, and his life Philander was as
safe from any injury either from France or any other Enemy as he, as she, or
Heaven it self; in sine, my Lord, he Vowed, he swore, and pleaded till the with
patience heard him tell your Story, and the necessity of your absence, this
brought her temper back and dried her Eyes, then sighing answered him -- that
if for your safety you were fled, she would forgive your cruelty and your
absence, and endeavor to be her self again: But then she would a thousand
times conjure him not to deceive her faith, by all the friendship that he bore
Philander, not to possess her with false hopes, then would he swear a new, and
as he swore, she would behold him with such charming sadness in her Eyes, that
he almost forgot what he would say, to gaze upon her and to pay his Pity? But
if with all his power of Beauty and of Rhetoric he left her Calm, he was no
sooner gone, but she returned to all the Tempests of despairing Love, to all
the unbelief of faithless passion, would neither sleep, nor eat nor suffer, day
to enter; but all was sad and gloomy as the vault that held the Ephesian
Matron, nor suffered she any to approach her but her Page, and Count Octavio,
and he in midst of all was well received, not that I think my Lord she seign'd
any part of that close retirement to entertain him with any freedom, that did
not become a Woman of perfect Love and Honor, though I must own, my Lord, I
believe it impossible for him to behold the Lovely Silvia without having a
passion for her, what restraint his Friendship to you may put upon his heart or
Tongue, I know not, but I conclude him a Lover, tho without success, what
effects that may have upon the heart of Silvia only time can render an account
of: And whose conduct I shall the more particularly observe from a curiosity
natural to me, to see, if it may be possible for Silvia to love again after the
adorable Phillander, which levity in one so perfect would cure me of the
Disease of Love, while I lived amongst the fickle Sex: But since no such
thought can yet get possession of my belief I humbly beg your Lordship would
entertain no jealousy that may be so fatal to your repose and to that of
Silvia, doubt not but my fears proceed perfectly from the zeal I have for your
Lordship, for whose Honor and tranquillity none shall venture so far as,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servant. Brilljard.
POSTCRIPT.
My Lord the Groom shall set forward with your Coach Horses to morrow Morning
according to your Order.




Having writ this, he read it over; not to see whether it were wity or
Eloquent, or writ up to the sense of so good a Judge as Philander, but to see
whether he had cast it for his purpose; for there his Masterpiece was to be
shown; and having read it, he doubted whether the relation of Silvia's griefs
were not too moving, and whether they might not serve to revive his fading love
which were intended only as a demonstration of his own pity, and compassion,
that from thence the deceived Lover might with the more ease entertain a belief
in what he hinted of her Levity when he was to make that out, as he now had but
touched upon it, for he would not have it thought the business of malice to
Silvia, but duty and respect to Philander: That thought reconciled him, to the
first part without alteration, and he fancied he had said enough in the latter,
to give any man of Love and Sense a Jealousy which might inspire a young Lover
in persute of a new Mistress, with a revenge that might wholly turn to his
advantage, for now every ray gave him light enough to conduct him to hope, and
he believed nothing too difficult for his Love, nor what his invention could
not conquer, he fancied himself a very Machiavel already, and almost promised
himself the Charming Silvia, with these thoughts he feals up his Letters and
hastes to Silvia's Chamber for her Further commands, having in his politic
transports forgotten he had left Octavio with her. Octavio, who no sooner had
seen Brilljard quit the Chamber all trembling and diforde'rd after having given
him entrance, but the next step was to the Feet of the newly recovered
languishing Beauty, who not knowing any thing of the freedom the daring
Husband-Lover had taken, was not at all surpised to hear Octavio cry (kneeling
before her) Ah Madam, I no longer wonder you use Octavio with such rigor, then
sighing declined his Melancholy Eyes, where love and jealousy made themselves
too apparent, while she believing he had only reproached her want of Ceremony
at his entrance, checking her self, she started from the Bed and taking him by
the hands to raise him, she cried, Rise, my Lord, and pardon the omission of
that respect which was not wanting but with even life it self Octavio answered,
Yes Madam, but you took care not to make the World absolutely unhappy in your
Eternal loss, and therefore made chioce of such a time to d^e in when you were
sure of a skilful person at hand to bring you back to life - My Lord -- said
she (with an innocent wonder in her Eyes, and an ignorance that did not
apprehend him) I mean Briljard, said he, whom I found sufficiently disordered
to make me believe he took no little pains to restore you to the World again.
This he spoke with such an Air as easily made her imagine he was a Lover to the
degree of jealousy, and therefore beholding him with a look that told him her
disdain before she spoke) she replied hastily, My Lord, if Brilljard have
expressed by any disorder or concern of his kind sense of my sufferings I am more
obliged to him for it then I am to you for your opinion of my virtue, and I
shall hereafter know how to set a value both on the one and on the other, since
what he wants in quality and ability to serve me, he sufficiently makes good
with his respect and Duty. At that she would have quitted him, but he (still
kneeling) held her Train of her Gown, and besought her with all the Eloquence
of moving and petitioning Love, That she would Pardon the effect of a Passion
that could not run into less extravagancy at a sight so new and strange, as
that she should in a morning with only her Night Gown thrown loosely about her
lovely body, and which left a thousand Charms to view, alone receive a man into
her Chamber, and make fast the door upon 'em, which when (from his importunity)
was opened he found her all ruffled, and almost fainting on her Bed, and a
young blushing youth start from her Arms with trembling Limbs, and a heart that
beat time to the Tune of active love, faultering in his speech, as if scarce
yet he had recruited the sense he had so happily lost in the Amorous encounter:
With that surveying of her self, as she stood, in a great Glass, which she
could not hinder her self from doing, she found indeed her Night Linen, her
Gown, and the bosom of her Shift in such disorder, as if at least she had yet
any doubt remaining that Briljard had not treated her well; she however found
cause enough to excuse Octavio's opinion, weighing all the circumstances
together, and adjusting her Linen and Gown with blushes that almost appeared
criminal, she turned to Octavio, who still held her, and still begged her
Pardon, assuring him upon her Honor, her love to Philander, and her friendship
^or him, that she was perfectly innocent, and that Brilljard, tho he should
have quality and all other advantages which he wanted to render him acceptable,
yet that there was in Nature something which compelled ^er to a sort of
coldness and disgust to his person for she had so much the more abhorrance to
him as he was a Husband, but that was a secret to Octavio, but she continued
speaking -- And cried no, could I be brought to yield to any but Philander, I
own I find Charms enough in Octavio to make a conquest, but since the
possession of that dear man is all I a^k of Heaven, I charge my Soul with a
Crime, when I but hear love from any other, therefore I conjure you, if you
have any satisfaction in my conversation, never to speak of Love more to me,
for if you do, Honor will oblige me to make vows against seeing you: All the
freedoms of friendship I Will allow: Give you the Liberties of a Brother, admit
you alone by Night, or any way but that of Love; but that is a re^erve of my
Soul which is only for Philander, and the only one that ever shall be kept from
Octavio She ended speaking and raised him with a smile; and he with a sigh,
told her she must command; then she fell to telling him how she had sent for
Briljard: and all the Discourse that past; with the reason of her falling into
a swound, in which she continued a moment or two, and while she told it she
blushed with a secret fear, that in that Trance some freedoms might be taken
which she durst not confess, but while she spoke our still more passionate
Lover devoured her with his eyes, fixed his very Soul upon her Charms of
speaking and looking, and was a thousand times (urged by transporting passion)
ready to break all her dictates, and vow himself her Eternal Slave, but he
feared the result, and therefore kept himself within the bounds of seeming
friendship, so that after a thousand things she said of Philander, he took his
leave to go to Din^er, but as he was going out he saw Brilljard enter; who, as
I said, had forgot he left Octavio with her; but in a moment recollecting
himself, he blushed at the apprehension, that they might make his disorder, the
subject of their Discourse, so what with that, and the sight of the dear object
of his late disappointed pleasures, he had much ado to assume an assurance to
approach; But Octavio past out and gave him a little release. Silvia's
confusion was almost equal to his, for she looked on him as a Ravisher, but how
to find that Truth, which she was very curious to know, she called up all the
Arts of Women to instruct her in, by threats she knew 'twas vain, therefore she
assumed an Artifice, which indeed was almost a stranger to her heart, that of
gilting him out of a secret which she knew he wanted generosity to give
handsomely, and meeting him with a smile, which she forced, she cried, How now
Briljard, are yon so ^aint hearted a Soldier, you cannot see a Lady dye
without being terrified. Rather Madam, (replied he blushing a new) so soft
hearted I cannot see the loveliest person in the World ^ainting in my Arms,
without being disordered with grief and fear, beyond the power of many days to
resettle again. At which she approacht him, who stood near the door, and
shutting it, she took him by the hand and smiling cried, And had you no other
business for your heart but grief and fear, when a fair Lady throws her self
into your Arms, it ought to have had some kinder effect on a person of
Brilljards youth and complexion. And while she spoke this she held him by the
wrist, and found on the sudden his pulse to beat more high, and his heart to
heave his bosom with sighs, which now he no longer took care to hide; but with
a transported joy he cried Oh Madam do not urge me to a confession that must
undo me, without making it criminal by my discovery of it, you know I am your
slave -- when she with a pretty won^ dering smile cried -- what a Lover too and
yet so dull! Oh Charming Silvia, says he (and falling on his knees) give my
profound respect a kinder Name, to which she answered -- You that know your
sentiments may best instruct ^e by what Name to call em, and you Brilljard may
do it without fear, -- You saw I did not struggle in your Arms, nor strove I to
defend the kisses which you gave -- Oh Heavens cried he transported with what
she said, is it possible that you could know of my presumption and favor it
too? I will no longer then curse those unlucky Stars that sent Octavio just in
the blessed Minute to snatch me from my Heaven, the lovely Victim lay ready for
the Sacrifice, all prepared to offer, my hands, my eyes, my Lips, were tired
with pleasure, but yet they were not fatis^i^d, oh there was joys beyond those
ravishments of which one kind Minute more had made me absolute Lord: Yes and
the next said she, had sent this to your heart -- Snatching a Penknife that lay
on her ^oylite, where she had been writing, which she offer^d so near to his
bosom that he believed himself already pierced, so sensibly killing were her
words, her motion, and her look, he started from her and she threw away the
Knife, and walking a turn or two about the Chamber, while he stood immovable
with his eyes ^ixt to earth, and his thoughts on nothing but a wild confusion,
of which he vowed afterward he could give no account of: But as she turned she
beheld him with some compassion, and remembering how he had it in his power to
expose her in a strange Country, and own her for a wife, she believed it
necessary to hide her resentments; and cried, Brilljard for the friendship your
Lord has for you, I forgive you, but have a care yon never raise your thoughts
to a presumption of that Nature more: Do not hope I will ever fall below
Philanders Love; go and repent your Crime -- and expect all things else from my
favor -- At this he le^t her with a bow that had some malice in it, and she
returned into her dressing Room -- After dinner Octavio writes her this Letter,
which his Page brought.

Octavio to Silvia.
Madam,
It Is true, that in obedience to your commands, I begged your pardon for the
confession I made you of my passion. But since you could not but see the
contradiction of my tongue in my eyes, and hear it but too well confim'd by my
sighs, why will you confine me to the formalities of a silent languishment,
unless to increase my flame with my pain.

You conjure me to see you often, and at the same time forbid me speaking of my
passion, and this bold intruder comes to tell you now, that it is impossible to
obey the first, without disobliging the last, and since the crime of adoring
you exceeds my disobedience in not waiting on you, be pleased at least to
pardon that fault, which my profound respect to the lovely Sylvia compells me
to commit; for it is impossible to see you, and not give you an occasion of
reproaching me: If I could make a truce with my eyes, and like amortifi'd
Capuchion, look always downwards, not daring to behold the glorious
temptations of your Beauty, yet you wound a thousand ways besides; your
touches inflame me, and your voice has music in it, that strikes upon my Soul
with ravishing tenderness; your Wit is unresistable and peircing; your very
sorrows and complaints have charms, that make me soft without the aid of Love:
But Pity joined with Passion raises a ^lame too mighty for my conduct! And I in
transports every way confess it! Yes, yes, Upbraid me! Call me Traitor and
ungrateful! Tell me my friendships falls! But Sylvia, yet be just, and say my
love was true. Say only he had seen the charming Sylvia; and who is he, that
after that would not not excuse the rest in one so absolutely born to be undone
by Love! as is

Her destined Slave Octavio.
Postscript.
Madam: Among some Rarities, I this Morning saw, I found these Trifles Florio
brings you, which be cause uncommon I presume to send you.




Sylvia, notwithstanding the seeming severity of her Commands, was well enough
pleased to be disobeyed, and Women never pardon any fault more willingly, than
one of this nature, where the Crime gives so infallable a demonstration of
their power and Beauty; nor can any of their Sex be angry in their hearts for
being thought desirable; and 'twas not with pain, that she saw him obstinate in
his passion, as you may believe by her answering his Letters, nor ought any
Lover to despair, when he rec^ives denial under his Mistresses own hand, which
she sent in this to Octavio.

Silvia to Octavio.
YOu but ill judge of my Wit, or Humor, Octavio, when you send me such a
Present, and ^uch a Billet, if you believe I either receive the one, or the
other as you designed. In obedience to me you will no more tell me of your
Love, and yet at the same time you are breaking your word from one end of the
Paper to the other. Out of respect to me you will see me no more, and yet are
bribing me with presents; believing you have found out the surest way to a
Woman's heart. I must needs confess, Octavio, there is great eloquence in a pair
of Bracelets of five thousand Crowns: It Is an Argument to prove your Passion,
that has more prevailing reason in it, than either Seneca or Tully could have
urged nor can a Lover write or speak in any Language so significant, and very
well to be understood, as in that (...) one of presen^ing. The ma^icious World
has along time agreed to reproach poor Women with cruel, unkind, insensible,
and dull* when indeed it is those men that are in sault, who want the right way
of addressing, the true and secret Arts of moving; sovereign Remedy against
disdain. It Is you alone, my Lord, like a young Columbus, that have found the
direct, unpractic'd way to that little and so much desired World the favor of
the Fair, nor could Love himself have pointed his Arrows with any thing more
successful, for his conquest of hearts: But mine, my Lord, like Scaeva's
Shield, is already so full of Arrows shot from Philanders eyes, it has no room
for any other darts! Take back your presents then, my Lord, and when you make
'em next, be sure you first consider the Receiver; for know, Octavio, Maids of
my Quality, ought to find themselves secure from addresses of this nature,
unless they first invite; You ought to have seen advances in my freedoms,
consenting in my eyes, or (that usual vanity of my Sex) a thousand little
tri^ling Arts of affectatio^n to furnish out a conquest, a forward complysance,
to every Gaudy Coxcombe, to fill my train with amorous Cringing Captives, this
might have justified your pretensions, but on the contrary my Eyes and thoughts
which never strayed from the dear man I love, were always bent to earth, when
gazed upon by you, and when I did but fear you looked with love, I entertained
you with Phillanders praise, his wondrous Beauty and his wondrous Love! and
left nothing untold that might confirm you how much impossible it was I e're
should love again, that I might leave you no room for hope, and since my story
has been so unfortunate to alarm the whole world with a conduct so fatal, I
made no scruple of telling you with what joy and pride I was undone; if this
encourage you; if Octavio have sentiments so meanly poor of me, to think
because I yielded to Philander, his hopes should be advanced? I banish him for
ever from my sight, and after that disdain the little service, he can render the

Never to be altered Silvia


This Letter, she sent him back by his Page* but not the Bracelets which were
indeed very fine, and very considerable, at the same time she threatened him
with banishment, she so absolutely expected to be disobeyed in all things of
that kind, that she dressed her self that day to advantage, which since her
arrival she never had done in her own habits; what with her illness and
Philanders absence a careless negligence had seized her, till roused and
wakened to the thoughts of Beauty by Octavio's Love, she began to try its
force, and that day dressed: While she was so imploy^d the Page hastes with the
Letter to his Lord, who changed Color at the sight of it e're he received it,
no^ that he hoped it brought love, 'twas enough she would but answer, tho she
railed; let her (said he in opening it) vow she hates me: Let her call me
Traitor and unjust, so she take the pains to tell it this way, for he knew well
those that argue will yield, and only she that sends him back his own Letters
without reading ^m can give despair. He read therefore without a sigh, nor
complained he on her rigours, and because it was too early yet to make his
Visit, to show the impatience of his Love, as much as the reality and
resolution of it, he bid his Page wait and sent her back this answer.

Octavio to Silvia.
FAir angry Silvia, how has my Love o^^ended? Has its excess betrayed the least
part of that respect due to your Birth and Beauty? Tho I am young as the Gay
rudy Morning, and vigorous as the gilded Sun at Noon, and Amorous as that God
when with such has^e he chased young Daphne over the slowrr'y Plain! it never
made me guilty of a thought that Silvia might not ^itty, and allow. Nor came
that tri^ling present to plead for any wish, or mend my Eloquence, which you
with such disdain upbraid me with, the Bracelets came not to be rafl'd for your
Love, nor Pimp to my desires, Youth scorns those common aids; No, let dull Age
pursue those ways of merchandise, who only buy up hearts at that vain price,
and never make a Barter, but a Purchase. Youth has a better way of trading in
Loves Markets, and you have taught me too well to judge of, and to value
Beauty, to dare to bid so cheaply for it; I found the toy was gay, the work was
nea^, and fancy new; and know not any thing they would so well adorn as
Silvia's lovely hands: I say, if after this, I should have been the mercenary
fool to have dunn'd you for return, you might have used me thus; -- Condemn me
e're you find me sin in thought; that part of it was yet so far behind 'twas
scarce arrived in wish. You should have staid till it approacht more ^ear,
before you damned it to e^ernal silence. To love, to sigh, -- to weep, to pray,
and to complain; why one may be allowed it in Devotion; but you, nicer than
Heaven it self, makes that a Crime, which all the powers Divine have never
decreed one I will not plead, nor ask you leave to love; Love is my right, my
business, and my Province; the Empire of the young, the vigorous, and the bold;
and I will claim my share; the Air, the Groves, the Shades, are mine to sigh
in, as well as your Philanders, the Eccho's answer me as willingly, when I
complain or Name the cruel Silvia; Fountains receive my Tears, and the kind
Springs reflection agreeably ^latters me to hope; and makes me vain enough to
think it just and reasonable I should pursue the Dictates of my Soul -- Love on
in spite of opposition, because I will not lose my Privilege, you may forbid
me naming it to you, in that I can obey, because I can; but not to love! not to
adore the fair! and not to languish for you, were as impossible as for you not
to be lovely, not to be the most charming of your Sex. But I am so far from a
pretending fool, because you have been possessed, that often that thought comes
cross my Soul, and checks my advancing Love! and I would buy that thought off
with all most all my share of future bliss! Were I a God, the first great
Miracle should be to form you a Maid again! For oh, what ever reasons
flattering Love can bring to make it look like just, the World! the World fair
Silvia, still will censure, and say -- you were too blame, but 'twas that fault
alone that made you mortal, we else should have adored you as a Deity, and so
have lost a generous race of young succeeding Hero's, that may be born of you!
yet had Philander loved but half so well' as I, he would have kept your
glorious Fame entire, but since alone for Silvia, I love Silvia! let her be
false to honor, false to Love! wanton and proud, ill natured, vain,
fantastique; or what is worse -- let her pursue her Love, be constant and still
do^e upon Philander -- Yet still she will be the Silvia I adore, that Silvia born
eternally to inslave.

Octavio.


This he sent by Florio his Page at the same time that she expected th^e Visit
of ^his Lord, and blushed with a little anger and concern at the disappointment;
however she hasted to read the Letter, and was pleased with the haughty
resolution he made, in spite of her, to love on as his right by birth; and she
was glad to find from these positive resolves, that she might the more safely
disdain, or at least assume a Tyranny which might render her virtue Glorious,
and yet at the same time keep him her slave on all occasions when she might
have need of his service, which in the circumstances she was in, she did not
know of what great use it might be to her, she having no other design on him,
bating the little Vanity of her Sex, which is an ingredient so intermixed with
the greatest virtues of Women kind, that those who endeavor to cure 'em of
that disease, robs 'em of a very considerable pleasure, and in most, it is
incurable: Give Silvia then leave to share it with her Sex* since she was so
much the more excusable by how much a greater portion of Beauty she had than
any other, and had sense enough to know it too; as indeed whatever other
Knowledge they want, they have still enough to set a price on beauty, tho they
do not always rate it, for had Silvia done that, she had been the hapiest of
her Sex! but as she was, she waited the coming of Octavio, but not so as to
make her quit one sad thought for Philander. Love and vanity, tho they both
reigned in her Soul, yet the first surmounted the last, and she grew to
impatient ravings when ever she cast a thought upon her fear that Philander
grew cold; and possibly pride and vanity had as great a share in that concern
of hers as Love it self, for she would often survey her self in her Glass, and
cry! Gods! can this Beauty be despised! this Shape, this Face, this Youth, this
Air, and what is more obliging yet, a heart that adores the sugitive, that
languish and sighs after the dear Run, away: Is it possible he can find a
Beauty, added she, of greater perfection -- Bnt oh it is fancy sets the rate on
Beauty; and he may as well love a third time as he has a Second: For in Love
those that once break the rules and Laws of that Deity set no bounds to their
Treasons, and disobedience. Yes yes^ would she cry, he that could l^ave
Mertilla the fair, the young, the Noble, Chaste and fond Mertilla, what after
that may he not do to Silvia, on whom he has less ties* less obligations: Oh
wretched Maid -- what has thy fondness done! he is satiated now with thee, as
before with Mertilla, and carries all those dear, those charming joys, to some
new Beauty, whom his looks have Conquered, and whom his soft bewitching Vows
will ruin! with that she rav^d and stamped, and cried aloud! Hell -- Fires --
Tortures -- Dagers -- Racks and Poyson-come all to my relief! Revenge me on the
perjured lovely Devil -- But I Will be brave -- I will be brave and hate him --
This she spoke in a tone less fierce, and with great Pride, and had not paws'd
and walked above a hasty turn or two, but Octavio as impatient as love could
make him, entered the Chamber, so dressed; so set out for Conquest, that I wonder
at nothing more than that Silvia did not find him altogether Charming, and fit
for her revenge who was formed by Nature for Love: And had all that could
render him the Dotage of Women; but where a heart is prepossest, all that is
Beautiful in any other Man serves but as an ill comparison to what it loves,
and even Philanders likeness, that was not indeed Philander, wanted the secret
to charm. At Octavio's entrance she was so sixth on her Revenge of Love, that
she did not see him who presented himself as so proper an Instrument, till he
first sighing, spoke, Ah Silvia, shall I never see that Beauty easy more?
Shall I never see it reconcil^d to content, and a soft calmness fixed upon those
Eyes* which were formed for looks all tender and serene, or are they resolved
(continued he sighing) never to appear but in storms when I approach? Yes,
replied she, when there is a Calm of Love in yours that raises it. Will you
con^ine my Eyes (said he) that are by Nature soft? May not their silent
Language tell you my hearts sad Story? But she replied with a sigh, it is not
generously done Octavio, thus to pursue a poor unguarded Maid, left to your
Care, your promises of Friendship. Ah will you use Philander with such
treachery? Silvia, said he, my Flame's so just and reasonable, that I dare even
to him pronounce I love you, and after that dare love you on -- And wou^d you
(said she) to satisfy a little short lived passion, forfeit those vows you have
made of Friendship to Philander? That heart that loves you Silvia (he replied)
cannot be guilty of so base a thought, Philander is my Friend, and as he is so,
shall know the dearest secrets of my Soul* I should believe my self indeed
ungrateful (continued he) where e^re I loved, should I not tell Philander, he
told me frankly all his Soul, his loves, his griefs, his Treasons, and escapes,
and in return I Will pay him back with mine, and do you Imagine (said she) that
he would permit your love, how should he hinder me (replied he.) I do believe
(said she) he would forfeit all his safety and his friendship, and fight ye, then
I Would defend my self, said he, if he were so ungrateful. While they thus argued
Silvia had her thoughts a part, on the little stratagems that Women in love
sometimes make use of, and Octavio no sooner told her he would send Philander
word of his Love, but she imagined that such a knowledge might retrieve the
heart of her Lover, if indeed it were on the wing, and revive the dying Embers
in his Soul, as usually it does from such occasions, and on the otherside she
thought that she might more allowably receive Octavio's addresses, when they
were with be per^mission of Philander, if he ^ou'd love so ill as to permit it,
and if he could not, she should have the joy to undeceive her fears of his
inconstancy tho she banished for ever the agreeable Octavio, so that on
Octavio's farther urging the necessity of his giving Philander that sure mark
of his friendship, she permitted him to write, which he immediately did on her
Table where there stood a little Silver Scrutore which contained all things for
his purpose.

Octavio to Philander.
My Lord
SInce I have vowed you my Eternal friendship, and that I absolutely believe my
self honored with that of yours, I think my self obliged by those powerful
ties to let you know my heart, not only now as that friend from whom I ought to
conceal nothing, but as a Rival too, whom in honor I ought to treat as a
generous one; perhaps you will be so unkind as to say I cannot be a friend and
a Rival at the same time, and that almighty love that sets the world at odds,
chases all things from the heart, where that reigns, to establish it self the
more absolutely there, but, my Lord, Iavow mine a Love of that good Nature,
that can endure the equalsway of friendship, where like two perfect Friends
they support each others Empire there, nor can the glory of one Eclipse that of
the other, but both like the notion we have of the Deity, tho two distinct
passions make but one in my Soul, and tho friendship first entered 'twas in
vain I called it to my aid, at the first soft invasion of Silvia's power; and
you my charming friend, are the most obliged to, pity me, who already knows so
well the force of her beauty I would fain have you think, I strove at first
with all my reason against the irrisistible luster of her eyes. And at the
first assaults of Love, I gave him not a welcome to my bosom, but like slaves
unused to fetters, I grew sullen with my chains, and wore 'em for your sake
uneasily. I thought it base to look upon the Mistress of my friend with wishing
eyes; but softer Love soon furnished me with arguments to justify my claim,
since Love is not the choice but the face of the Soul, who seldom regards the
object loved as it is, but as it wishes to have it be, and then kindfancy makes
it soon the same. Love that Almighty Creator of something from nothing, forms a
Wit, a Hero, or a Beauty, Virtue, good Humor, Honor, any excellence, when
oftenimes there is neither in the Object, but where the agreeing world has fixed
all these, and it is by all resolved, (whether they love or not) that this is
she, you ought no more Philander to upbraid my Flame; than to wonder at it; it
is enough I tell you that it is Silvia, to justify my passion! nor is it a Crime
that I confess, I love! since it can never rob Philander of the least part of
what I 've vowed him, or if his nicer Honor will believe me guilty of a fault,
let this atone for all; that if I wrong my friend in loving Silvia, I right
him in despairing, for oh I am repulsed with all the Rigor of the coy, and
fair, with all the little Malice of the wity Sex! and all the Love of Silvia to
Philander, -- There, there is the stop to all my hopes, and happiness, and yet
by Heaven, I love thee, oh thou favored Rival!

After this frank Confession, my Philander, I should be glad to hear your
sentiment, since yet in spite of Love, in spite of Beauty I am resolved

To die Philanders Constant Friend, Octavio.


After he had writ this, he gave it (...) Silvia See Charming Creature (said he
in delivering it) if after this you either doubt my Love or what I dare for
Silvia. I neither receive it (said she) as a proof of the one or the other; but
rather that you believe by this frank Confession, to render it as a piece of
Gallantry and diversion to Philander; for no Man of sense will imagine that,
love, true, or arrived to any height, that makes a public confession of it to
his Rival. Ah Silvia answered he, how malicious is your Wit, and how active to
turn its pointed mischief on me, had I not writ, you would have said I durst
not, and when I make a declaration of it, you call it only a slight piece of
Gallantry! but Silvia you have wit enough to try it a thousand ways, and power
enough to make me obey; use the extremity of both; so you recompense me at last
with a confession that I was at least found worthy to be numbered in the crow'd
of your adorers. Silvia replied, he were a dull Lover indeed, that would need
instructions from the Wit of his Mistress to give her proofs of his passion,
what ever opinion you have of my sense, I have too good a one of Octavio's to
believe that when he is a Lover he will want aids to make it appear, till then
we will let that argument alone and consider his address to Philander* She then
read over the Letter he had writ, which she liked very well for her purpose,
for at this time our young Dutch Hero was made a property of, in order to her
revenge on Philander* She told him he had said too much both for himself and
her. He told her, he had declared nothing with his Pen; that he would not make
good with his Sword. Hold Sir, said she, and do not imagine from the freedom
you have taken in owning your passion to Philander. that I shall allow it here;
what you declare to the world is your own Crime, but when I hear it, it is no
longer yours but mine, I therefore conjure you, my Lord, not to charge my Soul
with so great a sin against Philander, and I confess to you I shall be
infinitely troubled to be obliged to banish you my sight for ever. He heard her
and answered with a sigh, for she went from him to the Table and sealed her
Letter and gave it him to be enclosed to Philander, and left him to consider on
her last words which he did not lay to heart, because he fancied she spoke this
as women do that will be won with industry, he in standing up as she went from
him, saw himself in the great glass, and bid his person answer his heart, which
from every view he took, was reinforced with new hope, for he was too good a
judge of Beauty not to find it in every part of his own Amiable person, nor
could he imagine from Silvia's eyes, (which were naturally soft and
languishing, and now the more so from her fears and jealousies) that she meant
from her heart the rigours she expressed: Much he allowed for his short time of
Courtship, much to her Sexes modesty, much from her quality, and very much from
her Love, and imagined it must be only time and assiduity, opportunity, and
obstinate passion, that was only capable of reducing her to break her faith
with Philander, he therefore endeavored by all the good dressing, the
advantage of lavish gayety, to render his person agreeable and by all the Arts
of Gallantry to charm her with his conversation, and when he could handsomely
bring in love, he failed not to touch upon it as far as it would be permitted,
and every day had the vanity to fancy he made some advances, for indeed every
day more and more she found she might have use for so considerable a Person, so
that one may very well say, never any past their time better than Silvia and
Octavio, tho with different ends, all he had now to fear was from the answer
Philanders Letter should bring for whom he had in spite of Love, so entire a
friendship that he even doubted whether, (if Philander could urge reasons
potent enough) he should not choose to dye and quit Silvia rather then be false
to friendship; one Post past, and another, and so eight successive ones, before
they received one word of answer to what they sent, so that Silvia, who was the
most impatient of her Sex, and the most in Love was raving and acting all the
extravagance of despair, and even Octavio now became less pleasing, yet he
failed not to Visit her every day to send her rich presents and to say all that
a fond Lover or a faithful friend might urge for her relief: at last Octavio
received this following Leter.

Philander to Octavio.
YOu have showed Octavio a freedom so generous, and so beyond the usual
Measures of a Rival, that 'twere almost injustice in me not to permit you to
love on, if Silvia can be false, to me and all her vows, she is not worth
preserving, if she prefer Octavio to Philander, then he has greater merit and
deserves her best; but if on the contrary she be just, if she be true and
constant, I cannot fear his Love will injure me, so either way Octavio has my
leave to Love the Charming Silvia: alas I know her power, and do not wonder at
thy fate! for it is as natural for her to Conquer, as it is for youth to yield,
oh she has fascination in her Eyes! a spel upon her tongue, her Wit's a
Philter, and her air and motion all snares for heedless hearts; her very faults
have Charms, her pride, her peevishness, and her disdain, have unresisted
power. Alas you find it every day -- and every Night she sweeps the Toore
along, and shows the Beauty, she inslaves the Men, and Rivals all the Women!
how often with Pride and Anger I have seen it, and was the inconsidering Cox^ombe
then, to rave and rail at her; to curse her Charms, her fair inviting and
perplexing Charms, and bullyed every Gazer; by Heaven I could not spare a
smile, a look! and she has such a lavish freedom in her humor, that if thou
chance to love as I have done -- 'twil surely make thee mad, if she but talked
aloud, or put her little affectation on, to show the wondering crowd what she
could do, if she designed to show the force of Beauty; oh God! how lost in
rage, how mad with jealousy, was my fond breaking heart, my eyes grew fierce,
and Clamorous my Tongue! and I have scarce contained my self from hurting, what
I so much adored! but then the subtle Charmer, had such Arts to slatter me to
peace again -- to clasp her lovely arms about my neck -- to sigh a thousand
dear confirming vows into my Bosom, and kiss, and smile, and swear -- and talk
away my rage, -- and then -- Oh my Octavio! no humane, fancy, can present the
joy of the dear reconciling moment, where little quarrels raised the rapture
higher, and she was always new. These are the wondrous pains, and wondrous
pleasures, that Love by turns inspires; till it grows wise by time and
repetition, and then the God assumes a serious gravity, enjoyment takes off the
uneasy keeness of the passion, the little jealous quarrels raise no more,
quarrels the very Feathers of Loves darts, that send 'em with more swiftness to
the heart; and when they cease, your transports lessen too, then we grow
reasonable, and consider; we love with prudence then; as Fencers fight with
foyls; a sullen brush perhaps sometimes or so; but nothing that can touch the
heart, and when we are arrived to love at that dull easy rate, we never die of
that Disease, then we have recourse to all the little Arts, the aids of
flatterers, and dear dissimulation (that help meet to the luke warm Lover) to
keep up a good Character of constancy and a right understanding.

Thus, Octavio, I have ran through both the degrees of Love; which I have taken
so often, that I am grown most learned and able in the Art: My easy heart is
of the Constitution of those whom frequent sickness renders apt to take
relapses from every little cause, or wind, that blows too fiercely on 'em, it
renders it self to the first effects of new surprising Beauty, and finds such
pleasure, in beginning passion, such dear delight of fancying new enjoyment,
that all past loves, past Vow, and obligations, have power to bind no more; no
pity, no remorce, no threatening danger, invades my amorous course; I scowre
along the slow'ry plains of Love, view all the charming prospect at a distance,
which represents it self all gay and glorious! and long to lay me down, to
stretch and bask in those dear joys that fancy makes so ravishing; nor am I one
of those dull whining slaves, whom quallity or my respect can awe into! a
silent Cringer, and no more! no, Love, Youth, and ost success has taught me
boldness and Art, desire and cunning to attaque, to search the feeble side of
femal weakness, and there to play Loves Engines, for Women will be won, they
will Octavio! if Love and wit find any opportunity,

Perhaps, my friend, you're wondering now, what this discourse, this odd
discovery of my own inconstancy tends to? Then since I cannot better pay you
back the secret you have told me of your Love, than by another of my own* take
this confession from thy Friend -- I love! -- I languish, and am dying, -- for
a new Beauty. To you, Octavio, you that have lived twenty dull tedious years,
and never understood the Mystery of Love, till Silvia taught you to adore; this
change may seem a wonder, you that have lasily run more than half your youths
gay course of life away; without the pleasure of one nobler hour of mine! who
like a Miser hoord your sacred store, or scantily have dealt it but to one,
think me a lavish prodigal in love, and gravely will reproach me with
inconstancy, -- but use me like a friend and hear my story.

It happened in my last days journey, on the road I overtook a man of quality,
for so his Equipage confessed, we joined and fell into discourse of many things
indifferent, till from a Chain of of one thing to another, we chanced to talk
of France, and of the Factions there, and I soon found him a Caesarian; for he
Grew hot with his concern for that Prince, and fiercely owned his interest,
this pleased me, and I grew familier with him; and I pleased him so well, in my
Devotion for Coesario, that being arrived at Collen, he invites me home to his
Palace, which he begged I would make use of as my own, during my stay at
Collen. Glad of the opportunity I obeyed; and soon informed my self by a
Spanish Page (that waited on him) to whom I was obliged, he told me it was the
Count of Clarinau, a Spaniard born and of quality, who for some disgust at
Court retired hither; that lie was a person of much gravity a great politician,
and very rich; and tho well in years was lately married to a very Beautiful
young Lady, and that very much against her consent: A Lady whom he had taken
out of a Monastery, where she had been pentioned from a Child, and of whom he
was so fond and jealous, he never would permit her to see or be seen by any
Man, and if she took the Air in her Coach, or went to Church, he obliged her to
wear a Veil. Having learnt thus much of the Boy, I dismissed him with a
present; for he had already inspired me with curiosity, that prologue to love,
and I knew not of what use he might be hereafter; a curiosity that I was
resolved to satisfy, tho I broke all the laws of hospitality, and even that
first Night I felt an impatience that gave me some wonder; in fine, three days
I languisht out in a disorder that was very near alied to that of Love. I found
my self magnificently lodged, attended with a formal Ceremony, and indeed all
things were as well as I could imagine, bating a kind opportunity to get a
sight of this young Beauty: now half a Lover grown, I sight and grew oppressed
with thought, and had recourse to Groves, to shady walks and Fountains, of
which the delicate Gardens aforded variety, the most resembling nature, that
ever Art produced, and of the most Melancholy recesses, fancying there in some
lucky hour, I might encounter what I already so much adored in Idea: Which
still I formed just as my fancy wished, there, for the first two days, I walked,
and sight, and told my new born passion to every gent^e Wind that played among
the boughs, for yet no Lady bright appeared beneath 'em, no Visionary Nymph the
Groves afforded, but on the third day, all full of Love and Stratagem in the
cool of the Evening, I past into a Thicket near a little Rivulet, that purl'd
and murmured through the gald, and past into the Meads, this pleased and fed my
present Amorous humor, and down I laid my self on the shady brink, and
listened to its melancholy glidings, when from behind me, I heard a sound more
ravishing, a Voice that sung these Words.

Alas, in vain, you Powers above,
You gave me youth, you gave me Charms,
And every tender sense of Love;
To destin me to old Phileno's Arms,
Ah how can youths gay spring allow,
The chilling kisses of the Winter's Snow.
All Night I languish by his side,
And fancy of joys I never taste,
As men in Dreams a Feast provide,
And waking find with grief they fast.
Either ye Gods my Youthful fires alay.
Or make the old Phileno, young and Gay.
Like a fair flower in shades obscurity,
Tho every sweet adorns my head,
Ungather'd, unadmir'd I lie,
And wither on my silent gloomy Bed,
While no kind aids to my relief appear,
And no kind Bosom makes me Triumph there.
By this you may easily guess, as I soon did, that the Song was sung by Madam
the Countess of Clarinau, as indeed it was; at the very beginning of her Song
my joyful Soul divined it so! I rose and advanced by such flow degrees as
neither alarmed the fair Singer, nor hindered me the pleasure of hearing any
part of the Song, till I approacht so near as (behind the shelter of some
jesimin that divided us) I unseen, completed those wounds at my Eyes, which I
had received before at my Ears. Yes, Octavio, I saw the lovely Clarinau!
leaning on a Pillow made of some of those Jesimins, which favored me, and
served her for a Canopy. But, Oh my Friend! how shall I present her to thee in
that Angel form, she then appeared to me? all young! all ravishing as new born
light to lost benighted Travelers her Face, the fairest in the World was
adorned with Curls of shining jett tied up -- I know not how, all carelessly
with Scarlet Ribbon mixed with pearls; her Robe was gay and rich, such as young
Royal Brides put on when they undress for joys! her Eyes were black, the
softest Heaven e're made, her mouth was sweet, and formed for all delight, so
red her Lips, so round, so graced with dimples, that without one other Charm,
that was enough to kindle warm desires about a frozen heart! a sprightly air of
Wit completed all, increased my Flame, and made me mad with love! endless it
were to tell thee all her Beauties, Nature all over, was lavish and (...), let
it suffice her face, her shape, her mien, had more of Angel in 'em than
humanity! I saw her thus all Charming! thus she lay! a smiling melancholy
dressed her Eyes, which she had sixth upon the Rivulet, near which I found her
lying: just such I fancied famed Lucretia was, when Tarquin first beheld her,
nor was that Royal Ravisher more inflamed than I! or readier for th'incounter.
Alone she was which heightened my desires! Oh Gods! alone lay the young lovely
Charmer, with wishing Eyes, and all prepared for Love! the shade was gloomy,
and the tell tale leaves combined so close, they must have given us warning, if
any had approacht from either side! all favored my design and I advanced! but
with such caution as not to inspire her with a fear, instead of that of Love! a
^low, uneasy pace, with folded Arms, Love in my Eyes, and burning in my heart.
-- At my approach she scarce contained her cries, and rose surpised and
blushing, discovering to me such a proportioned height -- so lovely and
Majestic -- that I stood gazing on her, all lost in Wonder, and gave her time
to dart her Eyes at me, and every look pierced deeper to my Soul, and I had no
sense but love, silent admiring Love! Immovable I stood, and had no other
motion but that of a heart all painting, which lent a feeble trembling to my
Tongue, and even when I would have spoke to her, it sent a sigh up; to prevent
my boldness: and, Oh Octavio, tho I have been bread in all the saucy daring of
a forward Lover, yet now I wanted a convenient impudence, awed with a haughty
sweetness in her look, like a Fave^ brave after a vigorous on set, finding the
danger fly so thick around him, sheers off and dares not face the pressing Foe,
struck with too fierce a lightening from her eyes, whence the God sent a^
thousand winged Darts, I veiled my own and durst not play with Fire; while thus
she hotly did pusue her Conquest, and I stood fixed on the defensive part, I
heard a rusling amongst the thick Grown Leaves, and through their Mystic
windings soon perceived the good old Count of Clarinau, approaching, Muttering
and mumbling to old Dormina, the Dragon appointed to guard this lovely
Treasure, and which, she having left alone in the Thicket, and had retired but
at an awful distance had most extremely disobliged her Lord. I only had time
enough in this little moment, to look with eyes that asked a thousand pitties,
and told her in their silent Language how loath they were to leave the Charming
Object, and with a sigh -- I vanished from the wondering fair One, nimble as
lightening, silent as a shade: To my first post behind the Jesimins, that was
the utmost that I could persuade my heart to do; you may believe my dear
Octavio, I did not bless the Minute that brought old Clarinau to that dear
recess, nor him, nor my own fate, and to complete my torment I saw him (after
having gravely reproached her for being alone without her Woman) yes I saw him,
fall on her neck, her lovely Snowy neck, and loll, and kiss, and hang his tawny
withered Arms on her fair Shoulders, and press his nauscious load upon
Calista's Body, (for so I heard him name her) while she was gazing still upon
the empty place, whence she had seen me vanish, which he perceiving cried. --
My little Fool, what is it thou gazest on, turn to thy none old man and buss him
soundly -- when putting him by with a disdain, that half made amends for the
injury he had done me by coming. Ah my Lord, cried she, even now, just there I
saw a lovely vision, I never beheld so excellent a thing; How, cried he, a
vision, a thing -- what Vision what thing, where, how, and when -- Why there,
said she, with my eyes, and just now, it vanished behind yon' Iesimins: With
that I drew my Sword -- for I dispair'd to get off unknown, and being well
enough acquainted with the jealous nature of the Spaniards, which is no more
then (...) and stab, I prepared to stand on my defense; till I could reconcile
him if possible to reason; yet even in that moment I was more afraid of the
injury he might do the innocent fair One then of what he could to me, but he
not so much as dreaming she meant a Man by her lovely Vision, fell a kissing
her a new, and beckning Dormina off to pimp at distance, told her, The Grove
was too sweet, the Rivers Murmurs too delicate, and she was so curiously dressed,
that altogether had inspired him with a love fit, and then assaulting her a new
with a Sneere which you have seen a Satyr make in Pictures, he fell to act the
little tricks of youth, that looked so goatish in him -- instead of kindling
'twou'd have dampt a flame, which she resisted with a scorn so charming gave me
new hope and fire, when to oblige me more, with Pride, disdain, and loathing in
her Eyes, she fled like Daphne from the Ravisher, he being bent on love persu'd
her, with a feeble pace, like an old Wood God chacing some coy Nymph, who
winged with fear out strips the flying VVind, and tho a God he cannot overtake
her; and left me fainting with new love, new hope, new jealousy, impatience,
sighs, and wishes, in the abandoned Grove* Nor could I go without another view
of that dear place in which I saw her lie, I went -- and laid me down just on
the print which her fair body made, and pressed, and kissed it over a thousand
times, with eager transports, and even fancied fair Calista there; there 'twas
I found the paper with the Song which I have sent you; there I ran over a
thousand Stratagems to gain another view, no little States men had more Plots
and Arts, than I to gain this. Object I adored the (...) Idea of my bur^ning
heart, now raging wild; abandoned all to Love and loose desire, (...) hitherto
my industry is vain, ^ach day I haunt the the thick^^^ Groves and Springs, the
slow'^y VValks, close Arbors, all the day my busy Eyes and heart are searching
her, but no intelligence they bring me in; in fine Octavio, all that I can
since learn is, that the bright Calista had seen a Vision in the Garden, and
ever since was so possessed with melancholy, that she had not since quited her
Chamber, she is daily pressing the Count to permit her to go into the Garden*
to see if she can again encounter the lovely Phantom, but whether from any
Description she have made of it, (or from any other cause)* he imagines who it
was, I know not, but he endeavors all he can to hinder her, and tells her it is
not lawful to tempt heaven by invoking an apparition, so that till a second
view eases the torments of my mind there is nothing in nature to be conceived
so raving mad as I: as if my despairs of finding her again increased my
impatient flame instead of les^ening it.

After this declaration judge Octavio, who has given the greatest proofs of his
friendship, you or I: You being my Rival trust me with the Secret of loveing my
Mistress, which can no way redound to your disadvantage, but I by telling you
the secrets of my Soul, put it into your power to ruin me with Silvia, and to
establish your ^elf in her heart? a thought I yet am not willing to bear, for I
have an ambition in my love, that would not while I am toyling for Empire here,
lose my dominion in another place; but since I can no more rule a Woman's heart,
than a Lovers Fate, both you and Silvia, may deceive my opinion in that, but
shall never have power to make me believe you less my friend, than I am

Your Philander.
POSTCRIPT.
The enclosed I need not oblige you to deliver: You see I give you opportunity.




Octavio no sooner arrived to that part of the Letter which named the Count of
Clerinau, but he stopped and was scarce able to proceed, for the Charming
Calista was his Sister, the only one he had who having been bred in a Nunnery
was taken thence to be married to this old rich Count, who had a great Fortune:
Before he proceeded, his Soul divined this was the new Amor that had engaged
the heart of his Friend, he was afraid to be farther convinced, and yet a
curiosity to know how far he had proceeded made him read it out with all the
disorder of a man jealous of his Honor, and nicely careful of his Fame; he
considered her young about eighteen, married to an Old ill favored jealous
Husband, no Parents but himself to right her wrongs, or revenge her levety, he
knew tho she wanted no Wit she did Art, for being bred without the Conversation
of Men she had not learnt the little cunnings of her Sex, he guest by his own
Soul that hers was so^t and apt for impression, he judged from her Con^ession
to her Husband of the Vision, that she had a simple Innocence, that might
betray a a young Beauty under such Circumstances; to all this he considered the
Charms of Philander unresistable, his unwearied industry in love, and concludes
his Sister lost. At first he upbraids Philander, and calls him ungrateful, but
soon thought it unreasonable to accuse himself of an injustice, and excused the
frailty of Philander, since he knew not that she whom he adored was Sister to
his friend; however it failed not to possess him of with inquietude that
exercised all his Wit, to consider how he might prevent an inseparable injury
to his Hono^r, and an intrigue that possibly might cost his Sister her Life, as
well as Fame: In midst of all those torments he forgot not the more i^portant
business of his Love. For to a Lover, who has his Soul per^ectly ^ixt on the
fair object of its adoration, what ever other thought, fa^igue, and cloud, his
mind, that like a soft Gleam of new sprung light, darts in and spreads a glory
all around, and like the God of day chearse^ very drooping vital, yet even
these dearer thoughts wanted not their torments. At first he strove to atone
for the ^ears of Calista, with those of imagining Philander ^alse to Silvia,
Well, cried he* -- If thou be^st lost (...) at least thy ruin has laid a
foundation for my happiness, and every Triumph Philander makes of thy Virtue,
it the more secures my Empire over Silvia, and since thy Brother cannot be
happy; but by the Sisters being undone, yield thou, oh faithless fair one,
yield to Philander and make me blessed in Silvia! And thou (continued he) Oh
perjured Lover and inconstant Friend, glut thy insatiate flame -- rifle Calista
of every Virtue Heaven and Nature gave her, so I may but revenge it on thy
Silvia! Pleased with this joyful hope he traverses his Chamber glowing and
blushing with new kindling fire, his heart that was all gay, defus'd a
gladness, that expressed it self in every Feature of his lovely face, his eyes
that were by nature languishing, shone now with an unusual Air of briskness,
Smiles graced his mouth, and dimples dressed his face, insensibly his busy
fingers trick and dress, and set his hair, and without designing it, his feet
are bearing him to Silvia, till he ^^ept short and wondered whither he was
going, for yet it was not time to make his Visit -- Whither fond Heart, (said
he) O whither would thou hurry this Slave to thy soft fires! And now
returning back he paws'd and fell to thought -- He remembered how impatiently
Sylvia waited the return of the answer he writ to him, wherein he owned his
passion for that Beauty. He knew she permitted him to write it, more to raise
the little brisk fires of Jealousy in Philander, and to set an edge on his
blunted love, than from any favors she designed Octavio: And that on this
answer depended all her happiness, or the confirmation of her doubts, and that
she would measure Philanders love by the effects she found there of it. So that
never Lover had so hard a game to play as our new one. He knew he had it now in
his power to ruin his Rival, and to make almost his own terms with his fair
Conqueress, but he considered the secret was not rendered him for so ^ase an
end, nor could his love advance it self by ways so false, dull, and criminal,
-- between each thought he paws'd, and now resolves she must know he sent an
answer to his Letter, for should she know he had, and that he should refuse her
the sight of it, he believed with reason she ^ught to banish him for ever her
presence, as the most disobedient of her Slaves. He walks and pawses on -- but
no kind thought presentsit self to save him; ^ither way he finds himself
undone, and from the most gay, and most triumphing Lover on the Earth, he now,
with one serious thought of right reasoning, finds he is the most miserable of
all the Creation! He reads the Superscription of that Philander writ to Silvia,
which was enclosed in his, and finds it was directed only -- For Silvia, which
would plainly demonstrate it came not so into Holland, but that some other
cover secured it; so that never any, but Octavio the most nice in Honor, had
ever so great a contest with Love and Friendship: for his Noble temper was not
one of those that could Sacrifice his friend to his little Lusts, or his more
solid passion, but truly brave, resolves now rather to die than to confess
Philanders Secret, to evade which he sent her Letter by his Page, with one from
himself, and commanded him to tell her that he was going to receive some
Commands from the Prince of Orange, and that he would wait on her himself in
the Evening. The Page obeys, and Octavio sent him with a sigh and Eyes, that
languishingly told him, he did it with regreet.

The Page hasting to Silvia, finds her in all the disquiet of an expecting
Lover, and snatching the Papers from his hand, the first she saw was that from
Philander, at which she trembled with fear and joy, for Hope, Love and Despair
at once seized her, and hardly able to make a sign with her hand for the Boy to
withdraw, she sunk down into her Chair all pale, and almost fainting, but
reassuming her Courage, she opened it, and read this.

Philander to Silvia.
AH Silvia! Why all these Doubts and Fears? Why at this distance, do you accuse
your Lover, when he is incapable to fall before you, and undeceive your little
jealousies. Oh Silvia, I fear this first reproaching me, is rather the effects
of your own guilt, than any that love can make you think of mine. Yes, yes, my
Silvia, it is the Waves that roll, and glide away, and not the steady shore.
It Is you begin to unfasten from the Vows that hold you, and sloat along the
flattering Tide of Vanity. It Is you, whose Pride and Beauty scorning to be
confined, gives way to the admiring Crowd, that sigh for you. Yes, yes, you,
like the rest of your fair glorious Sex, love the admirer tho you hate the
Coxcomb. It Is vain! it is great! and shows your Beauties Power! -- Is It
possible, that for the safety of my Life, I cannot retire but you must think
I Am fled from Love and Silvia! or is it possible that pi^ying tenderness that
made me incapable of taking leave of her should be interpreted as false -- And
base, -- and that an absence of thirty days, so forced, and so compelled must
render me inconstant, -- lost -- ungrateful -- as if that after Silvia heaven
e're made a Beauty that could Charm me?

You charge my Letter with a thousand faults, it is short, it is cold, and wants
those usual softnesses that gave 'em all their welcome, and their Graces. I fear
my Silvia loves the flatterer, and not the Man, the Lover only, not Philander:
And she considers him not for himself, but the gay glorious thing he makes of
her! Ah! too self int'res^ed! Is that your Jus^ice? You never allow for my
unhappy circums^ances, you never think how care oppresses me: Nor what my Love
contributes to that care. How business, danger, and a thousand ills, takes up
my harassed mind; by every power I love thee still, my Silvia, but time has
made us more familiar now, and we begin to leave off Ceremony, and come to
closer joys, to join our interest now, as people fixed, resolved to live and die
together; to weave our thoughts, and be united stronger. At first we show the
gayest side of Love, dress and be nice in every word and look, set out for
conquest all; spread every Art, use every Stratagem -- but when the toil is
past, and the dear Victory gained, we then propose a little idle rest, a little
easy slumber; We then embrace, lay by the Gaudy show, the Plumes and gilded
Equipage of Love, the trappings of the Conqueror, and bring the naked Lover to
your Arms; we show him then u^cas'd with all his little disadvantages; perhaps
the flowing hair, (those Ebon Curles you have so often combed, and dressed, and
kissed) are then put up and show a fiercer Air, more like an Antique Roman than
Philander, and shall I then, because I want a Grace be thought to love you
less; because the embroidered Coat, the Point, and Garniture's laid by, must I
put off my Passion with my Dress? No, Silvia, love allows a thousand little
freedoms: Allows me to unbosom all my Secrets; tell thee my wants, my Fears,
complaints and dangers, and think it great relief, if thou but sigh and pity
me: And often thy Charming wit has aided me, but now I find thee adding to my
pain. Oh where shall I unload my weight of cares, when Silvia, who was wont to
sigh, and weep, and suffer me to ease the heavy Burden, now grows displeased
and peevish with my moans, and calls 'em the effects of dying love! instead of
those dear smiles, that fond bewitching prattle, that used to calm my roughest
storm of Grief, she now reproaches me with coldness, want of concern and Lovers
Rethorick: And when I seem to beg relief, and show my Souls resent^ment, it is
then I Am false; it is my aversion! or the effects of some new kindling Flame! Is
this fair dealing Silvia? can I not spare a little sigh from love, but you must
think I rob you of your due? If I omit a tender Name by which I used to call
you, must I be thought to lose that passion that taught me such indearments?
And must I never reflect upon the ruin both of my fame and Fortune, but I must
run the risk of losing Silvia too? Oh cruelty of Love! Oh too, too fond and
jealous Maid, what Crimes thy innocent passion can create, when it extends
beyond the bounds of reason: Ah too, too nicely tender Silvia, that will not
give me leave to cast a thought back on my former glory; yet even that loss I
could support with tameness and content, if I believed my su^^ering reached
only to my heart, but Silvia, if she love, must feel my torments too, must
share my loss, and want a thousand Ornaments, my sinking Fortune cannot
purchase her; believe me Charming Creature, if I should love you less, I have a
sense so just of what you have suffered for Philander, I Would be content to be a
Galley Slave, to give thy Beauty, Birth and Love their due, but as I am thy
Faithful Lover still, depend upon that Fortune Heaven has left me; which if
thou can (as thou have often sworn) then thou would submit to be cheerful
still, be gay and confident, and do not judge my heart by little words, my
heart -- too great and fond for such poor demonstrations.

You ask me Silvia where I am, and what I do; all I can say is that at present
I am safe from any fears of being delivered up to France, and what I do, is
sighing, dying, grieving; I want my Silvia: But my Circumstances, yet have
nothing to encourage that hope, when I resolve where to settle, you shall see
what haste I will make to have you brought to me: I am impatient to hear from
you, and to know how that dear pledge of our soft hours advances. I mean what I
believe I left thee possessed of, a young Philander: Cherish it Silvia, for
that is a certain Obligation, to keep a dying fire alive, be sure you do it no
hurt by your unnecessary grief, tho there needs no other tie but that of Love
to make me more entirely

Your Philander.


It Silvia's Fears were great before she opened the Letter, what were her pains
when all those fears were confirmed from that never failing mark of a declining
Love, the coldness and alteration of the Style of Letters, that first Symptom
of a dying flame? Oh where, said she, where, Oh perjured Charmer, is all that
ardency that used to warm the Reader, where is all that Natural Innocence of
Love that could not, even to discover and express a Grace in Eloquence, force
one soft word, or one Passion. Oh, continued she, he is lost and gone from
Silvia and his Vows; some other has him all, Clasps that dear body, hangs upon
that face, gazes upon his Eyes, and listens to his Voice, when he is looking,
sighing, swearing, dying, lying and damning of himself for some new Beauty --
He is, I Will not endure it, aid me Antonett, Oh where is the perjured Traitor!
Antonett who was waiting on her seeing her rise on the sudden in so great a
fury would have staid her hasty turns and ravings, beseeching her to tell her
what was the occasion, and by a discovery to case her heart, but she with all
the fury imaginable, flung from her Arms, and ran to the Table, and snatching
up a Penknife, had certainly sent it to her heart had not Antonett stepped to her
and caught her hand, which she resisted not, but blushing resigned with telling
her she was ashamed of her own Cowardice, for, said she, if I had design^d to
have been brave, I had sent you off* and by a Noble resolution have freed this
Slave within (striking her Breast) from a Tyranny which it should disdain to
suffer under: With that she raged about the Chamber with broken words and
imperfect threatenings, unconsider'd imprecations, and unheeded Vows and Oaths:
at which Antonett redoubled her Petition to know the cause; and she replied --
Philander! the dear, the soft, the fond and Charming Philander is now no more
the same. Oh Antonett said she, did thou but see this Letter compared to
those of heretofore, when Love was gay and young, when new desire dressed his
soft Eyes in tears, and taught his tongue the Harmony of Angels; when every
tender word had more of passion then Volumes of this forced* this triffling
business. Oh thou would say I were the wretch'dst thing that Nature ever made
-- Oh thou would curse as I do -- Not the dear Murderer, but thy Frantic
self, thy mad, deceived, believing, easy self; if thou were so undone -- Then
while she wept she gave Antone^t liberty to speak, which was to persuade her,
her fear were vain; she urged every argument of Love she had been Witness too,
and could not think it possible he could be false: To all which the still
weeping Silvia lent a willing ear: For Lovers are much inclined to believe
every thing they wish. Antonett having a little calmed her, continued telling
her that to be better convinced of his Love or his persidy, she ought to have
Patience till Octavio should come to visit her, For have you forgotten, Madam,
said she, that that generous Rival has sent him word he is your Lover: For
Antonett was waiting at the reading of that Letter, nor was there any thing the
open hearted Silvia concealed from that Servant; and Women, who have made a
breach in their Honor, are seldom so careful of their rest of Fame, as those
who have a Stock entire; and Silvia believed after she had trusted the Secret
of one Amor to her discretion, she might conceal none. See Madam, says
Antonett, here is a Letter yet unread: Silvia who had been a great while
impatient for the return of Octavio's answer from Philander, expecting from
thence the confirmation of all her doubts: Hastily snatched the Letter out of
Antonetts hand, and read it, hoping to have found something there to have eased
her Soul one way or other: a Soul the most raging and haughty by Nature, that
ever possessed a Body, the Words were these.

Octavio to Silvia.
AT least you will pity me, Oh Charming Silvia, when you shall call to mind the
cruel services, I am obliged to render you; to be the Messenger of love from
him, whom Beauty and that God plead so strongly for already in your heart.

If after this, you can propose a torture; that yet may speak my passion and
obedience in any higher measure, command and try my fortitude, for I too well
divine, Oh rigorous Beauty, the business of your love sick Slave will be, only
to give you proofs how much he does adore you, and never to taste a joy, even
in a distant hope, like Lamps in Urns my lasting Fire must burn; without one
kind material to supply it. Ah Silvia, if e're it be your wretched fate to see
the Lord of all your Vows given to another Arms -- When you shall see in those
soft eyes that you adore a languishment and joy, if you but name another Beauty
to him: -- When you behold his blushes fade and rise at the approaches of
another Mistress. -- Hear broken sighs and unassur'd replys, when e're he
answers some new conqueress: tremblings, and pantings seizing every part at the
warm touch as of a second Charmer. Ah Silvia do but do me justice then, and
sighing say -- I pity poor Octavio.

Take here a Letter from the blessed Philander, which I had brought my self, bu^
cannot bear the torment of that joy, that I shall see advancing in your eyes
when you shall read it over -- no -- it is too much that I imagine all! yet
bless that patient fondness of my Passion that makes me still

Your Slave, and Your Adorer. Octavio.


At finishing this, the jealous fair One redoubled her tears with such violence
that 'twas in vain her Woman strove to abate the flowing Tide by all the
reasonable arguments she could bring to her aid, and Silvia to increa^e it,
read again the latter part of the ominous Letter, which she wet with the tears
that streamed from her bright eyes. Yes, yes, (cried she laying the Letter
down) I know Octavio this is no Prophecy of yours, but a known truth; alas,
you know too well the fatal time's already come when I shall find these changes
in Philander! Ah Madam replied Antonett, how curious are you to search out
torments for your own heart, and as much a Lover as you are, how little do you
understand the Arts and Politics of Love: Alas, Madam, continued she, you your
self have armed my Lord Octavio with those Weapons that wound you: The last
time he writ to my Lord Philander, he found you possessed with a thousand fears
and jealousies; of these he took advantage to attaque his Rival, for what man
is there so dull that would not assault his Enemy in that part where the most
considerable mischief may be done him; it is now Octavio's Interest and his
business to render Philander false, to give you all the umbrage that is
possible of so powerful a Rival, and to say any thing that may render him
hateful to you, or at least to make you love him less. Away* replied Silvia
(with an uneasi-smile) how foolish are thy reasonings, for were it possible I
could Love Philander less, is it to be imagined, that should make way for
Octavio in my heart, or any, after that dear deceiver? No doubt of it, replied
Antonett, but that very effect it would have on your heart, for Love in the
Soul of a witty person is like a scain of Silk; to unwin'd it from the Bottom,
you must wind it on another or it runs into confusion and becomes of no use,
and then of course, as one lessens the other increases, and what Philander
loses in Love, Octavio or some one industrious Lover will most certainly gain:
Oh replied Silvia you are a great Philosopher in Love. I should be Madam, cried
Antonett, had I but had a good Memory, for I ^ad a young Church man once in
love with me, who has read many a Philosophical Lecture to me upon Love; among
the rest he used to say the soul was all composed of Love. I used to ask him
him then, if it were formed of so soft Materials, how it came to pass that we
were no oftener in love, or why so many were so long before they loved, and
others who never loved at all? No queston but he answered you wisely, said
Silvia carelessly and sighing, with her thoughts but half attentive. Marry and
so he did, cried Antonett, at least I thought so then, because I loved a
little. He said, Love of it self was unactive, but 'twas informed by Object,
and then too that Object must depend on fancy (for Souls, tho all love, are not
to love all) now fancy, he said, was sometimes nice, humourous, and fantastic,
which is the reason we so often love those of no merit, and despise those that
are most excellent; and sometimes fancy guides us to like neither, he used to
say Women were like Misers, tho they had always love in store, they seldom
cared to part with it, but on very good interest and security, Cent per Cent,
most commonly heart for heart at least, and for security he said we were most
times too unconscionable, we asked Vows at least, at worst Matrimony -- Half
angry, Silvia cried -- and what is all this to my loving against? Oh Madam,
replied Antonett, he said a Woman was like a Gamester, if on the winning hand,
hope, interest, and vanity made him play on, besides the pleasure of the play
it self; if on the losing, then he continued throwing at all to save a stake at
last, if not to recover all; so either way they find occasion to continue the
game. But oh, said Silvia sighing, what shall that Gamester set, who has
already played for all she had, and lost it at a cast? Oh Madam, replied
Antonett, The young and fair find Credit every where, there is still a prospect
of a return, and that Gamester that plays thus upon the tick is sure to lose
but little, and if they win, it is all clear gains. I find, said Silvia, you are
a good manager in love; you are for the frugal part of it. Faith Madam, said
Antonett, I am indeed of that opinion, that love and interest always do best
together, as two most excellent ingredients in that rare Art of preserving of
Beauty. Love makes us put on all our Charms, and interest gives us all the
advantage of dress, without which Beauty is lost, and of little use. Love would
have us appear always new, always gay, and magnificent, and money alone can
render us so, and we find no Women want Lovers so much as those who want
Petticoats, Jewels, and all the necessary trifles of Gallantry. Of this last
opinion I find you your self to be; for even when Octavio comes, on whose heart
you have no design, I see you dress to the best advantage, and put on many, to
like one: Why is this but that, even unknown to your self, you have a secret
joy and pleasure in gaining Conquests* and of being adored and thought the most
Charming of your Sex. That is not from the inconstancy of my heart, cried
Silvia, but from the little vanity of our Nat^res* Oh Madam, replied Antonett,
there is no friend to Love, like Vanity; it is the falsest betrayer of a Woman's
heart, of any Passion or humor she can be guilty of, not Love it self betrays
her sooner to Love than Vanity or Pride, and, Madam, I would I might have the
pleasure of my next wish, when I find you not only listening to the love of
Octavio, but even approving it too. Away, replied Silvia in frowning, your
mirth grows rude and troublesome, -- Go bid the Page wait, while I return an
answer to what his Lord has sent me. So sitting at the Table she dismissed
Antonett, and writ this following Letter.

Silvia to Octavio.
I Find Octavio this little Gallantry of yours, of showing me the Lover, stands
you in very great stead, and serves you upon all occasions for abundance of
uses, amongst the rest, it is no small obligation you have to it, for furnishing
you with handsome pretenses to keep from those who importune you, and from
giving 'em that satisfaction by your Council and Conversation which possibly
the unfortunate may have need of sometimes; and when you are pressed and obliged
to render me the friendship of your Visits, this necessary ready love of yours,
is the only evasion you have for the answering a thous^nd little questions I
ask you of Philander; whose heart I am afraid you know much better than Silvia
does, I could almost wish Octavio, that all you tell me of your passion were
true, that my commands might be of force sufficient to compel you, to resolve
my heart in some doubts that oppress it, and indeed if you would have me
believe the one, you must obey me in the other, to which end I conjure you to
hasten to me, for something of an unusual coldness in Philanders Letter, and
some ominous divinations in yours, have put me on a rack of thought, from which
nothing but Confirmation can relieve me, this you dare not deny if you value
the repose

Of Silvia.


She read it over, and was often about to tear it, fancying it was tooo kind:
But when she considered 'twas from no other inclination of her heart than that
of getting the secrets out of his, she pardoned her self the little levity she
found it guilty off, all which considering as the effects of the violent
Passion she had for Philander, she found it easy to do, and sealing it she
gave it to Antonett to deliver to the Page, and set herself down to ease her
soul of its heavy weight of grief, by her complaints to the dear Author of her
pain; for when a Lover is insupportably afflicted there is no ease like that of
writing to the person loved: And that all that comes uppermost in the Soul, for
true love is all unthinking artless speaking, incorrect disorder, and without
Method, as it is without bounds or rules, such were Silvia's unstudy'd thoughts,
and such her following Letter.

Silvia to Philander.
OH my Philander, how hard it is to bring my Soul to doubt, when I consider all
thy past tender vows, when I reflect how thou have loved and sworn. Methinks I
hear the Music of thy voice still whispering in my bosom; methinks the
Charming softness of thy words remain like lessening Eccho's on my Soul, whose
distant Voices by degrees decay, till they be heard no more! Alas I Have read thy
Letter over and over, and turned the sense a thousand several ways, and all to
make it speak and look like Love -- Oh I have flattered it with all my Art.
Sometimes I fancied my ill reading spoiled it, and then I tuned my Voice to
softer Notes, and read it over again; but still the words appear^d too rough
and harsh for any moving Air, which way so e're I changed, which way so e're I
questioned it of love, it answered in such Language -- as others would perhaps
interpret love, or something like it; but I who have heard the very God himself
speak from thy wondrous Lips, and known him guide thy Pen when all the
eloquence of moving Angels flowed from thy Charming Tongue! when I have seen
thee fainting at my feet, (whilst all Heaven opened in thy glorious face) and
now and then sigh out a trembling word; in which there was contained more love,
more Soul, than all the Arts of speaking ever found. What sense! Oh what
reflections must I make on this decay, this ^trange -- this sudden alteration
in thee? But that the cause is fled, and the effect is ceased, the God retired,
and all the Oracles ^ilenc'd! Confess -- oh thou eternal Conqueror of my Soul,
whom every hour, and every tender joy, renders more dear and lovely -- Tell me
why (if thou still love me, and love as well) does love not dictate to thee
as before! Do thou want words? Oh then begin again, repeat the old ones over
ten thousand times, such repetitions are loves Rethorick! how often have I
asked thee in an hour, when my fond Soul was ^oating on thy Eyes, when with my
Arms, clasding thy yielding Neck, my lips imprinting kisses on thy cheeks, and
taking in the breath, that sight from thine, how often have I asked this little
but important question of thee? Does my Philander Love me? then kiss thee for
thy Yes and sighs, and ask again, and still my Soul was ravished with new joy,
when thou would answer, Yes; I love thee dearly! and if I thought you spoke
it with a tone that seemed less soft and servent than I wished, I asked so often
till I made thee answer in such a voice as I would wish to hear it; all this
had been impertinent and foolish in any thing but love, to any but a Lover: But
oh -- give me the impertinence of love! talk little nonsense to me all the day,
and be as wanton as a playing Cupid, and that will please and Charm my love
sick heart better than all fine sense and reasoning.

Tell me, Philander, what new accident, what powerful misfortune has befallen
thee, greater than what we have experienced yet? could drive the little God out
of thy heart, and make thee so unlike my soft Philander? What place contains
thee, or what pleasures ease thee, that thou art now contented to live a
tedious day without thy Silvia. How then the long long Age of forty more, and
yet thou liv'st, art patient, tame, and well; thou talk not now of ravings,
or of dying, but lookst about thee like a well pleased Conqueror after the
toyls of Battle -- Oh I have known a time -- but let me never think upon it
more! it cannot be remembered without madness! What think thee ^allen from love!
to think that I must never hear thee more pouring thy Soul out in soft sighs of
love? A thousand dear expressions by which I knew the Story of thy* heart, and
while you tell it, bid me ^eel it panting -- Never to see thy Eyes fixed on my
face -- till the soft showers of joy would gently fall and hang their shining
dew upon thy looks, then in a Transport snatch me to thy bosom, and sigh a
thousand times e're thou could utter -- Ah Silvia how I love thee -- Oh the
dear Eloquence, those few short words contain; when they are sent with Lovers
accents, to a Soul all languishing! but now -- alas, thy love is more familiar
grown -- Oh take the other part of the Proverb too and say 't has bred contempt,
for nothing less than that your Letter shows, but more it does, and that is
indifference, less to be born than hate or any thing --

At least be just and let me know my doom; do not deceive the heart that
trusted all thy Vows, if thou be'st generous -- if thou let'st me know -- thy
date of Love -- is out (for love perhaps as life has dates) and equally
uncertain, and thou no more can stay the one than the other, yet if thou art so
kind for all my honor lost; my youth undone, my Beauty tarnisht, and my
lasting vows to let me fairly know thou art departing, my worthless Life will
be the only loss; But if thou still continuest to impose, upon my easy Faith,
and I should any other way learn my approaching Fate -- Look to it Philander --
She that had the courage t'abandon all for Love, and faithless thee, can when
she finds her self betrayed and lost, Nobly revenge the ruin of her fame, and
send thee to the other World with,

Silvia


She having writ this, read it over, and fancied she had not spoke half the
sense of her Soul -- Fancied if she were again to begin she could express her
selfmuch more to the purpose she designed, than she had done. She began again
and* writ two or three new ones, but they were either too kind or too rough,
the first she feared would show a weakness of Spirit, since he had given her
occasion of jealousy, the last she feared would disoblige if all those
jealousies were false, she therefore tore those last she had writ, and before
she sealed up the first she read Philanders Letter again, but still ended it
with fears that did not l^ssen those she had first conceived; still she thought
she had more to say as Lovers do, who never are weary of speaking or writing to
the dear object of their Vows, and having already forgotten what she had said
just before -- and her heart being by this time as full as e're she began she
took up her complaining Pen, and made it say this in the Covert of the Letter.

Oh Philander! Oh thou eternal Charmer of my Soul, how fain I would repent me
of the cruel thoughts I have of thee; when I had finished this enclosed I read
again thy chilling Letter, and strove with all the force of Love and soft
imagination to find a dear occasion of asking Pardon for those fears, which
press my breaking heart: but Oh the more I read, the more they strike upon* my
tenderest part, -- something so very cold, so careless, and indifferent you end
your Letter with -- I will not think of it -- by Heaven it makes me rave -- and
hate my little power, that could no longer keep thee soft and kind. Oh if those
killing fears (bred by excess of Love) are vainly taken up in pity my adorable
-- in pity to my tortured Soul convince 'em, Redress the torment of my jealous
doubts, and either way confirm me; be kind to her that dies and languishes for
thee, ^^turn me all the so^^ness ^^at first Charmed me, or frankly tell me my
approaching Fate. Be generous, or be kind, to the unfortunate and undone.

Silvia.


She thought she had ended here, but here again she read Philanders Leter, as
if on purpose to find new torments out for a heart too much pressed already; a
sour that is always mixed with the sweets of Love, a pain that ever accompanies
the pleasure. Love else were not to be numbered among the passions of men, and
was at first ordained in Heaven for some divine of the Soul, till Adam with his
loss of Paradise debaucht it, with jealousies fears, and curiosities, and mixed
it with all that was afflicting; but you will say he had reason to be jealous,
whose Woman for want of other Seducers listened to the Serpent, and for the
Love of change would give way even to a Devil, this little Love of Novelty and
knowledge has been entailed upon her daughters ever since, and I have known
more Women rendered unhappy and miserable from this torment of curiosity, which
they bring upon themselves, than have ever been undone by less villainous* Men.
One of this humor was our haughty and Charming Silvia, whose Pride and Beauty
possessing her with a belief that all Men were born to dye her Slaves made her
uneasy at every action of the LoLover (whether beloved or not) that did but
seem to slight her Empire; but where indeed she loved and doated, as now on
Philander this humor put her on the rack at every thought or fancy that he
might break his Chains and having laid the last Obligation upon him, she
expected him to be her Slave for ever, and treated him with all the haughty
Tyranny of her Sex, in all those moments when softness was not predominate in
her Soul. She was shagrien at every thing if but displeased with one thing, and
while she gave torments to others she failed not to feel 'em the most sensibly
her self; so that still searching for new occasion of quarrel with Philander
she drew on her self most intolerable pains, such as doubting Lovers feel
after long hopes and confirmed joys, she reads and weeps, and when she came to
that part of it that inquired of the health and being of the pledge of Love --
she grew so tender that she was almost fainting in her Chair, but recovering
from the soft reflection, and finding she had said nothing of it already she
took her Pen again and writ.

You ask me, Oh Charming Philander how the Pledge of our soft hours thrives?
Alas, as if it meant to brave the worst of fate! it does advance, my sorrows
and all your cruelties have not destroyed that: But I still bear about me the
destiny of many a sighing Maid, that this (who will I am sure be like
Philander) will ruin with his looks.

Thou Sacred Treasure of my Soul forgive me, if I have wronged thy love; adieu.

She made an end of writing this, just when Antonett arrived, and told her
Octavio was a lighted at the Gate, and coming to visit her, which gave her
occasion to say this of him to Philander,

I think I had not ended here but that Octavio the bravest and the best of
friends is come to visit me. The only Satisfaction I have to support my life in
Philanders absence, pay him those thanks that are due to him from me, pay him
for all the generous cares he has taken of me; beyond a friend! almost
Philander in his blooming Passion when 'twas all new and young, and full of
duty, could not have rendered me his service with a more awful industry: sure
he was made for love and glorious friendship. Cherish him them, preserve him
next your Soul, for he is a Jewel, fit for such a Cabinet: His form, his parts,
and every Noble action, shows us the Royal Race from whence he sprung, and the
Victorious Orange confesses him his own in every Virtue, and in every Grace,
nor can the illigitimacy eclips him; sure he was got in the first heat of Love,
which formed him so a Hero -- But no more. Philander is as kind a Judge as

Silvia.


She had no sooner finished this and sealed it, but Octavio came in to the
Chamber, and with such an Air, with such a Grace, and mien he approached her --
with all the languishment of soft trembling Love in his face, which with the
addition of the dress he was that day in, (which was extremely rich and
advantageous, and altogether such as pleases the Vanity of Women.) I have since
heard the Charming Silvia say, in spite of all her tenderness for Philander;
she found a a soft emotion in her Soul, a kind of pleasure at his approach,
which made her blush with some kind of anger at her own easiness. Nor could she
have blushed in a more happy season; for Octavio saw it, and it served at once
to add a Luster to her paler Beauty, and to betray some little kind sentiment,
which possessed him with a joy that had the same effects on him: Silvia saw it;
and the care she took to hide her own, served but to increase her blushes,
which put her into a confusion she had much ado to reclaim; she cast her Eyes
to Earth, and leaning her Cheek on her hand, she continued on her seat without
paying him that usual Ceremony she was wont to do. While he stood speechless
for a moment gazing on her with infinite satisfaction, when she to assume a
formality as well as she could, rose up and cried (fearing he had seen too
much) Octavio I have been considering after what manner I ought to receive you,
and while I was so, I left those Civillities unpaid which your quality, and my
good manners ought to have rendered you. Ah Madam, replied he sighing, if you
would receive me as I merited and you ought, at least you would receive me as
the most passionate Lover that ever Adored you. I was rather believing, said
Silvia, that I ought to have received you as my Foe: Since you conceal from me
so long what you cannot but believe I am erxteamly impatient of hearing, and
what so nearly concerns my repose. At this he only answering with a sigh, she
pursued, Sure, Octavio, you understand me: Philanders answer to the Letter of
your confessing Passion has not so long been the subject of our discourse and
expectation, but you guess at what I mean? Octavio, who on all Occasions wanted
not wit, or reply, was here at a loss, what to answer: Notwithstanding he had
considered before what he would say: but let those in love fancy, and make what
fine speeches they please, and believe themselves furnished with abundance of
eloquent Harangues at the sight of the dear Object they lose 'em all, and love
teach 'em a dialect much more prevailing without the expense of duller thought:
And they leave unsaid all they had so sloridly formed before, and sigh a
thousand things with more success: Love like Poetry cannot be taught, but
uninstructed flows without painful study, if it be true; it is born in the Soul,
a Noble inspiration not a Science! such was Octavio's, he thought it
dishonorable to be guilty of the meaness of a Lie, and say he had no answer:
He thought it rude to say he had one and would not show it Silvia: And he
believed it the height of ungenerous baseness to show it. while he remained
this moment silent; Silvia, who is love, jealousy, and impatience endured no
delay, with a malicious half smile, and a tone all angry, scorn in her Eyes,
and passion on her Tongue, she cried -- It Is, well Octavio, that you so early
let me know you can be false, unjust, and faithless, you knew your power, and
in pity to that Youth and easiness you found in me, have given a Civil warning
to my heart. In this I must confess, continued she, you have given a much
greater testimony of your friendship for Philander, than your Passion for
Silvia, And, I suppose, you came not here to resolve your self of which you
should prefer, that was decided e're you arrived, and this visit I imagine was
only to put me out of doubt: A piece of Charity you might have spared. She
ended this with a scorn, that had a thousand Charms, because it gave him a
little hope; and he answered with a sigh, Ah Madam, how very easy you find it
to entertain thoughts disadvantagious of me: And how small a fault your Wit and
cruelty can improve to a Crime. You are not offended at my friendship for
Philander. I know you do not Vallue my Life, and my repose so much, as to be
concerned who, or what, shares this heart, that adores you; No, it has not
merited that Glory; Nor dare I presume to hope, you should so much as wish my
Passion for Silvia, should surmount my Friendship to Philander. If I did,
replied she with a scorn, I perceive I might wish in vain: Madam, answered he,
I have too Divine an opinion of the justice of the Charming Silvia to believe I
ought, or could make my approaches to her heart by ways so base and ungenerous,
the result of even tolerated Treason is to hate the Traitor. Oh, you are very
nice, Octavio, re plied Silvia, in your Functilio to Philander, but I perceive
you are not so tender in those you ought to have for Silvia? I find Honor in
you men, is only what you please to make it, for at the same time you think it
ungenerous to betray Philander, you believe it no breach of Honor to betray
the eternal repose of Silvia? You have promised Philander your friendship, you
have avowed your self my Lover, my Slave, my Friend, my every thing, and yet
not one of these has any tie, to oblige you to my interest, pray tell me,
continued She, when you last writ to him, was it not in order to receive an
answer from him? And was not I to see that answer? And here you think it no
dishonor to break your word or promise; by which I find your false Notions, of
Virtue and Honor, with which you serve your selves, when interest, design, or
self Love makes you think it necessary. Madam, replied Octavio, you are pleased
to pursue your anger, as if indeed I had disobeyed your command, or refused to
show you what you Imagine I have from Philander: Yes, I do replied she hastily;
and wonder why you should have a greater friendship for Philander, than for
Silvia, especially if it be true that you say, you have joined Love to
friendship; or are you of the opinion of those that cry they cannot be a Lover
and a friend of the same Object. Ah Madam, cried our perplexed Lover, I beg you
to believe, I think it so much more my Duty and inclination to serve and obey
Silvia than I do Philander, that I swear to you, Oh, Charming Conqueress of my
Soul, if Philander have betrayed Siliva, ^e has at the same time betrayed
Octavio, and that I would revenge it with the loss of my Life: In injuring the
adorable Silvia, believe me, lovely Maid, he injures so much more than a
Friend, as Honor is above the inclination; if he wrong you, by Heaven he
cancels all! he wrongs, my Soul, my Honor, Mistress and my Sister: Fearing he
had said too much, he stopped and sight at the word Sister, and casting down
his Eyes, blushing with shame and anger, he continued, Oh, give me leave to say
a Sister, Madam, least Mistress had been too daring and presumptious, and a
Title that would to justify my quarrel half so well, since 'twou'd take the
Honor from my just resentment and blast it with the scandal of self intrest or
jealous revenge. What you say replied she, deserves abundance of
acknowledgement; but if you would have me believe you, you ought to hide
nothing from me, and he methinks that was so daring to confefs his Passion to
Philander, may, after that, venture on any discovery: In short Octavio, I
demand to see the return you have from Philander, for possibly -- said she,
sweet'ning her Charming face into a Smile de^ign'd, I should not be displeased
to find I might with more freedom receive your Addresses, and on the coldness
of Philanders reasoning may depend a great part of your Fate, or Fortune: Come,
come, produce your credentials, they may recommend your heart more effectually
than all the fine things you can say, you know not how the least appearance of
a slight from a Lover, may advance the Pride of a Mistress, and Pride in this
affair will be your best Advocate. Thus she insinuated with all her female
Arts, and put on all her Charms of Looks and smiles, sweetened her mouth,
softened her Voice and Eyes, assuming all the tenderness and little
affectations her subtle Sex was capable of, while he lay all ravished and almost
expiring at her Feet; sometimes transported with imagined Joys in the
possession of the dear slatterting Charmer, he was ready to unravel all the
Secrets of Philanders letter; but Honor yet was even above his Passion and
made him blush at his first hasty thought; and now he strove to put her off,
with all the Art he could, who had so very little in his Nature, and whose real
Love and perfect Honor had set him above the little evasions of Truth, who
scorned in all other cases the baseness and cowardice of a Lie: and so
unsuccessful now was the little honest cheat, which he knew not how to manage
well, that 'twas soon discovered to the Wity, jealous, and angry Silvia: So
that after all the rage a passionate Woman could express, who belive'd her self
injured by the only two persons in the World from whom she expected most
Adoration? she had recourse to that Natural and softning aid of her Sex, her
Tears, and haviug already reproached Octavio with all the malice of a defeated
Woman, she now continued it in so moving a manner, that our Hero could no
longer remain unconquered by that powerful way of Charming, but unfixt to all
he had resolved gave up, at least, apart of the secret, and owned he had a
Letter from Philander; and after this confession knowing very well he could not
keep her from the sight of it; no tho an Empire were rendered her to buy it
off; his Wit was next employed how he should defend the sense of it, that she
might not think Philander false. In Order to this, he, forcing a Smile, told
her, that Philander was the most malicious of his Sex, and had contrived the
best Stratagem in the world to find whether Silvia still loved, or Octavio
retained his friendship for him; And but that, continued he, I know the Nature
of your curious Sex to be such, that if I should persuade you not to see it, it
would but the more inflame your desire of seeing it, I would ask no more of the
Charming Silvia, than that she would not oblige me to show, what would turn so
greatly to my own advantage: if I were not too sensible, it is but to entrap me,
that Philander has taken this method in his answer. Believe me Adorable Silvia,
I plead against my own Life, while I beg you not to put my honor to the test,
by commanding me to show this Letter, and that I join against the interest of
my own Eternal repose while I plead thus: she hears him with a hundred changes
of countenance. Love, rage, and Jealousy swell in siercer Eyes, her breath
beats short, and she was ready to burst into speaking before he had finished
what he had to say; she calls up all the little discretion and Reason Love had
left her to manage her self as she ought in this great occasion? she bit her
Lips and swallowed her rising sighs; but he soon saw the storm he had raised
and knew not how to stand the shock of its fury, he sighs, he pleads in vain,
and the more he endeavors to excuse the Levity of Philander the more he rends
her heart, and sets her on the Rack; and concluding him false, she could no
longer contain her rage but broke out into all the fury that madness can
inspire, and from one degree to another wrought her Passion to the height of
Lunacy: She tore her Hair and bit his hands, that endeavored to restrain hers
from violence, she rent the Ornaments from her fair Body, and discovered a
thousand Charms and Beauties, and finding now that both his strength and reason
was too weak to prevent the mischiefs he found he had brought on her, he calls
for help: When Briljard was but too ready at hand; with Antonelt and some
others, who came to his assistance; Briljard, who knew nothing of the occasion
of all this, believed it the second part of his own late adventure, and fancied
that Octavio had used some violence to her, upon this he assumes the Authority
of his Lord, and secretly that of a Husband or Lover, and upbraiding the
innocent Octavio with his brutallity they fell to such words as ended in a
challenge the next morning for Briljard appeared a Gentleman, Companion to his
Lord; and one whom Octavio could not well refuse, this was not carried so
silently but Antonett busy as she was about her raving Lady heard the
appointment, and Octavio quitted the Chamber almost as much disturbed as
Silvia, whom, with much ado, they persuaded him to leave, but before he did so
he on his knees offered her the Letter and implored her to receive it. So
absolutely his Love had vanquished his Nobler part, that of honor; but she at
tending nomotions but those of her own Rage, had no ragard either to Octavio's
proffer or his Arguments of Excuse, so that he went away with the Letter, in
all the extremity of disorder; this last part of his submission was not seen by
Briljard; who immediately le^t the Chamber, upon rcceiving Octavia's answer to
his Challenge; so that Silvia was now left with her Woman only, who by degrees
brought her to more calmness; and Briljard impatient to hear the reproaches, he
hoped she would give Octavio when she was returned to reason, being curious of
any thing that might redound to his disadvantage, whom he took to be a powerful
Rival, returned again into her Chamber: But in heu of hearing what he wished;
Silvia being recovered from her Passion of madness, and her Soul in a state of
thinking a little with reason; she misses Octavio in the crow'd, and with a
Voice, her rage had infeebl'd to a Languishment, she cried -- surveying
carefully those about her, Oh where is Octavio? Where is that Angel man? he who
of all his kind can give me comfort. Madam, replied Antonett, he is gone, while
he was here, he kneeled and prayed in vain, but for a word, or look, his Tears
are yet remaining wet upon your Feet, and all for one sensible reply, but rage
had deafen'd you; what has he done to merit this? Oh Antonett cried Silvia --
'Twas what he would not do that makes me rave, run, have and fetch him back --
But let him leave his Honor all behind; Tell him he has too much consideration
for Philander, and none for my repose. Oh, fly Briljard -- Have I no friend in
view, dares carry a Message from me to Octavio? Bid him return, oh instantly
returrn -- I dye I languish for a sight of him -- Descending Angels would not
be so welcome -- Why stand ye still, have I no power with you -- Will none obey
-- Then running hastily to the Chamber Door, she called her Page to whom she
cried -- Have, have, dear youth, and find Octavio out, and bring him to me
instantly: Tell him I dye to see him. The Boy glad of so kind a Message, to so
liberal a Lover, runs on his Errant while she returns to her Chamber, and
endeavors to recollect her senses against Octavio's coming as much as possible
she could: She dismisses her Attendant with different apprehensions; sometimes
Briljard believed this was the second part of her first raving, and having
never seen her thus, but for Philander concludes it the height of tenderness
and Passion for Octavio, but because she made so public a Declaration of it
he believed he had given her a Philter, which had raised her flame so much
above the bounds of modesty and discretion; concluding it so, he knew the usual
essects of things of that Nature, and that nothing could alay the heat of such
a love but possession, and easily deluded with every fancy that slatter'd his
love; mad, stark mad by any way to obtain the last blessing with Silvia, he
consults with Antonelt how to get one of Octavio's Letters out of her Ladies
Cabinet, and feigning many frivolous reasons, which deluded the Amorous Maid;
he persuaded her to get him one, which she did in half an hour after; for by
this time Silvia being in as much tranquillity as 'twas possible a Lover could
be in, who had the hopes of knowing all the Secrets of the false betrayer, she
had called Antonett to dress her; which she resolved should be in all the
careless magnificence that Art or Nature could put on; to Charm Octavio wholly
to Obedience; whom she had sent for, and whom she expected; but she was no
sooner set to her Toylight, but Octavio's Page arrived with a Letter from his
Master, which she greedily snacht; and read this.

Octavio to Silvia.
BY this time, oh Charming Silvia give me leave to hope your Rage is abated,
and your reason returned, and that you will hear a little from the most
unfornate of men, whom you have reduced to this miserable Extremity of losing
either the Adorable Object of his Soul, or his Honor: If you can preser a
little curiosity that will serve but, to afflict you before either that or my
repose. What esteem ought I to believe you have for the unfortunate Octavio;
and if you hate me, as it is evident if you compel me to the extremity of losing
my repose or honor, what reason or argument have I to perfer so careless a
Fair One above the last, It Is certain you neither do nor can love me now; and
how much below that hope shall the exposed and abandoned Octavio be, when he
shall pretend to that Glory without his Honor: Believe me, Charming Maid, I
would Sacrifice my life, and my entire Fortune at your least command to serve
you; but to render you a devoyr that must point me out the basest of my Sex, is
what my temper must resist in spite of all the violence of my Love, and I
thank my happyer Stars that they have given me resolution enough rather to fall
a Sacrifice to the last, then be guilty of the breach of the first: This is the
last and present thought and pleasure of my Soul, and least it should by the
force of those Divine Ideas which Eternally surround it, be soothed and
slatter'd from its Noble Principles, I will to morrow put my self out of the
hazard of Temptation, and divert if possible by absence to the Compagne, those
soft importunate betrayers of my Liberty; that perpetually solicit in favor of
you: I dare not so much as bid you adieu, one sight of that bright Angels face,
would undo me, unfix my Nobler resolutions, and leave me a despicable Slave,
sighing my unrewarded Treason at your insensible Feet: My Fortune I leave to be
disposed by you; but the more useless necessary I will for ever take from those
lovely Eyes, who can look on nothing with joy, but the happy Philander: If I
have denied you one satisfaction, at least I have given you this other of
securing you Eternally from the trouble and importunity of.

Madam your Faithful Octavio.


This Letter to any other less secure of her own power than was our fair
Subject, would have made them impatient and angry: But she found that there was
something yet in her power, the dispensation of which could soon recall him from
any resolution he was able to make of absenting himself: Her Glass stood before
her, and every glance that way was an assurance and security to her heart; she
could not see that Beauty and doubt its power of persuasion; She therefore took
her Pen, and writ him this answer, being in a moment furnished with all the Art
and subtilty that was necessary on this occasion.

Silvia to Octavio.
My Lord,
THo I have not Beauty enough to command your heart; at least allow me sense
enough to oblige your belief, that I fancy and resent all that the letter
contains which you have denied me, and that I am not of that sort of Women,
whose want of youth or Beauty renders so constant to pursue the Ghost of a
departed Love: It is enough to justify my Honor, that I was not the first
Agressor. I find my self persu'd by too many Charms of Wit, Youth, and
Gallantry, to bury my self beneath the willows, or to whine away my youth by
murmuring Rivers, or betake me to the last refuge of a declining Beauty, a
Monastary: no my Lord, when I have revenged and recompensed my Self for the
injuries of one inconstant, with the joys a thousand imploring Lovers offer, it
will be time to be weary of a world which yet every day presents me new joys;
and I swear to you, Octavio, that it was more to recompense what I owed your
passion that I desired a convincing proof of Philanders false-hood, than for
any other reason, and you have too much Wit not to know it; for what other use
could I make of the Secret; if he be false he is gone, unworthy of me, and
impossible to be retrieved, and I would as soon dye my sullied Garments and
wear them over again, as take to my embraces a reformed Lover, the Native first
Luster of whose passion is quite extinct, and is no more the same; no, my Lord,
she must be poor in Beauty that has recourse to shifts so mean; if I would know
the Secret by all that is good it were to hate him heartily, and to dispose of
my Person to the best advantage; which in honor I cannot do, while I am
unconvinc'd of the falseness of him with whom I have exchanged a thousand Vows
of fidellity, but if he unlink the Chain I am at perfect liberty, and why by
this delay you should make me lose my time, I am not able to conceive, unless
you fear I should then take you at your word, and expect the performance of all
the Vows of Love you have made me. -- If that be it -- My Pride shall be your
security, or if other recompense you expect, set the Price upon your Secret,
and see at what rate I will purchase the liberty it will procure me, possibly
it may be such as may at once infranchize me, and revenge me on the perjured
ingrate, than which nothing can be a greater Satisfaction to

Silvia,


She Seals this Letter with a wafer, and giving it to Antonett to give the
Page, believing she had writ what would not be in vain to the quick sighted
Octavio: Antonett takes both that and the other which Octavio had sent and left
her Lady busy in dressing her head, and went to Briljard's Chamber, who
thought every moment an Age till she came; so vigorous he was on his new
design: That which was sent to Octavio being sealed with a wet Wafer he neatly
opens, as 'twas easy to do, and read and Sealed again, and Antonett delivered
it to the Page. After receiving what pay Briljard could force himself to bestow
upon her; some flatteries of dissembled love; and some cold Kisses, which even
imagination could not render better, She returned to her Lady, and he to his
Stratagem, which was to counterfeit a Letter from Octavio: She having in hers
given him a hint, by bidding him set a price upon the Secret, which he had
heard was that of a Letter from Philander, with all the Circumstances of it,
from the faithless Antonett whom Love had betrayed* and after blotting much
paper to try every Letter through the Alphabet, and to produce them like those
of Octavio, which was not hard for a Lover of ingenuity; he fell to the
business of what he would write, and having finished it to his liking, his next
trouble was how to convey it to Her; for Octavio always sent his by his Page,
whom he could trust. He now was certain of love between 'em? For tho he often
had persuaded Antonett to bring him Letters, yet she could not be wrought on
till now to betray her trust: And what he long apprehended, he found too true
on both sides, and now he waited but for an opportunity to send it seasonably,
and in a lucky minute. In the mean time Silvia adorns her self for absolute
conquest and disposing her self in the most charming, careless, and tempting
manner she could devise, she lay expecting her coming Lover, on a repose of
rich Embroidery of Gold on blew Satin, hung within side with little Amorous
Pictures of Venus descending in her Chariot naked to Adonis, she embracing,
while the youth more eager of his rural sports turns half from her, in a
posture of pursuing his Dogs, who are no their Chase: Another of Armida who is
dressing the sleeping warrior up in wreaths of Flowers, while a hundred little
Loves are playing with his gilded Armor; this puts on his Helmet too big for
his little head that hides his whole face; another makes a Hobby horse of his
Sword and Lance, another fits on his breast piece, while three or four little
Cupi^s are seeming to heave and help him to hold it an end, and all turned the
Emblimes of the Hero into redicule. These and some other of the like nature
adorned the Pavillion of the languishing Fair One, who lay carelessly on her
side; her Arm leaning on little Pillows, of Point of Venice, and a Book of
Amors in her other hand. Every noise alarmed her with trembling hope that her
Lover was come, and I have heard she said she verily believed that acting and
feigning the Lover possessed her with a tenderness against her knowledge and
Will; and she found something more in her Soul than a bear curiosity of seeing
Octavio for the Letters sake: But in Lieu of her Lover, she found her self once
more approacht with a Billet from him; which brought this.

Octavio to Silvia.
AH Silvia, he must be more than humane, that can withstand your Charms, I
confess my frailty, and fall before you, the weakest of my Sex, and own I am
ready to believe all your dear Letter contains, and have vanity enough to wrest
every hopeful word to my own interest, and in favor of my own Heart: What will
become of me, if my easy faith should only flatter me, and I with shame should
find it was not meant to me, or if it were, 'twas only to draw me from a Virtue
which has been hitherto the Pride and Beauty of my youth, the Glory of my name,
my Comfort and refuge in all extremes of Fortune: The eternal Companion, Guide
and Counselor of all my actions: Yet this good you only have power to rob me
of, and leave me exposed to the scorn of all the laughing World: Yet give me
Love! give me but hope in lieu of it, and I am content to divest my self of all
besides.

Perhaps you will say I ask too mighty a rate for so poor a secret? But even in
that, there lies one of my own, that will more expose the feebleness of my
Blood and Name, than the discovery will me in particular, so that I know not
what I do, when I give you up the knowledge you desire. Still you will say all
this is to inhaunce its value, and raise the Price: And oh, I fear you have
taught my soul every quality, it fears and dreads in yours, and learnt it to
chasser for every thought, if I could fix upon the rate to sell it at: And I
with shame confess I would be Mercenary, could we but agree upon the Price: But
my respect forbids me all things, but silent hope, and that in spite of me,
and all my reason, will predominate? for the rest I will wholly resign my self
and all the faculties of my Soul to the Charming Arbitrator of my peace, the
powerful Judge of Love, the adorable Silvia: And at her Feet render all she
demands; yes, she shall find me there to justify all the weakness this
proclaims, for I confess, oh too too powerful Maid, that you have absolutely
subdued.

Your Octavio.


She had no sooner read this Letter, but Antonett instead of laying it by,
carried it to Briljard, and departed the Chamber to make way, for Octavio, who
she imagined was coming to make his visit, and left Silvia considering how she
should manage him to the best advantage, and with most honor acquit her self,
of what she had made him hope, but instead of his coming to wait on her; an
unexpected accident arrived to prevent him, for a messenger from the Prince
came with commands that he should forthwith come to his Highness, the messenger
having command to bring him along with him; So that not able to disobey he only
begged time to write a note of business, which was a Billet to Silvia, to excuse
himself till the next day, for it being five Leagues, to the Village where the
Prince waited his coming, he could not return that night: which was the
business of the Note, with which his Page hasted to Silvia: Briljard who was
now a vigilent Lover, and waiting for every opportunity that might favor his
design: Saw the Page arrive with the Note; and as 'twas usual he took it to
carry to his Conqueress, but meeting Antonett on the Stayers, he gave her what
he had before counterfeited with such Art, after he had opened what Octavio had
sent, and found Fortune was wholly on his side, he having learned from the
Page, besides that his Lord had taken Coach with Monsieur -- to go to his
Highness, and would not return that night: Antonett not knowing the deceit
carried her Lady the forged Letter, who opened it with eager have, and read
this.

TO THE CHARMING SILVIA.
Madam,
SInce I have a secret which none but I, can unfold; and that you have offered
at any rate to but it of me: Give me leave to say that you fair Creature have
another secret, a joy to dispense, which none but you can give the languishing
Octavio: If you dare purchase this of mine, with that infinitely more valuable
one of yours: I will be as secret as death, and think my self happier than a
sancy'd God! Take what Methods you please for the payment, and what time, order
me, command me, conjure me, I will wait, watch, and pay my Duty at all hours,
to snatch the most convenient one ^o reap so ravishing a blessing. I know you
will accuse me with all the confidence and rudeness in the world; but, oh! to
consider lovely Silvia, that that passion, which could change my Soul from all
the Course of Honor, has power to make me forget that nice respect your Beauty
aws me with, and my passion is now arrived at such a height, it obeys no Laws
but its own; and I am obstinately bent on the pursuit of that vast pleasure, I
fancy to find in the dear, the ravishing Arms of the Adorable Silvia: Impatient
of your answer, I am as love compels me.

Madam your Slave, Octavio.


The Page, who waited no answer was departed; but Silvia who believed he
attended it, was in a thousand minds what to say or do: She blushed as she
read, and then looked pale, with anger and disdain, and but that she had already
given her Honor up, it would have been something more surprising: But she was
used to questions of that Nature, and therefore received this with so much the
less concern? nevertheless 'twas sufficient to fill her Soul with a thousand
agitations, but when she would be angry the consideration of what she had writ
to him, to incourag^ him to this boldness stopped her rage: When she would take
it ill, she considered his knowledge of her lost fame, and that took off a
great part of her resentment on that side; and in midst of all she was raving
for the knowledge of Philanders secret. She rose from the Bed, and walked about
the room in much disorder, full of thought and no conclusion; she is ashamed to
consult of this affair with Antonett, and knows not what to fix on: The only
thing she was certain of, and which was fully and undisputably resolved in her
Soul, was never to consent to so false an Action, never to buy the secret at so
dear a rate; she abhors Octavio, whom she regards no more as that fine thing
which before she thought him, and a thousand times she was about to write her
despite and contempt, but still the dear secret staid her hand, and she was
fond of the torment: At last Antonett, who was afflictted to know the cause of
this disorder, asked her Lady if Octavio would not come: No replied Silvia
blushing at the Name, nor never shall the ungrateful man dare to behold my face
any more. Jesus, replied Antonett, what has he done Madam, to deserve this
severity? For he was a great benefactor to Antonett, and had already by his
gifts and presents made her a Fortune for a Burgomaster: He has. said Silvia,
c^mmitted such an impudence, as deserves death from my Hand: This she spoke in
rage, and walked away cross the Chamber. Why Madam, cried Antonett, does he
deny to give you the Letter: No replied Silvia, but asks me such a price for
it, as makes me hate my self, that am reduced by my ill conduct, to Addresses
of that Nature: Heavens, Madam, what can he ask you, to afflict you so; the
presumptuous man, said she (in rage) has the impudence to ask what never man,
but Philander was ever possessed of -- At this Antonett laughed -- Good Lord,
Madam, said she, and are you angry at such desires in men toward you? I believe
you are the first Lady in the World, that was ever offended for being
desirable: Can any thing proclaim your Beauty more, or your youth or Wit? marry
Madam, I wish I were worthy to be asked the question by all the fine dancing,
dressing, Song-making Fops in Town. And you would yield, replied Silvia, not so
neither replied Antonett, but I would spark my self, and value my self the more
upon it. Oh, said Silvia, she that is so fond of hearing of Love, no doubt but
will find some one to practice it with. That Is as I should find my self
inclined, replied Antonett: Silvia was not so intent on ^^tonett's rail'ery,
but she employed all her thought the while, on what she had to do; and those
last words of Antonett's jogged a thought that ran on to one very advantageous,
at least her present and first apprehension of it was such: And she turned to
Antonett with a face more gay than it was the last minute, and cried. Prithee
good Wench tell me, what sort of man would soonest incline you to a yielding?
if you command me Madam, to be free with your Lordship, replied Antonett, I
must confess there are too sorts of men that would most villainou^ly incline
me; the first is he that would make my fortune best: The next he that would
make my pleasure; the young, the handsome, or rather the well bread, and good
humored: But above all the Man of Wit: But what would you say Antonett,
replied Silvia, if all these made up in one man should make his Addresses to
you? Why then most certainly Madam, replied Antonett; I should yield him my
Honor, aft^r a reasonable siege. This though the wanton young maid spoke
possibly at first more to put her Lady in good humor than from any inclination
she had to what she said, yet after many arguments upon that subject, Silvia
cunning enough to pursue her design, brought the business more home, and told
her in plain terms that Octavio was the man who had been so presumptious as to
ask so great a reward as the possession of her self for the secret she desired;
and after a thousand little subtilties, having made the forward Girl confess
with blushes, she was not a Maid; she insinuated into her an opinion that what
she had done already (without any other motive than that of Love, as she
confessed in which interest had no part,) would make the trick the easier to do
again, especially if she brought to her Arms a person of Youth, Wit, Gallantry,
Beauty, and all the Charming qualities that adorn a man, and that besides she
should find it turn to good account, and for her secresies, she might depend
upon it, since the person to whose im^races she should submit her self, should
not know but that she her self was the Woman, so that says Sil^ia, I will have
all infamy, and you the reward every way with unblemisht Honor, while she
spoke the willing M^id gave an inward pleasing attention, tho at first she made
a few faint modest scruples; Nor was she less joy'd to hear it should be
Octavio, whom she knew to be rich, and very handsome, and she immediately found
the humor of inconstancy cease her, and Briljard appeared a very Husband Lover
in comparison of this new Brisker man of quality; so that after some pro's and
Con's the whole matter was thus concluded on between these two young persons;
who neither wanted Wit, nor Beauty; and both cro'd over the contrivance, as a
most diverting piece of little Malice, that should serve their present turn,
and make 'em sport for the future The next thing that was considered, was a
Letter which was to be sent in answer, and that Silvia being to write with her
own hand, begot a new doubt, in so much as the whole business was at a stand:
For when it came to that point that she her self was to consent, she found the
project look with a face so foul, that she a hundred times resolved and
unresolved. But Philander filled her Soul, revenge was in her view, and that
one thought put her on new resolves to pursue the design, let it be never so
base and dishonorable: Yes, cried she at last, I can commit no action, that is
not more just, excusable, and honorable, than that which Octavio has done to
me, who uses me like a common Mistress of the Town, and dares ask, me that which
he knows, he durst not do if he had not mean, and abject thoughts of me* his
buseness deserves death from from my hand if I had courage to give it him, and
the least I can do is to deceive the deceiver. Well then give me my Scrutore,
says she, so sitting down she writ this, not without abundance of of guilt and
confusion, for yet a certain Honor, which she had by birth checked the cheat
of her Pen.

Silvia to Octavio.
THe price Octavio, which you have set upon your secret, I (more generous than
you) will give your merit; to which alone it is due. if I should pay so high a
price for the first, you would believe I had the less esteem for the last, and
I would not have you think me so poor in spirit to yield on any other terms: If
I valued Philander yet -- after his confirmed inconstancy, I would have you
think I scorn to yield a Body where I do not give a Soul, and am yet to be
persuaded there are any such Brutes amongst my Sex, but as I never had a wish
but where I loved, so I never extended one till now, to any but Philander, yet
so much my sense of shame is above my growing tenderness that I could wish you
would be so generous to think no more of what you seem to pursue with such
earnestnest and haste: But least I should retain any sort of former love for
Philander, whom I am impatient to race wholly from my Soul. I grant you all you
ask provided you will be discreet in the management: Antonett therefore shall
only be trusted with the secret, the outward gate you shall find at twelve only
shut too, and Antonett wait you at the Stairs foot to conduct you to me; come
alone. I blush and guild the Paper with their reflections, at the thought of an
encounter like this before I am half enough secured of your heart? And that you
may be made more absolutely the master of mine, send me immediately Philanders
Letter enclosed, that if any remains of shagrien possess me, they may be
totally vanquished by twelve a Clock.

Silvia


She having with much difficulty writ this, read it to her trusty confident;
for this was the only secret of her Ladys she was resolved never to discover to
Briljard, and to the end he might know nothing of it, she sealed the Letter
with Wax; But before she sealed it, she told her Lady, she thought she might
have spared abundance of her blushes, and have writ a less kind Letter, for a
word of invitation or consent, would have served as well: To which Silvia
replied, her anger against him was too high, not to give him all the defeat
imaginable, and the greater the Love appeared, the greater would be the
revenge, when he should come to know (as in time he should) how like a false
friend she had treated him: This reason or any at that time would have served
Antonett, whose heart was set upon the new adventure, and in such haste she was
(the night coming on a pace) to know how she should dress, and what more was to
be done, that she only went out to call the Page, and meeting Briljard, (who
watched every bodies motion) on the Staircase, he asked her what that was, and
she said to send by Octavio's Page: You need not look in it said she (when he
snatched it hastily out of her hand): For I can tell you the contents, and it is
sealed so it must be known if you unrip it: Well, well, said he, if you tell it
me it will satisfy my curiosity as well; therefore I Will give it the Page. She
returns in again to her Lady, and he to his own Chamber to read what answer the
dear Object of his desire had sent to his forged one* So opening it, he found
it such as his Soul wished: and was all joy and ecstasy, he views himself a
hundred times in the glass, and set himself in Order with all the Opinion and
pride, as i^ his own good parts had gained him the blessing; he enlarged
himself as he walked, and knew not what to do, so extremely was he ravished with
his coming Joy, he blessed himself, his Wit, his Stars his Fortune, then read the
dear obliging Letter, and kissed it all over, as if it had been meant to him, and
after he had forced himself to a little more serious consideration, he
bethought himself of what he had to do in Order to this dear appointment: He
finds in her Letter, that in the first place he was to send her the Letter from
Philander: I told you before he took Octavio's Letter from the Page; when he
understood his Lord was going five Leagues out of Town to the Prince. Octavio
could not avoid his going and write to Silvia; in which he sent her the Letter
Philander writ, wherein was the first part of the confession of his love to
Madam the Countess of Clarinau: Generously Octavio sent it without terms; but
(...) slid his own forged one into Antonetts hand, in Lieu of it, and now he
read that from Philander, and wondered at his Lords inconstan^^, yet glad of
the opportunity to take Silvia's heart a little more off from him, he soon
resolved she should have the Letter, but being wholly mercenary, and fearing,
that either when once she had it, it might make her go back from her promised
assignation, or at least put her out of humor, so as to spoil a great part of
the entertainment he designed: He took the pains to counterfeit another Billet
to her, which was this,

To Silvia.
Madam,
SInce we have began to chaffer, you must give me leave to make the best of the
advantage I find I have upon you; and having violated my Honor to Philander,
allow the breach of it in some degree on other occasions; not but I have all
the obedience and Adoration for you that ever possessed the Soul of a most
passionate and languishing Lover: But fair Silvia, I know not whether, when you
have seen the secret of the false Philander, you may not think it less valuable
than you before did, and so defraud me of my due. Give me leave, oh wondrous
Creature! to suspect even the most perfect of your Sex; and to tell you that I
will no sooner approach your presence, but I will resign the paper you so much
wish; if you send me no answer, I will come according to your Directions; if
you do, I must obey and wait, tho with that impatience that never attended a
suffering Lover, or any, but,

Divine Creature, your Octavio.


This he sealed and after a convenient distance of time, carried as from the
Page to Antonett, who was yet contriving with her Lady, to whom she gives it,
who read it with abundance of impatience, being extremely angry at the rudeness
of the style, which she fancied much alter' from what it was, and had not her
rage blinded her, she might easily have perceived the difference too of the
Character, tho it come as near to the like as possible so short a practice
could produce: She took it with the other, and tore it in pieces; with rage,
and swore she would be revenged; but after calmer thoughts she took up the
pieces to keep, to upbraid him with, and fell to weeping, for anger, defeat,
and shame; but the April shower being past, she returned to her former
resentment, and ^ad some pleasure amidst all her torment of fears, jealousies,
and sense of Octavio's disrespect, in the thoughts of revenge; in Order to
which she contrives how Antonett shall manage her self, and commanding her to
bring out some fine point Linen, she dressed up Antonett's head with them, and
put her on a Shi^t laced with the same; for tho she intended no Light should be
in the Chamber, when Octavio should enter; she knew he understood by his touch
the difference of fine things from other, in fine having dressed her exactly, as
she her self used to be, when she received Octavio's Visits in Bed, she
embraced her, and fancied she was much of her own shape and bigness, and that
'twas impossible to find the deceit; and now she made Antonett dress her up in
her Clothes, and mobbing her Sarcenet hood about her head; she appeared so like
Antonett (all but the face) that 'twas not easy to distinguish 'em; And Night
coming on they both long for the hour of twelve, tho with different designs;
and having before given notice that Silvia was gone to Bed, and would receive
no Visit that Night, they were alone to finish all their business, this while
Briljard was not idle, but having a fine Bath made he washed and p^rfum'd his
Body and after dressed himself in the finest Linen perfumed, that he had, and
made himself as fit as possible for his design, nor was his shape which was
very good, or his stasture unlike to that of Octavio: And ready for the
approach, he conveys himself out of the house telling his ^ootman, he would put
himself to Bed after his Bathing, and locking his Chamber door, stole out, and
it being dark many a longing turn he walked impatient till all the Candles were
out in every Room of the House; in the mean time he employed his thoughts on a
thousand things, but all relating to Silvia; some times the Treachery he showed
in this Action to his Lord, caused short lived blushes in his Face, which
vanished as soon, when he considered his Lord false to the most beautiful of her
Sex: Sometimes he accused and cursed the Levity of Silvia, that could yield to
Octavio, and was as jealous as if she had indeed been to have received that
Charming Lover, but when his thought directed him to his own happiness, his
Pulse beat high, his blood flasht apace in his Cheeks, his eyes languisht with
Love; and his Body with a soverish fit? in these extremes by turns he past at
least three teadious hours, with a strikeing watch in his hand; and when it
told 'twas twelve, he advanced nearer the door, but finding it shut walked yet
with greater impatience every half minute going to the door; at last he found
it yield to his hand that pusht it: But oh, what mortal can express his Joy,
his heart beats double, his knees tremble, and a feebleness seizes every Limb,
he breaths nothing but short sighs, and is ready in the dark hall to fall on
the Floor; and was forced to lean on the rail that begins the Stairs to take a
little Courage: While he was there recruting himself, intent on nothing but his
vast joy; Octavio who going to meet the Prince, being met half way by that
young Hero was dispatch back again without advancing to the end of his five
Leagues, and impatient to see Silvia, after Philanders Letter that he had sent
her, or at least impatient to hear how she took it, and in what condition she
was, he, as soon as he alighted, went toward her house in hope to have met
Antonett, or her Page, or some that could inform him of her welfare; tho 'twas
usual for Silvia to set up very late, and he had often made her. Visits at that
hour: And Briljard wholly intent on his adventure, had le^t the door open, so
that Octavio perceiving it, believed they were all up in the back rooms where
Silvia's, apartment was toward a Garden, for he saw no light forward; but he
was no sooner entered (which he did without noise) but he heard a soft
breathing, which made him make a stand in the Hall: And by and by he heard the
soft tread of some body descending the Stairs: At this he approaches near, and
the Hall being a Marble floor, his tread was not heard: When he heard one cry
with a sigh -- Whose there? And another reply, it is I, who are you? The first
replied, a faithful and an impatient Lover. Give me your hand then, replied the
female voice, I will conduct you to your happiness; you may imagine in what
surprise Octavio was, at so unexpected an adventure, and like a jealous Lover
did not at all doubt but the happiness expected was Silvia, and the impatient
Lover some one whom he could not imagine, but raved within to know, and in a
mom^nt ran over in his thoughts all the men of quallity or celibrated Beauty,
or Fortune in the Town, but was at as great a loss, as at first thinking: But
be thou, who thon wilt, cried he to himself, Traitor as thou art, I will by thy
death revenge my self on the faithless Fair One; and taking out his Sword, he
advanc^d toward the Stairs foot, when he heard them both softly ascend; but
being a man of perfect good Nature, as all the brave and witty are, he
reflected on the severe usage he had had from^ Silvia, notwithstanding all his
industry, his vast expense, and all the advantages of Nature. This thought made
him in the midst of all his jealousy and haste, pawse a little moment, and
fain he would have persuaded himself, that what (...) was the Errors of his
sen^e; (...) that he dreamed, or that it was ^t least not to Silvia, to whom
this yet ascending Lover was advancing; but to undeceive him of that favorable
imagination, they were no sooner on the top of the Stairs, but he not being
many steps behind could both hear and see by the ill light of a great Sash
window on the Stair Case: The happy Lover enter the Chamber door of Silvia,
which he knew too well to be mistaken, not that he could perceive who or what
they were, but two persons not to be distinguished. Oh what human fancy (^ut
that of a Lover to that degree that was our young Hero,) can imagine the
amazement and torture of his Soul, wherein a thousand other passions reigned at
once, and maugre all his Courage and resolution forced him to sink beneath
their weight, he stood holding himself up by the rails of the Stair Case,
without having the power to ascend farther, or to show any other signs of life,
but that of sighing, had he been ^ favored Lover, had he been a known declared
Lover, to all the World, had he ^ut hoped he had had so much interest with the
false Beauty, as but to have been designed upon for a future love or use, he
would have rusht in, and have made the guilty Night a Covert to a Scene of
Blood; but even yet he had an awe upon his So^l for the perjured Fair One, tho
at the same time he resolved she should be the the object of his hate; for the
Nature of his honest Soul abhorred an Action so treacherous and base: He begins
in a moment from all his good thoughts of her, to think her the most Jilting of
her Sex, he knew if interest could oblige her, no man in Holland had a better
pretense to her than himself, who had already without any return even so much
as hope, presented her the vallue of eight or ten thousand pound, in fine Plate
and Jewels: If it were looser desire he fancied himself to have appeared as
capable to have served her as any man, but oh he considers there is a fate in
things, a destiny in Love that elevates and advances the most mean, deformed,
or abject, and debases and contemns the most worthy and magnificent: Then he
wonders at her excellent art of dissembling for Philander, he runs in a minute
over all her Passions of rage, jealousy, tears and softness, and now he hates
the whole Sex, and thinks 'em all like Silvia, than which nothing could appear
more despicable to his present thought, and with a smile (while yet his heart
was insensibly breaking, he fancies himself a very Coxcomb, a Cully, an imposed
on Fool, and a conceited Fop: Val^e's Silvia as a common fair Jil^, whose whole
design was to deceive the World, and make her self a Fortune, at the price of
her Honor, one that receives all kind bidders, and that he being too lavish,
and too modest was reserved the Cully on purpose to be undone and Jilted out of
all his fortune; This thought was so perfectly fixed in him that he recovered
out of his excess of pain, and fancied himself perfectly cured of his blind
passion, resolves to leave her to her beastly entertainment, and to depart? but
before he did so, Silvia (who had conducted the Amorous Spark to the Bed where
the expecting Lady lay dressed rich and sweet to receive him) returned out of the
Chamber, and the light being a little more favorable to his ^yes, by his being
so long in the dark^ he perceived it Antonett, at least such a sort of figure,
as he fancied her, and to confirm him saw her go into that Chamber where he
knew she lay; he saw her perfect dress, and all confirmed him; this brought him
back almost to his former confusion, but yet he commands his passion, and
descended the Stairs, and got himself out of the Hall into the Street; and
Silvia having forgot the street door was open, went and shut it, and returned
to Antonett's Chamber with the Letter, which Briljard had given to Antonett, as
she lay in the Bed, believing it Silvia, for that trembling Lover was no sooner
entered the Chamber and approacht the Bed side, but he kneeled before it and
o^^er'd the price of his happiness, this Letter; which she immediately gave to
Silvia unperceived, who quitted the Room; and now with all the eager have of
impatient love, she strikes a Light and falls to reading the sad contents; but
as she read she many times fainted over the Paper, and as she has since said
'twas a wonder she ever recovered, having no ^ody with her, by that time she
had ^^nisht it, she was so ill she was not able to get her self into Bed, but
threw her self down on the place where she sat which was the side of it, in
such agonies of grief and despair, as never any Soul was possessed of; but
Silvia's wholly abandoned to the violence of Loves and despair: it is
i^possible to paint a torment to express hers by, and though she had vowed to
Antonett it should not at all effect her, being s^ prepossest before; yet when
she had the confirmation of her fears, and heard his own dear soft words
addressed to another object, saw his transports, his impatience, his languishing,
industry; and endeavor to obtain the new desire of his soul; she found her
resentment above ^age, and given over to a more silent and less supportable
torment, brought her self into a high Fever; where she lay without so much as
calling for Aid in this extremity, not that she was afraid the cheat she had
put on Octavio would be discovered, for she had lost the remembrance that any
such prank was played; and in this multitude of thoughts of more concern, had
forgot all the rest of that Nights action.

Octavio this while was traver^ing the street wrapped in his Cloak just as if he
had come from Horse, for he was no sooner gone from the door, but his resenting
passion returned, and he resolved to go up again, and disturb the Lovers, tho
it cost him his life and fame: But returning hastily to the door he found it
shut; at which being enraged he was often about to break it open, but still
some unperceivable respect for Silvia prevented him, but he resolved not to
stir from the door, till he saw the fortunate rogue come out, who had given him
all this torment? at first he c^rst himself for being so much concerned for
Silvia or her actions, to waste a minute, but flattering himself that it was
not love to her, but pure curiosity to know the man, who was made the next fool
to himself, tho the more happy one, he waited all Night, and when he began to
see the day break, which he thought a thousand years; his Eye was never off
from the door, and wondered at their confidence, who would let the day break
upon them, but the Close drawn Curtains there, cried he, favors the happy
Villainy: Still he walked on, and still he might for any Rival that was to
appear for a most unlucky accident prevented Briljard's coming out, as he
doubly intended to do, first for the better carrying on of his cheat of being
Octavio; and next that he had challenged Octavio to fight, and when he knew his
Error, designed to have gone this morning and asked him pardon if he had been
returned; but the Amorous Lover over Night, ordering himself, for the encounter
to the best advantage had sent a Note to a Doctor, for something that would
encourage his spirits, the Doctor came, and opening a little Box, wherein was a
powerful. Medicine: He told him that a Dose of those little flies would make
him come off with wondrous Honor in the Battle of Love, and the Doctor being
gone to call for a glass of Sack, the Doctor having laid out of the Box what he
thought requisite on a piece of Paper, and leaving the Box open; our Spark
thought if such a Dose would encourage him so, a greater would yet make him do
greater Wonders, and taking twice the quantity out of the Box, puts 'em into
his pocket, and having drunk the first with full directions, the Doctor leaves
him, who was no sooner gone, but he takes those out of his pocket, and in a
glass of Sack drinks 'em down; after this he bathes and dresses, and believes
himself a very (...) that could have got at least twelve Son^ that happy Night
^ But he was no sooner laid in Bed with the Charming Silvia as he thought, ^ut
he was taken with intolerable gripes and pains, such as he h^d never felt
before, insomuch as he was not able to lie in the bed, this enrages him, he
grows mad and ashamed, sometimes he had little intermissions for a moment of
case, and then he would plead softly by her Bed side, and ask ten thousand
pardons, which being easily granted ^e would come into bed again, but then the
pain would seiz^ him anew, so that after two or three hours of distraction he
was forced to dress and retire; but instead of going down he went softly up to
his own Chamber, where he sat him down and (...) the World himself and his
hard ^ate; and in this extremity o^ pain, shame and grief, he reremain'd till
break of day: By which time Antonett who was most violently afflicted, got her
Coats on, and went to her own Chamber, where she found her Lady more dead than
alive: She immediately shi^ted her bed Linen, and made her B^d, and conducted
her to it; without endeavoring to divert her with the History of her own
misfortune; and only asked her many questions concerning her being thus ill, to
which the wretched Silvia only answered with sighs, so that Antonett perceived
'twas the Letter that had disordered her, and begged she might be permitted to
see it; she gave her leave and Antonett read it, but no sooner was she come to
that part of it which named the Countess of Clarinau, but she asked her Lady if
she understood who that person was, with great amazement? At this Silvia was
content to speak, pleased a little that she should have an account of her
Rival. No, said she, Do thou know her, Yes Madam, replied Antonett
particularly well, for I have served her ever since I was a Girl of five years
old; she being of the same Age with me, and sent at six years old both to a
Monastery; for she being fond of my play, her Father sent me at that Age with
her, both to serve and to divert her with Babies and Baubles, there we lived
seven years^ together, when an old rich Spaniard, the Count of Clarinau, fell
in love with my Lady, and married her from the Monastery, before she had seen
any part of the World beyond those sanctified Walls. She cried bitterly to have
had me to Collen with her, but he said I was too ^ouug now for her service, and
so sent me away back to my own Town, which is this, and here my Lady was born
too, and is Sister to -- Here she stopped, fearing to tell; which Silvia
perceiving, with a briskness (which her indisposition one would have thought
could not have allowed) sat up in her B^d and cried. Ha^ Sister to whom? Oh,
how thou would please me to say, to Octavio, why Madam would it please you
said the blushing Maid. Because said Silvia, 'twou'd in part revenge me on his
bold Addresses to me, and he would also be obliged in honor to his Family, to
revenge himself on Philander. A^ Madam said she, as to his presumption toward
you, fortune has sufficiently revenged it; at this she hung down her head and
looked very foolishly: How, said Silvia smiling and rearing her self yet more
in her Bed, is any misfortuue arrived to Octavio. Oh how I will triumph and
upbraid the daring man -- tell me quickly what it is? for nothing would rejoice
me more tha^ to hear he were punished a little; Upon this Antonett told her what
an unlucky Night she had, how Octavio was seized, and how he departed, by which
Silvia believed he had made some discovery of the cheat that was (...) upon
him, and that he only feigned illness to get himself loose from her embraces;
and now she falls to considering how she shall be revenged on both her Lovers:
And the best (...) can pitch upon is that of s^tting them both at odds, and
making ^em fight and revenge themselves on one another; but she like a right
Woman, could not dissemble her resentment of jealousy, what ever art she had
to do so in any other point; but mad to ease her Soul that was full; and to
upbraid Philander, she writes him a Letter, but not till she had once more, to
make her stark mad, read his over again; which he sent Octavio.

Silvia to Philander.
YEs p^rjur'd Villain, at last all thy perfidy is arrived to my knowledge; and
thou had better have been damned, of have fall^n, like an ungrateful Traitor
as thou art, under the public shame of dying by the common Executioner, than
have (...) under the grasp of my revenge, insatiate as thy Lust, false as thy
Treasons to thy Prince* fatal as thy destiny, loud as thy infamy, and bloody as
thy party. Villain, Villain, where got you the courage to use me thus, knowing
my injuries, and my Spirit; thou see base Traitor, I do not fall on thee with
treachery, as thou have on thy King and Mistress, to which thou has broke thy
Holy vows of allegiance and Eternal Love! but thou that have broke the Laws of
God and Nature! What could I expect, when neither Religion, Honor, common
Justice, nor Law could bind thee to humanity; thou that b^tray'd thy Prince,
abandoned thy Wife, renounced thy Child, killed thy Mother, ravished thy Sister,
and art in open Rebellion against thy Native Country, and very Kindred, and
Brothers. Oh after this what must the Wretch expect, who has believed thee, and
followed thy abject fortunes, the miserable outcast Slave, and contempt of the
World; what could she expect, but that the Villain is still potent in thee
unrepented, and all the Lover dead and gone, the Vice remains and all the
Virtue vanished. Oh, what could I expect from such a Devil, so lost in sin and
wickedness, that even those, for whom he ventured all his Fame, and lost his
Fortune, lent like a State Cully upon the public Faith, on the security of
Rogues, Knaves and Traitors; even those I say turned him out of their Councels,
for a reprobate too lewd for the villainous society: Oh, cursed that I was by
Heaven and Fate, to be blind and deaf to all thy infamy, and suffer thy
adorable bewitching Face and Tongue to charm me to madness and undoing, when
that was all thou had left thee thy false person, to cheat the silly, easy,
fond, believing World, into any sort of opinion of thee, for not one good
principle was left; not one poor virtue to guard thee from Damnation, thou
had but one friend left thee, one true, one real Friend, and that was
wretched Silvia, she, when all abandoned thee but the Executioner, fled with
thee, suffered with thee, starved with thee, lost her Fame and Honor with
thee, lost her friend, her Parents, and all her Beauties hopes for thee, and in
lieu of all, found only the accusation of all the good, the hate of all the
Virtuous, the reproaches of her kindred, the scorn of all chaste Maids, and
curses of all honest Wives; and in requital had only* thy false Vows, thy empty
love, thy faithless embraces, and cold dissembled kis^es. My only comfort was,
(ah miserable comfort) to fancy they were true; now that is departed too, and I
have nothing but a brave revenge lest in the room of all! in which I Will be as
merciless and irreligious as even thou have been in all thy Actions; and there
remains about me only this sense of Honor yet; that I dare tell thee of my
bold design; a bravery thou have never showed to me, who take me unawares,
stab'st me without a warning of the blow; so would thou serve thy King had
thou but power; and so thou serv'st thy Mistress; when I look back even to thy
infancy, thy li^e has been but one continued race of treachery, and I (destined
thy evil genius) was born for thy tormenter, for thou have made a very Fiend of
me, and I have Hell within; all rage, all torment, fire, distraction, madness*
I rave, I burn, I tear my self and faint, am still a dying, but can never fall,
till I have graspt thee with me: Oh, I should laugh in flames to see thee
howling by: I scorn thee, hate thee, loath thee more than ever I have loved
thee, and hate my self so much for ever loving thee, (to be revenged upon the
filthy, Criminal) I will expose my self to all the World, Cheat, Jilt, and
slatter all as thou have done, and having not one sense or grain of Honor
left, will yield the abandoned body, thou have rifl'd to every asking Fop: Nor
is that all, for they that purchase this, shall buy it at the price of being my
Bravos: And all shall aid in my revenge on thee; all merciless and as resolved
as I; as I! The injured

Silvia


Having shot this flash of the lightning of her Soul, and finished her rant, she
found her self much easier in the resolves on revenge, she had fixed there? she
scorned by any vain endeavor to recall him from his passion, she had wit enough
to have made those eternal observations, that love once gone is never to be
retrieved, and that it was impossible to cease loving, and then again to love
the same person, one may believe for sometime ones love is abated, but when it
comes to a trial, it shows it self as vigorous as in its first shine; and finds
its own Error, but when once one comes to love a new Object, it can never
return with more than pity, compassion, or civility for the first: This is a
most certain truth which all Lovers will find, as most Wives may experience,
and which our Silvia now took for granted, and gave him over for dead to all
but her revenge. Tho Fits of softness, weeping, raving, and tearing, would by
turns seize the distracted abandoned Beauty; in which extremities she has
recourse to scorn and Pride, too feeble to aid her too often: The first thing
she resolved on by the advice of her reasonable Councellor, was to hear Love at
both her ears, no matter whether she regard it or not, but to hear all as a
remedy against loving one in particular, for it is most certain that the use of
hearing Love, or of making Love (though at first without design) either in Women
or men, shall at last unfix the most confirmed and constant resolution. And
since you are assured continued Antonett, that sighs nor tears brings back the
wandered Lover, and that dying for him will be no revenge on him, but rather a
king assurance that you will no more trouble the man, who is already weary of
you, you ought with all your power, industry, and Reason rather to seek the
preservation of that Beauty, and fine humor to serve you on all occasions,
either for revenge or love, than by a foolish and insignificant Concern and
Sorrow reduce your self to the condition of being scorned by all, or at best
but pitty'd: How pitied cried the haughty Silvia, is there any thing so
insupportable to our Sex as pity! No surely replied the Servant, when it is
accompanied by Love; Oh what blessed comfort it is to hear people cry -- She was
once Charming, once a Beauty; is any thing more grating Madam? At this rate she
ran on, and le^t nothing unsaid that might animate the Angry Silvia to love a
new, or at least to receive and admit of love, for in that Climate, the Air
Naturally breeds Spirits avaritious, and much inclines 'em to the Love of Money,
which they will gain at any price or hazard, and all this discourse to Silvia
was but to incline the revengeful listening Beauty to admit of the Addresses of
Octavio, because she knew he would make her fortune. Thus was the unhappy Maid,
left by her own unfortunate conduct, encompassed in on every side with
distraction; and she was pointed out by fate to be made the most wretch'd of
all her Sex, nor had she left one faithful friend to advise or stay her youth
in its hasty advance to ruin; she hears the persuading Eloquence of the
flattering Maid, and finds now nothing so prevailent on her Soul as revenge,
and nothing so hsit more? and amongst all her Lovers, or those at least that
she knew adored her, none was ^ound so proper an instrument as the Noble
Octavio, his youth, his Wit, his Gallantry, but above all his fortune pleads
most powerful with her; so that she resolves upon the Revenge and fixes him the
man; whom she now knew by so many Obligations was obliged to serve her turn on
Philander: Thus Silvia found a little tranquillity, such as it was, in hope of
revenge, while the passionate Octavio was wrecked with a thousand pains and
torments, such as none but Jilted Lovers can imagine, and having a thousand
times resolved to hate her, and as often to love on, in spite of all -- after
a thousand arguments against her, and as many in favor of her, he arrived only
to this knowledge, that his love was extreme, and that he had no power over his
heart, that Honor, Fame, Interest, and whatever else might oppose his Violent
flame, were all too weak to extinguish the least spark of it, and all the
Conquest he could get of himself was, that he suffered all his torment, all the
Hell of raging Jealousy grown to Confirmation, and all the pangs of absence
for that whole day, and had the Courage to live on the Rack without easing one
moment of his Agony by a Letter or Billet; which in such cases discharges the
burden and pressures of the love sick heart; and Silvia who dressed, and
suffered her self wholly to be carried away by her Vengeance, expected him with
as much impatience as ever she did the coming of the once adorable Philander,
tho with a different passion; but all the live long day past in expectation of
him, and no Lover appeared; no not so much as a Billet, nor page at her
uprising to ask her health, so that believing he had been very ill indeed, from
what Antonett told her of his being so all Night, and fearing now that it was
no discovery of the cheat put upon him by the exchange of the Maid for the
Mistress, but real sickness, she resolved to send to him, and the rather
because Antonett assured her he was really sick, and in a cold damp sweat all
over his face and hands which she touched, and that from his infinite concern at
the defeat, the extreme respect he showed her in midst of all, the rage at his
own disappointment, and every Circumstance, she knew it was no ^eign'd thing
for any discovery he had made: On this confirmation, from a Maid cunning enough
to distinguish truth from flattery, she write Octavio this letter at Night.

Silvia to Octavio.
AFter such a parting from a Maid so entirely kind to you; she might at least
have hoped the favor of a Billet from you, to have informed her of your
health; unless you think that after we have surrendered all we are of the
Humor of most of your Sex, who despise the obliger, but I believed you a man
above the little Crimes and Levities of your race, and I am yet so hard to be
drawn from that opinion; I am willing to ^latter my self, that it is yet some
other reason that has hindered you from visiting me since, or sending me an
account of your recovery, which I am too sensible of to believe was feigned,
and which indeed has made me so tender, that I easily forgive all the
disappointment I received from it; and beg you will not afflict your self at
any loss, you sustained by it, since I am still, so much the same I was, to be
as sensible as before of all the obligations I have to you, send me word
immediately how you do, for on that depends a great part of the happiness of

Silvia


You may easily see by this Letter she was not in a humor of either writing
love or much flattery, for yet she knew not how she ought to resent this
absence in all kinds from Octavio, and therefore with what force she could put
upon a Soul too wholly taken up with the thoughts of another, more dear and
more afflicting, she only writ this to fetch one from him, that by it she might
learn part of his sentiment of her last Action, and sent her Page with it to
him; who, as was usual, was carried directly up to Octavio, whom he found in a
Gallery walking in a most dejected posture without a Hat, unbrac'd, his Arms a
cross his open breast; and his eyes bent to the Floor; and not taking any
notice when the Pages entered, his own was forc^d to pull him by the Sleeve,
before he would look up, and starting from a thousand thoughts that oppressed him
almost to death, he gazed wildly about him and asked their business: When the
Page delivered him the Letter; he took it, but with such confusion as he had
much a do to support himself, but resolving not to show his feebleness to her
Page he made a shift to get to a Wax Light, that was on the Table and read it;
and was not much amazed at the contents, believing she was persuing the
business of her Sex and Life, and Jilting him on; (for such was his opinion of
all Women now) he forced a smile of scorn, though his Soul were bursting, and
turning to the Page gave him a liberal reward, as was his daily use when he
came, and Mustered up so much Courage as to force himself to say -- Child tell
your Lady it requires no answer, you may tell her too, that I am in perfect
good Health -- He was oppressed to speak more, but sighs stopped him, and his
former resolution, wholly to abandon all corrispondence with her, checked his
forward Tongue; and he walked away to prevent himself from saying more: While
the Page, who wondered at this turn of Love, after a little waiting, departed,
and when Octavio had ended his walk, and turned, and saw him gone, his heart
felt a thousand pangs not to be born or supported; he was often ready to recall
him, and was angry the Boy did not urge him for an answer, he read the Letter
again, and wonders at nothing now after her last nights Action, tho all was
riddle to him; he found 'twas writ to some happier man than himself, however he
chanced to have it by mistake, and turning to the outside, viewed the
superscription; where there happened to be none at all, for Silvia writ in
haste and when she did it 'twas the least of her thoughts: And now he believed
he had found out the real Mystery, that it was not meant to him; he therefore
calls his Page, whom he sent immediately after that of Silvia, who being yet
below (for the Lads were laughing together for a moment) he brought him to his
distracted Lord; who nevertheless assumed a mildness to the innocent Boy, and
cried My Child thou have mistaken the person to whom thou should have carried
the Letter, and I am sorry I opened it; pray return it to the happy Man 'twas
meant to, giving him the Letter; My Lord reply^d the Boy, I do not use to carry
Letters to any but your Lordship: It Is the footmens business to do that to
other persons: It Is a mistake, where ever it lies, cried Octavio sighing,
whether in thee or thy Lady -- So turning from the wondering Boy he left him to
return with his Letter to his Lady, who grew mad at the relation of what she
heard from the Page, and notwithstanding the torment she had on her Soul
occasioned by Philander, she now found she had more to endure, and that in
spite of all her love V^ws and resentments, she had something for Octavio to
which she could not give a Name, she fancies it all pride, and concern for the
indignity put on her Beauty? but what ever it was this slight of his so wholly
took up her Soul, that she had for sometime quite forgot Philander, or when she
did think on him 'twas with less resentment than of this affront; she considers
Philander with some excuse now; as having long been (...) of a happiness he
might grow weary off; but a new Lover, who had for six months incessantly lain
at her feet, imploring, dying, vowing, weeping, sighing, giving, and acting all
things the most passionate of men was capable of, or that love could inspire,
for him to be at last admitted to the possession of the ravishing Object of his
Vows and Soul, to be laid in her Bed; nay in her very Arms (as She imagined he
thought) and then, even before gathering the Roses he came to pluck, before he
had begun to compose, or finished his Nosegay: To depart the happy Paradise with
a disgust, and such a disgust, as first to oblige him to dissemble sickness,
and next fall even from all his Civillities: Was a contempt she was not able to
bear: especially from him who of all men living she designed to make the
greatest property of, as most fit for her revenge, of all degrees and sorts:
But when she reflected with reason, (which she seldom did, for either Love or
rage blinded that) she could not conceive it possible that Octavio could be
fallen so suddenly from all his Vows and professions, but on some very great
provocation: Sometimes she thinks he tempted her to try her Virtue to
Philander, and being a perfect Honorable friend, hates her for her Levity, but
she considers his presents, and his unwearied industry, and believes he would
not at that expense have bought a knowledge which could profit neither himself
or Philander; then she believes some disgustful Scent or something about
Antonett might disoblige him; but having called the Maid ^onjuring her to tell
her whether any thing past between her and Octavio; she again told her Lady the
whole truth, in which there could be no discovery of infirmity there; she
embraced her, she kissed her bosom, and found her touches soft, her breath and
Bosom sweet as any thing in Nature could be; and now lost almost in a Confusion
of thought, she could not tell what to imagine; at last she being wholly
possessed that all the fault was not in Octavio, (for too often we believe as we
hope) she concludes that Antonett has told him all the cheat she put upon him:
This last thought pleased her, because it seemed the most probable, and was the
most favorable to her self; and a thought, that if true could not do her any
injury with him* This set her heart a little to rights, and she grew calm with
a belief, that if so it was, as now she doubted not, a sight of her, or a
future hope from her, would calm all his discontent, and beget a right
understanding: She therefore resolves to write to him and own her little
fallacy: But before she did so; Octavio whose passion was as violent as ever in
his Soul, tho 'twas oppressed with a thousand torments, and languisht under as
many feeble resolutions, burst at last into all its former softness, and he
resolves to write to the false Fair One, and upbraid her with he^ last Nights
in^idelity: Nor could he sleep till he had that way Charmed his senses, and
(...) It being (...) and he (...) (...) Chamber, he set himself down, and writ
this.

Octavio to Silvia.
Madam,
YOu have at last taught me a perfect knowledge of my self; and in one unhappy
Night, made me see all the follies and Vanities of my Soul, which self Love and
fond imagination had too long rendered that way guilty; long, long! I Have played
the Fop as others do, and showed the gaudy Monsieur, and set a Value on my
worthless person for being well dressed, as I believed, and furnished out for
Conquest, by being the gayest Coxcombe in the Town, where even as I past
per^^ps I fancied, I made ^dvances on ^ome wishing hearts, and vain, with but
imaginary Victory, I still fooled on -- And was at last undone; for I saw
Silvia, the Charming faithless Silvia; a Beauty that one would have thought had
had the power to have cured the fond disease of self conceit and foppery, since
love they says a remedy against those faults of youth, but still my vanity was
powerful in me, and even this Beauty too: I thought it not impossible to
vanquish, and still dressed on, and took a mighty care to show my self -- a
Blockhead, curse upon me, while you were laughing at my industry, and turned
the fancying fool to ridicule: Oh, he deserved it well; most wondrous well; for
but believing any thing about him, could merit but a serious thought from
Silvia. Silvia! whose business is to laugh at all; yet Love, that is my sin,
and punishment, reigns still as absolutely in my Soul, as when I wished, and
hoped, and longed for mighty blessings you could give; yes I still love! only
this wretchedness is fixed to it, to see those Errors which I cannot shun; my
love's as high, but all my wishes gone; my Passion still remains entire and
raving, but no desire, I burn, I dye, but do not wish to hope, I would be all
despair, and like a Martyr, am vain and proud even in suffering. Yes, Silvia --
When you made me wise, you made me wretch'd too? before, like a false
Worshipper, I only saw the Gay, the gilded side of the deceiving Idol, but now
it is fallen -- discovers all the cheat and shows a God no more: and it is in
Love as in Religion too, there is nothing makes their voteries truly happy but
being well deceived: For even in love it self, harmless, and innocent, as it is
by Nature, there needs a little Art to hide the daily discontents and torments,
that fears distrusts, and Jealousies creats; a little soft dissimulation's
needful, for where the Lover's easy, he is most constant. But oh, when love it
self's defective too, and managed by design and little interest, what cunning,
oh what cautions ought the fair designer then to call to her defense; yet I
confess your Plot -- Still Charming Silvia! Was subtly enough contrived,
discre^tly carried on -- The shades of Night, the happy Lovers Refuge, favored
you too: 'twas only ^ate, was cruel, fate that conducted me, in an unlucky
hour, dark as it was, and silent too the Night, I saw, -- Yes, faithless Fair,
I saw, I was betrayed; by too much faith, by too much love undone, I saw my
fatal ruin and your per^idy: And like a tame ignoble sufferer left you without
revenge!

I must confess, oh thou deceiving Fair One, I never could pretend to what I
wished; and yet methinks, because I ^ know my heart, and the entire Devotion
that it paid you; I merited at least not to have been imposed upon; but after
so dishonorable an Action, as the betraying the Secret of my friend, it was
but just that I should be betrayed, and you have paid me well; deserv'dly well,
and that shall make me silent; and what so e're I suffer, how e're I dye, how
e're I languish out my wretch'd life, I Will bear my sighs where you shall never
hear 'em, nor the reproaches my complaints express: Live thou a punishment to
vain fantastic hoping youth, live and advance in cunning and deceit, to make
the fond believing men more wise, and teach the Women newer arts of falsehood,
till they deceive so long, that man may hate and set as vast a distance between
Sex and Sex, as I Have resolved (oh Silvia) thou shall be, for ever from

Octavio.


This letter came just as Silvia was going to write to him; of which she was
extremely glad* for all along there was nothing expressed that could make her
think he meant any other than the cheat she put upon him in Antonett instead of
her self: And it was some ease to her mind to be assured of the cause of his
anger and absence, and to find her own thought confirmed, (...) he had indeed
discovered the truth of the matter: she knew since that was all she could
easily reconcile him by a plain confession, and giving him new hopes; she
therefore writes this answer to him, which she sent by his Page, who waited for
it.

Silvia to Octavio.
I Own too angry, and too nice Octavio, the Crime you charge me with; and did
believe a person of your Gallantry, Wit, and Gayety would have past over so
little a fault, with only reproaching me pleasantly, I did not expect so grave
a reproof, or rather so serious an accusation, youth has a thousand follies to
answer for, and cannot Octavio pardon one sally of it, in Silvia; I rather
expected to have seen you early here this morning pleasantly rallying my little
perfidy, than to find you railing at a distance at it; calling it by a thousand
names that does not merit half this malice: And sure you did not think me so
poor in good, Nature but I could some other coming hour have made you amends
for those you lost last Night, possibly I could have wished my self with you at
the same time; and had I perhaps followed my inclination I had made you happy
as you wished, but there were powerful reasons, that prevented me; I conjure you
to let me see you, where I will make a confession of my last nights sin, and
give you such arguments to convince you of the necessity of it, as shall
absolutely reconcile you to love, hope, and --

SILVIA*


It being late, she only sent this short Billet: And not hoping that Night to
see him, she went to bed, after having inquired the health of Briljard whom she
heard was very ill; and that young defeated Lover finding it impossible to meet
Octavio as he had promised, not to fight him but to ask his pardon for his
mistake, he made a shift with much ado to write him a Note* which was this:

My Lord,
I Confess my yesterdays rudeness, and beg you will give me a Pardon before I
leave the World, for I was last Night taken violently ill, and am unable to
wait on your Lordship, to beg what this most earnestly does for

Your Lordships most Devoted Servant, Briljard


This Billet, tho it signified nothing to Octavio, it served Silvia afterward
to very good use and purpose, as a little time shall make appear: And Octavio
received these two Notes from Briljard and Silvia, at the same time; the one he
flung by regardless, the other he read with infinite pain, scorn, hate,
indignation, all at once stormed in his heart, he fe^t every passion there but
that of Love, which caused 'em all; if he thought her false and ungrateful
before, he now thinks her fallen to the lowest degree of lewdness, to own her
Crime with such impudence; he fancies now he is cured of Love, and hates her
absolutely, thinks her below even his scorn, and puts himself to bed, believing
he shall sleep as well as before he saw the Light, the foolish Silvia: But oh
he boasts in vain, the Light, the foolish Silvia was Charming still; still all
the Beauty appeared, even in his slumbers the Angel dawned about him, and all
the Fend was laid: He sees her lovely Face, but the false heart is hid; he
hears her Charming Wit, but all the cunnings hushed; he views the motions* of
her delicate Body, without regard to those of her mind, he thinks of all the
tender words she has given him, in which the Jilting part is lost, and all
forgotten, or if by chance it crossed his happier thought, he rowls and tumble in
his Bed, he raves and calls upon her charming Name, till he have quite forgot
it, and takes all the pains he can to deceive his own heart: Oh it is a tender
part; and can endure no hurt; he sooths it therefore, and at the worst
resolves, since the vast blessing may be purchased, to revel in delight; and
cure himself that way: These flattering thoughts kept him all night waking, and
in the Morning he resolves his Visit; but taking up her Letter which lay on the
Table, he read it over again, and by degrees, wrought himself up to madness, at
the thought that Silvia was possessed; Philander he could bear with little
patience, but that because before he loved or knew her, he could allow; but
this -- This wrecks his very Soul; and in his height of fury writes this Letter
without consideration.

Octavio to Silvia.
SInce you profess your self a common Mistress, and set up for the Glorious
trade of sin; send me your price, and I perhaps may p^rchase Damnation at your
rate; may be you have a Method in your dealing, and I Have mistook you all this
while, and dealt not your way: Instruct my youth, great Mistress of the Art,
and I shall be obedient; tell me which way I may be happy too* and put in for
an adventurer; I have a stock of ready youth and money, pray name your time and
sum for hours, or Nights, or months; I will be in at all, or any, as you shall
find leisure to receive the

Impatient Octavio.


This in a Mad moment he wr^t, and sent it e're he had considered farther, and
Silvia who expected not so course and rough a return, grew as mad as he in
reading it; and she had much a^ do to hold her hands off from beating the
innocent Page that brought it: To whom she turned with fire in her Eyes, ^lames
in her Cheeks, and Thunder on her Tongue, and cried, Go tell your Master, that
he is a Villain? and if you dare approach me any more from him? I Will have my
Footmen whip you? and with a scorn that discovered all the indignation in the
World she turned from him and tearing his Note, threw it from her and walked
her way: And the Page thunderstruck returned to his Lord, who by this time was
repenting he had managed his passion no better; and ^t what the Boy told him,
was wholly convinced of his Error, he now considered her Character and
quallity; and accused himself of great indiscretion; and as he was sitting the
most dejected melancholy man on Earth, reflecting on his misfortune, the Post
arrived with Letters from Philander, which he opened and laying by that which
was enclosed for Silvia he read that from Philander to himself:

Philander to Octavio.
THere is no pain, my dear Octavio, either in Love or friendship like that of
doubt; and I confess my self guilty of giving it you in a great measure by my
silence the last Post, but having business of so much greater concern to my
heart than even writing to Octavio, I found my self unable to pursue any other,
and I believe you could too with the less impatience bear with my neglect
having affairs of the same nature there; our circumstances and the business of
our hearts then being so resembling, methinks, I have as great an impatience to
be recounting to you the story of my Love and Fortune, as I am to receive that
of yours, and to know what advances you have made in the heart of the still
charming Silvia! tho there will be this difference in the relations; mine, when
ever I recount it, will give you a double satisfaction, first from the share
your friendship makes you have in all the pleasures of Philander, and next that
it excuses Silvia if she can be false to me, for Octavio; and still advances
his design on her heart: but yours, when ever I receive it, will give me a
thousand pains which it is however, but just I should feel, since I was the
first breaker of the solemn League and Covenant made between us: which yet I do
by all that is sacred with a regret, that makes me reflect with some repentance
in all those moments wherein I do not wholly give my soul up to Love, and the
more beautiful Calista; yes more, because new.

In my last, my dear Octavio, you left me pursuing, like a Knight Errant, a
Beauty enchanted, within some invisible Tree, or Castle, or Lake, or any thing
inaccessable, or rather wandering in a Dream after some glorious disappearing
fantom: and for some time indeed, I knew not whether I slept or waked, I saw
daily the good old Count of Clarinau; to whom I durst not so much as ask a
civil question toward the satisfaction of my soul; the Page was sent into
Holland (with some Express to a Brother in Law of the Counts) of whom before I
had the intelligence of a fair young wife to the old Lord his Master, and for
the rest of the Servants they spoke all Spanish, and the devil a word we
understood each other so that 'twas impossible to learn, any thing farther from
them: and I found I was to owe all my good Fortune to my own industry, but how
to set it a working, I could not devise; at last it happened, that being
walking in the Garden which had very high Walls on three sides, and a large
fine apartment on the other, I concluded, that 'twas in that part of the house,
my fair new Conqueress resided, but how to be resolved I could not tell, nor
which way the Windows looked that were to give the light, forwards that part
of the Garden there was none, at last I saw the good old Gentleman come trudging
through the Garden fumbling out of his Pocket a Key, I stepped into an Arbor to
observe him, and saw him open a little door that led him into another Garden,
and locking the door after him vanished; and observing how that side of the
Apartment lay, I went into the street and after a large compass, found that
which faced that Garden, which made the fore part of the Apartment. I made a
story of some occasion I had for some upper rooms and went into many houses, to
find which fronted best the Apartment, and still disliked something till I met
with one so directly to it, that I could, when I got a story higher, look into
the very Rooms, which only a delicate Garden par^ed from this by street: there
'was I fixed, and learnt from a young Dutch woman that spoke good France, that,
that was the very place I looked for; the Apartment of Madam, the Countess of
Clarinau: She told me too, that every day after Dinner the old Gentleman came
thither, and sometimes a nights: and bewailed the young Beauty, who had no
better entertainment than what an old withered Spaniard of threescore and ten,
could give her: I found this young woman apt for my purpose, and having very
well pleased her with my conversation, and some little presents I made her, I
left her in good humor, and resolved to serve me on any design, and returning
to my lodging I found old Clarinau returned, as brisk and gay as if he had been
carest by so fair and young a Lady, which very thought made me rave, and I had
abundance of pain to withold my rage from breaking out upon him, so jealous and
envious I was of what now I loved and desired, a thousand times more than ever;
since the relation my new young female friend had given me: who had wit and
beauty sufficient to make her judgment impartial: however I contained my
jealousy with the hopes of a sudden revenge, for I fancied the business half
accomplished in my knowledge of her residence. I feigned some business to the old
Gentleman, that would call me out of town for a week to consult with some of
our party, and taking my leave of him he offered me the Complement of Money, or
what else I should need in my affair, which at that time was not unwelcome to
me, and being well furnished for my enterprise. I took Horse without a Page or
Footman to attend me, because I pretended my business was a secret, and taking
a turn about the Town in the Evening, I left my horse without the gates and
went to my secret new quarters, where my young Friend receceiv'd me with the
joy of a Mistress, and with whom indeed I could not forbear entertaining my
self very well, which engaged her more to my service, with the aid of my
liberallity; but all this did not allay one spark of the fire kindled in my
Soul for the lovely Calista; and I was impatient for Night, against which time
I was preparing an Ingine to mount the Battlement, for so it was that divided
the Garden from the Street, rather than a Wall: All things fitted to my
purpose, I fixed my self at the Window^ that looked directly toward her Sashes;
and had the satisfaction to see her leaning there, and looking on a Fountain
that stood in the midst of the Garden, and cast a thousand little streams into
the Air, that made a melancholy noise in falling into a large Alablaster
Cistern beneath: Oh how my heart danced at the dear sight' to all the tunes of
Love; I had not power to stir or sp^ak, or to remove my eyes, but languisht on
the window where I leant half dead with Joy and transport; for she appeared
more Charming to my view: undrest and fit for Love! Oh, my Octavio, such are
the pangs which I believe thou felt at the approach of Silvia, so beats thy
heart, so rise thy sighs, and Wishes; so trembling, and so pale at every view,
as I was in this lucky Amorous moment! and thus I fed my Soul till Night came
on, and left my Eyes no Object, but my heart, -- a thousand dear Idea's: And
now I sallied out, and with good success, for with a long engine which reached
the top of the Wall I fixed the end of my Ladder there, and mounted it, and
sitting on the top brought my Lader easily up to me, and turned it ^over to the
other side; and with abundance of ease descended into the Garden which was the
finest I had ever seen; for now as good luck would have it, who was designed to
savor me: The Moon begun to shine so bright as even to make me distinguish the
Colors of the Flowers that dressed all the Banks in ravishing order, but these
were not the Beauty I came to possess, and my new thoughts of disposing my self
and managing my matters, now took off all that admiration that was justly due
to so delightful a place, which art and Nature had a greed to render Charming
to every sense, thus much I considered it, that there was nothing that did not
invite to love; a thousand pretty recesses of Arbours, Grot^s and little
Artificial Groves; Fountains environed with Beds of flowers and little
Rivulets, to whose dear fragrant Banks, a wishing Amorous God would make his
so^t retreat, after having ranged about rather to ^seek a Covert on occasion,
and to know the passes of the Garden, which might serve me in any Extremity of
surprise that might happen. I returned to the fountain that faced Calista's
Window, and leaning on its brink viewed the whole apartment, which appeared
very magnificent: Just against me I perceived a Door that went into it; which
while I was considering how to get open, I heard it unlock, and skulking behind
the large Basin of the Fountain, (yet so as to mark who came out) I saw to my
unspeakable transport the Fair, the Charming Calista, dress just as she was ^at
the Window, a loose gown of Silver stuff lap^ about her delicate Body, her Head
in fine night Clothes, and all careless as my Soul could wish^; she came and
with her the old Dragon; and I heard her say in coming out, -- This is too fine
a Night to sleep in: Prithee Dormina do not grudge me the pleasure of it, since
there are so very few, that entertain Calista* This last she spoke with a sigh,
and a languishment in her Voice, that shot new slames of Love into my panting
heart, and trill'd through all my vains; while she persu'd her walk with the
old Gentlewoman; and still I kept my self at such a distance, to have 'em in my
sight, but slid along the shady side of the walk where I could not be easily
seen, while they kept still on the shiny part: She led me thus through all the
Walks, through all the Maze of Love; and all the way I fed my greedy Eyes upon
the melancholy Object of my raving desire; her shape, her gate, her motion,
every step, and every movement of her hand and head, had a peculiar grace; a
thousand times I was tempted to approach her, and discover my self, but I
dreaded the fatal consequence, the old Woman being by, nor knew I whether they
did not expect the Husband there; I therefore with impatience waited when she
would speak, that by that I might make some discovery of my destiny that Night;
and after having tired her self a little with walking, she sat down on a fine
seat of White Marble, that was placed at the end of a grassie walk: And only
shadowed with some tall Trees that ranked themselves behind it, against one of
which I leaned: There for a quarter of an hour they sat as silent as the
Night, where only soft breathed Winds were heard amongst the bows, and softer
sighs from fair Calista; at last the old thing broke silence, who was almost a
Sleep while she spoke. Madam if you are weary, let us retire to Bed, and not
sit gazing here at the Moon; to bed, replied Calista, what should I do there?
marry sleep, quoth the old Gentlewoman, what should you do? Ah Dormina (sight
Calista) would Age would seize^ me too, for then perhaps I should find at least
the Pleasure of the Old: be dull and Lazy; Love to Eat and Sleep not, have my
slumbers undisturbed with Dreams more insupportable than my waking wishes; for
reason, then suppresses rising thoughts, and the impossibility of obtaini^g
keeps the fond soul in order, but Sleep -- Gives an ^nguarded loose to soft
desire, it brings the lovely fantom to my view, and tempts me with a thousand
Charms to Love; I see a Face, a Mine, a Shape, a look! such as Heaven never
made or any thing, but fond imagination! Oh 'twas a wondrons Vision! for my
part, replied the old One, I am such a Heathen Christian, Madam, as I do not
believe there are any such things as Visions, or Ghosts, or fantoms: But your
head runs of a young man, because you are married to an old^one; such an Idea
as you framed in your wishes, possessed your fancy, which was so strong (as
indeed fancy will be sometimes,) that it persuaded you, 'twas a very fantom or
Vision. Let it be fancy or Vision, or what ever else you can give a Name to,
replied Calista* still it is that, that never ceased since to torture me with a
thousand pains, and prithee why Dormina is not fancy since, as powerful in me
as it was before (fancy has not been since so kind; yet I have given it room
for thought, which before I never did, I set whole hours and days, and fix my
soul upon the lovely Figure* I know its stature to an Inch; tall and Divinely
made, I saw his hair* long, Black, and Curling to his wast all loose and
flowing* I saw* his eyes where all the Cupids played, black, large, and
sparkling, piercing loveing, languishing. I saw his Lips sweet, dimpl'd, red,
and soft, a youth completing all, like early May; that looks and smells, and
cheers above the rest: In fine, I saw him such as nothing but the nicest fancy
can imagine, and nothing can describe, I saw him such as robs me of my rest, as
gives me all the raging pains of love (Love I believe it is) without the joy of
any single hope: Oh Madam said Dormina, that Love will quickly die, which is
not nursed with hope, why, that is its only Food. Pray^ Heaven I find it so,
replied Calista^ At that she sight as if her heart had brok^n, and leaned her
Arm upon a rail of the end of the Seat, and laid her lovely Cheek upon her
hand, and so continued sighing without speaking* While I, who was not a little
transported with what I heard with infinite pain, with held my self from
kneeling at her Feet, and prostrating before her that happy fantom of which she
had spoke so favorably; but still I feared my Fate: And to give any offense;
while I was amidst a thousand thoughts considering which to pursue, I could
hear Dormina snoring as fast as could be, leaning at her ease on the other end
of the Seat, supported by a white Marble rail, which Calista hearing also
turned, and looked on her, then softly ro^e, and walked away to see how long
she would sleep there, if not waked! Judge now, my dear Octavio, whether Love
and Fortune were not absolutely subdued to my interest, and if all things did
not favor my design: The very thought of being alone with Calista; of making
my self known to her, of th^^ opp^rtunity she gave me by going from Dormina*
into a by Walk, the very joy of ten thousand hopes, that filled my Soul in that
happy moment, which I fancied the most blessed of my life, made me tremble all
over, and with unassur'd steps, I softly persu'd the Object of my new desire:
Sometimes I even overtook her, and fearing to fright her, and cause her to make
some noise that might alarm the sleeping Dormina, I slackt my pace, till in a
Walk, at the end of which she was obliged to turn back, I remained; and
suffered her to go on* 'twas a Walk of Grass, broad and at the end of it a
little Arbor of Greens; into which she went and sat down, looking toward me,
and methought she looked full at me; so that finding she made no noise, I
softly approached the door of the Arbor, at a convenient distance, she then
stood up, in great amaze as she after said, and I kneeling down in an humble
posture; cried, -- Wonder not, oh Sacred Charmer of my Soul, to see me at your
Feet; at this late hour, and in a place so inaccessible, for what attempt is
there so hazardous, despairing Lovers dare not undertake, and what
impossibility almost, can they not overcome; remove your fears, oh Conqueress
of my Soul, for I am an humble Mortal that Adores you; I have a thousand
Wounds, a thousand pains that proves me flesh and Blood, if you would hear my
story: Oh give me leave to approach you with that Awe, you do the sacred
Altars; for my Devotion is as pure as that which from your Charming Lips
ascends the Heavens: -- With such Can^and stuff, as this, which Lovers serve
themselves with, on occasion, I lessened the terrors of the frighted Beauty,
and she soon^ saw with Joy in her Eyes, that I was both a mortal, and the same
^he had before seen in the outward Garden: I rose from my knees then, and with
a Joy that wandered all over my body, trembling and panting I approached her,
and took her hand and k^^t it with a transport that was almost ready to lay me
fainting at her Feet; nor did she answer any thing to what I had said, but with
sighs suffered her hand to remain in mine; her Eyes she cast to Earth, her
Breast heaved with nimble motions, and we both unable to support our selves,
sat down together on a Green Bank in the Arbor, where by that Light we had,
we gazed at each other unable to utter a syllable on either side. I confess, my
dear Octavio, I have felt Love before, but do not know, that ever I was possessed
with such pleasing pain, such agreeable languishment in all my life, as in
those happy moments, with the fair Calista: And on the other, I dare answer tor
the soft Fair One; she felt a passion as tender as mine; which, when she ^ou'd
recover her first transp^rt, the expr^st in such a manner as has wholly Charmed
me: For with all the Eloquence of young Angels, and all their innocence to ^^
she said, she whispered, she ^ight, the so^test things that ever Lover heard: I
told you before she had from her infancy been bred in a Monastery, kept from
the fight of men, and knew no one art or subtilty of her Sex: But in the very
purity of her innocence, she appeared like the first born Maid in Paradise,
generously giving her Soul away to the great Lord of all, the new formed man,
and nothing of her hearts dear thoughts did she reserve, (but such as modest
Nature should conceal) yet, if I touched but on that tender part where Honor
dwelt; she had a sense to nice, as 'twas a Wonder, to find so vast a store of
that mixed with so soft a passion. Oh what an excellent thing a perfect Women
is, e're man has taught her Arts to keep her Empire, by being himself
inconstant? all I could ask of Love she freely gave, and told me every
sentiment of her heart, but 'twas in such a way; so innocently she con^est her
passion that every word added new flames to mine, and made me raging mad; at
last she sufferr'd me to kiss, with caution; but one began another, -- that, a
Number -- And every one was an advance to happiness and I, who knew my
advantage, lost no time, but put each Ninute to the properest use, now I
embrace, Clasp her Fair Lovely Body close to mine, which nothing parted but her
shi^t and Gown, my busy hands find passage to her Breasts, and give, and take
a thousand nameless Joys; all but the last, I reapt; that heaven was still
denied; tho she were fainting in my trembling Arms, still she had watching
sense to guard that Treasure: Yet in spite of all, a thousand times I brought
her to the very point of yielding, but oh she begs and pleads with all the
Eloquence of love! tells me that what she had to give she gave, but would not
violate her Marriage Vow: No, not to save that life she found in danger with
too much Love, and too extreme desire; she told me that I had undone her quite,
she sight and wished, that she had seen me sooner, e're Fate had rendered her a
Sacrifice to the embraces of old Clarinau; she weept with Love, and answered
with sob, to every Vow I made: thus by degrees she wrought me to undoing, and
made me mad in Love: 'Twas thus we past the Night; we told the hasty hours and
cursed their coming: we told from ten to three? and all that time seemed but a
little Minute: Nor would I let her go, who was as loath to part, till she had
given me leave to see her often there; I told her all my story of her Conquest,
and how I came into the Garden: She asked me pleasantly if I were not afraid of
old Clarinau, I told her no, of nothing but of his being happy with her, which
thought I could not bear; she assured me I had so little reason to envy him,
that he rather deserved my compassion, for that her aversion was so extreme to
him; his person, years, his temper, and his diseases were so disagreeable to
her, that she could not dissemble her disgust, but gave him most evident proofs
of it too frequently; ever since she had the misfortune of being his Wife; but
that since she had seen the Charming Philander, (for so we must let her call
him too) his Company and Conversation was wholly insupportable to her; and but
that he had ever used to let her have four Nights in the Week her own, wherein
he never disturbed her repose, she should have been dead with his nasty
entertainment; She vowed she never knew a soft desire, but for Philander she
never had the least concern for any of his Sex besides, and till she felt his
touches -- took in his kisses, and suffered his dear embraces; she never knew
that Woman was ordained for any Joy with man, but fancied it designed in its
Creation for a poor Slave to be oppressed at pleasure by the Husband, dully to
yield obedience and no more: But I had taught her now she said to her Eternal
ruin, that there was more in Nature than she knew, or ever should, had she not
seen Philander; she knew not what dear name to call it by, but something in her
Blood; something that panted in her heart, glowed in her Cheeks and languisht
in her looks, told her she was not born for Clarinau; or love would do her
wrong: I soothed the thought, and urged the Laws of Nature, the power of Love,
necessity of Youth, -- And the Wonder that was yet behind, that ravishing
something, which not love or kisses could make her guess at; so beyond all soft
imagination that nothing but a trial could convince her; but she resisted
still, and still I pleaded with all the subtillest Arguments of Love, words
mixed with kisses* sighing mixed with Vows but all in vain, Religion was my Foe,
and Tyrant Honor guarded all her Charms; thus did we pass the Night till the
young Morn advancing in the East forced us to bid adieu: Which often we did, and
often we sighed and kissed, often parted and returned, and sighed again, and as she
went away, she weeping cry' -- wringing my hand in hers, pray Heaven Philander,
this dear interview, do not prove fatal to me, for, oh, I find frail Nature
weak about me, and one dear minute more would forfeit all my Honor. At this
she started from my trembling hand, and swipt the Walk like Wind so swift and
sudden, and left me panting, sighing, wishing, dying, with mighty Love and
hope, and after a little time I scaled my Wall, and returned unseen to my new
Lodging. It was four days after, before I could get any other happiness but
that of seeing her at her window which was just against mine from which I
never stirred, hardly to eat or sleep, and that she saw with joy, for every
Morning I had a Billet from her; which we contrived that Happy Night should be
conveyed me thus -- It was a By^Street where I lodged, and the other side was
only the dead wall of her Garden, where early in the morning she used to walk,
and having the Billet ready, she put it with a Stone into a little Leathern
purse, and tossed it over the wall, where either my self from the Window or any
young friend below waited for it, and that way every Morning and every Eveving
she received one from me; but it is impossible to tell you the innocent Passion
she expressed in them, innocent in that there was no Art, no fai^'d, nicefolly to
express a Virtue that was not in the Soul; but all she spoke con^est her hearts
soft wishes. At last, (for I am teadious in a relation of what gave me so much
pleasure in the enjoyment) at last, I say, I received the happy invitation to
come into the Garden as before, and Night advancing for my purpose I need not
say that I delivered my self upon the place appointed, which was by the
Fountain side beneath her Chamber Window, toward which I cast, you may
believe, many a longing look: The Clock struck ten, eleven, and then twelve,
but no dear Star appeared to conduct me to my happiness, at last I heard the
little Garden door (against the Fountain) open; and saw Calista there wrapped in
her Night Gown only; I ran like Lightning to her Arms, with all the transports
of an eager Lover, and almost smothered my self in her warm rising Breast, for
she taking me in her Arms. Let go her Gown, which falling open left nothing but
her Shift, between me and all her Charming Body: But she bid me hear what she
had to say before, I proceeded farther, she told me she was forced to wait till
Dormina was a sleep, who lay in her Chamber, and then stealing the Key she came
softly down to let me in. But, said she, since I amall undrest, and cannot walk
in the Garden with you, will you promise me on Love and Honor, to be obedient
to all my Commands, if I carry you to my Chamber, for Dormina 's sleep are like
death it self; however least she chance to awake, and should take an occasion
to speak to me, 'twere absolutely necessary, that I were there? for since I
served her such a trick the other Night, and let her sleep so long she will not
let me walk late. A very little argument persuaded me to yield to any thing to
be with Calista any where; so that both returning softly to her Chamber, she
put her self into Bed, and left me kneeling on the Carpet: But 'twas not long
that I remained so; from the dear touches of her hands and breast, we came to
kisses, and so equally to a forgetfullness of all we had promised and agreed on
before, and broke all Rules, and Articles, that were not in the Favor of Love;
so that stripping my self by degrees, while she with an unwilling force made
some feeble resistance, I got into the Arms of the most Charming Woman that
ever Nature made; she was all over perfection: I dare not tell you more; let it
suffice she was all that luxurious man could wish, and all that renders woman
fine and ravishing. About two hours thus was my Soul in rapture, while
sometimes she reproacht me, but so gently, that 'twas to bid me still be false
and perjured if these were the effects of it; if disobedience have such
wondrous Charms; may I, said she, be still Commanding thee, and thou still
disobeying: While thus we lay with equal ravishment, we heard a murmuring noise
at distance, which we knew not what to make of, but it grew still louder and
louder, but still at distance too; this first Alarmed us, and I, was no sooner
persuaded to rise; but I heard a door unlock at the side of the Bed; which was
not that by which I entered, for that was at the other end of the Chamber
toward the Window. Oh Heavens, said the fair frighted trembler, here is the
Count of Clerinau: For he always came up that way, and those Stairs by which I
ascended was the back stairs, so that I had just time to grope my way toward
the door without so much as taking my Clothes with me; never was any Amorous
adventurer in so lamentable a Condition, I would fain have turned upon him, and
at once have hindered him from entering, with my Sword in my hand, and secured
him from ever disturbing my pleasure any more, but she implored I would not,
and in this minutes dispute he came so near me, that he touched me^ as I gl^ded
from him; but not being acquainted very well with the Chamber, having never
seen my way, I lighted in my passage on Dormina's palate Bed, and threw my
self quite over her, to the Chamber door, which made a damnable clattering, and
a waking Dormina with my Catastrophe, she set up such a bawl as frighted, and
Alarmed the Old Count, who was just taking in a Candle from his Footman, who
had lighted it at his Flamboy: So that hearing the noise, and knowing it must
be some Body in the Chamber, he lets fall his Candle in the fright, and called
his Footman in with the Flamboy, draws his Tolledo, which he had in his hand,
and wrapped in his Night Gown; with three or four woollen Caps one upon the top
of another, tied under his tawny Leathern Chops, he made a very pleasant
figure, and such an one as had like to have betrayed me by laughing at it; he
closely persu'd me, though not so close as to see me before him, yet so as not to
give me time to ascend the Wall, or to make my escape up or down any Walk,
which were straight and long, and not able to conceal any body from pursuers,
approacht so near as the Count was to me: What should I do? I was naked,
unarmed, and no defense against his jealous rage; and now in danger of my life,
I knew not what to resolve on; yet I swear to you Octavio, even in that minute
(which I thought my last) I had no repentance of the dear sin, or any other
fear, but that which possessed me for the fair Calista; and calling upon Venus
and her Son for my sa^ety (for I had scarce a thought yet of any other Deity)
the Sea born Queen lent me immediate aid, and e're I was aware of it, I touched
the Fountain, and in the same minute threw my self into the Water, which a
mighty large Basin or Cistern of white Marble contained, of a Compass* that
forty men might have hid themselves in it, they had pursued me so hard, they
fancied they heard me press the gravel near the Fountain, and with the Torch
they searched round about it, and beat the fringing Flowers that grew pretty
high about the bottom of it, while I sometimes dived, and sometimes peept up to
take a view of my busy Coxcomb: Who had like to have made me burst into
laughture many times, to see his figure, the dashing of the stream which
continually fell from the little Pipes above, into the Basin hindered him from
hearing the noise I might possibly have made by my swiming in it, after he had
surveyed it round without side, he took the Torch in his own hand, and surveyed
the Water it self while I dived, and so long forced to remain so, that I
believed I had escapt his Sword to dye that foolisher way, but just as I was
like to expire, he departed muttering, that he was sure some body did go out
before him, and now he search every Walk and Arbor of the Garden, while like a
Fish I lay basking in Element still, not daring to adventure out least his
hasty return should find me on the Wall, or in my passage over: I thank^d my
Stars he had not found the Ladder, so that at last returning to Calista's
Chamber, after finding no Body, he desired (as I heard the next morning) to
know what the matter was in her Chamber; but Calista, who till now never knew
an Art, had before he came laid her Bed in order, and taken up my Clothes, and
put them between her Bed, and Q^ilt; not forgetting any one thing that belonged
to me, she was laid as fast a sleep as innocence it self, so that Clarinau a
waking her, she seemed as surpised and ignorant of all, as if^ she had indeed
been innocent, so that Dormina now remained the only suspected person, who
being asked what she could say concerning that uproar she made, she only said,
as she thought, that she dreamed his Honor fell out of the! Bed upon her, and
a waking in a fright, she found 'twas but a Dream, and so she fell a sleep
again till he waked her, whom she wondered to see there at that hour; he told
'em that while they were securely sleeping he was like to have been burned in
his Bed, a piece of his apartment being burned down, which caused him to come
thither; but he made them both Svvear that there was no body in the Chamber of
Calista, before he would be undeceived, for he vowed he saw something in the
Garden, which to his thinking was all in White, and it vanished on the sudden
behind the Fountain, and we could see no more of it. Calista dissembled
abundance of fear, and said she would never walk out after candle light for
fear of that Ghost, and so they p^st the rest of the Night, while I all wet and
cold got me to my Lodging unperceived, for my young friend had left the door
open for me.

Thus, dear Octav^o, I have sent you a Novel* instead of a Letter of my first
most happy adventure, of which I must repeat thus much again, that of all the
enjoyments I ever had, I never was so perfectly well entertained for two hours,
and I am waiting with infinite impatience a second Encounter. I shall be
extream^y glad to hear what progress you have made in your Amor, for I have
lost all for Silvia, but the affection of a Brother with that Natural pity we
have for those we have undone; for my heart, my Soul, and Body are all
Calista's, the bright the young, the wity, the Gay, the fondly loveing Calista:
Only some reserve I have in all for Octavio, pardon this long History for it is
a sort of acting all ones joys again to be telling 'em to a friend so dear as
is the Gallant Octavio to

Philander.
POSTSCRIPT.
I should for some reasons that concern my safety have quitted this town
before, but I am chained to it, and have no sense of danger while Calista
compels my stay.




If Octavio's Trouble were great before from but his fear of Calista's
yielding, what must it be now, when he found all his fears confirmed, the
pressures of his Soul were too extreme be^ fore, and the concern he had for
Silvia had brought it to the highest tide of Grief; so that this addition, over
whelmed it quite, and left him no room for rage; no, it could not discharge it
self so happily, but bowed and yield^ ed to all the extremes of Love, grief,
and sense of Honor? he threw himself upon his Bed, and lay without sense or
motion for a whole hour, confused with thought, and divided in his concern,
half for a Mistress false, and half for a Sister loose and undone; by turns the
Sister and the Mistress torture; by turns they break his heart, he had this
comfort left before, that if Calista were undone, her ruin made way for his
Love and happiness with Silvia, but now -- he had no prospect left, that could
afford any ease, he changes from one ^ad Object to another, from Silvia to
Calista, then back to Silvia, but like to feverish men, that toss about here
and there, remove for some relief, he shifts but to new pain, where e're he
turns he finds the mad man still, in this distraction of thought he remained
till a Page from Silvia, brought him this Letter: Which in midst of all, he
started from his Bed with excess of joy and read.

Silvia to O^^^vio^
My Lord,
AFter your last a^^ront by your Page, I believe it will surprise you to
receive any thing from Silvia but scorn and disdain: But, my Lord, the interest
you have by a thousand ways been so long making in my heart, cannot so soon be
cancelled by a minutes offense, and every Action of your life has been too
generous to make me think you writ what I have rec^iv'd, at least you are not
well in your senses; I have committed a fault against your Love, I must
confess, and am not ashamed of the little cheat I put upon you in bringing you
to bed to Antonet^ instead of Silvia: I was ashamed to be so easily won, and
took it ill, your passion was so mercenary, to ask so coursely for the
possession of me; too great a pay I thought for so poor service, as rendering
up a Letter, which in Honor you ought before to have showed me: I own I gave
you hop^, in that too I was Criminal, but these are faults that sure deserved a
kinder punishment than what I last r^ceiv'd -- A Whore -- A Common Mistress!
Death you are a Coward -- And even to a Woman dare not say it; when she
confronts the Scandaller, -- Yet pardon me, I meant not to revile, but gently
to reproach, it was unkind -- At least allow me that, and much unlike Octavio

I think I had not troubled you, my Lord, with the least confession of my
resentment, but I could not leave the Town, where^ for the Honor of your
Conversation and friendship alone I have remained so long without acquitting my
self of those Obligations I had to you* I send you therefore the key of my
Closet and Cabinet, where you shall find, not only your Letters, but all those
presents you have been pleased once to think me worthy of: But having taken
back your friendship, I render you the less valluable trifles, and will retain
no more of Octavio than the dear memory of that part of his Life that was so
agreeable to the

Vnfortun^te Silvia.


He finished this Letter reading with Tears of tender Love; but considering it
all over he fancy^d she had put great Constraint upon her natural high Spirit,
to write in this Calm manner to him, and through all he found dissembled rage,
which yet was visible in that one breaking out in the middle of the Letter: He
found she was not able to contain at the Word common Mistress, in fine how ever
Calm it was, and however designed, he found at least, he thought he found, the
Charming Jilt all over; he fancies from the hint she gave him of the change of
Antonett for her self in Bed, that it was some new cheat that was to be put
upon him, and to bring her self off with Credit: Yet in Spite of all this
appearing reason, he wishes, and has a secret hop^ that either she is not in
fault, or that she will so cozen him into a belief she is not, that it may
serve as well to sooth his willing heart; and now all he fears is, that she
will not put so neat a Cheat upon him, but that he shall be able to see through
it, and still be obliged to retain his ill Opinion of her: But love returned,
she had roused the flame a new; and softened all his rougher thoughts with this
dear Letter, and now in haste he calls for his Clothes, and suffering himself
to be dressed with all the advantage of his Sex, he throws himself into his
Coach, and goes to Silvia, whom he finds just dressed en Chavalier, (and setting
her Hat and Feather in good order, before the Glass) with a design to depart
the town, at least so far as should have raised a concern in Octavio, if yet he
had any for her, to have followed her; he ran up without asking leave into her
Chamber* and e're she was aware of him* threw himself at her Feet, and clasping
her knees, to which he fixed his mouth, he remained there for a little space
without life or motion, and pressed her in his Arms as fast as a dying man. She
was not offended to see him there, and he appeared more lovely than ever he yet
had been. His grief had added a languishment and paleness to his Face; which
suffi^iently told her he had not been at ease while absent from her; and on the
other side Silvia appeared ten thousand times more Charming than ever; that
dress of a Boy adding extremely to her Beauty, Oh you are a pretty Lover, said
she, raising him from her knees to her Arms, to treat a Mistress so for a
little innocent raillery. -- Come sit and tell me how you came to discover the
harmless^ cheat; setting him down on the side of her Bed: Oh name it no more
cried he, let that damned Night be blotted from the year, deceive me, flatter
me, say you are innocent, tell me my se^ses rave, my E^es were false,
deceitful, and my Ears were deaf: Say any thing that may convince m^ madness,
and bring me back to tame adoring Love. What means Octavio, replied Silvia,
sure he is not so nice and squemish a Lover, but a fair young Maid might have
been welcome to him coming so prepared for Love; tho it was not she whom he
expected* it might bave served as well in the dark at least. Well said, replied
Octavio forcing a smile -- adv^nce, pursue the dear design, and cheat me still,
and to convince my Soul, oh swear it too, for Women want no weapons of defense,
Oaths, Vows, and Tears, sighs, imprecations, ravings, are all the tools to
fashion mankind Coxcombs, I am an easy fellow fit for use, and long to be
initiated Fool, come swear I was not here the other Night. It Is granted Sir you
were, Why all this passion? This Silvia spoke and took him by the hand, which
burnt with raging Fire; and tho he spoke with all the heat of Love, his looks
were soft the while as infant Cupids, still he proceeded, Oh Charming Silvia,
since yon are so unkind to tell me truth, cease, cease to speak at all, and let
me only gaze upon those Eyes that can so well deceive: Their looks are
innocent, at least they will flatter me, and tell mine that the lost their
faculties that other Night: No, replied Silvia, I am convinced they did not,
you saw Antonett -- Conduct a happ^ man (interpreted he) to Silvia 's Bed, oh
why by your confession must my Soul be tortured over a new! at this he hung his
heap upon his Bosom, and sight, as if each breath would be his last. Heavens!
cried Silvia, what is it Octavio says, Conduct a happy Lover to my Bed; by all
that is Sacred I Am abused, design^d upon to be betrayed and lost; what said you
Sir, a Lover to my Bed! When he replied in a fainting tone, clasping her to his
Arms, now Silvia, you are kind, be perfect Woman, and keep to couzeniug still
-- N^w back it with a very little Oath, and I am as well as e're I saw your
falsehood, and never will lose one thought upon it more. Forbear, said she,
you will make me angry: In short what is it you would say, or swear you rave, and
then I Will pity what I now despise, if you can think me false. He only answered
with a sigh, and she pursued, am I not worth an answer; tell me your Soul and
thoughts, as e're you hope for favor from my Love, or to preserve my quiet. If
you will promise me to say it is false, replied he softly, I will confess the
Errors of my senses. I came the other Night at twelve, the door was open --
It Is true, said Silvia -- At the Stairs Foot I found a man, and saw him led to
you, into your Chamber; sighing as he went, and panting with impatience: Now
Silvia if you value my Repose, my life, my Reputation, or my services* turn it
off handsomely and I^m happy: At that being wholly amazed, she told him the
whole story, as you heard, of her dressing Antonett, and bringing him to her,
at which he smiled, and begged her to go on -- She fetch the pieces of Briljards
counterfeit Letters, and showed him; this brought him a little to his his Wits;
and at first sight he was ready to fancy the Letters came indeed from him, he
found the Character his, but not the business: And in great amaze replied, Ah
Madam, did you know Octavio's Soul so well, and could you imagine e it capable
os a thought like this? A presumption so dareing to the most awful of her Sex:
This was unkind indeed: And did you answer 'em? Yes, replied she, with all
kindness I could force my Pen to express: So that after canvasing the matter,
and relating the whole story again with his being taken ill, they concluded
from every Circumstance Briljard was the man; for Antonett was cal^^d to
Council, who now recollecting all things in her mind, and knowing Briljard but
too well; she confessed she verily believed it was he, especially when she told
how she stole a Letter of Octavio's for him that day, and how he was ill of the
same disease still. Octavio then called his Page, and sent him home for the
Note Briljard had sent him, and all appeared as clear as day: But Antonett met
with a great many reproaches for showing her Ladies Letters, which she excused
as well as she could: But never man was so ravished with joy as Octavio was at
the knowledge of Silvia's innocence; a thousand times he kneeled and begged her
Pardon, and her figure encouraging his Caresses; a thousand times he embraced
her, he smiled, and blushed, and sight with Love and Joy, and knew not how to
express it most effectually: And Silvia, who had other business than Love in
her heart and head, suffered all the marks of his eager passion and transport,
out of design, for she had a farther use to make of Octavia* tho when she
surveyed his person handsome, young, and adorned with all the Graces and
Beauties of his Sex; not at all inf^rior to Philander, if not exceeding in
every Judgment but that of Silvia; when she considered his Soul, where Wit,
Love and Honor equally reigned, when she consults the excellence of his
Nature, his Generosity, Courage, Friendship, and softness, she sight and cried,
'twas pity to impose upon him; and make his Love, for which she should esteem
him, a property to draw him to his ruin, for so she fancied it must be if ever
he incounter'd Philander; and tho good Nature was the least ingredient that
formed the Soul of this fair Charmer, yet now she ^ound she had a mixture of
it, from her concern for Octavio; and that generous Lover made her so many soft
Vows, and tender pr^testations of the respect, and awfulness of his passion,
that she was wholly convinced he was her Slave, nor could she see the constant
Languisher pouring out his Soul and fortune at her feet, without suffering some
warmth about her heart, which she had never felt, but for Philander; and this
day she expressed her self more obligeingly than ever she had done: And allows
him little freedoms of approaching her with more softeness than hitherto she
had; and absolutely Charmed, he promises lavishly and without reserve, all she
would ask of him; and in requital she assured him all he could wish or hope, if
he would serve her in her revenge against Philander: She recounts to him at
large the story of her undoing, her quality, her Fortune, her nice education,
the care and tenderness of her Noble Parents, and charges all her Fate to the
evil Conduct of her heed ^less youth: Sometimes the reflection on her ruin, she
looking back upon her former innocence and tranquillity, forces the Tears to
flow from her fair Eyes, and makes Octavio sigh and weep by simpathy: Sometimes
(arrived at the Amorous part of her relation, ^he would sigh and languish with
the remembrance of past Joys, in their beginning love;) and sometimes smile at
the little unlucky adventures they met with, and their escapes; so that
different passions seiz^d her Soul while she spoke, while that of all love
filled Octavio's: He doats, he burns, and every word she utters inflames him
still the more; he fixes his very Soul upon her Tongue, and darts his very Eyes
into her face, and every thing she says raises his vast esteem and passion
higher: In fine, having with the Eloquence of sacred Wit, and all the Charms of
every differing Passion finished her moving tale, they both declined their Eyes,
whose falling showers kept equal time and pace, and for a little time were
still as thought: When Octavio, oppressed with mighty Love! broke the soft
silence, and burst into extravagance of passion, says all that men (grown mad
with love and wishing) could utter to the Idol of the heart; and to oblige her
more recounts his Life in short; where in, in spite of all his modesty, ^the
found all that was great and brave; all that was Noble, Fortunate, and Honest:
And having now confirmed her, he deserved her, kneeling implored she would
accept of him* not as a Lover for a Term of passion, for dates of Months or
years, but for a long Eternity; not as a rifler of her Sacred Honor, but to
defend it from the sensuring World; he vowed he would forget that ever any part
of it was lost, nor by a look or Action e're upbraid her with a misfortune
past, but still look forward, on Nobler joys to come: And now implores that he
may bring a Priest to tie the Solemn knot: In spite of all her Love for
Philander, she could not choose but take this offer kindly, and indeed it made a
very great impression on her heart, she knew nothing but the height of Love
could oblige a man of his quality, and vast fortune, with all the advantages of
youth and Beauty, to marry her in so ill Circumstances; and paying him first
those acknowledgments that were due on so great an occasion, with all the
tenderness in her Voice and Eyes that she could put on; she excused her self
from receiving the Favor, by telling him she was so unfortunate as to be with
Child by the ungrateful man: And falling at that thought into new Tears, she
moved him to infinite Love; and infinite compassion; in so much that wholly
abandoning himself to softness, he assured her, if she would secure him all his
happiness by marrying him now, that he would wait till she were brought to Bed,
before he would demand the glorious recompense he aspired to; so that Silvia
being oppressed with Obligation, finding yet in her Soul a violent passion for
(...) ^hilander, she knew not how to take, or how to refuse the Blessing
offered, since Octavio was a man, whom in her height of innocence and youth she
might have been vain and proud of engaging to this degree: He saw her pain and
irresolution, and being absolutely undone with love, delivers her Philanders
last Letter to him, with what he had sent her enclosed; the sight of the very
outside of it made her grow pale as Death; and a feebleness seized her all over
that made her unable for a moment to open it; all which, confusion Octavio saw
with pain; which she perceiving recollected her thoughts as well as she could,
and opened it and read it; that Octavio first, as being fondest of the
continuation of the History of his falsehood, she re^^* and often paused to
recover her Spirits that were fainting at every period; and having finished it,
she fell down on the Bed, where they sat; Octavio caught her in her fall in
his Arms, where she remained ^ead some moments; While he, just on the point of
being so himself, ravingly called for help, and Antonett being in the dressing
Room ranto 'em, and by degrees Silvia recovered and asked Octavio a thousand
p^rdons for exposing a weakness to him, which was but the effects of the last
blaze of Love: And taking a Cordial which A^tonett brought her* she roused*
resolved, -- and took Octavio by the hand; Now, said she, show you^ self that
generous Lo^er you have professed and give me your Vows of revenge on Philander,
and after that, by all that is Holy, kneeling as she spoke, and holding him
fast, by all my injured innocence, by all my Noble Fathers wrong, and my dear
Mothers grief; by all my Sisters sufferings; I swear! I le marry you, love you,
and give you all! this she spoke without considering Antonett was by, and spoke
it with all the rage and blushes in her Face, that inj^r'd Love and revenge
could inspire: And on the other side, the sense of his Sisters Honor so^t, and
that of the tender pa^sion he had for Silvia, made him swe^r by all that was
sacred, and by all the Vows of Eternal Love and Honor he had made to Silvia,
to go and revenge himself and her on the fal^e Friend and Lover; and confessed
the second motive; which was his Sisters Fame, For, cried he, that foul
Adultress, that false Calista, is so all^ed to me: But still he urged that
would add to the ju^^ness of his cause, if he might depart her Husband as well
as Lover; and revenge an Injured wife as well as Sister; and now h^ could ask
nothing, she did not easily grant; and because 'twas late in the day they
conclude that the Morning shall consumate all his desires: And now she gives
him her Letter to read, For^ said she, I shall esteem my self henceforth so
absolutely Octavio's, that I will not so much as read a Line from that perjured
ruiner of my Honor, he took the Letter with smiles and bows of gratitude, and
read it:

Philander to Silvia:
THere are a thousand reasons, dearest Silvia, at this time that prevents my
writing to you, reasons that will be convincing enough to oblige my pardon; and
plead my Cause with her, that Loves me, all which I will lay before you, when I
have the happiness to see you; I have met with some affairs since my arival to
this place, that wholly takes up my time, affairs of state whose fatigues have
put my heart extremely out of Tune, and if not carefully managed may turn tomy
perpetual ruin, so that I have not an hour in a day to spare for Sil^ia; which
believe me is the greatest affliction of my Life; and I have no prospect of
Ease in the endless toyls of Life, but that of reposing in the Arms of Silvia:
Some short inter^als: Pardon my have, for you cannot guess the weighty business
that at present, robs you of

Your Philander.


You lie, false Vi^^ain -- replied Silvia in mighty rage; I can guess your
business, and can revenge it too, curse on thee Slave; to think me grown as
poor in sense, as Honor: To be caj^l'd with this -- Stuff that would never
sham a Chamber Maid: Death am I so forlorn, so despicable, I am not worth the
pains of being well dissembled with. Confusion overtake him; misery seize him,
may I become his plague, while life remains, or public tortures end him: This
with all the madness that ever inspired a Lunatic, she uttered with Tears and
Violent Actions: When Octa^io besought her not to afflict her self, and almost
wished he did not love a temper so contrary to his own: He told her he was
sorry, extremely sorry, to find she still retained so violent a passion for a
m^n unworthy of her least concern, when she replied -- Do not mistake my soul,
by Heaven it is Pride, disdain, despite and have -- to think he should believe
this dull excuse could pass upon my judgment, had the false Traitor told me
that he hated me, or that his faithle^s date of Love was out, I had been tame
with all my injuries, but poorly thus to impose upon my Wit -- By Heaven he
shall not bear the affront to Hell in Triumph! no more -- I Have vowed he shall
not, -- My Soul has fixed, and now will be at ease. -- Forgive me, oh Octavio,
and letting her self fall into his Arms, she soon obtained what she asked for,
one touch of the fair Charmer could calm him into Love, and softness.

Thus after a thousand transports of passion on his side, and all the seeming
tenderness on hers the Night being far advanced, and new Confirmations given
and taken on either side of pursuing the happy Agreement in the Morning, which
they had again resolved, they appointed that Silvia and Antonett should go
three Miles out of Town to a little Village, where there was a Church, and that
Octavio should meet 'em there to be Confirmed and secured of all the happiness
he proposed to himself in this World -- Silvia, being so wholly bent upon
revenge (for the accomplishment of which alone, she accepted of Octavio,) that
she had lost all remembrance of her former Marriage, with Briljard: Or if it
ever entered into her thought 'twas only considered as a sham, nothing designed
but to secure her from being taken from Philander by her Parents: And, without
any respect to the Sacred tie, to be regarded no more; nor did she design this
with Octavio from any respect she had to the Holy State of Matrimony, but from
a Lust of Vengeance which she would buy at any price; and which she found no
Man so well able to satisfy as Octavio.

But what wretched changes of Fortune she met with after this, and a miserable
Portion of Fate was destined to this unhappy Wanderer; the last Part* of
Philanders Life, and the Third and Last Part of this History, shall most
Faithfully relate.

The End of the Second Part.
THE AMORS OF PHILANDER AND SILVIA: Being the Third and Last Part OF THE
Love Letters Between a NOBLEMAN AND HIS SISTER.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by most Booksellers, 1687.

TO THE LORD SPENCER.
My Lord,
WHEN a New Book conies into the World, the first thing we consider, is the
Dedication; and according to the Quality and Humor of the Patron, we are apt
to make a Judgment of the following Subject: If to a Statesman we belive it
Grav^ and Politic; if a Gown-man, Law or Divinity; if to the Young and Gay,
Love and Gallantry. By this Ride, I believe the gentle Reader, who finds your
Lordship's Name prefixed before this, will make as many various Opinions of it,
as they do Characters of your Lordship, whose youthful Sallies, have been the
business of so much Discourse, and which according to the Relator's Sense or
good Nature, is either aggravated or excused; though the Woman's Quarrel to your
Lordship has some more reasonable Foundation, than that of your own Sex; for
your Lords^ip being Formed with all the Beauties and Graces of Mankind, all
the Charms of Wit, Youth and Sweetness of Disposition (derived to you from an
Illustrious Race of Hero's) adapting you to noblest Love and Softness; they
cannot but complain on that mistaken Conduct of ^ours, that so lavishly deals
out those agreeable Attractions, Squandering away that Youth and Time on many,
which might be more advantageously dedicated to some one of the Fair; and by a
Liberty (which they call) not being Discreet enough, robb 'em of all the Hopes
of Conquest over that Heart which they believe can fix no where; they cannot
carress you into Tameness, or if you sometimes appear so, they are still upon
their Guard with you; for like a Young Lion, you are ever apt to leap into your
Natural Wildness; the Greatness of your Soul disdaining to be con^ined to lazy
Repose; tho the Delicacy of your Person and Constitution so absolutely require
it; your Lordship not being made for Diversions so rough and fatigueing, as
those your active Mind would impose upon it. Your Lordship is placed in so
Glorious a Station (the Son of so Great a Father) as renders all you do more
perspicuous to the World, than the Actions of common Men already; the
advantages of your Birth have drawn all Eyes upon you, and yet more on those
coming Greatnesses, to which you were born; if Heaven preserves your Lordship
amidst the too vigorous Efforts, and too dangerous Adventures, which a too
brisk Fire in your Noble Blood, a too forward desire of gaining Fame daily
exposes you to; and will, unless some force confine your too impatient Bravery,
shorten those Days which Heaven has surely designed for more Glorious Actions;
for according to all the Maxims of the Judging Wise, the little Extravagancies
of Youth accomplish, and perfect the Riper Years. It Is this that makes
indulgent Parents permit those Sparks of Fire, that are Gleaming in Young
Hearts, to kindle into a Flame, knowing well that the Consideration and
Temperament of a few more Years will regulate it to that just degree, where the
noble and generous Spirit should ^ix it self: And for this we have had the
Examples of some of the greatest Men that ever adorned History.

My Lord, I presume to lay ^t your Lordship's Feet, an Illustrious Youth; the
unhappy Circumstances of whose Life ought to be Written in lasting Characters
of all Languages, for a President to succeeding Ages, of the Misfortune of
^eedless Love, and ^ too Early Thirst of Glory; for in him, your Lordship will
find the fatal Effects of great Courage without Conduct, Wit without
Discretion, and a Greatness of Mind without the steady Virtues of it; so that
from a Prince even adored by all, by an imprudence, that too often attendss the
Great and Young, and from the most exhalted Height of Glory, misled by false
notions of Honor, and falser Friends, fell the most pityed Object, that ever
was abandoned by Fortune. I hope no One will imagine I intend this as a
Parallel between your Lordship and our mistaken brave Unfortunate, since your
Lordship has an unquestioned and hereditary Loyalty, which nothing can deface,
born from a Father, who has given the World so evident Proofs, that no fear of
threatened danger can separate his useful Service, and Duties from the Interest
of his Royal and God-like Master, which he pursues with an undaunted Fortitude,
in disdain of Phanatical Censures, and those that want the Bravery to do a just
Action, for fear of future Turns of State. And such indeed is your true Man of
Honor; and as such I doubt not but your Lordship will acquit your self in all
times, and on all occasions.

Pardon the Liberty, my Zeal for your Lordship has here presumed to take, since
among all those that make Vows and Prayers for your Lordship's Health and
Preservation, none offers them more devoutly, than,

My LORD, Your Lordships, Most Humble and Obedient Servant, A. B.

THE AMORS OF PHILANDER and SILVIA.
OCTAVIO the Brave, the Generous, and the Amorous, having left Silvia
absolutely resolved to give her self to that doting fond Lover, or rather to
sacrifice her self to her Revenge, that unconsidering Unfortunate, whose
Passion had exposed him to all the unreasonable Effects of it, returned to his
own House, wholly transported with his happy Success. He thinks on nothing but
vast coming Joys: Nor did one kind Thought direct him back to the evil
Consequences of what he so hastily pursued; he reflects not on her
Circumstances, but her Charms; not on the Infamy he should espouse with Silvia,
but of those ravishing Pleasures she was capable of giving him: he regards not
the Reproaches of his Friends; but wholly abandoned to Love and youthful
Imaginations, gives a Loose to young Desire and Fancy, that deludes him with a
thousand soft Ideas: He reflects not that his gentle and easy Temper, was most
unfit to join with that of Silvia, which was the most haughty and humorous in
Nature; for though she had all the Charms of Youth and Beauty, that are
conquering in her Sex, all the Wit and Insinuation that even surpasses Youth
and Beauty, yet to render her Character impartially, she had also abundance of
disagreeing Qualities mixed with her Perfections. She was Imperious and Proud,
even to Insolence; Vain and Conceited even to Folly; she knew her Virtues and
her Graces too well, and her Vices too little; she was very Opinionated and
Obstinate, hard to be convinced of the falsest Argument, but very positive in
her fancied Judgment: Abounding in her own Sense, and very critical on that of
others: Censorious, and too apt to charge others with those Crimes to which she
was her self addicted, or had been guilty of: Amorously inclined, and
indiscreet in the Management of her Amors, and constant rather from Pride and
Shame than Inclination; fond of catching at every trifling Conquest, and loved
the Triumph though she hated the Slave. Yet she had Virtues too, that balanced
her Vices, among which we must allow her to have loved Philander with a
Passion, that nothing but his Ingratitude could have decayed in her Heart, nor
was it lessened but by a Force that gave her a thousand Tortures, Racks, and
Pangs, which had almost cost her her less valued Life; for being of a Temper
nice in Love, and very fiery, apt to fly into Rages at every Accident that did
but touch that tenderest Part, her Heart; she suffered a world of Violence and
Extremity of Rage and Grief by turns: at this Affront and Inconstancy of
Philander. Nevertheless she was now so discreet, or rather Cunning, to
dissemble her Resentment the best she could to her generous Lover, for whom she
had more Inclination than she yet had leisure to perceive, and which she now
attributes wholly to her Revenge; and considering Octavio as the most proper
Instrument for that, she fancies, what was indeed a growing Tenderness from the
sense of his Merit, to be the Effects of that Revenge she so much desired and
thirsted after; and though without she dissembled a Calm; within she was all Fury
and Disorder, all Storm and Distraction: She went to Bed racked with a thousand
thoughts of dispairing Love; sometimes all the Softness of Philander in their
happy Enjoyments came in view, and made her sometimes weep, and sometimes faint
with the dear loved Remembrance; sometimes his late Enjoyments with Calista,
and then she raved and burnt with frantic Rage: But oh! at last she found her
Hope was gone, and wisely fell to argue with her Soul. She knew Love would not
long subsist on the thin Diet of Despair, and resolving he was never to be
retrieved who once had ceased to Love, she strove to bend her Soul to useful
Reason, and thinks on all Octavio's Obligations, his Vows, his Assiduity, his
Beauty, his Youth, his Fortune, and his generous Offer, and with the Aid of
Pride resolves to unfix her Heart, and give it better Treatment in his Bosom:
To cease at least to love the false Philander, if she could never force her
Soul to hate him: And though this was not so soon done as thought on, in a Heart
so prepossest as that of Silvia's, yet there is some Hope of a Recovery, when a
Woman in that Extremity will but think of listening to Love from any new
Adorer; and having once resolved to pursue the Fugitive no more with the
natural Artillery of their Sighs and Tears, Reproaches and Complaints, they
have Recourse to every thing that may soonest chase from the Heart those
Thoughts that oppress it: For Nature is not inclined to hurt it self, and there
are but very few who find it necessary to die of the Disease of Love. Of this
sort was our Silvia, though to give her her due, never any Person who did not
indeed die, ever languished under the Torments of Love, as did that charming
and afflicted Maid.

While Silvia remained in these eternal Inquietudes, Antonett having quitted
her Chamber, takes this Opportunity to go to that of Brilljard, whom she had
not visited in two days before, being extremely troubled at his Design which
she now found he had on her Lady; she had a mind to vent her Spleen, and as the
Proverb says, call W -- re first. Brilljard longed as much to see her, to rail
at her for being privy to Octavio's Approach to Silvia's Bed, as he thought
(she imagined) and not giving him an account of it, as she used to do, of all
the Secrets of her Lady. She finds him alone in his Chamber, recovered from all
but the Torments of his unhappy Disappointment. She approached him with all the
Anger her sort of Passion could inspire (for Love in a mean unthinking Soul, is
not that glorious thing it is in the Brave) however she had enough to serve her
Pleasure, for Brilljard was young and handsome, and both being bent on Railing,
without knowing each others Intentions, they both equally flew into high Words;
he upbraiding her with her Infidelity, and she him with his. Are not you, said
he (growing more calm) the falsest of your Tribe, to keep a Secret from me that
so much concerned me? is it for this I have refused the Addresses of
Burgomasters Wives and Daughters, where I could have made my Fortune and my
Satisfaction, to keep myself entirely for a thing that betrays me, and keeps
every Secret of her Heart from me? false and forsworn, I will be Fool no more.
It Is well Sir (replied Antonett) that you having been the most perfidious Man
alive, should accuse me who am Innocent; Come, come Sir, you have not carried
Matters so swimingly but I could easily dive into the other Nights In^rig^^ and
Secret. What Secret, tho^ false one? Thou art all over secret; a very hopeful
Bawd at eighteen -- go I hate ye -- At this she wept, and he pursued his
Railing to out-noyse her, You thought because your Deeds were done in Darkness,
they were concealed from a Lovers Eyes; no thou young Viper, I saw, I heard,
and felt, and satisfied every Sense of this thy Falsehood, when Octavio was
conducted to Silvia 's Bed by thee. But what, said she, if instead of Octavio I
conducted the perfidious Traitor to love Brilljard? Who then was false and
perjured? At this he blushed extremely, which was too visible on his fair Face.
She being now confirmed she had the better of him, continued -- Let thy
Confusion, said she with Scorn, witness the Truth of what I say, and I have
been but too well acquainted with that Body of yours, weeping as she spoke, to
mistake it for that of Octavio. Softly dear Antonett, replied he, -- nay now
your Tears have calmed me; and taking her in his Arms, sought to appease her by
all the Arguments of seeming Love and Tenderness; while she yet wholly
unsatisfied in that Cheat of his of going to Silvia's Bed, remained still
pouting and very frumpish. But he that had but one Argument left, that on all
Occasions served to convince her, had at last Recourse to that, which put her
in good Humor, and hanging on his Neck she kindly chid him for putting such a
Trick upon her Lady. He told her, and confirmed it with an Oath, That he did it
but to try how far she was Just to his Friend and Lord, and not any Desire he
had for a Beauty that was too much of his own Complexion to charm him, 'twas
only the Brunet and the Black, such as her self, that could move him to Desire;
thus he shams her into perfect Peace. And why, said she, were you not satisfied
that she was False, as well from the Assignation as the Trial. Oh no, said he,
you Women have a thousand Arts of Gibing, and no Man ought to believe you, but
put you to the Trial. Well, said she, when I had brought you to the Bed, when
you found her Arms stretched out to receive you, why did you not retire like an
honest Man, and leave her to her self? Oh fie, said he, that had not been to
have acted Octavio to the Life, but would have made a Discovery. Ay, said she,
that was your Aim to have acted Octavio to the Life, I believe, and not to
discover my Lady's Constancy to your Lord, but I suppose you have been sworn at
the But of Hedleburgh, never to kiss the Maid when you can kiss the Mistress:
But he renewing his Caresses and Asseverations of Love to her, she suffered
herself to be convinced of all he had a mind to have her believe. After this
she could not contain any Secret from him, but told him she had something to
say to him, which if he knew, would convince him she had all the Passion in the
World for him: He presses eagerly to know, and she pursues to tell him, it is as
much as her Life is worth to discover it, and that she lies under the
Obligation of an Oath not to tell it; but Kisses and Rhetoric prevails, and
she cries -- What will you say now if my Lady may Marry one of the greatest and
most considerable Persons in all this Country? I should not wonder at her
Conquests (replied Brilljard) but I should wonder if she should Marry. Then
cease your Wonder, replied she, for she is to morrow to be married to Count
Octavio, whom she is to meet at nine in the Morning to that end, at a little
Village a League from this place. She spoke, and he believes; and finds it true
by the raging of his Blood, which he could not conceal from Antonett, and for
which he feigns a thousand Excuses to the Amorous Maid, and charges his Concern
on that for his Lord: At last (after some more Discourse on that Subject) he
pretends to grow sleepy, and hastens her to her Chamber, and locking the Door
after her, he began to reflect on what she had said, and grew to all the
Torment of Rage, Jealousy, and all the Dispairs of a passionate Lover: And
though his Hope was not Exstreme before, yet as Lovers do, he found, or fancied a
Probability (from his Lords Inconstancy, and his own right of Marriage) that
the Necessity she might chance to be in of his Friendship and Assistance in a
strange Country, might some happy Moment or other render him the Blessing he so
long had waited for from Silvia; for he ever designed, when either his Lord
left her, grew cold, or should happen to die, to put in his Claim of Husband.
And the soft familiar way, with which she eternally lived with him, encouraged
this Hope and Design; nay she had often made him Advances to that happy
Expectation. But this fatal Blow had driven him from all his fancied Joys, to
the most wretched Estate of a desperate Lover. He traverses his Chamber wounded
with a thousand different Thoughts, mixed with those of preventing this Union
the next Morning. Sometimes he resolves to fight Octavio, for his Birth might
pretend to it, and he wanted no Courage; but he is afraid of being overcome by
that gallant Man, and either loosing his Hopes with his Life, or if he kill
Octavio, to be forced to fly from his Happiness, or die an ignominious Death.
Sometimes he resolves to own Silvia for his Wife, but then he fears the Rage of
that dear Object of his Soul, which he dreads more than Death it self: So that
tossed from one Extreme to another, from one Resolution to a hundred, he was not
able to fix upon any thing. In this Perplexity he remained till Day appeared;
that Day that must advance with his undoing, while Silvia and Antonett were
preparing for the Design concluded on the last Night. This he heard, and every
Minute that approached gave him new Torments, so that now he would have given
himself to the Prince of Darkness for a kind Disappointment: He was often ready
to go and throw himself at her Feet, and plead against her Enterprise in hand,
and to urge the unlawfulness of a double Marriage, ready to make Vows for the
Fidelity of Philander, though before so much against his own Interest, and to
tell her all those Letters from him were forged: He thought on all things, but
nothing remained with him, but Despair of every thing. At last the Devil and
his own Subtilty, put him upon a Prevention, though base, yet the most likely to
succeed in his Opinion.

He knew there were many Factions in Holland, and that the States themselves
were divided in their Interests, and a thousand Jealousies and Fears were
eternally spread amongst the Rabble; there were Cabals for every Interest, that
of the French so prevailing, that of the English, and that of the Illustrious
Orange, and others for the States; so that it was not a Difficulty to move any
Mischief, and pass it off among the Crowd for dangerous Consequences. Brilljard
knew each Division, and which way they were inclined, he knew Octavio was not
so well with the States as not to be easily rendered worse; for he was so
entirely a Creature and Favorite of the Prince that they conceived abundance
of Jealousies of him which they durst not own. Brilljard besides knew a great
Man, who having a Pique to Octavio, might the sooner be brought to receive any
ill Character of him: To this sullen Magistrate he applies himself, and
deluding the Credulous busy old Man with a thousand circumstantial Lies, he
discovers to him that Octavio held a Correspondence with the French King to
betray the State; and that he Caball'd to that end with some who were looked
upon as French Rebels, but indeed were no other than Spies to France. This
coming from a Man of that Party, and whose Lord was a French Rebel, gained a
perfect Credit with the old Sr. Politi^; so that immediately hasting to the
State-House he lays this weighty Affair before them, who soon found it
reasonable, and if not true, at least they feared, and sent out a Warrant for
the speedy apprehending him; but coming to his House, though early, they found
him gone, and being informed which way he took, the Messenger pursued him, and
found his Coach at the Door of a Caberett, too Obscure for his Quality; which
made them apprehend this was some place of Rendezvous, where he possibly met
with his Traiterous Associators: They send in, and cunningly inquire who he
waited for, or who was with him, and they understood he stayed for some
Gentlemen of the French Nation, for he had ordered Silvia to come in man's
Clothes, that she might not be known; and had given Order below, that if two
French Gentlemen came they should be brought to him. This Information made the
Scandal as clear as Day, and the Messenger no longer doubted of the
Reasonableness of his Warrant, though he was loath to serve it on a Person whose
Father he had served many Years. He waits at some distance from the House
unseen, though he could take a View of all; he saw Octavio come often out into
the Balcony and look with longing Eyes toward the Road that leads to the Town;
he saw him all rich and gay as a young Bridegroom, lovely and young as the
Morning that flattered him with so fair and happy a Day; at last he saw two
Gentlemen alight at the Door, and giving their Horses to a Page to walk a
while, they ran up into the Chamber where Octavio was waiting, who had already
sent his Page to prepare the Priest in the Village Church to marry them. You
may imagine with what Love and Joy the ^avished Youth approached the Idol of
his Soul, and she who beholds him in more Beauty than ever yet she thought he
had appeared, pleased with all things he had on, with the gay Morning, the
flowery Field, the Air, the little Journey, and a thousand diverting things,
made no Resistance to those fond Embraces that pressed her a thousand times with
silent Transport, and falling Tears of eager Love and Pleasure, but even in
that moment of Content she forgot Philander, and received all the Satisfaction
so soft a Lover could dispense: While they were mutually thus exchanging Looks,
and almost Hearts, the Messenger came into the Room, and as civilly as possible
told Octavio he had a Warrant for him to secure him as a Traitor to the State,
and a Spy for France. You need not be told the Surprise and Astonishment he was
in; however he obeyed: The Messenger turning to Silvia, cried Sr. Though I can
hardly credit this Crime that is charged to my Lord, yet the finding him here
with two French Gentlemen gives me some more Fears that there may be something
in it; and it would do well, if you would deliver your selves into my Hands for
the farther clearing this Gentleman. The foolish grave Speech of the Messenger
had like to have put Octavio into a loud Laughter, he addressing himself to two
Women, for two Men: But Silvia replied, Sir, I hope you do not take us for so
little Friends to the gallant Octavio, to abandon him in his Misfortune; no, we
will share it with him, be it what it will. To this the generous Lover,
blushing with kind Surprise, bowed, and kissing her Hand with Transport,
calling her his charming Friend; and so all three being guarded back in
Octavio's Coach, they return to the Town, and to the House of the Messenger,
which made a great Noise all over, that Octavio was taken with two French
Jesuits plotting to fire Amsterdam, and a thousand things equally Ridiculous.
They were all three lodged together in one House, that of the Messenger, which
was very fine, and fit to entertain any Persons of Quality; while Brilljard,
who did not like that part of the Project, bethought him of a thousand ways how
to free her from thence; for he designed as soon as Octavio should be taken to
have got her to have quitted the Town under pretense of being taken upon
Suspicion of holding Correspondence with him, because they were French; but her
delivering herself up, had not only undone all his Design, but had made it
unsafe for him to stay. While he was thus bethinking himself what he should do,
Octavio's Uncle, who was one of the States, extremely affronted at the
Indignity put upon his Nephew and his sole Heir, the Darling of his Heart and
Eyes, commands that this Informer may be secured; and accordingly- Brilljard
was taken into Custody, who giving himself over for a lost Man, resolves to put
himself upon Octavio's Mercy, by telling him the Motives that induced him to
this violent and ungenerous Course. It was some days before the Council thought
fit to call for Octavio, to hear what he had to say for himself in the mean
time, he having not had Permission yet to see Silvia; and being extremely
desirous of that Happiness, he bethought himself that the Messenger having been
in his Fathers Service, might have so much Re^^^t for the Son as to allow him
to speak to that fair Charmer, provided he might be a Witness to what he should
say: He sends for him, and demanded of him where those two fair Prisoners were
lodged who came with him in the Morning; he told him, in a very good Apartment
on the same Floor, and that they were very well Accommodated, and seemed to
have no other Trouble but what they suffered for him. I hope my Lord, added he
-- your Confinement will not be long, for I hear there is a Person taken up,
who has confessed he did it for a Revenge on you. At this Octavio was very well
pleased, and asked him who it was; and he told him a French Gentleman belonging
to the Count Philander, who about six Months ago was obliged to quit the Town
as an Enemy to France. He soon knew it to be Brilljard, and comparing this
Action with some others of his lately Committed, he no longer doubts it the
Effects of his Jealousy. He asked the Messenger if it were impossible to gain
so much Favor of him, as to let him visit those two French Gentlemen, he being
by while he was with them: The Keeper soon granted his Request, and replied --
There was no Hazard, he would not run to serve him; and immediately, putting
back the Hangings, with one of those Keys he had in his Hand, he opened a Door
in his Chamber that led into a Gallery of fine Pictures, and from thence they
past into the Apartment of Silvia: As soon as he came in he threw himself at
her Feet, and she received him, and took him up into her Arms with all the
Transports of Joy a Soul (more than ever possessed with Love for him) could
conceive; and though they all appeared of the Masculine Sex, the Messenger soon
perceived his Error, and begged a thousand Pardons. Octavio makes have to tell
her his Opinion of the cause of all this Trouble to both; and she easily
believed, when she heard Brilljard was taken, that it was as he imagined, for
he had been found too often faulty not to be suspected now: This Thought
brought a great Calm to both their Spirits, and almost reduced them to their
first soft Tranquillity, with which they began the day: For he protested his
Innocence a thousand times, which was wholly needless, for the generous Maid
believed before he spoke, he could not be guilty of the Sin of Treachery. He
renews his Vows to her of eternal Love, and that he would perform what they
were so unluckily prevented of doing this Morning, and that though possibly by
this unhappy Adventure his Design might have taken Air, and have arrived to the
Knowledge of his Uncle, yet in spite of all Opposition of Friends, or the
Malice of Brilljard, he would pursue his Glorious Design of marrying her, though
he were forced for it to wander to the farthest parts of the Earth with his
lovely Prize. He begs she will not disesteem him for this Scandal on his Fame,
for he was all Love, all soft Desire, and had no other Design than that of
making himself Master of that greatest Treasure in the World; that of the
possessing the most charming, the all ravishing Silvia: In return, she paid him
all the Vows that could secure an In^idel in Love, she made him all the
indearing Advances a Heart could wish, wholly given up to tender Passion,
insomuch that he believes, and is the gayest Man that ever was blessed by Love.
And the Messenger who was present all this while, found that this Caballing
with the French Spies, was only an innocent Design to give himself away to a
fine young Lady: And therefore fully convinced he, was guilty of no other
Crime, he gave them all the Freedom they desired; and which they made use of to
the most Advantage Love could direct or Youth inspire. This Suffering with
Octavio begot a Pity and Compassion in the Heart of Silvia, and that grew up to
Love, for he had all the Charms that could inspire it; and every Hour was
adding new Fire to her Heart, which at last burnt into a Flame, such Power has
mighty Obligation on a Heart that has any grateful Sentiments: And yet when she
was absent anights from Octavio, and thought on Philander's Passion for
Calista, she would Rage and Rave, and find the Effects of wondrous Love, and
wondrous Pride, and be even ready to make Vows against Octavio: But those were
Fits that seldomer seized her now, and every Fit was like a departing Ague,
still weaker than the former, and at the sight of Octavio all would vanish, her
Blushes would rise and discover the soft Thoughts her Heart conceived for the
approaching Lover; and she soon found that vulgar Error of the Impossibility of
Loving more than once. It was four days they thus remained without being called
to the Council, and every day brought its new Joys along with it: They were
never asunder, never interrupted with any Visit, but once for a few Moments in
a day by Octavio's Uncle, and then he would go into his own Apartment to
receive him: He offered to bail him out; but Octavio, who had found more real
Joy there than in any part of the Earth besides, eva^^d the Obligation, by
telling his Uncle he would be obliged to nothing but his Innocence for his
Liberty: So would get rid of the fond old Gentleman, who never knew a Passion
but for his darling Nephew, and return with as much Joy to the Lodgings of
Silvia as if he had been absent a Week, which is an Age to a Lover; there they
sometimes would play at Cards, where he would lose considerable Sums to her,
or at Hazard, or be studying what they should do next to pass the Hours most to
her Content; not but he had rather have lain eternally at her Feet, gazing,
doting, and saying a thousand fond things, which at every View he took were
conceived in his Soul: And though but this last Minute he had finished saying all
that Love could Dictate, he found his Heart oppressed with a vast store of new
Softness, which he languish'd to unload in her ravishing Bosom: But she, who
was not arrived to his pitch of Loving, diverts his softer Hours with Play
sometimes, and otherwhile with making him follow her into the Gallery, which
was adorned with pleasant Pictures, all of Hempskerk's hand, which afforded
great Variety of Objects very Drole and Antique, Octavio finding something to
say of every one that might be of Advantage to his own Heart; for whatever
Argument was in dispute, he would be sure to bring it home to the Passion he
had for Silvia; it should end in Love however remotely begun: So strange an Art
has Love to turn all things to the Advantage of a Lover.

'Twas thus they passed their time, and nothing was wanting that lavish Expense
could procure, and every Minute he advances to new Freedoms, and unspeakable
Delights, but still such as might hitherto be allowed with Honor; he sighs,
and wishes, he languishes and dies for more, but dares not utter the Meaning of
one Motion of Breath, for he loved so very much that every Look from those fair
Eyes that charmed him, awed him to a Respect that robbed him of many happy
Moments a bolder Lover would have turned to his Advantage, and he treated her
as if she had been an unspotted Maid; with Caution of Offending, he had forgot
that general Rule, That where the sacred Laws of Honor are once invaded, Love
makes the easier Conquest.

All this while you may imagine Brilljard endured no little Torment, he could
not on the one side determine what the States would do with him, when once they
should find him a false. Accuser of so great a Man, and on the other side he
suffered a thousand Pains and Jealousies from Love; he knew too well the Charms
and Power of Octavio, and what Effects Importunity and Opportunity have on the
Temper of feeble Woman: He found the States did not make so considerable a
matter of his being Impeached as to confine him strictly, and he dies with the
Fears of those happy Moments he might possibly enjoy with Silvia, where there
might be no Spies about her to give him any kind Intelligence; and all that
could afford him any glimps of Consolation, was, That while they were thus
confined he was out of Fear of their being married. Octavio's Uncle this while
was not Idle, but taking it for a high Indignity his Nephew should remain so
long without being heard, he moved it to the Council, and accordingly they sent
for him to the State-House the next Morning, where Brilljard was brought to
confront him; whom, as soon as Octavio saw, with a scornful Smile, he cried --
It Is well, Brilljard, that you who durst not fight me fairly, should find out
this nobler way of ridding your self of a Rival; I am glad at least, that I
have no more honorable a Witness against me. Brilljard, who never before
wanted Assurance, at this Reproach was wholly Confounded; for it was not from
any Villainy in his Nature, but the absolute Effects of mad and desperate
Passion, which put him on the only Remedy that could relieve him; and looking
on Octavio with modest Blushes, that half pleaded for him, he cried -- Yes my
Lord, I am your Accuser, and come to charge your Innocence with the greatest of
Crimes, and you ought to thank me for my Accusation; when you shall know it is
regard to my own Honor, violent Love for Silvia, and extreme Respect to your
Lordship, has made me thus saucy with your unspotted Fame. How, replied
Octavio, shall I thank you for accusing me with a Plot upon the State? Yes my
Lord, replied Brilljard; and yet you had a Plot to betray the State, and by so
new a way, as could be found out by none but so great and brave a Man. --
Heavens, replied Octavio enraged, this is an Impudence, that nothing but a
Traitor to his own King, and one bred up in Plots and Mischiefs, could have
invented; I betray my own Country? -- Yes my Lord, cried he (more briskly than
before, seeing Octavio color so at him) to all the Looseness of unthinking
Youth, to all the Breach of Laws both Human and Divine, if all the Youth should
follow your Example, you would betray Posterity it self; and only mad Confusion
would abound: In short, my Lord, that Lady who was taken with you by the
Messenger, was my Wife: And going to wards Silvia, who was struck as with a
Thunderbolt, he seized her Hand, and Cried, -- while all stood gazing on --
This Lady Sir I mean -- she is my Wife, my lawful married Wife. At this Silvia
could no longer hold her Patience within its Bounds, but with that other Hand
he had left her, she struck him a Box on the Ear, that almost staggered him,
coming unawares, and as she struck she cried aloud, Thou lie base Villain --
and I Will be revenged; and flinging herself out of his Hand, she got on the
other side of Octavio, while the whole Company remained confounded at what they
saw and heard. How, cried out old Sebastian, Uncle to Octavio, a Woman, this?
By my Troth, sweet Lady, if you be one, methought you were a very pretty
Fellow: And turning to Brilljard, he cried -- Why, what Sir, then it seems all
this Noise of betraying the State was but a Cuckold's Dream. Hah! and this
wonderful and dangerous Plot, was but one upon your Wife Sir; hah -- was it so?
Marry Sir, at this rate, I rather think it is you have a Design of betraying the
State -- you cuckoldly Knaves that bring your handsome Wives to seduce our
young Senators from their Sobriety and Wits. Are these the Recompenses, replied
Brilljard, you give the Injured, and in lieu of restoring me my Right, am I
reproached with the most scandalous Infamy that can befall a Man. Well Sir,
replied Sebastian, this is all you have to charge this Gentleman with? At which
he bowed and was silent -- and Sebastian continued -- If your Wife, Sir, have a
mind to my Nephew, or he to her, it should have been your Care to have forbid
it, or prevented it, by keeping her under Lock and Key, if no other way to be
secured; and Sir, we do not sit here to relieve Fools and Cuckolds; if your
Lady will be Civil to my Nephew, what is that to us: Let her speak for herself;
What say you Madam? -- I say, replied Silvia, that this Fellow is mad and
raves; that he is my Vassal, my Servant, my Slave; but, after this, unworthy of
the meanest of these Titles. This she spoke with a Disdain that sufficiently
showed the Pride and Anger of her Soul -- La you Sir, replied Sebastian, you
are discharged your Ladys Service; it is a plain case she has more mind to the
young Count than the Husband, and we cannot compel People to be honest against
their Inclinations. And coming down from the Seat where he sat, he embraced
Octavio a hundred times, and told the Board, he was extremely glad they found
the mighty Plot but a Vagary of Youth, and the Spleen of a Jealous Husband or
Lover, or whatsoever other malicious thing; and desired the angry Man might be
discharged since he had so just a Provocation as the loss of a Mistress. So all
laughing at the Jest, that had made so great a Noise among the Grave and Wise,
they freed 'em all: And Sebastian advised his Nephew, that the next Cuckold he
made, he would make a Friend of him first, that he might hear of no more
Complaints against him. But Octavio very gravely replied: Sir, you have
infinitely mistaken the Character of this Lady, she is a Person of too great
Quality for this Raillery; at more Leisure you shall have her Story. While he
was speaking this, and their Discharges were making, Silvia confounded with
Shame, Indignation, and Anger, goes out, and taking Octavio's Coach that stood
at the Gate, went directly to his House, for she resolved to go no more where
Brilljard was. After this Sebastian fell seriously to good Advice, and
earnestly besought his Darling to leave off those wild Extravagancies that had
so long made so great a Discourse all the Province over, where nothing but his
splendid Amors, Treats, Balls, and Magnificences of Love, was the Business of
the Town, and that he had forborne to tell him of it, and had hitherto justified
his Actions, tho they had not deserved it; and he doubted this was the Lady to
whom for this six or eight Months he heard he had so entirely dedicated
himself: He desires him to quit this Lady, or if he will pursue his Love, to do
it discreetly, to love some unmarried Woman, and not injure his Neighbors; to
all which he blushed and bowed, and silently seemed to thank him for his grave
Council. And Brilljard having received his Discharge, and Advice how he
provoked the Displeasure of the States any more, by accusing of great Persons,
he was ordered to ask Octavio's Pardon, but in lieu of that, he came up to him
and challenged him to fight him for the Injustice he had done him, in taking
from him his Wife; for he was sure he was undone in her Favor, and that
Thought made him mad enough to put himself on this second Extravagancy: However
this was not so silently managed but Sebastian perceived it, and was so enraged
at the young Fellow for this second Insolence, that he was again confined, and
sent back to Prison, where he swore he should suffer the utmost of the Law: And
the Council breaking up, every one departed to his own Home. But never was Man
Ravished with excess of Joy as Octavio was, to find Silvia meet him with
extended Arms on the Stare-Case, whom he did not imagine to have found there,
nor knew he how he stood in the Heart of that Charmer of his own, since the
Affront she had received in the Court from those that however did not know her,
for they did not imagine this was that Lady, Sister to Philander, of whose
Beauty they had heard so much, and her Face being turned from the Light, the
old Gentlemen did not so much consider or see it. Silvia came into his House
the back way, through the Stables and Garden, and had the good Fortune to be
seen of none of his Family, but the Coachman who brought her home, whom she
conjured not to speak of it to the rest of his Servants; and unseen of any body
she got into his Apartment, for often she had been there at Treats and Balls
with Philander. She was all alone, for Antonett stayed to see what became of
her false Lover, who, after he was seized again, retired to her Lodging the
most disconsolate Woman in the World, for having lost her Hopes of Brilljard,
to whom she had engaged all that Honor she had. But when she missed her Lady
there, she accused herself with all the Falsehood in the World, and fell to
repent her Treachery. She sends the Page to inquire at Octavio's House, but no
body there could give him any Intelligence; so that the poor amorous Youth
returning without Hope, endured all the Pain of a hopless Lover, for Octavio
had anew charmed his Coachman: And calling up an ancient Woman who was his
Housekeeper, who had been his Nurse, he acquainted her with the short History
of his Passion for Silvia, and ordered her to give her attendance on the
treasure of his Life; he bid her prepare all things as magnificent as she could
in that Apartment he designed her, which was very rich and gay, and toward a
fine Garden: The Hangings and Beds all glorious, and fitter for a Monarch than
a Subject; the finest Pictures the World afforded, Flowers in-laid with Silver,
and Ivory, gilded Roofs, carved Wainscot, Tables of Plate, with all the rest
of the movables in the Chambers of the same, all of great value, and all was
perfumed like an Altar, or the Marriage Bed of some young King. Here Silvia was
designed to lodge, and hither Octavio conducted her; and setting her on a Couch
while the Supper was getting ready, he sits himself down by her, and his heart
being ready to burst with Grief, at the thought of the Claim which was laid to
her by Brilljard; he silently views her, while Tears were ready to break from
his fixed Eyes, and Sighs stopped what he would fain have spoke: While she
(wholly confounded with Shame, Guilt, and Disappointment (for she could not
imagine that Brilljard could have had the Impudence to have claimed her for a
Wife) fixed her fair. Eyes to Earth, and durst not behold the languishing
Octavio. They remained thus a long time silent, she not daring to defend
herself from a Crime, of which she knew too well she was guilty, nor he daring
to ask her a Question to which the Answer might prove so fatal; he fears to
know what he dies to be satisfied in, and she fears to discover too late a
Secret which was the only one she had concealed from him. Octavio runs over in
his Mind a thousand Thoughts that perplexed him, of the Probability of her
being married; he considers how often he had found her with that happy young
Man, who more freely entertained her than Servants use to do: He now considers
how he has seen 'em once on a Bed together, when Silvia was in the Disorder of
a yielding Mistress, and Brilljard of a ravished Lover; he considers how he has
found 'em alone at Cards and Dice, and often entertaining her with Freedoms of
a Husband, and how he wholly managed her Affairs, commanded her Servants like
their proper Master, and was in full Authority of all. These and a thousand
more Circumstances confirms Octavio in all his Fears: A thousand times she is
about to speak, but either fears to lose Octavio by a clear Confession, or to
run herself into farther Error by denying the matter of Fact, stops her Words,
and she only blushes and sighs at what she dares not tell, and if by chance
their speaking Eyes meet, they would both decline 'em hastily again, as afraid
to find there what their Language could not confess. Sometimes he would press
her Hand and sigh -- Ah Silvia, you have undone my Quiet; to which she would
return no Answer but Sigh; and now rising from the Couch she walked about the
Chamber as sad and silent as Death, attending when he should have advanced in
speaking to her, though she dreads the Voice she wishes to hear, and he waits for
her Reply, though the Mouth that he adores should deliver Poison and Daggers to
his Heart. While thus they remained in the most silent and sad Entertainment
(that ever was between Lovers that had so much to say) the Page, which Octavio
only trusts to wait, brought him this Letter.

Brilljard to Octavio.
My Lord,
I am too sensible of my many high Offenses to your Lordship, and have as much
Penitence for my Sin committed toward you as it is possible to conceive; but
when I implore a Pardon from a Lover, who by his own Passion may guess at the
violent Effects of my dispairing Flame, I am yet so vain to hope it. Antonett
gave me the Intelligence of your Design, and raised me up to a Madness that
hurried me to that Barbarity against your unspotted Honor. I own the baseness
of the Fact, but Lovers are not, my Lord, always guided by Rules of Justice and
Reason; or if I had, I should have killed the fair Adultress that drew you to
your Undoing, and who merits more your Hate than your Regard; and who having
first violated her marriage Vow to me, with Philander, would sacrifice us both
to you, and at the same time betray you to a Marriage that cannot but prove
fatal to you, as it is most unlawful in her; so that, my Lord, if I have
injured you, I have at the same time saved you from a Sin and Ruin, and humbly
implore that you will suffer the Good I have rendered you in the last, to atone
for the Ill I did you in the first. If I have accused you of a Design against
the State, it was to save you from that of the too subtle and too charming
Silvia, which none but myself could have snatched you from: It Is true I might
have acted something more worthy of my Birth and Education; but, my Lord, I
knew the Power of Silvia, and if I should have sent you the Knowledge of this,
when I sent the Warrant for the Security of your Person, the haughty Creature
would have prevailed above all my Truths, with the Eloquence of Love, and you
had yielded and been betrayed worse by her, than by the most ungenerous
Measures I took to prevent it: Suffer this Reason, my Lord, to plead for me in
that Heart where Silvia Reigns, and shows how powerful she is every where.
Pardon all the Faults of a most unfortunate Man undone by Love, and by your own
guess what his Passion would put him on who aims or wishes at least for the
entire Possession of Silvia, though it was never absolutely hoped by

the most unfortunate Brilljard.


At the beginning of this Letter Octavio hoped it contained the Confession of
his Fault in claiming Silvia; he hoped he would have owned it done in order to
his Service to his Lord, or his Love to Silvia, or any thing but what it really
was; but when he read on -- and found that he yet confirmed his Claim, he
yielded to all the Grief that could sink a Heart over-burthen'd with violent
Love; he fell down on the Couch were he was sat, and only calling Silvia with
a dying Groan, he held out his Hand in which the Letter remained, and looked on
her with Eyes that languished with Death, Love, and Despair; while she who
already feared from whom it came, received it with Disdain, Shame, and
Confusion: And Octavio recovering a little -- Cried in a faint Voice -- See
Charming, Cruel, Fair -- see how much my Soul adores you, when even this --
cannot extinguish one spark of that Flame you have kindled in my Soul: At this
she blushed and bowed with a graceful modesty that was like to have given the
lie to all the Accusations against her: She reads the Letter, while he greedily
fixes his Eyes upon her Face as she read, observing with curious Search every
Motion there, all killing and adorable. He saw her Blushes sometimes rise, then
sink again to their proper Fountain, her Heart; there swell and rise, and beat
against her Breast that had no other Covering than a thin Shirt, for all her
Bosom was open, and betrayed the nimble Motions of her Heart. Her Eyes
sometimes would sparkle with Disdain, and glow upon the fatal tell-tale Lines;
and sometimes languish with excess of Grief: But having concluded the Letter,
she laid it on the Table and began again to traverse the Room, her Head
declined, and her Arms across her Bosom. Octavio made too true an
Interpretation of this Silence, and Calm in Silvia, and no longer doubted his
Fate. He fixes his Eyes eternally upon her, while she considers what she shall
say to that afflicted Lover; she find's Philander lost, or if he ever return,
it is not to Love, so that he was for ever gone* for too well she knew no Arts,
Obligations, or Industry, could retrieve a flying a Cupid: She found if even
that, could return, his whole Fortune was so exausted he could not support her;
and that she was of a Nature so haughty and impatient of Injuries, that she
could never forgive him those Affronts he had done her Honor first, and now
her Love; she resolves no Law or Force shall submit her to Brilljard; she finds
this Fallacy she has put on Octavio, has ruined her Credit in his Esteem, at
least she justly fears it; so that believing herself abandoned by all in a
strange Country, she fell to weeping her Fate, and the Tears wet the Floor as
she walked: At which Sight so melting, Octavio starts from the Couch, and
catching her in his trembling Arms, he cried, be false, be cruel, and
deceitful; yet still I must, I am compelled to Adore you -- This being spoken
in so hearty and resolved a Tone, from a Man, of whose Heart she was so sure,
and knew to be so generous, gave her a little Courage -- and like sinking Men
she catches at all that presents her any Hope of escaping. She resolves by
discovering the whole Truth to save that ^ast Stake, his Heart, though she could
pretend to no more; and taking the ^ainting Lover by the Hand, she leads him to
the Couch: Well, said she, Octavio, you are too generous to be imposed on in
any thing; and therefore I will tell you my Heart without Reserve as absolutely
as to Heaven it self, if I were interceeding my last Peace there. She begged a
thousand Pardons of him for having concealed any part of her Story from him,
but she could no longer be guilty of that Crime, to a Man for whom she had so
perfect a Passion; and as she spoke she embraced him with an unresistable
Softness that wholly charmed him: She reconciles him with every Touch, and
sighs on his Bosom a thousand grateful Vows and Excuses for her Fault, while he
weeps with Love, and almost Expires in her Arms; she is not able to see his
Passion and his Grief, and tells him she will do all things for his Repose. Ah
Silvia, sighed he, talk not of my Repose, when you confess your self Wife to
one, and Mistress to another, in either of which I have alas no part: Ah, what
is reserved for the Unfortunate Octavio, when two happy Lovers divide the
Treasure of his Soul! Yet tell me Truth, because it will look like Love; show
me that excellent Virtue, so rarely found in all your fickle Sex. Oh! tell me
Truth, and let me know how much my Heart can bear before it break with Love;
and yet perhaps to hear thee speak to me, with that insinuating dear Voice of
thine, may save me from the Terror of thy Words; and though each make a Wound,
their very Accents have a Balm to heal! Oh, quickly pour it then into my
listening Soul, and I Will be silent, as over ravished Lovers, whom Ioys have
charmed to tender Sighs and Pantings. At this, embracing her anew, he let fall
a Shower of Tears upon her Bosom, and sighing Cried -- Now I attend thy Story:
She then began anew the Repetition of the Loves between herself and Philander;
which she slightly ran over, because he had already heard every Circumstance of
it, both from herself and Philander; till she arrived to that part of it where
she left Belsont, her Fathers House: Thus far, said she, you have had a
faithful Relation And I was no sooner missed by* my Parent, but you may imagine
the diligent Search that would be made, both by Foscario, whom I was to have
married the next day, and my tender Parents; but all Search, all Hu-an-Crys
were vain; at last they put me into the weekly Gazette, describing me to the
very Features of my Face, my Hair, my Breast, my Stature, Youth and Beauty,
omitting nothing that might render me apparent to all that should see me,
offering vast Sums to any that should give Intelligence of such a lost Maid of
Quality. Philander, who understood too well the Nature of the common People,
and that they would betray their very Fathers for such a proferr'd Sum, durst
trust me no longer to their Mercy: His Affairs were so involved with those of
Caesario, he could not leave Paris; for they every Moment expected the People
should rise against their King, and these Glorious Chiefs of the Faction were
obliged to wait and watch the Motions of the dirty Crowd. Nor durst he trust me
in any place from him, for he could not live a Day without me. At that Thought
she sighed, and then went on: so that I was obliged to remain obscurely lodged
in Paris, where now I durst no longer trust myself, though disguised in as many
Shapes as I was obliged to have Lodgings. At last we were betrayed, and had
only the short Notice given us to yield or secure our selves from the hand of
Justice by the next Morning, when they designed to surprise us: To escape we
found almost impossible, and very hazardous to attempt it; so that Philander,
who was raving with his Fear, called myself and this young Gentleman,
Brilljard, (then Master of his Horse) and one that had served us faithfully
through the whole Course of our Loves) to Council: Many things were in vain
debated, but at last this hard Shift was found out, of marrying me to
Brilljard, for to Philander it was impossible; so that no Authority of a Father
could take me from the Husband. I was at first extremely unwilling, but when
Philander told me it was to be only a mock-Marriage, to secure me to himself, I
was reconciled to it, and more, when I found the in^inite Submission of the
young Man, who vowed he would never look up to me with the Eyes of a Lover or
Husband, but in Obedience to his Lord did it to preserve me entirely for him:
Nay further, to secure my future Fear, he confessed to me he was already
privately married to a Gentlewoman, by whom he had two Children. Oh -- tell me
true my Silvia, Was he married to another? Cried out the overjoyed Lover. Yes,
on my Life, replied Silvia; for when it was proved in Court that I was married
to Brilljard, (as at last I was, and innocently Beded) this Lady came and
brought her Children to me, and falling at my Feet, wept and implored I would
not own her Husband, for only she had right to him; we all were fo^ced to
discover to her the truth of the Matter, and that he had only married me to
secure me from the Rage of my Parents; that if he were her Husband, she was
still as entirely possessed of him as ever, and that he had advanced her Fortune
in what he had done, for she should have him restored with those Advantages
that should make her Life, and that of her Children more Comfortable; and
Philander making both her and the children considerable Presents, sent her away
very well satisfied. After this, before People, we used him to a thousand
Freedoms, but when alone, he retained his Respect entire; however this used him
to something more Familiarity than formerly, and he gr^w to be more a Companion
than a Servant, as indeed we desired he should; and of late have found him more
presumptious than usual: And thus much more I must confess, I have reason to
believe him a most passionate Lover, and have lately found he had Designs upon
me, as you well know.

Judge now, oh dear Octavio, how unfortunate I am; yet judge too, whether I
ought to esteem this a Marriage, or him a Husband: No, replied Octavio, more
briskly than before, nor can he by the Laws of God or Man, pretend to such a
Blessing, and you may be divorced. Pleased with this Thought, he soon assumed
his native Temper of Joy and Softness, and making a thousand new Vows that he
would perform all he had sworn on his part; and imploring and pressing her to
renew those she had made to him, she obeys him; she makes a thousand grateful
Returns, and they pass the Evening the most happily that ever Lovers did. By
this time Supper was served up, noble and handsome; and after Supper he led her
to his Closet, where he presented her with Jewels and other Rareties of great
Value, and omitted nothing that might oblige an Avaritious designing Woman, if
Silvia had been such; nor any thing that might beget Love and Gratitude in the
most insensible Heart: And all he did and all he gave was with a peculiar
Grace, in which there lies as great an Obligation, as in the Gift it self: The
handsome way of giving being an Art so rarely known, even to the most Generous.
In these happy and glorious Moments of Love, wherein the Lover omitted nothing
that could please, Philander was almost forgotten, for it is natural for Love to
beget Love, and Inconstancy its Likeness, or Disdain: And we must conclude
Silvia a Maid wholly insensible, if she had not been touched with Tenderness,
and even Love it self, at all these extravagant marks of Passion in Octavio;
and it must be confessed, she was of a Nature soft and apt for Impression; she
was, in a word, a Woman. She had her Vanities, and her little Fevibleses, and
loved to see Adorers at her Feet, especially those in whom all things, all
Graces, Charms of Youth, Wit and Fortune agreed to form for Love and Conquest:
She naturally loved Power and Dominion; and it was her Maxim, That never any
Woman was displeased to find she could beget Desire.

'Twas thus they lived with uninterrupted Joys, no Spies to pry upon their
Actions, no false Friends to censure their real Pleasures, no Rivals to poison
their true Content, no Parents to give Bounds or grave Rules to the destruction
of nobler lavish Love; but all the Day was past in new Delights, and every Day
produced a thousand Pleasures; and even the Thoughts of Revenge were no more
remembered on either side; it lessened in Silvia's Heart, as Love advanced
there, and her Resentment against Philander was lost in her growing Passion for
Octavio: And sure if any Woman had Excuses for Loving and Inconstancy, the most
Wise and Prudent must allow 'em now to Silvia; and if she had Reason for
Loving, 'twas now, for what she paid the most deserving of his Sex, and whom
she managed with that Art of Loving (if there be Art in Love) that she gained
every Minute upon his Heart, and he became more and more her Slave, the more he
found he was beloved: In spite of all Brilljard's Pretention he would have
married her, but durst not do it while he remained in Holland, because of the
Noise Brilljard's Claim had made; and he feared the Displeasure of his Uncle,
but waited for a more happy time, when he could settle his Affairs so as to
remove her into Flanders, though he could not tell how to accomplish that without
ruining his Interest: These Thoughts alone took up his time whenever he was
absent from Silvia, and would often give him abundance of Trouble, for he was
given over to his Wish of possessing Silvia, and could not live without her; he
loved too much, and thought and considered too little. These were his eternal
Entertainments, when from the lovely Object of his Desire, which was as seldom
as possible, for they were both unwilling to part; though Decency and Rest
required it, a thousand soft things would hinder him, and make her willing to
retain him; and though they were to meet again next Morning, they grudge
themselves the parting Hours, and the Repose of Nature. He longs and languishes
for the blessed Moment that shall give him to the Arms of the ravishing Silvia,
and she finds but too much yielding on her part, in some of those silent lone
Hours, when Love was most prevailing, and feeble Mortals most apt to be
overcome by that insinuating God; so that though Octavio could not ask what he
sighed and died for; though he resolved he would not press her, though for the
Safety of his Life, for any Favors; and though, on the other side, Silvia
resolved she would not grant, no, though mutual Vows had passed, though Love within
pleaded, and almost unresistible Beauties and Inducements without, though all the
Powers of Love, of Silence, Night, and Opportunity, though on the very Point a
thousand times of yielding, she had resisted all: But oh! one Night; let it not
rise up in Judgment against her, you bashful modest Maids, who never yet tried
any powerful Minute; nor you chaste Wives, who give no Opportunities: One night
-- they lost themselves in Dalliance, forgot how very near they were to
yielding, and with imperfect Transports found themselves half dead with Love,
clasped in each others Arms, betrayed by soft Degrees of Joy, to all they
wished. '^ would be too Amorous to tell you more; to tell you all that Night,
that happy Night produced; let it suffice that Silvia yielded all, and made
Octavio happier than a God. At first he found her weeping in his Arms, raving
on what she had unconsideringly done; and with her soft Reproaches chiding her
ravished Lover, who lay sighing by, unable to reply any other way, he held her
fast in those Arms that trembled, yet with Love and new-past Joy; he found a
Pleasure even in her Railing, with a Tenderness that spoke more Love than any
other Language Love could speak. Betwixt his Sighs he pleads his Right of Love,
and the Authority of his solemn Vows; he tells her that the Marriage Ceremony
was but contrived to satisfy the Ignorant, and to proclaim his Title to the
Crowd, but Vows and Contracts were the same to Heaven: He speaks -- and she
believes; and well she might, for all he spoke was honorable Truth. He knew no
Guile, but uttered all his Soul, and all that Soul was Honest, Just, and Brave;
thus by degrees he brought her to a Calm.

In this soft Rancounter he had discovered a thousand new Charms in Silvia; and
contrary to those Men, whose end of Love is Lust (which extinguish together)
Octavio found increase of Tenderness from every Bliss she gave; and grew at
last so fond -- so doting on the still more charming Maid, that he neglected
all his Interest, his Business in the State, and what he owed his Uncle, and
his Friends, and became the common Theme over all the United Provinces, for his
Wantonness and Luxury, as they were pleased to call it; and living so contrary
to the Humor of those more sordid and slovenly Men of Quality, which make up
the Nobility of that parcel of the World. For while thus he lived retired,
scarce visiting any one, or permitting any to visit him, they charge him with a
thousand Crimes of having given himself over to Effeminacy; as indeed he grew
too Lazy in her Arms; neglecting Glory, Arms, and Power, for the more real Joys
of Life; while she even Rifles him with Extravagancy; and grows so bold and
hardy, that regarding not the Humors of the stingy censorious Nation, his
Interest, or her own Fame, she is seen every day in his Coaches going to take
the Air out of Town; puts him upon Balls, and vast expensive Treats; devises
new Projects and ways of Diversion, till some of the more busy Impertinents of
the Town made a public Complaint to his Uncle, and the rest of the States,
urging he was a Scandal to the Reverend and Honorable Society. On which it was
decreed that he should either lose that Honor, or take up, and live more
according to the Gravity and Authority of a Senator: This Incenses Sebastian,
both against the States and his Nephew; for though he had often reproved and
counseled him, yet he scorned his Darling should be schooled by his Equals in
Power. So that resolving either to discard him, or draw him from the Love of
this Woman; he one Morning goes to his Nephews House, and sending him up word
by his Page he would speak to him, he was conducted to his Chamber, where he
found him in his Nightgown: He began to upbraid him, first with his want of
Respect and Duty to him, and next, of his Affairs, neglecting to give his
Attendance on the Public: He tells him he is become a Scandal to the
Commonwealth, and that he lived a lude Life with another Man's Wife: He tells
him he has all her Story, and she was not only a Wife, but a scandalous
Mistress too to Philander. She boasts, says he, of Honorable Birth, but what is
that, when her Conduct is Infamous? In short, Sir, continued he, your Life is
obnoxious to the whole Province: Why, what Sir -- cannot honest Men's Daughters
(cried he, more angerly) serve your turn, but you must crack a Commandment?
Why, this is flat Adultery: A little Fornication in a civil way, might have
been allowed, but this is stark naught. In fine Sir, quit me this Woman, and
quit her me presently; or, in the first place, I renounce thee, cast thee from
me as a Stranger, and will leave thee to Ruin, and the incensed States. A
little Pleasure -- a little Recreation, I can allow: A Layer of Love, and a
Layer of Business -- But to neglect the Nation for a Wench, is flat Treason
against the State; and I wish there were a Law against all such unreasonable
Whore-Masters -- that are Statesmen -- for the rest it is no great matter.
Therefore in a Word, Sir, leave me off this Mistress of yours, or we will
secure her yet for a French Spy, that comes to debauch our Common-Wealths-Men
-- The States can do it Sir, they can -- Hitherto Octavio received all with
Blush and Bow, in sign of Obedience; but when his Uncle told him the States
would send away his Mistress; no longer able to contain his Rage, he broke out
into all the Violence imaginable against them, and swore he would not now
forego Silvia to be Monarch over all the nasty Provinces, and 'twas a greater
Glory to be a Slave at her Feet. Go, tell your States, cried he -- They are a
company of Cynical Fops, born to moyl on in sordid Business, who never were
worthy to understand so great a Happiness of Life, as that of nobler Love. Tell
'em, I scorn the dull Gravity of those Asses of the Commonwealth, fit only to
bear the dirty Load of State Affairs, and die old busy Fools. The Uncle, who
little expected such a Return from him who used to be all Obedience, began more
gently to persuade him with more solid Reason, but could get no other Answer
from him, than that what he commanded he should find it Difficult to disobey;
and so for that time they parted. Some days after (he never coming so much as
near their Councils) they sent for him, to answer the Contempt: He came and
received abundance of hard Reproaches, and finding they were resolved to
Degrade him, he presently rallied them in Answer to all they said; nor could
all the Cautions of his Friends persuade him to any Submission, after receiving
so rough and ill-bred a Treatment as they gave him: And impatient to return to
Silvia, where all his Joys were Centered, he was with much a-do persuaded to
stay and hear the Resolution of the Council, which was to take from him those
Honors he held amongst them; at which he cocked and smiled, and told 'em he
received what he was much more proud of than of those useless Trifles they
called Honors; and wishes they might treat all that served them at that
ungrateful Rate: For he that had received a hundred Wounds, and lost a Stream
of Blood for their Security, shall, if he kiss their Wives against their Wills,
be banished like a Coward. So hasting from the Council, he got into his Coach,
and went to Silvia. This incensed the old Gentlemen to a high Degree, and they
carried it against the younger Party. (because more in Number) That this French
Lady, who was for High Treason, as they called it, forced to fly France, should
be no longer protected in Holland: And in order to her Removal, or rather their
Revenge on Octavio, they sent out their Warrant to Apprehend her; and either to
send her as an Enemy to France, or force her to some other part of the World.
For a day or two Sebastian's Interest prevailed for the stoping the Warrant;
believing he should be able to bring his Nephew to some Submission, which when
he found in vain, he betook himself to his Chamber, and refused any Visits or
Diversions: By this time Octavio's rallying the States was become the Jest of
the Town, and all the Sparks laughed at them as they past, and Lampoon'd 'em to
damnable Dutch Tunes, which so highly incensed 'em that they sent immediately
and served the Warrant on Silvia, whom they surpised in Octavio's Coach, as
she was coming from taking the Air. You may imagine what an Agony of Trouble
and Grief our generous and surpised Lover was in: It was in vain to make
Resistance, and he who before would not have submitted to have saved his Life,
to the States, now for the Preservation of one moments Content to Silvia, he
was ready to go and fall at their Feet, kiss their Shoes, and implore their
Pity. He first accompanies her to the House of the Messenger, where he only is
permitted to behold her with Eyes of dying Love, and unable to say any thing to
her, left her with such Gifts, and Charge, to the Messengers Care, as might
oblige him to treat her well; While Silvia, less surprised, bid him, at going
from her, not to afflict himself for any thing she suffered; she found it was
the Malice of the pevish old Magistrates, and that the most they could do to
her, was to send her from him: This last she spoke with a Sigh, that pierced
his Heart more sensibly than ever any thing yet had done; and he only replied
(with a Sigh) No Silvia, no rigid Power on Earth shall ever be able to deprive
you of my eternal Adoration, or to separate me one Moment from Silvia, after
she is compelled to leave this ungrateful place, and whose Departure I will
hasten all that I can, since the Land is not worthy of so great a Blessing. So
leaving her for a little Space, he hasted to his Uncle, whom he found very much
discontented: He throws himself at his Feet, and assails him with all the
moving Eloquence of Sighs and Tears; in vain was all, in vain alas he pleads.
From this he flies to Rage -- and says all a distracted Lover could power forth
to ease a tortured Heart; what Divinity did he not provoke? Wholly regardless
even of Heaven and Man, he made a public Confession of his Passion, denied her
being married to Brilljard, and weeps as he protests her Innocence: He kneels
again, implores and begs anew, and made the movingest Moan that ever touched a
Heart, but could receive no other Return but Threats and Frowns: The old
Gentleman had never been in Love since he was born, no not enough to marry, but
bore and unaccountable Hate to the whole Sex, and therefore was pityless to all
he could say on the Score of Love; though he endeavors to soften him by a
thousand things more dear to him. For my Sake, Sir, said he, if ever my soft
Pleawere grateful to you, when all your Joy was in the young Octavio; release,
release, the charming Silvia; regard her tender Youth, her blooming Beauty, her
timorous helpless Sex, her noble Quality, and save her from the rude Assaults
of Power -- Oh save the Lovely Maid! This he uttered with interrupting Sighs
and Tears, which fell upon the Floor as he pursued the Obdurate on his Knees:
At last Pity touched his Heart, and he said -- Spare, Sir, the Character of
your enchanting Circe; for I have heard too much of her, and what Mischiefs she
has bred in France; abandoning her Honor, betraying a virtuous Sister,
defaming her Noble Parents, and ruining an Illustrious young Noble Man, who was
both her Brother and her Lover. This Sir, in short, is the Character of your
Beauteous Innocent. Alas Sir, replied Octavio, you never saw this Maid! or if
you had, you would not be so cruel. Go to, Sir, replied the old Gentleman, I am
not so soon softened at the sight of Beauty. But do but see her, Sir, replied
Octavio, and then perhaps you will be charmed like me -- You are a Fop, Sir,
replied Sebastian, and if you would have me allow any Favor to your enchanting
Lady, you must promise me first to abandon her, and marry the Widow of Monsieur
-- who is vastly Rich, and whom I have so often recommended to you, she loves
you too; and though she be not fair, she has the best Fortune of any Lady in the
Netherlands. On these Terms, Sir, I am for a Reconciliation with you, and will
immediately go and deliver the fair Prisoner, and she shall have her Liberty to
go or stay, or do what she please -- and now, Sir, you know my Will and
Pleasure -- Octavio found it vain to pursue him any further with his Petitions;
only replied it was wondrous hard and cruel. To which the old one replied;
It Is what must be done, I have resolved it, or my Estate, in value, above two
hundred thousand Pounds, shall be disposed of to your Sister, the Countess of
Clarinau: And this he ended with an Execration on himself if he did not do; and
he was a Man that always was just to his Word.

Much more to this ungrateful effect he spoke, and Octavio had Recourse to all
the Dissimulation his generous Soul was capable of; and 'twas the first base
thing, and sure the last, that ever he was guilty of. He promises his Uncle to
obey all his Commands and Injunctions, since he would have it so; and only
begged he might be permitted but one Visit, to take his last Leave of her: This
was at first refused, but at last; provided he might hear what he said to her,
he would suffer him to go: For, said the crafty old Man (who knew too well the
Cunning of Youth) I will have no Tricks put upon me; I will not be outwitted by
a young Knave: This was the worst part of all; he knew, if he alone could speak
with her, they might have contrived, by handsome agreeing Flattery, to have
accomplished their Design, which was; first, by the Authority of the old
Gentleman to have freed her from Confinement; and next, to have settled his
Affairs in the best Posture he could; and without valuing his Uncle's Fortune,
his own being greater, he resolved to go with her into Flanders or Italy; but
his going with him to visit her would prevent whatever they might resolve: But
since the Liberty of Silvia was first to be considered, he resolves -- since it
must be so, and leaves the rest to Time and his good Fortune. Well then, Sir,
said Octavio, since you have resolved your self, to be a Witness of those
melancholy things, I shall possibly say to her, let us haste to end the great
Affair -- Hang it, Cried Sebastian, if I go I shall abuse the young Hussie, or
commit some Indecency that will not be suitable to good Manners -- I hope you
will, not Sir -- replied Octavio -- Whip 'em, whip 'em, replied the Uncle, I
hate the young cozening Baggages, that wander about the World undoing young
extravagant Coxcombes; gots so, they are naught, stark-naught -- Be sure you
dispatch as soon as you can, and -- do you hear -- let us have no Whineing.
Octavio overjoyed he should have her released to Night, promised lavishly all
he was urged to; and his own Coach being at the Gate, they both went
immediately to the House of the Messenger; and all the way the old Gentleman
did nothing but rail against the Vices of the Age, and the Sins of Villainous
Youth; the Snares of Beauty, and the Danger of witty Women; and of how ill
Consequences these were to a Commonwealth. He said, if he were to make Laws,
he would confine all young Women to Monasteries, where they should never see
Man till Forty, and then come out and marry for Generation sake, no more: For
his part he had never seen that Beauty yet that could inspire him with that
silly thing called Love; and wondered what the Devil ailed all the young
Fellows of this Age, that they talked of nothing else: At this rate they
discoursed till they arrived at the Prison, and calling for the Messenger, he
conducted them both to the Chamber of the fair Prisoner, who was laid on a
Couch, near which stood a Table with two Candles, which gave a great Light to
that part of the Room, and made Silvia appear more fair than ever, if possible.
She had not that day been dressed but in a rich Nightgown, and Cornets of the
most advantageous Fashion: At his Approach she blushed (with a secret Joy,
which never had possessed her Soul for him before) and spread a thousand
Beauties round her fair Face: She was leaping with a transported Pleasure to
his Arms, when she perceived an old Grave Person follow him into the Room: At
which she reassumed a Strangeness, a melancholy Languishment, which charmed no
less than her Gayety. She approaches 'em with a modest Grace in her beautiful
Eyes; and by the Reception Octavio gave her, she found that reverend Person was
his Uncle, or at least some body of Authority; and therefore assuming a Gravity
unusual, she received 'em with all the Ceremony due to their Quality: And first
she addressed herself to the old Gentleman, who stood gazing at her, without
Motion; at which she was a little out of Countenance. When Octavio perceiving
it, approached his Uncle, and cried, Sir, This is the Lady -- Sebastian
starting as from a Dream, cried -- Pardon me, Madam, I am a Fellow whom Age
has rendered less Ceremonious than Youth: I have never yet been so happy as to
have been used to a fair Lady; Women never took up one Minute of my more
percious time, but I have been a Satyr upon the whole Sex: And if my Treatment
of you be rougher than your Birth and Beauty Merits, I beseech you -- fair
Creature, pardon it, since I am come in order to do you Service. Sir, replied
Silvia. (blushing with Anger at the Presence of a Man who had contributed to
the having brought her to that place) I cannot but wonder at this sudden Change
of Goodness, in a Person to whom I am indebted for part of my Misfortune, and
which I shall no longer esteem as such, since it has occasioned me a Happiness,
and an Honor, to which I could no other way have arrived. This last she spoke
with usual insinuating Charms; the little Affectation of the Voice sweetened to
all the Tenderness it was possible to put on, and so easy and natural to
Silvia: And if before the old Gentleman were seized with some unusual Pleasure,
which before he never felt about his icy and insensible Heart, and which now
began to thaw at the Fire of her Eyes -- I say, if before he were surprised
with looking, what was he when she spoke -- with a Voice so soft, and an Air so
bewitching? He was all Eyes and Ears, and had use of no other Sense but what
informed those: He gazes upon her, as if he waited and listened what she would
farther say; and she stood waiting for his Reply, till ashamed, she turned her
Eyes into her Bosom, and knew not how to proceed. Octavio views both by turns,
and knows not how to begin the Discourse again, it being his Uncle's Cue to
speak: But finding him altogether mute -- he steps to him, and gently pulled
him by the Sleeve -- but finds no Motion in him; he speaks to him, but in vain,
for he could hear nothing but Silvia's charming Voice; nor saw nothing but her
lovely Face, nor attended any thing but when she would speak again, and look
that way. At this Octavio smiled, and taking his Adorable by the Hand, he led
her nearer her admiring Adversary; whom she approached with Modesty and
Sweetness in her Eyes, that the old Fellow having never before beheld the like
Vision was wholly vanquished, and his old Heart burnt in the Socket, which
being his last Blaze made the greater Fire. Fine Lady, cried he -- or rather
fine Angel, how is it I shall expiate for a Barbarity that nothing could be
guilty of but the Brute, who had not learned Humanity from your Eyes: What
Atonement can I make for my Sin; and how shall I be punished? Sir, replied
Silvia, if I can merit your Esteem and Assistance, to deliver me from this
cruel Con^inement, I shall think of what is past as a Joy, since it renders me
worthy of your Pity and Compassion. To answer you, Madam, were to hold you
under this unworthy Roof too long; therefore let me convince you of my Service,
by leading you to a Place more fit for so fair a Person. And calling for the
Messenger, he asked him if he would take his Bail for his fair Prisoner; who
replied, Your Lordship may Command all things: So throwing him a little Purse,
about thirty Pounds in Gold, he bid him drink the Ladies Health; and without
more Ceremony or talk, led her to the Coach; and never so much as asking her
whether she would go, insensibly carries her, where he had amind to have her,
to his own House: This was a little Affliction to Octavio, who nevertheless
durst not say any thing to his Uncle, nor so much as to ask him the Reason why:
But being arrived all thither, he conducts her into a very fair Apartment, and
bade her there command that World he could command for her: He gave her there a
very magnificent Supper, and all three supped together, Octavio and Silvia
still wondering what would be the Issue of this Business; for Octavio could not
imagine that his Uncle, who was a single Man, and a grave Senator, one famed
for a Woman-Hater, a great Railer at the Vices of young Men, should keep a fair
young single Woman in his House: But it growing late, and no Preparation for
her Departing, she took the Courage to say -- Sir, I am so extremely Obliged to
you, and have received so great a Favor from you, that I cannot flatter myself
it is for any Virtue in me, or merely out of Compassion to my Sex, that you have
done this; but for somebody's Sake to whom I am more enjaged than I am aware
of; and when you passed your Parole for my Liberty, I am not so vain to think
it was for my Sake; therefore pray inform me, Sir, how I can pay this Debt, and
to whom, and who it is you require should be bound for me, to save you
harmless. Madam, cried Sebastian, though there need no greater Security than your
own Innocence, yet least that Innocence should not be sufficient to guard you
from the Outrage of a People approaching to Savages, I^ b^gg^, for your own
Security, not mine, that you will make this House your Sanctuary; my Power can
save you from impending Harms, and all that I call mine, you shall command. At
this she blushing bowed, but durst not make Reply to contradict him: She knew
at least that there she was safe, and well, free from Fear of the Tyranny of
the rest, or any other Apprehension: It Is true she found by the Shyness of
Octavio toward her before his Uncle, that she was to manage her Amor with him
by stealth, till they could contrive matters more to their Advantage: She
therefore finding she should want nothing, but as much of Octavio's
Conversation as she desired; she begged he would give her Leave to write a Note
to her Page, who was a faithful sober Youth, to bring her Jewels, and what
things she had of Value, to her, which she did, and received those and her
Servants together, who ^ound a perfect Welcome to the old Lover; but Antonett
had like to have lost her Place, but that Octavio pleaded for her, and she
herself confessing 'twas Love to the false Brilljard, that made her do that
foolish thing (in which she vowed she thought no harm, though it was like to have
cost so dear) she was again received into Favor: So that for some Days Silvia
found herself very much at her Ease with the old Gentleman, and had no want of
any thing but Octavio's Company: But she had the Pleasure to find by his Eyes
and Sighs he wanted hers more: He died every day, and his fair Face faded like
falling Roses: Still she was gay; for if she had it not about her, she assumed
it to keep him in Heart: she was not displeased to see the old Man on Fire too,
and fancied some Diversion from the Intrigue: But he concealed his Passion all
he could, both to hide it from his Nephew, and because he knew not what he
ailed: A strange change he found, a wondrous Disorder in Nature, but could not
give a Name to it, nor Sigh aloud for fear he should be heard, and lose his
Reputation; especially for this Woman, on whom he had railed so lavishly. One
day therefore, after a Night of Torment very incommode to his Age, he takes
Octavio into the Garden alone, telling him he had a great Secret to impart to
him. Octavio guessing what it might be, put his Heart in as good order as he
could to receive it: He at least knew the worst was but for him at last to
steal Silvia from him, if he should be weak enough to dote on the young
Charmer, and therefore resolved to hear with patience. But if he were prepared
to attend, the other was not prepared to begin, and so both walked many silent
Turns about the Garden. Sebastian had a-mind to ask a thousand Questions of his
Nephew, who he found, ma^gre all his Vows of deserting Silvia, had no power of
doing it: He had a-mind to urge him to marry the Widow, but durst not now press
it, though he used to do so, least he should take it for Jealousy in him; nor
durst he now forbid him seeing her, least he should betray the Secrets of his
Soul: He began every Moment to love him le^s, as he loved Silvia more, and
beholds him as an Enemy to his Repose, nay his very Life. At last the old Man
(who thought if he brought his Nephew forth under pretense of a Secret, and
said nothing to him, it would have looked ill) began to speak. Octavio, said
he, I have hitherto found you so just in all you have said, that ^were a Sin to
doubt you, in what relates to Silvia. You have told me she is nobly Born; and
you have with infinite Imprecations convinced me she is Virtuous; and lastly,
you have sworn she was not Married -- At this he sighed and paused, and left
Octavio trembling with Fear of the Result: A thousand times he was like to have
denied all, but durst not defame the most sacred Idol of his Soul: Sometimes he
thought his Uncle would be generous, and think it fit to give him Silvia; but
that Thought was too Seraphick to remain a Moment in his Heart. Sir, replied
Octavio, I own I said so of Silvia, and hope no Action she has committed since
she had a Protection under your Roof has contradicted any thing I said. No,
said Sebastian, sighing -- and pausing, as loath to speak more: Sir, said
Octavio, I suppose this is not the Secret you had to impart to me, for which
you separate me to this lonely Walk; fear not to trust me with it, whatever it
be, for I am so entirely your own, that I will grant, submit, prostrate myself,
and give up all my Will, Power, and Faculties to your Interest or Designs. This
encouraged the old Lover, who replied -- Tell me on Truth, Octavio, which I
require of you, and I will desire no more -- Have not you had the Possession of
this fair Maid? You apprehend me: Now it it was that he feared what Design the
Amorous old Gentleman had in his Head and Heart; and was at a loss what to say,
whether to give him some Jealousy that he had known and possessed her, and so
prevent his Designs on her; or by saying he had not, to leave her Defenseless
to his Love. But on second Thoughts, he could not resolve to say any thing to
the Disadvantage of Silvia, though to save his own Life; and therefore assured
his Uncle he never durst assume the Boldness to ask so rude a Question of a
Woman of her Quality: And much more he spoke to that purpose to convince him.
That it is true he would have Married her, if he could have gained his consent;
maugre all the Scandal that the malicious World had thrown upon her. But since
he was positive in his command for the Widow, he would bend his Mind to
Obedience. In that, replied Sabastian, you are Wise, and I am glad all your
Youthful Fires are blown over; and having once fixed you in the World as I
design, I have resolved on an Affair -- At this again he paused -- I am, says
he, in Love, -- I think it is Love, or that which you call so: I cannot eat nor
sleep, nor even pray, but this fair Stranger interposes; or if by chance I
slumber, all my Dreams are of her; I see her, I touch her, I embrace her, and
find a Pleasure even then that all my waking Thoughts could never procure me.
If I go to the State House I mind nothing there, my Heart's at home with the
Young Gentlewoman, on the Change or wheresoever I go, my restless Thoughts
present her still before me: And prithee tell me, is not this Love, Octavio? It
may arrive to Love, replied the blushing Youth, if you should fondly give way
to it: But you are Wise and Grave, and hate all Women, Sir, till about Forty,
and then for Generation only: You are above the Follies of vain Youth. And let
me tell you, Sir, without Offending, Already you are charged with a Thousand
little Vanities unsuitable to your Years, and the Character you have had, and
the Figure you have made in the World. I heard a Lampoon on you the other day,
-- Pardon my Freedom, Sir, for keeping a Beauty in your House, who they are
pleased to say was my Mistress before. And pulling out a Lampoon, which his
Page had before given him, he gave it his Uncle. But instead of making him
resolve to quit Silvia, it only served to incense him against Octavio; he
railed at all Wits, and swore there was not a more dangerous Enemy to a civil,
sober Commonwealth: That a Poet was to be banished as a Spy, or hanged as a
Traitor: That it ought to be as much against the Law to let 'em live, as to
Shoot with white Powder, and that to write Lampoons should be put into the
Statute against Stabbing. And could he find the Rogue that had the Wit to write
that, he would make him a warning to all the Race of that Damnable Vermin; what
to abuse a Magistrate, one of the States, a very Monarch of the Commonwealth!
-- 'twas Abominable and not to be born, -- and looking on his Nephew, -- and
considering his Face a while, he cried, -- I Fancy, Sir, by your Physiognomy,
that you your self have a hand in this Libel: At which Octavio blushed, which
he taking for guilt, flew out into terrible Anger against him, not suffering
him to speak for himself, or clear his Innocence. And as he was going in this
Rage from him, having forbidden him ever to set his Foot within his Doors, he
told him, -- If, said he, the scandalous Town, from your Instructions, have
such Thoughts of me, I will convince it by Marrying this fair Stranger the
first thing I do: I cannot doubt but to find a welcome since she is a Banished
Woman, without Friend or Protection; and especially when she shall see how
civilly you have handled her here, in your Dogerel Ballad: I Will teach you to be
a Wit, Sir; and so your Humble Servant. -- And leaving him almost wild with his
Fears, he went directly to Silvia, where he told her, his Nephew was going to
make up the Match between himself and Madam the Widow of -- and that he had
made a scandalous Lampoon on her Fair self. He forgot nothing that might make
her hate the Amiable young Nobleman, whom she knew too well to believe that any
thing of this was other than the effects of his own growing Passion for her.
For though she saw Octavio every day, in this time she had remained at his
Uncles, yet the Old Lover so watched their very Looks, that 'twas impossible
almost to tell one another Heart by any Glance there. But Octavio had once in
this time conveyed a Letter to her, which having Opportunity to do he put it
into her Comb-box, when he was with his Uncle one day in her Dressing Room; for
he durst not trust her Pag^, and less Antonett, who had before betrayed 'em:
And having for Silvia's release so solemnly Sworn to his Uncle, (to which Vows
he took Religious care to keep him.) He had so perfect an awe upon his Spirits
from every Look and Command of his Uncles, he took infinitely heed how he gave
him any Umbrage by any Action of his; and the rather because he hoped when time
should serve to bring about his Business of stealing Silvia from him, for she
was kept and guarded like a mighty Heiress; so that by this prudent Management
on both sides, they heightened the growing Love in every Heart. In that Billet
which he dropped in her Comb-box, he did not only make Ten thousand Vows of
Eternal Passion and Faith, and beg the same assurance of her again; but told
her he was secured (so well he thought of her) from fears of his Uncles
Addresses to her, and begged she would not let 'em perplex her, but rather serve
her for her diversion, that she should from time to time write him all he said
to her, and how he treated her when alone; and that since the Old Lover was so
watchful, she should not trust her Letters with any body; but as she walked out
into the Garden, she should in passing throw the Hall, put her Letter in at the
broken Glass of an Old Sedan that stood there, and had stood for several Years;
and that his own Page, whom he could trust, should, when he came with him to
his Uncles, take it from thence. -- Thus every Day they writ, and received the
dearest returns in the World; where all the Satisfaction, that Vows often
repeated could give, was rendered each other; with an account from Silvia that
was very pleasant, of all the Passion of the Doting Old Sebastian, the
Presents he made her, the Fantastic Youth he would assume, and the unusual
manner of his Love, which was a great diversion to both; and this Difficulty of
speaking to Silvia, and entertaining her with Love, though it had its Pains, had
its infinite Pleasures too; it increased their Love on both sides, and all
their Wishes. But now by this last Banishment from the House where she was, to
lose that only Pleasure of beholding the Adorable Maid, gave him all the Pains
without the hope of one Pleasure; and he began to fear he should have a World
of Difficulty to secure the dear Object of his continual Thoughts: He found no
way to send to her, and dreads all his Malicious Uncle and Rival may say to his
disadvantage: He dreads even that infinite Tenderness and Esteem he had for the
good Old Man, who had been so fond a Parent to him; least even that should make
him unwilling to use that Extremity against him in the regaining Silvia, which
he would use to any other Man. Oh, how he Curses the fatal hour that ever he
implored his Aid for her Release; and having overcome all Difficulties, even
that of his Fears of Philander, (from whom they had received no Letter in Two
Months) and that of Silvia's Disdain, and had Established himself in her Soul
and her Arms; he should, by employing his Uncle's Authority for Silvia's
Service, be so Unfortunate to involve 'em into new Dangers and Difficulties, of
which he could foresee no other end, than that which must be fatal to some of
'em. But he believed half his Torture would be eased, could he but write to
Silvia, for see her he could not hope: He bethought himself of a way atlast.

His Uncle had belonging to his House the most fine Garden of any in that
Province, where those things are not much esteemed, in which the Old Gentleman
took wonderful Delight, and kept a Gardener and his Family in a little House at
the farther end of the Garden, on purpose to look to it and dress it. This Man
had a very great Veneration for Octavio, whom he called his Young Lord. Sure of
the Fidelity of this Gardener, when it was dark enough to conceal him, he wrapped
himself in his Cloak and got him thither by a back-way, where with Presents he
soon won those to his Interest, who would before have been Commanded by him in
any Service. He had a little clean Room, and some little French Novels which he
brought; and there he was as well concealed as if he had been at the Indies; he
left word at home that he was gone out of Town. He knew well enough that
Silvia's Lodgings looked that way. And when it was dark enough he walked under
her Window, till he saw a Candle lighted in Silvia's Bedchamber, which was as
great a Joy to him as the Star that Guides the Traveller, or wandering Seaman,
or the Lamp at Sestos, that Guided the Ravished Lover over the Hellespont. And
by that time he could imagine all in Bed, he made a little noise with a Key on
the Pummel of his Sword; but whether Silvia heard it or not I cannot tell, but
she anon came to the Window, and putting up the Shash, leaned on her Arms and
looked into the Garden. Oh! who but he himself that Loved so well as Octavio,
can express the Transports he was in at the Sight? which more from the Sight
within than that without, he saw was the lovely Silvia; whom calling softly by
her Name, answered him as if she knew the welcome Voice, and cried, -- Whose
there, Octavio? She was soon Answered you may imagine. And they began the most
indearing Conversation that ever Love could dictate. He complains on his Fate
that sets 'em at that distance, and she pities him. He makes a Thousand Doubts,
and she undeceives 'em all. He Fears, and she convinces his Error, and is
impatient at his Suspicions. She will not endure him to question a Heart that
has given him so many proofs of its Tenderness and Gratitude: She tells him her
own Wishes, how soft and servent they are; and assures him, he is extremely
obliged to her -- Since for you -- my Charming Friend, said she to Octavio, I
have refused this Night to Marry your Uncle; have a care, said she, Smiling,
how you treat me, least I revenge my self on you; become your Aunt, and bring
Heirs to the Estate you have a Right to: The Writings of all which I have now
in my Chamber, and which were but just now laid at my Feet, and which I cannot
yet get him to receive back. And to oblige me to a compliance, has told me, how
you have deceived me, by giving your self to another, and exposing me in
Lampoons. -- To this Octavio would have replied, but she assured him she needed
no Argument to convince her of the Falshhood of all. He Sighs, and told her all
she said, though Dear and Charming was not sufficient to ease his Heart, for he
foresaw a World of hazard to get her from thence, and mischiefs if she
remained; insomuch that he caused the Tears to flow from the fair Eyes of
Silvia, with the Reflections on her rigid Fortune. And she cried, Oh, my
Octavio! what strange Fate or Stars ruled my Birth, that I should be born the
ruin of what I Love, or of those that Love me? At this rate they past the
Night, sometimes more soft, sometimes encouraging one another; but the last
result was to contrive the means of escaping. He fancied she might easily do it
by the Garden from that Window: But that he was not sure he could trust the
Gardener so far, who in all things would serve him, in which his Lord and
Master was not Injured; and he amongst the rest of the Servants, had Order not
to suffer Silvia out of the Garden, for which reason he kept a strict Guard on
that Backdoor. Some way must be found out which yet was not, and was left to
time. He told her where he was, and that he would not stir from thence, till he
were secured of her flight: And Day coming on, though loath, yet for fear of Eyes
and Ears that might Spy upon 'em, he retired to his little Lodging and Silvia
to Bed; after giving and receiving a Thousand Vows and Farewels. The next Night
he came to the same place, but instead of entertaining her -- he only saw her
softly put up the Shash a little, and throw something white out of the Window
and retire. He was wondering at the meaning, but taking up what was thrown down,
he found and smelt it was Silvia's Handkerchief, in which was tied up a Billet:
He went to his little Lodging and read it.

Silvia to Octavio.
GO from my Window my adorable Friend, and be not afflicted that I do not
entertain you, as I had the Joy to do last Night, for bath our Voices were
heard by some one tha^ Lodges below, and though your Uncle could not tell me any
part of our Conversation, yet he heard I talked to somebody; I have persuaded
him the Fellow dreamed, who gave him this Intelligence, and he is almost
satisfied he did so; however hazard not thy dear self any more so, but let me
lose for a while the greatest Happiness this Earth can afford me (in the
Circumstances of our Fortunes) rather than expose what is dearer to me than
Life or Honor: Pity the Fate I was born to, and expect all things from

Your Silvia.
I will wait at the Window for your Answer, and let you down a Ribband, by
which I will draw it up: But as you love me do not speak.




He had no sooner read this, but he went to write an Answer, which was this.

Octavio to Silvia.
COmplain not, thou Goddess of my Vows, on the Fate thou were born to procure
to all Mankind; but thank Heaven for having received ten thousand Charms that
can recompense all the Injuries you so unwillingly do us: And who would not
implore his Ruin from all the angry Powers, if in return they would give him
so glorious a Reward? Who would not be undone to all the trifling Honors of
the mistaken World, to find himself in lieu of all, possessed of the Ravishing
Silvia? But oh! where is that presumptious Man, that can at the price of all,
lay claim to so vast a Blessing? Alas my Silvia, even while I dare call you
mine, I am not that hoping Slave, no not after all the valued dear things you
have said and vowed to me last Night in the Garden, welcome to my Soul as Life
after a Sentence of Death, or Heaven after Life is ended. But, oh Silvia! all
this, even all you uttered from your dear Mouth is not sufficient to support
me: Alas, I die for Silvia: I am not able to bear the cruel Absence longer,
therefore without Delay assist me to contrive your Escape, or I shall die and
leave you to the Ravage of his Love who holds thee from me; the very Thoughts
of that is worse than Death. I die, alas I die, for an entire Possession of
thee: Oh let me grasp my Treasure, let me ingross it all, here in my longing
Arms. I can no longer languish at this Distance from my eternal Joy, my Life,
my Soul! But oh I Rave! and while I should be speaking a thousand useful
things, I am telling you my Pain, a Pain that you may guess; and confounding
myself between those and their Remedies, am able to fix on nothing: Help me to
think, oh my dear charming Creature, help me to think how I shall bear thee
off! Take your own Measures, flatter him with Love; sooth him to Faith and
Confidence, and then -- oh pardon me if there be Baseness in the Action -- then
-- Cozen him -- Deceive him -- any thing -- for he deserves it all, that thinks
that lovely Body was formed for his Embraces, whom Age has rendered fitter for
a Grave. Form any Plots, use every Stratagem to save the Life of.

Your Octavio.


He writ this in Have and Disorder, as you may plainly see by the Style, and
went to the Window with it, where he found Silvia leaning expecting him: The
Shashes were up, and he tossed it in the Ha^^kerchief into her Window: She read
it, and writ an Answer back as soft as Love could form, to send him pleased to
Bed: wherein she commanded him to hope all things form her Wit and industrious
Love.

This had partly the Effects she wished, and after kissing his Hand, and
throwing it up toward Silvia, they parted as silent as the Night from Day,
which was now just dividing -- so long they stayed, though but to look at each
other; so that all the Morning was passed in Bed to make the Day seem shorter,
which was too tedious to both: This Pleasure he had after Noon, toward the
Evening, that when Silvia walked, as she always did in the Garden, he could
see her through the Glass of his Window, but durst not open it; for the old
Gentleman was ever with her. In this time Octavio failed not however to essay
the good Nature of the Gardener in order to Silvia's Flight, but ^ound there
was no dealing with him in this Affair; and therefore durst not come right down
to the Point: The next Night he came under the beloved Window again, and found
the sacred Object of his Wishes leaning in the Window expecting him: To whom,
as soon as she heard his Tread on the Gravel, she threw down a Handkerchief
again, which he took up, and tossed his own with a soft complaining Letter to
entertain her till his Return; for he hasted to read hers, and swep'd the
Garden as he passed as swift as Wind; so impatient he was to see the Inside --
which he found thus.

Silvia to Octavio.
I Beg, my charming Friend, you will be assured of all I have promised you; and
to believe that, but for the Pleasure of those dear Billets I receive from you,
I could as little support this cruel Confinement as you my Absence. I have but
one Game to play, and I beseech you not to be surpised at it; it is to promise
to marry Sebastian: He is eternally at my Feet, and either I must give him my
Vow to become his Wife, or give him hope of other Favors. I am so entirely
yours, that I will be guided by you which I shall Flatter him in, to gain my
Liberty, for if I grant either he has proposed to carry me to his
Country House, two Leagues from the Town, and there Consummate whatever I
design to bless him with; and this is it that has wrought my Consent, that we
being to go alone, only my own Servants, you may easily take me thence by Force
upon the Road, or after our Arrival, where he will not guard me perhaps so
strictly as he does here: For that, I leave it to your Conduct, and expect your
Answer to

Your Impatient Silvia.


He immediately sat down and writ this.

Octavio to Silvia.
HAVE a Care, my Charming Fair, how you play with Vows; and however you are
forced for that Religious End of saving your Honor, to deceive the poor old
Lover, whom, by Heaven, I pity; yet rather let me die than know you can be
guilty of Vow-Br^ach, though made in jest. I am well pleased at the Glimpse of
Hope you give me, that I shall see you at his Villa; and doubt not but to find
a way to secure you to myself: Say any thing, promise to sacrifice all to his
Desire; but oh, do not give away thy dear, thy precious self by Vow, to any but
the Languishing.

Octavio.


After he had writ this he hast'd and throws it into her Window, and returned
to Bed without seeing her, which was no small Affliction to his Soul: He had an
ill Night of it, and fancied a thousand tormenting things; That the old
Gentleman might th^^ be with her; and if alone, what might he not persuade by
force of rich Presents, of which his Uncle was well stored: And so he guessed,
and as he guessed it proved, as by his next Nights Letter he was informed, that
the old Lover no sooner saw Silvia retire, but having a mind to try his Fortune
in some Critical Minute -- for such a Minute he had heard there was that
favored Lovers; but he goes to his Closet, and taking out some Jewels of great
Value, to make himself the more welcome, he goes directly to Silvia's Chamber,
and entered just as she had taken up Octavio's Letter, and clapped it in her
Bosom as she heard some body at the Door; but was not in a little Confusion
when she saw who it was; which she excused, by telling him she was surpised to
find herself with a Man in her Chamber: That there he fell to pleading his
cause of Love; and offered her again to settle his Estate upon her, and
implored she would be his Wife. After a thousand faint Denials, she told him
she could not possibly receive that Honor, but if she could, she would have
looked upon it as a great Favor from Heaven; at that he was Thunderstruck,
and looked as ghastly as if his Mothers Ghost had frightened him; and after much
Debate, Love and Grief on his side, Design and Dissimulation on hers, she gave
him Hopes that Atoned for all she had before said; insomuch that before they
parted an absolute Bargain was struck up, and he was to settle part of his
Estate upon her, as also that Villa, to which he had resolved in two days to
carry her; in earnest to this he presents her a Necklace of Pearl of good
Value, and other Jewels, which was the best Rhetoric he had yet spoke to her;
and now she appeared the most Complaisant Lady in the World, she suffers him to
talk wantonly to her, nay even to kiss her, and rub his grizly Beard on her
divine Face, grasp her Hands, and touch her Breast; a Blessing he had never
before arrived to with any body above the Quality of his own Servant-Maid. To
all which she makes the best Resistance she can, under the Circumstances of one
who was to deceive well; and while she loathes she seems well pleased, while the
gay Jewels sparkled in her Eyes and Octavio in her Heart; so fond is Youth of
Vanities, and to purchase an addition of Beauty at any Price. Thus with her
pretty Flatteries she wrought upon his Soul, and smiled and looked him into
Faith; loath to depart she sends him pleased away, and having her Heart the more
inclined to Octavio by being Persecuted with his Uncles Love (for by Comparison
she finds the mighty Difference) she sets herself to write him the Account of
what I have related; this Nights Adventure and Agreement between his Uncle and
herself. She tells him that to Morrow, for now 'twas almost Day, she had
promised him to go to his Villa: She tells him at what rate she has purchased
the Blessing expected; and lastly, leaves the management of the rest to him,
who needs not be instructed. This Letter he received the next Night, at the old
place, and Silvia with it lets down a Velvet Night Bag, which contained all the
Jewels and things of Value she had received of himself, his Uncle, or any
other: After which he retired, and was pretty well at ease, with the
imagination he should ere long be made Happy in the Possession of Silvia: In
order to it the next Morning he was early up, and dressing himself in a great
course Campagne-Coat of the Gardeners, putting up his Hair, as well as he could,
under a Country-Hat, he got on a Horse that suited his Habit, and rides to the
Villa, whither they were to come, and which he knew perfectly well every Room
of; for there our Hero was born. He went to a little Caberet in the Village,
from whence he could survey all the great House, and see every Body that passed
in and out: He remained fixed at the Window, filled with a thousand Agitations;
this he had resolved, not to set upon the good old Man as a Thief or Robber;
nor could he find in this Heart or Nature to injure him, though but in a little
afrighting him, who had given him so many anxious Hours, and who had been so
unjust to desire that Blessing himself, he would not allow him; and to believe
that a Virtue in himself, which he exclaimed against as so great a Vice in his
Nephew; nevertheless he resolved to deceive him, to save his own Life. And he
wanted that nice part of Generosity, as to satisfy a little unnecessary Lust in
an old Man, to ruin the eternal Content of a young one, so nearly allied to his
Soul, as was his own dear proper Person. While he was thus considering he saw
his Uncle's Coach coming, and Silvia with that doting Lover in it, who was that
day dressed in all the Fopperies of Youth, and every thing was young and gay
about him but his Person, that was Winter it self, disguised in artificial
Spring; and he was altogether a mere Contradiction: But who can guess the
Disorders and Pantings of Octavio's Heart at the Sight; and though he had
resolved before he would not to save his Life lay violent Hands on his old
Parent; yet at their Approach, at their presenting themselves together before
his Eyes, as two Lovers going to betray him to all the Miseries, Pangs, and
Confusions of Love, going to possess -- her, the dear Object and certain Life
of his Soul, and she the Parent of him, to whom she had disposed of herself so
entirely already, he was provoked to break from all his Resolutions, and with
one of those two Pistols he had in his Pockets, to have sent unerring Death to
his old amorous Heart: But that Thought was no sooner born than stifled in his
Soul, where it met with all the Sense of Gratitude that ever could present the
tender Love and dear Care of a Parent there; and the Coach passing into the
Gate put him upon new Designs, and before they were finished he saw Silvia's
Page coming from the House, after seeing his Lady to her Apartment, and being
showed his own, where he laid his Vallice and Riding-things, and was now come
out to look about a Country where he had never been before. Octavio goes down
and meets him, and ventures to make himself known to him: And so infinitely
glad was the Youth to have an Opportunity to serve him, that he vowed he would
not only do it with his Life, on Occasion, but believed he could do it
effectually, since the old Gentleman had no sort of Jealousy now; especially
since they had so prudently managed Matters in this time of his Ladies
remaining at Sebastian's House. So that, Sir, it will not be difficult, says
the generous Boy, for me to convey you to my Lodging when it is dark. He told
him his Lady cast many a longing Look out toward the Road as she passed, for
you, I am sure my Lord -- for she had told both myself and Antonett of her
Design before, least our Surprise or Resistance should prevent any Force you
might use on the Road, to take her from my Lord Sebastian: She sighed and
looked on me as she alighted, with Eyes, my Lord, that told me her Grief for
your Disappointment. You may easily imagine how transported the poor Octavio
was; he kissed and embraced the Amiable Boy a thousand times; and taking a Ring
from his Finger of considerable Value, gave it the dear Reviver of his Hopes.
Octavio already knew the Strength of the House, which consisted but of a
Gardener, whose Wife was Housekeeper, and their Son, who was his Fathers
Servant in the Garden, and their Daughter, who was a sort of Maidservant: And
they had brought only the Coachman, and one Footman, who were likely to be
mirrily employed in the Kitchen at Night when all got to Supper together. I
say, Octavio already knew this, and there was now nothing that opposed his
Wishes: So that dismissing the dear Boy he remained the rest of the tedious Day
at the Caberet, the most impatient of Night of any Man on Earth: And when the
Boy appeared it was like the Approach of an Angel. He told him his Lady was the
most Melancholy Creature that ever Eyes beheld, and that to conceal the Cause,
she had feigned herself Ill, and had not stirred from her Chamber all the day:
That the old Lover was perpetually with her, and the most concerned Doatard
that ever Cupid enslaved: That he had so wholly taken up his Lady with his
disagreeable Entertainment, that it was impossible either by a Look or Note to
inform her of his being so near her, whom she considered as her present
Defender, and her future Happiness. But this Evening, continued the Youth, as I
was waiting on her at Supper, she spied the Ring on my Finger, which, my Lord,
your Bounty made me Master of this Morning. She blushed a Thousand times and
fixed her Eyes upon it, for she knew it, and was Impatient to have asked me
some Questions, but contained her Words. And after that I saw a Joy dance in
her lovely Eyes, that told me, She devin'd you were not far from thence.
Therefore I beseech your Lordship let us haste. So both went out together, and
the Page Conducted him into a Chamber he better knew than the Boy, while every
Moment he receives Intelligence how Affairs went in that of Silvia's, by the
Page, who leaving Octavio there went out as a Spy for him. In fine, with much
ado, Silvia persuaded her Old Lover to urge her for no Favors that Night, for
she was indisposed and unfit for Love; yet she persuades with such an Air, so
Smiling and Insinuating, that she increases the Fire she endeavored to allay:
but he, who was all Obedience as well as New Desire, resolves to humor her,
and show the perfect Gallantry of his Love; he promises her she shall command:
And after that never was the Old Gentleman seen in so excellent a Humor
before, in the whole Course of his Life; a certain Lightening against a Storm,
that must be fatal to him. He was no sooner gone from her, with a promise to go
to Bed and Sleep, that he might be the earlier up, to show her the fine Gardens
which she loved, but she sends Antonett to call the Page, from whom she longed
to know something of Octavio, and was sure he could inform her. But she was
undressing while she spoke, and got into her Bed before she left her: But
Antonett, instead of bringing the Sighing Youth, brought the Transported and
Ravished Octavio, who had by this time pulled off his Course Campaign and put
down his Hair. He fell breathless with Joy on her Bed side; when Antonett, who
knew that Love desired no lookers on, retired and left Octavio almost dead with
Joy, in the Clasping Arms of the Trembling Maid, the lovely Silvia. Oh, who can
guess their satisfaction? Who can guess their Sighs and Love? their tender
Words half stifled in Kisses; Lovers! fond Lovers! only can imagine; to all
besides this Tale will be Insipid. He now forgets where he is, that not far off
lay his Amorous Uncle, that to be found there was Death and something worse;
but wholly Ravished with the Languishing Beauty, taking his Pistols out of
either Pocket, he lays them on a Dressing Table near the Bed side, and in a
Moment throws off his Cloths, and gives himself up to all the Heaven of Love
that lay ready to receive him there, without thinking of any thing but the vast
Power of eithers Charms. They lay and forgot the hasty Hours, but Old Sebastian
did not. They were all counted by him, with the Impatience of a Lover: He
Burnt, he Raged with fierce Desire, and tossed from side to side and found no
ease; Silvia was present in Imagination, and he like Tantalus reaches at the
Food, which, though in view, is not within his reach: He would have Prayed, but
he had no Devotion for any Deity but Silvia; he rose and walked, and went to
Bed again, and found himself uneasy every way. A Thousand times he was about
to go, and try what Opportunity would do in the dark silent Night -- but fears
her Rage -- he fears she will chide at least; then he resolves and unresolves as
fast: Unhappy Lover -- thus to blow the Fire when there were no Materials to
supply it; at last overcome with fierce Desire, too Violent to be withstood, or
rather Fate would have it so ordained, he ventures all, and steals to Silvia's
Chamber, believing when she found him in her Arms she could not be displeased;
or if she were, that was the surest place of Reconciliation: So that only
putting his Night Gown about him, he went softly to her Chamber for fear of
waking her: The unthinking Lovers had left open the Door, so that it was hardly
put to. And the first Alarm was Octavio's Hand being seized, which was Clasping
his Treasure. He starts from the frighted Arms of Silvia, and leaping from the
Bed would have escaped, for he knew too well the touch of that Old Hand; but
Sebastian wholly surpised at so robust a repulse, took most unfortunately a
stronger hold, and laying both his Hands roughly upon him, with a Resolution to
know who he was, for he felt his Hair; and Octavio struggling at the same
Minute to get from him, they both fell against the Dressing Table, threw down
the Pistols; in their fall one of which going off, shot the unfortunate Old
Lover into the Head, so that he never spoke word more: At the going off of the
Pistol, Silvia, who had not minded those Octavio laid on the Table, cried* out
-- Oh my Octavio! -- My dearest Charmer, replied he, I Am well -- And feeling on
the Dead Body, which he wondered had no longer Motion, he felt Blood flowing
round it, and Sighing cried -- Ah, Silvia! I Am undone -- My Uncle -- Oh my
Parent -- Speak, Dear Sir! Oh! what unlucky Accident has done this fatal Deed?
Silvia, who was very soft by Nature, was extremely surpised, and frightened at
the News of a Dead Man in her Chamber, so that she was ready to run Mad with
the Apprehension of it: She raved and tore her self, and expressed her Fright in
Cries and Distraction; so that Octavio was compelled from one charitable Grie^
to another. He goes to her and Comforts her, and tells, since it is by no design
of either of them, their Innocence will be their Guardian Angel. He tells her
all their fault was Love, which made him so heedlesly fond of Joys with her, he
staid to reap those when he should have secured 'em by Flight. He tells her
this is now no place to stay in, and that he would put on her Clothes and fly
with her to some secure part of the World; For who, said he, that finds this
poor Unfortunate here, will not charge his Death on me or thee. -- Haste then,
my dearest Maid, haste, haste, and let us fly -- So dressing her he led her
into Antonett's Chamber, and conjured her to say nothing of the Accident, while
he went to see which way they could get out. So locking the Chamber door where
the dead Body lay, which by this time was stiff and cold; he locked that also
of his Uncle's Chamber, and calling the Page they all got themselves ready; and
putting Two Horses in the Coach, they unseen and unperceived got themselves all
out: The Servants having drunk hard at their meeting in the Country last Night,
were all too sound a sleep to understand any thing of what past. It being now
about the Break of Day, Octavio was the Coachman, and the Page Riding by the
Coachside, while Silvia and Antonett were in it, they in an hours time reached
the Town, where Octavio packed up all that was carriageable; took his own Coach
and Six Horses; left his Affairs to the Managent of a Kinsman that dwelt with
him; took Bills to the value of Two thousand Pounds, and immediately left the
Town, after receiving some Letters that came last Night by the Post, one of
which was from Philander; and indeed this new Grief upon Octavio's Soul, made
him the most Dejected and Melancholy Man in the World, insomuch that he, who
never wept for any thing but for Love, was often found with Tears rolling down
his Cheeks, at the remembrance of an Accident so deplorable, and of which he
and his unhappy Passion was the Cause, though Innocently: Yet could not the dire
Reflection often hat, nor the loss of so tender a Parent, as was Sebastian,
lessen one Spark of that Fire for Silvia, whose unfortunate Flame had been so
Fatal. While They were safe out of danger, the Servants of Sebastian admired
when Ten, Eleven and Twelve a Clock was come, they saw neither the Old Lord nor
any of the New Guests. But when the Coachman mist his Coach and Horses he was
in a greater maze, and thought some Body had stolen 'em, and accusing himself
of Sluggishness and Debauchery, that made him not able to hear when the Coach
went out, he forswore all Drinking. But when the Housekeeper and he met and
discoursed about the Lady and the rest, they concluded that the Old Gentleman
and she were agreed upon the matter, and being got to Bed together had quite
forgot themselves; and made a Thousand Roguish remarks upon 'em. They believed
the Maid and the Page too were as well employed, since they saw neither. But
when Dinner was ready she went up to the Maids Chamber and found it empty, as
also that of the Page; her Heart then presaging something, she ventures to
knock at her Lord's Chamber door, but finding it Locked and none Answer, they
broke it open; and after doing the same by that of Silvia, they found the Poor
Sebastian stretched on the Floor, and Shot in the Head, the Toylet pulled
almost down, and the Lock of the Pistol hanging in the point of the Toylet
entangled, and the Muzzle of it just against the Wound. At first when they saw
him they fancied Silvia might kill him, for either o^fering to come to Bed to
her in the Night, or for some other Malicious end. But when they saw how the
Pistol lay they fancied it Accident in the Dark; For, said the Woman -- I and
my Daughter have been up ever since Daybreak, and, I Am sure no such thing
happened then, nor co^ld they since escape: And it being natural in Holland to
cry, Lope Schellum, that is, Run Rogue, to him that is alive, and who has
killed another; and for every Man to set a helping Hand to bear him out of
Danger, thinking it too much that one's already dead: I say, this being the
Nature of the People, they never pursued the Murderers or fled Persons, but
suffered Sebastian to lie till the Coroner sat upon him, who found it, or at
least thought it, Accident; and there was all for that time. But this, with all
the reasonable Circumstances, did not satisfy the States. Here is one of their
High and Mighties killed, a fair Lady fled, and upon inquiry a fine Young
Fellow too, the Nephew: All knew they were Rivals in this fair Lady; all knew
there were Animosities between 'em; all knew Octavio was absconded some Days
before; so that, upon Consideration, they concluded he was Murdered by Compact;
and the rather, because they wished it so in spite to Octavio; and because
both he and Silvia were fled like Guilty Persons. Upon this they make a Seizure
of both his and his Uncle's Estate, to the use of the States. Thus the best and
most glorious Man that ever graced that part of the World was undone by Love.
While Silvia with Sighs and Tears would often say, That sure she was born the
Fate of all that Adored her, and no Man ever thrived that had a Design upon
her, or a Pretension to her.

Thus between excess of Grief and excess of Love, which indeed lay veiled in
the first, they arrived at Bruxells; where Octavio, having News of the
proceedings of the States against him, resolving rather to lose his Life, than
tamely to surrender his Right, he went forth in order to take some Care about
it: And in these extremes of a troubled Mind he had forgot to read Philander's
Letters, but gave 'em to Silvia to peruse, till he returned, beseeching and
conjuring her, by all the Charms of Love, not to suffer herself to be
afflicted, but now to consider she was wholly his; and she could not, and ought
not to rob him of a Sigh or Tear for any other Man. For they had concluded to
marry as soon as Silvia should be delivered from that part of Philander of
which she was possessed. Therefore beholding her entirely his own, of whom he
was so fondly tender, he could not endure the Wind should blow on her, and kiss
her lovely Face: Jealous of even the Air she breathed, he was ever putting her
in mind of whose and what she was; and she ever giving him new Assurances that
she was only Octavio's. The last part of his ill News he concealed from her;
that of the Usage of the States. He was so entirely careful of her Fame, that
he had two Lodgings, one, most magnificent, for her, another for himself; and
only visited her all the live-long Day. And being now re^red from her, she,
whose Love and Curiosity grew less every day for the false Philander, opened
his Letter with a Sigh of departed Love, and read this.

Philander to Octavio.
SVRE of your Friendship, my dear Octavio, I venture to lay before you the
History of my Misfortunes, as well as those of my Ioys; equally Extreme.

In my last I gave you an Account how triumphing a Lover I was in the
Possession of the adorable Calista; and how very near I was being surpised in
the Fountain, where I had hid myself from the Rage of old Clarinau; and escaped
wet and cold to my Lodging: And though indeed I escaped, it was not without
giving the old Husband a Iealousy, which put him upon an Inquiry after a
stricter mann^r, as I heard the next day from Calista; but with as ill Success
as the Night before; notwithstanding it appears by what after happened that he
still retained his Iealousy, and that of me, from a thousand little Inquiries I
had from time to time made, form my being now absent, and most of all from my
being (as now he fancied) that Vision which Calista saw in the Garden. All
these Circumstances wrought a thousand Canundrums in his Spanish politic
Noddle: And he resolves that Calista's Actions should be more narrowly watched.
This I can only guess from what insu'd. I am not able to say by what good
Fortune I escaped several happy Nights after the first, but it is certain I did
so; for the old Man carrying all things fair to the lovely Countess, she
thought herself secure in her Ioys hitherto, as to any Discovery: However I
never went on this dear Adventure but I was well armed against any Mishaps of
Poniard, Sword, and Pistol, that Grab of a right Spaniard. Calista had been
marri^d above two years before I beheld her, and had never been with Child: But
it so chanced, that she conceived the very first Night of our Happiness; since
which time not all her Flatteries and Charms could prevail for one Night with
the old Count: For, whether from her seeming Fondness he imagined the Cause, or
what other Reason he had to withstand her Desire and Caresses, I know not: But
still he found or feigned some Excuses to put her off; so that Calista's Fears
and Love increased with her growing Belly. And though almost every Night I had
the fair young Charmer in Bed with me (without the least Suspicion on Dormina's
side) or else in the Arbours, or on flowery Banks in the Garden: Till I am
confident there was not a Walk, a Grove, an Arbor, or Bed of Sweets, that was
not conscious of our stolen Delights. Nay we grew so very bold in Love, that
we often suffered the Day to break upon us; and still escaped his Spies, who by
either watching at the wrong Door, or part of the vast Garden; or by Sleepiness
and Carelessness still let us pass their View. Four happy Months, thus blessed
and thus secured, we lived, when Calista could no longer conceal her growing
Shame from the Jealous Clarinau or Dormina. She feared with too much Reason
that 'twas Iealousy which made him refrain her Bed, though he dissembled well all
Day: And one Night, weeping in my Bosom, with all the tenderness of Love, she
said, That if I loved her, as she hoped I did, I should be shortly very
miserable: For oh, cried she, I can no longer hide this -- dear Effect of my
stolen Happiness -- and Clarinau will no sooner perceive my Condition, but he
will use his utmost Rigor against me. I know his jealous Nature, and find I am
undone -- With that she told me how he had killed his first Wife; for which he
was obliged to fly from the Court and Country of Spain: And that she found from
all his Severity he was not changed from his Nature. In sine, she said and
loved so much, that I was wholly charmed, and vowed myself her Slave, or
Sacrifice, either to follow what she could propose, or fall a Victim with her
to my Love. After which 'twas concluded (neither having a mind to leave the
World, when we both knew so well how to make our selves happy in it) that the
next Night I should bring her a Suit of Man's Cloths; and she would in that
Disguise fly with me to any part of the World. For she vowed if this unlucky
Force of Flying had not happened to her, she had not been longer able to have
endured his Tyranny and Slavery: But had resolved to break her Chain, and put
herself upon any Fortune. So that after the usual Indearments on both sides, I
left her resolved to follow my Fortune, and she me, to sacrifice all to her
Repose. That Night, and all next Day, she was not idle; but put up all her
Iew^ls, of which she had the richest of any Lady in all those Parts, for in
that the old Count was over lavish: And the next Night I brought her a Suit,
which I had made that day on purpose; as gay as could be made in so short a
time; and scaleing my Wall well armed, I found her ready at the Door to receive
me; and going into an Arbor, by the aid of a Dark-Lanthorn I carried, she
dressed her in a laced Shirt of mine, and this Suit I had brought her, of blew
Velvet, trimmed with rich Loops and Buttons of Gold; a white Hat and white
Feather; a fair Peruke, and scarlet Breeches, the rest suitable. And I must
confess to you, my dear Octavio, that never any thing appeared so Ravishing,
and yet I have seen Silvia! But even she a Baby to this more noble Figure.
Calista is tall, and fashioned the most divinely -- the most proper for that
Dress of any of her Sex: And I own I never saw any thing so Beautiful all over,
from Head to Foot: and viewing her thus (carrying my Lanthorn all about her,
but more especially her Face, her wondrous Charming Face -- (Pardon me if I
say, what does but look like Flattery) -- I never saw any thing more resembling
my dear Octavio, than the lovely Calista. Your every Feature, your very Smile
and Air; so that, if possible, that increased my Adoration and Esteem for her:
Thus completed, I Armed her and buckl'd on her Sword, and she would needs have
one of my Pistols too, that stuck in my Belt; and now she appeared all lovely
Man. 'Twas so late by that time we had done, that the Moon which began to shine
very Bright, gave us a Thousand little Fears, and disposing her Jewels all
about us safe, we began our Adventure, with a Thousand dreadful Apprehensions
on Calista's side. And going up the Walk toward the place where we were to
mount the Wall; just at the end of it, turning a Corner we encountered Two Men,
who were too near us to be prevented. Oh, cried Calista to me, who saw 'em
first, -- My dear Philander we are undone! I looked and saw 'em and replied, My
Charmer do not fear, they are but two to two whoever they be; for Love, and I,
shall be of force enough to Encounter 'em. No, my Philander, replied she
briskly, it is I will be your Second in this Rancounter. At this approaching 'em
more near (for they hasted to us, nor could we fly from them,) we soon found by
his hobling, that Old Clarinau was one, and the other a Tall Spaniard, his
Nephew. I clapped my Hair under my Hat, and both of us making a stand, we
resolved if they durst not venture on us to let 'em pass -- but Clarinau, who
was on that side which faced Calista, cried, Ah Villain, have I caught thee!
and at the same instant with a Poniard stabbed her into the Arm; for with a
sudden turn she evaded it from her Heart, to which it was designed. At which
repaying his Complement, she shot of her Pistol, and down he fell, crying out
for a Priest; while I at the same time laid my Tall Boy at his Feet. I caught
my dear Virago in my Arms, and hasted through the Garden with her, and was very
hasty in mounting my Ladder, putting my fair Second before me, without so much
as daring yet to ask her if she were wounded, least it should have hindered our
flight if I had found her hurt: Nor knew I she was so, till I felt her warm
precious Blood streaming on my Face, as I lifted her over the Wall; but I soon
conveyed her into my new Lodgings; yet not soon enough to secure her from those
that pursued us: For with their bauling they alarmed some of the Servants, who
looking narrowly for the Murderers, track'd us by Calista's Blood, which they
saw with their Flambeaus from the Place where Clarinau and his Nephew lay, to
the very Wall; and thinking from our Wounds we could no^ escape far, they
searching the Houses, found me dressing Calista's Wound, which I kissed a
Thousand times. But the matchless Courage of the fair Virago! the Magnanimity
of Calista's Soul! nothing of foolish Woman har^our'd there, nothing but
softest Love; for while I was raving mad, tearing my Hair and cursing my Fate
in vain, she had no concern but for me; no pain but that of her fear of being
taken from me and being delivered to Old Clarinau, whom I feared was not dead;
nor could the very seizing her daunt her Spirits, but with an unmatched
Fortitude she bore it all; she only wished she could have escaped without
Bloodshed. We were both led to Prison, but none knew who we were, for those
that seized us had by chance never seen me, and Calista's Habit secured the
discovery. While we both remained there, we had this Comfort of being well
Lodged together; for they did not go about to part us, being in for one Crime.
And all the satisfaction she had, was, that she should, she hoped, die
concealed, if she must die for the Crime; and that was much a greater Joy than
to think she should be rendered back to Clarinau, who in a few days we heard
was upon his Recovery; this gave her new fears; but I confess to you I was not
afflicted at it; nor did I think it hard for me to bribe Calista off; for the
Master of the Prison was very Civil and Poor, so that with the help of some few
of Calista's Jewels, he was wrought upon to let her escape, I offering to
remain and bear all the brunt of the Business, and ^o pay whatever he could be
Fined for it. These Reasons with the ready Jewels mollified the needy Rascal;
and though loath she were to leave me; yet she being assured that all they could
do was but to sine me; and her stay she knew was her inevitable Ruin, she at
last submitted, leaving me sufficient in Jewels to satisfy for all that could
happen, which were the value of a Hundred thousand Crowns. She is fled to
Bruxells, to a N^nnery of Augustin's, where the Lady Abbess is her Aunt, and
where for a little time she is secure, till I can follow her.

I beg of you, my dear Octavio, write to me, and write me a Letter of
Recommendation to the Magistrates here, who all being concerned when any one of
'em is a Cuckold, are very severe upon Criminals in those Cases. I tire you
with my Melancholy Adventure -- but it is some ease in the Extremes of Grief to
receive the tender Pity of a Friend, and that I Am sure Octavio will afford his
unhappy

Philander.


As cold and as unconcerned as Silvia imagined she had found her Heart to
Philander's Memory, at the reading of this Letter, in spite of all the
Tenderness she had for Octavio, she was possessed with all those pains of Love
and Jealousy, which heretofore tormented her when Love was Young, and
Philander appeared with all those Charms with which he first Conquered; she
found the Fire was but hid under those Embers, which every little blast blows
off and makes it Flame a new. 'Twas now that she forgetting all the past
Obligations of Octavio, all his vast Presents, his Vows, his Sufferings, his
Passion and his Youth, abandoned herself wholly to her Tenderness for
Philander, and drowns her fair Cheeks in a Shower of Tears: And having eased
her Heart a little by this natural Relief of her Sex, she opened the Letter
that was designed for her self, and read this.

To Silvia.
I Know, my lovely Silvia, I am accused of a Thousand Barbarities, for unkindly
detaining your Lover, who long ere this ought to have thrown himself at your
Feet, imploring a Thousand Pardons for his tedious Six Months absence, though the
affliction of it is all my own, and I am afraid all the Punishment; but when,
my dearest Silvia, I reflect again, it is in order to our future Tranquillity,
I depend on your Love and Reason for my Excuse. I know my absence has procured
me a Thousand Rivals, and you as many Adorers, and fear Philander appears grown
Old in Love, and worn out with Sorrow and Care, unfit for the soft Play of the
Young and Delicate Silvia; new Lovers have new Vows and new Presents, and your
fickle Sex stoop to the lavish Prostrate. Ill luck -- unkind Fate has ri^^'d
me, and of a shining Fortune left me even to the Charity of the stingy World;
and I have no new Complement to maintain the esteem in so great a Soul as that
of Silvia, but that old repeated one of telling her my dull, my trifling Heart
is still her own: But, oh! I want the presenting Eloquence that so persuades
and charms the Fair, and am reduced to that fatal Torment of a generous Mind,
rather to ask and take than to bestow. Yet out of my contemptible stock, I have
sent my Silvia something toward that dangerous unavoidable hour, which will
declare me, however, a happy Father of what my Silvia bears about her; it is a
Bill for a Thousand Patacoons. I am at present under an easy restraint, about
a little Dispute between a Man of Quality here and my self, I had else been at
Bruxells to have provided all things for your coming Ilness, but every day
expect my Liberty, and then without delay I will take Post and bring Philander
to your Arms.

I have News that Caesario is arrived at Bruxells. I am at present a Stranger
to all that passes, and having a double Obligation to haste, you need not fear
but I shall do so.


This Letter raised in her a different Sentiment from that of the Story of his
Misfortune; and that taught her to know that this he had writ to her was all
false and dissembled: Which made her in concluding the Letter, cry out with a
vehement Scorn and Indignation -- Oh how I hate thee Traitor! who have the
Impudence to continue thus to impose upon me, as if I wanted common Sense to
see thy Baseness: For what can be more Base and Cowardly than Lies, that poor
Plebeian Shift; contemned by Men of Honor or of Wit. This she spoke without
reminding that this most contemptible Quality she herself was equally guilty
of, though infinitely more excusable in her Sex, there being a thousand little
Actions of their Lives liable to Censure and Reproach, which they would
willingly excuse and color over with little Falsities; but in a Man, whose
most inconstant Actions pass oftentimes for innocent Gallantries, and to whom
it is no Infamy to own a thousand Amors, but rather a Glory to his Fame and
Merit: I say, in him (whom Custom has favored with an Allowance to commit any
Vice and boast it) it is not so brave. And this Fault of Philander's cured
Silvia of her Disease of Love; and chaced from her Heart all that Softness
which once had so much favored him. Nevertheless she was filled with Thoughts
that failed not to make her extremely Melancholy: And 'twas in this Humor
Octavio found her; who forgetting all his own Griefs, to lessen hers (for his
Love was arrived to a degree of Madness) he caresses her with all the Eloquence
his Passion could pour out; he falls at her Feet, and pleads with such a Look
and Voice as could not be resisted; nor ceased he till he had talked her into
Ease, till he had looked and loved her into a perfect Calm: 'Twas then he urged
her to a new Confirmation of her Heart to him, and took hold of every yielding
Softness in her to improve his Advantage. He pressed her to all (...) wished,
but by such tender Degrees, by Arts so fond and indearing (...) the could deny
nothing. In this Humor she makes a thousand Vows against Philander; to hate
him as a Man that has first ruined her Honor, and then abandoned her to all
the Ills that attend ungoverned Youth, and unguarded Beauty: She makes Octavio
swear as often to be revenged on him, for the Dishonor of his Sister: Which
being performed, they re-assum'd all the Satisfactions, which had seemed almost
destroyed by adverse Fate, and for a little space lived in great Tranquillity;
or if Octavio had Sentiments that represented past Unhappinesses and a future
Prospect of ill Consequences, he strove with all the Power of Love to hide 'em
from Silvia. In this time they often sent to the Nunnery of the Augustins, to
inquire of the Countess of Clarinau; and at last hearing she was arrived, no
force of Persuasion or Reason could hinder Silvia from going to make her a
Visit: Octavio pleads in vain the overthrow of all his Revenge, by his Sisters,
knowledge that her Intrigue was found out: But in an Undress -- for her
Condition permitted no other, she is carried to the Monastery, and asks for the
Mother Prioress, who came to the Grate: Where after the first Complement's
over, she tells her she is a Relation to that Lady who such a day came to the
House. Silvia by her Habit and Equipage appearing of Quality; was answered,
that tho^ the Lady were very much indisposed, and unfit to appear at the Grate,
she would nevertheless endeavor to serve her, since she was so earnest; and
commanding one of the Nuns, to call down Madam the Countess, she immediately
came; but though in a Dress all negligent, and Face where Languishment appeared,
she at first sight surprised our Fair One; with a certain Majesty in her Mein
and Motion, and an Air of Greatness in her Face, which resembled that of
Octavio: So that not being able to sustain herself on her trembling Supporters,
she was ready to faint at a Sight so charming, and a Form Angelick. She saw her
all that Philander had described; nor could the Partiality of his Passion
render her more lovely than she appeared this Instant to Silvia. She came to
reproach her -- but she found a Majesty in her Looks above all Censure, that
awed the jealous Upbraider, and almost put her out of Coun^enance; and with a
rising Blush she seemed ashamed of her Errand. At this Silence the lovely
Calista, a little surpised, demanded of an attending Nun if that Lady would
speak with her? This awaked Silvia into an Address, and she replied; Yes,
Madam, I am the Unfortunate, who am compelled by my hard Fate to complain of
the most charming Woman that ever Nature made: I thought in coming hither I
should have had no other Business but to have told you how false, how perjured
a Lover I had had; but at a Sight so wondrous I blame him no more (whom I find
now compelled to love) but you, who have taken from me, by your Charms, the
only Blessing Heaven had lent me. This she ended with a Sigh, and Madam the
Countess, who from the beginning of her speaking guessed, from a certain
trembling at her Heart, who it was she spoke of, resolved to show no Signs of a
womanish Fear or Je^lousy, but with an unalterable Air and Courage, replied,
Madam, if my Charms were so powerful, as you are pleased to tell me they are,
they sure have attracted too many Lovers for me to understand which of 'em it
is I have been so unhappy to rob you of. If he be a gallant Man, I shall
neither deny him, nor repent my Loving him the more, for his having been a
Lover before. To which, Silvia, who expected not so brisk an Answer, replied.
She that makes such a Confession with so much Generosity, I know cannot be
insensible of the Injuries she does, but will have a Consideration and Pity for
those Wretches at least, who are undone to establish her Satisfaction. Madam,
replied the Countess (a little touched with the Tenderness and Sadness with
which she spoke) you have so just a Character of my Soul, that I assure you, I
would not, for any Pleasure in the World, do an Action should render it less
worthy of your good Thoughts. Name me the Man -- and if I find him such as I
may return you with Honor, he shall find my Friendship no more. Ah Madam, it is
impossible, cried Silvia, that he can ever be mine, that has once had the Glory
of being conquered by you; and what is yet more, of having con^uered you. Nay,
Madam, replied Calista, if your Loss be irrecoverable, I have no more to do,
but to sigh with you, and join our hard Fates; but I am not so vain of my own
Beauty, nor have so little Admiration for that of yours, to imagine I can
retain any thing you have a Claim to ^ for me, I am not fond of Admirers, if
Heaven be pleased to give me one, I ask no more. I Will leave the World to you,
so it allow me my Philander. This she spoke with a little Malice, which called
up all the Blushes in the fair Face of Silvia; who a little netled at the word
Philander, replied. Go, take the perjured Man, and see how long you can
maintain your Empire over his fickle Heart, who has already betrayed you to all
the Reproach an incensed Rival and an injured Brother can load you with: See
where he has exposed you to Octavio; and after that tell me what you can hope
from such a perjured Villain -- At these Words she gave her the Letter
Philander had writ to Octavio, with that he had writ to herself -- and without
taking Leave or speaking any more, she left her thoughtful Rival: Who after
pausing a Moment on what should be writ there, and what the angry Lady meant,
she silently passed on to her Chamber. But if she were surprised with her
Visiter, she was much more when opening the Letters, she found one to her
Brother, filled with the History of her Infamy, and what pressed her Soul more
sensibly, the other filled with Passion and Softness to a Mistress. She had
scarcely read them out but a young Nun, her Kinswoman, came into her Chamber;
whom I have since heard protest she scarce saw in that Moment any Alteration in
her, but that she rose and received her with her wonted Grace and Sweetness;
and but for some Answers that she made mal a propo, and Sighs that against her
Will broke from her Heart, she should not have found an Alteration; but this
being unusual made her Inquisitive; and the faint Denial she met with made her
importune, and that so earnestly and with so many Vows of Fidelity and Secrecy,
that Calistas's Heart, even breaking within, poured it self for Ease into the
faithful Bosom of this young Devotee; and having told her all the Story of her
Misfortune, she began with so much Courage and bravery of Mind, to make Vows
against the charming Betrayer of her Fame, and with him all Mankind; and this
with such Consideration and Repentance as left no room for Reproach or
Persuasion; and from this Moment resolved never to quit the Solitude of the
Cloisters. She had all her Life before her Marriage lived in one, and wished
now she never had seen the World, or departed from a Life so pure and Innocent.
She looked upon this fatal Accident now a Blessing, to bring her back to a Life
of Devotion and Tranquillity; and indeed is a Miracle of Piety. Sometime after
this she was brought to Bed, but commanded the Child should be removed where
she might never see it, which accordingly was done; after which, in due time,
she took the Habit; and remains a rare Example of Repentance, and Holyliving.
This new Penitent became the News of the whole Town; and it was not without
some Pleasure that Octavio heard it, as the only Action she could do that could
reconcile him to her; the knowledge of which, and a few soft Days with Silvia,
made him chase away all those Shiverings that had seized him upon several
Occasions: But Silvia was all Sweetness, all Love and good Humor, and made his
Days easy, and his Nights entirely Happy. While on the other side there was no
Satisfaction, no Pleasure, that the fond lavish Lover did not at any Price
purchase for her Repose; for it was the whole Business of his Life to study
what would charm and please her: And being assured by so many Vows of her
Heart, there was nothing rested to make him perfectly Happy, but her being
delivered of what belonged to his Rival, and in which he had no part, he was at
perfect Ease. This she wishes with an Impatience equal to his; whose Love and
Fondness for Octavio appeared to be arrived to the highest Degree, and she
every Minute expected to be freed from the only thing that hindered her from
giving herself entirely to her impatient Lover.

In the midst of this Serenity of Affairs, Silvia's Page one day brings 'em
News his Lord was arrived, and that he saw him in the Park walking with some
French Gentlemen, and undiscovered to him came to give her Notice, that she
might take her measures accordingly, in spite of all her Love to Octavio: Her
Blushes flew to her Cheeks at the News, and her Heart panted with unusual
Motion; she wonders at her self and Fears, and doubts her own Resolution; she
till now believed him wholly indifferent to her, but she knows not what
Construction this new Disorder will bear; and what confounded and perplexed her
more, was, That Octavio beheld all these Emotions, with unconceivable
resentment, he swells with Pride and Anger, and even bursts with Grief, and not
able longer to contain his complaint, he reproaches her in the softest Language
that ever Love and Grief invented; while she weeps with Shame and divided Love,
and demands of him a Thousand Pardons; she deals thus kindly at least with him
to confess this Truth; that 'twas impossible, but at the approach of a Man who
taught her first to love, and for which Knowledge she had paid so infinitely
dear, she could not but feel unusual Motions, that that Tenderness and Infant
Flame he once inspired could not but have left some warmth about her Heart, and
that Philander, the once charming dear Philander, could never be absolutely to
her as a common Man, and begged that he would give some grains of allowance to a
Maid, so soft by Nature, and who had once loved so well to be undone for the
dear Object; and though every kind word she gave his Rival was a Dagger at his
Heart, nevertheless, he found, or would think he found some reason in what she
said; at least he seemed more appeased, while she on the other side dissembled
all the ease and repose of Mind, that could flatter him to Calmness.

You must know that for Silvia's Honor, she had Lodgings by her self, and
Octavio had his in another House, at an Aunts of his, a Widow, and a Woman of
great Quality; and Silvia being near her Lying-in, had provided all things with
the greatest Magnificence imaginable, and past for a Young Widow whose Husband
died at the Siege of -- Octavio only visited her daily, and all the Nights she
had to her self. For he treated her as one whom he designed to make his Wife,
and one whose Honor was his own; but that Night the News of Philander's
Arrival was told her, she was more than ordinary impatient to have him gone
pretending Illness, and yet seemed loath to let him go, and Lovers (the greatest
Cullies in Nature, and the aptest to be deceived, though the most quick-sighted)
-- do the soonest believe; and finding it the more necessary he should depart,
the more ill she feigned to be, he took his Leave, and left her to her Repose,
after taking all care necessary for one in her Circumstances. But she, to make
his Absence more sure, and fearing least he should suspect something of her
Design, being herself Guilty, she orders him to be called back, and Caresses
him anew, tells him she was never more unwilling to part with him, and all the
while is complaining and wishing to be in Bed: And says he must not stir till
he sees her laid. This obliges and cajoles him anew, and he will not suffer her
Women to undress her, but does the grateful Business himself, and reaps some
dear Recompense by every Service, and pleases his Eyes and Lips with the
ravishing Beauties of the loose unguarded suffering Fair one. She permits him
any thing to have him gone, which was not till he saw her laid as if to her
Rest: But he was no sooner got into his Coach, but she rose and slipped on her
Nightgown and some other loose things, and got into a Chair, commanding her
Page to conduct the Chair-men to all the great Cabarets: Where she believed it
most likely to find Philander; which was accordingly done; and the Page
entering, enquires for such a Cavalier, describing his Person and fine
remarkable black Hair of his own: But the first he entered into he saw
Brilljard bespeaking Supper: For you must know that that Husband-Lover being
left, as I have said, in Prison in Holland, for the Accusation of Octavio; the
unhappy young Noble Man was no sooner fled upon the unlucky Death of his Uncle,
but the States set Brilljard at Liberty; who took his Journey immediately to
Philander, whom he found just released from his troublesome Affair, and
designed for Bruxells, where they arrived that very Morning. Where the first
thing he did was to go to the Nunnery of St. Austin, to inquire for the fair,
Calista; but instead of encountering the kind, the impatient, the brave
Calista, he was addressed to by the old Lady Abbess in so rough a manner, that
he no longer doubted upon what Terms he stood there, though he wondered how they
should know his Story with Calista: When to put him out of Doubt, she assured
him he should never more behold the Face of her injured Niece; for whose
Revenge she left him to Heaven. It was in vain he kneeled and implored; he was
confirmed again and again she should never come from out the Confines of those
Walls; and that her whole remaining Life spent in Penitence was too little to
wash away her Sins with him: And giving him the Letter he sent to Octavio
(which Silvia had given Calista, and she the Lady Abbess, with a full
Confession of her Fault) she cried; See there, Sir, the Treachery you have
committed against a Woman of Quality -- whom your Criminal Love has rendered,
the most Miserable of her Sex. At the ending of which, she drew the Curtain
over the Grate and left him, wholly amazed and confounded, finding it to be the
same he had writ to Octavio, and in it that he had writ to Silvia: By the sight
of which he no longer doubted but that Confident had betrayed him every way. He
rails on his false Friendship, curses the Lady Abbess, himself, his Fortune and
his Birth; but finds it all in vain: Nor was he so infinitely afflicted with
the thought of the eternal Loss of Calista (because he had possessed her) as he
was to find himself betrayed to her, and doubtless to Silvia by Octavio; and
nothing but Calista's being confined from him (though she were very dear and
charming to his Thoughts) could have made him rave so extremely for a Sight of
her: He loves her the more by how much more it was impossible for him to see
her; and that Difficulty and his Despair increased his Flame. In this Humor he
went to his Lodging, the most undone Extravagant that ever raged with Love. He
considers her in a place where no Art or force of Love, or humane Wit can
retrieve her; no nor so much as send her a Letter. This added to his Fury, and
in his first wild Imaginations he resolves nothing less than firing the
Monastery, that in that Confusion he might Seize his right of Love; and do a
Deed that would render his Name as famous as the Athenian Youth, who to get a
Fame, though an Inglorious one, fired the Temple of their Gods. But his Rage
abating by Consideration, that Impiety dwelt not long with him: And he ran over
a number more, till from one to another he reduced himself to a degree of
Moderation, which presented him with some flattering Hope, that gave him a
little Ease: 'Twas then that Chivalier Tomaso, and another French Gentleman of
Cesario's Faction (who were newly arrived in Bruxells) came to pay him their
Respects: And after a while carried him into the Park to walk, where Silvia's
Page had seen him; and from whence they sent Brilljard to bespeak Supper at
this Cabaret, where Silvia's Chair and herself waited, and where the Page found
Brilljard, of whom he asked for his Lord; but understanding he would not
possibly come in some Hours, being designed for Court that Evening, whither he
was obliged to go and kiss the Governors Hands, he went to the Lady, who was
almost dead with Impatience, and told her what he had learned: Upon which she
ordered her Chairmen to carry her back to her Lodgings, for she would not be
persuaded to ask any Questions of Brilljard, for whom she had a mortal Hate:
However she resolved to send the Page back with a Billet to wait Philander's
coming; which was not long; for having sooner dispatched their Complement at
Court than they believed they should, they went all to Supper together, where
Brilljard had bespoke it: Where being impatient to learn all the Adventures of
Cesario since his Departure from him, and of which no Person could give so good
an Account as Chivalier Tomaso, Philander gave order that no body whomsoever
should disturb them, and sat himself down to listen to the Fortune of the
Prince.

You know, my Lord, said Tomaso, the state of Things at your Departure; and
that all our glorious Designs for the Liberty of all France were discovered and
betrayed by some of those little Rascals, that great Men are obliged to make
use of in the greatest Designs: Upon whose Confession you were proscribed,
myself, this Gentleman, and several others: It was our good Fortunes to escape
untaken, and yours to fall first into the Messenger's Hands, and carried to the
Bastile, even from whence you had the Luck to escape: But it was not so with
Cesario. Heavens, cried Philander, the Prince I hope is not taken? Not so
neither, replied Tomaso, nor should you wonder you have received no News of him
in a long time, since forty thousand Crowns being offered for his Head, or to
any that could discover him, it would have exposed him to have written to any
body, he being beset on all sides with Spies from the King; so that it 'twas
impossible to venture a Letter without very great Hazard of his Life. Besides
all these Hindrances, Cesario, who, you know, was ever a great admirer of the
fair Sex, happened in this his Retreat to fall most desperately in Love: Nor
could the fears of Death, which alarmed him on all sides, deterr him from this
new Amor: Which because it has Relation to some part of his Adventures, I
cannot omit, especially to your Lordship, his Friend, to whom every
Circumstance of that Princes Fate and Fortune will be of Concern.

You must imagine, my Lord, that your Seizure and Escape was enough to alarm the
whole Party; and there was not a Man of the League who did not think it high
time to look about him, when one, so considerable as your Lordship, was
surpised. Nor did the Prince himself any longer believe himself safe; but
retired himself under the darkness of the following Night: He went only
accompanied with his Page, to a Ladies House, a Widow of Quality in Paris, that
populous City; being as he conceived, the securest Place to conceal himself in.
This Lady was Madam the Countess of -- who had, as you know, my Lord, one only
Daughter, Madam Osell Hermione, the Heiress of her Family. The Prince knew this
young Lady had a Tenderness for him ever since they were both very young, which
first took beginning in a Mask at Court, where she then acted Mercury, and
danced so exceeding finely, that she gave our young Hero new Desire, if not
absolute Love; and charmed him at least into Wishes. She was then old enough to
perceive she conquered, as well as to make a Conquest: And she was capable of
receiving Impressions, as well as to give 'em: And it was believed by some who
were very near the Prince, and knew all his Secrets then, that this young Lady
pitied the Sighs of the Royal Lover, and even then rewarded 'em: And though this
were most credibly whispered, yet methinks it seems impossible he should then
have been happy, and after so many Years, after the Possession of so many other
Beauties, should return to her again, and find all the Passions and Pains of a
beginning Flame. But there is nothing to be wondered at in the Contradictions
and Humors of Man's human Nature. But however inconstant and wavering he had
been, Hermione retained her first Passion for him; and that I less wonder at,
since you know the Prince has the most charming Person in the World, and is the
most perfectly Beautiful of all his Sex: To this his Youth and Quality adds no
little Luster; and I should not wonder if all the softer Sex should languish
for him, nor that any one should love on -- who has once been touched with
Love for him. 'Twas this last Assurance the Prince so absolutely depended on,
that (notwithstanding she was far from the Opinion of his Party) made him
resolve to take Sanctuary in those Arms he was sure would receive him in any
Condition and Circumstances. But now he makes her new Vows, which possibly at
first his Safety obliged him to, while she returned 'em with all the Passion of
Love. He made a thousand Submissions to Madam the Countess, who he knew was
fond of her Daughter to that degree, that for her Repose she was even willing
to behold the Sacrifice of her. Honor to this Prince, whom she knew Hermione
loved even to Death; so fond, so blindly fond is Nature* And indeed after a
little time that he lay there concealed, he reaped all the Satisfaction that
Love could give him, or his Youth could wish, with all the Freedom imaginable.
He only made Vows of renouncing all other Women, what Ties or Obligations
soever he had upon him; and to resign himself entirely up to Hermione. I know
not what new Charms he had found by frequent Conversation with her, and being
uninterrupted by the sight of any other Ladies; but it is most certain, my Lord,
he grew to that excess of Love, or rather Doatage (if Love in one so young, can
be called so) that he languishes for her, even while he possessed her all: He
died, if obliged by Company to retire from her an Hour, at the end of which,
being again brought to her, he would fall at her Feet, and sigh, and weep, and
make the most pitious Moan that ever Love inspired. He would complain upon the
Cruelty of a Moments Absence, and vow he could not live where she was not. All
that disturbed his Happiness, he reproached as Enemies to his Repose, and at
last made her feign an Illness, that no Visits might be made her, and that he
might possess all her Hours. Nor did Hermione perceive all this without making
her Advantages of so glorious an Opportunity; but with the usual Cunning of her
Sex, improved every Minute she gave him: She now found herself sure of the
Heart of the finest Man in the World; and of one she believed would prove the
greatest, being the Head of a most powerful Faction, who were resolved the
first Opportunity to order Affairs so as to come to an open Rebellion, and to
make him a King. All these things, how unlikely soever in Reason, her Love and
Ambition suggested to her; so that she believed she had but one Game more to
play to establish herself the greatest and most happy Woman in the World. She
consults in this weighty Affair with her Mother, who had a share of Cunning
that could carry on a Design as well as any of her Sex. They found but one
Obstacle to all Hermione's rising Greatness; and that was the Prince's being
married; and that to a Lady of so considerable Birth and Fortune, so eminent
for her Virtue, and all Perfections of Womankind; and withal so excellent for
Wit and Beauty, that 'twas impossible to find any Cause of a Separation between
'em. So that finding it improbable to remove that Let to her Glories, she grew
very Melancholy; which was soon perceived by the too Amorous Prince, who
pleads, and sighs, and weeps on her Bosom Day and Night to find the Cause: But
she, who found she had a difficult Game to play, and that she had need of all
her little Aids, pretends a thousand little frivillous Reasons before she
discovers the true one; which served but to oblige him to ask anew, as she
designed he should -- At last, one Morning, finding him in the softest fit in
the World, and ready to give her whatever she could ask in return for the
Secret of her Disquiet, she told him with a Sigh, how Unhappy she was in loving
so violently a Man who could never be any thing to her more than the Robber of
her Honor: And at last with abundance of Sighs and Tears bewailed his Marriage
-- He taking her with all the Joy imaginable in his Arms, thanked her for
speaking of the only thing he had a thousand times been going to offer to her,
but durst not for fear she should Reproach him. He told her he looked upon
himself as married to no Woman but herself, to whom, by a thousand solemn Vows
he had contracted himself, and that he would never own any other while he
lived, let Fortune do what she pleased with him. Hermione thriving hitherto so
well, urged his easy Heart yet farther, and told him, Though she had left no
Doubt remaining in her of his Love and Virtue, no suspicion of his Vows, yet
the World would still esteem the Princess his Wife, and herself only as a
Prostitute to his Youthful Pleasure; and as she conceived her Birth and Fortune
not to be much inferior to that of the Princess, she should die with
Indignation and Shame, to bear all the Reproach of his Wantonness, while his
now Wife would live esteemed and pitied as an injured Innocent. To all which he
replied, as mad in Love, That the Princess, he confessed, was a Lady to whom he
had Obligations, but that he esteemed her no more his Wife, since he was
married to her at the Age of twelve Years; an Age wherein he was not
capacitated to choose Good or Evil, or to answer for himself, or his
Inclinations: And though she were a Lady of absolute Virtue, of Youth, Wit and
Beauty; yet Fate had so ordained it, that he had reserved his Heart to this
Moment entirely for herself; and that he renounced all Pretenders to him except
herself; that he had now possessed the Princess for the space of twenty Years;
that Youth had a long Race to run, and could not take up at those Years with
one single Beauty: That hitherto Ravage and Destruction of Hearts had been his
Province and Glory, and that he thought he had never lost time but when he was
a little while Constant: But now he was fixed to all he would ever possess
whilst he had Breath; and that she was both his Mistress and his Wife; his
eternal Happiness, and the end of all his Loving. It Is there he said he would
remain as in his first state of Innocence: That hitherto his Ambition had been
above his Passion, but that now his Heart was so entirely subdued to this fair
Charmer (for so he called and thought her) that he could be content to live and
die in the Glory of being hers alone, without wishing for Liberty or Empire,
but to render her more Glorious. A thousand things tender and fond he said to
this purpose, and the result of all ended in most solemn Vows, That if ever
Fortune favored him with a Crown, he would fix it on her Head, and make her in
spite of all former Ties and Obligations Queen of France. This was sufficient
to appease her Sighs and Tears, and she remained entirely satisfied of his
Vows, which were exchanged before Madam the Countess, and confirmed by all the
binding Obligations Love on his side could invent, and Ambition and Subtilty on
hers. When I came at any time to visit him, which by stealth a-nights I
sometimes did, to take Orders from him how I should act in all things (though I
lay concealed like himself) he would tell me all that had passed between him
and Hermione. I suppose, not so much for the reposing the Secret in my Breast,
as out of a fond Pleasure to be relating Passages of his Doa^age, and repeating
her Name, which was ever in his Mouth: I saw she had reduced him to a great
degree of Slavery, and could not look tamely on while a Hero so young, so gay,
so great, and so hopeful, lay idling away his precious Time, without doing any
thing, either in order for his own Safety or Ambition. 'Twas, my Lord, a great
pity to see how his noble Resolution was changed, and how he was perfectly
effeminated into soft Woman. I endeavored at last to rouse him from this
Lethargy of Love; and argued with him the little Reason, that in my Opinion he
had to be so charmed. I told him Hermione, of all the Beauties of France, was
esteemed one of the meanest, and that if ever she had gained a Conquest (as
many she was infamously famed for) it was purely the force of her Youth and
Quality; but that now that Bloom^ was past, and she was one of those, which in
less quality, we called Old. At these Reproaches of his Judgment, I often
perceived him to blush, but more with Anger than Shame. Yet because, according
to the Vogue of the Town, he found there was Reason in what I said, and which
he could only contradict by saying however she was, she appeared all otherwise
to him: He blamed me a little kindly for my hard Words against her, and began
to swear to me he thought her all over Charm. He vowed there was absolute
Fascination in her Eyes and Tongue. It Is confessed, said he, she has not much
of Youth, nor of that which we agree to call Beauty; but she has a Grace so
Masculine, an Air so Ravishing, a Wit and Humor so absolutely made to charm,
that they all together sufficiently recompense for her want of Delicacy in
Complexion and Feature: And in a word, my Tomaso, cry's he* embracing me; she
is, though I know not what, or how, a Maid that compels me to adore her; she has
a natural Power to please above the rest of her dull Sex; and I can abate her a
Face and Shape, and yet vie her for Beauty with any of the celebrated ones of
France.

I found by the manner of his saying this, that he was really charmed, and past
all Retrieve; bewitched to this Lady. I found it vain therefore to press him to
a Separation, or to lessen his Passion; but on the contrary told him there was
a time for all things; if Fate had so ordained it that he must love. But I
besought him with all the Eloquence of perfect Duty and Friendship not to
suffer his Passion to surmount his Ambition and his Reason, so far as to
neglect his Interest and Safety; and for a little Pleasure with a Woman, suffer
all his Friends to perish that had woven their Fortunes with his, and must
stand or fall as he thrived: I implored him not to cast away the Good Cause
which was so far advanced, and that yet, notwithstanding this Discourse, might
all be retrieved by his Conduct and good Management. That I knew, however the
King appeared in outward show to be offended, that it was yet in his Power to
calm the greatest Tempest this Discovery had raised* That 'twas but casting
himself at his Majesty's Feet, and begging his Mercy, by a Confession of the
Truth of some part of the Matter; and that it was impossible he could fail of a
Pardon from so indulgent a Monarch as he had offended: That there was no Action
could wholly raze out of the Kings Heart that Tenderness and Passion he had
ever expressed toward him; and his Peace might be made with all the Facility
imaginable. To this he urged a very great Reluctance, and cried he would sooner
die, than by a Confession expose the Lives of his Friends, and let the World
see their whole Design before they had power to effect it: And not only so, but
put it past all their Industry ever to bring so hopeful a Plot about again. At
this I smiled, and asking his Highness Pardon, told him I was of another
Opinion, as most of the Heads of the Hugonots were, That what he said to his
Majesty in Private could never possibly be made Public: That his Majesty would
content himself with the Knowledge of the Truth, without caring to satisfy the
World, so greatly to the Prejudice of a Prince of the Blood, and a Man so very
dear to him as himself: He urged the Fears this would give those of the
Reformed Religion, and alarm 'em with a thousand Apprehensions, that it would
discover every Man of 'em, by unraveling the Intrigue. To this I replied, That
their Fears would be very short lived; for as soon as he had by his Submission
and Confession gained his Pardon, he had no more to do but to renounce all he
had said, leave the Court, and put himself into the Protection of his Friends,
who were ready to receive him. That he need but appear abroad a little time,
and he would see himself addressed to again by all of the Hugonot Party, who
would quickly put him into a Condition of fearing nothing.

My Council, with the same Persuasion from all of Quality of the Party, who
came to see him, was at last approved of by him, and he began to say a thousand
things to assure me of his Fidelity to his Friends and the Faction, which he
vowed never to forsake for any other Interest, but to stand or fall in its
Defense; and that he was resolved to be a King or Nothing; and that he would
put in Practice all the Arts and Stratagems of Cunning, as well as Force, to
attain to this Glorious End, however crooked and indirect they might appear to
Fools. However he conceived the first necessary Step to this, was the getting
his Pardon, to gain a little time to manage things anew, to the best Advantage:
That at present all things were at a stand without Life or Motion, wanting the
sight of himself who was the very Life and Soul of Motion; the Axel-tree that
could turn the Wheel of Fortune round again.

And now he had talked himself into Sense again; he cried -- Oh my Tomaso! I
long to be in Action, my Soul is on the Wing, and ready to take its Flight
through any Hazard. -- But sighing, on a sudden again he cried: But oh my
Friend, my Wings are impt by Love, I cannot mount the Regions of the Air and
thence survey the World; but still as I would rise to mightier Glory, they ^^ag
to humble Love, and fix me there. Here I am charmed to lazy soft Repose, here
it is I smile and play, and love away* my Hours: But I will rouse, I will, my
dear Tomaso; nor shall the winged Boy hold me enslaved: Belive me Friend he
shall not -- He sent me away pleased with this, and I left him to his Repose.

Supper being ready to come upon the Table, though Philander were impatient to
hear the Story out, yet he would not press Tomaso, till after Supper; in which
time they discoursed of nothing but the Miracle of Cesario's Love to Hermion^.
He could not but wonder a Prince so young, so amorous, and so gay, should
return again, after almost fifteen Years, to an old Mistress; and who had never
been in her Youth a celebrated Beauty: One, whom it was imagined, the King, and
several after him at Court, had made a Gallantry with -- On this he paused for
some time, and reflected on his Passion for Silvia; and this fantastic
Intrigue of the Prince's inspired him with a kind of Curiosity to try, whether
fleeting Love would carry him back again to this abandoned Maid. In these
Thoughts, and such Discourse, they passed away the time during Supper; which
ended, and a fresh Bottle brought to the Table, with a new Command that none
should interrupt 'em: The impatient Philander obliged Tomaso to give him a
farther Account of the Princes Proceedings; which he did in this manner:

My Lord, having left my Prince, as I imagined, very well resolved, I spoke of
it to as many of our Party as I could conveniently meet with, to prepare 'em
for the Discovery I believed the Prince would pretend to make, that they should
not by being alarmed at the first News of it, put themselves into Fears that
might indeed discover 'em: Nor would I suffer Cesario to rest, but daily saw
him, or rather nightly stole to him, to keep up his Resolution: And indeed, in
spite of Love, to which he had made himself so entire a Slave, I brought him
to his own House, to visit Madam his Wife, who was very well at Court, maugre
her Husbands ill Conduct, as they called it. The King being, as you know, my
Lord, extremely kind to that deserving Lady, often made her Visits, and would
without very great Impatiency hear her plead for her Husband, the Prince; and
possibly it was not ungrateful to him: All this we daily learned from a Page,
who secretly brought Intelligence from Madam the Princess: So that we conceived
it wholly necessary for the Interest of the Prince, that he should live in a
good Understanding with this prudent Lady. To this end he feigned more Respect
than usual to her, and as soon as it was dark, every Evening made her his
Visits. One Evening among the rest, he happened to be there, just as the
Proclamation came forth of four thousand Crowns to any that could discover him;
and within half an Hour after came the King to visit the Princess, as every
Night he did; her Lodging being in the Court: The King came without giving any
Notice, and with a very slender Train that Night; so that he was almost in the
Princess's Bedchamber before any body informed ^her he was there; so that the
Prince had no time to retire but into Madam the Princess's Cabaret, the Door of
which, she immediately locking, made such a Noise and Bustle that it was heard
by his Majesty, who nevertheless had passed it by, if her Confusion and Blushes
had not farther betrayed her, with the unusual Address she made to the King:
Who therefore asked her who she had concealed in her Closet. She endeavored to
put him off with some feigned Replies, but 'twould not do; the more her
Confusion, the more the King was inquisitive, and urged her to give him the Key
of her Cabaret: But she, who knew the Life of the Prince would be in very great
Danger, should he be taken so, and knew on the other side. that to deny it
would betray the Truth as much as his Discovery would, and cause him either to
force the Key or the Door, fell down at his Feet, and wetting his Shoes with
her Tears, and grasping his Knees in her trembling Arms, implored that Mercy
and Pity for the Prince her Husband, whom her Virtue had rendered dear to her,
however Criminal he appeared to his Majesty: She told him his Majesty had more
peculiarly the Attributes of a God than any other Monarch upon Earth, and never
heard the Wretched or the Innocent plead in vain. She told him that herself and
her Children, who were dearer to her than Life, should all be as Hostages for
the good Conduct and Duty of the Prince's future Life and Actions: And they
would all be obliged to suffer any Death, though never so ignominious, upon the
least breaking out of her Lord: That he should utterly abandon those of the
reformed Religion, and yield to what Articles his Majesty would graciously be
pleased to impose, quitting all his false and unreasonable Pretensions to the
Crown, which was only the Effects of the Flattery of the Hugonot Party, and the
Malcontents. Thus with the Virtue and Goodness of an Angel, she pleaded with
such moving Eloquence, mixed with Tears, from beautiful Eyes, that she failed
not to soften the royal Heart, who knew not how to be deaf when Beauty pleaded:
Yet he would not seem to yield so suddenly, least it should be imagined he had
too light a Sense of his Treasons, which, in any other great Man, would have
been punished with no less than Death: Yet, as she pleaded, he grew calmer, and
suffered it without Interruption, till she waited for his Reply; and obliged
him by her Silence to speak. He numbers up the Obligations he had heaped on her
Husband; how he had, by putting all Places of great Command and Interest into
his Hands, made him the greatest Prince and Favorite, of a Subject, in the
World; and infinitely happier than a Monarch: That he had all the Glory and
Power of one, and wanted but the Care: All the Sweets of Empire, while all that
was disagreeable and toilsom, remained with the Title alone. He therefore
upbraided him with infinite Ingratitude, and want of Honor; with all the Folly
of ambitious Youth: And left nothing unsaid that might make the Princess
sensible it was too late to hide any of his Treasons from him, since they were
all but too apparent to his Majesty. 'Twas therefore that she urged nothing but
his Royal Mercy and Forgiveness, without endeavoring to lessen his Guilt, or
enlarge on his Innocence. In fine, my Lord, so well she spoke, that at last she
had the Joy to perceive the happy Effects of her Wit and Goodness, which had
moved Tears of Pity and Compassion from his Majesty's Eyes; which was Cesario's
Cue to come forth, as immediately he did (having heard all that had passed) and
threw himself at his Majesty's Feet: And this was the critical Minute he was to
snatch for the gaining his Point, and of which he made a most admirable use. He
called up all the Force of necessary Dissimulation, Tenderness to his Voice,
Tears to his Eyes, and Trembling to his Hands, that stayed the too willing and
melting Monarch by his Robe, till he had heard him implore, and granted him his
Pity: Nor did he quit his Hold, till the King cried with a soft Voice -- Rise
-- at which he was assured of what he asked. He refused however to rise, till
the Pardon was pronounced. He owned himself the greatest Criminal in Nature;
that he was drawn from his Allegiance by the most subtle Artifices of his
Enemies, who under false Friendships had allured his Hopes with gilded
Promises; and which he now too plainly saw were Designs to propagate their own
private Interests, and not his Glory. He humbly besought his Majesty to make
some gracious Allowances for his Vanities of Youth, and to believe now he had
so dearly bought Discretion, at almost the price of his Majesty's eternal
Displeasure, that he would reform, and lead so good a Life, so absolutely from
any appearance of Ambition, that his Majesty should see he had not a more
faithful Subject than himself. In fine, he found himself, by this
Acknowledgment he had begun with, to advance yet farther: Nor would his Majesty
be satisfied without the whole Scene of the Matter; and how they were to have
surprised and seized him; where, and by what Numbers. All which he was forced
to give an Account of; since now to have fallen back, when he was in their
Hands, had been his infallible Ruin. All which he performed with as much
Tenderness and Respect to his Friends concerned, as if his own Life had been
depending: And though he were extremely pressed to discover some of the great ones
of the Party, he would never give his consent to an Action so mean, as to be an
Evidence. All that could be got from him farther, was, to promise his Majesty
to give under his Hand, what he had in private confessed to him; with which the
King remained very well satisfied, and ordered him to come to Court the next
day. Thus for that Night they parted, with infinite Caresses on the King's
part, and no little Joy on his. His Majesty was no sooner gone, but he gave
immediate order to the Secretaries of State, to draw up his Pardon, which was
done, with good Speed, that he had it in his own Hands the next day. When he
came to Court it is not to be imagined the Surprise it was to all to behold the
Man, in the greatest State imaginable, who but Yesterday was to have been
Crucified at any Price: And those, who most exclaimed against him, were the
first who paid him Homage, and caressed him at the highest rate; only the most
Wise and Judicious, prophesied his Glories were not of a long Continuation. The
King made no Visits where the Prince did not publicly appear: He told all
People, with infinite Joy, that the Prince had confessed the whole Plot, and
that he would give it under his Hand and Seal, in order to having it published
throughout all France, for the Satisfaction of all those who had been deluded and
deceived by our specious Pretenses; and for the Terror of those, who had any
ways adhered to so pernicious a Villainy: So that he met with nothing but
Reproaches from those of our own Party at Court: For there were many, who,
hitherto were unsuspected, and who now, out of fear of being betrayed by the
Prince, were ready to fall at the Kings Feet and confess all: Others there
were, that left the Court and Town upon it. In fine, the face of things seemed
extremely altered, while the Prince bore himself like a Person who had the
Misfortune justly to lie beneath the Exclamations of a disobliged Multitude, as
they at least imagined, and bore all, as if their Fears had been true, without
so much as offering at his Justification, to confirm his Majesty's good Opinion
of him: He added to his Pardon a Present of twenty thousand Crowns; half of it
being paid the next day after his coming to Court. And in short, my Lord, his
Majesty grew so fond of the Prince, he could not endure to suffer him out of
his Presence; and was never satisfied with seeing him: He carried him the next
day to the public Theater with him, to show the World he was reconciled. But
by this time he had all confirmed, and grew impatient to declare himself to his
Friends, whom he would not have remain long in their ill Opinion of him. It
happened, the third day of his coming to Court (in returning some of those
Visits he had received from all the great Persons.) he went to wait upon the
Duchess of -- a Lady who had ever had a tender Respect for the Prince: In the
time of this Visit, a young Lady of Quality happened to come in; one whom your
Lordship knows a great Wit, and much esteemed at Court, Madamoisell Mariana: By
this Lady he found himself welcomed to Court with all the Demonstrations of
Joy; as also by the old Duchess, who had diverse times heretofore persuaded the
Prince to leave the Hugonots, and return to the King and Court: She used to
tell him he was a handsome Youth, and she loved his Mother well; that he danced
finely, and she had rather see him in a Ball at Court, than in Rebellion in the
Field; and often to this purpose her Love would rally him; and now showed no
less concern of Joy for his Reconciliation; and looking on him, as a true
Convert, fell a-railing, with all the Malice and Wit she could invent, at those
public spirited Knaves who had seduced him. She railed me, and cursed those
Politics which had betrayed him, to almost Ruin it self. The Prince heard
her, with all the Patience he could, for some time, but when he found her touch
him so tenderly, and name his Friends, as if he had owned any such ill
Counselors, his Color came into his Face, and he could not forbear defending
us with all the Force of Friendship. He told her he knew of no such Seducers,
no Villains of the Party, nor of any traiterous Design, that either himself, or
any Man in France, had ever harbored: At which, she growing to upbraid him, in
a manner too passionate, he thought it decent to end his Visit, and left her
very abruptly. At his going out he met with the Duke of -- Brother to the
Duchess, going to visit her: En passant a very indifferent Ceremony passed on
both sides, for this Duke never had entertained a Friendship, or scarce Respect
for Cesario; but going into his Sister's, the Duchess her Chamber, he found
her all in a Rage at the Princes so public Defense of the Hugonots, and their
Allies; and the Duke entering, they told him what had passed. This was a very
great Pleasure to him, who had a mortal Hate at this time to the Prince. He
made his Visit very short, hastens to Court, and went directly to the King, and
told him how infinitely he found his Majesty mistaken in the imagined Penitence
of the Prince; and then told him what he had said at the Duchess of --
Lodgings, and had disowned he ever confessed any treasonable Design against his
Majesty, and gave 'em the Lie, who durst charge him with any such Villainy. The
King, who was unwilling to credit what he wished not true, plainly told the
Duke, he could not believe it, but that it was the Malice of his Enemies who
had forged this; the Duke replied, he would bring those to his Majesty, that
heard the Words: Immediately thereupon dispatched away his Page, to beg the
Duchess would come to Court, with Madamoisell Mariana. The Duchess suspecting
the truth of the Business, and unwilling to do the Prince an ill Office,
excused herself, by sending word she was ill of the Colic. But Mariana, who
loved the King's Interest, and found the Ingratitude, as she called it, of the
prime, hasted in her Chair to Court, and justified all the Duke had said; who
being a Woman of great Wit and Honor, found that Credit which the Duke failed
of, as an open Enemy to the Prince. About an hour after the Prince appeared at
Court, and found the face of Things changed extremely; and those, who before
had kissed his Hand, and were proud of every smile from him: Now beheld him
with coldness, and scarce made way as he past. However, he went on to the
Presence and found the King, whose looks were also very much changed; who
taking him into the Bedchamber, showed him his whole Confession, drawn up
ready for him to sign, as he had promised, though he never intended any such
thing; and now resolved to die rather than do it: He took it in his Hand, while
the King cried, -- Here keep your Word, and Sign your Narrative. -- Stay, Sir,
replied the Prince, I have the Council of my Friends to ask first, in so
weighty an Affair. The King confirmed in all he had heard, no longer doubted
but he had been too cunning for him; and going out in a very great discontent,
he only cried, -- Sir, if you have any better Friends than my self, I leave you
to 'em; -- and with this left him. The Prince was very glad he had got the
Confession-Paper, hoping it would never come to light again; the King was the
only person to whom he had made the Confession, and he was but one Accuser; and
him he thought the Party could at any time be too powerful to oppose, all being
easily believed on their side, and nothing on that of the Court. After this, in
the Evening, the King going to visit Madam the Duchess of -- for whom he had a
very great Esteem, and whither every Day the whole Court followed him: The
Prince, with all the assurance imaginable, made his Court there also; but he
was no sooner come into the Presence, but he perceived Anger in the Eyes of
that Monarch, who had indeed a peculiar Greatness and Firceness there when
Angry: A Minute after he sent Monsieur -- to the Prince, with a command to
leave the Court; and without much Ceremony he accordingly departed, and went
directly to Hermione, who with all the impatience of Love expected him; nor was
much surprised to find him Banished the Court: For he made her acquainted with
his most Secret Designs; who having made all his Interests her own, Espoused
whatever related to him, and was capable of retaining all with great Fidelity:
Nor had he quitted her one Night, since his coming to Court; and he has often,
with rapture, told me, Hermione was a Friend as well as a Mistress, and one
with whom, when the first Play was ended, he could Discourse with of useful
things of State, as well as Love; and improve in both the Noble Mysteries, by
her Charming Conversation. The Night of this second Disgrace, I went to
Hermione's to visit him, where we Discoursed what was next to be done. He did
not think his Pardon was sufficient to secure him, and he was not willing to
trust a King who might be convinced, that that Tenderness he had for him, was
absolutely against the Peace and Quiet of all France. I was of this Opinion, so
that upon farther debate, we thought it absolutely necessary to quit France,
till the Courts heat should be a little abated, and that the King might imagine
himself, by his absence, in more Tranquillity than he really is. In order to
this, he made me take my Flight into Flanders, here to provide all things
necessary against his coming, and I received his command to seek you out, and
beg you would attend his coming hither. I expect him every Day. He told me at
parting he longed to consult with you how next to play this mighty Game, on
which so many Kingdoms are staked, and which he is resolved to win or be
nothing. An imperfect Relation, replied Philander, we had of this Affair, but I
never could learn by what Artifice the Prince brought about his good Fortune at
Court; but of your own Escape, I have heard nothing, pray oblige me with the
Relation of it: Sir, said Thomaso, there is so little worthy the trouble you
will take in hearing it, that you may spare your self the Curiosity. Sir,
replied Philander, I always had too great a share in what concerned you not to
be Curious of the Story. In which, replied Thomaso, though there be nothing
Novel, I will satisfy you.

Be pleased to know, my Lord, that about a Week before our design was fully
discovered by some of our own under-Rogues, I had taken a great House in Fabour
St. Iermins, for my Mistress, whom you know, my Lord, I had lived with for the
space of a Year. She was gone to drink the Waters of Bourbon, for some
indisposition, and I had promised her all things should be fitted against her
return, agreeable to her Humor and Desire; and indeed I spared no cost to make
her Apartment Magnificent: And I believe few Women of Quality could purchase
one so rich; for I loved the Young Woman, who had Beauty and Discretion enough
to charm, though the Parisians of the Royal Party called her Nicky Nacky, which
was given her in derision to me, not to her, for whom every body, for her own
sake, had a considerable Esteem. Besides, my Lord, I had taken up Money out of
the Orphans and Widows Bank from the Chamber of Paris, and could very well
afford to be Lavish when I spent upon the public Stock. While I was thus
ordering all things, my Vallet came running out of Breath to tell me, that
being at the Loovre, he saw several persons carried to the Secretaries Office,
with Messengers; and that inquiring who they might be, he found they were two
Parisians, who had offered themselves to the Messengers, to be carried to be
Examined about a Plot, the Prince Cesario and those of the Reformed Religion
had to surprise his Majesty, kill Monsieur his Brother, and set all Paris in a
Flame: And as to what particularly related to my self; he said, That I was
named as the person designed to seize upon the King's Guards, and dispatch
Monsieur. This my own Conscience told me was too true for me to make any doubt,
but I was discovered; I therefore left a Servant in the House, and in an
Hackney-Coach took my Flight. I drove a little out of Paris till Night and then
returned again, as the surest part of the World where I could conceal my self:
I was not long in studying who I should trust with my Life and safety, but went
directly to the Palace of Madam the Countess of -- who you know, my Lord, was a
Widow, and a Woman who had for a year past, a most violent Passion for me; but
she being a Lady who had made many such Gallantries, and past her Youth, I had
had only a very great Respect and Acknowledgment for her and her Quality, and
being obliged to her for the Effects of her Tenderness, shown upon several
Occasions, I could not but acquit my self like a Cavalier to her, whenever I
could possible; and which, though I have a thousand times feigned great Business
to prevent, yet I could not always be ungrateful; and when I paid her my
Services, 'twas ever extremely well received; and because of her Quality, and
seting up for a second Marriage, she always took care to make my Approaches to
her in as concealed a manner as possible; and only her Porter, one Page, and
one Woman, knew this secret Amor; and for the better carrying it on, I ever
went in a Hackney-Coach, least my Livery should be seen at her Gate: And as it
was my Custom at other times, so I now sent the Porter (whom, by my Bounty and
his Ladies, was entirely my own Creature) for the Page, to come to me, who
immediately did, and I desired him to let his Lady know, I waited her Commands;
That was the Word: He immediately brought me Answer, that by good Fortune his
Lady was all alone, and infinitely wishing she knew where to send him for me:
and I immediately, at that good News, ran up to her Chamber; where I was no
sooner come, but desiring me to sit, she ordered her Porter to be called, and
gave him Orders, upon pain of Life, not to tell of my being in the House,
whatever Enquiry should be made after me; and having given the same Command to
her Page, she dismissed 'em, and came to me, with all the Fear and Trembling
imaginable. Ah Monsieur, cried she, falling on my Neck, we are undone -- I not
imagining she had heard the News already; cried, Why, is my Passion discovered?
Ah, replied she in Tears, I would to Heaven it were no worse! would all the
Earth had discovered that, which I should esteem my Glory -- But it is, my
charming Monsieur, continued she, Your Treasons and not Amor, whose discovery
will be so fatal to me. At this I seemed amazed, and begged her to let me
understand her: She told me what I have said before; and moreover, That the
Council had that very Evening issued out Warrants for me, and she admired how I
escaped. After a little Discourse of this kind, I asked her what she would
advise me to do? for I was very well assured the violent hate the King had
particularly for me, would make him never consent I should live on any terms:
And therefore 'twas determined I should not surrender my self; and she resolved
to run the risk of concealing me; which in fine she did Three Days, furnishing
me with Money and Necessaries for my Flight. In this time a Proclamation came
forth and offered five hundred Crowns for my Head, or to Seize me alive or
dead. This Sum so wrought with the slavish Minds of Men, that no Art was left
unessay'd to take me: They searched all Houses, all HackneyCoaches that passed
by Night; and did all that Avarice could inspire to take me, but all in vain:
At last this glorious Sum so dazzled the Mind of Madam the Countess's Porter,
that he went to a Captain of the Musketeers, and assured him, if the King
would give him the aforesaid Sum, he would betray me, and bring him the
following Night to surprise me without any Resistance: The Captain, who
thought, if the Porter should have all the Sum, he should get none; and every
one hoping to be the happy Man that should take me and win the Prize, could not
endure another should have the Glory of both, and so never told the King of the
Offer the Porter had made. But however Secret one may imagine an Amor to be
kept, yet in so busy a place as Paris, and the Apartments of the Court
Coquets, this of ours had been discoursed, and the Intrigue more than
suspected: Whether this, or the Captain before named, imagined to find me at
the House of the Countess, because her Porter had made such an Offer; I say,
however it was, the next Morning, upon a Sunday, the Guards broke into several
Chambers, and missing me, had the Insolence to come to the Door of that of the
Countess; and she had only time to slip on her NightGown, and running to the
Door, besought them to have Respect to her Sex and Quality, while I started
from my Bed, which was the same from whence the Countess rose; and not knowing
where to hide, or what to do, concealing my Clothes between the Sheets, I
mounted from the Table to a great silver Sconce that was fa^tened to the Wall
by the Bedside, and form thence made but one Spring up to the Tester of the
Bed; which being one of those, raised with strong wood-work, and Japan, I could
easily do; or rather it was by Miracle I did it; and laid myself along on the
top, while my Back touched the Cieling of the Chamber; by this time, when no
Entreaties could prevail, they had burst open the Chamber Door, and running
directly to the Bed, they could not believe their Eyes: They saw no Person
there, but the plain print of two, with the Pillows for two Persons. This gave
them the Curiosity to search farther, which they did, with their Swords, under
the Bed, in every Corner, behind every Curtain, up the Chimney, felt all about
the Wains^ot and Hangings for false Doors, or Closets; surveyed the Floor for a
Trap-door: At last, they found my fringed Gloves in the Window, and the Shash a
little up, and then they concluded I had made my Escape out at that Window:
This Thought they seemed confirmed in, and therefore ran to the Garden, where
they thought I had descended, and with my Gloves, which they bore away, as the
Trophies of their almost gained Victory, they searched every Hedge and Bush,
Arbor, Grotto, and Tree; but not being able to find what they ^ought, they
concluded me gone, and told all the Town how very near they were to seizing me.
After this, the very Porter and Page believed me escaped out at that Window,
and there was no farther Search made after me: But the Countess was amazed, as
much as any of the Soldiers, to find which way I had conveyed myself, when I
came down and undeceived her; but when she saw from whence I came, she wondered
more than before, how I could get up so high; when trying the trick again, I
could not do it, if I might have won never so considerable a Wager upon it,
without pulling down the Sconce and the Teaster also.

After this, I remained there undiscovered the whole time the Prince was at
Hermione's, till his coming to Court, when I verily believed he would have
gained me my Pardon, with his own; but the King had sworn my final Destruction,
if he ever got me in his Power; and proclaiming me a Traitor, seized all they
could find of mine. 'Twas then that I believed it high time to take my Flight;
which, as soon as I heard the Prince again in Disgrace, I did, and got safely
into Holland, where I have remained about six Weeks. But, oh! what is Woman?
The first News I heard, and that was while I remained at the Countess's, that
my Mistress, for whom I had taken such Care, and who had professed to love me
above all things, no sooner heard I was ^led and proscribed, but retiring to a
Friends House (for her own was seized for mine) and the Officers imagining me
there too, they came to search; and a young Cavalier, of a noble Aspect, great
Wit and Courage, and indeed a very fine Gentleman, was the Officer that entered
her Chamber to search for me; who, being at first sight, surprised with her
Beauty, and melted with her Tears, fell most desperately in Love with her, and
after hearing how she had lost all her Money, Plate, and Jewels, and rich
Furniture, offered her his Service to retrieve 'em, and did do it; and from one
Favor to another, continued so to oblige the fair fickle Creature, that he
won, with that and his handsome Mien, a Possession of her Heart, and she yielded
in a weeks time to my most mortal Enemy. And the Countess, who, at my going
from her, swounded, and bathed me all in Tears, making a thousand Vows of
Fidelity, and never to favor Mankind more: This very Woman, Sir, as soon as my
Back was turned, made new Advances to a young Lord, who, believing her to be
none of the most Faithful, would not trust her under Matrimony: He being a Man
of no great Fortune, and she a Mistress of a very considerable one, his
standing off on these Terms, inflames her the more; and I have Advice that she
is very much in Love with him, and it is believed will do what he desires of
her: So that I was no sooner abandoned by Fortune, but fickle Woman followed
her Example, and ^led me too. Thus, my Lord, you have the History of my double
Unhappiness: And I am waiting here a Fate which no Human Wit can guess at: The
Arrival of the Prince will give a little Life to our Affair; and I yet have
Hope to see him in Paris, at the Head of forty thousand Hugonots, to revenge
all the Insolences we have suffered.

After discoursing of several things, and of the Fate of several Persons, it
was Bedtime, and they taking Leave, each Man departed to his Chamber.

Philander, while he was undressing, being alone with Brilljard, began to
discourse of Silvia, and to take some care of letting her know he was arrived
at Bruxells; who even yet retained some unaccountable Hope, as Lovers do, of
one day being happy with that fair one; and believing he could not be so, with
so much Facility, while she was in the Hands of Octavio, as those of Philander,
whould never tell his Lord his Sentiments of her Conduct, nor of her Love to
Octavio, and those other Passages that had occurred in Holland: He only cried,
he believed she might be overcome, being left to herself, and by the Merits and
good Fashion of Octavio; but would not give his Master an absolute Fear, or any
account of Truth; that he might live with her again if possible, as before; and
that she might hold herself so obliged to him for his Silence in these Affairs,
as might one day render him happy. These were the unweighed Reasons he gave for
deluding his Lord into a Kind Opinion of the fickle Maid: But ever when he
named Silvia, Philander could perceive his Blushes rise, and from 'em, believed
there was something behind in his Thought, which he had a mind to know: He
therefore pressed him to the last degree, -- and cried -- Come -- confess to
me, Brilljard, the reason of your Blushes: I know you are a Lover, and I was
content to suffer you my Rival, knowing your Respect to me. This, though he spoke
smiling, raised a greater Confusion in Brilljard's Heart. I own, my Lord, said
he, that I have, in spite of that Respect, and all the force of my Soul, had
the daring to love her whom you loved; but still the consideration of my
Obligations to your Lordship surmounted that saucy Flame, notwithstanding all
the Encouragement of your Inconstancy, and the Advantage of the Rage it put
Silvia in against you. How, cried Philander, does Silvia know then of my
Falsness, and is it certain that Octavio has betrayed me to her? With that
Brilljard was forced to advance, and with a design of some Revenge upon Octavio
(whom, he hoped, would be challenged by his Lord, where one or both might fall
in the Rancounter, and leave him Master of his Hopes) he told him all that had
passed between 'em, all but real Possession, which he only imagined, but laid
the whole Weight on Octavio, making Silvia act but as an incensed Woman, purely
out of high Revenge and Resentment of so great an Injury as was done her Love.
He f^rther told ^im, how in the Extravagancy of her Rage she had resolved to
marry Octavio, and how he prevented it by making a public Declaration she was
his Wife already; and for which Octavio procured the States to put him in
Prison; but by an Accident that happened to the Uncle of Octavio, for which he
was forced to fly, the States released him, when he came to his Lord: How,
^ry'd Philander, and is the Traitor, Octavio, fled from Holland, and from the
reach of my Chastisement? Yes, replied Brilljard; and not to hold you longer
from the Truth, has forced Silvia away with him. At this Philander grew into a
violent Rage, sometimes against Octavio, for his Treasons against Friendship;
sometimes he felt the old Flame revive, raised and blown by Jealousy, and was
raving to imagine any other should posses the lovely Silvia. He now beholds her
with all those Charms that first fired him, and thinks, if she be Criminal,
'twas only the Effects of the: greatest Love, which always hurries Women on to
the highest Revenges. In vain he seeks to extinguish this returning Flame by
the Thought of ^alista; yet at that Thought he starts like one awakened from a
Dream of Honor, to fall asleep again, and dream of Love. Before 'twas Rage and
Pride, but now it was Tenderness and Grief, softer Passions, and more
insupportable. New Wounds smart most, but old ones are most dangerous. While he
was thus rageing, walking, pausing, and loving, one knocked at his
Chamber Door. It was Silvia's Page, who had waited all the Evening to speak to
him, and could not till now be admitted. Brilljard was just going to tell him
he was there before, when he arrived now again: Philander was all unbutton'd,
his Stockings down, and his Hair under his Cap, when the ^age, being let in by
Brilljard, ran to his Lord, who knew him and embraced him: And 'twas a pretty
while they thus caressed each other, without the Power of speaking; he of
asking a Question, and the Boy of delivering his Message; at last he gave him
Silvia's Billet; which was thus --

To Philander.
FAlse and perjured as you are, I languish for a Sight of you, and conjure you
to give it me as soon as this comes to your Hands. Imagine not that I have
prepared those Instruments of Revenge that are so justly due to your Perfidy;
but rather, that I have yet too tender Sentiments for you, in spite of the
Outrages you have done my Heart; and that for all the Ruin you have made, I
still adore you: And though I know you now another Slave, yet I beg you would
vouchsafe to behold the Spoils you have made, and allow me this Recompense for
all, to say -- Here was the Beauty I once esteemed, though now she is no more
Philander's

Silvia.


How! cried he out, No more Philander' s Silvia? By Heaven, I had rather be no
more Philander! And at that word, without considering whether he were in order
for a Visit or not, he advancing his joyful Voice, cried out to the Page; Lead
on, my faithful Boy, lead on to Silvia. In vain Brilljard beseeches him to put
himself into a better Equipage; in vain he urges to him the indecency of making
a Visit in that Posture; he thought of nothing but Silvia; however he ran after
him with his Hat, Cloak, and Comb, and as he was in the Chair dressed his Hair,
and suffered the Page to conduct him where he pleased: Which being to Silvia's
Lodgings, he ran up Stairs, and into her Chamber, as by Instinct of Love, and
found her laid on her Bed, to which he made but one step from the Door; and
catching her in his Arms, as he kneeled upon the Carpet, they both remained
unable to utter any thing but Sighs: And surely Silvia never appeared more
charming; she had for a Month or two lived at her Ease, and had besides all the
Advantage of fine Dressing, which she had purposly put on, in the most tempting
Fashion, on purpose to engage him, or rather, to make him see how fine a
Creature his Perfidy had lost him: She first broke Silence, and with a thousand
violent Reproaches, seemed as if she would fain break from those Arms, which
she wished might be too strong for her Force; while he endeavors to appease
her by swearing and lying, as Lovers do, protesting a thousand times that there
was nothing in that History of his Amor with Calista, but Revenge on Octavio,
who he knew was making an Interest in her Heart, contrary to all the Laws of
Honor and Friendship (for he had learned by the Reproaches of the Lady Abbess,
that Calista was Sister to Octavio) he has had the daring to confess to me his
Passion, said he, for you, and could I do less in Revenge than tell him I had
one for his Sister? I knew by the violent Reproaches I ever met with in your
Letters, though they were not plainly confessed, that he had played me foul, and
discovered my ^eign'd Intrigue to you; and even this I suffered, to see how far
you could be prevailed with against me. I knew Octavio had Charms of Youth and
Wit, and that you had too much the Ascendant over him, to be denied any Secret
you had a mind to draw from him; I knew your Nature too curious, and your Love
too inquisitive, not to press him to a sight of my Letters, which seen, must
incense you; and this Trial I designedly made o^ your Faith, and as a Return to
Octavio. Thus he flatters, and she believes, because she has a mind to believe;
and thus by degrees he softens the listening Silvia: Swears his Faith with
Sighs, and confirms (...) with his Tears, which bedewed her fair Bosom, as they
fell from his bright dissembling Eyes; and yet so well he dissembled, that he
scarce knew himself that he did so: And such Effects it wrought on Silvia, that
in spite of all her Honor and Vows engaged to Octavio, and horrid
Protestations, never to receive again the Fugitive to her Arms, she suffers all
he ask's, gives herself up again to Love, and is a second time undone. She
regards him as one to whom she had a peculiar Right as the first Lover: She was
married to his Love, to his Heart, and Octavio appeared the intruding Gallant,
that would, and ought to be content with the Gleanings of the Harvest,
Philander should give him the opportunity to take up: And though, if she had at
this very time been put to her sober Choice, which she would have abandoned, it
would have been Philander, as not in so good Circumstances at that time to
gratify all her Extravagancies of Expense; but she could not endure to think of
loosing either: She was for two Reasons covetous of both, and swore Fidelity to
both, protesting each the only Man; and she was now contriving in her Thoughts
how to play the Jilt most Artificially; a Help meet, though natural enough to her
Sex, she had not yet much essayed, and never to this purpose: She knew well she
should have need of all her Cunning in this Affair, for she had to do with Men
of Quality and Honor, and too much Wit to be grossly imposed upon. She knew
Octavio loved so well, it would either make her love him by Death or resenting
Pride, if she should ever be discovered to him to be untrue; and she knew she
should lose Philander to some new Mistress, if he once perceived her false. He
asked her a thousand Questions concerning Octavio, and she seemed to lavish
every Secret of her Soul to her Lover; but like a right Woman, so ordered her
Discourse, as all that made for her Advantage, she declared, and all the rest
she concealed. She told him that those Hopes which her Revenge had made her
give Octavio, had obliged him to present her with such and such fine Jewels,
such Plate, such Sums; and in fine, made him understand that all her Trophies
from the believing Lover, should be laid at his Feet, who had conquered her
Heart: And that now, having enriched herself, she would abandon him wholly to
Despair. This did not so well satisfy Philander, but that he needed some
greater Proofs of her Fidelity, fearing all these rich Presents were not for a
little Hope alone; and she failed not giving what Protestations he desired.

Thus the Night passed away, and in the Morning, she knowing he was not very
well furnished with Money, gave him the Key of her Cabinet, where she bid him
furnish himself with all he wanted; which he did, and left her, to go take
Orders about his Horses and other Affairs, not so absolutely satisfied of her
Virtue, but he feared himself put upon, which the Advantage he was likely to
reap by the Deceit, made him less consider than he would perhaps otherwise have
done. He had all the Night a full Possession of Silvia, and found in the
Morning he was not so violently concerned as he was overnight: It was but a
Repetition of what he had been feasted with before; 'twas no new Treat, but
like Matrimony, went dully down: And now he found his Heart warm a little more
for Calista, with which little Impatience he left Silvia.

That Morning a Lady having sent to Octavio, to give her an Assignation in the
Park; though he were not curious after Beauty; yet believing there might be
something more in it than merely a Lady, he dressed himself and went, which was
the reason he made not his Visit that Morning, as he used to do, to Silvia, and
so was yet ignorant of her Ingratitude: while she, on the other side, finding
herself more possessed with Vanity than Love; for having gained her end as
imagined, and got a second Victory over his Heart, in spite of all Calista's
Charms, she did not so much consider him as before; nor was he so dear to her
as before she believed it possible to get him any more to her Arms; and she
found it was Pride and Revenge to Calista, that made her so fond of indearing
him, and that she should ^hereby triumph over that haughty Rival, who pretended
to be so sure of the Heart of her Hero: And having satisfied her Ambition in
that Point, she was more pleased than she imagined she should be, and could now
return her Thoughts again to Octavio, whose Charms, whose Indearments, and
lavish Obligations, came anew to her Memory, and made him appear the most
agreeable to her Genius and Humor, which now leaned to Interest more than
Love; and now she fancies she found Philander duller in her Arms than Octavio,
that he tasted of Calista, while Octavio was all her own entirely, adoring and
ever presenting; two Excellencies, of which Philander now had but part of one.
She found Philander now in a Condition to be ever taking from her, while
Octavio's was still to be giving; which was a great Weight in the Scale of
Love, when a fair vain Woman guides the Balance: And now she begins to distrust
all that Philander had said of his Innocence, from what she now remembers she
heard from Calista herself, and reproaches her own Weakness for believing:
While her penitent Thoughts were thus wandering in favor of Octavio, that
Lover arrived, and approached her with all the Joy in his Soul and Eyes that
either could express. It Is now, my fair Charmer, said he, that I am come to
offer you, what alone can make me more worthy of you -- And pulling from his
Pocket the Writings and Inventories of all his own and his Uncles Estate -- See
here, said he, what those mighty Powers that favor Love, have done for Silvia?
It is not, continued he, the Trifle of a Million of Money (which these amount
to) that has pleased me, but because I am now able to lay it without Control
at your Feet. If she were before inclined to receive him well, what was she
now, when a million of Money rendered him so charming: She embraced his Neck
with her snowy Arms, lays her Cheek to his ravished Face, and kissed him a
thousand Welcomes; so well she knew how to make herself Mistress of all this
vast Fortune: And I suppose he never appeared so fine as at this Moment. While
she thus caressed him, he could not forbear sighing, as if there were yet
something behind to complete his Happiness: For though Octavio were extremely
blinded with Love, he had abundance of Wit, and a great many Doubts (which were
augmented by the Arrival of Philander) and he was too wise and too haughty to
be imposed upon, at least as he believed: And yet he had so very good an
Opinion of Silvia's Honor and Vows, which she had engaged to him, that he
durst hardly name his Fears, when by his Sighs she found them: And willing to
leave no Obstacle unremov'd that might hinder her possessing this Fortune, she
told him; My dear Octavio -- I am sensible these Sighs proceed from some Fears
you have of Philander 's being in Bruxells, and consequently that I will see
him, as heretofore; but be assured that that false Man shall no more dare to
pretend to me; but on the contrary, I will behold him as my mortal Enemy, the
Murderer of my Fame and Innocence, and as the most ungrateful and perfidious
Man that ever lived. This she confirmed with Oaths and Tears, and a thousand
indearing Expressions. So that establishing his Heart in a perfect
Tranquillity, and he leaving his Writings and Accounts with her, he told her he
was obliged to dine with the Advocates, who had acted for him in Holland, and
could not stay to dine with her.

You must know, that as soon as the Noise of old Sebastian, Octavio's Uncle's
Death was noised about, and that he was thereupon fled, they seized all the
Estates, both that of the Uncle, and that of Octavio, as belonging to him by
right of Law; but looking upon him as his Uncle's Murderer, they were forfeited
to the States. This part of ill News Octavio kept from Silvia, but took order
that there should be such a Process began in his Name with the States, that
might retrieve it; and sent word, if it could not be carried on by Attorneys
(for he was not, he said, in Health) that nevertheless he would come into
Holland himself. But they being not able to prove by the Witness of any of
Octavio's or Sebastian's Servants, that Octavio had any hand in his Death; but,
on the contrary, all Circumstances, and the Coroner's Verdict, brought it in as
a thing done by Accident, and through his own Fault, they were obliged to
release to Octavio all his Fortune, with that of his Uncle, which was this day
brought to him, by those he was obliged to dine and make up some Accounts
withal: He therefore told her he feared he should be absent all that Afternoon;
which she was the more pleased at; because, if Philander should return before
she had ordered the Method of their Visit, so as not to meet with each other,
(which was her only Contrivance now) she should be sure he would not see or be
seen by Octavio; who had no sooner taken his Leave, but Philander returns; who
being now fully bent upon some Adventure to see Calista if possible, and which
Intrigue would take up his whole Time, to excuse his Absence to the jealous
Silvia, he feigned that he was sent to by Cesario, to meet him upon the
Frontiers of France, and conduct him into Flanders, and that he should be
absent some Days. This was as Silvia could have wished; and after forcing
herself to take as kind a Leave of him as she could, whose Head was wholly
possessed with a Million of Gold, she sent him away, both Parties being very
well pleased with the Artifices with which they gilted each other. At
Philander's going into his Chair, he was seen by the old Count of Clarinau, who
cured perfectly of his Wound, was come thither to seek Philander, in order to
take the Revenge of a Man of Honor, as he called it; which in Spanish, is the
private Stab, for private Injuries; and indeed, more reasonable than base
French Duelling, where the Injured is as likely to suffer as the Injurer: But
Clarinau durst not attack him by Daylight in the open Street, nor durst he
indeed appear in his own Figure in the King of Spain's Dominions, standing
already there convicted of the Murder of his first Wife; but in a Disguise came
to Bruxells. The Chair with Philander was no sooner gone from the Lodgings, but
he inquired of some of the House who lodged there, that that Gentleman came to
visit? and they told him, A great Bellied Lady, who was a Woman of Quality, and
a Stranger: This was sufficient, you may believe, for him to think it Madam the
Countess of Clarinau. With this Assurance he repairs to his Lodging, which was
but hard by, and sets a Footman that attended him, to watch the Return of
Philander to those Lodgings, which he believed would not be long: The Footman,
who had not seen Philander, only asked a Description of him; he told him he was
a pretty tall Man, in black Clothes (for the Court was then in Mourning) with a
long black Hair, fine black Eyes, very handsome, and well made: This was enough
for the Lad; he thought he should know him from a thousand by these Marks and
Tokens. A way goes the Footman, and waited till the shuting in of the Evening,
and then, running to his Lord, told him Philander was come to those Lodgings;
that he saw him alight out of the Chair, and took perfect Notice of him; that
he was sure it was that Philander he looked for: Clarinau, overjoyed that his
Revenge was at hand, took his Dagger, Sword, and Pistol, and hasted to Silvia's
Lodgings, where he found the Chair still waiting, and the Doors all open; he
made no more ado, but goes in and ascends the Stairs, and passes on, without
any Opposition, to the very Chamber where they sat, Silvia in the Arms of her
Lover, not Philander, but Octavio, who being also in black, tall, long brown
Hair, and handsome, and by a Sight that might very well deceive; he made no
more to do, not doubting but it was Philander and Calista, but steps to him,
and offering to stab him, was prevented by his starting at the suddeness of his
Approach; however the Dagger did not absolutely miss him, but wounded him in
the left Arm; but Octavio's Youth, too nimble for Clarinau's Age, snatching at
the Dagger as it wounded him, at once prevented the Hurt being much, and
returned a home Blow at Clarinau, so that he fell at Silvia's Feet, whose
Shreeks alarmed the House to their Aid, where they found, by the light of a
Candle that was brought, that the Man was not dead, but lay gazing on Octavio,
who said to him; Tell me, thou unfortunate Wretch, what miserable Fate brought
thee to this place, to disturb the Repose of those who neither know thee, nor
had done thee Injury? Ah, Sir, replied Clarinau, you have Reason for what you
say, and I ask Heaven, that unknown Lady, and your self, a thousand Pardons for
my Mistake and Crime: Too late I see my Error, pity and forgive me; and let me
have a Priest, for I believe I am a dead Man. Octavio was extremely moved with
Compassion at these Words, and immediately sent his Page, who was alarmed up in
the Crowd, for a Father and a Surgeon; and he declared before the rest that he
forgave that Stranger, meaning Octavio, since he had, by a Mistake of his
Footman, pulled on his own Death, and had deserved it: And thereupon, as well
as he could, he told them for whom he had mistaken Octavio, who having injured
his Honor, he had vowed Revenge upon; and that he took the fair Lady, meaning
Silvia, for a faithless Wife of his, who had been the Authoress of all this.
Octavio soon divined this to be his Brother-in-Law Clarinau, whom yet he had
never seen; and stooping down to him, he cried; It Is I, Sir, that ought to
demand a thousand Pardons of you, for letting the Revenge of Calista 's Honor
alone so long. Clarinau wondered who he should be that named Calista, and
asking him his Name, he told him he was the unhappy Brother to that fair
Wa^ton, whose Story was but too well known to him. This while Clarinau viewing
his Face, found him the very Picture of that false Charmer; while Octavio went
on and assured him, if it were his Unhappiness to die, that he would revenge
the Honor of him and his Sister on the Betrayer of both. By this time the
Surgeon came, who found not his Wound to be mortal, as was feared, and ventured
to remove him to his own Lodgings, whither Octavio would accompany him; and
leaving Silvia inclined, after her Fright, to be reposed, he took his Leave of
her for that Evening, not daring, out of Respect to her, to visit her any more
that Night: He was no sooner gone, but Philander, who never used to go without
two very good pocket Pistols about him, having left 'em under his Pillow last
Night at Silvia's Lodgings; and being upon Love Adventures, he knew not what
Occasion he might have for 'em, returned back to her Lodgings: When he came she
was a little surprised at first to see him, but after reflecting on what
Revenge was threatened him, she exposed Octavio's Secret to him, and told him
the whole Adventure, and how she had got his Writings, which would be all her
own, if she might be suffered to manage the fond Believer. But he, whose
thought (...) on the Revenge was threatened him cried out -- He has kindly
awakened me to my Duty by what he threatens; it is I that ought to be revenged
on his Persidy of showing you my Letter's; and to that end, by Heaven, I will
defer all the Business in the World to meet him, and pay his Courtesy -- If I
had enjoyed his Sister, he might suppose I knew her not to be so; and what Man
of Wit or Youth would refuse a lovely Woman, that presents a Heart laden with
Love, and a Person all over Charms, to his Bosom* I were to be esteemed
unworthy the Friendship of a Man of Honor, if I should: But he^ has basely
betrayed me every way, makes Love to my celebrated Mistress, whom he knows I
love, and getting Secrets, unravels 'em to make his Court and his Access the
easier. She foresaw the dangerous Consequence of a Quarrel of this nature, and
had no sooner blown the Fire (which she did, to the end that Philander should
avoid her Lodgings, and all places where he might meet Octavio) but she hinders
all her Designs; and fixing him there, he was resolved to expect him at the
first place he thought most likely to find him in: She endeavored, by a
thousand Entreaties, to get him gone, urging it all for his Safety; but that
made him but the more resolved; and all she could do could not hinder him from
staying Supper, and after that, from going to Bed: So that she was forced to
hide a thousand Terrors and Fears by feigned Caresses, the sooner to get him to
meet Cesario in the Morning, as he said he was to do: And though she could not
help flattering both while by, yet she ever loved the absent best; and now
repented a thousand times that she had told him any thing.

Early the next Morning, as was his Custom, Octavio came to inquire of Silvia's
Health; and though he had oftentimes only inquired and no more (taking Excuse of
ill Nights, or Commands that none should come to her till she called) and had
departed satisfied, and came again: Yet now, when he went into Antonett's
Chamber, he found she was in a great Consternation, and her Looks, and
flattering Excuses made him know, there was more than usual in his being to day
denied; he therefore pressed it the more, and she grew to greater Confusion by
his pressing her: At last he demanded the Key of her Lady's Chamber, he having,
he said, Business of great Importance to communicate to her; she told him she
had as great a Reason not to deliver it, -- That is, said she (fearing she had
said too much) my Lady's Commands; and finding no Persuasion would prevail, and
rather venturing Silvia's eternal Displeasure, than not to be satisfied in the
Jealousies she had raised; especially reflecting on Philander's being in Town,
he took Antonett in his Arms and forced the Key from her, who was willing to be
forced; for she admired Octavio's Bounty, and cared not for Philander. Octavio
being Master of the Key, flies to Silvia's Door like Lightening, or a jealous
Lover, mad to discover, what seen, would kill him: He opens the Chamber Door,
and goes softly to the Bedside, as if he now feared to find what he sought,
and wished to Heaven he might be mistaken; he opened the Curtains, and found
Silvia sleeping with Philander in her Arms. I need make no Description of his
Confusion and Surprise; the Character I have given of that gallant, honest and
generous Lover, is sufficient to make you imagine his Heart, when indeed he
could believe his Eyes: Before he thought -- he was about to draw his Sword,
and run 'em both through, and revenge at once his injured Honor, his Love, and
that of his Sister; but that little Reason he had left checked that Barbarity,
and he was readier, from his own natural sweetness of Disposition to run
himself upon his own Sword: And there the Christian pleaded -- and yet he found
his Heart breaking, his whole Body trembling, his Mind all Agony, his Cheeks
cold and pale, his Eyes languishing, his Tongue refusing to give Utterance to
his Pressure, and his Legs to support his Body; and much ado he had to reel
into Antonett's Chamber, where he found the Maid dying with Grief for her
Concern for him. He was no sooner got to her Bedside, but he fell dead upon
it; while she, who was afraid to alarm her Lady and Philander, least Octavio
being found there, had accused her with betraying 'em; but shuting the Door
close (for yet no body had seen him but herself) she endeavored all she could
to bring him to Life again, and it was a great while before she could do so: As
soon as he was recovered he lay a good while without speaking, reflecting on
his Fate; but after appearing as if he had assumed all his manly Spirits
together, he rose up, and conjured Antonett to say nothing of what had
happened, and that she should not repent the Service she would do him by it.
Antonett, who was his absolute devoted Slave, promised him all he desired; and
he had the Courage to go once again, to confirm himself in the Lewdness of this
undone fair one, whose Perjuries had rendered her even odious now to him, and
he beheld her with Scorn and Disdain: And that she might know how indifferently
he did so (when she should come to know it) he took Philander's Sword, that lay
on her Toylet, and left his own in the place, and went out pleased; at least in
this, that he had commanded his Passion in the midst of the most powerful
Occasion for Madness and Revenge that ever was.

They lay, thus secured in each others Arms, till nine a-Clock in the Morning,
when Philander received a Note from Brilljard, who was managing his Lords
Design of getting a Billet delivered to Calista by the way of a Nun, whom
Brilljard had made some Address to to that end, and sent to beg, his Lord would
come to the Grate and speak to the young Nun, who had undertaken for any
innocent Message. This Note made him rise and have to go out, when he received
another from an unknown Hand; which was thus:

To Philander.
MY Lord, I have important Business with you, and beg I may speak with you at
three of the Clock; I will wait you by the Fountain in the Park:

Yours


Silvia, who was impatient to have him gone, never asked to see either of these
Notes, least it should have deterred him; and she knew Octavio would visit her
early, though she knew withal she could refuse him Entrance with any slight
Excuse, so good an Opinion he had of her Virtue, and so absolute an Ascendant
she had over him. -- She had given Orders, if he came, to be refused her
Chamber; and she was glad to know he had not yet been at her Lodgings. A
hundred times she was about to make use of the lessened Love Philander had for
her, and to have proposed to him the suffering Octavio to share her Embraces
for so good an Interest, since no Returns could be had from France, nor any
Signs of an Amendment of their Fortunes any other way: But still she feared he
had too much Honor to permit such a Cheat in Love, to be put even upon an
Enemy. This Fear deferred her speaking of it, or offering to sacrifice Octavio
as a Cully to their Interest, though she wished it; nor knew she long how to
deceive both; the Business was to put Philander off handsomely, if possible,
since she failed of all other Hopes. These were her Thoughts while Philander
was dressing, and raised by his asking for some more Pistols from her Cabinet,
which she found would quickly be at an end, if one Lover deminished daily, and
the other was hindered from increasing: But Philander was no sooner dressed but
he left her to her Repose; and Octavio (who had a Grison attending the Motions
of Philander all that Morning, (...) had brought him word he was gone from
Silvia) went to visit her, and entered her Chamber, all changed from what he
was before, and Death sat in his Face and Eyes, maugre all his Resolves and
art of Dissembling. She not at first perceiving it as she lay, she stretched
out her Arms to receive him with her wonted Caresses, but he gently put her
off, and sighing cried -- No Silvia, I leave those Ioys for happier Lovers. She
was a little surpised at that -- but not imagining he had known her Guilt,
replied; Then those Caresses were only meant for him; for if Silvia could make
him happy, he was sure of being the Man; and by force compelled him to suffer
her Kisses and Embraces, while his Heart was bursting, without any sense of the
Pleasure of her Touches. Ah Silvia, says he, -- I can never think myself Secure
or Happy while Philander is so near you; every absent Moment alarms me with ten
thousand Fears; in Sleep I dream thou ^art false, and gives thy Honor up all
my absent Nights, and all day thy Vows: And that he was sure, should she again
suffer herself to see Philander, he should be abandoned; and perhaps she again
undone. For since I parted with you, continued he, I heard from Clarinau, that
he saw Philander yesterday come out of your Lodgings. How can I bear this, when
you have vowed, not to see him, with Imprecations that must damn thee, Silvia,
without severe Repentance? -- At this she offered to swear again, -- but he
stopped her, and begged her not to swear till she had well considered; then she
confessed he made her a Visit, but that she used him with that Pride and Scorn
that if he were a Man of Honor, he could never bear; and she was sure he would
trouble her no more: In fine, she flattered, fawned, and gilted so, as no Woman
common in the Trade of sinful Love, could be so great a Mistress of the Art. He
suffered her to go on in all that could confirm him she thought him an errant
Coxcomb; and all that could render her the most contemptible of her Sex. He was
pleased, because it made him despise her; and that was easier than adoring her;
yet though he heard her with Scorn, he heard her with too much Love. When she was
even Breathless with eager Protestation -- he cried, Ah Indiscreet and
Unadvised Silvia, how I pity thee. Ah, said she -- observing him speak this
with a scornful Smile -- is it possible you should indeed be offended for a
simple Visit! which neither was by my Invitation or Wish: Can you be angry if I
treat Philander with the Civility of a Brother? Or rather, that I suffer him to
see me to receive my Reproaches? -- Stop here, said he, thou fair deluding
Flatterer, or thou art for ever ruined. Do not charge thy Soul yet farther; --
do not delude me on -- all yet I can forgive, as I am dying, but should I live,
I could not promise thee. Add not new Crimes by cozening me anew, for I shall
find out Truth, though it lie hid even in the bottom of Philander 's Heart. This
he spoke with an Air of Fierceness -- which seeing her grow pale upon, he sunk
again to Compassion, and in a soft Voice cried -- Whatever Injuries thou have
done thy Honor, thy Word, and Faith to me, and my poor Heart, I can perhaps
forgive when you dare utter Truth: There is some Honesty in that -- She once
more embracing him, fell anew to protesting her ill Treatment of Philander,
how she gave him back his Vows, and assured him she would never be reconciled
to him. And did you part ^o Silvia? replied the dying Octavio. Upon my Honor,
said she, just so. -- Did you not kiss at parting? said he faintly, -- Just
kissed, as Friends, no more, by all thy Love. At this he bursts into Tears, and
cried -- Oh! why, when I reposed my Heart with thee, and lavished out my very
Soul in Love, could I not merit this poor Recompense, of being fairly dealt
with? Behold this Sword -- I took it from your Toylet; view it, it is Philander
's; myself this Morning took it from your Table: No more -- since you may guess
the fatal rest: I am undone, and I am satisfied. -- I had a thousand Warnings
of my Fate, but still the Beauty charmed, and too good Nature yielded: Often you
have cozened me, and often I saw it, and still Love made me willing to forgive;
the foolish Passion hung upon my Soul, and soothed me into Peace. Silvia, quite
confounded, (not so much with the Knowledge he had of the unlucky Adventure, as
at her so earnest denying and forswearing any Love had passed between 'em) lay
still to consider how to retrieve this lost Game, and gave him leisure to go
on. -- Now, said he, thou art silent -- would thou had still been so: Ah
hapless Maid, who have this Fate attending thee, To ruin all that love thee! Be
dumb, be dumb for ever; let the false Charm that dwells upon thy Tongue be
ended with my Life: Let it no more undo believing Man; least amongst the Number
some one may conquer thee, and deaf to all thy Wit, and blind to Beauty, in
some mad Passion think of all thy Cozenings, should fall upon thee and forget
thy Sex, and by thy Death revenge the lost Octavio. At these Words he would
have rose from her Arms, but she detained him, and with a pitious Voice
implored his Pardon; but he calmly replied; Yes, Silvia, I will pardon thee,
and wish that Heaven may do so; to whom apply thy early Rhetoric and
Penitence, for it can never, never, charm me more: My Fortune, if thou ever
want Support, to keep thee Chaste and Virtuous, shall still be commanded by
thee, with that usual Frankness it has hitherto served thee; but for Octavio,
he is resolved to go where he will never more be seen by Woman -- or hear the
name of Love to ought but Heaven. -- Farewell -- one parting Kiss, and then a
long Farewell. -- As he bowed to kiss her she caught him fast in her Arms, while
a Flood of Tears bathe his Face, nor could he prevent his from mixing with
hers: While thus they lay, Philander came into the Room, and finding them so
closely intwin'd, he was as much surpised almost as Octavio was before; and
drawing his Sword, was about to have killed him; but his Honor overcame his
Passion; and he would not take him at such Disadvantage, but with the Flat of
his Sword striking him on the Back as he lay, he cried, Rise Traitor, and turn
to thy mortal Enemy. Octavio, not at all surpised, turned his Head, and his
Eyes bedewed in Tears, toward his Rival. If thou be an Enemy, said he, thou
never could have taken me in a better Humor of dying. Finish, Philander,
that Life then, which if you spare, it will possibly never leave thine in
Repose; the Injuries you have done me, being too great to be forgiven. And is
it thus, replied Philander, -- thus with my Mistress, that you would revenge
'em? Is it in the Arms of Silvia that you would repay me the Favors I did your
Sister Calista? You have by that Word, said Octavio handsomely reproached my
Sloth. And leaping briskly from the Bed he took out his Sword, and cried: Come
then, -- let us go where we may repair both our Losses, since Ladies Chambers
are not fit places to adjust Debts of this nature in. At these Words they both
went down Stairs; and 'twas in vain Silvia called and cried out to conjure them
to come back; her Power of Commanding she had in one unlucky Day lost over both
those gallant Lovers: And both left her with Pity; to say no worse of the
Effect of her ill Conduct.

Octavio went directly to the Park, to the Place whither he before had
challenged Philander, who lost no time but followed him: As soon as he was come
to the Fountain he drew, and told Philander that was the place whither he
invited him in his Billet that Morning; however, if he liked not the Ground, he
was ready to remove to any other: Philander was a little surpised to find that
Invitation was a Challenge, and that Octavio should be beforehand with him upon
the Score of Revenge; and replied; Sir, if the Billet came from you, it was a
Favor I thank you for, since it kindly put me in mind of that Revenge I ought
so justly to take of you for betraying the Secrets of Friendship I reposed in
you, and making base Advantages of 'em, to recommend your self to a Woman, you
knew I loved, and who hates you, in spite of all the ungenerous ways you have
taken to gain her. Sir, replied Octavio, I confess with a Blush and infinite
Shame the Error with which you accuse me, and have nothing to defend so great a
Perfidy. To tell you I was wrought out of it by the greatest Cunning
imaginable, and that I must have seen Silvia die at my Feet if I had refused
'em, is not Excuse enough for the Breach of that Friendship. No, though I were
exasperated with the Relation there of my Sister's Dishonor; I must therefore
adjust that Debt with you as well as I can; and if I die in the juster Quarrel
of my Sister's Honor, I shall believe it the Vengeance of Heaven upon me for
that one Breach of Friendship. Sir, replied Philander, you have given me so
great a Satisfaction in this Confession; and have made so good and gallant an
Atonement by this Acknowledgment, that it is with Reluctance I go to punish you
for other Injuries, of which I am assured you cannot so well acquit your self.
Though I would not justify a Baseness, replied Octavio, for which there ought to
be no Excuse; yet I will not accuse myself, or acknowledge other Injuries, but
leave you something to maintain the Quarrel on -- and render it a little just
on your side; nor go to wipe off the Outrage you pretend I have done your Love,
by adoring the fair Person who at least has been dear to you, by the Wrongs you
have done my Sister. Come, Sir, we shall not by disputing quit Scores, cried
Philander a little impatiently, what I have so lately seen, has made my Rage
too brisk for long Parley. At that they both advanced, and made above twenty
Passes before either received any Wound; the first that bled was Octavio, who
received a Wound in his Breast, which he returned on Philander; and after that
many were given and taken; so that the Track their Feet made in following and
advancing as they fought, was marked out by their Blood: In this Condition
(still fighting) Silvia (who had called 'em back in vain, and only in her
Nightgown in a Chair pursued 'em that Minute they quitted her Chamber) found
'em thus employed, and without any fear the threw herself between them:
Octavio, out of Respect to her, ceased; but Philander, as if he had not
regarded her, would still have been striving for Victory, when she stayed his
Hand, and begged him to hear her; he then set the Point of his Sword to the
Ground, and breathless and fainting almost, attended what she had to say: She
conjured him to cease the Quarrel, and told him if Octavio had injured him in
her Heart, he ought to remember he had injured Octavio as much in that of his
Sister: She conjured him by all the Friendship both she and himself had
received at Octavio's Hands; and concluded with saying so many fine things of
that Cavalier, that in lieu of appeasing, it but the more exasperated the
jealous Philander, who took new Courage with new Breath, and passed at Octavio.
She then addressed to Octavio, and cried: Hold, oh hold, or make your way
through me, for here I will defend Virtue and Honor! and put herself before
Octavio: She spoke with so pitious a Voice, and pleaded with so much
Tenderness, that Octavio laying his Sword at her Feet, bid her dispose -- false
as she was, of his Honor. For oh, said he, my Life is already fallen a Victim
to your Perjuries! He could say no more, but falling where he had laid his
Sword, left Philander master of the Field. By this time some Gentlemen that had
been walking came up to 'em, and found a Man ly dead, and a Lady imploring
another to fly: They looked on Octavio, and found he had yet Life; and
immediately sent for Surgeons, who carried him to his Lodgings, with very
little Hope: Philander, as well as his Wounds would give him leave, got into a
Chair, telling the Gentlemen that looked on him, he would be responsible for
Octavio's Life, if he had the ill Fortune to take it; that his Quarrel was too
just to suffer him to fly. -- So being carried to the Cabarett, with an
absolute Command to Silvia not to follow him, or visit him: For fear of hurting
him by disobeying, she suffered herself to be carried to her Lodgings, where
she threw herself on her Bed, and drowned her fair Eyes in a Shower of Tears:
She advises with Antonett and her Page what to do in this Extremity; she fears
she has by her ill Management lost both her Lovers, and she was in a Condition
of needing every Aid. They who knew the excellent Temper of Octavio, and knew
him to be the most considerable Lover of the two, besought her, as the best
Expedient she could have Recourse to, to visit Octavio, who could not but take
it kindly; and they did not doubt but she had so absolute a Power over him,
that with a very little Complaisance toward him, she would retrieve that Heart
her ill Luck had this Morning forfeited; and which, they protested, they knew
nothing of, nor how he got into her Chamber. This Advice she took; but because
Octavio was carried away dead, she feared (and swounded with the Fear) that he
was no longer in the World, or at least, that he would not long be so: However
she assumed her Courage again at the Thought, that, if he did die, she had an
absolute Possession of all his Fortune, which was to her the most considerable
part of the Man, or at least, what rendered him so very agreeable to her:
However she thought fit to send her Page, which she did in an hour after he was
carried home, to see how he did, who brought her word that he was revived to
Life, and had commanded his Gentleman to receive no Messages from her. This was
all she could learn, and what put her into the greatest Extremity of Grief. She
after sent to Philander, and found him much the better of the two, but most
infinitely incensed against Silvia: This also added to her Despair; yet since
she found she had not a Heart that any Love or loss of Honor, or Fortune could
break; but on the contrary, a Rest of Youth and Beauty, that might oblige her,
with some Reason, to look forward on new Lovers, if the old must depart: The
next thing she resolved, was, to do her utmost Endeavor to retrieve Octavio,
which if unattainable, she would make the best of her Youth. She sent therefore
(notwithstanding his Commands to suffer none of her People to come and see him)
to inquire of his Health; and in four Days (finding he received other Visits)
she dressed herself, with all the Advantages of her Sex, and in a Chair was
carried to his Aunt's, where he lay. The good Lady not knowing but she might be
that Person of Quality whom she knew to be extremely in Love with her Nephew,
and who lived at the Court of Bruxells, and was Niece to the Governor, carried
her to his Chamber, where she left her, as not willing to be a Witness of a
Visit, she knew must be supposed Incognito: It was Evening, and Octavio was in
Bed, and at the first sight of her his Blood grew disordered in his Veins,
flushed in his pale Face, and burnt all over his Body, and he was near to
swounding as he lay: She approached his Bed with a Face all set for
Languishment, Love and Shame in her Eyes, and Sighs, that without speaking
seemed to tell her Grief at his Disaster; she sat, or rather, fell on his Bed,
as unable to support the sight of him in that Condition; she in a soft manner
seized his burning Hand, grasped it and sighed, then put it to her Mouth, and
suffered a Tear or two to fall upon it; and when she would have spoke she made
her Sobs resist her Words; and left nothing unacted that might move the tender
Hearted Octavio to that degree of Passion she wished. A hundred times fain he
would have spoke, but still his rising Passion choked his Words; and still he
feared they would prove either too soft and kind for the Injuries he had
received, or too rough and cold for so delicate and charming a Creature, and
one who, in spite of all those Injuries, he still adored: She appeared before
him with those Attractions that never failed to conquer him; with that
Submission and Pleading in her modest bashful Eyes, that even gave his the Lie,
who had seen her Perfidy. Oh! what should he do to keep that Fire from breaking
forth with Violence, which she had so thoroughly kindled in his Heart; how
should that excellent good Nature assume an unwonted Sullenness, only to appear
what it could not by Nature be? He was all Soft and Sweet, and if he had had
Pride, he knew also how to make his Pleasure; and his Youth loved Love above
all the other little Vanities that attend it, and was the most proper to it.
Fain he would palliate her Crime, and considers in the Condition she was, she
could not but have some Tenderness for Philander; that it was no more than what
before past; 'twas no new Lover that came to kindle new Passions, or to
approach her with a new Flame; but a Decliner, who came and was received with
the Dregs of Love, with all the cold Indifference imaginable: This he would
have persuaded himself, but dares not till he hear her speak; and yet fears she
should not speak his Sense; and this Fear makes him sighing break Silence, and
he cried in a soft Tone; Ah! why, too lovely Fair, why do you come to trouble
the Repose of my dying Hours? Will you, cruel Maid, pursue me to my Grave,
shall I not have one lone Hour to ask Forgiveness of Heaven, for my Sin of
loving thee? The greatest that ever loaded my Youth -- and yet alas, -- the
least repented yet. Be kind, and trouble not my Solitude; depart with all the
Trophies of my Ruin, and if they can add any Glory to thy future Life, boast
'em all over the Universe, and tell, what a deluded Youth thou have undone.
Take, take fair Deceiver, all my Industry, my right of Birth, my thriving
Parents have been so long a geting to make me happy with; take the useless
Trifle, and lavish it on Pleasure to make thee gay and fit for luckier Lovers:
Take that best part of me, and let this worst alone; 'twas that first won the
dear Confession from thee, that drew my Ruin on -- for which I hate it -- and
wish myself born a poor Cottage Boor, where I might never have seen thy
tempting Beauty, but lived for ever blessed in Ignorance. At this the Tears ran
from his Eyes, with which the softened Silvia mixed her welcome Stream, and as
soon as she could speak, she replied (with half Cunning and half Love, for
still there was too much of the first mingled with the last) Oh my Octavio, to
what Extremities are you resolved to drive a poor Unfortunate, who, even in the
height of Youth, and some small stock of Beauty, am reduced to all the Miseries
of the Wretched? Far from my noble Parents, lost to Honor, and abandoned by my
Friends; a helpless Wanderer in a strange Land, exposed to Want, and perishing,
and had no Sanctuary but thyself, thy dear, thy precious self, whom Heaven had
sent, in Mercy, to my Aid; and thou at last, by a mistaken turn of miserable
Fate, have taken that dear Aid away. At this she fell weeping on his panting
Bosom; nevertheless he got the Courage to reply once again, before he yielded
himself a shameful Victim to her Flattery, and said; Ah cruel Silvia, is it
possible that you can charge the Levity on me! Is it I have taken this poor
Aid, as you are pleased to call it, from you? Oh! rather blame your own unhappy
Easiness, that after having sworn me Faith and Love, could violate 'em both;
both, where there was no need. 'Twould better have become thy Pride and
Quality, to have resented Injuries received, than brought again that scorned
abandoned Person (fine as it was, and shining still with Youth) to his
forgetful Arms. Alas, said she, I will not justify my hateful Crime; a Crime I
loath to think of, it was a Fault beyond a Prostitution; there might have
po^ibly been new Joy in such a Sin, but here 'twas palled and gone -- sted to
Eternity away: -- And but for the dear Cause I did commit it, there were no
Expiation for my Fault; no penitent Tears could wash away my Crime. Alas, said
he, -- if there were any Cause, if there be any possible Excuse for such a
breach of Love, give it my Heart; make me believe it, and I yet may live; and
though I cannot think thee Innocent, to be compelled by any frivolous Reason,
'twould greatly satisfy my longing Soul. But have a care, do not delude me on
-- for if thou do persuade me into Pardon, and to return to all my native
Fondness, and then again shoula'st play me fast and loose; by Heaven -- by all
my sacred Passion to thee, by all that Men call Holy, I will pursue thee with
my utmost Hate; forsake thee with my Fortune and my Heart, and leave thee
wretched to the scorning Crowd. Pardon these rude Expressions of a Love that
can hardly forgive the Words it utters: I blush with Shame while I pronounce
'em true. When she replied; May all you have pronounced, and all your injured
Love can yet invent, fall on me, when I ever more deceive you: believe me now,
and but forgive what is past, and trust my Love and Honor for the future. At
this she told him, that in the first Visit Philander made her, she using him so
reproachfully, and upbraiding him with his Inconstancy, made him understand
that he was betrayed by Octavio, and that the whole Intrigue with Calista,
confessed by him, was discovered to Silvia: Which, he said, put him into so
violent a Rage against Octavia, that he vowed that Minute to find him out and
kill him. Nor could all the Persuasions of Reason serve to hinder him; so that
she (who as she said) loved Octavio to Death, finding so powerful an Enemy, as
her Fears made her fancy Philander was, ready to have snatched from her, in one
furious Moment, all she adored; she had recourse to all the Flattery of Love to
withold him from an Attempt so dangerous: And 'twas with much ado, with all
those Aids, that he was obliged to stay; which she had forced him to do, to get
time to give him Notice in the Morning for his approaching Danger: Not that she
feared Octavio's Life, had Philander attacked it fairly; but he looked on
himself as a Person injured by close private ways, and would take a like
Revenge, and have hurt him when he as little dreamed of it, as Philander did of
the Discovery he made of his Letter to her. To this she swore, she weep'd, she
embraced, and still protested it true; adding withal a thousand Protestations
of her future Detestation of him; and that since the worst was past, and that
they had fought, and he was come off, though with so many Wounds, yet with Life,
she was resolved utterly to defy Philander, as the most perfidious of his Sex;
and assured him that nothing in the World was so indifferent as she in his
Arms. In fine, after having omitted nothing that might gain a Credit, and
assure him of her Love and Heart, and possess him with a Belief, for the
future, of her lasting Vows: He wholly convinced and overcome, snatches her in
his Arms, and bursting into a Shower of Tears, cried -- Take, -- take all my
Soul, thou lovely Charmer of it, and dispose of the Destiny of Octavio. And
smothering her with kisses and Embraces, made a perfect Reconciliation. When
the Surgeons, who came to visit him, finding him in the disorder of a Fever,
though more Joy was triumphing in his Face than before, they imagined this Lady,
the fair Person, for whom this Quarrel was; for it had made a great Noise, you
may believe; and finding it hurtful for his Wounds, either to be transported
with too much Rage, Grief or Love, besought him he would not talk too much, or
suffer any Visits that might prejudice his Health: And indeed, with what had
been past, he found himself after his Transport very ill and feverish, so that
Silvia promised the Doctors she would visit him no more in a day or two, though
she knew not well how to be from him so long; but would content herself with
sending her Page to inquire of his Health. To this Octavio made very great
Opposition, but his Aunt, and the rest of the Learned, were of Opinion it ought
for his Health to be so, and he was obliged to be satisfied with her Absence:
At parting she came to him, and again besought him to believe her Vows to be
well, and that she would depart somewhere with him far from Philander, who she
knew was obliged to attend the Motions of Cesario at Bruxels, whom again she
imprecated never to see more. This satisfied our impatient Lover, and he
suffered her to go and leave him to what Rest he could get. She was no sooner
got home, and retired to her Chamber, but finding herself alone, which now she
did not care to be, and being assured she should not see Octavio; instead of
triump^ing for her new gained Victory, she sent her Page to inquire again of
Philander's Health, and to entreat that she might visit him: At first, before
she sent, she checked this Thought as base, as against all Honor, and all her
Vows and Promises to the brave Octavio; but finding an Inclination to it, and
proposing a Pleasure and Satisfaction in it; she was of a Nature not to lose a
Pleasure for a little Punctilio of Honor; and without considering what would
be the event of such a Folly, she sent her Page, though he had been repulsed
before, and forbid coming with any Messages from his Lady. The Page found no
better Success than hitherto he had done; but being with much Entreaty brought
to Philander's Chamber he found him sitting in his Nightgown, to whom
addressing himself -- he had no sooner named his Lady -- but Philander did him
be gone, for he would hear nothing from that false Woman: The Boy would have
replied, but he grew more enraged; and reviling her with all the Railings of
incensed Lovers, he put himself into his Closet without speaking any more, or
suffering any Answer. This Message being delivered to the expecting Lady, put
her into a very great Rage -- which ended in as deep a Concern: Her great Pride
fortified by her Looking-glass, made her highly resent the Affront; and she
believed it more to the Glory of her Beauty to have quitted a hundred Lovers
than to be abandoned by one. 'Twas this that made her rave and tear, and talk
high; and after all, to use her Cunning to retrieve, what it had been most
happy for her, should have been for ever lost; and she ought to have blessed
the Occasion. But her malicious Star had defign'd other Fortune for her: She
writ to him several Letters, that were sent back sealed: She railed, she
upbraided, and then fell to Submission. At last he was persuaded to open one,
but returned such Answers as gave her no Satisfaction, but encouraged her with
a little Hope that she should draw him on to a Reconciliation: Between whiles
she failed not to send Octavio the kindest impatient Letters in the World, and
received the softest Replies that the Tongue of Man could utter, for he could
not write yet. At last, Philander having reduced Silvia to the very brink of
Despair, and finding by her passionate Importunity, that he could make his
Peace with her on any term of Advantage to himself; resolved to draw such
Articles of ^^greement, as should wholly subdue her to him, or to stand it out
to the la^t: The Conditions were, That he being a Person, by no means, of a
Humor to be imposed upon; if he were dear to her, she should give herself
entirely to his Possession, and quit the very Conversation of all those he had
but an Apperhension would disturb his Repose* That she should remove out of the
way of his troublesome Rivals, and suffer herself to be conducted whither he
thought good to carry her. These Conditions she liked, all but the going away;
she could not tell to what sort of Confinement that might amount. He flies off
wholly, and denies all Treaty upon her least Scruple, and will not be asked the
Explanation of what he has proposed, so that she bends like a Slave for a
little Empire over him; and (...) purchase the Vanity of retaining him, suffers
herself to be absolutely undone, She submits; and that very Day she had leave
from the Doctors to visit Octavio, and that all ravished Lover lay panting in
expectation of the blessed Sight, believing every Minute an Age; his Apartment
dressed and perfumed, and all things ready to receive the Darling of his Soul,
Philander came in a Coach and six Horses (and making her pack up all her Jewels
and fine Things, and what they could not carry in the Coach put up to come
after them) and hurries her to a little Town in Luke-Land, a place between
Flanders and Germany, without giving her time to write, or letting her know
whither she was going. While she was putting up her things (I know she has
since confessed) her Heart trembled, and foreboaded the Ill that was to come;
that is, that she was hasting to Ruin; But she had chanced to say so much to
him of her Passion, to retrieve him, that she was ashamed to own the Contrary
so soon; but suffered that Force upon her Inclinations to do the most
dishonorable and disinteressed thing in the World. She had not been there a
Week, and her Trunks of Plate and fine Things were arrived, but she fell in
Labor, and was brought to Bed, though she showed very little of her Condition
all the time she went. This great Affair being well over, she considers herself
a new Woman, and began, or rather continued, to consider the Advantage she had
lost in Octavio: She regrets extremely her Conduct, and from one Degree to
another she looks on herself as lost to him; she every day saw what she had
decayed, her Jewels sold one by one, and at last her Necessaries. Philander,
whose Head was running on Calista, grudged every Moment he was not about that
Affair, grew as peevish as she; she recovers to new Beauty, but he grows
colder and colder by Possession; Love decayed and ill Humor increased* They
grew uneasy on both sides, and not a Day passed wherein they did not break into
open and violent Quarrels, upbraiding each other with those Faults, which both
wished that either would again commit, that they might be fairly rid of one
another: It grew at last to that height, that they were never well but when
they were absent from one another; he making a hundred little Intrigues and
Gallantries with all the pretty Women, and those of any Quality in the Town or
neighboring Villa's. She saw this with Grief, Shame, and Disdain, and could
not tell which way to relieve herself: She was not permitted the Privilege of
Visits, unless to some grave Ladies, or to Monasteries; a Man was a Rarety she
had hardly seen in two Months, which was the time she had been there; so that
she had leisure to think of her Folly bemoan the Effects of her Injustice, and
contrive, if she could, to remedy her disagreeable Life, which now was reduced,
not only to scurrilous Quarrels, and hard Words; but often in her Fury, she
flying upon him, and with the Courage, or Indiscretion of her Sex, would
provoke him to Indecencies, that render Life insupportable on both sides. While
they lived at this rate, both contriving how handsomely to get quit of each
other, Brilljard, who was left in Bruxells, to take care of his Lord's Affairs
there, and that as soon as he had heard of Cesario's Arrival, he should come
with all speed, and give him notice, thought every Minute an Hour till he could
see again the Charmer of his Soul, for whom he suffered comtinual Fevers of
Love. He studies nothing but how first to get her Pardon, and then to compass
his Designs of possessing her: He had not seen her, nor durst pretend to it,
since she left Holland. He believed she would have the Discretion to conceal
some of his Faults, least he should discover, in Revenge, some of here is; and
fancied she would imagine so of his Conduct: He had met with no Reproaches yet
from his Lord, and believed himself Safe. With this Imagination he omitted
nothing that might render him acceptable to her, nor to gain any Secret he
believed might be of use to him: Knowing therefore that she had not dealt very
generously with Octavio, by this Flight with Philander, and believing that that
exasperated Lover, would in Revenge declare any thing to the Prejudice of the
fair Fugitive, he (under pretense of throwing himself at his Feet, and asking
his Pardon for his ill treating him in Holland) designed before he went into
Luke-Land to pay Octavio a Visit, and accordingly went; he met first with his
Page, who being very well acquainted with Brilljard, discoursed with him before
he carried him to his Lord: He told him, That his Lord that day that Silvia
departed, being in impatient Expectation of her, and that she came not
according to Appointment, sent him to her Lodgings, to know if any Accident had
prevented her coming; but that when he came, though he had been with her but an
Hour before, she was gone away with Philander, never more to return. The Youth,
not being able to carry this sad news to his Lord, when he came home, offered
at a hundred things to conceal the right; but the impatient Lover would not be
so answered, but all enraged, commanded him to tell that Truth which he found
already but too apparently in his Eyes. The Lad, so commanded, could no longer
defer telling him Silvia was gone, and being asked again and again, what he
meant, with a Face and Voice, that every Moment altered to dying; the Page
assured him she was gone out of Bruxells with Philander, never more to return;
which was no sooner told him, but he sunk on the Couch where he lay, and
fainted: He farther told him how long it was, and with what Difficulty he was
recovered to Life; and that after he was so, he refused to speak or see any
Visitors; could for a long time be neither persuaded to eat nor sleep, but that
he had spoke to no body ever since, and did now believe he could not procure
him the Favor he begged: That nevertheless he would go and see what the very
Name of any that had but a relation to the Family of Silvia would produce in
him, whether a storm of Passion, or a calm of Grief: Either would be better
than a Dullness, all silent and sad, in which there was no understanding what he
meant by it: Whoever spoke, he only made a short sign, and turned away, as much
as to say, Speak no more to me: But now, resolved to try his Temper, hasted to
his Lord, and told him that Brilljard, full of Penitence for his past Fault,
and Grief, for the ill Condition he heard he was in, was come to pay his humble
Respects to him and gain his Pardon, before he went to his Lord and Silvia;
without which he had, nor could have any peace of Mind, he being too sensible
of the baseness of the Injury he had done him. At the Name of Philander and
Silvia, Octavio showed some signs of listening, but to the rest no regard; and
starting from the Bed where he was laid: Ah! what have thou said, cried he? The
Page then repeated the Message, and was commanded to bring him up; who,
accordingly, with all the signs of Submission, cast himself at his Feet and
Mercy; and though he were an Enemy, the very thought that he belonged to Silvia
made Octavio caress him, as the dearest of Friends: He kept him with him two or
three days, and would not suffer him to stir from him; but all their Discourse
was of the faithless Silvia; of whom, the deceived Lover spoke the softest
unheard tender things, that ever Passion uttered: He made the amorous Brilljard
weep a hundred times a day; and ever when he would have soothed his Heart with
Hopes of seeing her, and one day enjoying her entirely to himself, he would
with so much peace of Mind renounce her, as Brilljard no longer doubted but he
would indeed not more trust her fickle Sex. At last the News arrived that
Cesario was in Bruxells, and Brillijard was obliged the next Morning to take
Horse, and to go to his Lord: And to make himself the more acceptable to
Silvia, he humbly besought Octavio to write some part of his Resentment to her,
that he might oblige her to a Reason for what she had so inhumanly done: This
flattered him a little, and he was not long before he was overcome by
Brilljard's Entreaties; who, having his Ends in every thing, believed this
Letter might contain at least something to asist in his Design, by giving him
Authority over her by so great a Secret: The next Morning, before he took
Horse, he waited on Octavio for his Letter, and promised him an Answer at his
Return, which would be in a few days. The Letter was open, and Octavio suffered
Brilljard to read it, making him an absolute Confident in his Amor; which
having done, he besought him to add one thing more to it; and that was, to beg
her to forgive Brilljard, which for his sake he knew she would do: He told him,
he was obliged as a good Christian, and a dying Man, one resolved for Heaven,
to do that good Office, and accordingly did. Brilljard, taking Post
immediately, arrived to Philander, where he found every thing as he wished, all
out of Humor, still on the Fret, and ever peevish. He had not seen Silvia, as
I said, since she went from Holland, and now knew not which way to approach
her: Philander was abroad on some of his usual Gallantries, when Brilljard
arrived; and having discoursed a while of the Affairs of his Lord and Silvia,
he told Antonett he had a great desire to speak with that dissatisfied fair
one, assuring her he believed his Visit would be welcome, from what he had to
say to her concerning Octavio: She told him (with infinite Joy) that she did
not doubt of his Pardon from her Lady if he brought any News from that gallant
injured Man; and in all have, though her Lady saw no body, but refused to rise
from her Couch, she ran to her, and besought her to see Brilljard, for he came
with a Message from Octavio, the Person who was the Subject of their Discourse
Night and Day, when alone. She immediately sent for Brilljard, who approached
his Goddess with a trembling Devotion; he kneeled before her, and humbly
besought her Pardon for all that was past: But she, who with the very Thought
that he had something to say from Octavio, forgot all but that, and hastily bid
him rise, and take all he asked and hope for what he wished: In this Transport
she embraced his Head, and kissed his Cheek, and took him up. That, Madam, said
Brilljard, which your divine Bounty alone has given me, without any Merit in
me, I durst not have had the Confidence to have hoped without my Credential
from a nobler Hand. -- This, Madam, said he, -- And gives her a Letter from
Octavio: The dear hand she knew and kissed a hundred times as she opened it;
and having increated Brilljard to withdraw for a Moment, that he might not see
her Concern at the reading it, she sat her down and found it this.

Octavio to Silvia.
I Confess, oh faithless Silvia, that I shall appear in writing to you, to show
a Weakness ever below that of your Infidelity; nor durst I have trusted myself
to have spoken so many sad soft things as I shall do in this Letter, had I not
tried the Strength of my Heart, and found I could upbraid you without talking
myself out of that Resolution I have taken -- but because I would die in perfect
Charity with thee as with all the World, I should be glad to know I could
forgive thee, for yet thy Sins appear too black for Mercy. Ah! why charming
Ingrate, have you left me no one Excuse for all your Ills to me? Why have you
injured me to that degree, that I, with all the mighty stock of Love I had
hoarded up together in my Heart, must die reproaching thee to my last Gasp of
Life; which had thou been so merciful to have ended, by all the Love that is
breaking off my Heart, that yet, even yet is soft and charming to me, I swear
with my last Breath, I had blessed thee, Silvia: But thus to use me; thus to
leave my Love, distracted raving Love, and no one Hope or Prospect of Relief,
either from Reason, Time, or faithless Silvia, was but to stretch the Wretch
upon the Rack, and screw him up to all degrees of Pain; yet such, as do not end
in kinder Death. Oh thou unhappy Ruiner of my Repose! Oh fair Unfortunate! if
yet my Agony would give me leave to argue, I am so miserably lost, to ask thee
yet this woeful Satisfaction; to tell me why thou have undone me thus? Why thou
should choose out me from all the Crowd of fond admiring Fools, to make the
World's Reproach, and turn to redicule? How could thou use that soft good
Nature so, that had not one ungrateful sullen Humor in it, for thy Revenge and
Pride to work upon? No Baseness in my Love, no dull Severity for Malice to be
busy with; but all was gay and kind, all lavish Fondness, and all that Woman
vain, with Youth and Beauty, could wish in her Adorer: What could thou ask
but Empire, which I gave not? My Love, my Soul, my Life, my very H^nour, all
was resigned to thee; that Youth that might have gained me Fame abroad was
dedicated to thy eternal Service, laid at thy Feet, and idly past in Love. Oh
charming Maid, whom Heaven has formed for the Punishment of all, whose Flames
are Criminal! why could not thou have made some kind distinction between
those common Passions and my Flame? I gave thee all my Vows, my honest Vows,
before I asked a Recompense for Love. I made thee mine before the sacred
Powers, that witness every secret solemn Vow, and fix 'em in the eternal Book
of Fate; if thou had given thy Faith to any other, as, oh, too sure thou
have, what Fault was this in me, who knew it not, why should I bear that sin? I
took thee to me as a Virgin Treasure, sent from the Gods to charm the Ills of
Life, to make the tedious Journey short and joyful; I came to make atonement
for thy Sin, and to redeem thy Fame; not add to the detested Number. I came to
guild thy Stains of Honor over; and set so high a Price upon thy Name, that
all Reproaches for thy past Offenses, should have been lost in future Crowds of
Glory: I came to lead thee from a world of Shame, approaching Ills, and future
Miseries; from noisy Flatterers that would sacrifice thee, first to dull Lust,
and more unthinking Wit; possess thee, then traduce thee. By Heaven, I swear,
it was not for myself alone, I took such pains to gain thee, and set thee free
from all those Circumstances that might perhaps debauch thy worthier Nature,
and I believed it was with pain you yielded to every buying Lover: No, 'twas
for thy Sake, in pity to thy Youth, Heaven had inspired me with Religious
Flame; and when I aimed at Silvia 'twas alone I might attain to Heaven the
surest way, by such a pious Conquest: Why have thou ruined a Design so
glorious, as saving both our Souls? Perhaps thou vainly think that while I
am pleading thus -- I am arguing still for Love; or think this way to move ^hee
into Pity; No, by my hopes of Death to ease my Pain, Love is a Passion not to
be compelled by any force of Reason's Arguments: It Is an unthinking Motion of
the Soul, that comes and goes as unaccountably as changing Moons, or Ebbs and
Flo^s of Rivers, only with far less certainty. It is not that my Soul is all
over Love, that (...) beget its Likeness in your Heart: Had Heaven and Nature
added to that Love all the Perfections that adorn our Sex, it had availed me
nothing in your Soul: There is a Chanc^ in Love as well as Life, and often the
most unworthy are preferred; and from a Lottery I might win the Prize from all
the venturing Throng with as much Reason, as think my Chance should favor me
with Silvia; it might perhaps have been, but 'twas a wondrous Odds against me.
Beauty is more uncertain than the Dice; and though I ventured like a forward
Gamester, I was not yet so vain to hope to win, nor had I once complained upon
my Fate, if I had never hoped; but when I had fairly won, to have it basely
snatched from my Possession, and like a bafled Cully, see it seized by a false
Gamester, and look tamely on, has showed me such a Picture of myself; has given
me such Idea's of the Fool, I scorn to look into my easy Heart, and loath the
Figure you have made me there. Oh Silvia! what an Angel thou had been,
had thou not soothed me thus to my Undoing. Alas, it had been no Crime in
thee to hate me, it was not thy Fault I was not Aimable; if thy soft Eyes could
meet no Charms to please 'em, those soft, those charming Eyes were not in
Fault; nor that thy Sense, too delicate and nice, could meet no proper Subject
for thy Wit, thy Heart, thy tender Heart, was not in fault, because it took not
in my tale of Love, and sent soft Wishes back: Oh! no, my Silvia, this, though I
had died, had caused you no Reproach; but first, to fan my Fire by all the Arts
that ever Subtle Beauty could ^^vent; to give me Hope; nay, to ^issemble Love;
yes, and so very well ^issemble too, that not one tender Sigh was breathed in
vain: All that my lovesick Soul was panting for, the subtle Charmer gave; so
well, so very well, she could dissemble: Oh! what more Proofs could I expect
from Love, what greater Earnest of eternal Victory? Oh! thou had raised me
to the height of Heaven, to make my Fall to Hell the more precipitate. Like a
fallen Angel now I howl and roar, and curse that Pride that taught me first
Ambition; it is a poor Satisfaction now, to know (if thou could yet tell
Truth) what Motive first seduced thee to my Ruin? Had it been Interest -- by
Heaven, I would have bought my wanton Pleasures at as high Rates as I would
gratify my real Passions; at least when Silvia set a price on Pleasure; nay,
higher yet, for Love when it is repaid with equal Love, it saves the Chafferer a
great Expense: Or were it wantonness of Youth in thee, alas you might have
made me understood it, and I had met you with an equal Ardor, and never thought
of loving, but quenched the short lived Blaze as soon as kindled; and hoping
for no more, had never let my hasty Flame arrive any higher than that powerful
Minutes Cure. But oh! in vain I seek for Reasons from thee; perhaps thy own
fantastic fickle Humor cannot inform thee why thou have betrayed me; but thou
have done it Silvia, and may it never rise in Judgment on thee, nor fix a Brand
upon thy Name for ever, greater than all thy other Guilts can load thee with:
Live fair Deceiver, live, and charm Philander, to all the Heights of his
beginning Flame; may thou be gaining Power upon his Heart, and bring it to
Rep^ntance for Inconstancy; may all thy Beauty still maintain its Luster, and
all thy Charms of Wit be new and gay; may thou be chaste and true; and since
it was thy Fate to (...) undone, let this at least excuse the h^pless Maid;
'twas Love alone bet^ay'd her to that Ruin and it was Philander only had that
Power* If thou had sinned with one, as Heaven's my Witness, after I had
plighted thee my sacred Vo^s, I do not think thou did 'st; may all the Powers
above forgive thee, Silvia; and those thou have committed since those Vows,
will need a world of Tears to wash away: It Is I will weep for both, it is I will
go and be a Sacrifice to atone for all our Sins; it is* I will be the pressing
Penitent, and watch, and pray, and weep, till Heaven have Mercy; and may my
Penance be accepted for thee; -- Farewel^ -- I have but one Request to make
thee, which is, that thou will for Octavio's Sake forgive the faithful Slave
that brings thee this from thy

Octavio.


Silvia, whose Absence and ill Treatment of Octavio, had but served to raise
her Flame to a^much greater degree, had no sooner read this Letter, but she
suffered herself to be distracted, with all the different Passions that possess
dispairing Lovers; sometimes raveing, and sometimes sighing and weeping: 'Twas
a good while she continued in these Disorders, still thinking on what she had
to do next, that might redeem all: Being a little come to herself, she thought
good to consult with Brilljard in this Affair, between whom and Octavio she
found there was a very good Understanding: And resolving absolutely to quit
Philander, she no longer had any Scruples or Doubt what Course to take, nor
cared she what Price she paid for a Reconciliation with Octavio, if any Price
would purchase it: In order to this Resolve, fixed in her Heart, she sends for
Brilljard, whom she careses anew, with all the Fondness and Familiarity of a
Woman, who was resolved to make him her Confident, or rather indeed her next
Gallant. I have already said he was very handsome, and very well made, and you
may believe he took all the care he could in dressing, which he understood very
well: He had a good deal of Wit, and was very well fashioned and bred: -- With
all these Accomplishments, and the addition of Love and Youth, he could not be
imagined to appear wholly indifferent in the Eyes of any body, though hitherto he
had in those of Silvia, whose Heart was doting on Philander; but now, that
that Passion was wholly extinguished, and that their eternal Quarrels had made
almost a perpetual Separation, she being alone, without the Conversation of
Men, which she loved, and was used to, and in her Inclination naturally
addicted to love, she found Brilljard more agreeable than he used to be; which
together with he Designs she had upon him, made her take such a Freedom with
him, as wholly transported this almost hopeless Lover: She discourses with him
concerning Octavio and his Condition, and he failed not to answer, so as to
please her, right or wrong; she tells him how uneasy she was with Philander,
who every day grew more and more insupportable to her; she tells him she had a
very great Inclination for Octavio, and more for his Fortune, that was able to
support her, than his Person; she knew she had a great Power over him, and
however it might seem now to be diminished by her unlucky Flight with
Philander, she doubted not but to reduce him to all that Love he once professed
to her, by telling him she was forced away, and without her Knowledge, being
carried only to take the Air, was compelled to the fatal Place where she now
was. Brilljard sooths and flatters her in all her Hope, and offers her his
Service in her Flight, which he might easily assist, unknown to Philander. It
was now about fix a Clock at Night, and she commanded a Supper to be provided
and brought to her Chamber, where Brilljard and she supped together, and talked
of nothing but the new Design; the hope of effecting which put her into so good
Humor, that she frankly drank her Bottle, and showed more signs of Mirth than
she had done in many Months before: In this good Humor Brilljard looked more
amiable than ever, she smiles upon him, she caresses him with all the assurance
of Friendship imaginable; she tells him she shall behold him as her dearest
Friend, and spoke so many kind things, that he was imbolden'd, and approached
her by degrees more near; he makes Advances; and the greatest Encouragement
was, the Secret he had of her intended Flight: He tells her, He hoped she would
be pleased to consider (that while he was serving her in a new Amor, and
assisting to render her into the Arms of another, he was wounding his own Heart
which languished for her; that he should not have taken the Presumption to have
told her this as such a time as he offered his Life to serve her, but that it
was already no Secret to her, and that a Man who loved at his rate, and yet
would contrive to make his Mistress happy with another, ought in Justice to
receive some Recompense of a Flame so constant and so submissive. While he
spoke he found he was not regarded with the Looks of Scorn or Disdain; he knew
her haughty Temper, and finding it calm, he pressed on to new Submissions; he
fell at her Feet, and pleaded so well, where no Opposers were, that Silvia no
longer resisted, or if she did, it was very feebly, and with a sort of Wish,
that he would pursue his Boldness yet farther; which at last he did, from one
degree of Softness and gentle Force to another, and made himself the happiest
Man in the World; though she was very much disordered at the Apprehension of what
she had suffered from a Man of his Character, as she imagined so infinitely
below her; but he redoubled his Submissions in so cunning a manner, that he
soon brought her to her good Humor; and after that he used the kind Authority
of a Husband whenever he had an Opportunity, and found her not displeased at
his Services* She considered he had a Secret from her, which if revealed, would
not only prevent her Design, but ruin her for ever; she found too late she had
discovered too much to him, to keep him at the Distance of a Servant, and that
she had no other way to attach him eternally to her Interest, but by this
means. He now every day appeared more fine, and well dressed, and omitted
nothing that might make him, if possible, and absolute Master of her Heart,
which he vowed he would defend with his Life, from even Philander himself; and
that he would pretend no other Empire over her, nor presume or pretend to
ingross that fair and charming Person which ought to be universally adored. In
fine, he failed not to please both her Desire and her Vanity, and every day she
loved Philander less, who sometimes in two or three together came not home to
visit her. At this time it so happened, he being in Love with the young
Daughter of an Advocate, about a League from his own Lodgings, and he is always
eager on the first Address, till he has completed the Conquest; so that she
had not only time to please and revenge herself with Brilljard, but fully to
resolve their Affair, and to provide all things against their Flight, which
they had absolutely done before Philander's Return; who, coming home, received
Brilljard very kindly, and the News which he brought, and which made him
understand, he should not have any long time to finish his new Amor in; but as
he was very Conquering both in Wit and Beauty, he left not the Village without
leaving some Ruins behind of Beauty, which ever after bewailed his Charms; and
since his departure was so necessary, and that in four or five days he was
obliged to go, they deferred their flight till he was gone; which time they had
wholly to themselves, and made as good use of it as they could; at least she
thought so, and you may be sure, he also, whose Love increased with his
possession. But Silvia longs for Liberty, and those necessary Gallantries,
which every day diminished; she loved rich Cloths, gay Coaches, and to be
lavish; and now she was stinted to good Housewifery, a Penury she hated.

The time of Philander's departure being come, he took a very careless leave of
Silvia, telling her he would see what Commands the Prince had for him, and
return in Ten or Twelve days. Brilljard pretended some little Indisposition,
and begged he might be permitted to follow him, which was granted, and the next
day, tho Brilljard pleaded infinitely for a continuation of his happiness two
or three days more, she would not grant it, but obliged him, by a thousand kind
promises of it for the future, to get Horses ready for her Page, and Woman, and
her Coach for her self; which accordingly was done, and they left the Village,
whose Name I cannot now call to mind, taking with her what of value she had
left. They were three days on their journey; Brilljard under pretense of care
of her Health, the weather being Hot, and for fear of overtaking Philander by
some accident on the Road, delayed the time as much as was possible, to be as
happy as he could all the while; and indeed Silvia was never seen in a Humor
more Gay. She found this short time of hope and pleasure, had brought all her
banished Beauties back, that Care, Sickness and Grief, had extremely tarnisht,
only her Shape was a little more inclining to be Fat, which did not at all
however yet impare her fineness; and she was indeed too Charming without, for
the deformity of her indiscretion within; but she had broke the bounds of
Honor, and now stuck at nothing that might carry on an Interest, which she
resolved should be the business of her future life.

She at last arrived at Bruxells, and caused a Lodging to be taken for her in
the remotest part of the Town; as soon as she came she obliged Brilljard to
visit Octavio; but going to his Aunt's, to enquire for him, he was told that he
was no longer in the World; he stood amazed a while, believing he had been
dead, when Madam, the Aunt, told him he was retired to the Monastery of the
Order of St. Bernard, and would in a day or two without the Probationary Year,
take Holy Orders. This did not so much surprise him as the other, knowing that
he discoursed to him, when he saw him last, as if some such retirement he meant
to resolve upon; with this News, which he was not altogether displeased at,
Brilljard returned to Silvia, which soon changed all her good Humor to Tears
and Melancholy: She inquired at what place he was, and believed she should have
power to withdraw him from a resolution so fatal to her, and so contradictive
to his Youth and Fortune; and having consulted the matter with Brilljard, he
had promised her to go to him, and use all means possible to withdraw him. This
resolved, she writ a most insinuating Letter to him, wherein she excused her
flight by a surprise of Philander's, and urged her condition, as it then was,
for the excuse of her long silence; and that as soon as her Health would give
her leave, she came to put her self eternally into his Arms; never to depart
more from thence. These Arguments and Reasons, accompanied with all the
i^dearing tenderness her artful Fancy was capable of framing, she sent, with a
full assurance it would prevail to persuade him to the World, and her fair Arms
again. While she was preparing this to go, Philander, who had heard at his
arrival, what made so much noise, that he had been the occasion of the Worlds
loss of two of the finest Persons in it, the Sister Calista by Debauching her,
and the Brother by Ravishing his Mistress from him, both which were entering
without all possibility of prevention, into Holy Orders. He took so great a
Melancholy at it, as made him keep his Chamber for two Days, maugre all the
urgent affairs that ought to have invited him from thence; he was consulting by
what power to prevent the Misfortune; he now ran back to all the Obligations he
had to Octavio, and pardons him all the injuries he did him; he loves him more
by loving Silvia less, and remembered how that generous Friend, after he knew he
had dishonored his Sister, had notwithstanding sent him Letters of Credit, to
the Majestrates of Cologne, and Bills of Exchange to save him from the Murder
of his Brother-in-Law, as was likely to have been. He now charges all his
little faults to those of Love, and hearing that old Clarinau was dead of the
wound Octavio had given him by mistake, which increased in him new hope of
Calista, could she be retrieved from the Monastery, he resolved in order to
this to make Octavio a Visit, to beg his Pardon, and beg his Friendship, and
his Continuation in the World. He came accordingly to the Monastery, and was
extreme civilly received by Octavio, who yet had not the Habit on. Philander
told him, he heard he was leaving the World, and could not suffer him to do so,
without endeavoring to gain his Pardon of him, for all the injuries he had
done him; that as to what related to his Sister the Countess, he protested upon
his Honor, if he had but imagined she had been so, he would have suffered
death sooner than his Passion to have approached her indiscreetly; and that for
Silvia, if he were assured her possession could make him happy, and call him to
the World again, he assured him he would quit her to him, were she Ten times
dearer to him than she was. This he confirmed with so many protestations of
Friendship, that Octavio obliged to the last degree, believed and returned him
this Answer, Sir, I must confess you have found out the only way to disarm me
of my resentment against you, if I were not obliged by those Vows I am going to
take, to pardon and be at peace with all the World. However these Vows cannot
hinder me from conserving entirely that Friendship in my Heart, which your good
qualities and beauties at first sight engaged there, and from esteeming you
more than perhaps I ought to do: the Man whom I must yet own my Rival, and the
undoer of my Sisters Honor. But Oh -- no more of that, a Friend's above a
Sister, or a Mistress. At this he hung down his Eyes and sighed -- Philander
told him he was too much concerned in him, not to be extremely afflicted at the
resolution he had taken, and besought him to quit a design so injurious to his
Youth, and the glorious things that Heaven had destined him to; he urged all
that could be said to diswade him, and after all, could not believe he would
quit the World at this Age, when it would be sufficient Forty Years hence so to
do. Octavio only answered with a Smile; but when he saw Philander still
persist, he endeavored to convince him by speaking, and lifting up his Eyes to
Heaven; he Vowed by all the Holy Powers there, he never would look down to
Earth again; nor more consider fickle, faithless Beauty; All the Gay Vanities
of Youth, said he, for ever I renounce, and leave 'em all to those that find a
Pleasure or a Constancy in 'em: for the fair faithless Maid, that has undone
me, I leave to you the Empire of her Heart; but have a care, said he, (and
Sighing laid his Arms about his Neck) for even you with all that stock of
Charms, she will at last betray: I wish her well -- so well as to repent of all
her Wrongs to me -- It Is all I have to say. What Philander could urge, being
impossible to prevail with him: And beging his Pardon and Friendship (which was
granted by Octavio, and implored on his side from Philander) he took a ring of
a great value from his Finger, and presented it to Philander, and begged him to
keep it for his Sake; and to remember him while he did so: They Kissed, and
Sighing parted.

Philander was no sooner gone, but Brilljard came to wait on Octavio, whom he
found at his Devotion, and begged his Pardon for disturbing him: He received him
with a very good Grace, and a cheerful Countenance, embracing him, and after
some Discourse of the Condition he was going to reduce himself to, and his
Admiration, that one so young should think of Devoting himself so early to
Heaven, and things of that nature as the time and occasion required, he told
him the extreme Affliction Silvia was seized with, at the News of the
Resolution he had taken, and delivered him her Letter, which he read without
any Emotions in his Heart or Face, as at other times used to be visible at the
very mention of her Name, or approach of her Letters. At the finishing of which
he only smiling Cried; Alas, I pity her, and gave him back the Letter.
Brilljard asked if he would not please to write her some Answer, or condescend
to see her; No, replied Octavio, I have done with all the gilded Vanities of
Life, now I shall think of Silvia but as Some Heavenly thing, fit for Diviner
Contemplations, but neverwith the Youthful thoughts of Love. What he should
send her now, he said, would have a different Style to those she used to
receive from him; it would be Pious Counsel, Grave Advice, unfit for Ladies so
Young and Gay as Silvia, and would scarce find a welcome: He wished he could
convert her from the World -- and save her from the dangers that pursued her.
To this purpose was all he said of her, and all that could be got from him by
the earnest Solliciter of Love, who perhaps was glad his Negotiation succeeded
no better, and took his leave of him, with a promise to visit him often; which
Octavio besought him to do, and told him he would take some care, that for the
good of Silvia's better part, she should not be reduced by want of Necessaries
for her Life, and little Equipage, to prostitute her self to vile inconstant
Man; he yet had so much respect for her -- and be sought Brilljard to come and
take care of it with him, and to entreat Silvia to accept of it from him; and
if it contributed to her future happiness he should be more pleased than to
have possessed her entirely.

You may imagine how this News pleased Silvia; who trembling with fear every
Moment, had expected Brilljard's coming, and found no other Benefit by his
Negotiation, but she must bear what she cannot avoid; but 'twas rather with the
Fury of a Bacchanal, than a Woman of common Sense, and Prudence; all about her
pleaded some days in vain, and she hated Brilljard for not doing
impossibilities; and it was sometime before he could bring her to permit him to
speak to her or visit her.

Philander having left Octavio, went immediately to wait on Cesario, who was
extremely pleased to meet him there; and they exchanged their Souls to each
other, and all the Secrets of 'em. After they had discoursed of all that they
had a mind to hear and know on both sides, Cesario inquired of him of Silvia's
Health; and Philander gave him an account of the uneasiness of her Temper, and
the occasions of their Quarrels, in which Octavio had his part, as being the
subject of some of 'em: From this he falls to give a Character of that Rival,
and came to this part of it, where he had put himself into the Orders of the
Bernardines, resolving to leave the World, and all its Charms and Temptations.
As they were speaking, some Gentlemen, who came to make their Court to the
Prince, finding 'em speaking of Octavio, told them that to morrow he was to be
initiated, without the Years Trial; the Prince would needs go and see the
Ceremony, having heard so much of the Man; and accordingly next day,
accompanied with the Governor, Philander, Thomaso, and abundance of Persons of
Quality and Officers, he went to the great Church; where were present all the
Ladies of the Court, and all that were in the Town. The Noise of it was so
great, that Silvia, all languishing, and ill as she was, would not be persuaded
from going, but so muffl'd in her Hoods, as she was not to be known by any.

Never was any thing so magnificent as this Ceremony, the Church was on no
occasion so richly adorned; Silvia chanced to be seated near the Prince of
Michlenburgh, who was then in Bruxells and at the Ceremony; sad as she was,
while the soft Music was playing, she discoursed to him, though she knew him
not, of the business of the day: He told her she was to see a Sight, that ought
to make her Sex less cruel; a Man extremely Beautiful and Young, whose Fortune
could command almost all the pleasures of the World; yet for the Love of the
most Amiable Creature in the World, who has treated him with Rigor, he abandons
this Youth and Beauty to all the Severities of rigid Devotion: This relation,
with a great deal he said of Octavio's Virtues and Bravery, had like to have
discovered her by putting her into a Swoon: and she had much ado to support her
self in her Seat. I my self went among the rest to this Ceremony, having in all
the time I lived in Flanders, never been so curious to see any such thing: The
Order of St. Bernard is one of the neatest of any of 'em, and there is a
Monastery of that Order, which are obliged to be all Noble Men's Sons; of which
I have seen fifteen hundred at a time in one House; all handsome, and most of
'em Young; their Habit adds a Grace to their Person, for of all the Religious,
that is the most becoming: Long white Vests of fine Cloth, tied about with
White Silk Sashes, or Cord of White Silk; over this a long Cloak without a
Cape, of the same fine white Broad-Cloth; their Hair of a pretty Length, as
that of our Parsons in England, and a White Beaver; they have very fine
Apartments, fit for their quality, and above all, every one his Library; They
have Attendance and Equipage according to their Rank, and have nothing of the
Inconveniences and Slovenliness of some of the Religious, but served in as good
order as can be, and they have nothing of the Monastic -- but the Name, the
Vow of Chastity, and the Opportunity of gaining Heaven, by the sweetest Retreat
in the World, fine House, excellent Air, and delicate Gardens, Grotto's and
Groves. 'Twas this Oader that Octavio had chosen, as too delicate to undertake
the Austerity of any other; and in my opinion it is here a Man may hope to
become a Saint, sooner than in any other, more perplexed with Want, Cold, and
all the necessaries of Life, which takes the thought too much from Heaven, and
afflicts it with the Cares of this World, with Pain and too much Abstinence:
and I rather think it is Necessity than Choice that makes a Man a Cordelier,
that may be a Jesuit or a Bernardine, two the best of the Holy Orders. But to
return, 'twas upon a Thursday this Ceremony began; and as I said there was
never any thing beheld so fine as the Church that day was, and all the Fathers
that officiated at the High-Altar; behind which a most magnificent Scene of
Glory was opened, with Clouds most rarely and Artificially set off, behind
which appeared new onesmore bright and dazzling, till from one degree to
another, their luster was hardly able to be looked on; and in which sat an
hundred little Angels so rarely dressed, such shining Robes, such Charming
Faces, such flowing bright Hair, Crowned with Roses of White and Red, with such
Artificial Wings, as one would have said they had born the Body up in the
Splendid Sky: and these, to soft Music, Tun (...) soft Voices with such
sweetness of Harmony, that for my part, I confess, I thought my self no longer
on Earth; and sure there is nothing gives us an Idea of real Heaven, like a
Church all adorned with rare Pictures, and the other Ornaments of it, with what
ever can Charm the Eyes; and Music, and Voices to Ravish the Ear; both which
inspire the Soul with unresistable Devotion; and I can Swear for my own part,
in those Moments a thousand times I have wished to Die; so absolutely I have
forgot the World, and all its Vanities, and fixed my thoughts on Heaven. While
this Music continued, and the Anthems were Singing, Fifty Boys all in White,
bearing Silver Censers, Cast Incense all round, and perfumed the Place with the
richest and most agreeable Smells, while two hundred Silver Lamps were burning
about the Altar, to give a greater Glory to the opened Scene, while other Boys
strow'd Flowers upon the inlaid Pavement, where the gay Victim was to tread;
for no Crowd of Gazers filled the empty Space, but those that were Spectators,
were so placed as rather served to adorn than disorder the awful Ceremony,
where all were silent, and as still as Death; as awful as Mourners, that attend
the Hearse of some loved Monarch. While we were thus listening, the soft Music
playing, and the Angels singing, the whole Fraternity of the Order of St.
Bernard, came in, two by two, in very graceful Order; and going up to the
shining Altar, whose Furniture, that day, was Embroidered with Diamonds,
Pearls, and Stones of great Value; they bowed and retired to their Places, into
little gilded Stalls, like our Knights of the Garter at Windsor: After them
fifty Boys that sang, approach in order to the Altar, bowed, and divided on
each side; they were dressed in white Cloth of Silver, with golden Wings and
rosy Chaplets: After these, the Bishop in his pontifick Robes, set with
Diamonds of great Price, and his Mitre richly adorned, ascended the Altar;
where, after a short Anthem, he turned to receive the young Devotee, who was
just entered the Church, while all Eyes were fixed on him: He was led, or
rather, on each side attended, with two young Noblemen, his Relations; and I
never saw any thing more rich in Dress, but that of Octavio exceeded all
Imagination, for the gayety and fineness of the Work: It was white Cloth of
Silver embroidered with Gold, and Buttons of Diamonds; lined with rich Cloth of
Gold and Silver Flowers, his Breeches of the same, trimmed with a pale Pinck
Garniture; rich Linen, and a white Plume in his white Hat: His Hair, which was
long and black, was that day in the finest order that could be imagined; but
for his Face and Eyes, I am not able to describe the Charms that adorned 'em;
no Fancy, no Imagination can paint the Beauties there: He looked indeed as if
he were maid for Heaven; no Mortal ever had such Grace: He looked, methought,
as if the Gods of Love had met in Council to dress him up that day for
everlasting Conquest; for to his usual Beauties he seemed to have the Addition
of a thousand more; he bore new Luster in his Face and Eyes, Smiles on his
Cheeks, and Dimples on his Lips: He moved, he trod with nobler Motions, as if
some supernatural Influence had took a peculiar Care of him: Ten thousand
Sighs, from all sides, were sent him, as he passed along, which, mixed with the
soft Music, made such a murmuring as gentle Breezes moving yielding Boughs: I
am assured he won that day more Hearts, without Design, than ever he had gained
with all his Toils of Love and Youth before, when Industry assisted him to
conquer. In his Approach to the Altar, he made three Bows; where, at the Foot
o^ it on the lower Step, kneeled, and then High-Mass began; in which were all
sorts of different Music, and that so excellent, that wholly ravished with
what I saw and heard, I fansied myself no longer on Earth, but absolutely
ascended up to the Regions of the Sky. All I could see around me, all I heard,
was ravishing and heavenly; the Scene of Glory, and the dazzling Altar; the
noble Paintings, and the numerous Lamps; the Awfulness, the Music, and the
Order, made me conceive myself above the Stars, and I had no part of mortal
Thought about me. After the Holy Ceremony was performed, the Bishop turned and
blessed him; and while an Anthem was singing, Octavio, who was still kneeling,
submitted his Head to the Hands of a Father, who with a pair of Sissors cut off
his delicate Hair; at which a soft Murmur of Pity and Grief, filled the Place:
Those fine Locks, with which Silvia had a thousand time played, and wound the
Curles about her snowy Finger, she now had the dying Grief, for her Sake, for
her Infidelity, to behold sacrificed to her Cruelty, and distributed amongst
the Ladies, who at any Price would purchase a Curl: After this they took off
his Linen, and his Coat, under which he had a white Satin Wastcoat, and under
his Breeches Drawers of the same. Then the Bishop took his Robes, which lay
consecrated on the Altar, and put them on, and invested him with the Holy Robe:
The Singing continuing to the end of the Ceremony; where, after an Anthem was
sung (while he prostrated himself before the Altar) he arose, and instead of
the two noble Men that attended him to the Altar, two Bernardines approached
and conducted him from it, to the Seats of every one of the Order, whom he
kissed, and embraced, as they came forth to welcome him to the Society. It was
with abundance of Tears that every one beheld this Transformation; but Silvia
swouned several times during the Ceremony, yet would not suffer herself to be
carried out; but Antonett and another young Lady of the House where she lodged,
that accompanied her, did what they could to conceal her from the public View.
For my part, I swear I was never so affected in my Life, with any thing, as I
was at this Ceremony, nor ever found my Heart so oppressed with Tenderness; and
was myself ready to sink where I sat, when he came near me, to be welcomed by
a Father that sat next me: After this he was led by two of the eldest Fathers,
to his Apartment, and left a thousand sighing Hearts behind him. Had he died,
there had not been half that Lamentation: so foolish is the mistaken World, to
grieve at our happiest Fortune, either when we go to Heaven, or retreat from
this World, which has nothing in it that can really charm, without a thousand
Fatigues to attend it: And in this Retreat, I am sure, he himself was the only
Person that was not infinitely concerned; who quitted the World with so modest
a Bravery, so entire a Joy, as no young Conqueror ever performed his Triumphs
with more.

The Ceremony being ended, Antonett got Silvia to her Chair, concerned even to
Death; and she vowed afterward, she had much ado to withhold herself from
running and seizing him at the Altar, and preventing his Fortune and Design,
but that she believed Philander would have resented it to the last degree, and
possibly have made it fatal to both herself and Octavio. It was a great while
before she could recover from the Indisposition to which this fatal and
unexpected Accident had reduced her: But as I have said, she was not of a
Nature to die for Love; and charming and brave as Octavio was, it was perhaps
her Interest, and the loss of his considerable Fortune, that gave her the
greatest Cause of Grief. Sometimes she vainly fancied that yet her Power was
such, that with the Expense of one Visit, and some of her usual Arts, which
rarely fail, she had power to withdraw his Thoughts from Heaven, and fix 'em
all on herself again, and to make him fly those Enclosures to her more
agreeable Arms: But again she wisely considered, though he might be retrieved,
his Fortune was disposed of to Holy Uses, and could never be so. This last
Thought more prevailed upon her, and had more convincing Reason in it, than all
that could besides oppose her Flame; for she had this wretched Prudence, even
in the highest Flights and Passions of her Love, to have a wise Regard to
Interest; insomuch that it is most certain, she refused to give herself up
entirely even to Philander; him, whom one would have thought nothing but
perfect Love, soft irresistible Love could have compelled her to have
transgressed withal, when so many Reasons contradicted her Passion: How much
more then ought we to believe that Interest was the greatest Motive of all her
after Passions? However, this powerful Motive failed not to beget in her all
the Pains and Melancholies that the most violent of Passions could do: But
Brilljard, who loved to a greater Degree than ever, strove all he could to
divert the Thoughts of a Grief, for which there was no Remedy; and believed if
he could get her out of Bruxells, retired to the little Town, or rather
Village, where he was first made happy, and where Philander still believed her
to be, he should again reassume that Power over her Heart he had before: In
this melancholy Fit of hers he Proposed it, urging the Danger he should be in
for obeying her, should Philander once come to know that she was in Bruxells;
and that possibly she would not find so civil a Treatment as he ought to pay
her, if he should come to the knowledge of it: Besides these Reasons, he said,
he had some of greater Importance, which he must not discover till she were
withdrawn from Bruxells: But there needed not much to persuade her to retire,
in the Humor she then was; and with no Opposition on her side, she told him
she was ready to go where he thought fit; and accordingly the next day they
departed the Town, and in three more arrived to the Village. In all this
Journey Brilljard never approached her but with all the Respect imaginable, but
withal with abundance of silent Passion; which manner of Carriage, obliged
Silvia very often to take Notice of it, with great Satisfaction and Signs of
Favor; and as he saw her Melancholy abate, he increased in sighing and Lovers
Boldnesses: Yet with all this he could not oblige her to those Returns he
wished: When, after ten days stay, Philander writ to him, to inquire of his
Health, and of Silvia, to whom he sent a very kind good natured Letter, but no
more of the Lover than if there had never been such a Joy between 'em: He begged
her to take care of herself, and told her he would be with her in ten or
fifteen days; and desired her to send him Brilljard, if he were not wholly
necessary to her Service, for he had urgent Affairs to employ him in: So that
Brilljard, not being able longer, with any color to defend his Stay, writ him
word he would wait on him in two days: which short time he wholly employed in
utmost Endeavor to gain Silvia's Favor; but she, whose Thoughts were roving
on new Designs, which she thought fit to conceal from a Lover, still put him
off with pretended Illness, and thoughtfulness on the late melancholy Object
and loss of Octavio: But assured him as soon as she was recovered of that
Pressure, she would receive him with the same Joy she had before, and which his
Person and his Services merited from her; 'twas thus she soothed the hoping
Lover, who went away with all the Satisfaction imaginable; bearing a Letter
from Silvia to Philander, written with all the Art of Flattery. Brilljard was
no sooner gone, but Silvia, whose Head ran on new Adventures, resolved to try
her Chance; and being, whenever she pleased, of a Humor very Gay, she resolved
upon a Design, in which she could trust no body but her Page, who loved his
Lady to the last Degree of Passion, tho he never durst show it, even in his
Looks or Sighs; and yet the cunning Silvia had by chance found his Flame, and
would often take Delight to torture the poor Youth, to laugh at him: She knew
he would die to serve her, and she durst trust him with the most important
Business of her Life: She therefore the next Morning sends for him to her
Chamber, which she often did, and told him her Design; which was, in Man's
Cloths to go back to Bruxells, and see if they could find any Adventures by the
way that might be worth the Journey, and divert 'em: She told him she would
trust him with all her Secrets; and he vowed Fidelity. She bid him bring her a
Suit of those Cloths she used to wear at her first Arrival at Holland; and he
looked out one very fine, and which she had worn that day she went to have been
married to Octavio, when the States Messengers took her for a French Spy, a
Suit Philander had never seen: She equips herself, and leaving in charge with
Antonett what to say in her Absence; and telling her she was going upon a
Frolic to divert herself a day or two, she, accompanied by her Page only, took
Horse, and made away toward Bruxells: You must know that the halfway Stage is
a very small Village, in which there is most lamentable Accommodation, and may
vie with any part of Spain for bad Inns. Silvia, not used much to riding, as a
Man, was pretty well tired by that time she got to one of those Hotels; and as
soon as she alighted she went to her Chamber, to refresh and cool herself; and
while the Page was gone to the Kitchen, to see what there was to eat, she was
leaning out of the Window, and looking on the Passengers that rode along, many
of which took up in the same House. Among them that alighted, there was a very
handsome young Gentleman, appearing of Quality, attended only by his Page: She
considered this Person a little more than the rest, and finding him so
unaccompanied, had a Curiosity, natural to her, to know who he was: She ran to
another Window, that looked into the Yard, a kind of Balcony, and saw him
alight, and look at her; and Saluted her in passing into the Kitchen, seeing
her look like a Youth of Quality: Coming in he saw her Page, and asked if he
belonged to that Young Cavalier in the Gallery; the Page told him he did: And
being asked Who he was, he told him he was a young Noble Man of France; a
Stranger to all those parts, and had made an escape from his Tutors, to ramble
for his Fancy and his Pleasure; and said he was of a Humor, never to be out of
his way; all places being alike to him in those little Adventures. So leaving
him (with yet a greater Curiosity) he ran to Silvia, and told her what had past
between the young Stranger and him: While she, who was possessed with the same
Inquisitive Humor, bid him inquire who he was, when the Master of the Hotel
coming in the interim up to usher in her Supper, she inquired of him who that
Young Stranger was; he told her, one of the greatest Persons in Flanders; that
he was Nephew to the Governor, and who had a very great Equipage at other
times; but that now he was Incognito, being on an Intrigue: This Intrigue gave
Silvia new Curiosity; and hoping the Master would tell him again, she fell into
great praises of his Beauty and his Mein; which for several reasons pleased the
Man of the Inn, who departed with the good News, and told every Word of it to
the Young Cavalier: The good Man having, besides the pleasing him with the
grateful Complements, a farther design in the Relation; for his House being
very full of Persons of all sorts, he had no Lodging for the Governor's
Nephew, unless he could recommend him to our Young Cavalier. The Gay unknown,
extremely pleased with the Character he had given him, by so beautiful a
Gentleman, and one who appeared of so much quality, being alone, and knowing he
was so also, sent a Spanish Page, that spoke very good French, and had a
handsome Address, and quick Wit, to make his Complement to the Young Mounsieur;
which was to beg to be admitted to Sup with him; who readily accepted the
Honor, as she called it; and the Young Governor, whom we must call Alonzo,
for a reason or two, immediately after entered her Chamber, with an admirable
Address, appearing much handsomer near, than at distance; though even then he
drew Silvia's Eyes with admiration on him; there were a thousand Young Graces
in his Person, Sweetnesses in his Face, Love and Fire in his Eyes, and Wit on
his Tongue: His Stature was neither Tall nor Low, very well made, and
fashioned; a Light brown Hair, Hazle Eyes, and a very soft and amorous Air;
about twenty Years of Age: He spoke very good French; and after the first
Complements on either side were over, as on such occasions are necessary; in
which on both sides were nothing but great Expressions of Esteem, Silvia began
so very well to be pleased with the fair Stranger, that she had like to have
forgot the part she was to act, and have made Discoveries of her Sex, by
Addressing herself with the Modesty and Blushes of a Woman: But Alonzo who had
no such apprehension; though she appeared with much more Beauty, than he ^ansied
ever to have seen in a Man, nevertheless admired without suspecting, and took
all those Signs of Effeminacy to unassur'd Youth, and first Address; and he was
absolutely deceived in her. Alonzo's Supper being brought up, which was the
best the bad Inn afforded, they sat down, and all Supper time talked of a
thousand pleasant things, and most of Love and Women, where both expressed,
abundance of Gallantry for the fair Sex. Alonzo related many short and pleasant
accidents, and amors he had had with women. Though the Stranger were by Birth a
Spaniard; yet while they discoursed, the Glass was not Idle, but went as
briskly about, as if Silvia had been an absolute good Fellow. Alonzo Drinks
his, and his Mistresses Health, and Silvia returned the Civility, and so on
till three Bottles were Sacrificed to Love and good Humor, while she at the
expense of a little Modesty, declared herself so much of the opinion of Don
Alanzo, for Gay Inconstancy, and the Blessing of Variety, that he was wholly
Charmed with a Conversation so agreeable to his own. I have heard her Page say,
from whom I have had a great part of the Truths of her Life, that he never saw
Silvia in so pleasant a Humor all his life before, nor seemed so well pleased,
which gave him, her Lover, a Jealousy, that perplexed him above any thing he
had ever felt from Love; though he durst not own it. But Alonzo finding his Young
Companion altogether so Charming (and in his own way too) could not forbear
very often from falling upon his Neck, and Kissing the fair disguised, with as
hearty an Ardour, as ever he did one of an other Sex: He told her he Adored
her; she was directly of his Principle, all gay, inconstant, galiard and
roving, and with such a Gusto he commended the Joys of fickle Youth, that
Silvia would often after say, she was then Jealous of him, and Envious of those
who possessed him, though she knew not whom. The more she looked on him, and heard
him speak, the more she fansied him: and Wine that warmed her Head, made her
give him a thousand Demonstrations of Love, that warmed her Heart; which he
mistoke for Friendship, having mistaken her Sex. In this fit of beginning Love
(which is always the best) and Jealousy, she bethought her to ask him on what
Adventure he had now been; for he being without his Equipage, she believed, she
said, he was upon some affair of Love: He told her there was a Lady, within an
Hours riding of that place, of quality, and handsome, very much Courted:
Amongst those that were of the number of her Adorers, he said, was a Young Man
of Quality of France, who called himself Philander: This Philander had been
about eight Days very happy in her Favor, and had happened to boast his good
Fortune the next Night at the Governors Table, where he Dined with the Prince
Cesario. I told him, continued Alonzo, That the Person he so boasted of, had so
soon granted him the Favor, that I believed she was of a Humor to suffer none
to die at her Feet: but this, said he, Philander thought an Indignity to his
good parts, and told me, he believed he was the only Man happy in her Favor,
and that could be so: On this I ventured a Wager, at which he colored
extremely, and the Company laughed, which Incensed him more; the Prince urged
the Wager, which was a pair of Spanish Horses, the best in the Court, on my
side, against a Discretion on his: This odds offered by me Incensed him yet
more; but urged to lay, we ended the Dispute with the Wager, the best
Conclusion of all Controversies. He would have known what measures I would
take; I refused to satisfy him in that; I only swore him upon Honor, that he
should not discover the Wager or the dispute to the Lady. The next day I went
to pay her a visit, from my Aunt, the Governors Lady, and she received me with
all the civility in the World, I seemed surpised at her Beauty, and could talk
of nothing but the Adoration I had for her, and found her extremely pleased,
and vai^, of which Feeble Resistance I made so good advantage, that before we
parted, being all alone, I received from her all the Freedoms that I could with
any good Manners be allowed, the first time; she fir^ing me with Kisses, and
suffering my closest Embraces. Having prosper'd so well, I left her for that
time, and two days after I made my visit again; she was a Married Lady, and her
Husband was a Dutch Count, and gone to a little Government he held under my
Uncle, so that again I found a free Admittance; I told her 'twas my Aunt's
Complement I brought before, but that now 'twas my own I brought, which was
that of an impatient Heart, that Burnt with a World of Fire and Flame, and
Nonsense. In ^ine, so eager I was, and so pressing for something more than
Dull Kissing, that she began to retire as fast as she advanced before, and told
me, after abundance of pressing her to it, that she had set a price upon her
Beauty, and unless I understood how to purchase her, it was not her fault, if I
were not happy: At first I so little expected it had been Money, that I
reiterated my Vows, and fansied it was the assurance of my Heart she meant; but
she very frankly replied, Sir, you may spare your Pains, and five hundred
Pistols will ease you of a great deal of trouble, and be the best Argument of
your Love. This Generous Conscientious Humor of hers, of suffering none to Die
that had five hundred Pistols to present for a Cure, was very good News to me,
and I found I was not at all obliged to my Youth or Beauty, but that a Man with
half a Nose, or a single Eye, or that stunk like an old Spaniard, that had
Dined on Rotten Cheese and Garlic, should have been equally as welcome for the
aforesaid Sum, to this Charming Insensible. I must confess, I do not love to
chaffer for my pleasure, it takes off the best part of it, and were I left to
my own Judgment of its worth, I should hardly have offered so sneaking a Sum;
but that sort of bargaining was her Humor, and to enjoy her mine, though she had
strangely palled me by this management of the Matter: all I had now to do, was
to appoint my Night, and bring my Money; now was a very proper time for it, her
Husband being absent: I took my leave of her, infinitely well pleased to have
gained my point on any Terms, with a promise to deliver my self there the next
Night: but she told me she had a Brother to come to morrow, whom she would not
have see me, and for that reason, (being however not willing to delay the
receiving her Pistoles) she desired I would wait at this very House, till a
Footman should give me notice when to come; accordingly I came, and sent her a
Billet, that I waited prepared at all points; and she returned me a Billet to
this purpose: That her Brother with some Relations being arrived, as she
expected, she begged for her Honor's sake, that I would wait till she sent,
which should be as soon as they were gone to their Chambers; and they having
rid a long Journey, would early retire; that she was impatient of the Blessing,
and should be as well prepared as himself, and that she would leave her Woman
Leticia to give me Admittance. -- This satisfied me very well; and as I
attended here, some of my acquaintance chanced to arrive; with whom I Supped,
and took so many Glasses, to her Health, as it past down, that I was arrived at
a very handsome pitch, and to say Truth was as full of Bacchus as Venus.
However as soon as her Footman arrived, I stole away, and took Horse, and by
that time it was quite dark arrived at her House, where I was let in by a
Young^ Maid, whose Habit was very neat and clean, and she herself appeared to
my Eyes, then dazzling with Wine, the most beautiful Young Creature I had ever
seen, as in truth she was; she seemed all Modesty, and blushing Innocence; so
that conducting me into a low Parlour, while she went to tell her Lady I was
come, who lay ready dressed in all the Magnificence of Night-dress to receive me,
I sat contemplating on this fair Young Maid, and no more thought of her Lady,
than of Bethlehem Gabor. The Maid soon returned, and Curtsying, told me with
Blushes on her Face, that her Lady expected me; the House was still as Sleep,
and no Noise heard, but the little Winds that rushed among the Iesamin that
grew at the Window; now whether at that moment, the false Light in the Room, or
the true Wine deceived me, I know not; but I beheld this Maid as an Angel for
Beauty; and indeed I think she had all the temptations of Nature. I began to
kiss her, and she to tremble and blush; yet not so much out of Fear, as
Surprise and Shame at my Addresses. I found her pleased with my Vows, and
melting at my Kisses; I sighed in her Bosom, which panted me a welcome there;
that Bosom whiter than Snow, sweeter than the Nosegay she had Planted there.
She urged me faintly to go to her Lady, who expected me, and I swore it was for
her Sake I came (whom I never saw) and that I scorned all other Beauties: She
kindled at this, and her Cheeks glowed with Love. I pressed her to all I
wished, but she replied, she was a Maid, and should be undone. I told her I
would Marry her, and swore it with a thousand Oaths; she believed, and grew
prettily Fond -- In fine, at last she, yielded to all I asked of her, which we
had scarce recovered when her Lady rung. I could not stir, but she who feared a
Surprise, ran to her, and told her I was gone into the Garden, and would come
immediately; she, hastens down again to me, Fires me anew, and pleased me anew;
'twas thus I taught a longing Maid the first Lesson of Sin, at the price of
Fifty Pistoles, which I presented her; nor could I yet part from this young
Charmer, but stayed so long that her Lady rung a Silver Bell again; but my new
Prize was so wholly taken up with the pleasure of this new Amor, and the good
Fortune arrived to her, she heard not the Bell, so that the fair deceived, put
on her Nightgown and Slippers, and came softly down Stairs, and found my new
Love, and I closely embracing with all the passion and fondness imaginable. I
know not what she saw in me in that kind moment to her Woman, or whether the
disappointment gave her a greater desire, but it is most certain she fell most
desperately in Love with me, and scorning to take notice of the Indignity I put
upon her, she unseen stole to her Chamber: Where after a most afflicting Night,
she next Morning called her Woman to her (whom I left toward Morning,) better
pleased with my Fifty Pistoles worth of Beauty, than I should have been with
that of five hundred: the Maid whose Guilt made her very much unassur'd,
approached her Lady with such tremblings, as she no longer doubted, but she was
guilty, but durst not examine her about it, least she, who had her Honor in
keeping, should by the discovery she found she had made of her Levity, expose
that of her Lady. She therefore, dissembled as well as she could, and examined
her about my stay; to which the Maid answered, I had fallen asleep, and 'twas
impossible to wake me till day appeared; when for fear of discovery, I posted
away. This, though the Lady knew was false, she was forced to take for current
Excuse, and more raging with Love, than ever, she immediately dispatched away
her Footman, with a Letter to me, upbraiding me extremely; but at the same
time, inviting me with all the passion imaginable; and because I should not
again see my young Mistress, who was dying in Love with me, she appointed me to
meet her at a little House she had, a Bow-shot from her own, where was a fine
De^oy, and a great number of Wild-fowl kept, which her Husband took great
delight in; there I was to wait her coming, where lived only a Man, and his old
Wife, her Servants: I was very glad of this Invitation, and went; she came
adorned with all her Charms. I considered her a new Woman, and one whom I had a
Wager to win upon, the conquest of one I had inclination to, till by the
discovery of the Jilt in her I began to despise the Beauty; however, as I said,
she was new, and now perhaps easy to be brought to my Terms, as indeed it
happened; she caressed me with all imaginable fondness; was ready to Eat my
Lips, instead of Kissing them, and much more forward than I wished, who do not
love an over easy Conquest; however she pleased me for three days together,
all which time she detained me there, coming to me early, and staying the
latest Hour; and I have no reason to repent my time; for besides that I have
past it very well, she at my coming away presented me this Jewel in my Hat, and
this Ring on my Finger, and I have saved my five hundred Pistoles, my heart,
and my credit in the Encounter, and am going to Bruxells to triumph over the
haughty conceited Philander, who set so great a value on his own Beauty, and
yet for all his fine Person has paid the Pistoles before he could purchase the
Blessing, as she swore to me, who have made a Convert of her, and reduced her
to the thing she never yet was, a Lover; insomuch that she has promised me to
renounce Philander. I have promised to visit her again; but if I do, 'twill be
more for the Vanity to please than be pleased, for I never repeat any thing
with pleasure: All the while he spoke, Silvia fixed her Eyes, and all her soft
desires upon him; she envies the happy Countess, but much more the happy Maid,
with whom his perfect liking made him happy; she fancies him in her Arms, and
wishes him there; she is ready a thousand times to tell him she is a Woman; but
when she reflects on his inconstancy, she fears. When he had ended his Story,
she Cried, sighing: And you are just come from this fair Lady? He answered her,
he was, Sound and Heart-hole: She replied, It Is very well you are so, but all
the young do not thus escape from Beauty, and you may some time or other be
Intrapt. Oh, cried he! I defy the power of one, while Heaven has distributed
Variety to all. Were you never in Love, replied Silvia? Never, said he, that
they call Love: I have burnt and raved an Hour or two, or so; pursued, and
gazed, and laid Sieges, till I had overcome; but what is this to Love? Did I
ever make a second visit, unless upon Necessity or Gratitude? And yet -- and
there he sighed; and yet, said he, I saw a Beauty once upon the Tower, that has
ever since given me Torment. At Bruxells, said Silvia? There, replied he; she
was the fairest Creature Heaven e're made, such White and Read by Nature, such
a Hair, such Eyes, and such a Mouth! -- all Youth and ravishing sweetness, -- I
pursued her to her Lodgings, and all I could get, was, that she belonged to a
young Noble Man, who since has taken Orders. From the Night I saw her, I never
left her Window, but had Spies of all sorts, who brought me in intelligence,
and a little after I found she had quitted the place with a new Lover, which
made me love and rave for her ten times more, when I knew assuredly she was a
Whore -- and how fine a one I had mist: This called all the Blood to Silvia's
Face, and so confounded her, she could not answer; she knew it was her self, of
whom he spoke; and that course word though innocently spoken, or rather gayly
expressed, put her quite out of Countenance; however she recovered again, when
she considered they were not meant as rudenesses to her. She loved him, and was
easy to pardon: With such discourse they past the Evening, till toward
Bedtime, and the young Spaniara, who had took but little rest in three Nights
before, was for some repose; and calling for his Chamber, the Host besought
him, since they had the happiness (the young French Gentleman and himself) to
be so good Friends, that they would share a Bed together; for intruth, said he,
Sir, you must sit up all Night else: he replied, with all his Soul, it was the
most grateful proposal, had been ever made him; and Addressing himself to
Silvia, asked him if he would allow him that Blessing: She blushed extremely at
the question, and hung down her Eyes, and he laughed to see it: Sir, said
Silvia, I will give you my Bed, for it is all one to me, to lie on a Bed, or on
the Chairs. Why, Sir, said Alonzo, I am too passionate an adorer of the Female
Sex, to incommode any of my own with Addresses; nor am I so Nice, but I can
suffer a Man to lie by me, especially so dear a Youth as your self^e. at which
he Embraced him in his Arms, which did but the more raise Silva's Blushes, who
wished for what she dreaded: With you, Sir, said she, I could methinks be
content to do what I do not use to do; and fearing to betray her Sex, forced a
consent; for either one or the other she was compelled to do; and with the
assurance that he thought her what she seemed, she chose to give her consent,
and they both went to Bed together: to add to her deceit (she being forced in
her Sickness to cut off her Hair) when she put off her Perriwig, she discovered
nothing of the Woman; nor feared she any thing but her Breasts, which were the
roundest and the whitest in the World; but she was long in undressing, which to
color the Matter, she suffered her Page to do, who, poor Lad, was never in so
trembling a condition, as in that manner to be obliged to serve her, where she
discovered so many Charms he never before had seen, but all such as might be
seen with Modesty: By that time she came to Bed, Alonzo was fast asleep, being
so long kept waking, and never so much as dreamt he had a Woman with him; but
she whose fears kept her waking, had a thousand Agitations and Wishes, so
natural it is when Virtue has broke the bounds of Modesty, to plunge in past
all retreat; and I believe there are very few who retire after the first Sin.
She considers her condition in a strange Country, her Splendour declining, her
Love for Philander quite reduced to Friendship, or hardly that; she was young,
and eat and drank well; had a World of Vanity, that Food of desire, that Fuel
to Vice: She saw this the Beautifullest Youth she imagined ever to have seen,
of Quality and Fortune able to serve her; all these made her rave with a desire
to gain him for a Lover, and she imagined as all the vain and young do, that
tho no Charms had yet been able to hold him, she alone had those that would;
her Glass had a thousand times told her so; she compares him to Octavio, and
finds him in her opinion handsomer; she was possessed with some Love for
Philander, when he first Addressed to her, and Octavio shared at best but half
a Heart; but now, that she had lost all for Philander and Octavio, and had a
Heart to cast away, or give to a new Lover; it was like her Money, she hated to
keep to it, and lavished it on any Trifle, rather than hoard it, or let it lie
by: 'Twas a loss of time her Youth could not spare: she after reflection
resolved, and when she had resolved, she believed it done. By a Candle she had
by her to read a little Novel, she had brought, she Surveyed him often, as
curiously as Psyche did her Cupid, and tho he slept like a mere Mortal, he
appeared as Charming to her Eyes as the winged God himself; and it is believed
she wished he would awake and find by her Curiosity, her Sex: For this I know,
she durst no longer trust her self a Bed with him, but got up, and all the last
part of the Night walked about the Room: her Page lay in the Room with her, by
her order, on the Table, with a little Vallice under his Head, which he carried
Silvia's Linen in; she waked him and told him all her fears in a pleasant
manner. In the Morning Alonzo awakes, and wonders to find her up so soon, and
reproached her for the unkindness; new Protestations on both sides passing of
eternal Friendship, they both resolved for Bruxells; but lest she should
encounter Philander on the way, who possible might be on visiting his Dutch
Countess, she desired him to ride on before, and to su^fer him to lose the
happiness of his Company, till they met in Bruxells: With much ado he consents,
and taking the Ring the Countess gave him from of his Finger; Sir, said he, be
pleased to wear this, and if ever you need my Fortune or my Sword, send it, and
in what part of the World soever I am, I will fly to your Service. Silvia
returned him a little Ring set round with Diamonds, that Philander in his woing
time had given her amongst a thousand of finer value: His Name and hers was
Engraven, instead of a Poesy in it; which was only Philander and Silvia, and
which he took no notice of, and parted from each other in the tenderest manner,
that two young Gentlemen could possible be imagined to do, tho it were more
than so on her side; for she was madly in Love with him.

As soon as Silvia came to Bruxells, she sent in the Evening to search out
Brilljard, for she had considered, if he should come to the knowledge of her
being in Town, and she should not send to him, he would take it so very ill,
that he might prevent all her designs and rambles, the now Joy of her Heart;
she knew she could make him her Slave, her Pimp, her any thing, for Love, and
the hope of her Favor; and his interest might defend her; and she should know
all Philander's motions, whom now, tho she loved no more, she feared. She found
him, and he took her Lodgings, infinitely pleased at the trust she reposed in
him; the only means by which he could arrive to happiness. She continues her
Man's Habit, and he supplied the place of Vallet, dressed her and undressed her,
shifted her Linen every day; nor did he take all these Freedoms, without
advancing a little farther upon occasion and opportunity, which was the hire
she gave him to serve her in more Lucky Amors; the Fine she paid to live free,
and at ease. She tells him her adventure, which tho it were Daggers to his
Heart, was however the only way to keep her his own; for he knew her Spirit was
too violent to be restrained by any means. At last she told him her design upon
a certain young Man of quality, which she told him was the same she
Incountered. She assures him 'twas not Love or Liking, but perfectly Interest
that made her design upon him, and that if he would assist her, she would be
very kind to him, as a Man that had gained very greatly upon her Heart. This
Flattery she urged with infinite fondness and art, and he overjoyed believed
every word as Gospel; so that he promised her the next day to carry a Billet to
the young Don: In the mean time she caused him to Sup with her, purposly to
give her an account of Philander, Cesario and Hermione, whom she heard was come
to Bruxells, and lived publicly with the Prince. He told her it was very true,
and that he saw them every day, nay, every moment together; for he verily
believed they could not live asunder. That Philander was every Evening
Caballing there, where all the male contents of the Reformed Religion had taken
Sanctuary, and where the Grand Council was every Night held; for some great
things were in Agitation, and debating how to trouble the repose of all France
again with new Broils; he told her, that all the World made their Court to
Hermione, that if any Body had any Petitions, or Addresses to make to the
Prince, 'twas by her sole Interest; she sat in their closest Councils, and
heard their gravest debates; and she was the Oracle of the Board: The Prince
paying her a perfect Adoration, while she, whose Charms of Youth were ended,
being turned of thirty, fortifyed her decays with all the Arts her Wit and Sex
were capable of, and kept her Illustrious Lover, as perfectly her Slave as if
she had engaged him by all those ties that Fetter the most circumspect, and
totally subdued him to her Will, who was without Exception the most lovely
Person upon Earth: and tho, Madam, you know him so perfectly well; yet I must
tell you my opinion of him; He is all the softer Sex can wish, and ours admire;
he is formed for Love and War; and as he is the most amorous and wanton in
Courts, he is also the most fierce and brave in Field: His Birth the most
elevated, his Age arrived to full blown Man, adorned with all the spreading
Glories that Charm the Fair, and engage the World; and I have often heard some
of our Party say, his Person gained him more numbers to his side, than his
Cause or Quality; for he understood all the useful Arts of Popularity, the
gracious smile and bow, and all those cheap Favors that so gain upon Hearts;
and without the expense of any thing but Ceremony, has made the Nation mad for
his Interest, who never otherwise obliged 'em; and sure nothing is more
necessary in the great, than Affability; nor shows greater marks of Grandeur,
or shall more etternize them, than bowing to the Crowd. As the Maiden Queen I
have read of in England, who made herself idolized by that sole Piece of
politic Cunning, understanding well the stubborn yet good Nature of the
People; and gained more upon 'em by those little Arts, than if she had parted
with all the Prerogatives of her Crown. Ah! Madam, you cannot imagine what
little Slights governed the whole Universe, and how easy it is for Monarchs to
oblige. This Cesario was made to know, and there is none so poor an Object, who
may not have Access to him, and whom he does not send away well pleased, though
he do not grant what they ask. He dispatches quickly, which is a grateful
Virtue in great Men; and none ever espoused his Interest, that did not find a
Reward and a Protection: It Is true, these are all the Tools he is to work with,
and he stops at nothing that leads to his Ambition^ nor has he done all that
lies in the Power of Man only, to set al^ France yet in a Flame, but he calls
up the very Devils from Hell, to his Aid, and there is no Man famed for
Negromancy, to whom he does not apply himself; which, indeed^ is done by the
Advice of Hermione* who is very much affected with those sort of People, and
puts a very great Trust and Confidence in 'em. She sent, at great Expense, for
a German Conjurer, who arrived the other Day, and who is perpetually consulting
with another of the same sort, a Scot by Birth, called Fergusano. He was once
in Holy Orders, and still is so, but all his Practice is the black Art; and
excellent in it he is reported to be. Hermione undertakes nothing without his
Advice; and as he is absolutely her Creature, so his Art governs her, and she
the Prince: She holds her Midnight Conferences with him; and as she is very
superstitious, so she is very learned, and studies this Art, taught by this
great Master Fergusano: And so far is this glorious Hero bewitched with these
Sorcerers, that he puts his whole Trust in these Conjurations and Charms; and
so far they have imposed on him, that with an enchanted Ointment which they
have prepared for him, he shall be invulnerable, though he face the very Mouth of
a Cannon: They have, at the earnest Request of Hermione, calculated his
Nativity, and find him born to be a King; and that before twenty Moons exspire
he shall be crowned in France: And flattering his easy Youth with all the
Vanities of Ambition, they have made themselves absolutely useful to him. This
Scot, being a most inveterate Enemy to France, lets the Prince rest neither
Night nor Day, but is still inspiring him with new Hopes of a Crown, and laying
him down all the false Arguments imaginable, to spur the active Spirit: My Lord
is not of the Opinion, yet seems to comply with them in Council; he laughs at
all the Fopperies of Charms and Incantations; insomuch, that he many times
angers the Prince, and is in eternal little Feuds with Hermione. The German,
would often in these Disputes say, he found by his Art, That the Stop to the
Princes Glory would be his Love. This so incensed Hermione, and consequently
the Prince, that they had like to have broke with him, but durst not for fear;
he knowing too much to be disobliged: On the other side, Fergusano is most
wonderfully charmed with the Wit and masculine Spirit of Hermione, her Courage,
and the manliness of her Mind; and understanding what way she would be served,
resolved to obey her, finding she had an absolute Ascendant over the Prince,
whom, by this means, he knew he should get into his sole Management. Hermione,
though she seemed to be possessed so entirely of Cesarrio's Heart, found she had
great and powerful Opposers, who believed the Prince lay idling in her Arms,
and that possibly she might eclipse his Fame by living at that rate with a
Woman he had no other Pretensions to but Love; and many other Motives were
urged daily to him by the Admirers of his great Actions: And she feared, with
reason, that some time or other Ambition might get the Ascendant of Love: She
therefore, in her Midnight Conferences with Fergusano, often urged him to show
her that piece of his Art, to make a Philtre to retain fleeting Love; and not
only keep a Passion alive, but even revive it from the dead. She tells him of
her Contract with him, she urges his forced Marriage, as she was pleased to
call it, in his Youth; and that he being so young, she believed he might find
it lawful to marry himself a second time; that possibly his Princess was for
the Interest of the King; and Men of his elivated Fortune, ought not to be tied
to those Strictnesses of common Men, but for the good of the Public, sometimes
act beyond the musty Rules of Law and Equity, those politic Bands to confine
the Mobile. At this unreasonable rate she pl^ads her Right to Cesario, and he
har^ens with all Attention, and approves so well all she says, that he
resolves, not only to attach the Prince to her by all the force of the black
Art, but that of necessary Marriage also: This pleased her to the last degree;
and she left him, after he had promised her to bring her the Philtre by the
Morning, for it was that she most urged, the other requiring time to argue with
him, and work him by degrees to it. Accordingly the next Morning he brings her
a Tooth-pick-case of Gold of rare infernal Workmanship, wrought with a thousand
Charms, of that Force, that every time the Prince should touch it, and while he
but wore it about him, his Fondness should not only continue, but increase, and
he should hate all Womankind besides, at least in the way of Love; and have no
power to possess another Woman, though she had all the Attractions of Nature. He
tells her the Prince could never suspect so familiar a Present, and for the
fineness of the Work, it was a Present for a Prince, For, said he, no human Art
could frame so rare a piece of Workmanship, that Nine Nights the most delicate
of the Infernals were mixing the Metal with the most powerful of Charms, and
watched the critical Minutes of the Stars, in which to form the mystic
Figures, every one being a Spell upon the Heart of that unerring Magic, no
mortal Power could ever dissolve, undo, or conquer. The only Art now was in
giving it, so as to oblige him never to part with it; and she, who had all the
Cunning of her Sex, undertook for that part: She dismissed her infernal
Confident, and went to her Toilet to dress her, knowing well that the Prince
would not be long before he came to her: She laid the Tooth-pick-Case down so
as he could not avoid seeing it: The Prince came immediately after in, as he
ever used to do Night and Morning, to see her dress her; he saw this gay Thing
on her Table, and took it in his Hand, admiring the Work of it, as he was the
most curious Person in the World: She told him there was not a finer wrought
thing in the World, and that she had a very great Esteem for it, it being made
by the Sybils; and bade him mind the Antiqueness of the Work: The more she
commended it, the more he liked it, and told her she must let him call it his:
She told him he would give it away to the next Commender: He vowed he would
not: She told him, then he should not only call it his, but it should in
reality be so; and he vowed it should be the last thing he would part with in
the World.

From that time forward she found, or thought she found, a more impatient
Fondness in him than she had seen before; however it was, she ruled and
governed him as she pleased; and indeed, never was so great a Slave to Beauty
as, in my Opinion, he was to none at all; for she is far from having any
natural Charms; yet it was not long, since it was absolutely believed by all,
that he had been resolved to give himself wholly up to her Arms; to have sought
no other Glory than to have retired to a Corner of the World with her, and
changed all his Crowns of Laurel for those of Roses: But some stirring Spirits
have roused him anew, and awakened Ambition in him, and they are on great
Designs, which possibly ere long, may make all France to tremble; yet still
Hermione is oppressed with Love, and the Effects of daily increasing Passion.
He has perpetual Correspondence with the Party in Paris, and Advice of all
things that pass; they let him know they are ready to receive him whenever he
can bring a Force into France; nor needs he any considerable Number, he having
already there in every place, through which he shall pass, all, or the most
part of the Hearts and Hands at his Devotion; and they want but Arms, and they
shall gather as they go: They desire he will land himself in some part of the
Kingdom, and it would be Encouragement enough to all the joyful People, who
will from all parts flock together. In fine, he is offered all Assistance and
Money; and least all the Forces of France should be bent against him, he has
Friends of great Quality and Interest, that are resolved to rise in several
places of the Kingdom, in Languedoc and Guinny, whether the King must be
obliged to send his Forces, or a great part of 'em; so that all this side of
France will be left defenseless. I myself, Madam, have some Share in this great
Design, and possibly you will one day see me a Person of a Quality sufficient
to merit those Favors I am now blessed with. Pray, replied Silvia, smiling
with a little Scorn, what part are you to play, to arrive at this good Fortune?
I am, said he, trusted to provide all the Ammunition and Arms, and to hire a
Vessel to transport them to some Seaport Town in France, which the Council
shall think most proper to receive us. Silvia laughed, and said she prophesied
another End of this high Design than they imagined; but desperate Fortunes must
take their Chance. What, continued she, does not Hermione speak of me, and
inquire of me? Yes, replied Brill^ard, but in such a way, as if she looked on
you as a lost Creature, and one of such a Reputation, she would not receive a
Visit from for all the World. At this Silvia laughed e^treamly, and cried,
Hermione would be very well content to be so mean a Sinner as myself, to be so
young and so handsome an one. However, said she, to be serious, I would be glad
to know what real Probability there is in advancing and succeeding in this
Design, for I would take my Measures accordingly, and keep Philander, whose
wavering, or rather lost Fortune, is the greatest Motive of my Resolves to part
with him, and that have made me so uneasy to him. Brilljard told her he was
very confident of the Design, and that it was almost impossible to miscarry in
the Discontent all France was in at this Juncture; and they feared nothing but
the Prince's Relapsing, who, now, most certainly preferred Love to Glory. He
farther told her, that as they were in Council, one deputed from the Parisians,
arrived with new Offers, and to know the last Result of the Prince, whether he
would espouse their Interest or not, as they were with Life and Fortune ready
to espouse his Glory: They sent him word, it was from him they expected
Liberty, and him whom they looked upon as their titular Deity. Old Fergusano
was then in Council, that High-land Wizard, that manages all, and who is ever
at hand to awaken Mischief, alarmed the Prince to new Glories, reproaching his
scandalous Life, withal telling him there were Measures to be taken to
reconcile Love and Fame; and which he was to discourse to him about in his
Closet only; but as things were, he bade him look into the Story of Armida and
Renaldo, and compare his own with it, and he doubted not but he would return
blushing at his Remissness and Sloth: Not that he would exempt his Youth from
the Pleasures of Love, but he would not have Love hinder his Glory: This bold
Speech before Hermione, had like to have begot an ill understanding; but she
was as much for the Prince's Glory as Fergusano, and therefore could not be
angry, when she considered the Elevation of the Prince, would be her own also.
At this necessary reproach, the Prince blushed; the Board seconding the wizard,
had this good effect to draw this assurance from him, That they should see he
was not so attached to Love, but he could for sometime give a Cessation to his
Heart, and that the Envoy from the Parisians, might return assured, that he
would as soon as he could put his affairs in good order, come to their relief,
and bring Arms for those that had none, with such Friends as he could get
together; he could not promise Numbers, least by leading so many here, their
design should take Air, but would wholly trust to Fortune, and their good
resolutions: He demanded a Sum of money of 'em, for the buying these Arms, and
they have promised him all Aids. This is the last result of Council, which
broke immediately up; and the Prince retired to his Closet; where he was no
sooner come, but reflecting on the necessity of leaving Hermione, he fell into
the most profound Melancholy and Muzing, that could seize a Man; while he sat
thus, Hermione (who had schooled Fergusano for his rough Speech in Council, and
desired he would now take the opportunity to repair that want of respect, while
the Prince was to be spoken to alone) sent him into the Closet to him; where he
found him walking with his Arms across, not minding the Bard who stood gazing
on him, and at last called to him; and finding no reply, he advanced, and
pulling him gently by the Arm, cried -- Awake, Royal young Man, awake! and look
up to coming Greatness -- I was reflecting, replied Cesario, on all the various
Fortunes I have passed from the time of my Birth, to this present hapless day,
and would be glad to know if any supernatural means can tell me, what future
Event will befall me? If I believed I should not gain a Crown by this great
Enterprise I am undertaking, here I would lay me down in silent Ease, give up
my Toils and restless Soul to Love, and never think on vain Ambition more: Ease
thou my troubled Mind, if thou have any Friend among the Infernals, and they
dare utter Truth: My gracious Prince, replied the fawning Wizard, this Night,
if you dare loose your self from Love, and come unattended to my Apartment,
I Will undertake to show you all the future Fortune you are to run, the Hazards,
Dangers, and Escapes, that attend your mighty Race of Life: I Will lay the
Adamantin Book before you, where all the Destinies of Princes are
Hieroglisick'd. I Will show you more, if Hell can furnish Objects, and you dare
stand untrembling at the Terror of 'em. Enough, replied Cesario; Name me the
Hour. 'Twixt Twelve and One, said he; for that is the sacred dismal time of
Night for Fiends to come, for Tombs to open, and let loose their Dead, -- we
shall have use of both. -- No more, replied Cesario, I Will attend 'em: The
Prince was going out, when Fergusano recalled him, and cried, one thing, Sir, I
must caution you, That from this minute to that, wherein I shall show you your
Destiny, you commit nothing unlawful with Women-kind: Away, replied the Prince,
smiling, and leave your Canting. The Wizard putting on a more grave
Countenance, replied -- By all the Infernals, Sir, if you commit unlawful
Things, I cannot serve you. If your devils, replied the Prince, Laughing, be so
nice, I doubt I shall find 'em too honest for my Purpose. Sir, said the subtle
old Fiend, such Conscientious Devils your Highness is to converse with to
Night; and if you discover the Secret, it will not prove so Lucky. Since they
are so Humourous, cried Cesario, I will give 'em way for once: And going out of
the Room, he went directly to Hermione's apartment; where it being late, she is
preparing for Bed, and with a thousand Kisses, and hanging on his Neck, she
asked him, why he is so slow, and why he suffers not himself to be undressed?
He feigns a thousand excuses, at which she seems extremely amazed; she
complains, reproaches and commands -- He tells her he was to wait on the
Governor, about his most urgent affairs, and was (late as it was) to consult
with him: She asked him what affairs he was to negotiate, of which she was not
to bear her part? he refuses to tell her; and she replied she had sense and
courage for any Enterprise, and should resent it very ill, if she were not made
acquainted with it: But he swore to her, she should know all the whole truth,
as soon as he returned: This pacifyed her in some measure, and at the hour
appointed, she suffered him to go; and in a Chair was carried to a little House
Fergusano had taken without the Town, to which belonged a large Garden, at the
farther end of which was a Thicket of unordered Trees, that surrounded a
Grotto; which passed a good way under the ground. It had had some rareties of
Water-work formerly belonging to it, but now they were decayed; only here and
there a broken Rock let out a little Stream, that murmured and dashed upon the
Earth below, and ran away in a little Rivolet; which served to add a Melancholy
to the dismal place: Into this the Prince was conducted by the old German, who
assisted in the Charm; they had only one Torch to light the way, which at the
entrance of the Cave, they put out, and within was only one Glimmering Lamp,
that rather served to add to the horror of the Vault, discovering its
hollowness and ruins. At his entrance he was saluted with a noise like the
rushing of Wind, which whiz'd and whistled in the mighty Concave. Anon a more
silent whispering surrounded him, without being able to behold any Creature,
save the old German. Anon came in Fergusano, who rolling a great Stone that lay
at one corner of the Cave, he desired the Prince to place himself on it, and
not be surpised at any thing he should behold, nor to stir from that enchanted
Ground: he nodding, assented to obey, while Fergusano and the German, with each
a Wand in their Hands, struck against the unformed Rocks, that finished the end
of the Cave, Muttering a thousand Incantations; with Voices dreadful, and
motions Antic; and after a mighty stroke of Thunder that shook the Earth, the
rude Rock divided, and opened a space that discovered a most magnificent
Apartment; in which was presented a young Hero, attended with Military
Officers; his Pages dressing him for the Field, all in gilded Armor. The
Prince began to doubt himself, and to swear in his thought, that the Apparition
was himself, so very like he was to himself, as if he had seen his proper
Figure in a Glass. After this, several Persons seemed to address to this great
Man, of all sorts and conditions, from the Prince to the Peasant, with whom he
seemed to discourse with great confidence and affability; they offered him the
League, which he took and Signed, and gave them back; they attend him to the
Door with great Joy and respect; but as soon as he was gone, they laughed and
pointed after him; at which the Prince infinitely incensed rose, and cried out,
What means all this, s' Death, am I become the Scorn and Mockery of the Crowd?
Fergusano besought him to sit and have patience, and he obeyed, and checked
himself. The Scene of the Apartment being changed to an Arbor of Flowers, and
the prospect of a noble and ravishing Garden; the Hero is presented Armed as he
was, only without his Plume-Head-peece, kneeling at the Feet of a fair Woman,
in loose Robes and Hair, and attended with abundance of little Loves, who
disarm him by degrees, of those Ornaments of War. While she Caresses him with
all the signs of Love, the Cupid's make Garlands of Flowers, and wreath around
his Arms and Neck, Crowning his Head, and fettering him all over in these sweet
soft Chains. They Curle his Hair, and adorn him with all Effeminacy; while he
lies smiling and pleased -- the wanton Boys disposing of his Instruments of
War, as they think fit, putting them to ridiculous uses, and Laughing at 'em.
While thus he lay, there enters to him a great many Statesmen and Politicians;
grave-Men in Furs and Chains, attended by the common Crowd: and opening a Scene
farther off in prospect, show him Crowns, Scepters, Globes, Ensigns, Arms, and
Trophies; promiscuously shuffel'd together, with heaps of Gold, Jewels,
Parchments, Records, Charters and Seals; at which sight he starts from the Arms
of the fair Medea, and strove to have approached those who waited for him, but
she held him fast, and with abundance of Tears and signs of moving Flattery,
brought him back to her Arms again, and all dissatisfied the promiscuous Crowd
depart, some looking back with Scorn, others with signs of Rage, and all the
Scene of Glory, of Arms and Crowns, disappeared with the Crowd. Cesario wholly
forgeting, cried out again, Ha lost! all for a Trifling Woman lost; all those
Trophies of thy Conquest for a Mistress! By Heaven I Will shake the Charmer from
my Soul, if both I cannot have. When Fergusano advancing to him, cried -- See,
Sir, how Supinely the young Hero's laid upon her downy Breast, and smiled as he
spoke, which angered the Prince, who replied with Scorn, Now by my Life, a Plot
upon my Love; but they protested it was not so, and begged he would be silent;
while thus the Hero lay regardless of his Glory, all decked with Flowers and
Braclets, the Drums beat, and the Trumpets were heard, or seemed to be heard to
sound, and a vast opening space was filled with armed Wariers, who offer him
their Swords, and seem to point at Crowns, that were born behind them; a while
they plead in vain, and point to Crowns in vain, at which he only casts a
scornful smile, and lays him down in the soft Arms of Love. They urge again,
but with one amorous look the Circe more prevails, than all their reasonings.
At last by force, they divested him of his Rosy-Garlands, in which there lay a
Charm, and he assumes new life, while others bore the Inchantress out of his
sight; and then he suffering himself to be conducted where they pleased, who
lead him forth, showing him all the way a prospect of Crowns. At this Cesario
sighed, and the Ceremony continued.

The Scene changed, discovering a Seashore, where the Hero is represented
Landed, but with a very Melancholy Air; attended with several Officers and
Gentlemen; the Earth seems to ring with Joy, and loud Acclamations at his
approach; vast Multitudes thronging to behold him, and striving who first
should kiss his Hand; and bearing him aloft in the Air, carry him out of sight
with Peals of Welcome and Joy.

He is represented next in Council, and deep debate; and so disappears: Then
soft Music is heard, and he enters in the royal Robe, with a Crown presented
him on the Knee; which he receives, and bows to all the Rabble and the Numbers,
to give them thanks: He having in his Hand blew Garters, with the order of St.
Esperet, which he distributes to several persons on either Hand; throwing Ducal
Crowns and Coronets, among the Rabble, who scuffle and strive to catch at them:
after a great shout of Joy, Thunder and Lightning again shook the Earth, at
which they seemed all amazed, when a thick black Cloud descended and, covered
the whole Scene, and the Rock closed again, and Fergusano let fall his Wand.

The Prince seeing the Ceremony end here, rises in a rage, and cries out, I
charge ye to go on -- remove the Veil, and let the Sun appear; advance your
mystic Wand, and show what follows next. I cannot, Sir, replied the trembling
Wizard; the Fates have closed the everlasting Book forbiding farther search.
Then damn your scanted Art, replied the Prince, a petty Iuggler could have done
as much. Is It not enough, replied the German Rabbi, that we have showed you
Crowned, and Crowned in France it self? I find the Infernals themselves are
bounded here, and can declare no more. Oh, they are pretty Powers that can be
Bounded, replied the Prince with scorn. They strove with all their Art to
reconcile him, laying the fault on some mistake of theirs, in the ingredients
of the Charm, which at another time they would strive to prevent: they sooth him
with all the hope in the World, that what was left unreveal'd, must needs be as
glorious^ and fortunate to him, as what he had seen already, which was
absolutely to be depended on: thus they brought him to the open Garden again,
where they continued their Instructions to him, telling him that now was the
time to arrive to all the Glories he had seen; they presented to him the State
of Affairs in France, and how much a greater interest he had in the Hearts of
the People, than their proper Monarch, arguing a thousand Fallacies to the
deluded Hero, who blind and mad with his Dreams of Glory; his Visions, and
Prospects, listened with reverence and attention, to all their false
persuasions. I call 'em false, Madam, for I never had Faith in these sort of
People, and am sorry so many great Men and Ladies of our times, are so
bewitched to their Prophecies. They there presented him with a List of all the
considerable of the Reformed Religion in Paris, who had assured him Aids of Men
and Money in this Epedition, Merchants, rich Tradesmen, Magistrates and
Gown-men of the reformed Church, and the Law. Next to this, another of the
Contribution of pious Ladies; all which Sums being named, amounted to a
considerable supply; so that they assured him Hell it self could not with these
Aids obstruct his Glory; but on the contrary, should be compelled to render him
assistance, by the help of Charms, to make him invincible: so that wholly
o'er-come by them, he has given order, that all Preparations be forthwith made
for the most secret and speedy conveyance of himself and Friends to some
Seaport in France; he has ordered abundance of Letters to be writ to those of
the Hugonot Party into all parts of France: all which will be ready to assist
him at his Landing. Fergusano undertakes for the management of the whole
affair, to write, to speak, and to persuade; and you know, Madam, he is the
most subtle and insinuating of all his Nonconforming Race, and the most
malignant of all our Party, and sainted by 'em for the most pious, and
industrious Labourer in the Cause; all that he says is Oracle to the Crowd, and
all he says Authentic; and it is he alone is the great Engine, that sets the
great Work a turning. Yes, replied Silvia, and makes the giddy World Mad with
his damnable Notions. Pernicious as he is, replied Brilljard, he has the sole
management of affairs under Hermione; he has power to treat, to advise, to
raise Money, to make and name Officers, and lastly, to draw out a Scen^ of fair
Pretenses for Cesario to the Crown of France, and the lawfulness of his Claim:
for let the Conquest be never so sure, the People require it, and the Conqueror
is obliged to give some better reason, than that of the strength of his Sword,
for his Dominion over them. This Pretension is a Declaration, or rather a most
scandalous, pernicious, and treasonable Libel, if I may say so, who have so
great an Interest in it, penned with all the Malice Envy can invent; the most
unbred, rude piece of Stuff, as makes it apparent, the Author had neither Wit
or common good Manners; besides the hellish Principles he has made evident
there. My Lord would have no hand in the Approbation of this gross piece of
Villainous Scandal, which has more unfasten'd him from their interest, than any
of their other d^signs, and from which he daily more and more declines, or
seems disgusted with, tho he does not wholly intend to quit the Interest.
Having no other probable means to make good that fortune, which has been so
evidently and wholly destroyed by it. I am extreme glad, said Silvia, that
Philander's Sentiments are so Generous, and am at nothing so much amazed, as to
hear the Prince could suffer so gross a thing to pass in his Name. I must, said
Brilljard, do the Prince right in this point, to assure you, when the thing was
first in the rough draught showed him, he told Fergusano, that those
accusations of a Crowned Head, were too Villainous for the thoughts of a
Gentleman; and giving it him again, cried, -- No -- let it never be said, that
the Royal Blood, that runs in my Veins, could dictate to me no more noble ways
for its defense and pretensions, than the mean Cowardice of Lies; and that to
attain to Empire, I should have recourse to the most detestable of all shifts.
No, no, my too zealous Friend, continued he, I will, with only my Sword in my
Hand at the head of my Army, proclaim my right, and demand a Crown; which if I
win, is mine; if not, it is his, whose Sword is better or Lucklier; and tho the
future World may call this unjust, at least they will say it was brave. At this
the Wizard smiled, and replied; Alas, Sir, had we hitherto acted by rules of
Generosity only, we had not brought so great advantages to our Interest. You
tell me, Sir, of a Speech you will make, with your Sword in your Hand; that will
do very well at the head of an Army, and a handsome Declaration would be proper
for men of Sense; but this is not to the Wise, but to the Fools; on whom
nothing will^ pass, but what is penned to their Capacity, and who will not be
able to hear the Speeches you shall make to an Army: this is to rouse 'em, and
find 'em wherever they are; how far remote soever from you, that at once they
may be incited to assist you, and espouse your Interest: This is the sort of
Gospel they believe; all other is too fine: believe me, Sir, it is by these
gross devices, you are to persuade those Sons of Earth, whose Spirits never
mounted above the Dunghill, whence they grew like o're-ripe Pumpkins. Lies are
the Spirit that inspires 'em, they are the very Brandy that make 'em Valiant;
and you may as soon beat Sense into their Brains, as the very appearance of
Truth; it is the very Language of the scarlet Beast to 'em. They understand no
other than their own, and he that does, knows to what ends we aim. No matter,
Sir, what Tools you work withal, so the finished piece be fine at last. Look
forward to the Goal, a Crown attend it! and never mind the dirty Road that
leads to it.

With such false Arguments as these, he wrought upon the easy Nature of the
Prince, who ordered some thousands of 'em to be Printed ready for their being
dispersed all over France, as soon as they should be Landed: Especially among
the Parisians, too apt to take any impressions that bore the stamp and pretense
of Religion and Liberty.

While these and all other things necessary were preparing, Cesario wholly
given over to Love, being urged by Hermione, to know the occasion of his last
Nights absence, unravels all the secret, and told my Lord, and she one Night at
Supper, the whole Scene of the Grotto; so that Hermione, more than ever being
puffed up with Ambitious thoughts, hast'ned to have the Prince pressed to marry
her; and consulting with the Councillour of her closest secrets, sets him anew
to work; swearing violently, that if he did not bring that design about, she
should be able by her Ascendant over Cesario, to ruin all those they had
undertaken, and yet turn the Prince from the Enterprise; and that it was more
to satisfy her Ambition (to which they were obliged for all the Prince had
promised) that he had undertaken to Head an Army, and put himself again into
the Hands of the Hugonots, and forsake all the soft repose of Love and Li^e,
than for any Inclination or Ambition of his own; and that she who had power to
animate him one way, he might be assured had the same power another. This she
ended in very high Language, with a look too fierce and fiery to leave him any
doubt of; and he promised all things should be done as she desired, and that he
would overcome the Prince, and bring him absolutely under her power: Not, said
she, with a scornful look, that I need your aid in this affair, or want power
of my own to command it; but I will not have him look upon it as my Act alone,
or a thing of my seeking, but by your advice shall be made to understand it is
for the good of the Public; that having to do with a sort of People of the
Reformed Religion, whose pretenses were more Nice, than Wise; more seemingly
zealous than reasonable or just; they might look upon the Life she lead with
the Prince, as scandalous, that was not justified by form, tho never so
unlawful. A thousand things she urged to him, who needed no instruction how to
make that appear authentic and just, however contrary to religion and Sense:
But so informed, he parted from her, and told her the Event should declare his
zeal for her Service; and so it did, for he no sooner spoke of it to the
Prince, but he took the Hint as a divine Voice; his very Soul flushed in his
lovely Cheeks, and all the Fire of Love was dancing in his Eyes: Yet as if he
had feared what he wished could not handsomely and lawfully be brought to pass;
he asked a thousand questions concerning it, all which the subtle Wizard so
well resolved, at least in his judgment, who easily was convinced of what he
wished, that he no longer deferred his happiness; but that very Night in the
visit he made Hermione, fell at her Feet, and implores her consent of what he
had told her Fergusano had fully convinced him was necessary for his Interest
and Glory, neither of which he could enjoy or regard, if she was not the
partner of 'em; and that when he should go to France, and put himself in the
Field to demand a Crown, he should do it with absolute Vigor and Resolution, if
she were to be seated as Queen on the same Throne with him, without whom a
Cottage would be more pleasant; and he could relish no Joys that were not as
entirely and immediately hers as his own: He pleaded impatiently for what she
longed, and would have made her Petition for, and all the while she makes a
thousand doubts and scruples only to be convinced and confirmed by him; and
after seeming fully satisfied, he leads her into a Chamber (where Fergusano
waited, and only her Woman, and his faithful confident Tomaso,) and Married
her: since which, she has wholly managed him with greater power than before;
takes abundance of State; is extremely elevated, I will not say Insolent; and
tho they do not make a public Declaration of this; yet she owns it to all her
Intimates; and is ever reproaching my Lord with his lewd course of Life, wholly
forgetting her own; crying out upon infamous Women, as if she had been all the
course of her Life an innocent.

By this time Dinner was ended, and Silvia urged Brilljard to depart with her
Letter; but he was extremely surpised to find it to be to the Governors
Nephew, Don Alonzo, who was his Lords Friend; and who would doubtless give him
an account of all, if he did not show him the Billet, all these reasons could
not dissuade this fickle wanderer, whose Heart was at that time set on this
young inconstant, at least her inclinations. He tells her that her Life would
be really in danger, if Philander comes to the knowledge of such an Intrigue,
which could not possibly be carried on in that Town without noise: She tells
him she is resolved to quit that false injurer of her Fame and Beauty; who had
basely abandoned her for other Women of less merit, even since she had pardoned
him the Crimes of Love he committed at Cologne; that while he was in the
Country with her, during the time of her Lying in, he had given himself to all
that would receive him there; that since he came away, he had left no Beauty
unattempted; and could he possibly imagine her of a Spirit to bow beneath such
injuries? No, she would on to all the revenges her Youth and Beauty were
capable of taking, and stick at nothing that led to that interest; and that if
he did not join with her in her noble design, she would abandon him, and put
herself wholly out of his Protection: Thus she spoke with a fierceness, that
made the Lover tremble with fear of losing her; he therefore told her she had
reason; and that since she was resolved, he would confess to her that Philander
was the most perfidious Creature in the World; and that Hermione, the haughty
Hermione, who hated naughty Women, invited and treated all the handsome Ladies
of the Court to Balls, and to the Basset Table, and made very great
entertainment, only to draw to her Interest all the brave and the young men;
and that she daily gained abundance, by these Arts, to Cesario, and above all
strove by these amusements to engage Philander; whom she perceived to grow cold
in the great concern; daily treating him with Variety of Beauty; so that there
was no Gaity, no Ga^lantry, or Play, but at Hermione's; whither all the Youth
of both Qualities repaired; and 'twas there the Governors Nephew was every
Evening to be found. Possibly, Madam, I had not told you this, if the Princes
Bounty had not taken me totally off from Philander; so that I have no other
dependence on him, but that of my Respect and Duty, out of perfect Gratitude.
After this to gain Brilljard entirely, she assured him if his Fortune were
suitable to her Quality, and her way of Life, she believed she should devote
herself to him; and tho what she said were the least of her thoughts, if failed
not to flatter him agreeably, and he sighed with Grief, that he could not
engage her; all he could get was little enough to support him fine, which he
was always as any Person of quality at Court, and appeared as Graceful, and
might have had some happy Minutes with very fine Ladies, who thought well of
him. To salve this defect of want of Fortune, he told her he had received a
command from Octavio, to come to him about settling of a very considerable
Pension upon her, and that he had at his investing put Money into his Aunt's
Hands, who was a Woman of considerable quality; to be disposed of to that
Charitable Use, and that if she pleased to maintain her rest of Fame, and live
without receiving Love Visits from Men, she might now command that, which would
be a much better and nobler support than that from a Lover, which would be
Transitory, and last but as long as her Beauty, or a less time, his Love. To
this she knew not what to answer, but ready money being the joy of her Heart,
and the support of her Vanity, she seems to yield to this, having said so much
before; and she considering she wanted a thousand things to adorn her Beauty,
being very expensive; she was impatient till this were performed, and deferred
the sending to Don Alonzo, tho her thoughts were perpetually on him. She by the
advice of Brilljard, writes a Letter to Octavio; which was not like those she
had before written, but as an humble Penitent would write to a Ghostly Father,
treating him with all the respect that was possible: and if ever she mentioned
love, it was as if her Heart had, violently and against her will, burst out
into softness, as still she retained there; and then she would take up again,
and ask pardon for that Transgression; she told him it was a passion, which tho
she could never Extinguish for him, yet that it should never warm her for
another, but she would leave Philander to the World, and retire where she was
not known, and try to make up her broken Fortunes; with abundance of things to
this purpose; which he carried to Octavio: he said he could have wished she
would have retired to a Monastery, as all the first part of her Letter had
given him hope; and resolved, and retired as he was, he could not read this
without extreme confusion and change of Countenance. He asked Brilljard a
thousand times whether he believed he might trust her, or if she would abandon
those ways of shame, that at last lose all: He answered, he verily believed she
would. However said Octavio, it is not my business to Capitulate, but to believe
and act all things for the interest and satisfaction of her, whom I yet adore;
and without farther delay writ to his Aunt, to present Silvia with those Sums
he had left for her; and which had been sufficient to have made her happy all
the rest of her Life, if her Sins of Love had not obstructed it. However she no
sooner found herself Mistress of so considerable a Sum, but in lieu of
retiring, and ordering her affairs so as to render it for ever serviceable to
her, the first thing she does, is to furnish herself with new Coach and
Equipage, and to lavish out in Cloth, and Jewels, a great part of it
immediately; and was impatient to be seen on the Toure, and in all public
Places; nor could Brilljard persuade the contrary, but against all good Manners
and Reason, she ^lew into most violent passions with him, till he had resolved
to give her way; it happened that the first day she showed on the Toure, neither
Philander, Cesario, nor Hermione chanced to be there; so that at Supper it was
all the news, how glorious a young Creature was seen only with one Lady, which
was Antonet very well dressed in the Coach with her: every Body that made their
Court that Night to Hermione, spoke of this new Vision, as the most
extraordinary Charmer that had ever been seen; all were that day undone with
Love, and none could learn who this fair destroyer was; for all the time of
Silvia's being at Bruxells before, her being big with Child had kept her from
appearing in all public places; so that she was wholly a new Face to all that
saw her; and it is easy to be imagined what Charms that delicate Person
appeared with to all, when dressed to such advantage, who naturally was the
most beautiful Creature in the World; with all the Bloom of Youth that could
add to Beauty. Among the rest that day that lost their Hearts, was the
Governor's Nephew; who came into the presence that Night wholly Transported,
and told Hermione he died for the lovely Charmer, he had that day seen; so that
she, who was the most curious to gain all the Beauties to her side, that the
men might be so too, endeavored all she could to find out where this Beauty
dwelt. Philander, now grown the most Amorous and Gallant in the World, grew
passionately in love with the very description of her, not imagining it had
been Silvia, because of her Equipage: He knew she loved him, at least he
thought she loved him too well to conceal herself from him, or be in Bruxells,
and not let him know it; so that wholly ravished with the Description of the
imagined new fair One, he burnt with desire of seeing her; and all this Night
was passed in discourse of this Stranger alone; the next day her Livery being
discrib'd to Hermione, she sent two Pages all about the Town, to see if they
could discover a Livery so remarkable; and that if they did, they should
enquire of them who they belonged to, and where that Persons Lodging was. This
was not a very difficult matter to perform: Bruxells is not a large place, and
it was soon surveyed from one end to the other: At last they met with two of
her Footmen, whom they saluted, and taking notice of their Livery, asked them
who they belonged to? these Lads were strangers to the Lady they served, and
newly taken; and Silvia at her first coming resolved to change her Name, and
was called Madam De -- a Name very considerable in France; which they told the
Pages, and that she lived at such a place: This news Hermione no sooner heard,
but she sends a Gentlemen in the Name of the Prince and herself to complement
her, and tell her she had the Honor to know some great Persons of that name in
France, and did not doubt but she was related to them: She therefore sent to
offer her her Friendship; which possibly in a strange place might not be
unserviceable to her, and that she should be extreme glad to see her at Court,
that is, at Cesario's Palace. The Gentleman who delivered this message, being
surpised at the dazzling Beauty of the fair Stranger, was almost unassur'd in
his Address, and the manner of it surpised Silvia no less, to be invited as a
strange Lady, by one that hated her; she could not tell whether it were real,
or a Plot upon her; however she made answer, and bad him tell Madam, the
Princess, which Title she gave her, that she received her Complement as the
greatest Honor that could arrive to her, and that she would wait upon her
Highness, and let her know from her own Mouth the Sense she had of the
Obligation. The Gentleman returned and delivered his message to Hermione; but
so altered in his Look, so sad and unusual, that she took notice of it, and
asked him how he liked the new Beauty: He blushed and bowed and told her, she
was a Wonder -- This made Hermione's Color rise, it being spoke before
Cesario; for though she were assured of the Hero's Heart, she hated he should
believe there was a greater Beauty in the World, and one universally Adored.
She knew not how so great a Miracle might work upon him, and began to repent
she had invited her to Court.

In the mean time, Silvia, after debating what to do in this Affair, whether to
visit Hermione and discover her self, or to remove from Bruxells, resolved
rather upon the last; but she had fixed her Design as to Don Alonzo, and would
not depart the Town. To her former beginning Flame, for him was added more
Fuel; she had seen him the Day before on the Toure; she had seen him gaze at
her with all the impatience of Love, with madness of Passion in his Eyes, ready
to fling himself out of the Coach every time she past by; and if he appeared
Beautiful before, when in his Riding dress, and harassed for Four Nights
together with Love and want of Sleep. What did he now appear to her Amorous
Eyes and Heart? She had wholly forgot Octavio, Philander, and all, and made a
Sacrifice of both to this new young Lover: She saw him with all the advantages
of Dress, magnificent as Youth and Fortune could invent; and above all, his
Beauty and his Quality warmed her Heart a new; and what advanced her Flame yet
farther, was a Vanity she had of fixing the dear Wanderer, and making him find
there was a Beauty yet in the World, that could put an end to his Inconstancy,
and make him languish at her Feet as long as she pleased. Resolved on this
design, she defers it no longer, but as soon as the Persons of Quality, who
used to walk every Evening in the Park, were got together, she accompanied with
Antonett, and Three or Four strange Pages and Footmen, went into the Park,
Masked, dressed in perfect Glory. She had not walked long there before she saw
Don Alonzo, richer than ever in his Habit, and more Beautiful to her Eyes than
any thing she had ever seen; he was gotten among the Young and Fair, caressing,
laughing, playing, and acting all the little Wantonnesses of Youth. Silvia's
Blood grew disordered at this, and she found she loved by her Jealousy, and
longs more than ever to have the glory of vanquishing tha^ Heart, that so
boasted of never having yet been conquered. She therefore uses all her Art to
get him to look at her; she passed by him often, and as often as she did so he
viewed her with Pleasure; her Shape, her Air, her Mien, had something so
Charming, as without the Assistance of her Face, she gained that Evening a
Thousand Conquests; but those were not the Trophies she aimed at, it was Alonzo
was the marked out Victim, that she destined for the Sacrifice of Love. She
found him so engaged with Women of great Quality, she almost dispair'd to get
to speak to him; her Equipage, who stood at the Entrance of the Park, not being
by her, he did not imagine this fine Lady to be her he saw on the Toure last
Night; yet he looked at her so much as gave occasion to those he was with to
rally him extremely, and tell him he was in Love with what he had not seen, and
who might, notwithstanding all that delicate appearance, be ugly when her Mask
was off. Silvia, however, still past on with abundance of sighing Lovers after
her, some daring to speak, others only languishing; to all she would vouchsafe
no word but made signs, as if she were a stranger and understood 'em not; at
last, Alonzo wholly impatient, breaks from these Ralliers, and gets into the
Crowd that pursued this lovely unknown: her Heart leapt^ when he approached
her, and the first thing she did was to pull off her Glove, and not only show
the fairest Hand that ever Nature made, but that Ring on her Finger Alonzo gave
her when they parted at the Village. The Hand alone was enough to invite all
Eyes with Pleasure to look that way; but Alonzo had a double Motive, he saw the
Hand with Love, and the Ring with Jealousy and Surprise; and as it is natural
in such Cases, the very first Thought that possessed him, was, that the young
Bellumere (for so Silvia had called herself at the Village) was a Lover of this
Lady, and had presented her this Ring. And after his Sighings and little
Pantings, that seized him at this thought, would give him leave, he bowing and
blushing cried, -- Madam, the whole piece must sure be Excellent, when the
Pattern is so very fine. And humbly beging the Favor of a nearer view, he took
her Hand and kissed it with a passionate Eagerness, which possibly did not so
well please Silvia, because she did not think he took her for the same person,
to whom he showed such signs of Love last Night. In taking her Hand he surveyed
the Ring, and cried, -- Madam, would to Heaven I could lay so good a claim to
this fair Hand, as I think I once could to this Ring, which this Hand Adorns
and Honors. How, Sir, replied Silvia, I hope you will not charge me with
Felony? I am afraid I shall, replied he, sighing, for you have attacked me on
the King's Highway and have robbed me of a Heart: I could never have robbed a
Person, said Silvia, who could more easily have parted with that Trifle; the
next fair Object will redeem it, and it will be very little the worse for my
using. Ah, Madam, replied he, sighing, that will be according as you will treat
it; for I find already, you have done it more damage than it ever sustained in
all the Rancounters it has had with Love and Beauty. You complain too soon,
replied Silvia, smiling, and you ought to make a trial of my good Nature before
you reproach me with harming you. I know not, replied Alonzo, sighing, what I
may venture to hope from that; but I am afraid, from your Inclinations, I ought
to hope for nothing, since a Thousand reasonable Iealousies already possess me,
from the sight of that Ring; and I more than doubt I have a powerful Rival, a
Youth of the most divine Form I ever met with of his Sex; if from him you
received it, I guess my Fate. I perceive, Stranger, said Silvia, you begin to
be incons^ant already, and find excuses to complain on your Fate before you
have tried your Fortune. I persuade myself that fine Person you speak of, and
to whom you gave this Ring, has so great a value for you, that to leave you no
Excuse, I assure you, he will not be displeased to find you a Rival, provided
you prove a very constant Lover. I confess, said Alonzo, Constancy is an
imposition I never yet had the Confidence and ill Nature to impose on the Fair;
and indeed I never found that Woman yet, of Youth and Beauty, that ever set so
small a value on her own Charms, to be much in Love with that dull Virtue, or
require it of my Heart; but upon occasion, Madam, if such an unreasonable fair
one be found -- I am extremely sorry (interrupted Silvia) to find you have no
better way of recommending yourself; this will be no great encouragement to a
person of my Humor to receive your Addresses. Madam, I do not tell you that I
am not in my nature wondrous constant, replied he; I tell you only what has
hitherto happened to me, not what will; that I have yet never been so, is no
fault of mine, but power, or truth in those Beauties to whom I have given my
Heart, rather believe they wanted Charms to hold me, than that I (where Wit and
Beauty engaged me) should prove so false to my own Pleasure. I am very much
afraid, Madam, if I find my Eyes as agreeably entertained when I shall have the
Honor to see your Face, as my Ears are with your excellent Wit, I shall be
reduced to that very whining, sighing Coxcomb, you like so well in a Lover, and
be ever dying at your F^et. I have but one^ hope left to preserve myself from
this wretched thing, you Women love; that is, that I shall not find you so all
over Charming, as what I have hitherto found presents it self to be. You have
already created Love enough in me for any reasonable Woman, but I find you are
not to be approached with the common Devotions we pay your Sex; but like your
Beauty, the Passion too must be great; and you are not content unless you see
your Lovers die; this is that fatal proof alone that can satisfy you of their
Passion. And though you laugh to see a Sir Courtly Nice, a Fop in Fashion acted
on the Stage, in your Hearts that foolish thing, that fine neat Pasquel is your
Darling, your fine Gentleman, your Well-bred Person.

Thus sometimes in Jest and sometimes in Earnest, they recommended themselves
to each other, and to so great a degree, that it was impossible for them to be
more Charmed on either side, which lasted till it was time to depart; but he
besought her not to do so till she had informed him where he might wait on her,
and most passionately folicits what she as passionately desired: To tell you
Truth, said she, I cannot permit you that freedom without you ask it of
Bellumere. He replied, Next to waiting on her, he should be the most overjoyed
in the World, to pay his Respects to that young Gentleman. However, to name
him, gave him a Thousand Fears; which when he would have urged, she bid him
trust to the generosity of that Man, who was of Quality, and loved him; she
then told him his Lodgings (which were her own:) Alonzo infinitely over-joyed,
resolved to lose no time, but promised that Evening to visit him: And at their
parting he treated her with so much passionate Respect, that she was vexed to
see it paid to one he yet knew not. However she verily believed her Conquest
was certain: He having seen her three times, and all those times for a several
Person, and yet was still in Love with her: And she doubted not when all three
were joined in one, he would be much more in Love than yet he had been; with
this assurance they parted.

Silvia was no sooner got home but she resolved to receive Alonzo, who she was
assured would come: She hasted to dress herself in a very rich Suit of Man's
Cloths, to receive him as the young French Gentleman. She believed Brilljard
would not come till late as was his use, now being at Play at Hermione's. She
looked extreme pretty when she was dressed, and had all the Charms that Heaven
could adorn a Face and Shape withal: Her Apartment was very magnificent, and
all looked very great. She was no sooner dressed but the young Lover came. Silvia
received him on the Staircase with open Arms, and all the signs of Joy that
could be expressed, and leads him to a rich drawing Room, where she began to
entertain him with that happy Nights adventure, when they both lay together at
the Village, while Alonzo makes imperfect replies; wholly charmed with the look
of the young Cavalier, which so resembled what he had seen the day before in
another Garb on the Toure. He is wholly ravished with his Voice, it being
absolutely the same that had charmed him that Day in the Park; the more he
gazed and listened, the more he was confirmed in his Opinion, that he was the
same, and he had the Music of that dear accent still in his Ears, and could
not be deceived. A Thousand times he is about to kneel before her and ask her
Pardon, but still is checked by Doubt: He sees, he hears, this is the same
lovely Youth who lay in Bed with him at the Village Caberett; and then no
longer thinks her Woman: He hears and sees it is the same Face, and Voice, and
Hands he saw on the Toure, and in the Park, and then believes her Woman: While
he is in these perplexities, Silvia, who with Vanity and Pride perceived his
disorder, taking him in her Arms, cried, Come my Alonzo, that you shall no
longer doubt but I am perfectly your Friend, I will show you a Sister of mine,
whom you will say is a Beauty, or I am too partial, and I will have your
judgment of her. With that he called to Antonett to beg her Lady would permit
him to bring a young Stranger to kiss her Hand. The Maid, instructed, re^res,
and Alonzo stood gazing on Silvia as one confounded and amazed, not knowing yet
how to determine; he now begins to think himself mistaken in the fair Youth,
and is ready to ask his Pardon for a Fault but imagined, suffering by his
silence, the little Pratler to discourse and laugh at him at his pleasure.
Come, said Silvia, smiling, I find the naming a Beauty to you has made you
Melancholy; possibly when you see her she will not appear so to you; we do not
always agree in one Object. Your Judgment, replied Alonzo, is too good to leave
me any hope of Liberty at the sight of a fine Woman; if she be like your self I
read my destiny in your charming Face. Silvia answered only with a Smile -- and
calling again for Antonett, he asked if his Sister were in a condition of being
seen; she told him she was not, but all undrest and in her Night-clothes; Nay,
then, said Silvia, I must use my Authority with her: And leaving Alonzo
trembling with Expectation, she ran to her dressing Room where all things were
ready, and slipping off her Coat put on a rich Nightgown, and instead of her
Peruke fine Night-Clothes, and came forth to the Charmed Alonzo, who was not
able to approach her, she looked with such a Majesty and so much dazzling
Beauty; he knew her to be the same he had seen in the Toure. She (seeing he
only gazed without Life or Motion) approaching him gave him her Hand, and cried
-- Sir, possibly this is a more old acquaintance of yours than my Face. At
which he blushed and bowed, but could not speak: At last Silvia laughing
outright, cried -- Here Antonett bring me again my Peruke, for I find I shall
never be acquainted with Don Alonzo in Peticoats. At this he blushed a Thousand
times more than before, and no longer doubting but this Charmer, and the lovely
Youth were one; he fell at her Feet, and told her he was undone, for she had
made him give her so undisputable Proofs of his Dullness, he could never hope
she should allow him capable of eternally adoring her. Rise, cried Silvia,
smiling, and believe you have not committed so great an Error, as you imagine;
the mistake has been often made, and Persons of a great deal of Wit have been
deceived. You may say what you please, replied Alonzo, to put me in
Countenance; but I shall never forgive my self the Stupidity of that happy
Night, that laid me by the most glorious Beauty of the World, and yet afforded
me no kind Instinct to inform my Soul how much I was blessed: Oh pity a
wretchedness, Divine Maid, that has no other excuse but that of Infatuation; a
thousand times, my greedy ravished Eyes wandered over the dazzling brightness of
yours; a thousand times. I wished that Heaven had made you Woman! and when I
looked, I burnt; but when I Kissed those soft, those lovely Lips, I durst not
trust my Heart; for every touch begot wild Thoughts about it; which yet the
Course of all my Fiery Youth, through all the wild Debauches I had wandered,
had never yet betrayed me to: and going to Bed with all this love and fear
about me, I made a solemn Oath not to approach you, least so much Beauty had
o'er-come my Virtue. But by this new discovery, you have given me a Flame I
have no power nor virtue to oppose: it is just, it is natural to adore you; and
not to do it, were yet a crime greater than my Sin of Dullness: and since you
have made me lose a Charming Friend; it is but just I find a Mistress; give me
but your permission to Love, and I will give you all my life in Services, and
wait the rest: I Will watch and pray for coming happiness; which I will buy at
any price of Life or Fortune. Well, Sir, replied our easy fair One; If you
believe me worth a Conquest over you, convince me you can love; for I Am no
common Beauty to be won with petty sudden Services; and could you lay an
Empire at my Feet, I should despise it where the Heart were wanting. You may
believe the Amorous; Youth left no Argument to convince her in that point
unsaid; and it is most certain they came to so good an understanding, that he
was not seen in Bruxells for eight days and nights after, nor this rare Beauty,
for so long a time, seen on the Toure or any public Place. Brilljard came
every day to visit her, and receive her commands, as he used to do, but was
answered still that Silvia was Ill, and kept her Chamber, not suffering even
her Domestics to approach her: This did not so well satisfy the Jealous Lover,
but he soon imagined the cause, and was very much displeased at the ill
Treatment; if such a design had been carried on, he desired to have the
management of it, and was angry that Silvia had not only deceived him in the
promise he had made for her to Octavio; but had done her own business without
him; he spoke some hard words; so that to undeceive him, she was forced to
oblige Alonzo to appear at Court again; which she had much ado to incline him
to, so absolutely she had Charmed him; however he went, and she suffered
Brilljard to visit her, persuading that easy Lover (as all Lovers are easy)
that it was only indisposition that hindered her of the happiness of seeing
him, and after having perfectly reconciled herself to him, she asked him the
news at Hermone's, to whom, I had forgot to tell you, she sent every day a Page
with a Complement, and to let her know she was Ill, or she would have waited on
her: She every day received the Complement from her again, as an unknown Lady.
Brilljard told her that all things were now prepared, and in a very short time,
they should go for France; but that whatever the matter was, Philander almost
publicly disowned the Prince's Interest, and to some very considerable of the
Party, has given out, he does not like the Proceedings, and that he verily
believed they would find themselves all mistaken; and that instead of a Throne
the Prince would meet a Scaffold; so bold and open he has been. Something of it
has arrived to the Prince's Ear, who was so far from believing it, that he
could hardly be persuaded to speak of it to him; and when he did, it was with
an assurance before hand, that he did not credit such reports. So that he gives
him not the pain to deny them: For my part, I am infinitely afraid he will
disoblige the Prince one day, for last night, when the Prince desired him to
get his Equipage ready, and to make such Provision for you as was necessary; he
coldly told him, he had a mind to go to Hungary, which at that time was
besieged by Solomon the Magnificent, and that he had no inclination of
returning to France. this surpised and angered the Prince; but they parted
good Friends at last, and he has promised him all things: So that I am very
well assured he will send me where he supposes you still are, and how shall we
manage that affair?

Silvia who had more cunning and subtlety, than all the rest of her Sex;
thought it best to see Philander, and part with him on as good terms as she
could, and that it was better he should think he yet had the absolute
possession of her, than that he should return to France with an ill opinion of
her Virtue, as yet he had known no guilt of that kind, nor did he ever more
than fear it, with Octavio; so that it would be easy for her to cajole him yet
a little longer, and when he was gone, she should have the World to range in,
and possess this new Lover, to whom she had promised all things, and received
from him all assurances imaginable of inviolable Love: In order to this then
she consulted with Brilljard; and they resolved she should for a few days leave
Antonett with her Equipage, at that House where she was, and retire herself to
the Village, where Philander had left her, and where he still imagined she was:
She desired Brilljard to give her a days time for this preparation, and it
should be so. He left her, and going to Hermione's, meets Philander, who
immediately gave him order to go to Silvia the next Morning, and let her know
how all things went, and to tell her he would be with her in two days. In the
mean time Silvia sent for Alonzo, who was but that Evening gone from her. He
flies on the Wings of Love, and she tells him, she is obliged to go to a place
six or seven days Journey off, whither he could not conduct her for reasons she
would tell him at her return: whatever he could plead with all the force of
love to the contrary, she gets his consent, with a promise wholly to devote
herself to him at her return, and pleased she sent him from her, when Brilljard
returning, told her the commands he had; and 'twas concluded they should both
depart next Morning, accompanied only by her Page. I am well assured she was
very kind to Brilljard all that Journey, and which was but too visible to the
amorous Youth, who attended them, so absolutely had she depraved her reason
from one degree of Sin and Shame to another; and he was happy above any
imagination, while even her Heart was given to another, and when she could
propose no other interest in this looseness, but security, that Philander
should not know how ill she had treated him. In four days Philander came, and
finding Silvia more ^air than ever was anew pleased; for she pretended to
receive him with all the joy imaginable, and the deceived Lover believed, and
expressed abundance of Grief, at the being obliged to part from her; a great
many Vows and Tears were lost on both sides, and both believed true: But the
Grief of Brilljard was not to be conceived; he could not persuade himself he
could live, when absent from her: Some Bills Philander left her, and was so
plain with her, and open-hearted, he told her that he went indeed with Cesario,
but it was in order to serve the King; that he was weary of their Actions, and
foresaw nothing but ruin would attend 'em; that he never repented him of any
thing so much, as his being drawn into that Faction; in which he found himself
so greatly involved, he could not retire with any credit, but since
Self-Preservation was the first principle to Nature, he had resolved to make
that his aim, and rather prove false to a party who had no Justice and Honor
on their Side, than to a King whom all the Laws of Heaven and Earth obliged him
to serve; however he was so far in the power of these People, that he could not
disingage himself, without utter ruin to himself; but that as soon as he was
got into France, he would abandon their Interest: Let the censuring World say
what it would, who never had right notions of things, or ever made true
Judgments of men's Actions.

He lived five or six days with Silvia there; in which time she failed not to
assure him of her constant Fidelity a thousand ways, especially by Vows that
left no doubt upon his Heart, and it was now that they both indeed found there
was a very great Friendship still remaining at the bottom of their Hearts for
each other, nor did they part without manifest proofs of it. Brilljard took a
sad and melancholy leave of her, and had not the freedom to tell it aloud; but
obliged to depart with his Lord, they left Silvia and posted to Bruxells, where
they found the Prince ready to depart, having left Hermione to her Women more
than half dead. I have heard there never was so sad a parting between Two
Lovers; a Hundred times they swounded with the apprehension of the separation
in each other's Arms, and at last the Prince was forced from her while he left
her dead, and was little better himself: He would have returned, but the
Officers and People about him, who had espoused his Quarrel, would by no means
suffer him: And he has a Thousand times told a person very near him, That he
had rather have forfeited all his hoped for Glory, than have left that Charmer
of his Soul. After he had taken all care imaginable for Hermione, for that name
so dear to him, was scarce ever out of his Mouth, he suffered himself with a
heavy Heart and Pace, to be conducted to the Vessel: And I have heard, he was
hardly seen to smile all that little Voyage, or his whole Life after, or do any
thing but sigh and sometimes weep, which was a very great discouragement to all
that followed him; they were a great while at Sea, tossed to and fro by stress of
Weather, and often driven back to the Shore where they first took Shiping; and
not being able to Land where they first designed, they got ashore in a little
Harbor, where no Ship of any bigness could Anchor; so that with much ado,
getting all their Arms and Men on shore they sunk the Ship, both to secure any
from flying, and that it might not fall into the Hands of the French. Cesario
was no sooner on the French shore, but numbers came to him of the Hugonot
Party, for whom he had Arms, and who wanted them he furnished as far as he
could, and immediately Proclaimed himself King of France and Navarr, while the
dirty Crowd, rang him Peals of Joy. But though the under World came in great
Crowds to his Aid, he wanted still the main supporters of his Cause, the men of
more substantial Quality: If the Ladies could have composed an Army, he would
not have wanted one, for his Beauty had got them all on his side; and he
Charmed the fair wheresoever he rode. --

He marched from Town to Town without any opposition, Proclaiming himself a
King in all the places he came to; still gathering as he marched, till he had
composed a very formidable Army. He made Officers of the Kingdom -- Fergusano
was to have been a Cardinal, and several Lords and Dukes were nominated; and he
found no opposition in all his prosperous Course -- in the mean time the Royal
Army was not Idle, which was composed of Men very well Disciplined, and
conducted by several Princes, and Men of great Quality and Conduct. But as it
is not the Business of this little History to treat of War, but altogether
Love; leaving those rougher Relations to the Chronicles and Historiographers of
those Times, I will only hint on such things in this Enterprise as are most
proper for my purpose, and tell you that Cesario omitted nothing for the
carrying on his great Design; he dispersed his Scandals all over France, though
they met with an obstruction at Paris, and were immediately suppressed, it
being proclaimed Death for any person to keep one in their Houses; and if any
should by chance come to their Hands, they were on this Penalty, to carry them
to the Secretary of State; and after the Punishment had past on Two or Three
Offenders, it deterred the rest from meddling with those edge Tools: I must tell
you also, that the title of King, which Cesario had taken so early upon him,
was much against his Inclinations; and he desired to see himself at the Head of
a more satisfiable Army, before he would take on him a Title he found (in the
condition he was in) he should not defend; but those about him insinuated into
him, that it was the Title that would not only make him more Venerable, but
would make his Cause appear more just and awful; and beget him a perfect
Adoration with those People who lived remote from Courts, and had never seen
that glorious thing called a King. So that believing it would give Nerves to
the Cause, he unhappily took upon him that which ruined him; for he had often
sworn to the greatest part of those of any Quality of his interest, That his
design was Liberty only, and that his end was the public good, so infinitely
above his own private interest, that he desired only the Honor of being the
Champion for the oppressed Parisians and People of France; that if they would
allow him to lead their Armies, to fight and spend his dearest Blood for them,
'twas all the Glory he aimed at: 'T was this pretended Humility in a person of
his high rank that first cajoled the Mobile, who look on him as their God,
their Deliverer, and all that was sacred and dear to them; but the wiser sort
regarded him only as one that had most power and pretension to turn the whole
Affairs of France, which they disliking were willing at any Price, to reduce to
their own conditions and to what they desired; not imagining he would have laid
a claim to the Crown, which many of them fancied themselves as capable of as
himself, rather that he would perhaps have set up the King of Navarr. This
Cesario knew; and understanding their Sentiments, was unwilling to hinder their
joining with him, by such a Declaration which he knew would be a means to turn
abundance of Hearts against him, as indeed it fell out; and he found himself
Master of some few Towns, only with an Army of Fifteen or Sixteen thousand
Peasants, ill Armed, unused to War, Watchings, and very ill Logding in the
Field, very badly Victuall'd, and worse Paid. For, from Paris no Aids of any
Kind could be brought him; the Roads all along being so well guarded and
secured by the Royal Forces, and wanting some great Persons to espouse his
Quarrel, made him not only despair of Success, but highly resent it of those
who had given him so large promises of Aid. Many, as I said, and most were
disgusted with his Title of King; but some waited the success of his first
Battle, which was every day expected, though Cesario kept himself as clear of the
Royal Army as he could a long time, marching away as soon as they drew near,
hoping by these means, not only to tire them out, but watch an advantage when
to engage, but gather still more Numbers. So that the greatest mischief he did
was teazing the Royal Army, who could never tell were to have him, so dexterous
he was in marching off. They often came so near, as to have Skirmishes with one
another by small Parties, where some few Men would fall on both sides: And to
say truth, Cesario in this Expedition showed much more of a Soldier than the
Politician: His Skill was great, his Conduct good, expert in Advantages, and
indfatigable in Toils. And I have heard it from the Mouth of a Gentleman, who
in all that undertaking never was from him; that in Seven or Eight Weeks that
he was in Arms he never absolutely undrest himself, and hardly slept an Hour in
the Four and twenty; and that sometimes was on his Horse's- back, in a Chariot,
or on the ground, suffering even with the meanest of his Soldiers all the
fatigues of the Enterprise: This Gentleman told me he would in those Hours, he
should sleep, and wherein he was not taking Measures and Councils (which were
always held in the Night) that he would be eternally speaking to him of
Hermione; and that with the softest concern 'twas possible for Love and
tenderest Passion to express. That he being the only Friend he could repose so
great a weakness in, and who soothed him to the degree he wished, the Prince
was so well pleased with him, as to establish him a Colonel of Horse, for no
other merit than that of having once served Hermione, and now would flatter his
disease agreeably: And though he did so, he protested he was ashamed to hear how
Poor this fond concern rendered this great Man, and he has often pitied what
should have been else admired; but who can tell the force of Love, backed by
Charms supernatural? and who is it that will not sigh at the Fate of so
Illustrious a Young Man, whom Love had rendered the most miserable of all those
numbers he led?

But now the Royal Army, as if they had purposly suffered him to take his Toore
about the Country, to Ensnare him with the more Facility; had at last, by new
Forces that came to their assistance daily, so incompas'd him, that it was
impossible for him to avoid any longer giving them Battle; however he had the
benefit of Posting himself the most advantageously, that he could wish; he had
the rising Grounds to place his Cannon, and all things concurred to give him
success. His Numbers exceeding those of the Royal Army; not but he would have
avoided a set Battle, if it had been possible, till he had made himself Master
of some places of stronger hold; for yet as I said, he had only subdued some
inconsiderable places, which were not able to make defense; and which as soon
as he was marched out, surrendered again to their lawful Prince; and pulling
down his Proclamation, put up those of the King: but he was on all sides so
embaras'd, he could not come even to parley with any Town of Note; so that as I
said, at last, being as it were blocked up, though the Royal Army did not offer
him Battle: Three Nights they lay thus in view of each other; the first night,
the Prince sent out his Scouts, who brought in intelligence, that the Enemy was
not so well prepared for Battle, as they feared they might be if they imagined
the Prince would engage 'em, but he had so often given them the slip, that they
believed he had no mind to put the Fortune of the Day to the push: And they
were glad of these delays, that new forces might advance; when the Scouts
returned with this news, the Prince was impatient to fall upon the Enemy; but
Fergusano, who was continually taking Council of his Charms, and looking into
his black Book of Fate, for every sally and step they made, persuaded his
Highness to have yet a little patience; positively assuring him his Fortune
depended on a Critical Minute, which was not yet come; and that if he offered
to give Battle before the Change of the Moon, he was inevitably lost, and that
the attendance of that fortunate moment would be the beginning of those of his
whole Life: with such like positive persuasions, he gained upon the Prince, and
overcame his impatience of engageing for that Night, all which he past in
Council without being persuaded to take any rest, often blaming the Nicety of
their Art and his Stars; and often asking if they lost that opportunity that
Fortune had now given 'em, whether all their Art, or Stars, or Devils, could
retrieve it? and nothing would that Night appease him, or dispossessed the
Sorcerers of this opinion.

The next day they received certain intelligence, that a considerable supply
would reinforce the Royal Army, under the Conduct of a Prince of the Blood;
which were every moment expected: This news made the Prince rave, and he broke
out into all the rage imaginable against the Wizards, who defended themselves
with all the reasons of their Art; but it was all in vain, and he vowed he
would that Night engage the Enemy; if he could find but one faithful Friend to
second him; tho he dyed in the attempt; that he was worn out with the Toils he
had undergone; haras'd almost to death, and would wait no longer the approach
of his lazy Fate, but boldly advancing, meet it what Face so 'ere it bore. They
besought him on their Knees, he would not overthrow the Glorious Design so long
in bringing to perfection, just in the very Minute of happy projection; but to
wait those certain Fates, that would bring him Glory and Honor on their Wings,
and who if slighted, would abandon him to destruction; it was but some few
Hours more, and then they were his own, to be commanded by him: 'twas thus they
drilled and delayed him on till Night; when again he sent out his Scouts to
discover the Posture of the Enemy; and himself in the mean time went to
Council. Philander failed not to be sent for thither, who sometimes feigned
Excuses to keep away, and when he did come, he fate unconcerned, neither giving
or receiving any advice. This was taken notice of by all, but Cesario, who
looked upon it as his being overwatch'd, and fatigued with the Toils of the
day: his Sullenness did not pass so in the opinion of the rest; they saw, or at
least thought they saw some other marks of discontent in his fine Eyes, which
Love so much better became. One of the Princes Offices and Captain of his
Guard, who was an old Hereditary Rogue, and whose Father had suffered in a
Rebellion before; a Fellow rough and daring, comes boldly to the Prince when
the Council rose, and asked him if he were resolved to Engage? He told him he
was. Then, said he, give me leave to shoot Philander in the Head: This blunt
proposition given without any manner of reason or Circumstance, made the Prince
start back a step or two, and ask him his meaning of what he said. Sir, replied
the Captain, if you will be safe, Philander must Die; for however it appear to
your Highness, to all the Camp he shows the Traitor, and it is more than doubted
he, and the King of France understand one another but too well: Therefore if
you would be Victor, let him be dispatched, and I my self will undertake it:
Hold, said the Prince, if I could believe what you say to be true, I should not
take so base a revenge; I would Fight like a Soldier, and he should be treated
like a man of Honor: Sir, said Vaneur, for that was the Captains name; do not
in the Circumstances we now are in talk of treating (with those that would'
betray us) like men of Honor; we cannot stand upon decency in killing, who
have so many to dispatch; we came not into France to fight Duels, and stand on
nice Punctillios: I say, we must make quick work, and I have a good Pistol
charged with two handsome Bullets, that shall as soon as he appears amongst us
on Horseback, do his business as gentilely as can be, and rid you of one of
the most powerful of your Enemies. To this, the Prince would by no means agree;
not believing one syllable of the Accusation. Vaneur swore then, that he would
not draw a Sword for his Service, while Philander was suffered to live; and he
was as good as his word: He said in going out, that he would obey the Prince,
but he begged his pardon, if he did not lift a Hand on his side; and in an Hour
after sent him his Commission, and waited on him, and was with him almost till
the last, in all the danger, but would not Fight, having made a solemn Vow.
Several others were of Vaneur's opinion, but the Prince believed nothing of it,
Philander being indeed, as he said, weary of the design and party, and regarded
them as his Ruiners, who with fair pretenses, drew him into a bad Cause; which
his Youth had not then considered, and from which he could not untangle himself.

By this time the Scout was come back, who informed the Prince that now was the
best time in the World to Attack the Enemy, who all lay supinely in their Tents
and did not expect a Surprise; that the very outguards were slender, and that
it would not be hard to put 'em to a great deal of Confusion. The Prince who
was enough impatient before, now was all Fire and Spirit, and 'twas not in the
Power of Magic to withhold him; but hasting immediately to Horse, with as much
speed as possible, he got at the Head of his Men; and marching on directy to
the Enemy put them into so great a surprise, that it may be admired how they
got themselves into a condition of defense; and to make short of a business
that was not long in acting, I may avow nothing but the immediate hand of the
Almighty (who favors the juster side, and is always ready for the support of
those who approach so near their own Divinity, sacred and anointed Heads) could
have turned the Fortune of the Battle to the Royal side; it was prodigious to
consider the unequal numbers, and the advantage all on the Princes part; it was
miraculous to behold the order on his side, and surprise on the other, which of
it self had been sufficient to have confounded them; yet notwithstanding all
this unpreparedness on this side, and the watchfuluess and care on the other;
so well the General and Officers of the Royal Army managed their scanted Time;
so bravely disciplined, and experienced the Soldiers were, so resolute and
brave, and all so well mounted and armed, that as I said to a Miracle they
fought; and 'twas a Miracle they won the Field: tho that fatal Night, Cesario
did in his own Person wonders, and when his Horse was killed under him, he took
a Partizan and as a common Soldier, at the head of his Foot acted the Hero,
with as much courage and bravery, as ever Caesar himself could Boast. Yet all
this availed him nothing, he saw himself abandoned on all sides, and then under
the Covert of the Night, he retired from the Battle, with his Sword in his
hand, with only one Page, who fought by his side: A thousand times he was about
to fall on his own Sword, and like Brutus have finished a life he could no
longer sustain with Glory: But Love, that coward of the Mind, and the Image of
Divine Hermione, as he esteemed her, still gave him Love to life; and while he
could remember she yet lived to charm him, he could even look with contempt on
the loss of all his Glory; at which if the repined, it was for her sake, who
expected to behold him return covered over with Laurels; in these sad thoughts
he wandered as long as his wearied Legs would bear him into a low Forest, far
from the Camp; where over-prest with Toil, all over pain, and a Royal Heart
even breaking with Anxiety, he laid him down under the shelter of a Tree, and
found but his length of Earth left to support him now, who not many hours
before beheld himself the greatest Monarch as he imagined in the World. Oh who,
that had seen him thus; which of his most mortal Enemies, that had viewed the
Royal Youth, adorned with all the Charms of Beauty, Heaven ever distributed to
Man; Born great, and but now adored by all the crowding World with Hat and
Knee; now abandon by all, but one kind trembling Boy weeping by his side, while
the Illustrious Hero lay Gazing with melancholy weeping Eyes, at those Stars
that had lately been so cruel to him: Sighing out his great Soul to the Winds
that whistled round his uncovered head; breathing his Griefs as silently as the
sad fatal Night past away. Where nothing in nature seemed to pity him, but the
poor wretched Youth that kneeled by him, and the sighing Air: I say, who that
beheld this, would not have scorned the World, and all its fickle Worshipers?
have cursed the Flatteries of vain Ambition, and prized a Cottage far above a
Throne? a Garland wreathed by some fair innocent hand, before the restless
Glories of a Crown?

Some Authors in the Relation of this Battle affirm, That Philander quitted his
Post as soon as the Charge was given, and sheer'd off from that Wing he
commanded; but all Historians agree in this Point, that if he did, it was not
for want of Courage; for in a Thousand Incounters he has given sufficient
proofs of as much Bravery as a Man can be capable of: But he disliked the
Cause, disapproved of all their Preten^ions, and looked upon the whole Affair
and Proceeding to be most unjust and ungenerous: And all the fault his greatest
Enemies could charge him with, was, That he did not deal so gratefully with a
Prince that loved him and trusted him; and that he ought frankly to have told
him, he would not serve him in this Design; and that it had been more Gallant
to have quited him that way, than this; but there are so many Reasons to be
given for this more Politic and safe Deceit, than are needful in this place,
and it is most certain as it is the most justifiable to Heaven and Man, to one
born a Subject of France, and having Sworn Allegiance to his proper King, to
abandon any other Interest; so let the Enemies of this great Man say what they
please, if a Man be obliged to be false to this or that Interest, I think no
body of common Honesty, Sense and Honor, will dispute which he ought to
abandon; and this is most certain, that he did not forsake him because Fortune
did so, as this one Instance may make appear. When Cesario was first Proclaimed
King, and had all the Reason in the World to believe that Fortune would have
been wholly partial to him, he offered Philander his choice of any Principality
and Government in France, and to have made him of the Order of Sanct, Espreet;
all which he refused, though he knew his great Fortune was lost and already
distributed to Favorites at Court, and himself Proscribed and Convicted as a
Traitor to France. Yet all these refusals did not open the Eyes of this
credulous great young Man, who still believed it the sullenness and Generosity
of his Temper. No sooner did the day discover to the World the horrid Business
of the preceding Night, but a diligent search was made among the infinite
number of dead, that covered the Face of the Earth, for the Body of the Prince,
or New King, as they called him: But when they could not find him among the
dead, they sent out Parties all ways to search the Woods, the Forests, and the
Plains; nor was it long they sought in vain, for he who had laid himself, as I
said, under the shelter of a Tree, had not for any consideration removed him;
but finding himself seized by a common Hand, suffered himself, without
Resistance, to be detained by one single Man till more advanced, when he could
as easily have killed the Rustic as speak or move; an Action so below the
Character of this truly brave Man, that there is no reason to be given to
excuse this easy submission but this, That he was Stupefied with long
Watching, Grief, and the Fatigues of his daily Toil for so many Weeks before:
For it is not to be imagined it was carelessness, or little regard for Life; for
if it had been so he would doubtless have lost it Nobly with the Victory, and
never have retreated while there had been one Sword left advanced against him;
or if he had disdained the Enemy should have had the Advantage and Glory of so
great a Conquest, at least when his Sword had been yet left him, he should have
died like a Roman, and have scorned to have added to the Triumph of the Enemy.
But Love had unmanned his great Soul, and Hermione pleaded within for Life at
any Price, even that of all his Glory; the thought of her alone blackened this
last Scene of his Life, and for which all his past Triumphs could never atone
nor excuse.

Thus taken, he suffered himself to be led away tamely by common Hands without
resistance: A Victim now even fallen to the pity of the Mobile as he past, and
so little imagined by the better Sort who saw him not, they would not give a
credit to it, every one affirming and laying Wagers he would die like a Hero,
and never surrender with Life to the Conqueror. But his submission was but two
true for the repose of all his Abettors; nor was his mean surrender all, but he
showed a dejection all the way they were bringing him to Paris, so extremely
unworthy of his Character, that it is hardly to be credited so great a a change
could have been possible. And to show that he had lost all his Spirit and
Courage with the Victory, and that the great strings of his Heart were broke,
the Captain who had the charge of him, and commanded that little Squadron that
conducted him to Paris, related to me this remarkable Passage in their Journey;
he said, That they Lodged in an Inn, where he believed both the Master, and a
great many Strangers who that Night Lodged there, were Hugonots, and great
lovers of the Prince; which the Captain did not know, till after the Lodgings
were taken: However he ordered a File of Musketeers to guard the Door; and
himself only remained in the Chamber with the Prince, while Supper was getting
ready: The Captain being extremely weary with Watching and Toyling, for a long
time together, laid himself down on a Bench behind a great long Table, that was
fast'ned to the Floor, and had unadvisedly laid his Pistols on the Table, and
tho he du^st not Sleep, he thought there to stretch himself into a little ease;
who had not quited his Horseback in a great while: The Prince who was walking
with his Arms across about the Room, musing in a very dejected posture; often
casting his Eyes to the door; at last advances to the Table, and takes up the
Captains Pistols; the while He -- who saw him advance, feared in that moment,
what the Prince was going to do; he thought, if he should rise and snatch at
the Pistols, and miss of 'em, it would express so great a distrust of the
Prince, it might provoke him to do, what by his generous submitting of 'em,
might make him escape; and therefore since it was too late, he suffered the
Prince to arm himself with two Pistols; who before was disarmed of even his
little Penknife. He was, he said, a thousand times about to call out to the
Guards; but then he thought before they could enter to his relief, he was sure
to be shot Dead, and it was possible the Prince might make his party good with
four or five common Soldiers, who perhaps loved the Prince as well as any, and
might rather assist than hinder his flight; all this he thought in an instant,
and at the same time seeing the Prince stand still, in a kind of consideration
what to do, looking, turning, and viewing of the Pistols, he doubted not but
his thought would determine with his Life; and tho he had been in the heat of
all the Battle, and had looked Death in the Face, when he appeared most horrid,
he protested he knew not how to fear till this moment, and that now he trembled
with the apprehension of unavoidable Ruin, he cursed a thousand times his
unadvisedness, now it was too late; he saw the Prince after he had viewed, and
reviewed the Pistols walk in a great thoughtfulness again about the Chamber,
and at last, as if he had determined what to do, came back and laid them again
on the Table; at which the Captain snatched 'em up, resolving never to commit
so great an oversight more. He did not doubt, he said, but the Prince in
taking them up, had some design of making his escape; and most cer^ainly if he
had but had Courage to have attempted it, it had not been hard to have been
accomplished: At worst he could but have died; but there is a Fate that
overrules the most lucky minutes of the greatest men in the World, and turns
even all advantages offered to misfortunes, when it designs their ruin.

While they were on their way to Paris, he gave some more signs, that the
misfortune he had suffered, had lessened his Heart and Courage: He writ several
the most submissive Letters in the World, to the King, and to the Queen Mother
of France; wherein he strove to mitigate his Treason, with the poorest
Arguments imaginable; and, as if his good Sense had declined with his Fortune,
his Style was altered and debased to that of a common Man, or rather a
Schoolboy, filled with Tautologies and Stuff of no Coherence; in which he
neither showed the Majesty of a Prince, nor Sense of a Gentleman; as I could
make appear by exposing those Copies, which I leave to History; all which must
be imputed to the disorder his Head and Heart were in, for want of that natural
rest he never after found. When he came to Paris, he fell at the Feet of his
Majesty, to whom they brought him; and with a Shower of Tears bedewing his
Shoes, as he lay prostrate, besought his Pardon, and asked his Life; perhaps
one of his greatest weaknesses to imagine, he could hope for mercy after so
many Pardons for the same fault; and which if he had had but one grain of that
Bravery left him, he was wont to be Master of, he could not have expected; nor
have had the confidence to have implored; and he was a poor Spectacle of pity
to all that once adored him; to see how he petitioned in vain for Life; which
if it had been granted, had been of no other use to him, but to have past in
some corner of the Earth with Hermione, dispis'd by all the rest: and tho he
fetched Tears of Pity from the Eyes of the best and, most merciful of Kings, he
could not gain on his first resolution; which was never to forgive him that
Scurillous Declaration he had dispersed at his first Landing in France; that he
took upon him the Title of King, he could forgive; that he had been the cause
of so much Bloodshed, he could forgive, but never that unworthy Scandal on his
unspoted Fame; of which he was much more nice, than of his Crown or Life; and
left him (as he told him this) prostrate on the Earth, when the Guards took him
up and conveyed him to the Bastile: As he came out of the Loure, it is said he
looked with his wonted Grace, only a Languishment sat there in greater Beauty,
than possible all his gayer looks ever put on, at least in his Circumstances;
all that beheld him imagined so; all the Parisians were crowded in vast numbers
to see him: And^ oh, see what Fortune is, those that had vowed him Allegiance
in their Hearts, and were upon all occasions ready to rise in Mutiny for his
least Interest, now saw him, and suffered him to be carried to the Bastile with
a small Company of Guards, and never offered to rescue the Royal Unfortunate
from the Hands of Justice, while he viewed 'em all around with scorning dying
Eyes.

While he remained in the Bastile, he was visited by several of the Ministers
of State, and Cardinals, and Men of the Church, who urged him to some
Discoveries, but could not prevail with him: He spoke, he thought, he dreamt of
nothing but Hermione; and when they talked of Heaven, he ran on some Discourse
of that Beauty, something of her Praise; and so continued to his last Moment,
even on the Scaffold, where he was urged to excuse, as a good Christian ought,
his Invasion, his Bloodshed and his unnatural War; he set himself to justify
his Passion to Hermione, endeavoring to render the Life he had lead with her,
Innocent and Blameless in the sight of Heaven; and all the Churchmen could
persuade, could make him speak of very little else. Just before he laid himself
down on the Block he called to one of the Gentlemen of his Chamber, and taking
out the Enchanted Tooth-pick-case, he whispered him in the Ear, and commanded
him to bear it from him to Hermione; and laying himself down suffered the
Justice of the Law, and died more pitied than lamented; so that it became a
Proverb, If I have an Enemy I wish he may live like -- and die like Cesario: So
ended the Race of this glorious Youth, who was in his time the greatest Man of
a Subject in the World, and the greatest Favorite of his Prince, happy indeed
above a Monarch, if Ambition and the Inspiration of Knaves and Fools had not
led him to Destruction, and from a Glorious Life brought him to a Shameful
Death.

This deplorable News was not long in coming to Hermione, who must receive this
due, That when she heard her Hero was dead, (and with him all her dearer
greatness gone,) she betook her self to her Bed, and made a Vow she would never
rise nor eat more; and she was as good as her word, she lay in that melancholy
Estate about Ten Days, making the most pitious Moan for her dead Lover that
ever was heard, drowning her Pillow in Tears, and sighing out her Soul. She
called on him in vain as long as she could speak, at last she fell into a
Lethargy and dreamed of him, till she could dream no more; an everlasting sleep
closed her fair Eyes, and the last word she sighed was Cesario.

Brillijard had the good Fortune the Night of the Battle to get away under the
covert of the Night, and posted into Flanders, where he found Silvia in the
Arms of the young Spaniard, and of whom they made so considerable Advantages,
that in a short time they ruined the Fortune of that young Nobleman, and became
the Talk of the Town, insomuch that the Governor not permitting her stay
there, she was forced to remove for new Prey, and daily makes considerable
Conquests where ever she shows the Charmer. Fergusano escaped, which was to the
last Moment of the Princes Life the greatest Affliction of his Mind; and he
would often say in great Rage, That if that Villain had been brought to Paris,
and that he could have had the satisfaction of seeing him broken on a Wheel
before he had died, he should have resigned his Life with Joy. But his time was
not yet come.

Philander lay sometime in the Bastile, visited by all the Persons of great
Quality about the Court; he behaved himself very Gallantly all the way he came,
after his being taken, and to the last Minute of his Imprisonment; and was at
last pardoned, kissed the King's Hand, and came to Court in as much Splendour as
ever, being very well understood by all good Men.

FINIS.

