Apud Edinburgum. Vicesimo primo die Aprilis 1691 post Meridiem.
THE whilk day the Commission appointed by the late General Assembly of this
Church, having considered. Report from a Committee of their own number whom the
said Commission had appointed to Revi^^ two Manuscripts, written by the late
Reverend Mr. Thomas Bell Minister of the Gospel, and Professor of Philology in
the College (...) Edinburgh, and given in to them by his Relick; the one where
(...), Grapes in the Wilderness, the other, Nehemiah the (...), or The
Character of a good Commissioner; whereby the (...) ^ommittee declared that
they having perused the said Pieces, (...) them to be solid and edifying
Discourses; and that (...) Printing there would be very useful and profitable.
And the said Commission being well and ripely advised with the said Report,
They do hereby recommend to the Relick of the said Mr. Thomas Bell to get the
said two Pieces printed and published with all convenient diligence. Extractum,
etc.

NEHEMIAH THE Tirshatha: OR, THE CHARACTER OF A Good Commissioner. To which is
Added GRAPES IN THE Wilderness.

By Mr. THOMAS BELL, Minister of the Gospel, and Professor of Philology in the
College of Edinburgh.

EDINBURGH, Printed by George Mosman, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Parliament Clo^ss. Anno 1692.

UNTO THE Most Noble and Illustrious PRINCESS THE Duchess of Hamiltoun.
May it please your Grace,
I Have adventured, though not without blushing and some fear, because of the
vastdistance, to dedicate and commit the Tutelage of these two little Orphan
treatises of my deceast Husband Mr Thomas Bell, Grapes in the Wilderness, and
The Character of a Commissioner, in the person of Nonesuch Nehemiah, to your
Grace the every way most fit and proper Person, under the benign in fluence of
whose encouraging countenance, he did for a considerable time preach the Gospel
at Hamiltoun: And indeed if any other in the World could possibly rival it with
your Grace in my esteem, yet could I not without the highest both Injustice and
Ingratitude Dedicate them otherwise, it having been to my certain knowledge
his firm resolution, if ever they saw the light, that they should be dedicated
thus, whose will i^ (...) such things was always, and is still to me as an
inviolably obliging Law. I am very confident your Grace will read them in Print
after his death, with the same edifying complacency and delight that you had
wont to hear him discourse by vive voice, in the Noble Family, and in the
solemn Assembly, for really they resemble their Father to the very life: That
I have therefore sent them abroad into the wide World, under the Patronage and
Protection of your Graces Noble and Renowned Name, (which will sufficiently
secure I am against all the Censures and Cavills of the most malevolent Carpers
of this ill natured Age) will not be construed impardonable presumption, is the
humble hope of,

Most Noble Princess, Your Graces most humble, most obliged, and most devoted
Servant, L. R.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE Discoveries that the Majesty of GOD, has made of himself, in these latter
days, are so transcendent and eminently beyond what was informer Ages, that it
may truly be said, that the Men of this Generation, shall be signally indebted,
either to the Grace and Mercy, or Justice of God. For informer Ages, thought
was comparatively dark, and the Sun but rising in our Horizon: But in this Age,
the light of the Moon (compared with former Generations) is like the light of
the Sun, and the light of the Sun sevenfold, as the light of seven days. But
alas! our not walking in the light may justly provoke the Lord to cause our Sun
go down at noon. Beza complained in his time that there was multum Scientiae
much Knowledge, but parum Conscientiae little Conscience; and how much more is
there ground for this Complaint now? For since the Primitive and Apostolic
Age, greater light has not broken forth, and more Stars of the first and
greatest magnitude, have not more clearly shined in any age: But oh! how little
walking is there suitable to such great light? How many eminent Christians were
there in former ages, who had not so much all their days of the riches of free
Grace discovered, and of the mysteries of the Gospel unfolded, as some in this
Generation have had in a very little time, who have far surpassed us in this
Generation for eminency in Faith, Love, Holy Zeal, Prayer, and Wrestling with
God, Patience, Meckness, diligence in duty, and a Gospel adorning conversation?
And the generality have shut their eyes and will not behold the Glory of God,
manifested in the (...) of Jesus Christ, in this Gospel: For which cause, the
holy and jealous God in great anger and holy indignation, has removed many and
eminent Candlesticks out of their place and taken away many shining and burning
lights: not in their old age, and gray Hairs, but even in the flower of their
age, and in the prime and flowrishing of their Graces and Gifts. One of which
was the Reverend (now Triumphant and Glorified) Author of these following
Treatises. who was eminent for Piety and Learning, as his Writtings do
manifest. His Roman Antiquities, which he published before his death, cannot
but command his Learning to all knowing persons, and his Piety was so eminent
to all that knew him, that he needs none of our Commendation: And these his
Works (which are a specimen of his great Knowledge, Eloquence, piety and solid
Judgment) will praise him in the gate, where he draws a Vive Picture and
Pattern for all, but especially for Rulers and Magistrates to look on, and walk
after, Which I am hopeful will be very acceptable to all the Judicious and
Godly. He I say was taken away in the flower of his Age and flowrishing of his
Gifts: God not accounting the World worthy of him. And having left amongst his
Papers these two Treatises (one of which was for me established by a private
Person, but without the knowledge and advice of the Authors Friends) some of
his Friends, lovers of the public Good, judged it expedient to review and
correct these Treatises that they might be published for the good and
edification of the Church, that he by them (though dead) might speak. Which we
hope shall through Gods blessing, be very edifying, for over throwing of
Atheism, discovering of the Souls happiness in Union and Communion with God,
directing great Persons in their duty, and holding forth the excellency of the
Scripture, and pointing out to these who are walking in this Wilderness the way
to the Heavenly Canaan, with many other edifying purposes; which that the Great
God may bless, is the earnest Prayer of.

Thy Servant in the Work of the Gospel. M. C.

NEHEMIAH THE Tirshatha: OR, THE CHARACTER OF A Good Commissioner.
THE Scripture casts such a light of Divinity every way, its Purpose being
the Mind of God, its Writting the Writting of God; as whole the Oracles of God,
and every part of it he faithful Sayings of God, that it is hid to none ^ut
those that perish, whose eyes the God of this World has blinded: So absurd a
thing is Atheism, that even those who serve the Devil cannot want their God. At
the Birth of Jesus there appeared a Star in the East, which guided the Wisemen
(by their Presents seeming to have been Greatmen) to the place where the was:
But the Scripture, like the Sun, is the great Light that rules the day of the
Gospel, circling the World as long as the Sun, and continuing while the Moon
endures. Rom: 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God:
But I say, have they not heard? yes verily, their sound went out into all the
Earth, and their words unto the Worlds end. In the Creation the firstborn
Light of the first day, lasting but three days concentred and ceased in the
enduring Luminaries the product of the fourth day: So in the Regeneration, the
light of Christ's personal Preaching, lasting just as many Prophetical days,
Dan. 9 27. has given place to the Scripture Light that endures for ever, and
the sure word rf Prophecy, to which we do well to take heed, as to a Light that
shines in a dark place. This is the Light that makes all things manifest,
even the thoughts and intents of the Heart, that discovers all things to Men
and a Man to himself, both what he is, and what he ought to be: And what manner
of persons ought we to be? 2 Pet 23, ^1 Truly this Light is sweet and
intertaineth u^ with variety of delightful Objects: Amongst which of late,
happening to be detained with these last words of Nehemiah, and seeing them
like a well done Portrait, in all stances looking toward me with an eye of
Instruction, walking and returning, and still more desireously beholding,
hardly could I be satisfied with a sixth View.

Remember me O my God for good. Nehem. 13. last.

THESE words at the very first view do clearly hold forth, That There is a God.
And that both by an express Testimony of his blessed Name, that heard in all
the Scripture, and seen in all his Works: ^e Man of Wisdom shall see thy Name.
Mic. 6. 9. And force of Reason, from the inclination and moti^^ of the Soul,
which finding nothing but emptiness home, goes forth in quest of Happiness,
and but ^arpening its desires with all that is imperfect, is ^^tisfied only
with a perfect Good: And that is ^od. So unhappy by necessity is every one that
is ungodly. The Pythagorean and Hermetick Method of ^ence is the best
Instructor of this Truth, which every Man may read off his own Soul. Be still
and know at I am God. How shall I know that? By my own desires and
Expectations, which can take up with other thing. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? and Earth what desire I beside thee? And now Lord what ^^t I for? my hope
is in thee. If a raving Stoic, or petulant Dialogist, shall say that these
Soul-ardors ^e but the intemperat extravagant heats of a working Fancy quickened
by the touch of a Platonic I^a, rather to be starved to extinction than
indul^^d to satisfaction: It is Answered seriously, That ^^icile est hominem
exuere. Or can any of them by an ^ey of Fancy quiet an earning Stomach, or cure
a ^erish Body, let be (without quenching the Spirit, ^d starving the Soul)
still otherwise than by Satisfaction, and enjoyment of the desired Object,
these Soul-longings and Desires, which are ever strongest ^^d most eager in the
greatest serenity? With my Soul ^^ve I desired thee in the night: by night upon
my Bed, ^ought him whom my Soul loved: And the Lord is in ^e still voice: To
make good the Argument, let it be added, That the Sagest, Holiest, Noblest So^
are always the hottest in this pursuit, such as P^^ Isay, Nehemiah, David. Now
after what is the King of Israel come out? after what does he pursue? after a
Flea? after a Fancy? or should a wife Man ^^ter vain knowledge, and like Simon
Patricks Pilgrim fill his Belly with the East Wind? Now shall a^ Man be so
unmerciful to conclude all the Wor^^ unavoidably miserable, that they may be
Atheist or shall they be so unwise, thus to be abused, to t^^ hazarding even of
a possibility of Happiness? F^^ if there be Happiness, there is a God; and if
the^ be no God, there can be no Happiness. And w^ then are all Men made in
vain? If there be no Men for what do we Hunger? if no Drink, what do (...)
Thirst for? if no Glory, says Cicero) for what (...) all Men labor? if no
Rest way weary we our selves in vain? if no God, no Happiness, what is this o^^
Souls do so importunately pursue, with a serio^^ loathing of all that is seen?
or what has waken^ in them those desires that can never be stilled till the
get what they seek. And what say these Soul-longings, Thirstings, Pantings,
Breathings, but that (...) thou be an Atheist, thou must put out the Soul,
a^ put off the Man?

How seasonable may this Reflection be in a Wo^^^ where Atheism is acted in so
various Guises: by some with a Fools Heart in a Fools Coat, saying in (...)
Heart, There is no God; by others in a Philosopher Garment; for in the
judgment of God, The Wor^^ by wisdom knew not God; by some in the dress of
Hypocrite, In words professing to know God, but ^^ works denying him; By others
in the person of Amhitryo thinking that God is altogether such a one ^s
himself: By some in Epicurus his person, complementing God with the Kingdom of
Heaven, and offering to relieve him of the abaseing pensive and expensive
charge of these his Low Countries, saying, He will neither do Good nor Evil;
But he is a God that judges in the Earth: By others in the Robs of Pharaoh the
Egyptian Tyrant, braving and defying God; Who is the Lord that I should obey
him, or harken to his voice? By some in the Pontificalls of Antichrist With a
Mouth speaking great things against the most High, boasting himself that he is
God, exalting himself above all that is called God, or is Worshipped: By others
in the Equipage of a Soldier fighting against God with Wit and Power, Pen and
Sword. But let such as Make War against the holy Covenant and Saints of the
most High; that hate the Gospel, and hinder the Preaching thereof, take
Gamaleels counsel, and beware lest they be found even to fight against God: For
there is neither Counsel nor Strength against the Lord; and who ever hardened
himself against him and prospered?

The Second View of these Words presents to us clearly, The Immortality of the
Soul. This is established 1. Upon the same ground with the former: For if the
Souls Happinessly in the enjoyment of a perfect, and so necessarly an
unchangeable Good, sit must undeniably be Immortal, both to enjoy and praise
its Object: Et miserum est fuisse felicem: There is no Happiness not perpetual,
else he was a Fool who spoiled his Mirth with the thoughts of a Sword hanging
over his head. 2. It is confirmed clearly by the expectation of a future
Reward: Remember me O my God for good. Till I see good Ropes twined of the
Sand, and the Sea beaten to powder, I cannot be inclined to think that the
World was made of Atoms. And if it be ruled by chance, what are Counsel and
Art, Wisdom and Folly, Good and Evil, Law and Justice, but names of Fancies,
large as ridiculous as he who should command the motes of the Sun to dance a
Measure, or be who scourged the Sea for its disorder? We know that pure chance
obtains impunity by the Law both of God and Man. Now this matter belongs to
the Ruler gravly to consider how inconsistent Atheism is with Government: For
to the Atheist Treason and Robbery is neither Plot nor Felony, but simple
chance medley, a French Air, or merry Jigg of Volage Atoms: But by this
fortuitous Act of Indemnity, as the Atheist can do no wrong, so neither can he
complain of injury, if he chance to be baffled, robbed, or dispatched
violently. If the World reel (I cannot say properly be ruled) by chance is not
the Atheist, not by Scripture only which never speaks good of him, but by his
own Principle; also proven a forlorn Fool, liable in all things to unavoidable
surprisal? yea a liar also, who knowing and warned of a continual surprisal,
can therefore never be surprised, except into the absurdity of a
Self-contradiction, whereof his Principles of Fortuity are a fair Essay. But to
a wise Man; If the World must be ruled by Counsel and Law; how is it that
Justice is not in this life universally and fully executed, and every Man
rewarded according to his Works? But that there is a Court of Referrs, A day of
the restitution of all things (...) of righting all wrongs and settling all
disorders. Romans 2. 6. to 13. Some are rewarded in this life, to convince us of
a Divine Providence; others are not rewarded, to warn ^s of a World to come. Or
what can persuade Nehemiah with all the wisest and best of Men, deliberat^ to
choose willingly to forgo the Worlds favor and measures, and undergo all its
toil and displeasure, but ^^ eye to the recompense of reward, by far more ^^e
better than it is the later? The sense of the Souls ^nmortality is the
indelible Character and solid ^^reats of Authentic Nature, exactly rendered in
^^ery Man's copy: Only it is not illuminated in some ^^rk Heretics and
desperate Monsters, Satyrs or ^^ch doleful Creatures in humane shape, where
you ^^ as little of the Man as of Immortality; for these ^^ all appear equally.
Yet it is shaddowed in all ^ens practice: For look we backward, What but ^^e
Air of Immortality makes Men so conceit an ^^cient Pedigree? Or foreward,
What moves ^^en to call their Children and Lands by their own ^ame, and to
endeavor to perpetuat all together, it the expectation of Immortality? Say it
is their ^^^ty; yet omne malum est in bono; and there must some reality under
that same vanity. And tru^^ the Souls Immortality is the early dictat of Na^^re
our Religious Mother. the uncontroverted ^^d universal Sentiment of all her
posterity of whatever Religion Jewish, Pagan, Christian, Mahume^^: The
Sadducees might well be the first Deniers, O Lord; O Lord, I beseeth thee send
now prosperity: Yet all that will live goaly in Christ Jesus must suffer
Persecution, and through much Tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of
God. But let no man add affliction to the afflicted, and scornfully with
Apostate Julian, allege to Christians this Doctrine, to make their burdens
heavier: God will not be mocked, but He will avenge his own Elect, who cry day
and night to him, Though he bear long with them: I tell you that he will avenge
them speedily, Luke 18. 7, 8. And men would remember, that there is Suffering
for evil-doing, as well as for well-doing; and he who inflicts the one, may be
rewarded with the other: For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the
Wine is red, it is full of mixture, and he pours out of the same; but the
dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out and drink them,
Psalm. 75. 8. And it ^^ a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you; and to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire,
taking vengeance, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7, 8. 2. The belief of the Souls
Immortality, teaches men effectually the Fear of God: Fear not them that kill
the Body, and when they have done that have no more, that they can do: But fear
ye him who can cast both Soul and Body into Hell; I say fear him, Luke 12. 4, 5
Psalm. 76. 11. He ought to be feared: And why? verse 12. He cutteth off the
Spirits of Princes, he is terrible to the Kings of the Earth. Who would not
fear thee, O King of Nations! For to thee does it appertain, Jer. 10. 7. 3. It
teaches moderation in the desire and use of all things worldly: We look not at
the things that are seen, which are Temporal, but at the things that are not
seen, which are Eternal. There is indeed the high spirit of Christianity
courting immortality with so great disdain of all Worldly things, that it
cannot see them in its way. This is the true Nobility of the Soul that
exempteth it from the Egyptian slavery and servil drudgery of loading it self
with thick clay for the brick-kilns of worldly projects; and sets it far
without the reach of this Temptation, And woe be to him who builds his House
by Blood, and his City by Oppression; and delivers it from the s^art of him,
Who will be Rich, till He be peirced with many Sorrows and drowned in
Damnation. But, this I say Brethren. the time is short; even short enough to
him who every Evening may hear, This night thy Soul shall be taken from thee.
It remains, That they who possess the World be as they possessed it not, they
that use it, as if they used it not, and as not abusing it; for the fashion of
this World passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 29. and foreward. But alas for pity that
this same Moderation and Indifferency should be both practiced and applauded in
the matters of God! And that it is so rare to be Seriously and positively Holy,
that Godliness may say, O ye Sons of Men, how long will ye turn my Glory into
Shame? How long will ye love Vanity, and seek after Leasing? Psalm. 4. 2. 4 It
teaches us the best managry. This Age has learned to be wonderful Thrifty:
But O that they could study to be rich toward God! And could be persuaded that
Alms and Charity is the best Husbandry, and surest Art of Managry; and would
learn of the Unjust Steward, To make to them-selves Friends of the unrighteous
Mammon, that when they fail, they may receive them into ever-lasting
habitations. Mat; 6, 19, 20 Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon earth
etc. But lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven. The me^ of the World have
their portion in this life* But as for me when I awake, I shall be satisfied
with thy likness Psalm. 17. 14, 15. Alas! most me^ first have so little desire
for Heaven, that next the^ come to have as little hope of it, and so at last
and fain to take up with the World, and for Ja^^^ blessing, must with Esau, be
content with the f^^ness of the earth. Genesis 27, 39. Or else what mea^ the
unhandsome, unhallowed, and unhappy Practices of catching, gripping, and
inhancing, which have prevailed so far that now men's Covetousness has
strengthened it self with Pride, lest they should be reputed less witty: for how
do they boast o^ such exploits? But such boasting is not good, and the^ glory
is their shame, for they mind earthly things Phi^* 3, 19, And they have hearts
exercised with covetou^ Practices, cursed Children 2 Pet. 2. 14. But alas! I
find^ one great fault in most men's accounts, that the^ never count upon the
Soul; They count their thousands, and ten thousands, and hundred thousands and
the Poor soul says, how many count you me^^ I stand Debtor for ten thousand
Talents upon your score; Yea, I am already destressed, and what will you give
in exchange for me? Not a groat, says the wretch, while I havelife, though
after that he would give ten thousand Worlds; So much there is betwixt
market-dayes. 5. It teaches patience in well doing; who by patience in well
doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and immortality, is eternal life; to them
Rom; 2, 7. Therefore my beloved Brethren be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord 1 Cor; 15. last. And this is the Conclusion of the
Apostles vindication of the Resurrection and the life to come. The Saints have
a long and sore service in the World, But God is not unrighteous to forget
their labor of love* a cup of cold water shall not be forgotten: And for
whatsoever any have forsaken, they shall have a hundred fold in this life, and
in the World to come life everlasting: And we reckon that the sufferings of
this present life are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in the Saints. Therefore let us not be weary in well doing, for in due
Season we shall reap, if we faint not Galat. 6, 9. 6. It supporteth the
Christians hope: For if in this life only we have hope in Christ, of all men we
are most miserable 1 Cor. 15, 19. It is certainly the interest of every good
man to believe the Souls immortality, and as much their Duty to live so as it
may be their interest: for it is not Reason and Judgment that prompt men to
deny it, but fear and and an evil Concience that tells them it will be ill for
them. The Souls immortality is the hope o^ Israel, that makes them diligent in
well doing patient in Tribulation, and desirous of their change: for we that
are in this Tabernacle do groan being burdened not for that we would be
uncloathed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life 2
Cor. 5. 4.

The Third view of these words gives this manifest Reflection, That Communion
with God is the Souls Sanctuary and Solace. We have this Prayer of Nehemiah
thrice Recorded in this Chap. and in the close of the 5, Chap, besides frequent
Addresses of the like nature, such as that solemn Ejaculation Chap. 24. And
that Chap. 6, 14. and another in this same Chap. ver. 29 Besides his ordinary
attendance on public worship, and Solemn and extra-ordinary Fasting Chap. 9.
By all which it is eviden^ how Seriously and constantly Godly this renounced
worthy was Like David who could say, what tim^ soever I awake I am with thee:
And truly the Soul is either sleeping or worse when not with God Affairs and
weight of Business quickened their Devotion as much as it extinguisheth ours:
And the matter is, they were not cool, indifferent Latitudinarians in Religion,
but men of another Spirit, serious Men. And if that be true which I hilosophers
have said, that that is not the Man which is seen; Alas what Puppyes, what
Mock-men are we, who can be any thing but Good and Serious? This Observation
proven by the experience of Saints in all Generations, Who sat down under the
shadow of the Almighty with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to their
taste Cant 2. 3. will make it self good by the strongest Reason, when we have
seen a little what Communion with God is, and wherein it consists,

And 1. It stands in Reconciliation, the immediate result of Justification by
faith: Amos 3, 3. ^ Can two walk together except they be aggreed? Romans 5, 1.
Being justified by faith we have peace with God, and 10. v. We are reconciled
by the death of his Son. This gives access to God, and brings us near who
sometimes were far off: This of Enemies makes Friends; even as Abraham
believed, and was called the Friend of God. 2. In a mystical, spiritual and
Supernatural Union, the product of Regeneration; for he that is joined to the
Lord is one Spirit, and is made partaker of the divine Nature This makes us
Sons; and plant^th us in God John 1, 12, 13. To as many as received him, to
them gave he power to become the sons of God: which were born, not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. 1 John 4, 13.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of
his spirit: and v. 16. God is love, and he that loves dwells in God, and God
in him. John 17. 23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one. John 15, 5. I am the vine, ye are the branches. 3. In likness of
natures, compliance of minds, and conformity of manners. 2 Cor: 3, last, he
that has Communion with God is changed into the same ^mage: and Colos. 3. 10.
is renewed after the image of him that created him. 1 Cor; 15. 49. As we have
born the image of the earthy, so must we also of the heavenly. Christ is the
image of his Father, and Saints are the image of Christ. And how much are they
of one Humor, pleased in and pleasing one another* The Lord is a God to the
Saints mind: in Heaven or earth he sees nothing to him: whom have I in heaven
but thee? Or who is a God like unto thee? Nec viget quidquam simile aut
secundum And the Saint is a David, a man to Gods heart What is the book of
Canticles but one continued proof of this matter? What exchange of heart^ are
there? What concentering of Affections? What returns of Love? What uniting
Raptures ^ What reflections of Beauty? What Echo's of Invitations and
Commendations with such likeness of voices that sometimes you shall hardly
discern who speaks. Moreover we find this complianc^ universal in the Saint,
swaying all that was in him to the Lords Devotion: his understanding is
re-newed in knowledge after the Image of him tha^ created him: he understands
with God, from God, and for God: He can do nothing against the truth but for
the truth: He lights his Torch at the Su^ and takes his light from the
Candlestick of t^ Sanctuary, the Law and the Testimony: his fait^ has the
image of Christ James 2. 1. It is the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord
of Glory; And Christ's Superscription Revel. 3, ^ These things says the Amen,
the faithful and true witness: And, we have the mind of Christ Conformably his
will is swayed, whether for acting Lord what will thou have me to do? or for
suffering Not my will but thy will be done: he is an Orthodox Monothelit. And
for his affections, he loves and hates as God does, and because he does it.
And finally, in his conversation, he is Holy as God is Holy, merciful as he is
merciful, and perfect as his heavenly Father is perfect. Hence the old
Philosophers seeing through the darkness of nature have said, That good men are
visible mortal Gods, and the Gods are invisible, immortal men: Which as it is
literally true of their fictitious fancied Gods; so with respect to the true
God, it proves Symbolically that the mystery of the Incarnation is no
absurdity; there being such a high affinity betwixt the Divine and Humane
nature in its integrity; for we are also his offspring (...) Acts 17. 28. 4.
In mutual claim to, and interest in the Persons and things of one another; the
result of mutual choice, gift, and Covenant contract: My beloved is mine and
and I am his: I will be their God and they shall be my People: All that is in
God is God, and all that is in God is for his People; he is a God to Israel:
all that his People are, or have, or can, is for him 1 Cor. 6. 19. 20. ye are
not your own; for ye are bought with a price; Therefore glorify God in your
body, and in your spirit which are Gods. And none of us lives to himself,
neither does any of us die unto himself, but whether we live we are the Lords,
or whether we die we are the Lords. And our Communion with God consists much
in holding up a Trade, and keeping a bank with God in getting from him and
bestowing for him: and though a man cannot profit God, nor reapeth he where he
sowed not, yet he must have his own with the use. Has a man communion with
God; What has he done? what has he given? or what has he forsaken that he
had, or refused that he might have had, for God? Numb. 24. 11. Balak could say
to Balaam, Lo the Lord has keept thee back from honor: but we may say to
some, The Lord has not keept thee back from Honor: for like the Apostate Jews
they love the praise of men better than God or the praise of God; But Moses
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt Heb. 11. 24, 26 The Apostles
forsook all and followed Christ: A good bargain, (a thing much prized by the
spirits of our time) a hundred fold in this present life, and in the World to
come life everlasting. A man may forsake all for God, but he can lose nothing
for God. Take Galeacius Caracciolus for a sufficient witness, who proved the
matter. Italy the Garden of the World, Naples of Italy, Vicum of Naples,
farewell all for Christ freely. But now if the son of man should come, shall he
find faith in the earth? Who believes indeed, that He who snared not his own
son will with him give us all things freely? Are the consolations of God small
with thee? Think thou so meanly of God, and Christ the gift of God, all the
fullness of God, the treasures of hope, the earnest of the Spirit, the Riches of
says, the first fruits of the inheritance? Did thou ever sing Psalm. 4, 7.
Thou have put more gladness in my heart than in the time that their corn and
their wine increased? All these things have I given thee, and yet I will do
more for thee, if thou can but for go a little for me; Poor Soul may thou
not spare it? 5. In fellowship of converse; And therefore in Scripture its
called a wal^ing with God, before God, in Christ; a dwelling in his presence,
and walking in the light of his countenance. Psalm. 73, 23. I am continually
with thee. Psalm. 139. 18. When I awake I am still with thee. 2 Cor. 16. 16. I
will dwell in them and walk in them Rev. 21. 2. And I heard a great voice out
of heaven saying, behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his People, and God himself shall be with them,
and be their God. Men live together for mutual comfort and help of life: his
comforts delight the soul, and he is the God of our life. Men converse together
for Counsel; Counsel is mine, says the wonderful Counselor, and ^e gives
his People Counsel; and therefore the Godly Souls desire is to enquire in his
temple: Men ^onverse together for business, and O how much ^ath the Soul to do
with God! Who does all things (...) it: Men pay visits to one another; and what
find visits pass betwixt God and his People? Men ^ast and sup together; I will
sup with him and he with me Rev. 3, 20. Prove. 9. 2. Wisdom has killed her
beasts, she has mingled her wine, she has also furnished her Table. Psalm. 23,
5. Thou preparest a table for me in the presence of mine Enemies. Isa, 25. 6, A
feast of fat things, a feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat things full of
Marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined, Cant. 4. last. and 5. 1. Let my
beloved come into his garden and eat his pleasant Fruits: I am come into my
Garden, my Sister, my Spouse, etc, Ea^ O Friend, Drink, yea Drink abundantly O
Beloved Friends Converse in Presence, and Correspond in Absence and at a
distance: The Godly Soul cannot endure Absence or Distance from God; for the
Light of his Countenance i^ better than Life: But if it fall at distance, it
keep^ up a correspondence; In my trouble, I sought the Lord, and my cry came
before him; ever into his Ears. O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, you see him whom
my Soul loves, tell him I am Sick of Love. When my heart was over whelmed
within me, thou knew my way From the ends of the earth will I cry unto thee
O when shall I come and appear before God Now for a reason of the observation,
pray confider where should a man be, but with his Friend Where should the Soul
be, but where it Subsist Lives, Loves, Thrives and does well? When should a man
be but at home where he dwells And where should a branch be but in the Vine
Where should Love be but with its Beloved? When a like but with its like? Where
should a man (...) but where he has Comfort, liking, and being liked Where
should a man be but with his Interest? Receiver but with a Giver? Or a Servant
Entrued but about his Masters Business? Where should Courteour be but with his
Prince? a man but With his Counselor? a person invited but at he feast? and
one visited but waiting upon his ^reind?

But how sad is it that men should so far slight ^s to forfeit, and so justly
forfeit as to slight Communion with God? What lamentations may hereon be
written? or what shall be taken to witness for this? Jer: 2, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Has any of the nations done such a thing as this to forsake their Gods, which
yet are no Gods? but my People has forsaken me for a thing that cannot profit.
And will a man forsake the snow of Lebanon for the water of the brook? But if
^et there be hope, let men be exhorted to consider ^f their ways, by all the
serious names of interest, profession, the love of their espousals, the memory
of their serious hours, the testimony of their experiences, their appaling
fears, their silent, silencing and silenced convictions, their unsatisfied
desires, and speaking disappointments giving them ^arkness for light, a
scorpion for an egg, a Ston or bread, a lie for truth, a cloud for Juno: And
^inally by the misery of their despised Souls: For what is the Soul destitute
of God? An exile, wandering, wearyed, weighted, wounded, naked, reproached,
starved, appaled, slighted, hopless, helpness, a broken soul, a lost soul?
Psalm: 142, 4. 5. Refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul: I cried unto thee
O Lord, I said, thou art my refuge and my portion in the Land of the living.
This is the rest wherewith they may cause the weary to rest: in returning and
rest shall men be saved, in quietness and confidence they shall be established.
Return unto thy rest O my soul.

The 4th view of this exquisite piece gives us The Pattern of a Good Ruler. For
being the Epilogue and close of the book, it has a natural and due relation to
what goes before; and bearing the answer of a good conscience, casts a
straight reflection on the life and acts of the man; and being a suit for
reward, has a necessary respect to the work, which also is expressed Chap: 5,
19. Think upon me O my God for good, according to all that I have done for this
People: and in this same Chap: 14. ver, remember me O my God concerning this,
and wipe not out my good deeds that have done for the house of my God: and ver.
2^ remember me O my God concerning this also and spare me according to the
greatness of the mercy. Many Rulers have done worthily, some excelling in one
thing, some in another; yet search Histories sacred and common, you shall no
readily find in one man so many excellent part^ nor so complete a living,
practical pattern of good Ruler. The Ruler would do himself a favor and God,
and his People a great good service, to preserve the Authentic of this book in
his heart, and copy it exactly in his life and Government. H^ is a great Kings
high Commissionar: and all thing in such a person being so great, that his sins
can not be small, his care had need be so much the greater, and he would look
to his copy the oftener Behold then and consider, and you see him, like the Sun
in the Zodiac, perfecting his course through all the signs of a ruleing
Luminary.

1. He is zealously and eminently Godly, a burning and shining light, breathing
at once a living compend of faith and obedience, Law and Gospel: For, faith
laying hold on Gods Covenant, and obedience to the first and great Commandment
of love, which is the fulfilling of the Law, are both angled and pointed in
this one word My God: a man much in meditation, given to Prayer, Duties of so
strict affinity, that in Scripture the one passes for the other: a man, the
multitude and weight of whose employments awakeneth and quickens his
devotion: such a riddle is Religion that out of the Eater it can bring meat,
and sweet out of the strong; but he that would unfold it must plow with Samsons
heifer and be truly Godly. Lo every act of the Governor shut up with Prayer.
In the discharge of his employment and exercise of his Government, he looks to
God for direction, for be did all things as was found written in the Law; for
help in his address to the King, he Prayed to the God of Heaven; for his
reward, remember me O my God for good. And therefore he was neither partial nor
indifferent in the Law, but zealously he pursued good, and persecuted evil, and
that in all whatsoever: neither is his Religion recluse, in the large as cold
as calm, and full as dark as cold-shaddows of fruitless, lazy, lifeless,
cowardly contemplation, but goes abroad into free, generous, zealous, and
Heroic acting, retaining the height of spirituality in the midst of
secularity, resembling therein the Archetype Ruler, who in most perfect rest
Rules all things, and moves all, himself unmoved. It is below the Godly Ruler
to be swayed and abused either by his own Lust and interest, or example of
others: Chap: 5. 14, 15. I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the
Governor: but the former Governors that had been before me were chargeable to
the People, and had taken of them bread and wine, beside forty shekels of
silver, yea even their servants bare Rule over the People: but so did not I,
because of the fear of God. The fear of God is the Star that guides the good
Ruler 2 Samuel 23, 3 He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of
God. If Religious pretenses be made helps to policy, how much better must be it
self in reality? And let politic pretenders beware of their fate and folly who
taught others to be Captains to their own ruin, that they teach not others to
be Politicians to the expense of the teacher, when he is served with his own
measure. Yet as to shun the baseness of Hypocrisy a man needs not run to the
wickedness of avowed profanity, so can he not pass from the one to the other
but over the fair neck of Christianity, with greater insolency of impiety then
the outrageously barbarous Tullia drove her chariot over the belly of her
Murdered Father. Levi. Lib. 1.

2. The good Ruler is a Reformer, a repairer of breaches, a restorer of paths
to dwell in: and it is but a faint encouragment and a desperate complement to a
good Ruler Isay 3, 6. Be thou our Ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand:
Nor can he love to have it recorded, that in his days such evils prevailed
unreformed: it was when there was no King in Israel that every man did what was
right in his own eyes. If the health of the People be not recovered, it says
there is no Physician there Ier: 8, 22. But a good Ruler scatters the wicked
and brings the wheel over them; and he may say with

David Psalm: 75, 3. The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I
bear up the pillars of it: he is (...) name and thing, a Joseph the Ston of
Israel. Such a one was Moses the Lawgiver, such was Joshua his successor, such
were the Judges of Israel, such was Samuel, such were all the good Kings of
Judah, such was Ezra the Scribe, and such was Nehemiah the Tirshatha, an
eminent Reformer of Religion and state, of Church and Kingdom. For Religion: in
general, Gods Holy Commandments were broken by all ranks of persons; prophanity
and iniquity prevailed and abounded, that is solemnly confessed and amended
Chapters 1. and. 9. In particular, oppression reigned, that is quashed Chap: 5.
and the People relieved: false Prophets were hired by the enemy, and bribed to
compliance to weaken the Rulers hands and hinder the work of Reformation, they
are discovered and marked Chap: 6. The ordinary worship of God, and his Solemn
Feasts were disused; these are restored ch: 8. For advancing and establishing
the whole Reformation a Solemn Fast is kept ch: 9. and a Covenant subscribed
chapter 10. The Holy Seed had mingled themselves and matched with strangers, People
of heathen abominations; they separate themselves, and that is amended ibid.
The offerings of the Lord were neglected, these are renewed ibid: The Sabbaths
were horribly profaned, That is strictly and with certification discharged,
and they not suffered to lodge about the walls Chap: 10, 31. and 13, 15. and
foreward. The service of God was neglected by non-residence of the Priests
through calamity and want, that also is helped Chap. 10, 11, 12, 13. ver. 10.
The orders and services of the Priests and Levits were confused; these are
cleared, and they set to their charges as appointed by David Chap; 7. 63, 12.
45. and 13, 30 Strangers uncircumcised had entered and defiled the Congregation
of the Lord, these are removed chap: 13, 3, Profane Persons of the Princes of
the heathen had lodgings in the Lords house, they are expelled and the Chambers
cleansed Chap. 13. 8. 9. Some of the chief of the Priests had defiled the
Covenant of the Preisthood by strange wives, they are branded, and that also is
amended. For the State: the city the place of their Fathers sepulchers lay
waste, and the gates thereof were consumed with fire: First these are repaired.
The people and their work are strongly opposed and sore reproached, they are
vindicated and their hands strengthened Chap. 2, 4. When the City is built it
is not manned, therefore inhabitants and defendants are appointed Chap. 11. The
People suffer sore by morgage, the great sin of the oppressors belonging to the
former head, and calamity of the oppressed pertaining to this part; that is
redressed Chap: 5. Open and secret enemies correspond and plot against the work
and the Ruler, these are discovered and disappointed Chap. 6. They are in great
reproach and distress; God is sought and means are used Chap. 4 and 6. They are
poor; husbandry and traffic is practiced, only the Sabbaths work and markets
are discharged; Oppression is born down, and the People relieved of public
burdens; Nehemtah the Governor and his brethren neither exacted the bread of
the Governor, nor bought Land, nor refused to work as others: O for such
Rulers to a nation scattered and peeled, a nation ^me^ted out and trodden down,
whose land is spoiled! Isay 18, 2. Our Rulers, if they had a mind, have a fair
occasion for I bs Gloriation Chap. 29. 13. The blessing of him that was ready
to perish came upon me etc. In this time are great decays, desolations,
abuses, and unsufferable corruptions; let it not be thought an Error proceeding
from the Ruler. And here People would be warned to enencourage and comply with
Reforming Rulers, not, as they were in Hezekiahs and Josiahs times, inveterate,
incureable and obstinate in their corruptions, lest they hear that, Hos. 10, 3,
4. A King can do them no good, because they feared not the Lord, and spoke
words swearing falsely in making a Covenant.But this pertains to the Ruler,
That whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven, be diligently done for the
house of the God of Heaven, lest there be wrath against the realm of the King
and his Sons Ezra. 7-23. And that Judgment run like a river, and righteousness
like a mighty stream: That he take his pattern from the type, and Antitype, who
also is the Archetype Ruler Psalm. 72. So shall there be abundance of peace; and
also in Judah things shall go well.

3. The good Ruler has a natural, Fatherly and tender care of the People. Thus
its said I say 49. 23. Kings shall be nursing Fathers. And in Israel they were
wont to mourn for good Rulers with this expression, ab my brother Ier: 2^, 18.
Yea he is the breath of our nostrils, Lament. 4, 20. by whom in the public
body we lead a quiet life and peaceable in all Godliness and honesty 1 Timothy 2.
2. He is pater patriae and parens Reip. Nor can I see what should have moved
those dissembling Emperors, who in semblance refused the title of Lord, to
make so nice of the endearing name of Father of the Country, but simply the
conscience that they did as little deserve the name as they designed the thing.
But surely, as a Rich man will never want an heir, a good Ruler can never want
Children; nor needs he fear Coniahs fate, Write ye this man Childless: for if
he have the heart of a Father, he shall have the names (...) better than sons
and daughters. We find not that Nehemiah was married, yet his name flourishes
in the records of his eminent services, more than if his line had continued
uninterrupted to this day. The righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance. Four things are proper to the care of a Father: Affection,
Instruction, Correction, and Provision: all which are evident in Nehemiah the
Governor. Great is his Affection Chap. 1, 3, 4. And how Sadly takes he on for
the reproach and affliction of his brethren? he sat down and weept and mourned
certain days, and fasted and Prayed before the God of Heaven. He cannot digest
their grief Chap: 8. 9, 10. When the People Weept, he said, Go your way, eat
the fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions to them for whom nothing is
prepared, for this day is holy, neither be ye sad for the joy of the Lord is
your strength. For Instruction, he causes the Priests read to them the book of
the Law of Moses; So they read in the book, in the Law of God distinctly, and
gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading ibid. 8, ver. Nor is
he wanting in correction chap. 5, 7. I rebuked the Nobles and the Rulers; and
chap. 13, 25. I contended with them, and cursed them, and smot certain of them,
and plucked off their hair: and in the 11, v. ibid. I contended with the Rulers;
and in the 17. v, again, I contended with the Nobles of Judah; and 21, v. then
I testified against them, and said unto them, why lodge ye about the wall? If
ye do so again I will lay hands on you. And in the matter of Provision, he was
of the mind of the Apostle, That Children ought not to lay up for their
Parents, but the Parents for the Children; he will not be chargeable to the
People, nor take the bread of the Governor, nor buy Land; but keeps a large
Table for a hundred and fifty of the Jews and Rulers, beside strangers. And
that no man may think this was a frolic, or an ambitious, singular, popular
humor, v, 15. he asserteth expressly, that this he did, because of the fear of
God; and resolves it into this reason; that he would not be chargeable to the
People: And thus I take the account of the matter, That to be chargeable to a
poor exhausted People consists not with the fear of God, nor with the
fatherly heart of a good Ruler. In fine, the Ruler should remember, that
Subjection first founded in a Son is ultimatly refounded in the Commandment,
Honor thy Father.

4 The good Ruler is a person well informed and thoroughly acquainted with the
condition of his People. Such was Nehemiah. And first, Somethings fall under
his own eye and observation: such as the profanation of the Sabbath, and the
marriages with strangers, in this same Chap. I saw (says he) etc. A Ruler can
be naught the less a Judge that he is a Witness. Matthew. 26. 65. What further
need have we of Witnesses? behold now ye have heard, was proof sufficient, if
the enditement had been relevant. It were good in the first place, that Rulers
would suppress the enormities whereof themselves are Witnesses. Histories tell
us of many famous Persons, who would go through their dominions incognito or in
diguise, to get information. Our James the fifth is known to have been much of
this humor; and a pity it is, that his methods and prattiques of information
were not committed to more clear and faithful records than dark and slippery
tradition. Chap; 2, 12. Nehemiah goes out by night to view the wall. The
ancient Hieroglyphics, which painted Rulers blind, may here come under
correction; for he that has not eyes and ears of his own can neither see nor
hear with another man's, as is commonly said to be the case of Rulers. Other
things the Tirshatha understands by information of others: And here the good
Ruler will seek information Chap. 1. 2. ver. And this proceeds from his
foresaid affection; or otherways he rejects not information, and that either by
complaint, as in the case of the morgage 5 chap. Or simple historical relation,
as the condition of Jerusalem and the people Chap. 1, 2, 3. and the fault of
Eltashib in giving Tobiah a chamber in the house of the Lord chap, 13. 7. And
the withholding of the Priests portion ver. 10. It is the part of all good
Subjects, in their several Stations, to give, and the part of the good Ruler to
seek and take information of evils and disorders in the Peoples condition or
manners. Princes should have long ears. Pharoahs Princes said, know thou not
that Egyptis destroyed? If he knew not, they could tell him it. But sometimes
know not is one with care not, and then comes the question of the disciples,
master carest thou not that we perish? and Prove. 24. 12. would be remembered: if
thou say, behold, we knew it not: does not he that pondereth the heart
consider it? and he that keeps thy Soul, does not he know it? and shall not
he render to every man according to his works? Foreign intelligence is
necessary of the counsels and motions of enemies: and Nehemiah is not wanting
in that either; yet take it apart from homeward information and acquaintance
with our own condition, it is but foris sapere, and none of the greatest
wisdom: for what is the difference betwixt a man out of his wits, and him whose
wits are without him? What can a Judge say to a cause, or a Physician to a
disease without information? And what can a Ruler do for a People, unless he be
thoroughly acquainted with their condition?

5. The good Ruler is a homely, condescending, conversible, and accessible
person. This necessarly makes way for the former in practice, and follows
from it in reason. Chap. 1. 2. Hanani and and the men of Judah got access to
and audience of Nehemtah. chap. 4, 22. he talks with the People; yea he hears
the complaints of the People and their wives that were oppressed chap. 5. 1. to
6. And chap. 75. God puts it in his heart to gather the Noble and the Rulers,
and the People. chap. 4, 14. and 8, 9. he encourages and comfort the
People, and says to them etc. chap. 13, 7, When he came to Jerusalem he
understood what there was done: and how but by converse? else might he as well
have understood elsewhere. Yea v. 15, he condescends to be a personal reprover
of those of the people whom he saw profaneing the Sabbath; and likewise of the
merchants v 21. and of these v. 25. who had transgressed by strange marriages.
Nor is all this popularity, but real duty, which obliges Rulers by many
commands in Scripture, to hearken the compaint and hearthe cause of the poor
and needy. Hence Isayes complaint 59, 14. that Judgment is turned away
backward, and justice stands afar off; that truth is fallen in the street,
and equity cannot enter; it can have no access to, nor hearing of the Ruler. An
unaccessible Ruler is a Luminary ecclipsed: The intercepting of the sovereign's
beams from shedding their benign influence upon the Subjects and precluding
the Subject from access to receive them, are by so far more fatal than the most
dismal ecclipses; these but conjecturally and contingently portend, these
necessarly and effectually produce and unavoidably infer the fall of a Ruler;
and really undo the Prince whatever they pretend for the person, and leave him,
like a defeated Trojan with his royal blood to shift for a Kingdom, beside the
wrong done to the People. If any should invert the decree Dan. 6, 7. and
establish it with this alteration, that any man may freely ask petitions of any
God or man, save of the King, it would be large as unpolitick as the other is
ungodly. In such case Esthers resolution must carry it: Behold I go in to the
King, which is not according to Law, and if I perish I perish. A recluse Prince
is so absurd and inconsistent, that Charles the fifth disponed his Crowns
before he took himself to the Cloister: Nor should ought but despair make a
Monk of a Ruler. I understand not the mystery of Gyges, how a man can see
unseen; nor what but a miserable vanity can move some great Princes of the East
to shut themselves up in Canopyes; but all the World knows what all the World
thinks of Achilles with his distaff, and Sardanapalus in his Gynaeceum and
Tiberius in his retreat at Caprea. But he that rules over men must be Just,
ruling in the fear of God; and is as the light of the morning when the Sun
riset^, even a morning without clouds, as the tender grass springing out of the
earth by clear shineing after rain. 2 Samuel 23 4. His countenance and influence
must reach, to visit and refresh the lowest of his People. That homely and
accessible Prince James the fifth, called The Carl's King of Scotland, really
was, and was reputed the bravest Prince in his time.

6. If he be a Nehemiah, a Commissioner deputed by a sovereign Ruler, he must
be, as diligent to get, so faithful to give true and full information of the
Peoples condition to his Master, and effectually to interpose for his help, and
to enlarge the indulgence of his Royal Concessions to the outmost Thus Nehemiah
told the King all that was told him of Jerusalem and his People chap. 2, 3. and
that in sadness: and sought a commission for help and reparation v, 5. and
foreward; which he showed to the Governors beyond the river v, 9. And executed
to the full extent throughout the whole Book. In the 4 and 6 v. of the 2 chap.
His request and the Kings grant was only that he might build Jerusalem: and we
see in the progress of the work, and sequel of the History, how amply he
prosecutes that Commission to the largest extent of its virtual comprehension:
for he not only builds but beautifyes, not only beautifyes, but fortifyes not
only repaires but reformes Jerusalem, and ye^ exceeds not his commission: for
when all this is done Jerusalem is but Jerusalem, beautiful for situation: a
city that is compact together; whether the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord
unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord: for
there are set throns of Judgment, the throns of the house of David Psalm 48, 2.
and 122, 3, 4, 5. And David by a figure understood no less in his serious us
petition Psalm; 51, 18. Do good in thy good Pleasure unto Zion: build thou the
walls of Jerusalem; where one part helps to clear another; to build her walls
is figurativly, to do her good properly; and to do her good in propriety, is in
the figure to build her walls; and Psalm. 122, 7 He calls it more expressly
peace and prosperity. The Ruler that is thus minded may resolve with Nehemiah,
to meet with scorn, calumny, opposition, and, which is ordinary, malicious
challenges of sedition, and accusations of rebellion; but affection to the
work, adherence to his Commission, the gallantry of his Person, Prayer to and
confidence in the God of Heaven bear him out against and over all these: chap.
2. 20. I said unto them, The God of heaven he will prosper us, therefore we his
servants will rise and build; chap. 6, 9. Now therefore O God strengthen my
hands; and 11, v. I said, should such a man as I flee? and who is there that
being as I am would go into the temple to save his life? I will not go in. How
chiefly necessary is this good part in a deputed Ruler, where the nation to
their great loss wants the desirable influence of their Gracious Princes
presence?

7. The good Ruler is Governed by Justice and the Law of God, in the whole
exercise of his Government 2 Samuel 23, 3. He must be just. Before there were
Kings in Israel, it was appointed Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19. That the King should have a
copy of the law which he should read, and keep, and do, even all the words and
statutes. This was David's study Psalm 119 throughout. This was the care of the
good reforming Kings of Judah, chiefly Hezekiah and Josiah; this was the
practice of Ezra the scribe, and Nehemiah the Tirshatha. According to the law
he hates and refraines from oppression himself, and restraines it in others:
According to the law he orders the Genealogies of the Priests, and appoints
their offices and portions: According to the Law he restores the ordinary and
extraordinary public worship, and Solemn Feasts. According to the Law he
reformes the abuse of marriage with strangers. According to the Law, and
practice of good Rulers in former times, he subscrives a Covenant for
Reformation. According to the Law he sanctifies the Temple, and cleanses it
from the abomination of heathen usurpation, and profanatition of strangers.
According to the Law, he dichargeth the profanation, and enjoyneth strictly the
sanctification of the Sabbath. This is that which makes the difference betwixt
a good Ruler and a Tyrant. But every measure is not the standard; and humane
Laws have too much of the man to be perfect, and not so much of the Pope as to
be ininfallible. Other Laws are but Ruled Rules; but the Law of God is the
Ruling pattern Psalm. 19, 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, and his testimony
is sure. In a time of Restitution, even Laws may suffer a Reformation: That
which has been may (...); and a Rescissory Act is not impossible. But
^^axerxes his decree must stand immovable Ezra 23. Whatsoever is commanded by
the God of Heaven, let it be diligently done for the house of the God Heaven:
With this inumation, lest there be wrath. Moses was faithful in all the house
of God, as a servant, but Jesus Christ as a son; and the Isles shall wait for
his Laws by 42. 4. A voice came from Heaven saying, This is my beloved Son,
hear ye him. Be wise ^^e Kings, be instructed ye judges of the earth: kiss the
Son. Ps. 2, 12. The Ruler ought to be a ^ing Law, and to remember the noble
saying of ^sar to the Roman Senate, In mexima fortuna min^^^ licentia est;
which is true, as he there reckon^^, in as far as the faults of Rulers being
more no^ur, are otherwise also aggravated above the ansgressions of others.
But herewith consider the Law being the mind of the Ruler; a lawless ruler, as
a self-contradicter, makes himself a transgressor: If the Law be evil, why did
he make it? it be good, then why should he break it?

8. The good Ruler is a wise person. It is wisdom that says Prove. 8. 15, 16.
By me Kings reign ^^d Princes decree Justice: by me Princes Rule, and ^iobles,
even all the Judges of the earth. You have ^eard of the wisdom of Solomon: and
David his father was as an Angel of God discerning Good and Evil: and who wiser
than Daniel? Happy Commonwealth where either wise men reign, or Kings study
wisdom. Six Things in morality and Divinity, in Reason and Scripture contribut
to wisdom Knowledge, Understanding, Invention, Counce^^ Judgment, and Prudence:
which, howbeit because of their affinity and mutual concurrence, they b^ often
used promiscuously; yet, having natural their distinct proprieties, I shall
endeavor, as I ca^ to marshall them in their due order, especially a required
in the Ruler. 1. Knowledge takes ^^ things simply and historically as they are
or appear and has its treasure chiefly in the Memory: it purchased and
preserved either by observation a^^ experience, for a wise man's eyes are in his
hea^ or by reading; Ahasuerus caused read the Chroncles; and Daniel understood
by Books. The Boo^ and play are the two things that take up Children if the
Latter be not below the Ruler, surely be not above the former: he who will not
be as a C^^ at Book, may happily prove such indeed in co^^ses^; and he who will
not be serious in L^^ may readily Ludere in re seri^. We know what (...) count
Alexarder had, and what use he made the works of Homer, I suppose most of the
Hist^ry then extant. And in all ages and places wh^^ Letters were received,
what a price have Prince put upon learned men and Libraryes? How g^^ Historians
were the bravest Emperors? Or knowledge is got by tradition and information
others; before books were used, or where t^ were not known, We have heard with
our ears, ^^ our fathers have told us was the History practice I suppose
History was not much known to Nation in the days of Galdus, yet we find h^
^^scourse to his People of the Noble acts of their ^ncestors, as exactly as if
he had been reading a ^cture of History. 2. Understanding lodged high^^ in the
upper room of the speculative judgment, and reaching deeper, discovers
things in ^^eir original, and takes them up in their causes, ^^d how they are.
Simple knowledge without understanding is like those of whom we read in Matthew.
13. 13. That seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they
understand. ^he says well. It is a good Memory that remembers a thing and the
reason thereof: I add, it is a ^od knowledge that knows a thing and the
^^uses thereof; felix qui potuit etc, Are there in a ^^d abuses and
corruptions? are their decays and assolations? here is the wisdom of the Ruler,
seriously to consider for what the land perishes, and is burnt up as a
wilderness Jer 9, 2. And ^he be as willing as concerned to know, the next ^^rse
will resolve him; because they have forsaken my Law, which I set before them,
and have not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein, but have walked after the
imagination of their own heart etc. The Philistines when they were afflicted,
^on inquiry found, that it was not a chance, but ^^ hand of God that afflicted
them, for his Ark which they held captive 1 Samuel 6 And Pharaoh to ^^ cost was
taught understanding, because be would ^^t let the People go to serve the
Lord. Genes: ^. 3 and 18 Abimilec King of Gera^ was taught to understand the
cause of the barrenness of his house, ^^ that he had taken a man's wife. The
same is showed by Hosea chap, 4. 10. They shall commit Whord^ and shall not
increase. In a word, whatsoever plag^^ whatsoever sore is upon a People, it
springs from S^ the formal cause of corruptions, and meritorious afflictiones
and desolations. The Crown is fallen from our head; woe unto us for we have
sinned. 3. Invention, great affinity with understanding; this resolving ^^^ects
into their causes, and that producing effects from their causes, like a Latin
Version of a Hebrew line sentence, rendering foreward what was read bac^ward.
This is seeded by observation, and conceive by Imagination: It Is issues, if
weaker and tender ^^ called fancys; if masculine and stronger, Engines a^witty
inventions. The Ruler must be an invent^ of fit means to reform the abuses,
remove the misery, further and settle the good and welfare his People: Such as
Nehemiah chap. 7. 5. acknowledges that God put into his heart for peopling a^^
manning of Jerusalem: and such as his appointing the Priests and Levits in
their offices for the servi^^ of God, and instruction of the People: (...)
causing shut the gates ordinarily with the Sun-^^ for defense of the City, and
sooner before t^^ Sabbath, for its sanctification: and that of not eating the
bread of the Governor, for the ease (...) the People: his causing restore
their Lands mo^^ gaged by oppression: his making a Covenant and entering the
People into a curse with their ow^ consent, for advancing reformation. O the
that Wisdom, be which King Reign, would teac^ them the knowledge of such witty
inventtons! Counsel is an assembly of the wits for advice, an^ for the
exercise and trial of inventions, that it may be known what is good, or what is
better, and that Israel ought to do. chap: 5, 7. I consulted with my self
(says Nehemiah) and I rebuked the nobles and the Rulers: and I set a great
Assembly against them; ^ appointed a high Commission for bearing down of
oppression: and that was amongst the rest of his Noble Inventions. 5. Judgment
is the Chairman and Umpire of Counsel, determining, approving, and referring
sentences, as bad or good, good or better: and resting in one thing, as a close
of the matter; Absalom says, give counsel among you; they ^y, the counsel of
Ahithophel is good, but the counsel of ^lusha^ the Archite is better: For the
great Counsel^ had appointed the one to defeat the other: ^ounsel is good but
determination is necessar: else ^e who has much, is no better than he who has
nothing to say in a matter: and wavering in counsel proves but Weakness of
Judgment. Consultation should end in Resolution, and Resolution in Ex^cution
(as we see in Nehemiah) for that whereof ^e are speaking is the practical
judgment. 6. ^rudence that wise and Religious Matron, who with the gravity of
her countenance puts to ^ame and silence the folly of Atheism, and insolen^
of impiety, in her whole carriage keeps such measure and decency as courteth
into her devo^^on all that is worshipped: Nullum numun ab^st si Prudentia; and
guides her affairs with such ^gh discretion, that by Scripture and Reason,
Di^^nes and Philosophers she is deservedly preferred the Government of Manners,
and entrusted with the balance and standard of virtues, which in all things
keep that measure quam vir prudens determinaver^^. She relieveth man of the
great misery that lyet^ upon him, teaching him to know both time and purpose:
for to every ^oing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under Heaven.
She so fitteth resolutions to the exigent of occasions, as makes them both
safe and seasonable, decent and effectual She foreseeth the evil and avoideth
it, and takes the good in its season: she saves a man the expense of
Apologies, and shame of non putaram And thus Nehemiah was wise to know the
Counsel of his enemies, and conceal his own purposes t^ the opportunity. And
this is the Rulers prudence neither to let the evil approach him, nor the good
escape him; nor ought he to say to the People come again another time, when it
is in the power his hand to do them good, lest hind-bald occasion si^ him, and
his power perish with the opportunity 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. The Children of Isachar
we men that had understanding of the times, to know w^ Israel ought to do.
Tempu^ nosce was the saying Pittacus of Mitylenae, reckoned the first of t^^
Greek sager. To day if ye will hear his voice, is (...) saying of the only wise
God: and, O that to haast known, even thou in this t^^^ day! Was the w^ and
Lamentation of the consubstantial Wisdom God. Be wise now therefore O ve kings:
be infirmed ye Judges of the earth Psalm. 2, 10.

9. The good Ruler is a person of courage a^ valor, a gallant Person. In this
Nehemiah was (...). This is the main and only thing so much culcat by Moses
upon Joshuah his successor, Jos. 1. 7. Only be thou strong and very courageous.
This joined with the former makes Consilio and animis a noble device for a
Ruler: and he who is born with those induements has a horoscope more
prognosticative of advancement, than he who is born under the most Regnant
Planets. The Gallantry of the Ruler is evidenced in a resolute and inflexible
observance of all God Holy Commandments, maugre all opposition of his own lust
and corruption: He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he that
rules his spirit than he that takes a City; Or of the example and
insinuations of others, or the scorn, and threats, and plots of enemies, or the
eminent degree of transgressors. If morality and righteousness be the true
measure of Gallantry, surely the World has many bastard ridiculous Gallants,
who dare do any thing but what is right and Godly. But the courage of Nehemiah
appears particularly. 1. In his address to the King in behalf of his City
that was desolate, and his People that were in reproach and affliction. It is
no less unpardonable a reflection upon the Justice and Royal goodness of a
King, to be diffident in requesting of him what is just, than to dare to ask
unjustly. Nehemiah when he is bid ask, all his asking is for Jerusalem chap. 2.
6, 7. 2. In that he can sustain the grief, disple sure, and scorn of malicious
heathen enemies for the work of Reformation Ibid. 10, v. 3. In that he dare
atcheive so desperate like a work as was the repairing of Jerusalems so vast
desolations. v. 17. 4. In his unconquered faith and confidence of Gods
assistance, 20. v. he was strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. 5.
In the atcheivment of a double employment, building and fighting. Chap. 4, 17.
A coward may build a City in peace, and a slugard may defend himself in a
strong City; but a Worthy only can build with one hand and fight with the
other. 6. In his rebuking the Nobles and the Rulers for their oppression, chap
5. 7. An act of native gallantry, and an example for all that deserve to be in
eminency; the matter of Holy Jobs Gloriation chap. 31. 34. Did I fear a great
multitude, or did the contempt of families terrify me, that I kept silence? 7.
In his rare generosity refusing, because of the fear of God, to eat the bread
of the Governor, or to bow to the example of those that had been before him,
who had been chargeable to the People. The good Ruler dare be singular in
virtue, and accounts it his honor, not to take evil, but to give good example.
What an unexcusable incongruity is it for a man who should be examplary to
others in good, to submit to evil example? And it is the voice of Roman
gallantry, discant al^ potius nostro exemplo recte facere, quam nos illorum
peccare. 8. In his inexorable resistance, even to the fifth time, of his
enemies treacherous pretenses for accommodation, with a design to do him
mischief: 6. chap. wherein is no less manifest his singular wisdom.

10. The good Ruler is a vigilant, active, and diligent person. We find
Nehemiah in continual motion, acting himself, and exciting others in their
respective orders, like a great Superior Orb winding the Inferior in their
subordinate courses. For it is the inseparable, undeniable right of Supremacy,
to take inspection of all, and put every one to his proper duty. And as the
Superior Orb moves not symmetrically in the place of the Inferior, but moves in
its place concentrically: Just so is the case of the Ruler. The slothful and
soft Ruler is one upon the matter; and if there be any odds, a waking living
Dog is better than a sleeping dead Lion. It was Nehemiah's Honor, that neither
the People, nor his own servants, nor the Princes and Rulers could be evil
without a witness, as they were not good without an example. Whence.

11. The good Ruler is a person of an examplary conversation: alios quod monet
ipse facit: he practices the same, that he commands: by a leading example he
goes out and in before the People: he walks with a perfect heart within his
house. The World is Ruled by example. A good life is as necessar as good Laws
in a Ruler; and an evil example more hurtful than evil Laws: for that a
pernicious Law may quickly be repealed; but bad example is not easily reformed.
Laws governed by righteousness, and a life ordered by Law makes the perfect
Ruler. Thus we see Nehemiah examplary in Religion, in refraining and
restraining oppression, in wisdom, courage, vigilance, and all the
forementioned virtues: and this he has left as a pattern to Rulers.

12. The good Ruler is a constant person, persevering and abounding in well
doing: he is fled fast, unmovable, abounding always in the work of the Lord
knowing that his labor is not in vain in the Lord. Thus we see Nehemiah
beginning with good designs and intentions, going on with gallant interprises
and good actions, and ending conformably with a good conscience, and Glorious
expectation in the last act of his appearance: Remember me O my God for good.
He remembers that better is the end of a thing than the beginning thereof; and
that he who indureth to the end shall be saved; and that he is crowned who
striveth lawfully, and therefore so runs that he may obtain. He knows
Ezekiel. 18. 24. When the righteous turns away from his righteousness, and
commits unquity, and does according to all the abominations that the wicked
man does, he shall not live: all his righteousness that he has done shall not
be mentioned, in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin, that he
has sinned, in them shall he die. He knows the quinquenmum Neroms, and the
misgiving pretenses and appearances of Tiberius and others: and he is better
acquaint with Scripture than to be ignorant of the Apostasy, ingratitude, and
fate of Joash 2 Chronicles. 24. Whereby is manifest that this observation is large
as useful as true concerning the Ruler. But the path of the Just is as the
shining light which grows brighter and brighter unto the noon-ti^e of the
day. And such a one is the good Ruler.

Now from this illustrat Character shine forth in so many bright beams 1. The
Original, 2, Dignity, 3, Duty, 4. Necessity, 5. Usefulness, and 6. ^arity of
the good Ruler. All which (so rich a piece is Scripture) may be easily deduced
from one sentence of Psalm 82 6. I have said, ye are Gods, and all of you are
Children of the most high. And because I know that both is evil manners, to
come ^athly into, and go hastily from the presence of a Ruler: I shall for a
salutation shut up my view with this seasonable exhortation: That in this
Atheistical age, the Ruler would do his Author the Honor, himself the
pleasure, and a discontented, unbelieving World the favor, to show forth so
much of God in his person and administrations, that those who will not believe
may see, and those who will not see may feel, That there is a God, that God
judges in the earth, and that by his vicegerent; that he be unquestionably
good himself, an incourager of those that do well, and a terror of evil doers:
that by the shadow of Divinity in the Ruler, the World (if possible) may be
convinced of the body and substance; and by the sight of the beautiful portrait
may be enamoured of the original. And you O Christian People consider, Christ
is not divided, nor contrary to himself. He is by nature and eternal Generation
Lord of the World, and God of policy and order, as well as of the Church by
pact and dispensation; and it is more than probable that Rulers hold not Christ
as Mediator. Christianity received into the policy is not so untoward or
unpleasant a Guest as to disturb its own quarter: and Religion but gets the
medlers blow when it sends a sword or occasioneth division: for of it is own
nature it is a harmless peace-pursuer; and they were sworn enemies and
slanderers of our Savior who said he was an enemy to Casar; for he taught his
followers to give unto Casar the things that are Casars, and unto God the
things that are Gods. Learn then of him to pay what we owe unto the Ruler. How
much are we indebted to so rare and excellent a creature as is the good Ruler?
We owe the Ruler 1. Honor in heart and behavior. 2, Subjection, in lawful
obedience or in humble submission. 3. Information and assistance in our
respective stations. 4. Tribute, and the bread of the Governor, 5. And with
all our owing we owe Prayer 1 Timothy 2. 2. 1. Sam. 24. 13. As says the Proverb
of the ancients, wickedness proceeds from the wicked: But God forbid that the
hand of any that fear God should be upon the Lords anointed A tender conscience
so far exercised to Godliness as to flee from all appearance of evil, cannot
digest the least approach to, or appearance of wrong to the Ruler: Say I this
as a man, or says not the Scripture the same also? ibid. 5, v. Davias heart
smot him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt.

The 5th view of this useful piece presents to us the Exit and retreat of the
Ruler. Rulers, like men upon a Stage, walk much in a disguise, or like Mercury,
and Aeneas, in a cloud; but here we have the Ruler going off with open face,
and with an eye to God, to himself, and to his reward. Remember me O my God for
good. His eye is upon God. 1. As a Witness: for remembrance is of things known,
and Gods knowledge is by sight and Intuition. He that can say with David Psalm.
119 168. All my ways are before thee, may save the travel and shun the woe of
those that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are
in the dark, and they say, who sees us? and who knows it? Isay 29. 15. And
their turning of things upside down is as the potters clay: they attempt more
than they are able, and presume where they have no power. A proud Ruler may say
to the Lords Messengers, who made thee of the Kings Counsel? But they would
remember, that Elisha the Prophet could tell the King of Israel the words which
the Syrian King spoke in his bedchamber: and who told him but God that heard
them? Let Rulers learn in their time to put God upon their counsels, and make
him a witness of their practices; left when they must go off, they find with
Jacob, that God was there, though they knew it not, nor called him to the
Council. 2. As a Friend: O my God. Happy he, Ruler or other, who can say with
his Savior, I go to my Father and my God. He may, in the Apostles words,
proclaim a bold defiance to all adversity: If God be with us who shall be
against us? He may meditat terror with the greatest security Isay 33, 18.
Though the World should be shaken and suffer sack, he may say with the
Philosopher, but upon better reason, that he is sure to be no loser: yea though
Hell were poured upon him, and heaven should seem to have forsaken him, My God,
My God even then shall support him, Every one seeks the Rulers favor; and the
Ruler would study to have a friend of his Superior. They who court alliance and
interest, would be persuaded that this is the highest. Bewar of that friend
that makes God an enemy, and of that gain where God is losed. Luther pronounces
him a Divine, who can well distinguish the Law and Gospel: and he is no less a
Christian, Ruler or other, who can reconcile them in, my God. Would thou
either get or know an interest in God, take the short and sure method of the
Psalmist, who also himself was a great Ruler, in that golden Ps. 16, 2. O my
soul thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord. 3. As a rewarder: for his,
remember, being a figure that puts the antecedent for the consequent, in
proper speaking is, reward me. And shall not he render to every man according
to his works? Prove. 24, 12. Ps. 62, 12 And verily there is a reward for the
righteous. Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield and thy exceeding great reward. I
fear the bad reward of some, has tempted others to do well to themselves in
their own time; but with greater reason I fear that those who are thus tempted,
have but a faint respect to the recompense of reward. But God who is not
unfaithful, to forget the service and labor of any, will sure be mindful of a
good Ruler. If Iehosaphat be reproved, his faults remembered, and wrath
threatened; yet his good deeds are not forgotten: Nevertheless there are good
things found in thee 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. 3. Most frequently throught the Scripture
the saints petition for reward is presented in the Word, Remember, whereby they
referr particulars to him who is able to do abundantly above all that they are
able either to ask or think. David says, remember me; Jeremiah says,
remember me; Hezekiah and Nehemiah say, remember me; and Augustine sweetly
rendereth Psalm. 8. 4. ver. Domine quid est homo nisi quia memor es ejus? Lord,
what is man but that thou art mindful of him? And happy he whose name is
written in that Book of Remembrance that is before the Lord Mal. 3. 16. And
when each man comes to be rewarded, malicious opposers of reformation, and
profane corrupters of Religion and the Covenant of the priesthood may readily
come to be remembered Chap 6, 14 and 13. 29. 2. In his retreat he goes off with
an eye to himself; Remember me etc. The Ruler who would make a honorable
retreat, and come fair off, would look to 5 Things chiefly that concern
himself. 1. His conscience. Can he say with Nehemiah? chap. 5. 19. Remember me
O my God for good according to all that I have done for this People: and chap.
13. 14. Remember me O my God concerning this and wipe not out my good deeds and
I have done for the house of my God and for the offices thereof Or with
Hezekiah 2 King 20. 3. I beseech thee O Lord remember now, how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight? Or with Samuel 1 Samuel 12 3. I have walked before you from my
Childhood to this day: behold here I am, witness against me before the Lord,
and before his anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or
whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received
any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you. Or if in any
thing, as a man, he has erred, for that he must say to God with Nehemiah chap.
13, 22. Remember me O my God and spare me according to the greatness of thy
mercy. A good conscience is a strong comforter: but Gods sweet and tender
mercies are the sinners last refuge and sure salvation: and it is Bellarmines
own Conclusion. Tutius tamen est adherere Christ's Justitiae. And if so, why
should unhappy men so voluminously dispute against their own mercy? Psalm. 119.
77. Let thy tender mercys come unto me that I may live, was the suit of the man
according to Gods heart, the pattern of Rulers. And truly this Generation
would be advised to amend their manners before they change their Religion, lest
under the gilded large net of Popery, by the Doctrine of merits, they be
involved and held in the inextricable grin of desperation: Or if indulgence and
pardon in end must do it, what ails them at Gods, which is infinitely better
than the Popes, and incompareably surer, beside that it is manifestly cheaper?
But for the Conscience of a Ruler, who can say with Titus that darling of
mankind? Non extare ullum suum factum Paeniteneum, excepto duntaxat uno. 2. His
soul: The Soul and Conscience are of such affinity that he who destroys the
one cannot save the other: And what does it profit a man though he should gain
the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what is the hope of the Hypocrite,
though he has gained,when God takes away his soul? The soul is the man, and
he has got his prize who gets that for a Prey. The end of our faith is the
salvation of our souls Psalm. 119. 175. Let my soul live, and it shall praise
thee, was the rare and suit of that excellent Ruler. And what a pity is it to
see a Ruler upon a retreat from the World, and from the Body, going off with
such a amentable Dirgie, as did Adrian the Emperor, in Aelius Spartianus.

Animula vagula, blandula,
Hospes comesque eorporis,
Quananc abibis in loca?
Pallidula, rigida, nudula:
Nee ut soles dabis ^ocos.
Or with such a hideous rage as Tiberius in Sue^onius, like one speaking out of
Hell: Du me Deaeque ejus perdant quam quotidie perire sentio. 3. His fame and
memory, a matter that highly concerns the Ruler, as in the last view shall be
showen more fully. ^ His posterity natural or politic. 5. His Works, both
which are expressed together in that Prayer of Moses the man of God Psalm: 90.
16, 17. Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy Glory unto their
Children: and let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: and establish thou
the work of our hands upon us; yea the work of our hands establish thou it. The
good Ruler not like the Ostrich, which God has deprived of wisdom, neither
has he imparted to her understanding; that is hardened against her young ones
as though they were not hers; her labor is in vain without fear Job 39. 16,
17. This regard to the work of God, and to the good of posterity, made Moses
record his Song Deuteronomy. 31, and 32. and moved him to bless the People chap. 33.
This moved Joshua to make a Covenant chap. 24 25. This begot in David such a
desire to build house unto the Lord. This made Hezekiah weep bitterly, that the
begun Reformation was like to cease by his death. This incited Paul that great
Church. Ruler so zealously to warn and guard the believers against what should
happen after his departure. This made Moses and David before the death so
carefully give charge to their successor concerning their duty. This moves all
men naturally at their death to leave their Counsel and Blesing to their
posterity. And finally, this induces good Rulers in their time to establish
good Ordinances by which being dead they may speak to posterity. 3. Like Moses,
he makes his retreat with a respect to the recompense of reward, Remember me, O
my God, for good, And that bo^ proposed in the promise 2 Samuel 23. 5. He has
made with mean everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and sure; for this is
all my Salvation, and all my desire; Or pledged in the testimony of a good
Conscience 2 King 20. 3. Remember O Lord how I have walked before the^ in truth
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is right in thy sight.He who
can say with Job My witness is in Heaven, and my record on high, may justly say
with Isaiah, my work is with the Lord, and my reward with my God. For surely
there is an end, and the expectation of the righteous shall not be cut off.
Now by these last words of the Tirshatha, the Ruler would be warned, in time to
think of his retreat, how he may make it good with honor. For whether slow
footed Time, which changes not his pace for fair weather or foul, for Summer
or Winter, advance at the ordinary rate of Journey; or whether death take post,
or changes take wing, and calamity come suddenly; or whether all these hold the
ordinary road with a warning, or take the by-way with a suprisal, It is time
for the Ruler to think of his removal. It is gravely observed by Pedro Mexia,
that there is no death incident to men which has not happened to Emperors:
Discontent and Grief is so ordinar to their rank, that almost it seems to be
proper: and how few of them escape a misfortune, even Children are taught from
Iuvenal.

Ad generum Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci
Descendunt reges, and sicca morte tyranni.
And in this consideration the Prayers made for Rulers and Emperors was a very
necessary devotion, sanctified by the command of God, and confirmed by the
examples of his servants in the Scriptures. Yet the Prayers which would not let
Pom^ey die in prosperity, could not recieve him of final adversity. The Ruler
would always e^pect his summonds, Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou
may be no longer steward. The plays which are but too much in fashion, act
things that are past; but the Ruler would erect a scene in his Soul, and
present there the things that may and shall be; That which has been is the
same that is, and that which is, is the same that shall be; and there is
nothing new: The Ruler must have a successor, as he himself succeeded to
another. But beyond paticulars Dan. 7 9. I beheld till the thrones were cast
down, were a divertisment worthy of the Ruler; who if he would make a safe
retreat, would beware of these things in particular 1. That he come not short
in reality of that which was denied Moses in the type Deuteronomy; 34, 4. The Canaan
above, the Land that is afar off, the rest that remains for the People of
God. I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not go over
thither. A sad matter for a ship to perish in the harbor, for a man to go to
Hell as it were in sight of Heaven: for a Ruler at once to be robbed of his
Soul and his Authority, who can sufficiently bewail his misery? I say this
happened Moses in the type; for that he is already possessed in Glory is manifest
from Heb. 11. and Luke 13, 28. 2. Of Solomon's fate, That by their Apostasy and
transgression they leave not the World to dispute their salvation; as Papists
and Armimans make him an instance of the final Apostasy of Saints; though they
fail in probation and fall short of their Enterprise. It were the wisdom of the
Ruler by his unquestioanble Goodness to put to silence evil speakers. 3. of the
fate of Joash, who for his Apostasy, ingratitude, and trespass, was taken away
in a hurry with terror and misery 2. Chron; 24, 23. and foreward. They who are
bold to sport with Eternity would bewar that time bear not witness of their
folly. 4. Of David's calamity; That they entail not a Judgment to their house
and posterity; The sword shall not depart from thy house. I the Lord thy God am
a jealous God visiting the iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, to the
third and fourth generation. Manasseh is a witness how much hereditary misery
may come upon posterity for the sins of Rulers. 5. Of Ieroboams memory; That he
bear not the brand of infamy with posterity, who ^ade Israel to sin. And this
inviteth me to another view.

The 6th view of these words obviously presents the Memoire of the Ruler:
And, being recorded as a part of the History, gives this friendly and
pertinent warning to all in Authority, That they would really be such as
willingly they would suffer themselves by History to be represented to the
World and to posterity: and that with Job they may say Chap. 31, 35. O that
mine Adversary had written a Book! etc, Prove. 22, 1. A good Name is rather to
be chosen than great Riches, and loving favor rather than silver and gold: And
the Apostle recommendeth to all, Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are of good report. Cicero pro Archia excellently says: ^rahimur omnes
Laudis studio: and optimus quisque maxim gloria ducitur. And Tiberins in
Tacitus Lib. 4. Annal: brings this so near, that in a manner he impropriateth
it to the Ruler; Ad ea Tiberius Cateris morta thus in eo stare consilia, quid
sibi conducer^ putent: Principum diversam esse sortem quibus pracipu^ rerum ad
samam dirigenda. So that all men in their measure, good men more, and Rulers
who should be the best men, most and chiefly are governed by regard to their
fame and Memory. And this is their study: though, if so their fate be, to do
well and be ill spoken of, is no less Princely: according to the saying vented
by Antisthenes, used by Alexander, and imitated by the Emperor Marcu^ Aurelius
Antoninus the Philosopher. The Ruler would seriously remember, That the World
will not die with him: and that there will be men to speak and write when he
shall not be found to answer: That fear and flattery the two abusers (...)
living Rulers, like enraged Cowards (nam timidissimum quod que est idem
crudelissimum) turn the most insolent avengers, and sarcastick insulters over
the Dead that bite not. Let the fates of Sejanus that great Minion, of Tiberius
his master, of Domitian, and generally all wicked Emperors and Rulers be
witnesses with a warning. Tacitus that great state Historian, and the Rulers
Author, against whom nothing can be excepted, in the entry of his History tells
us, That the acts and affairs of Tiberius, Ca^us, Clandius and Nero, while they
flourished were falsely represented by fear; but after they fell, were set off
with fresh hatred. If the voice of a flattering, fearful, interessed
discontented, changeable multitude be rejected as partial, or slighted as
unsufficient, whose mouths not withstanding it were ^^ter they were stopped;
yet the Ruler would ^ell consider what he leaves a Tacitus, an imparti^^^
Author to say, who writes sine ira and s^udio, quo^^m causas procul habet; who
can tell him contemtis ^^mae, contemni virtutes. But lastly the Ruler above all
^ould consider. what he deserves at the hands of ^od that cannot lie, who
deceives not nor is de^ived, the faithful witness, the sovereign Ruler (...)
fame, unerring giver of names, and just dispen^^^ of honors, who has
testified 1 Samuel; 2, 30. Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed: And ^ov. 10. 7. The memory of the just is
blessed, but the memory of the wicked shall rot. That ^uler has given a
desirable subject for History, and erected a fair and enduring Monument for his
memory, who can say with Nehemiah, Remember ^^e O my God for good, according to
all that I have one for this People, and for the house of my God: for ^sal.
112, 6. The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance; and ver. 9. his
righteousness endures for ^ver, his horn shall be exalted with honor.

FINIS.
GRAPES IN THE Wilderness: OR A Discourse fitted to all Times, Treating of the
Dispensations of GOD, AND OF The pertinent Duties and Comforts of His PEOPLE in
these Times. WITH A Preface of the fullness of Scriptur sufficiency for
Answering all Cases.

Hosea 9. 10, I found Israel like Grapes in the Wilderness Jer. 2, 2. I
Remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when
thou want after me in the Wilderness in a Land that was not sown Numb. 33,
1. These are the journeyes of the Children of Israel, which went forth out of
the land of Egypt with their armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron. 2 Verse.
And Moses wrote their goings out, according to their journeyes by the
Commandment of the Lord, and these are their journeyes according to their
goings out. 1 Epistle of John 1 3 That which we have seen and heard, declare we
unto you. Written in the Wilderness.

Edinburgh, Printed by George Mosman, and are to be Sold at his Shop in the
Parliament-Close, Anno Dom. 1692.

THE PREFACE,
THE Jews have a Tradition of that Manna wherewith God fed Israel in the
Wilderness forty years, that the taste thereof was such, and so various, that
it answered every man's Appetit, and tasted to him of whatsoever food his soul
desired. And look how uncertain is that Jewish Tradition of the material Manna
that was gathered off the Earth for the space of forty years in the Wilderness
of the land of Egypt: So certain is this Christian Truth of the Spiritual Manna
the word of God, that bread of Heaven, that Angels food, wherewith God feeds
his Church in all ages successively, and every Child of his House the Israelite
indeed respectively throughout the whole course of their life and travel in the
World, which is the great Wilderness: that it has in it a real supply of all
their necessities, and has always in it a word in season to all persons, at
all times, and in every condition: To the Dead, it is life: to the living, it
is health: to the weary, it is refreshment: to the weak, it is strength: to
Babes, it is milk: to strong men, it is meat: to the hungry, it is bread: to
the thirsty, it is waters: To the drooping soul and sorrowful heart, it is
wine: to the faint, it is apples and Pomegranats, cinnamon, safron, spiknard,
Calamus and all spices of the merchant. To such who love dainties, it is marrow
and fatness, honey of the rock and droping from the honeycomb: to the wounded,
it is the balm of Gilead: to the blind and weak sighted, it is eye salve and
ointment to anoint the eyes. To such neat souls as love to be all Glorious
within, and to keep clean Garments, it is a Crown, chains of the neck,
braceless, earrings, pendents and Ornaments of all sorts: and if they like to
be in fashion and to go fine in the court of a Heavenly Conversation and
communion with God, it presents them a bright large glass whereat they may
daily adorn themselves to purpose. This Glass is no falsifying nor multiplying
Glass, but a just discovering and directing one; here are also discovered not
only all the obliquities of gesture, and faults of feature; and all spots upon
the face or clothes; but likewise the very in most thoughts and intents of the
heart with the most subtle imaginations of the mind are here manifested. Here
ye are directed to sit all your Soul-ornament in the fynest spiritual fashion,
and to compose your gestur and order your motion, so as you may be able to
stand in the presence of him who is greater than Solomon. This large bright
Glass does stand in King Solomon's Bedchamber in the Pook of Canticles, and in
it you may see your self from head to foot, There ye see the head beautiful
with locks. Cantic. 4, There ye see the sweet comely Countenance of the Saint,
which the Lord is so much in love with, that he is in continual desire to see
it: there you see those eyes that ravish his heart and so throughout even to
the feet that are very beautiful with shoes. Chap. 7. 1. For such as are
destitute and unprovided, the word of God is a portion: to the poor, it is
Riches of treasure of choice Silver and fine Gold. Here is that which
dispelleth darkness, clears doubts, dissolveth hardness, dissappointeth
fears, discharges cares, solaceth sorrows, and satisfies desires. Here is
counsel and strength for peace and war. Here is daily intelligence from Heaven.
And in a word, here is the best Companion that ever a soul did choose. And
blessed they who can spiritually tone that short but high note Psalm. 119. 98.
Thy Commandments are ever with me. And that they are not with the soul as a
burden of idle attendants are with a man, see what good offices they perform by
their presence. Prove. 6. 22. 23. They are as Hobab to Israel, and David to
Nabal, Eyes and a Guard to us in the Wilderness. In the World, and chiefly in
this World we change seats and Societies, we shift conditions and habitations,
we go through the Wilderness of Baca from troop to troop; we are driven from
Temple, Altar, and Oracle, and we are divided from our relations and dearest
acquaintance whom we loved as our own Soul, we are spoiled of our Companions
with whom we took sweet counsel and went into the house of God. But blessed
that Soul who in all this can say I am not alone, my good old friend the word
of God, the Bible the guide of my Youth has not yet forsaken me, it is with
me, yea it is in me, in the midst of my heart, and I bear about me daily a
living copy of those livly Oracles, and they are more near me than my very
self: for my heart is within me, and they are within my heart. I may be
separated from my self by death that parts the dearest Friends, my heart may be
plucked from my breast, and my Soul dislodged of my Body, but my Companion, the
word of God and me shall nothing part. Prosperity shall not cause me forget it:
And adversity will not cause it forget me. I will never forget thy Precepts,
for with them thou have quickened me. Psalm. 119. 93. As those who live upon the
shore have a very just dial of the measure and motion of the water, which they
can make use of without the sun; so are the ebbings and flowings of our
affections to the word of God, the surest, most universal, and constant
witnesses of our daily condition: for albeit the darkness that is upon the face
of our Souls may pretend that it is night with us; yet if it be full sea in our
affection to the word of God, we may be sure it is noon day: and when it is low
water in our affection to the word, sure then, it is mid night: and the sun was
never seen at mid night. Be sure, it is ill with that Soul that is out of
conceit with the word of God.

Now to say nothing of the malignant qualities of gross ignorants, profane
Atheists, and obstinate unbelievers who are habitually dissafected to the word
of God: nor yet to mention the willful groundless fits of pettish distempers in
Saints, who often times do even take up at their foot groundless and needless
pleaes and discouraging apprehensions which they cannot so easily lay down
again Psalm. 42, 5, Why art thou cast down O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted in me? Psalm. 77. 2. My sore ran in the night and ceased not, my soul
refused to be comforted. To pass these, I say, as bearing no direct impeachment
of the abovesaid commendation of the absolute sufficiency of the word of God to
answer all cases; There are three Things that in a time of tentation, in an
hour and power of darkness do readily concur to diminish the Saints respects
to the word of God. The first is, that their case seems odd, unparalleled, and
unpracticable in Scripture: they find no case equal with theirs in all respects
that has been cured. 2 In their weakness they thereupon conclude that their
case is really hopless and irremedable. But 3 The saddest of all is, that they
find the word not only silent for them, but to speak directly and aloud against
them, as they think, smiting, hewing and hammering them, with sad and heavy
threatenings and intimations of determined wrath rejection and ruin to come
upon them from the Lord. In all these they err, not knowing the Scriptures, But
that yet for all this there is hope, and that the Scriptures are not to be
casten out with as unkind and uncomfortable Companions in such cases, Let these
things be considered for vindication of the Scriptures to Souls thus exercised.

And 1. Be it granted as the truth is, that a Souls case may be such for
Circumstances, that the Scriptures mention none Parallel with it in all points
to have been cured (the same is all along to be understood respectivly of
Churches and Nations as of particular persons) yet I am confidently persuaded,
that there is no case now incident to any whether Nation, Church, or Person,
but the Scripture holds forth some either, as evil or worse, whether for sin
or suffering that have been helped. There has no temptation taken you (says
the Apostle 1 Cor. 10 13) but such as is common to man. Is thy case sinful?
behold the Scripture tells us, that he obtained mercy who once a day thought
himself the chief of sinners. 1 Timoth. 1, 15. And that as an exquisite and
rare piece of mercy is set forth in the Gospel, for a pattern to all those who
should afterward believe in Christ to life everlasting. Christ loves to have
sinners change and for that he puteth forth his pattern, as Merchants do their
samplers of Rich Wares: and sure he has since that time put off many such
pieces, and yet the pattern stands forth showing that their is more, abundance
to serve all that have need. To say nothing of Paul's sin which sure was great
enough, nor of many who since his time may have thought themselves the chief of
sinners as well as he did (where I think I see a kind of strife among mercies
Clients who shall be most beholding to free Mercy and free Grace) This pattern
makes it fully certain that there is mercy for the chief of sinners be who he
will, and that he, whosoever he that supposes himself the chief of sinners, is
^ot thereby warranted to despair of mercy; but rather to plead the greatest
interest of necessity, and to look upon himself as the fittest subject for the
Lord, wherein to display his Glory. Is thy Case afflicted? And thy sufferings
extraordinary? See Job's desperate Case, see Heman's distracted Case, see that
Case of the Church in the Lamentations, in whose Case there is hope, though it
had not been done under the whole Heaven as had ^een done to Jerusalem. Look to
the cloud of Witnesses. Look to Jesus Heb. 11. and 12. Chapters.

But here is the great Case of the troubled Soul, Cleanly sufferings for the
Exercise of my Grace, ^^ Job's, or for the testimony of Truth and a ^ood
Conscience, as those of all the Witnesses and Martyrs, I could well bear: In
these respects, I ^ount it all joy to fall into diverse temptations, and could
count it my Honor and Mercy as well ^^ suffer for Christ as to believe in him:
I could ^o with such sufferings as Job would have done with his Adversaries
Books; I could take them upon my shoulder, and bind them as a Crown to me, and
as a Prince would I go near unto him; ^ut Alas! I suffer with an evil
Conscience, my afflictions are to me the punishment of my ini^uity, and the
fruits of my folly. This case indeed, if any, requires the Tongue of the
learned, and a word in season to the Soul that is weary of ^^; And if the word
of God help me not here, I have lost the Cause, and come short of my Accounts.
But there is hope in Israel also concerning this thing. Ezra. 10. 2. And I find
the Scripture clear in these particulars concerning this case

1. I find indeed a great odds betwixt cleanly suffering for righteousness, and
suffering merely for i^ doing. The one is a thing thank-worthy, and Glorifying
of God in the highest manner actively the other is not thank-worthy, but is the
man's misery. In the one a man has a good Conscience and joy therefrom: in the
other a man has an i^ Conscience, with terror and sorrow proceeding
therefrom. The one gives a man good confidence of assistance, and of the spirit
of Glory and of God to rest upon him: the other makes a man despon^ and droop.
The one stops, the other opens the mouths of wicked men. Therefore says Peter.
Pet. 3, 17. It is better if the will of God be so, t^^ ye suffer for well
doing, than for evil doing.

2ly It is clear that we ought to bear such Afflictions with the more patience,
Micah 7, 9. I will be^ the indignation of the Lord, because I have finned again
him. Nor ought any living man to complain who suffers merely for the punishment
of his iniquity. La^ 3, 39. and if he must complain let him complain to God,
and bemoan his case in quietness to him* It is far better for men to bear their
yoke quieth and sit alone, than to pine away in their iniquity Mourning one to
another whilst they do not (...) to the Lord. Too much whining and complaining
to men will be found Labor which profitet not, try it who will. But as a man
would complain to God. so he would beware to complain of God: he would leave
his complaint upon him self. Job 10, 1. and lay the blame of his afflictions
home upon himself. Psalm 38. 5. My folly makes is so.

3. It is clear from the whole History of the Scriptures, that most of all the
Saints Afflictions, whether conjunctly in the Body of a Church or Nation, or
severally in their own persons particularly, have been the chastizments of
their iniquities and the Rods of men, that is, such corrections as men use upon
misdemeaning Children: I find this true of publik Affliction of a whole Church
or Nation.

4, It is clear, that the Lords Rods, whether public or personal upon his
sinful People, ^ow from love in the fountain, are mixed with love in their
course, and run forth into love in the ^ssue. If this seem strange to any, let
him remember, that he who spares his Rod, hates his Child ^ut he that
chasteneth him betimes delivers his ^oul. Gods thoughts concerning his People
are thoughts of peace and not of evil, to give them an expected end. Jer. 29.
11. And in the midst of wrath he will remember mercy, Habbac, 3. 2. Gods love
to his People is very consistent with anger, though that be even servent to the
Degree of wrath, but not with hatred; and hatred, not anger, is lov's opposite:
an angry love is ofttimes most profitable. Heb. 12. 10. Let none therefore be
so weak and Child-witted as to eonclude, I am sharply scourged, and sore
smitten for my folly, herefore my Father has cast me off and cares not for me.
And yet we find Affliction, that makth a wise man mad, raising such
apprehensions oft^^s in the wise heart of strong David. I do not here speak how
the Lord causes his People to pass under the rod, and brings them within the
bond of the Covenant Ezekiel. 20, 37. and how he chooses them in the furnace of
Affliction Isai 48. 10. and that was an Affliction for sin and sadly deserved
Rod: And yet the Lord when he would pick out a piece of the finest metal, goes
neither to Coffer nor Cup-board, where the glistering of Peace and posterity
dazzle the eyes of undescreet behold ers; but he goes to the smoke and Soot of
the furnace, and there he pitcheth upon the rare^ Saints of the last refine:
The Lord goes down to the Land of Affliction and to the house of Bondage to
visit his People, and there he falls in love with them, there he wooes them,
and there he wedds them in their mourning Garments: For the get not the oil of
joy nor the Garment of Praise till the second day of the Marriage, and then
the^ rise from the Dust and shine, their light comes and the Glory of the Lord
arises upon them. See Isai 48. 10. cited, Hos. 2, 14. and foreward. Isai 61.
3. and 60. 1. In fine, the Scripture is full o^ rare and satisfactory
Expressions of Gods love to his People, even under sufferings which their own
wickedness has procured, whereof it will apper tain to speak more particularly
in the sequel of ou^ ensuing Discourse.

5thly It is clear from Scripture, that there is difference to be put betwixt
sin procuring and bringing on Sufferings and bitter Afflictions, and sin
discovered in and by suffering. Let God ca^ a Holy Job in the furnace, and it
will discover scum, that will cause him say, My Transgressions are infinite, And
yet the Lord himself sustains Job's Plea, that it was not for sin that he was
pursuing him.

6. It is clear that there is a great difference often times betwixt the
Righteousness of God, and the Righteousness of Men Afflicting his People: as we
see frequently in David's Cases. Yea I find an excellent, rare, comfortable
Dispensation of God to his People, that he will sometimes scourge them with the
Golden Rod of Martyrdom, and correct their faults in an Honorable way, and
chastile them soundly, and yet never let the World know, what is betwixt him
and them. The Lord loves not to proclaim and blaze the bemoaned faults of his
People, nor to make them Odious to the World which has a bad enough Opinion of
them always: But if I must correct my Child says he, I will stay till the
World and he fall out in some point of Conscience, in Faith or manners,
wherefore he must suffer, and then in my Gracious Wisdom, I will show a rare
Conjunction or meeting of these three Planets in one house. 1. The correction
of my Child. 2. His Glory, and 3. His acceptable Duty; and I will let him earn
a reward of thanks and Glory in that very suffering wherein I shall visit his
iniquities, and he shall give Testimony for me. God can go many Earauds at
once, and sold up many Projects in one piece of Providence: the Lord will
finish the whole work and cut it short in Righteousness, because a short work
will the Lord make upon the earth. Romans 9. 28. The Lord is good at dispatches.
If the Question be then, whether God will ever Honor a Man with whom he has a
Controversy, to suffer for Righteousness? I Answer, Yes, and I confess I
should hardly have been of that Judgment, if I had not found clear Divine truth
going before me in it, comparing the whole tenor of the 38 Psalm with the 20.
verse thereof: where at once the Psalmist is suffering from men for that which
is good, and from God for his foolishness and iniquity. Verses 4, 5, and 18.
Here it is fit to remember Luther's seasonable warning, that when David in his
Prayers speaks of his Righteousness, we would refer it to its true
correlative, to wit, toward men his enemies he was Righteous; but toward God
that is his Language, Be merciful to me O God, be merciful to me, in the
multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my iniquities Psalm. 51. The accuser of
Gods Children will be ready to carry ill reports betwixt him and them, and to
keep up an ill understanding betwixt them, if he can, and in times of suffering
for their Duty he will not be idle: he will tell them a thousand Stories of
their own sins, to weaken their hands and cause them believe, that God will
never accept service of them, but that they shall come foul off with all their
fair Essays. Ye have heard of Gods Gracious Wisdom, and now these are the
Devil's malicious wyles; but a Syllogism or Argument framed of one premise of
Gods, and another of the Devil's, will never infer a Conclusion of Faith, and
that can claim ^iducial assent. Wherefore in such a mixed case, (which I
desire may be remembered to be every caseable) let a man freely declare his
iniquity (...) God and be sorry for his sin, Psalm: 38. 18. Let him repent and
mean himself to God, who (as I have said) loves to keep his People's Counsel
and to keep their faults sub sigillo confessionis and under the rose, that is,
he will be to them a good Secretary, but ^^t them cleave to that which is good,
and encourage themselves in a good matter, and beware of failing in present
Duty in a discourageing sense of former iniquities: for one fault will never
^end another, and yet that is even the best method that Satan uses to offer in
such cases: But the Lord, that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke him, for troubling
his poor afflicted People, who are as ^rands plukt out of the fire. I have
insisted upon his case, because of it self it is a weighty deserving one; and I
have not seen any who has directly spoken to it, but one who dispatcheth it to
good purpose in a word. It is worthy Mr. Scuder in his Christians daily walk,
(this book was by famous Mr. Alexander Henderson recommended and gifted as a
vade mecum or pocket piece to his ^riend, at that time a young Gentlman going
into ^rance) where, page 263 he speaks thus. You will say, if you did bear
Afflictions for Christ, then you could think and expect well of it; but you
oftimes suffer Affliction justly for your sin. I Answer (says he, for he had
been speaking of that Scripture, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18) though this place
principally point at Martyrdom and suffering for Christ's cause; yet it is all
one in your case if you will bear Afflictions patiently for his sake A man may
suffer Afflictions for Christ two ways. First when he suffers for his
Religion and for his cause. 2dly when a man suffers any thing that God lays
on him quietly and for Christ's will and commands sake. This Latter is more
general than the former, and the former must be comprehended in this Latter:
else the former suffering for Christ's cause, if it be not in love and obedience
for Christ's sake, out of Conscience to fulfill his will is nothing: whereas he
that endures patiently endures Affliction for Christ, though he never be put
to it to suffer for profession of Christ: and i^ such an one were put to it, he
would readily suffer for Christ's cause: and such Afflictions as these thus
patiently endured, work also this excellent weight of Glory as well as the
other. By these and the like reasonings of faith, you may world your Souls to
patience as David and others have done by casting Anchor on God and on his word
fixing their stay and hope in God. Let the issue of your reasoning be this, I
will wait on God, and yet for all matter of disquietment will praise him who is
the health of my countenance and my God. Thus Mr. Scudder, and truly none
could have spoken more, nor to better purpose in so few words.

And thus have I spoken to Scripture examples of cases Parralleling the
weightiest of cases, incident to any man now living. Only be it remembered that
cases are as faces, many agree in some things some in many things, none in all
things. There is in every man's case something peculiar, aggravating it beyond
that of another man, and (as the Heart knows its own grief) every man knows
best the plague of his own Heart; but he knows not, at least feels not his
Neighbors sores: Hence every one judges his own case worst of all, it may be
the best is bad enough, and yet the worstis not so bad but it may be better.

In the second place, for Vindication of the Scriptures from the foresaid
disheartning prejudices, I shall lay down this very self-ground whereupon the
querulous Soul does walk, though with a halting foot. That those Cases are
hopeful and cureable that are paralleled and practicable in Scripture, that is
to say, That such whereof the Scripture gives account, have been either hopeful
and curable, or actually have been cured and helped. And thus I reason, e
converso, or by exchange. That case is hopeful and curable which is paralleled
and practicable: But such is thy case, it has a match in Scripture, and
therefore curable. That is Paralleled and has a match in Scripture I prove
thus: A case concluded hopeless has a match in Scripture: But such is thy
case, thou concludes it hopeless: And therefore it has a match in Scripture.
That a case concluded hopeless has a match in Scripture, it is clear, in that
the Lord finds fault with those in Jeremiah, that said their was no hope, and
assures them there is hope; if they will return and repent. It is clear
likewise from the Churches case in Isaiah, who said her judgment was passed
over of the Lord, and for that is taxed, that she spoke unreasonably. Likewise
from David's case in the Psalms, that said, He was cut off from God's presence,
and yet he found heart to look again to God, and to cry to him and was heard,
notwithstanding his former peremptoriness: Likewise from the case of the
Church, or Jeremiah for the Church in the Lamentations, who with one breath
said, My hope and my strength is perished from the Lord, and at the next breath
could say, This I call to mind, therefore have I hope. And thereupon has left
a general experimental instruction to all others, That it is good that a man
should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord, Lament. 3. 26.

But in the third place, The Soul affected is to be advertised and put in mind,
that it is an error and weakness to think that matchless and unparalleled
cases, are therefore hopless and uncureable: For it is to be considered, that
Scripture instances and examples of parallel matching cases, are neither the
only, nor complete, nor principal ground of curing and resolving cases: For
some cases were the first of their kind, and so could have no precedent, nor
yet practicable example: And yet in that case, according to this crazie
principle, That no unparalleled Case is curable, the very fixed examples and
choice copies of curable cases should themselves have remained uncurable, as
having no precedent nor example: but the only square and complete ground of
curing all cases, is the whole Scripture, whereof examples are but a small
part, and that too, but as the illuminating colors, and not the substantial
lineaments thereof: For exempla illustrant, examples do but enlighten things,
and all that an example can do, is to show that such a case is practicable, and
potentially curable: But it does not, it cannot actually cure it. Wherefore the
principal, yea proper ground of resolving and curing all cases, are the
universal fundamental truths of the Gospel, the knowledge of God and Christ,
and of God in Christ according to the Gospel, whereof the Covenant of Grace is
the sum and text; and this David knew right well 2 Samuel 23. 5. This Covenant
will mend all the holes of the believers house, and completely fit every case
he can be in: Till the foundations be destroyed it is never time to ask, what
can the Righteous do? Psalm. 11. 3. But so long as there is a God in Heaven that
does wonders, so long as Christ is all, and in all, and ^o long as Gods
Covenant with his Saints endures, which shall be while Sun and Moon endure, and
longer too, For his Covenant shall live to lay its hands upon those two shining
Eyes of this corruptible World that is passing and posting off daily, and which
now (like the first Covenant, Heb. 8. 13.) decaying and waxing old, is ready to
evanish and die; So long (I say) as these foundations stand sure, the
righteous, in every case may still know what to do: For upon these shall Mercy
be built, and Faithfulness established in the very Heavens, Psalm. 89. 2. I
shall illustrate this consideration with the case of Relapses, a case right
perplexing to exercised Spirits, and wherein they find the Scripture sparing of
examples, at least of frequent relapses into the same fault, which, makes them
apprehend there is no hope. These I write, not that any should sin (and sure
for that very cause, the Spirit of God in Wisdom has beeen more sparing of
such examples) (...) if any man have sinned and relapsed often into sin, Let
him remember. 1. Christ's Seventy times Seven times, Matthew 18, 22. And withal,
that as far as Heaven is above the earth, so far are his ways above our ways,
and his thoughts above ours. Isai. 55. 9. Let him remember. 2, The indefinit
promises Ezekiel 18. 27. and the like, That when and what time soever a sinner
shall repent, he shall find mercy, 3. Let him remember chiefly, the blood of
Christ that cleanses us from all sin. 1 John 1; 7. And 4thly if he must have
examples, Let him read the History of Israel's relapses in the book of Judges,
Notwithstanding which, the Lord as often as he heard their penitent cries,
returned, and Repented, and sent them Saviors. And let him read a notable
place Psalm 78. 38. 40. In the 38 verse, many a time he delivered them, and
forgave them: but how many times did he that in the 40. verse, how many a time
did they provoke him? Even as often as they provoked him, a^ often he forgave
them: And when any man shall tell me precisely how often they provoked him, I
shall then tell him peremptorly how often he forgave them. A simple Soul may
possibly think to prevail with God at a time, by pleading thus after the manner
of men: Help me O Lord this once, and pardon my sin, and I shall never trouble
thy Majesty again. I apprehend such are sometimes the thoughts of some. But
when Heaven and earth shall be measured in one line, when God shall be as man
or as the son of man, when his ways shall be as our ways, and his thoughts as
our thoughts; when I shall see the man that shall not be beholding to mercy, Or
the day wherein we ought not to Pray, forgive us our debts, or the time when it
shall be lawful to limit the Holy one of Israel, then shall I think that a
convenient Argument: But if I understand the Gospel, it might be more beseeming
God and his Grace in the Gospel, to plead after this manner; O Lord be gracious
to me and forgive me this once; And if ever I need, I shall come to thee again.
Providing always that the Grace of God be not turned into wantonness, nor this
our liberty used for an occasion to sin.

Now for confirmation of what has been said in this consideration, I shall
apply my self briefly to two places of Scripture. The first is Psalm 22, 7.
where I observe these things from the whole tenor of the Psalm. 1. A saint's
case may be right odd, and in many things without a match, but I am a worm and
no man, a reproach of men etc. 2. I see in afflicted Saints a strong
inclination to aggrege their own case, and to reason themselves out of case,
with a sort of pleasure, verse 4. Our Fathers trusted in thee, and thou
deliveredst them; but I am not like other men, I am a worm and no man, the
very language of dejected Spirits to this day. 3. I see, that when they have
reasoned themselves never so far out of account, beyond all example or match of
case Parrallel, there is yet some further ground, for the faith of the desolate
Soul to travel upon, in its search for discoveries of light and comfort, for we
see how he goes on complaining, searching, believeing, and Praying till he
arrives at Praise, which ever lies at the far end of the darkest Wilderness
that a Saint can go through: for when a Saint is in the thickest darkness and
under the greatest damps, there is still aliquid ultra, something before them;
and that is, light for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. 4. I
see that a humble well tamed Soul will stoop right low to lift up such grounds
of hope and encouragement, as to a Soul that is lifted up might seem but
slender and mean: thou tookest me from my mothers belly, and caused me to hope
upon the breasts. A humble faith will winn its meat amongst other folks feet,
and when all examples fail such, they will find an example in themselves
furnishing them with matter of hope. 5. I see there may be extant signal and
manifest evidences of Gods kindness to his People in former times, and in cases
as pressing as the present, the Memory whereof, for a long time may be darkened
with the prevailing sense of incumbent pressures. verse 21. save me from the
Lions mouth, for thou have heard me from the horns of the unicorns. 6. Though
all Parallels and matching examples of other men's cases fail a Saint; yet to
him it is sufficient ground of Faith and matter of Praise, that his own case
has been helped, when once it has been as ill as now it is, thou have heard
me from the horns of the unicorns; and therefore I will declare thy name
amongst my brethren, in the midst of the Congregation will I praise thee. 7. If
there, must be examples of leading cases, if so I may call them, then some must
be the example by being first in that case? And thus oftentimes, he that finds
no Parallel before him, leaves one behind him: And indeed we should be as well
content, if so the will of God be, to be examples to others of suffering
affliction and enduring tentations, as to have examples of others, Therefore
says he, verse 27. All the ends of the World shall remember this, and in the
last verse, They shall declare to the people that shall be to come, that he
has done this.

The 2d place of Scripture I direct my thoughts to is Job. 5. 8, 9. Job's case
was clearly unparalled and absolutely matchless: And says Eliphaz the
Temanite, I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause. And that
he might do that upon good ground, he shows in the 9 verse, for (says he) God
does great things. Why, says the Soul, mine is a great case, then he does
great things; Why, I know what he does: No, neither thou nor all the World
knows that, nor can find it out for he does unsearchable things. Whether that
he is a God that cannot be known, be a greater mercy. or that he is an unknown
God be to us a greater misery, is that which I know not: but this I know well,
that more of the knowledge of God, and larger thoughts of him would loose many
a knot, and answer many a perplexing case, to his People. Yea, but says the
Soul, it shall be a wonder, a very miracle if ever my case mend; Why, then
says Eliphaz, he does marvelous things. Yea but God's wonders are not his
every-dayes work; but they are a few rare pieces of his kindness showed to
eminent Saints, and great favourities, And we are not obliged to expect
wonders: Yet, I hope you are obliged to believe Gods word, that he does such
things, and those too without number; and you are obliged to obey Gods voice,
to seek unto him, and unto him to commit your cause, and you are obliged to
give God his own latitude, and as well not to limit him if he will do wonders,
as not to tempt him to wait for wonders: And Psalm. 88. 10. will thou show
wonders to the dead? makes it clear, that God will turn the course of nature
upside down, and make the World Reel as we see Psalm. 18. at length, And will do
wonders to purpose, that even the dead shall be witnesses of, before that his
beloved be not delivered. Now to descend into the particular grounds of the
cures of Saints cases, were to go through all the Attributes of God, all the
offices of Christ, all the promises of the Gospel, and Articles of the Covenant
of Grace, which are the substantial Lincaments of that well contrived piece the
Word of God, which is so well illumnated with the lively colors of examples
sufficient, and those so well mixed and so justly distinguished, one having
what another wants, and the other having what it wanted, and wanting what it
had, that it speaks the finger of God to have done it, and leaves a defiance to
nature and Art once to come near it.

In the Fourth place I offer this to be considered by the Soul distempered,
that is like to fall unkind with the Word of God, through an apprehension. That
all the threatenings of the Word are directly against it. That all the most
peremptory and seere threatenings of the Word are to be understood and qualified
with the exception of Repentance. This is clear, 1. from Christ's express Word.
Luke 13. 3. 5. except ye repent ye shall all perish, ^^ from the account of
events wherein we see ^^at the most peremptory threatenings have been ^iverted,
and their execution prevented by Repentance: witness, with many others, the
cases of Hezekiah and the Ninevits. 3. From the exhortations and Expostulations
annexed to ^reatnings, with a Solemn Declaration of the ^ords Gracious dislike
of men's Misery, whereof ^e Scripture is full. In a word, the humble peni^^nt is
worse Feared, than hurt with threatenings. And even as a plentiful rain quenches
thunders, always the violence of Storms and Tempests, and ^oth tempers and
calms the Air; So the Tears of ^odly Repentance, compose the Thunder-and
^eather-beaten Soul that is tossed with the Tem^ests of Thundering threatenings.
In the 32, Psalm, ^ere was a great Storm in Davia's Conscience. He ^ared all
day long; etc. But a free work of sincere repentance Calmes all, and leaves the
Soul quiet ^^d serene: David takes a House upon his head, refuges himself in
God by faith, and then let it ^t the unhappiest, Thou art my hiding place, thou
^^t preserve me from trouble, thou shall compass ^e about with Songs of
deliverance Selah. Verse 7. By this time, I hope, it does in some measure
^^pear, that the Scriptures are not wanting, in the performance of all offices
of kindness, that can Rationally be required in the most unpromising cases: And
that they are much to be blamed who upon any of the foresaid pretenses would
pick quarrel against the Scriptures. But such deal not fairly neither are their
ways equal: and I may we say to them, is this your kindness to your friend
sure the Scriptures have not deserved any such service of your hands.

Now to the Soul that would keep See Grenhams directions for reading the
Scriptures.
up kindness with the Scriptures, and so would be mighty in the Scriptures I
leave these Directions in sh^^ words.

1. Acquaint thy self with the whole Scripture and all Scripture both in its
letter and meaning for that is to know the Scriptures: Otherway it is but an
unknown Tongue to him that is ^^naquainted either with the phrase or meaning of
i^ The Soul that is thus acquainted with all Scriptures, if one Scripture bind
it, another will loose i^ if one wound it, another will heal it: if one ca^ it
down, another will comfort it.

2. Be a careful keeper of the word of God i^ practice. David felt, and every
Soul that had their Senses exercised will feel their Affection to and
proficiency in the Scriptures grow according to their practice of the
Scriptures. Psalm. 1: 9. 5 This I had because I kept thy Precepts, And Christ
teaches plainly, that he that is a doer of the will of God, is fairest to know
the Doctrine that is of God. I know no such way to be a good Scholar, as to be
a good Christian.

3. Intertain the Spirit of God, if you would ^ave either comfort or profit of
the word: Isai 59, 1. the Spirit and the Word are promised together: ^ohn 6.
63. Christ tells us that his Words are spirit ^^d life. 1 Cor. 2, 10. and
foreward, it is the Spirit that does all by the Word: and 1. John 2, 27. ^^ is
the anointing that teaches all things. One ^yes well of Paul's Epistles that
no man can understand them without Paul's Spirit: And so may be ^^id of all
Scripture. Sight is as needful as light, ^s blind men might judge of Colors:
And if the spirit were not as needful as the Word of Faith, ^en blind sense and
hasty unbelief would not and to say that all men are Liars, and that God's
Truth fails for ever. The material Doctrines and objective Revelations of the
Word and Spirit ^e ever the same: And a Spirit clashing with the Word, is
surely a Ghost and an evil Spirit. But ^^e Word and Spirit in the conveyance
and deliver of the self-same Revelations, are oftimes sepa^t in their
influences: for sometimes the Word ^^mes alone without the Spirit to those who
have ^es and see not. etc. Sometimes again the Spirit ^^mes with a discovery of
the same Truth that in the Word without the help of the Word, as Infants, deaf
Persons, and even others at age ^^d having the use of their ears; but being not
^ell versed in the Scriptures, yet desiring to how and do the will of God, are
oftimes, no ^oubt, by a secret immediate instinct of the Spirit, God, without
the actual remembrance and ^^lp of the Word of God, taught and instructed
acccording to the Word: for God leads the blind by a way that they know not.
And the Apostle 1 Pet: 3. 1. tells us, that some men at age, by good example
may be won without the Word Why then may not the Spirit of God do, what the
example of a Christian woman can do? But that it concerns all that would
converse comfortable with the Scriptures, to call the Spirit of God to their
assistance is manifest from this, That ther^ are many, and those the most
concerning Questions, that fall under a Christians Cognition to be resolved
according to the Word of God, which are determinable only by the Spirit of God:
eve^ all these that may most desevedly be called to things of a man, which none
knows, and therefore cannot competently judge of, but the Spirit of God that
knows all things, and the Spirit the man, and that not either without a
special presence and assistance of the Spirit of God: Nay you should conveen
about these Questions a Council or General Assembly, of the learned Doctor or
ablest Divines in Christendom, they could no^ define them: Such are the
Questions of a Man^ personal interest in God, and his state toward God whether
a man have the Spirit and be born of God and the like. They may give evidences
of the^ things in the general, and indefinitly, which man be as media to
conclud upon, and which they man frame into universal propositions, that he who
ha^ these evidences is of God etc. But to subsume those propositions, and from
these premises to conclude particularly, belongs only to the Spirit of God
witnessing with our Spirits that we are ^e Children of God: for by the Spirit
we know ^^e things that are freely given us of God. The ^^ke is to be said of
many particular matters of fact that concern a man. I instance in one, but it
is a ^ain on. The nature of the sin against the Holy Ghost, I find the best
advised Divines very warry as they have Reason) to determine in: and yet ^ore
awar of personal application of their determinationss, because of latent
circumstances impossible to be infallibly reached and discerned by any ^an in
his neighbor. Now whether is my sin against the Holy Ghost? is a Question so
puzling and perplexing oftimes (some know what I ^^y) even to such as are dear
to God, that it passes ^e reach of all created wisdom to ridd their doubt. and
let me say only by the way, there is no more compendious method in the World,
to draw or ^ther to drive a man to the sin against the Holy ^host, than the
apprehension that he has already ^^nned that sin: for that apprehension
renders him ^esperat, and what will not a desperate man do? O cunning Devil! But
O wiser God! that gives sub^lty to the simple, and makes them able to stand
against the wyles of Satan. But how is the Question ridd? I answer, the Spirit
of God rids it thus, according to the Scripture: That surely is not the sin
against the Holy Ghost, whereof a man repents. Now when the Soul is at its
wits end, and ready to sink, the Spirit of God sends such loose, into the
Soul of the sinner, of Godly sorrow unto repentance, for that sin whereof he
was so jealous, and the Soul of him so joys in hi^ sorrow, and sorrows with
his joy (de peccato (...) let, and de dolor gaudet) that he cannot be
satisfied nor get his fill of that Godly sorrow, which is so warm with love,
and so wet with tears, tha^ except a man that is wet to the Skin should de^^
that he has gotten the shower, he cannot deny b^ he repents of that sin: And
than sure he is not ^^ sinner against the Holy Ghost, For it is impossible to
renew such an one to Repentance. I do no^ here mean, that only an overflowing
power of Repentance, such as I have spoken of, is a cure (...) the case: no;
for the very desire of Repentance vindicats a man from any fear of this sin,
(because a sinner against the Holy Ghost, so sins and so delights to sin that
sin, that he would not do other wise, if it were in his choice.) But when the
Soul's perplexities about this question are over whelming, then it is fit that
they be cured wi^^ this measure of Repentance that is so overflowing I marked
before, and I mind it again, as goo^ Showrs calm and clear the Air, so, much
Repentance it clears many doubts, resolves many Cases, ridds the Soul from many
perplexities, and settles it in a sweet calm and serenity.

The Fourth Direction I give to those th^^ would keep so in with the
Scriptures, as to ma^^ use of them with comfort and profit is this, th^^ they
despise not the Discipline of tentations. Book learned Christians and Divines
are not the be Scholars: but they that would be taught the mysteries and
Acroamaticks of Religion and Divinity must be Luther's Condisciples; and he was
bred at the School of Tentations: he confessed, that his tentations had learned
him more of the Gospel than all his books had done. This School of tentations
is of an old erection: and (not to speak of others) here our Lord Jesus took
all his Degrees. Hence he was commenced Master of experiences, and Doctor
universal in all cases: for in that he suffered being tempted, he is able also
to help those that are tempted: and in all things he was tempted as we are,
that he might succor them that are tempted. Heb. 2. 17, 18. and 4, 15. And as
his temptations accomplished him highly, for the rest of his Mediatory Work, so
particularly and especially for the Ministry: these were his Trials for the
Ministry, Matthew. 4. at the beginning, he is tempted, and in the 17 verse, from
that time Jesus began to Preach. Wherefore let Ministers remember, that if they
be tempted, the Lord is giving them the highest point of breeding for their
employment. But blessed is the man that endures temptation (or bides out the
Trial) for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life which the Lord
has promised to them that love him. James 1, 12. Now having thus spoken at
length to the Commendation of Scripture what excellent uses it serves to in all
cases, and what kind Offices it performs to the People of God in every
condition, Let us for Conclusion behold how it shows to us the kindness of the
Lord, in that Iethro-like it comes to visit ^s in the Wilderness; And let us
hearken what it till say to us there: For there we are.

Text Hosea 2. 14. Therefore behold, I will allure her and bring her into the
Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her.
INTRODUCTION.
WE have in the contexture of this Chapter, a solemn confirmation of three
great Truths, that are noted in the Scripture of Truth.

1. That the Lord will not cast off his People, nor forsake his Inheritance,
Psalm. 94. 14. Which general assertion it will be fit to clear in these
particular Propositions. 1. God will never cast off the universal Church, nor
leave himself destitute of a People upon the Earth, who may own him and his
Truth, and may hold forth the Word of Life, shining ^s Lights in the World,
being blameless and ^armless in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation.
Thus in our Creed, We believe a Church Universal, which sometimes is clothed
in Scarlet, and sometime again is set upon the Dunghill: Sometimes is courted
of the multitude in the City, and sometimes is persecuted and driven to the
Wilderness: Sometimes is more visible and glorious, in the incorporat Societies
of National Churches, sometimes more latent and obscure in some few single
persons scattered up and down in the World; who, it may be, in their time, are
as little observed by the World, as the seven thousand true Worshipers were by
Elias in his time. There is a time, Prove. 28. 12. when a man is hidden: And the
Lord in the worst of times has his hidden ones, Psalm. 83. 3. And when
judgment returns unto righteousness, all the upright in Heart will follow
after it, Psalm. 94. 15.

2. God may utterly reject and totally cast off the visible Body of a
particular Church: Witness the Church of the Jews at this day, and the seven
famous Churches of Asia.

3. God may sententially reject his People by Threatenings, when he does it not,
nor minds to do it eventually and effectually in his Dispensations. God may
list up his Hand against his People to overthrow them, and he may say by his
threatenings, That he will destroy them, as it is Psalm. 106. 23. 26. When yet
they are spared: he may frame a Bill of Divorse against his Church but not give
it her into her hand, Zeph. 2. 2. The Decree, or the threatening intimating the
Decree is one thing, and the bringing forth of the Decree, or the execution of
that Threatening is another thing. Repentance will obtain both a Suspension and
Repeal of a Sentence of rejection. In a word, God may cast out with his people,
and not cast them off for all that: He may Censure them within doors, when he
minds not to put them to the door: The Lord may say; he cannot own a Whore,
and yet he is Married to her: and he threatens to cast off a Whore, that so he
may keep still an honest Woman.

4. God may really and effectually cast out his People, when yet he does not
cast them off: A Whore may be put to the door and taken home again, Ier. 3. 1.
A Leprous Miriam may be put out of the Camp and taken in again: God may not
only say by his threatenings, but seem to confirm it by his Dispensations, that
his People are outcasts, and yet He gathers the outcasts of Israel, Psalm. 147.
2. The Lord has often times in his Dispensations so showed himself to his
People, testifying his Displeasures against them; that even those who were more
than common Counselors with God. and were best acquaint with his ways have
had right sad apprehensions of total off-casting, Ier. 14. 19, Have thou
utterly rejected Judah? Psalm. 85, 5, 6. Will thou be angry with us for ever?
Will thou draw out thine anger to all Generations? Will thou not revive us
again that thy people may rejoice in thee? And yet in the 9th. verse (and O! if
this were the answer for the Mourners and inquirers in Scotland,) his salvation
is near them that fear him, that Glory may dwell in our land. So that these are
three very different things, 1. Gods casting out with his People. 2. His
casting out his People. And 3. his casting his People off.

5. God may reject one Generation of a Church or Nation, as a Generation of his
wrath, and yet his Covenant stand with the same Nation or Church: Witness that
Generation with whom the Lord's Spirit was grieved forty years, and whose
Carcases fell in the Wilderness.

6. God may cast off the Incorporation of a Church or Nation, whereof sometimes
he reserves a remnant to whom he will be gracious, and with whom he will
establish his Covenant, Paul Romans 11 at the beginning shows, that be with
Israel as it will, God will not cast off his own Elect, such as he himself was.
And Romans 9. 27: though a number like the sand of the Sea be destroyed, Yet a
remnant shall be saved, as says Isaiah chap. 1, verse, 9. And that is the grand
consolation, when all goes to all, That of all that the Father has given him,
Christ will lose none, Joh. 6. 39. A Son of perdition when he meets with a
temptation may go from Christ's very elbow, both to Hell and the Halter at
once: 'But however such may be lent to Christ to make use of in a common
Service for a time; yet certain it is, that they have never been given to him
for Salvation. But yet God is good to Israel. Psalm. 73. 1.

But here two distinctions are fit to be remembered, The 1. is Paul's
distinction Romans 9, 6. betwixt Israel and those that are of Israel. Common
Professors, Carnal Hypocrites and unbelievers may expect little mercy in a time
of public offcasting of a Church or Nation. The 2d distinction is Hosea's in
this Chapter, betwixt the Children of a Whore and the Children of her
Whoredoms. This Whorish Church had lawfully begotten Children Ammi and
Ruchamah, to whom the Prophet, who likewise himself was one, and a brother of
those Children, is commanded to apply himself, and of these there were few in
that time of public Apostasy. But then in the 4th verse of this Chapter there
are the ill begotten Children of her Whoredoms, whose names in the 1 Chapter
were called Loammi and Loruchamah, and these were many. The Children of
Whoredoms are those who comply in judgment or practice with the common course
of a Churches Apostasy, whose Faith and Principles (if they have any) are not
the fruit of the immortal seed of the incorrupted Word of God; but of the
inventions and Commandments of men, or the delusions and impostures of Satan,
which their Adulterous Mother, the Church that so breeds them, (who is damned
for that she has forsaken her first faith) is so fond of. If a Woman be a
gaudy, light Person, it may readily render her Children suspected: but if she
be an arrand notorious Whore, then it is too likely, and in the case of
Religion, it is almost necessary and certain, that si Matter Meretrix, Filia
talis erit. If the mother be a Whore, the Daughter will be such also, and so
the Proverb shall be fulfilled Ezekiel. 16. 44. As is the Mother so is the
Daughter. Papists breed their Children Papists, and other Folk breed their
Children such as they themselves are, and few Children make their Fathers
Religion better: and therefore sad is the case of young ones that fall into
corrupt times: and sad is the condition of these times wherein young ones are
bred corrupt. There is little appearance, if Sovereign goodness interpose not,
that they shall soon be better: Because a person ordinarily persists in those
Principles wherewith they have been first possessed by education: for Solomon
tells us that whatsoever way a Child is trained up in, he will not depart from
it when he is old: and, quo semel est imbutarecens servabit odorem testa diu. A
new vessel will keep the first scent long. But moreover there is real ground of
fear, that such times shall still grow worse and worse: for evil beginnings
have worse proceedings, they proceed (says the Prophet from evil to worse;
Jer. 9, 3. And evil men and seducers, says the Apostle, proceed and wax worse
and worse, deceiving and being deceived. 2 Timoth. 3. 13. I hid me and was
wroth, says the Lord, Isai. 57, 17. And he went on frowardly in the way of his
heart: And what shall the end be? and where will they stand? if the Lord say
not that also which follows in the 18. verse, I have seen his ways, and I
will heal him. Prelacy will breed Popery to which it naturally inclines.
Profanness will make a straight path to Atheism and Barbarity. Ignorance will
nourish superstition. Formality, Indifferency, Looseness, Lightness, and
Luxuriancy of wanton-witted Preachers especially (but God be thanked, their
skill is not so good as their will, nor their wit so great as their wantoness,
and they are like evil favored old Whores out of case to do worse; and
therefore they must entertain their paramours with painting for beauty, and
complement for courtesy) will foster Heresy. Ceremonies straight way will
learn to say Mass; and then (...), Lord help it. But the other sort of Children
that are the Children of the Whore, yet not of her Whoredoms, but of her
Marriage bed, are these whose Faith is the offspring of that first Faith of
the Apostat Church, and that unspoted chaste Religion which she professed,
before she forsook her first Faith and brake her Covenant of Marriage; and who
own their righteous Father, whom their Whorish Mother has dishonored and
forsaken, and who with grief and shame make mention of the lewdness of their
Mother, who mourn for her backslidings, and plead (as here in the 2d verse
they are commanded) for the honor and right of their Father: With these it
shall not fare worse for their Mothers cause, for they are fellow sufferers of
reproach with their Father, and they bear his name: nor will he deny his
interest in them, they are Ammi, nor yet will he refuse them Fatherly kindness
and Duty, they are Ruhamah to him: And though their base Mother by Adulterating
her Faith does forfeit her dowry of the privileges of a true Church; yet their
Righteous Father will find himself obliged by their Mothers Marriage Covenant
and contract, to give them the Inheritance of lawfully begotten Children: and
they shall be kept and brought up in his House, when she shall be sent off to
call her Lovers Baali, with her Adulterous Brats at her foot, who cry Father to
Balaam. If I might insist, this consideration would clear the case well betwixt
us and the Popish Church: But to speak to a purpose nearer us, If our Mother
will Debord, let us tell her of it, and plead with her: If that cannot help it,
let us be sorry for it: But let us not in any thing be partakers with her
Adulteries, lest we be thought Bastards: Let us own our Father, and Study to
be like him, even to be living Pictures of his Divine Nature, that so it may be
out of all question that we are his own lawfully begotten Children, when we
Bear his Name upon our Foreheads, Rev. 22. 4. and that is, Holiness to the
Lord, Zach. 14. 20. Now these are they, even these who study sound Faith, and
sincere Holiness, that go the World as it will, and let Gods Dispensations and
their own apprehensions say what they will, shall never be forsaken nor cast
off of God, Psalm 9. 10. Thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek thee: Psalm.
37. 25. David in his old Age who had seen many things in his time; Yet never
had he seen the Righteous forsaken. Joh. 6. 37. Him that comes to me, says
Christ, I will in no wise cast out, Heb. 13. 5. the Lord has said, I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

II. The Second grand Scripture Truth that is confirmed so solemnly in the
context of this Scripture, is, That all the ways of the Lord to his People are
mercy and truth, Psalm. 25. 0. We see in the former part of this Chapter, in the
8th. verse, so long as she obeys and serves God, what kindness he shows her, he
lets her want for nothing: And though (...) most shamefully plays the wanton
under all ^^at Mercy, yet long he forbears her, and is still ^^ving her, till
she begins insolently to reflect upon the Lord, and to speak more kindly of her
^overs than of him: Then the Lord, as one that cannot endure to be so far
disparaged, as to have said that there is any Service or Fellowship so ^ood as
his, finds it now time that she be taught, ^^at she can no where do so well as
with her own ^^st Husband: And this she must learn in the Wilderness, where he
remembers mercy in the midst of ^rath, and as it were forgets what he had even
^ow been saying, and from threatening falls a comforting and alluring of her,
and there intertains ^^r with the most convincing expressions of Love ^^d
Respects. And we may mark especially in ^^e Text proposed, how the Lord loves
not to tell ^^s people ill News, and that he desires, in a ^anner, to tyne his
threatenings in the telling, if ^^ could be for his Peoples good; or, at least
to ^ll them so cannily and convey them so artificial^^, and as it were,
insensibly, and by the by; and withal to drop them out so sparingly, as that
they may neither hinder nor hide his great design ^^ love and alluring Mercy. I
will allure her, and ^^ing her into the Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto
her: And when the Lord has gained his great ^esign and has once won the Heart
of her, then follows mercy upon mercy and promise upon promise to the end of
the Chapter; where he de^ares that he will betroath her unto himself for ever
in Faithfulness, and that there shall be ^^ thing but inviolable kindness
betwixt them in ^^ time coming. The Lords Threatenings, Fro^^ and Chastening
Rods, are all necessary Mercy advancing the great Mercy of God's People in ^^
nearer Enjoyment of himself: And that which ^^ its own nature, and at sometime
is mercy, at another time to such a person were no mercy, or cruel Mercy, such
as are the tender Mercies of ^^ wicked. But God will not show wicked m^n
Mercies, cruel Mercies to his People. I compare the mercy of God to his People,
in all ^^ ways, to a white thread in a Web, (...)ing through many dark
colors. A child, or ^^ that knows no better, will readily think at eve^
disappearing of the white, that there is no wh^^ there: But when they look to
the inner-side, th^^ find the white appearing there that was interrup^^ and
lost, as they thought on the other side. Ev^^ so the mercy of the Lord, which
indureth ^^ ever to his People, runs uninteruptedly alon^^ all his
dispensations to them; and if they point^ any black part of the web, and ask,
where^^ your white thread now? if they pitch upon a^^ sad dispensation of
Providence, and ask, what mercy is here? I will bid them, look to the
inner-si^^ for we must not judge by appearance, but we m^^ judge righteous
Judgment. There is a disappeari^^ white thread of mercy on the innerside of all
blackest and most afflicting lots of Saints, and ^^ any have not the faith to
believe this in an h^^ and power of darkness, yet I shall wish them ^^ patience
to wait, till they see the white thread ^yth again in its own place, and till
they find undeniable mercy, that will not suffer it self to be mistaken, tryst
them upon the borders of that dark valley: for mercy follows them all the days
of their life Psalm. 23. 6. and sometimes it will compass them round about Psalm.
32, 10. In a word all the very outfallings that are betwixt God and his People,
they are amantium irae that is but amoris redintegratio, ^overs cast out and
agree again, and they cast not out but that they may agree again: and so are
God and his People, mercy shall conclude all that passes betwixt them: and that
mercy is joined with truth: for God has said it, and he was never yet worse
than his word to any; but to many very often much better. You see here (which
confirms the point not a little) what a wild ^iece she is, to whom the Lord
does all this, neither minding God nor his Covenant nor Commandments; but
courting her lovers and following her lightness: and yet the Lord pursues her,
^ight and little worth as she is, courts her, and invites her to come home. All
this is strange, and yet all this is but like God, that the Holy One of Israel
should thus like the Adullamite Judah 's friend Genesis 38. go to seek a Harlot by
the way side.

But consider. 1. That when the Lord Married her, he knew all the faults that
followed her, and ^ook her with them all. If God had not known before what she
would prove, it might be strange that thus he suits her: but if there be any
thing to be admired here, it is his first love to her whom he knew to be such
an one. But 2dly consider where will the Lord do better? Where is there any in
the World that without his own undertaking would serve him otherwise? And
therefore till the Lord find a better match, he thinks (and with all reason)
even as good hold him at his first choice: Especially since 3. He knows of a
way how to gain her: And 4. sees her already rewing her courses, and saying
that she will return to her first husband. And by all this 5. he will let it be
seen that he is not so unstable and light as she is. She could find in her
heart to entertain others in his place, and surely she was not ill to please,
that could take an Idol in his rooms: but yet he will make it manifest to all
the World, that he is God and changes not; and therefore he will mantain his
old kindness to her, and will remember the love of her espousals, and the
kindness of her youth: For 6. Foolish as she was, he had gotten more love of
her in former times, than he had gotten of all the World besides. And thus the
very case stands betwixt God and his deboarding Children and backsliding People
unto this day.

III The third great Scripture truth that is here solemnly confirmed is this,
That Gods way will his People is not the manner of men. 2 Samuel 7, 19 Hosea 6,
7. They like men transgress the Covenant and Chap. 11. 9. He like God and like
himself (and there is none like unto him: for if any were like him, he were not
himself) will not exe^ cut the fierceness of his anger, nor return to destroy
them; because he is God and not man, Jer. 3, 1. The^ say if a man put away his
wife, and she go from him and become anothermans, Shall be return unto her
again? ^^all not that land be greatly polluted? but thou have ^ayed the Harlot
with many lovers, yet return again unto me says the Lord. Now that Gods way
with ^is People, is not the manner of men, warrands them to expect from him
things not ordinary: ^or it was the greatness of his extraordinary kindness to
David that made him say so of God: yea ^^ warrands them to expect above
expectation. Isai. ^4. 3. Thou did terrible things that we looked not ^^r.
Yea more, it even warrands them to expect above admiration. Zech. 8. 6. If it
be marvelous ^^ the eyes of the remnant of this People in these days; should
it also be marvelous in my eyes, says the Lord of Hosts? And the Ground of all
is Isai. 55, 9. Because as the Heavens are higher than the earth, so are ^^e
Lords ways higher than our ways, and his thoughts than our thoughts. This is
solemnly confirmed in ^he Text proposed: where we have such a stupendous
strange inference, a Therefore that (considering what has been last said) all
the World cannot ^ell Wherefore: a Therefore, that if it had been left ^o all
the World to supply what follows it, considering what has immediately gone
before, I doubt it could have entered into any created heart to have once
guessed it. She went after her lovers and forgot me says the Lord, and
therefore I will allure here and comfort her. To this Therefore is well
subjoined, Behold, which observation teaches Admiration of what we cannot
reach to satisfaction: Only, from all this, let us consider, whether the great
sin of limiting God be not too ordinary, and too little abhorred an evil amongst
us. We frame to our fancy a little modest God forsooth that must not take too
much upon him: and by those fancies we model our Prayers, and returns, and
pardons of sin, and accounts of Providence, and events of dispensations, and
all things. And if that be not to have another God before the true God, I have
not read my Bible right, nor do I understand the first Commandment. But now
after that I have wandered so long before, though, I hope, not beside the
purpose, I am yet but entering the Wilderness.

SERMON
Hosea 2: 14: Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the
Wilderness, and speak Comfortably unto her:
A Wilderness is a land of darkness Ier. 2, 31. and whilst I but look into the
Wilderness, I am surrounded with the darkness of a mysterious transition in the
particle Therefore. But when I begin to enter, and while my foot stands even
upon the borders of darkness, I see a light shining out of darkness, Psalm. 119.
130. the entrance of thy words gives light, it gives understanding unto the
simple. This lights me over the border. where being come, I hear a voice which
bids me Behold, and beholding I see a strange Wherefore, of this strange
Therefore, and it is this, that by any means the Lord must have his Peopl's
heart, and be sole owner of their love without a Rival or partaker. In the
close of the former verse, she forgot m^ says the Lord: that I cannot suffer,
and therefore will allure her, Behold I will allure her. She forgot me and
could not tell wherefor, except it was for my indulgence, and that I spilt her
with too much kindness; as it is written for my love they are my enemies. And I
will pursue her love, and follow her for her heart. I will allure her, and I
will tell her wherefore not: Not for your sakes do I this says the Lord God,
be it known unto you; Be ashamed and be confounded for your own ways, O house
of Israel. Ezekiel. 36, 32. But I will not tell her wherefore, but so it must be:
therefore I will allure her, and if my former kindness and indulgence was a
fault; (for the Prosperity of fools destroys them, Prove. 1. 32.) that shall be
mended: I will bring her into the Wilderness; For she is so wild that I must
tyne her before I win her: I must kill her, before I make her alive: I must
loose her, before I find her: I must cast her down before I comfort her; And
therefore I will bring her into the Wilderness; and I will speak comfortably
unto her. All this we are willed to Behold. Therefore Behold. etc.

In the words then we have these four things distinctly so be considered. 1.
The Note of observation Behold. 2, The intimation of the Churches condition, I
will bring her into the Wilderness. 3. The Lords great design upon his Church
in this and all his Dispensations to her, I will allure her, which rules all
the vicissitudes of her diverse Lots, as means depending in a due Subordination
upon this high end, whereinto they are ^ll to be resolved, as into the last
cause and reason. This great design of God upon his People, is as the
Principles and fundamental propositions of Sciences, which prove all particular
conclusions, whilst themselves only remain unproven by infe^ence, as being
received by evidence, of all that ^re but acquaint with the terms. For if it be
asked, wherefore God will afflict his Church and bring her into the Wilderness?
The answer is, because he will allure her: And wherefore will he comfort her?
Because he will allure her; He must have her heart as I said before. But if it
be asked, and wherefore will he allure her? What sees he in her, That thus he
should Court her for her Kind ness? That must answer it self, that is the
therefore that has no wherefore, but. Even so Lord, for so it pleases thee! 4.
I shall consider the juncture and coincidency of her Afflictions and his
Consolations; I will bring her into the Wilderness and speak comfortably unto
her.

Therefore behold.
FRom the first thing then, the Note of Observation we have this Doctrine, That
it is our Duty (and a weighty one) well to consider the Lords ways with his
People and his Works toward them. Therefore behold. etc. When God bids us
behold, it is sure we shall have something worthy of the seeing. Now that this
is a concerning Duty, seriously to observe the Lords works and ways toward
his People, is confirmed By these three things from the Scripture. The 1. is,
Scripture Commands to this purpose, such as the many Beholds that the Lord
either prefixes or annexes to his works, whereof we have one in this place; and
Psalm. 37. 37. We are commanded to mark and behold the end both of the upright
and of the transgressors. And to the head of commands (because I love not to
multiply things without great necessity) I refer all these things that are
proper pertinents and pendicles of a command. 1. Exhortations, such as Ier. 2.
31. O generation see ye the word of the Lord. 2. complaints and expostulations
such as Isai 26. 11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see. 3.
Promises, such as Hosea. 6. 3. Then shall ye know, if ye follow on to know the
Lord etc. 4. Threatenings, such as Psalm. 28. 5. because they regard not the
works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands he shall destroy them and not
build them up; with Psalm. 50. 22. Consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear
you in pieces and there be none to deliver. 5. Commendations, such as Psalm.
107, 43. whosoever is wise and will observe these things etc, Hosea 14. 9. And he
that was a wise man and a great observer tells us Eccles. 2, 14. that the wise
man's eyes are in his head. 6. We have also Discommendations and Exprobrations
wherewith the Lord upbraids such as observe not his works and ways Isai 42. 18.
they are deaf and blind that will not see: yea Jeremy 4, 22. calls them
Sottish, and the Psalmists call them Bruits Psalm 92, 6. So then by the command
of God which is the undoubted determiner of Duty it is a necessary concerning
duty to observe the Lords works and ways toward his People.

The 2d. thing that confirms the point, is this, That the Works of God are
wrought before his People for that very end, that they may observe them: and he
makes his ways known to men, that all men may observe him: take but one
pregnant place for this. Isai 41, 20. That they may see and know and consider
and understand together, that the hand of the Lord has done this, and the Holy
one of Israel has created it. The Holy one of Israel is no Hypocrite, and yet
he does all his works to be seen of men.

The third thing that confirms the point is, the usefulness of the works of
God: There is never a work of God, but it has some excellent instruction to
men that will observe them: every work has a word in its mouth. There is
something of use in every one: God speaks no idle words: every word of God is
pure, yea his words are like Silver tried in the furnace seven times: there is
no dross nor refuse in the Bible: the light of Israel and his Holy One works no
unfruitful works, like the works of darkness: Gods works of Providence are an
enlargement and continuation of his first piece of Creation; and if the first
edition of his works was all very good, perfect and unreproveable; how
excellent to all admiration must the last edition be, after so many? But who is
wise to understand these things, and prudent to know them? who has these two
useful volumes of the word and works of God bound in one, and so makes joint
use of them in their daily reading? But howbeit many are unlearned, and to many
the book be sealed, yet there are rare things in the book. So then since the
works of God are so useful, it concerns us to observe them as things tending,
even as also they are intended, to our great advantage. And upon this very
useful consideration, we will find our selves obliged to observe seriously the
Lords works and ways to his People; except we can answer that question,
wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he has
no heart to it. Prove. 17, 16. I shall not here mention that which is, if not a
strange confirmation, yet a clear illustration of the Doctrine; and it is the
practice of Saints in Scripture who have been diligent students of all the
works of God universally, and particularly of his ways to his People: and some
have been such proficient by their observations, that they have been able to
leave us a perfect Chronicle, with a diurnal account of events in their time,
as the Scripture-Historians; others have searched so deep, by the special
assistance of him that searches all things, even the deep things of God, that
they have been able to frame us certain and everlasting Almanacks of the state
of future times; as the Prophets. But to pass these, as being acted and
assisted by an extraordinary motion and measure of the Spirit of God, Look we
through all the Scriptures, how Religious observers of the works of God and his
ways whether in general to his People, or to themselves in particular, we find
even ordinary Saints and extraordinary persons in their ordinary conversation
to have been.

Now being convinced that it is our concerning Duty to observe diligently the
works of God, and his Dispensations to his People: Two great Questions require
to be answered for our further satisfaction, and better instruction in this
Duty. 1, What are we specially to observe in the works of God and his
Dispensations to his People? 2. How are we to observe the works of God?

To the first Question then, be it presupposed, 1. That there is no work of
God, nor any thing in any work of God, how common and ordinary soever, that is
not excellent and Glorious, and worthy to be searched out, Psalm. 111. 2, 3, 4.
But 2. Of all the works of God, some are more Glorious and observable than
others, and of every work of God, some things are more excellent and
searchworthy than others. 3. That we are not able to observe or take up fully
any work of God; far less all his works. Eccles. 8, 17. Whereupon it follows in
all reason 4. that we are to apply our selves to the observation of some things
especially in the works of God. Otherwise as by a perpetual endless
divisibility, of the least continuous body (according to the principles of
Peripatetick Philosophy) a midges wing may be extended to a quantity able to
cover the outmost Heavens: so the observation of the meanest work of God, may
abundantly furnish discourse deducable to perpetuity. But then what shall come
of shortbreathed man, whose days are an hand breadth, in the attempt of an
impossibility? he mustly by the gate, and leave the rest (as Italians do their
chess plays) to be told by his posterity. Wherefore I shall but hint
compendiously at these four things chiefly, to be observed seriously in the
works of God, and his ways toward his People.

1. We would consider and observe seriously the works themselves with all their
circumstances, and this is a part to know the times, to know what the Lord is
doing to his people in the times none would be such strangers in Jerusalem as
not to know the things that happen there in their days Luke 24, 18. David Psalm.
143, 5. can say, I meditat on all thy works, I muse on the work of thy hands.
We might think him a bad Mariner who being at sea should not be able at any
time to tell from what airth the wind did blow; and we may think him a little
better Christian who can give no account of the times, nor of the Works of God
in the times; and knows not, it may be cares not, how the wind blows upon the
Church and People of God. Every one that would be worthy of their room in the
time, would study to be acquainted with the accidents of divine Dispensations
in the time; not out of Athenian curiosity, but Christian inquiry; But if it be
asked, how far is it betwixt Antioch and Athens? or plainly what difference is
there betwixt Christian inquiry and Athenian curiosity? it may not be amiss (as
Paul inpassing by beheld their devotion Act. 17. 23.) by the way to take notice
out of Act, 17. 19. 20. 21. of these three properties of Athenian curiosity,
which difference is from Christian inquiry,

1. It runs all upon new things; Even the Ancient truths of the Gospel, and the
best things in Gods dispensations, if once they become old and ordinary, do not
relish with curiosity. 2. Curiosity satisfies it self with telling and hearing
of those new things; it hears to tell, and tells what it hears, and tells that
it may tell, and nothing else, as the Text says; it is taken up with the report
of things more than with the things; it is an empty airy thing. 3. It is a time
spending thing: they spend their time so, says the Text: Curiosity like
nigards can spend well upon another man's purse, and give liberally of that
which is none of its own: let no man trust his time to Curiosity, which will be
sure to give him a short account of All spent. But for further satisfaction in
the difference betwixt Athenian curiosity and Christian Inquiry, let all that
be considered which rests to be answered to both the Questions proponed before,
upon a particular survey whereof, we shall be able to give a more distinct
judgment in the case of this difference. Only as it is kindness not curiosity
that makes men inquire, how their friends do: so where there is true kindness
to the People of God, it will kyth in a solicitous inquiry concerning their
state in all things. But, as the man asked Christ, who then is my neighbor? so
may the Church and People of God justly ask, But who is my friend? she sees so
many as the Levite, pass by on the other side, who never turn aside, so much as
once to ask how she does, and to whom all is as nothing that she suffers.
Lament. 1. 12, Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? etc, Let it be
remembered then, that the works of God themselves with all their circumstances
be duly considered.

The 2d thing to be observed in the works of God, is, the Author and hand that
works these works. This the Saints have observed in the works of God, Psalm.
39, 9. this they will that others may observe, Psalm. 109 27. This all may, and
ought, and shall in the end see Psalm. 9, 16. Isai 26. 11. who ever be the
Amanuensis or what ever be the instrument, Gods works, as Paul's Epistles, are
all given under his own hand, with this inscription, all these have my hands
done. The Scripture has diverse expressions to this purpose, of the finger of
God, the hand of God, the arm of the Lord, and God himself appearing in his
works, intimating the gradual difference of manifestations of a Providence,
appearing sometimes more darkly, sometimes more clearly in the works and
dispensations of God. And yet even the smallest character of providence, if men
had on their Spectacles, is sufficiently conspicuous and may be discerned that
it is the hand writing of the Lord, for that it has a peculiar stamped of
Divinity that cannot be counterfited. If God creat but a louse in Egypt, that
is an original whereof the greatest Magicians can give no copy: because it is
the finger of God Exodus 8. 19. And yet many read the Epistle without the
inscription; many see the hand work, and not the hand; the Work, and not the
Worker. Not to speak of Heathen Atheists, of whom some have been darkened with
the fancy of a voluble blind Fortune: others dammished with the impression of
on inflex^^^e inexorable fate: both equally opposed to the ^th of a wisely
contrived and freely exercised ^^ovidence. Nor to speak of heretical Maniche^
who attributed all evil events of sin or pain, to ^e Daemoniacal influence of a
malum principium an dependent unprincipiated Principle of evil, in ^ain speech,
a Devil-God: nor of malicious blas^emous Jews, who, albeit that they could not
any, that notable Works and Miracles were ^ought by Christ, yet calumniously
attributed at, which was the finger of God, to Beelzebub ^e Prince of Devils. I
say, not to mention these, ^w many are there in all Generations, who have
^gmatically received the true principles of a gene^ Providence, that, either of
neglect, do not, of infirmity and mistake cannot, or of malice ^ill not see,
the hand of God in particular events: and therefore we have this frequent
Conclusion Gods dispensations whether of mercy or Judg^ent, then shall they
know that I am the Lord. Unbelief of a providence loses all the pins and
^aketh the whole frame of Religion: and the ^^th and actual observation of a
Providence sixeth that Atheism loses. Upon this pin of an observed
Providence, the Saints do hang many excellent vessels of greater and smaller
quantity. and what does not David build upon this foundation? the Lord
reigns. Let us then observe ^rovidence ruling in all dispensations, and in
every one of these, let us with old Eli, both see, ^d say, it is the Lord: and
whether dispensations be prosperous or cross, let us remember him the has
said, I make peace, and I creat evil. On^^ let not the observation of
providence either slaken our hands in any good Duty: This evil i^ the Lord,
wherefore then should I wait any longer (...) him, was an ill use of
Providence. And this is b^ like the rest of Satan's and Unbeliev's Conclusion
Nor 2. Let it strengthen our hands in any sin^ project or practice. It was the
Devil that (...) cast thy self down from the pinnacle because he has ^^ven his
Angels charge of thee. Let us not take Providence 3. for approbation of our
practice: Senacherib who could say that he was not come without the Lord
against Jerusalem. It was a wick^^ word in David's enemies to say, God has
fors^^^ him, let us persecute and destroy him: But David (...) of another
spirit, when God delivered Saul i^ his hand: let not my hand (says he) be upon
b^ for wickedness proceeds from the wicked, says the Proverb of the
Ancients. 4. Let dispensations of Providence be determining evidences of our
state before God: for all things (...) alike unto all, and and no man can know
either ^^ or hatred by all that is before him, Eccles. 9, 1. ^^ a great vanity
in a wicked man to think the (...) of himself for prosperity. And it a great
weak^^^^ in a Saint, to think the worse of himself for affliction and
adversity, albeit all these come from the hand of the Lord. And yet none are
hereup^^ allowed to be Stoically or stupidly unconcerned (...) the vicissitudes
of differing dispensations: for ^^cles. 3, 4. there is a time to weep and a
time to (...) time to mourn and a time to dance. And chap. 7. 14. the wise God
by the wise man's mouth bids us, in ^he day of prosperity be joyful, but in the
day of ad^ersity consider.

The 3d. thing to be observed in the works of God and his ways to his People,
is the Properties and Attributes of those his works: for as omne ^actum refert
suum factorem, every thing made re^embles its maker; so in the works of God
generally, and more specially in his ways and dispensations to his own, we have
a lively draught and ^elineation of all the attributes of the blessed Worker.
Here is displayed the soveraignity of God which is exalted equally above
limited ^oyality and licentious Tyranny: for the Kings ^^rength loves
judgment, Psalm. 99. 4. The Soverignity of God flows from his unlimited
Indend^nt nature, is founded upon his transcendent un^erived right in his
creatures, and runs in this method, 1. he is over and before all things: 2. all
things are of him: 3. all things are his: and therefore. 4. he may do with his
own what he will: ^e is the only potentat, and to him belongs the Kingdom, the
power and the glory for ever, Amen. This ^overaignity of the works of God, or
of God in ^is works, is a common pass-key that will open all ^he Adyta, the
secret passages of the most mysterious reserved works of God, in his most
surprising ^ispensations to his People, and gives the only answer to Questions
about many of his dispensations otherways unanswerable: instance these few.

Question. Why has the Lord elected one to Salvation, and appointed another to
Damnation and that, it may be, of two Brethren, as Iaca^ and Easu Twins born,
where all things are equal in the Object? Answer. Because the Potter has power
over the clay to make of the same lump one vessel to honor and another to
dishonor, Romans 9. 21. Question 2: Why, i^ pursuance of the design and
accomplishment of the work of our Salvation, did the Lord bruise his own Son
and put him to grief? It pleased the Lord Isai 53. 10. Question 3. Why does the
Lord show mercy to one, and harden another? Answer. So he ^^ Rom, 9. 18.
Question 4. Why to all those that an^ really in a state of Grace, does the Lord
dispens^ Grace so differently in time, measure, method manner and other
circumstances? Answer, th^^ is as the spirit of God will 1 Cor. 12, 11.
Question 5. Why does the Lord distribute an equal reward of Glory to those
whose works and service i^ very unequal in the World? Answer. Because it is
lawful for the Lord to do what he will with ^^ own. Math. 20. 15. Question 6.
Why does the Lord vouchafe Grace to those most ordinaril^ who naturally ly at
the greatest disadvantages, ^ that the Poor, the Fools, Babes, yea the most
desperate forlorn sinners, Publicans and Harlots, a^ called and do receive the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven and enter thereinto, whilst the Wise, the
Mighty, the Righteous, Civil, Well Natured and Well bred Pharisees are passed
by? Wh^ should all this be? Answer. Even so father for so seemed good in thy
sight. Math. 11. 26, Question 7. Why does the Lord choose one People, and
^ation to make them his People, bring them with(...) the bond of his Covenant,
and give them a free ^^spensation of his ordinances, whilst he does not to
others, and loves them that are of themselves, may be, the least lovely? Answer
The Lord loves and chooses, because he loves and chooses ^eut. 7. compare the
7, and 8. verses. Question 8. ^^w comes it that the Lord surprises his Saints
any times with such unexpected kindness and ^ercies, as distress their wits and
dash their mo^sty so, that they are equally ashamed and ignorant of that
kindness, wherewith they are so loaded ^d weighted without wearying, that they
are ^terly at a loss to express, let be to requite it? hence is all this, I
say? Answer. Because Gods way with his People, is not the manner of man: And
what can David say more to it? 2 Samuel 19, 20. Question 9, But how is it that
the Lord withdrawes his comfortable presence many times ^om his People, when
they are most earnest to keep ^m, and solicitous to entertain him? Answer. that
is as he pleases, Cant. 2, 7. It becomes us well to ^ait his Dyets, and it as
well becomes him to be ^aster of his own Dyets. Question 10. Why is it ^at the
Lord gives many of his finest and most ^oly Saints, such a sad inward life of
desertions, ^ears, Tentations, that are able to distract even a ^ise Heman from
his youth? and to make them ^iferenters also of such Exercises? Answer, I find
^is Question made by Heman Psalm. 88, 14. but I and no answer to it. And it may
be, the Lord would have said it is ill speired. The just answer to this and
such like Questions is, Job. 33. 13. G^^ gives not account of any of his
matters. Question 11. ^ dispensations how is it that either all things f^ alike
to all; or if there be any odds of Lots, the worst falls to the Saints in this
life? And that some times men that are singulary Holy are strangely afflicted?
as Job. Answer. Job 9, 22, 23. This ^^ one thing, therefore, I said it: he
destroys the perfect and the wicked, if the scourge slay suddenly, he will
laugh at the trial of the innocen^ O Soveraignity becoming him only who does ^
Heaven and Earth whatsoever he pleases! The next property and attribute of God
observable i^ his works, is wisdom: and this sweetly influence the former: for
albeit God always will not, yet always he well can, give a good account of his
ma^ters: known unto God are all his works, from the beginning, Act 1^. 18. Yea
the Lord some times manifests the wisdom of his works evidentl^ and eminently,
to his Peoples admiration rath^^ than satisfaction, and lets them see more
wisdom in his dispensations than they can fathom: O the depth! Romans 11. 33. I
dare not cast my self into the depth of this wisdom of God in his
dispensations, lest I be not able in haste to recover my self Only let us mind
that what we know not now ^^ God's mind in his dispensations, it may be w^
shall know afterward to our great satisfaction We should likewise observe in
the works of God Power, Holiness, Justice, Goodness (whereo^ more in the sequel
of our discourse) and particularly we would observe the Truth, for which the
Psalmist so much commends the judgments and and works of God: we should
observe, how every work of God verifies some word of his book, and ^ow all
fulfills the whole. We find it frequent in the mouth of Christ and his
Apostles, and sure it was first in their eyes: thus and thus it was done that
the Scriptures might be fulfilled. See the fulfilling of the Scriptures.
The works of God are an enlarged Commentary of ^ daily new edition upon the
Word of God. And be sure, this shall not be an Orleans gloss that will overturn
the Text; nor will the only wise God so far forget himself, in the least to
counter work his Word. And if thus we observe the correspondency of Gods Works
with his Word, our Song shall be: as we have heard, so have we seen in the ^
City of our God. And that according to his name so is his praise to all the
ends of the earth. Psalm. 48, 8, 10. Only let us be sure to have the Word on our
side, if ever we would expect good of the Works of God: for if Gods word be for
us, himself is on our side; and if God be for us, who shall be against us? who
is the man, what is the thing? neither death nor life etc.

The Fourth thing to be observed in the works of God is the voice of them. Gods
words have a hand, and are active working words: his Works have a tongue, and
are speaking works: his words may be seen. Ier; 2. 13. O generation see ye the
word of the Lord: and his works may be heard, Mica. 6. 9. the Lords voice
cries to the City, and the man of wisdom shall see the thy name, hear ye the
rod and him that has appointed it. There is both a visible Voice and name, and
an audible Rod. Men have no ears for Gods Word or if they hear it, they dally
with it, and make i^ but what they please, darkening it with the du^ of their
Carnal self-pleasing glosses: but God has another Voice, the heavy voice of a
bloody lashing rod: that Voice will cause men hear, and i^ speaks so distinctly
that it will make the meaning of a despised Word so plain, that it shall be
even visible what God would say to such hearers. As the Apostle says. 1 Cor,
24, 10. there are so many kinds of voices in the World, and every voice has
its own signification: So the several works o^ God have their several
signifying voices to the Sons of Men. Some Works of God have a Voice o^
Instruction: some have a voice of Lamentation: Jesus once weept over the City
Jerusalem with the proper voice of his Body: Jesus often weeps over Cities,
Churches, Provinces and Kingdoms with the Metaphorical voice of his
Dispensations: some works of God have a voice of gladness and singing Psalm. 9.
4. thou Lord have made me glad through they work Some have a voice of Victory
and Triumph and dividing the spoil; I will triumph in the works of thy hands
ibidem, in that same verse: Miriam sang Exodus 15, 1. the Lord has triumphed
Gloriously; and Psalm. 47. the Lord is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the
sound of a Trumpet Sing praises to God, sing praises, sing praises to our God,
sing praises. Some Works of God have the voice of a Lion roaring, some of a
thunder cracking, some of waters rushing: some Works of God have a still
whispering voice, some have ^ clear speaking voice, some have a loud crying
voice. The still voice whispers in the Conscience, the plain clear voice speaks
in the Word, and the loud voice cries in the rod: the Lords voice cries to the
City, hear ye the rod and who has appointed it. Now they hear and observe the
voice of God's Works that make the true use of every dispensation that it
requires, that lament when the Lord Mournes, that dance when he Pipes, that
tremble when he Roares, that hearken when he teaches, that answer when he
calls: and thus every Godly Soul is an Echo to the voice of God: The spirit
says come, and the Bride says come: The Lord says return, and the sinner says,
behod we come: He says, seek ye my face, and the Soul says, thy face will I
seek O Lord. But as Christ says, it is only he that has an ear who will hear,
and (as the Prophet Micah says) it is only the man of wisdom that will see Gods
name and hear the Rod. And I take him to have a bad ear, and little skill in
discerning voices, that cannot give the Tune of God's present dispensations to
his People in these Nations. But it will appertain to the answer of the next
question, to give the particular notes of this tune, and to hold forth the
proper uses of present dispensations to the Church and Saints of God.

The 2d Question proponed was, how are we to observe the Works and
dispensations of God? To the Question I answer, that we are to observe the
dispensations of God. 1. with selfdenyal and humble diffidence of our own
wisdom and understanding. There is 1. so much of mystery in the dispensations
of God. Verily thou art a good that h^est thy self O God the Savior of Israel,
Isai 42, 15 And 2dly So many even good observers, Godly men, have verily
mistaken so far in their apprehensions of Divine dispensations, (Witness Job
and his friends who darkened counsel by words without knowledge? Job 38. 2. and
42, 3. whereupon the Lord poses ^ob in the former place, and which he freely
confesses in the latter) That it is needful in this point, if in any, to
hearken to instruction Prove 3, 5, 7. lean not to thine own understanding: be no
wise in thine own eyes. Humble David though wise David, who for his discerning
was as an Angel ^^ God 2 Samuel, 14. 17. would not exercise himself ^^ matter too
high for him, Psalm, 131 1. whereof the dispensations of God are a high part,
which h^ acknowledges to be too hard for him to understand Psalm. 73. 16. And
his Son Solomon whose wisdom is so renowned, taxes all rash and unadvised
inquiry into the works of God Eccles. 7, 10. There is no safe nor true
discovery of the Works of God but through the prospect of his Word Psa^ 73. 17.
We must ^o to the sanctuary with Gods Works the Word will let us see, that
wicked men are se^ upon slippery places, even when they seem to stand surest,
Psalm. 73. 18. And when their roots are wrapped about the earth, and they see
the place o^ Stones, while they lean upon their House and holy it fast, While
they are in their greenness, they are cut down, and as the rush they wither
before any other herb. Job. 8. 11. and foreward. Yea whilst the Saints look not
upon their own state and Gods dispensations to them, according to the Word,
they are ready to mistake right far. I said in my prosperity, my mountain
stands strong and I shall never be moved: thou did hide thy face and I was
troubled. And upon the other hand, when I said, my foot slippeth, Thy mercy,
Lord, it held me up: Wherefore let us ay be ready to hearken to better
information, in our apprehensions of Divine dispensations and particular
events, remembering that all men are liars. But for the general issue of things,
we may be well assured without all fear of mistake, That it shall be well with
the righteous, and ill with the wicked: for this is the sure word of Prophecy
Isai 3. 10. 11. Yea not only shall it be well with the Righteous in the end,
but every thing how cross soever in the way shall conduce and concur to work
his welfare: And this is a truth that shall never fail, and wherein there is
no fear of mistake, Romans 8. 28. And the Scripture abounds with Noble instances
of this truth. But by the contrary, all things how prosperous soever that fall
to the wicked in his way, shall in the end redound to his woe, and turn to his
greater misery: of this likewise there are in Scripture instances not a few.
Learn we then to observe dispensations of particular events with humility and
submission to a better Judgment.

2dly We must observe the works of God with Patience, if we would know the
Lords going forth we must follow on to know Hosea 6. 3. In our observation of
dispensations we must not conclude at a view nor upon their first appearance.
There is I, so much of surprisal in many dispensations, that often they escape
our first thoughts: verily, says Jacob, God was in this place, and I knew it
not Genes. 28, 16. when the Lord brought back the captivity of Zion, says the
Church, we were as men that dream Psalm. 116, 1, When the Angel delivered
Peter, he wist not whether that it was true that was done; but thought he saw a
vision Act. 12, 9. There is 2, often times much Error in our first thoughts of
things that needs to be corrected by second thoughts (...), second thoughts are
the wiser. I say (ays David) I am cut off from thine eyes; but I said it over
soon, I said it in my haste, I took no leisure thoroughly to consider the
matter: And therefore I will look again toward thy Holy temple, I looked, but I
must look again; I said, but I must say again. The Scriptures gives many
instances, of the Saints mistaks and errors in the first thoughts of Gods
dispensations: and in these pat^untur aliquid humani, they are but like men.
Sometimes again 3, the Lord goes through in his dispensations by a method of
contraries: he brings his People into the dark, before he cause light shine out
of darkness; he brings them (as the Text says) into the driery Wilderness, and
there he comforts them; he wounds before he heal; he kills before he make
alive; he casts down before he raise up. And therefore there is need of
Patience to observe the whole course of dispensations and their connection: for
if we look upon them by parts, we will readily mistake in our Observation. I
find likewise 4. In many Dispensations a reserve, the Lord keeping up his mind,
as it were to bait and allure his People to observe: Verily thou art a God that
hidest thy self O God the Savior of Israel, Isai 45. 14. O Lord we cannot see
what thou would be at: what I do thou know not now (says Christ) but thou
shall know afterward. Like a man if he see his hearers slack their attention
to a serious discourse, he breaks off and pauses a little, to reduce them to a
serious attention: so does God in his works to gain us to a diligent
Observation. Threfore in our Observation of Dispensations, we would be like
Abraham's Godly servant Genes. 24, 21. he held his peace, to wit whether the
Lord had made his journey prosperous or not. Moreover 5. in some Dispensations
the Lord uses a Holy simulation, and makes as if he would do that which he has
no mind to do. Sometimes he makes to take leave of his People before he tell
his Erand, Let me go says he to Jacob, when Jacob was but yet beginning to know
that it was he, and ere ever there was a word of the blessing, which he came to
leave with Jacob for his encouragement in his encounter with his Brother. And
Christ made as if he would have passed by his Disciples at Sea: and the like
semblance he made Luke 24, 28. Now if we can have the patience to observe, we
will sometimes see the Issue of Dispensations other than it appeared. And for
patient Observation of Dispensations 1. respice finem a good advice, Behold the
end. Psalm. 37, 37. It is the end that we are bidden mark and behold, a^ I said
above. We must not conclude of Dispensations neither by appearances nor parts:
We must wait till we see every part do its part: for all works together Romans 8.
28. And 2, respice usque finem, Behold or observe to the end, is an other
direction necessary to the practice of the former: whose would see the end must
behold with patience to the end. Daniel 12, 8. enquires concerning the end of
things, and he observes till the time of the end, he looks through all
interveening times of the accomplishment of these events manifested to him; so
albeit none of us has a prophetical Spirit to lead us through future times, yet
the Faith and Patience of Saints teaches us to wait all our appointed time. In
our patient Observation of Dispensations we must be like the Prophet Isai 21,
8. where he says I stand continually upon the watch tower in the day, and I am
set in my ward whole nights. My soul waits for the Lord says David. more than
the watch waits for the morning Psalm. 130. 6. I say more than they that wait
for the morning, and by such patient Observation he had seen many a foul night
have a fair morning: Sorrow may be at night, but joy comes in the morning. Psalm
30, 5.

3dly We should observe the Lords Dispensations with Search and Secrutiny Psalm.
77. 6. my spirit made diligent search. 1. We should search the Lord's affection
in Dispensations, and whether they be in mercy or in wrath: many get their will
and asking in wrath Psalm. 78. 30. 31. some are rebuked and chastened, but not
in wrath nor displeasure as David Prays for himself Psalm. 6, 1. Therefore the
question would be Ier. 14. 19. have thou rejected ^udah? has they soul loathed
Zion? 2dly We would search the Reasons and procuring causes of sad
Dispensations Job 10, 2. show me wherefore thou con^endest with me? 3dly We
would search and inquire ^nent the event of Dispensations, will thou not revive
us again that thy People may rejoice in thee? Psalm. 85. 6. We are allowed
likewise 4thy to search and enquire anent the continuance of Dispensations: to
this purpose we read in Scripture many a how long Lord? In sad Dispensations
likewise 5ly we should search for solid grounds of comfort, and for this we
should remember bygone times, and remember the kindness we have tasted of in
them, Psalm. 89. 49. Lord where are thy former loving kindnesses Psalm, 77. 10. I
will remember the years of the right hand of the most high. But in the
Observation of Dispensations our search would be, 6ly chiefly about our Duty:
our main question would be, Lord what will thou have me to do. Act 9, 6. And
our great Petition with David must be, lead me O Lord in they righteousness
because of mine enemies, make thy way straight before my face, Psalm. 5. 8.
teach me thy way, O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear
thy name Psalm. 86. 11.

4. We should observe the Dispensations of God with Regard, the challenge is
Isai 5. 12, that they regard not the work of the Lord. This Regard is a due
judgment and estimation of the works of God with reverence becoming the
Majesty, worth and excellency of the worker, and the works, and that leaves an
impression of Piety and Religion upon the heart of the Observer: according to
that pathetick exclamation Rev. 15, 4. who shall not not fear thee, O Lord, and
glorify they name? for thou art Holy: for all nations shall come and worship
before thee: for thy judgments are made manifest. Due Observation of the works
of God is a great curb to Atheism and Prophanity: and Atheism and Prophanity
are as great enemies to due Observation of divine Dispensations. Put men in
fear O Lord that they may seek thy name.

5ly We should observe the Lord Dispensations with Affection: Lament. 3 51.
mine eye affects mine heart: the Prophet's Observation of Dispensations made
him cry, my bowels, my bowels, my heart is pained within me! Jer. 4. 19. I
reckon him a savage person, and one that has vicera fera and triplex circa
pectus robur, the bowels of a tygar or bear, and that his heart is brass, oak,
or stones, who is not affected with the Dispensations of our times; who grieves
not for the afflictions of Joseph Amos6. 6. and who cries not alas for the day,
for none is like it. It is the day of Jacob's trouble. Jer. 30. 7.

6. We should observe the Lords works with Memory: in our Observations of
things present, we should reflect upon these that are past in former times. I
remember the days of old Psalm. 153. 5. And likewise we would lay up in memory
our present Observations for the time to come Psalm. 48. 12, 13. Mark ye well
that ye may tell it to the generation following. We have both joined together
Psalm, 78, 3, 4. that which we have heard and known and our fathers have told
us, we will not hide from their children, ^hewing to the generations to come
the praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his wonderful works that he
has ^one. The Psalmist says Psalm. 111. 4. The Lord has made his wonderful
works to be remembered. O! then ^t not the memory of the Lords Works go down ^n
our days. Let us comfort our selves with what ^s remembered: and let us transmit
the memory of the Lords Works to succeeding Generations, that they may share of
the same comforts. And I believe the People of God in this time have much to ^o
with their memory: we hear not what we were wont to hear, nor see what we were
wont to see: We are now left to gather up the Fragments of former enjoyments by
the hand of a Sanctified memory. One says, O, I shall still think well of
Christ! He shall be to me as the Apple tree along the trees of the Wood: for
the day was then I sat down under his shadow, and his fruit ^as sweet to my
taste. Cant. 2. 3. Another says O ^ut I love the house of God well! And O when
shall I come and appear there before God! for the ^ay was when I saw the Lords
Glory and his power in ^^ sanctuary. Psalm. 63, 2. And O when shall I see ^e
like again? O how shall that be? Then make ^e of thy Memory, and remember that
David ^^m the Wilderness returned and dwelt in the ^use of the Lord all the
days of his life. Remember likewise Isai 64. 3. that God did for his People
terrible things which they looked not for, ^he came down and the mountains
flowed down at his presence; and this they build their hope upon in their
present case. Conclude thou then with David 2 Samuel 15 25. That if thou have
found favor in the eyes of the Lord: he will bring thee again, and show the
both his Ark and his Habitation! This Scripture has long lodged in my
thoughts, and while min^ own heart, like Sarah behind the Tent door laughed and
says, shall these things be? In reproach ^^ scornful unbelief, I thus both use
and please to reason. Those who find favor in the eyes of the Lord he will
bring them again, and show them both his Ark and his Habitation: to wit the
Sanctuary But the many wandering Saints and outcast Ministers and People of
these Nations find favor in the eyes of the Lord: Therefore they shall be
brought back to see the Ark of the Lord and his Habitation. Let unbelief answer
the first proposition: Le^ even their enemies answer the second, and the^^ who
shall deny the Conclusion?

7. We would observe the Works of God and his Dispensations with Use: the
useful Observe is the good Observer of divine Dispensations, an^ this is that
which before, in Scripture phrase w^^ called a harkening to the Lords Voice in
his Dispensations, and a discerning of their Tune. There no Work of God, but it
has a Voice, and it has a Use; and the Works of God are of so universal ^^
that hardly is their any truth in the Word of God but we are taught it by some
Work of God. It ^t pertinent, nor take I pleasure here to enlarge general, of
the proper uses of the several ^orks of God; But having above supposed, as ^e
truth is, that to any who has an ear to discern; The voice of present
dispensations to the church in these Nations is beyond all dispute a ^urnful
one. I shall therefore shortly hint at the ^oper uses of such Mournful
Dispensations: and shall direct them all from the third chapter of the
Lmentations.

The first Use of present Dispensations is, for Lamentation. Verses 48, 49, 51.
Mine eye, ^ine eye, mine eye! mine eye runs down with ^vers of Waters. Mine
eye trickleth down and ^^seth not, without any intermission: mine eye affect^^
mine heart. O Call all that are skilful to Mourn, and let them raise up a
Lamentation. But though neither our Eyes weep nor our Voice La^ent, yet even
our Condition it self does weep and Mourn to God. Jer. 12. 10, 11. Many Pastors
have destroyed my vtneyard, they have trodden my portion un^^r foot; they have
made my pleasant portion a desolate Wilderness, they have made it desolate, and
being deso^^e, it Mourns unto me, the whole land is made de^^ate, and no man
lays it to heart. Come then and ^^t up a Lamentation together all that are
sorrowful for the Solemn Assemblies. Lament smitten ^epherds, Lament scattered
flocks, Lament hungry and thristy Souls, Lament desolate Congregations, Lament
poor doubting disconsolate Christians, Lament closed Churches, Lament empty
^^ulpits, Lament silent Sabbaths, turn your joy into Mourning, O our blessed
Communion-time Lament Cities, Lament Burrows, Lament ye d^ Villages, and my
soul shall Mourn in secret places, cause the Lords flock is carried away. Jer.
13. 17. say! it is a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation. We never saw
the like since Popish ^^terdictions, so many Glorious lights obscured these
Nations. And if an enemy had done the then might we have born it; if Pope, if
Turk, Pagan: But thou O -- a friend, a Protestant, Prince of the Covenant! What
thing shall I ta^^ to Witness for this?

But because the Apostle bids us Mourn as those the have hope. The 2d Use of
present Dispensations she be to Hope, verse 21. This I recall to my m^^
therefore have I hope. verse 24. in him will I hope verse 26. it is good that a
man should both hop^ and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord Isai 8. 17.
I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I
will loo^ for him. It is wonderful to see, how contrar^ conclusions Faith and
Unbelief will draw from the same premises. The Lord is wroth and hides h^^
face, then say believing Isai and Jeremy we wi^^ hope in him and wait for him;
yea but set unbelieving Joram to it, and he will tell you shortly why should I
wait any longer for him 2 Kings (...) 32. And if he must know why; Jeremy
(Lament 3. 26.) can tell him, it is good: and if he ask what good is in it?
Isai will tell him more particularly Chap. 30. 18. The Lord is a God of
judgment, (...) blessed are all they that wait for him Psalm. 52, 9. will wait
on thy name, for it is good before thy Saints: ^here we see it is the judgment
of all the Saints, ^at it is still good to wait on God. O then let us ^ait on
him that hides his face from the house (...) Jacob; for surely there is hope.
But where is ^ur hope? our hope is in God that saves the up^^ght: he is the
hope of Israel, and the Savior there^^ in time of trouble Jer. 14, 8. So long
as he is God, (...) long is their hope: and to say there were no hope, were to
say there were no God, and they ^ob God of his Glory and Title who fail in
their hope.

The 3d Use of present Dispensations is Submission. verses 27, 28, 29, 30. It
is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth: he sits alone and
keeps silence: because he has born it upon him: he puteth his mouth in the
dust, if so be there may be hope, he gives his cheeks to him that smites him,
he is filled with reproach, and verse 39. wherefore does a living man complain,
a man for the punishment of his sins? What ever be the Lords Dispensations, is
our part to submit. And because Submission (...) Gods Dispensations is a hard
duty to our Rebellious corrupt hearts, I find the lamenting Prophet tacitly
insisting to persuade submission upon ^hese grounds. 1. From the mitigation of
Dispensations: the Lord punishes not as we deserve: ^^e are living men and are
not consumed, and that ^his mercy renewed every morning. And indeed that is
less than Hell to a sinner, is mercy un^^served verse 22, 23, 2dly from the
good that may be expected of the saddest Dispensations verse 27. It is good
that a man bear the yoke in h^ youth: there is no lot so ill, but a well
exercise Soul can make good of it. 3dly From the hope ^ an out-gate in the
issue. verses 31. 32. the Lord will not cast off for ever, but though he can
grief, yet will he have compassion according ^ the multitude of his mercies. 4.
From the Lords unwillingness to afflict. verse 33. for he does not afflict
willingly nor grieve the Children of men. 5. From the Lords Soveraignity verse
37, 38 out of the mouth of the most high proceeds not evil and good? 6. From
men's deserving justly the saddest things. verse 39. wherefore does a man
complain for the punishment^ his sins? and verses 35. 36. the Lord approv^ no
unjust dealing. But true submission is not stupid, idle, heartless thing: and
if we suffer o^ hearts wholly to be idle, they will not fail, like unemployed
Soldiers, to mutin, and so find themselves both unhappy and unlawful Worl^
therefore they must be diverted to that which good.

Take we then the 4th Use of present Dispensations to employ our hearts with
all, and that is Se^^ examination. verse 40. Let us search and try o^ ways; a
pertinent and very necessary work for su^^ a time. Amongst the many things we
get leisu^^ now to think on, let this be minded as none the least: as the
^yning Pot for Silver and the Furnace for Gold; so is affliction to a sinner, a
discovering and purging thing. Affliction (as I not before) will cause men hear
on the deafest side of their head, it will open their ears to discipline, it
will cause them see things that before they would not see. Let us then set in
earnest to the Work of ^elf-examination while we have the advantage of ^uch a
help.

The 5th Use of present Dispensations is Repentance in that same 40 verse and
let us turn again to the Lord, What ever by Self-examination is discovered to
be amiss, (as hardly any man shall search himself faithfully but many such
things will be ^ound with him) let all that be amended: for if ^ur scum be only
discovered and go not out from ^s, we shall be in hazard to be consumed in the
Furnace. Repentance well becomes a sinner at any ^ime; but especially when God
with rebukes is ^hastising man for iniquity, and persuing sin with ^ Rod: And
Gods hand will fiul be stretched out, nor will his anger turn away, till the
People turn to him that ^nites them, Isai 9, 12, 13. If we would freely turn to
the Lord from all iniquity, we needed neither fear the wrath of men, nor be
beholden to their kindness, the Lord should then command deliverances for
Jacob, as it is said Psalm. 44 4. and should cause the best of them be glad to
go his Erands and serve at his Commands, But our iniquities turn away and with
hold good things from us Ier. 5. 25. O if once that sweet Word were going
through the Land, Hosea 6. 1. every one sending it to his neighbor and saying,
come and let us return unto the Lord.

The 6th Use of present Dispensations is much Prayer, verse 41. Let us lift up
our heart with our hands to God in the Heavens, and if the People of God set
once to Prayer in good earnest, it will be high time for their enemies to fear
a mischief; for sure the cloud of the Saints Prayers will break in a tempest
upon their fatal heads. The three last verses of the Chapter are dreadful to
them. Render unto them a recompense O Lord, according to the Work of their
hands: give them sorrow of heart; thy curse unto them: persecute and destroy
them in anger from under the Heavens of the Lord. And if the destitute People
of God were mighty in Prayer, wrestling with God, weeping and making
supplication to the Angel as Jacob did, I could tell the Church of God good
news, that then the Lord would build up Zion, and would appear in his Glory,
and tha^ he would regard the Prayer of the destitute; and no^ despise their
Prayer Psalm. 102 16, 17. For the Lord is even waiting his Peoples Call, Isai
30. 18. 19 the Lord waits to be Gracious, he will be very Gracious to thee,
at the voice of thy cry when he shall hear it, he will answer thee. And what
will he give us? he will give us our removed Teachers with the fullness of the
blessing of the Gospel, in a plentiful and powerful Dispensation of the Word
Isai 30. 20, 21. O then Let all that love Jerusalem Pray, and let us wrestle
together by Prayer, and each Pray with another, and for another, and to
another hand, and let us all join hands, and see who can give the kindest lift
and go nearest to raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, that we bear
not the shame, that this breach is under our hand. Now all these uses of
afflicting Dispensations, are as pertinent to the Cases of particular Persons,
whose heart knows its own grief, and who know every one the plague of their own
heart. And by all the rest Prayer by the Holy Ghost is prescribed, as a chief
ingredient in all the cures of an afflicted case Jam. 5, 13. Is any man
afflicted let him Pray. Prayer has its famous witnesses in the Scriptures, of
the great things that it has done; neither wants it its witnesses in the
breasts all the Saints. One word of sincere Prayer will cause Devils, and men,
and lusts, and fears, and cares all run, and will burst the strongest bands.
One word of sincere Prayer from the end of the earth, will at a call bring God
to the Soul, and with him light, joy, peace, inlargment and Soulsolace. But if
any be so obstinate, as the Jews were in the case of the Blind man, that they
will not believe famous well qualified witnesses, who know what they speak, and
speak that which they have seen; I say but of Prayer to them, as the blind man's
Parents said to those of him John 9, 21, ask him, he shall speak for himself.
Try but Prayer in earnest, and I have no fear to be found a false witness: for
its own works shall praise it self best, and then I shall be thought to have
spoken within bounds. And thus I have answered the questions proponed for
instruction in the Observation of divine Dispensations: all which may serve (as
I said) to state a clear difference betwixt Athenian curiosity and a Christian
inquiry into the works of God and his ways toward his People.

Having already prosecuted the Doctrine in a way (as I hope) not unuseful,
there remains the less to be said to it by way of Use distinctly, in the usual
way. Only be it remembered that we observe the Lords Dispensations in manner
aforesaid: and for incouragment take but one place Psalm. 107. 42, 43. the
righteous shall see it, and rejoice and all iniquity shall stop her mouth.
Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. And so much for the first thing in the Text, the
Note of Observation Behold.

I will bring her into the Wilderness.
THE second thing in the Words is, the intimation of the Churches Condition. I
will bring her into the Wilderness, And hence the Doctrine is, That these to
whom the Lord minds good, may expect to come to the possession of intended
blessedness by the way of a Wilderness, Behold says the Lord I will allure her,
and speak comfortably unto her: there is my design upon her, and these are my
thoughts of Good concerning her, but first I will bring her into the
Wilderness. In the prosecution of this Doctrine, three things are to be
considered. 1. What is this Wilderness? 2. Wherefore does the Lord bring his
People into the Wilderness? 3. What use we are to make of this intimation of
such a Condition?

1, First then, what is the Wilderness? I Answer 1. in general, it is a
Figurative expression of an afflicted Condition, I will bring her into the
Wilderness; that is, I will erercise her with such Afflictions as men are wont
to meet with in a Wilderness. And therefore 2dly I find a Wilderness Condition
importing these things particularly.

1. It imperteth a Condition of Want and scarcety both of Temporal and
Spiritual things Heb. 1. 37. those of whom the World was not worthy were
destitute of all things: 2 Cor. 6. 10. The Apostles that made many Rich, were
themselves as poor: and they that possessed all things were as having nothing.
Psalm. 107 4, 5. They that wander in a Wilderness are hungry and thristy; and
their Soul faints in them. David Psalm. 63. 1. says my Soul thristeth for
thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thusty land where no water is: he
had no doubt his own temporal Wants, and those great enough, but his greatest
Want was of the waters of the Sanctuary, as is clear from the 2d verse, To see
thy power and thy Glory so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary: and the same
was his Condition in the 42. and 43. Psalms, And this is the supposed
Condition of all the People of God. Isai. 41. 17. they are poor and needy,
seeking water and there is none, and their tongue fails for thrist. The want
of Water which is a most common thing, denotes the extremity of scarcety and
want. And this is the first thing in a Wilderness-Condition. The many hungry
Bellys, and no fewer hungry Souls in these times which are crying, my Leanness,
my Leanness, do plainly say, that we are entered more nor a days journey into
the Wilderness.

The 2d thing imported in a Wilderness-Condition is Desolation and Barrenness,
Psalm. 63. 1. and Psalm. 107. 33. a Wilderness is a dry land, a thristy land
where no water is. Jer. 9, 12. It is burnt up like a Wilderness, and likewise a
Wilderness is a desolate place: there no foot of man does come; there the
Cities are made heaps; there nettles grow upon the ruins of Glorious Temples.
This Desolation and Barrenness is the cause of scarcety and want in a
Wilderness. And this likewise we have felt in our Wilderness; we Want, but we
know not where to get it: the Wells are stopped, good Occasions for our Souls
are removed, our Teachers are removed into Corners, the Songs of our Temples
are become howlings. We may sing the 8 verse of the 46. Psalm with a sad note,
Come behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the earth:
and where Desolations end, there begins Barrenness and dry breasts. As in
one place we have the Wells of water and the Streams from Lebanon stopped, in
the next place we come to, we find Clouds without rain, and Pits without water,
Trees whose fruit is withered, and without fruit, Epistle of Jude 12 verse, men
who either never had any thing, or elss have lost what once they promised. As
if Christ (O sad!) had come by and said, henceforth never fruit grow upon you;
if we were thristy beside the water, or hungry beside Food, or sick beside the
Physician, or sorrowful beside a comforter, or in darkness beside light, we
might the better bear it: But that it is other ways shows we are indeed in the
Wilderness.

3dly The Wilderness imports a Solitary Condition of Separation from
comfortable, sweet and useful Society: David felt this in the Wilderness Psalm.
42. 4. When he remembered that he had gone to the house of God with the
multitude, with the voice of joy and praise, with the multitude that kept Holy
day: and for that his Soul was poured out in him: Heman felt this in his
Wilderness Psalm. 88. 18. lover and friend have thou put far from me, and mine
acquaintance into darkness,: The afflicted, overwhelmed Composer of the 102,
Psalm felt this likewise in his Wilderness, 6, and 7, verses. I am like a
Pelican in the Wilderness, and like on Owl of the desert. I watch and am as a
sparrow alone upon the house top. Isai 35, 1. The Wilderness is a solitary
place. Good company and sweet comfortable useful Society has this to prove it
a choice mercy, that (as the rest of that nature) it is never well known nor
prized by us, till we are denied it, and deprived of it. And now (with Pharoahs
Butler Genesis 41. 9.) I remember my faults this day; and I fear I have too many
fellows in the fault, who either neglect disdainfully, or else abuse good
Company to the increase of vanity. Now begin I to understand more of that Text
Eccl. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12. And what a woe is it to him that is alone, and yet I
doubt not but the kindness of the Lord is shown to many, even in separating and
scattering them one from another: And to confirm me in this judgment, I
remember the Opinion of some who have been in account for skill in things of
that nature: And thus they have thought, that when a Family or Bairn-time
incline to a Consumption (which being a disease hereditary runs much in a
blood) in that case it is good that they part Company, and live at a distance
one from another, for that the disease is strengthened by their social
conversation. I apply, that the evil and hazard of the Company of those that
are tenderly beloved Children of God, may move him even in kindness to send
them apart: but they will find it a kindness not so comfortable as needful. As
I could like to be hungry beside good meat, or weary beside good lodging: so I
would choose to be solitary beside good Company, that is, so to enjoy my self
by my self, as that I might likewise enjoy the help of Christian Company at will
with convenience. And as I am sure that God was never the instituter of the
Monks order; so, sure I am, none can choose to shun good Company, but such as
would choose their own affliction, and forsake their own mercy. Only I must
here mind that good People are not always good Company: but a good Man or Woman
are only then good Company, when they show their goodness in Company, so that
they may do good to the Company: and therefore, though it may seem a Paradox,
yet it is too true; that we cannot always say we have been in good Company,
when we have been in the company of Good Men. Let Good People keep fellowship
and company; let the evils and vanities of good People be discharged the
Company, let Good People do good in Company, and so Good People shall be Good
Company. But as often as we miss good Company, let it mind us that we are in
the Wilderness, And be it here added (because I love not to multiply) that it
is no small part of the Saints Wilderness to be vexed and intested with evil
Company. The Scripture descrives a Wilderness to be the place of Owls,
Ostriches, Wolves, Lions, Serpents, Satyrs, Devils, Dragons and all evil
Beasts and doleful Creatures: And as it is said of Christ literally, Mark, 1,
13. that in the Wilderness he was with the wild Beasts, so Christians are
mystically neighboured with the like in their Wilderness: their righteous Souls
are vexed with hearing and seeing daily their doleful and detestable practices,
besides their Persecutions whereof it follows to speak, particularly.

4. The Wilderness imports a Wandering and unsettled Condition, Psalm. 107. 4.
they wandered in the Wilderness in a solitary way, they found no City to dwell
in, Heb. 11. 37, 38. those of whom the World was not worthy wandered about in
deserts, and in mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the earth. We read in the
History of Scripture, how Israel wandered, and how many seats they changed in
the Wilderness of Egypt forty years, We read of the Patriarchs Psalm. 105, 13.
how as strangers in the land of Promise they went from one Nation to another,
from one Kingdom to another People. We read, in the 1 Samuel of David's
wandering from one Wilderness to another, and amongst the rocks of the wild
Goats which he ^esents with Tears, Psalm. 56. 8. Thou tellest my wanderings,
says he, put thou my Tears into thy bottle, are they not in thy Book? And this
is even the wilderness-condition of the Saints and Servants of God this day in
these Nations. How many driven from Station and Relations, and put to seek
Lodging amongst Strangers? What strange Unsettlings are there among us? By
Outing, Confinement, Banishment, denouncing Fugitive; and all these by Laws and
Acts so contrived, as if they meant only to grant the Lords Servants Ieremys
deploring wish Ier. 9, 2. O that I had in the Wilderness a lodging-place of
waysaring men, that I might leave my People and go from them. And all these are
beside all the particular wanderings of the Lords scattered flocks whose
Condition we may see Ezekiel, 34. 6. and throughout: my sheep wandered through all
the mountains and upon every high hill, yea my flock was scattered upon all the
face of the earth and none did search nor seek after them.

5. The Wilderness imports a Condition of Tentations, Matthew. 4, 1. Christ was
led into the Wilderness to be tempted Psalm. 95, 8. 9. Isreal's time in the
Wilderness, is called the day of Tentation. I know it is there meant Activly of
these Tentations; as is clear from the 9th verse, Your fathers tempted me,
proved me, and saw my works. ^ut when I look back upon Moses, who himself ^as
with the Church in the Wilderness, and well ^ew their case, I find him
reckoning it a time ^ Passive Tentations also, such I mean wherewith ^^ey were
tried and tempted Deuteronomy. 8. 2. And thou shall remember all the way, which the
Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the Wilderness to humble thee, and
to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou would keep his
Commandments or not. It is ^ar 1. from Jam. 1, 15. that God tempts no ^n. 2.
It is a great question whether Satan ^^th a hand by tentation in every sin of
man. ^t 3dly I judge, that Satan has not such a hand every sin as some are
ready to say and think. ^he Devil is not so ill, we say, as he is called, nor ^
ugly as he is painted: many men father those ^s upon the Devil, that have their
own hearts ^th for Father and Mother: and many sin with^^t a Tentation ab
extra, or from without. Yet the 4th place, it is manifest from Iam. 1, 14. 15.
at a man is tempted at least by his own lust, as often the sins. And thus there
is no sin without some and of tentation, either from another or from the ^ner
himself: and where there is much sin and ^ovocation, (as was amongst the
Israelites in the ^ilderness) there is much Tentation. Let the ^ords People
then expect to find their Wilderness place of Temptation. And are not
Tentations ^awed thick in the way of Gods People in these ^es? Is there not a
ne^t spread upon mount Tabor? may we not say with the Psalmist, P^ 142. 3. in
the way wherein I walked have they la^^ snare for me? Is not the cass now, you
must either do thus or thus as men (who because they have ^^ Conscience of
their own, therefore care not ^ yours) shall please to command, or else do other
wa^ upon your peril? And when things might therways be better ordered and
established, a^ not Laws and Acts contrived so as occasions (...) be sought
against those, against whom, like Da^ Chap. 6, 5. there can be found no
occasion, except the matters of their God. Is not this the hou^ temptation?
Rev. 3. 10. But when enemies h^ given over, and done their worst, in come (...)
friends (who as Peter to Christ Matthew. 16. 23) (...) a temptation to us, O, say
they, look to your self, and play not the Fool. And when all the prevail not
yet, in comes Carnal, Worldly, (...) believing, Grudging and disquieting
though^ from our own hearts, and these, as in a refer guard, give the last and
most dangerous assault, ^ specially if the force of our spirits be any w^
daunted or disordered by the foresaid attempt and therefore James. 1. 14.
(looking over t^ former as it were) tells us that then a man is tem^ed, when he
is led away of his own lust and enti^e and then it is high time to look to our
selves, wh^ our enemies are those of our own house. Man have born the force of
outward attempts who h^ much ado to sustain the impetuous assaults of the own
disquieted and disquieting hearts. Psalm. 42, and 43, 5. Why art thou cast down
O my se^^ and why art thou disquieted in me?And therefore James pronounces him
the blessed man Chap. 1. 12. that endures tentation. The Tentations of an
afflicted lot is the great Affliction of our lot: and therefore in Scripture
Afflictions are called Tentations, and they that escape the Tentations of
Affliction have got above all hazard of Affliction otherwise: for Tentations
being the snare of Affliction, when that is once broken, the strength of it is
spent, and it is force is over.

6. The Wilderness imports a Condition of fears, and perplexing Doubts: for
the Wilderness being a land of darkness. Jer. 2, 31. and a place where there is
no way, it puts the traveller inevi^ably to many sad fears, and perplexing
doubts. The afflicting fears and doubts of Saints in the Wilderness may be
reduced to those three chief ^eads. The 1, are concerning their spiritual
Con^ition and state before God. The 2, are concerning their present incumbent
Duty and Work. The ^, are concerning thee vents of incumbent Dispensations. I
cannot endure, nor dare I expatiat more ^rgly in a discourse of these
particularly, lest either saint in the way, or once turning off but a little
^to those dark mysterious paths, I be not able ^ickly to recover the high way:
for if I speak to ^^e purpose, I may readily prognosticat that to ^ the fate of
my discourses, which is of their case ^ho once are engaged in the intricacies
of these ^^rplexities, that hardly can they quickly ridd themselves. This only
I must say, that those ^^uls that have been at their wits end in these things,
and have not known in all the World what to do, can best tell what it is, to be
brought into the Wilderness. And this I observe, that even as men have got a
custom to plant Wildernesses in the midst of pleasant Gardens; so many me^^ in
their otherwise good Books and Sermons, imprudently either starting
difficulties unseasonably or pursuing them excessivly, do rather creat that
clear perplexities to poor Souls, and give them the entertainment of a toilsome
divertisment in plac^ of solid refreshment. But my project invites m^^ if I
could be so happy, rather to plant a Garden i^ a Wilderness, than a Wilderness
in a Garden. I fea^ there is in the World but too much artificial Religion and
exercises, like Garden-Wildernesses, invented rather for pleasure than created
by necessity I fear some Christians, like some Preachers, read more off their
book, nor they repeat off their hear^ But I doubt the pleasure of an artificial
Wilderness will either relieve or compense the grief of ^ real One. Elaborat,
fine, accurat Discourses o^ Christians Doubts and cases whatever they deserv^
in their own place, will be found but Physician of no value, and miserable
comforters to Sou^ that are in earnest; except he that reveals secr^^ and
loses the Prisoners lighten the doubtin^ Soul's darkness, with a beam of his
own presenc^ In the 42, Psalm. David had said well to it, but the says best, 11.
verse, he is the health of my countenam and my God. As Gardens are more
pleasant f^^ men in health, than for sick men; so, Discourses of Christian
cases, in doubts and perplexties, will readily do better, either before or
after the distempter, than in the time. Much Prayer and communion with God, is
the best book of cases that ever a doubting Soul read, and is blessed with the
maniest discoveries and manifestations of God, to those that walk in darkness
and have no light.

7. The Wilderness imports a Condition of Reproach and Persecution: Job 30.
5. descrives the reproachful base Condition of his Adversaries that mocked him
from this, that, they fled into the Wilderness and were driven forth from among
men who cried after them as after a thief. And Rev. 12. 6. the woman in travel
the persecuted Church fled into the Wilderness. This was David's
Wilderness-Condition. Psalm. 55. 3. because of the voice of the enemy, because
of the oppression of the wicked; for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath
they hate me, and in verse 6 and 7 I said, O that I had wings like a dove: for
then would I flee away and be at rest. Lo then would I wander far off, and be
in the Wilderness, Selah. The scourge and persecution of false tongues, being
worse than the venom of Asps, the sting of Serpents, or Poison of Dragons that
^aunt the Wilderness, makes often the Wilderness a refuge and rest to be
desired by the Reproached People of God, and the wrath and cruelty of wicked
men makes the Saints often times find Lions, Bears Wolves and Dragons to be
better neighbors. Heb. 11. 36. Cruel mockings is the first Item in the account
of Saints sufferings: and then follows Scourging, Bonds, Killing Sawing,
tempting, Torturing and wandering about. And the Apostle 2 Timoth. 3. 12. warns
all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, that there way lies through this
Wilderness of persecution, whereof reproach is not the least part: for compare
Genesis 21, 9. with Galat. 4. 29. that was carnal Ishmael's Persecution, wherewith
he persecuted his Brother Isaac the son of the promise. And they had trial,
says the Apostle, of Cruel mockings: and the slandering tongues of wicked men
are compared in Scripture to the sharpest and most bitter instruments, sharp
arrows, Coals of Juniper, Swords, Spears and the poison of Serpents: Racking
and Torturing may break a man's bones, But Reproach, says the Psalmisi, has
broken my heart, and it has dammished my very Spirits, for I am full of
heaviness Psalm 69, 20. And now when the People of God live in a land of trouble
and anguish, from whence come the young and old Lion, the viper and fiery
fleeing Serpent, Isa. 30. 6. pray, who will not call that a Wilderness? and
where are they, think you, whose soul is among Lions? Psalm. 57. 4. If any shall
search the records of our Scottish Inquisition (the Creature that likes not to
be called the high Commission) they may be soon convinced that these are no
fictions of Fanatics and disaffected persons. But the question is not
demonstrative; (for I warrant they have more Loyalty than to deny these things
that they say are so good service to --) but juridical; for Jure factum di^u^t,
they do all by Law forsooth, and so justify all their practices: But are all
Laws righteous? or is there such a thing in the World as a throne of ini^ity
which frames mischief by a Law. Psalm. 94. 20. They think possibly (as Paul
once thought) that they ought to do these things, and that they do good
service; to God indeed they do not say, but ^^ -- they cry. But stay till
Christ examine the Bra^est man amongst the Examinators, upon that little
qvestion, Why persecntest thou me? and then my Lord ^nquisitor comes in upon
second thoughts with his confession, I was a Blasphemer, a Persecuter, and
in^rtous. 1 Timoth. 1, 13. And then the fools excuse is alleged by him that
thought himself so ^ise (for sapientis non est dicere, Putavi) I thought that I
should have done these things. But what think you now Sir? Why now I see that
which formerly ^ called Loyalty, zeal and good service, must change ^ts Name
without any change in the Thing: for it ^^oth was, and is, no other thing but
Blasphemy, Persecution and injury. Such a thing as this has been.

8. The Wilderness imports a Melancholi^us, sad and dejected Condition. This
follows from all the rest. Any who ever traveled alone through a Wilderness,
may easily understand this; and there is reason for it: because a man is there
deprived of any thing that may cheer his Spirit, and of all gladening Objects;
besides that he is possessed with fearful apprehensions of evils that may befall
him: and his spirit in the very entry is amused with the uncouth and solitary
nature of the place. To say no more of this: the very Countenances of of the
Lords People in these times look like a Wilderness: and s^d cause why; we see
many things to make us sorry, little to make us glad. We see such things as we
nor our Fathers have not seen the like. And if there were no more, and albeit
for our own particular we had no occasion of grief, and though like Nehemiah we
were serving the King with Wine, and were of as jovial an humor as he who was
not wont before time to be sad: yet if any should ask the Kings Question.
Nehemiah 2, 2. Why is thy countenance sad seeing thou art not sick? This is
nothing else but sorrow of heart may we not sadly reply with him in the 3 d
verse Why should not my Countenance be sad when my City, the place of my
fathers Sepulchers lies waste, and the Gates thereof are consumed with fire?
That is, when the Church of God is laid desolate. But I suspect there are few
that truly love God, or are kindly sons of Zion but they have their own
particular grievances in these times wherein they share of the common lot of
the Church their Mother that sits in the dust: and ^^ is good it be so: For woe
to them that are at ease ^^ Zion. Amos 6. 1. The particular grievances of
Saints and their pressures, serve well to keep them mindful of the Churches
common lot: for fellowship in calamity is such a pregnant incentive to
sympathy, that even Jesus himself was made the more compassionat, for what he
himself suffered being in all points tempted as we are, yet without sin, he
cannot but be touched with the feeling of our infirmity. Heb. 4. 15. And does
it not well suite all the Children to go in Mourning when the Mother sits
desolate and afflicted as a Woman forsaken? E^ how could they expect to be
comforted with her, if they do not Mourn for her? Solomon that great Master of
Religion, Nature, and Reason, has determined Eccl. 7. 2, 3. that it is better
to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting. And that sorrow
is better than laughter; for that by the sadness of the Countenance the heart
is made better: and he who is greater than Solomon, who himself often weept,
but never (that we read) once laughed, pronounces them blessed that mourn, for
that they shall be comforted. Matthew. 5. 4.

9. This Wilderness imports a Condition of Weariness and fainting: This yet
follows naturally from all that has been said Psalm. 107. 5. those that wander
in a Wilderness, their soul faints in them; Psalm. 63. 1. David's Wilderness
was a thristy, or (as the Original has it,) a weary Land: and Isai 32, 2. it
is expressly rendered a weary Land. The Saints case in their Wilderness is often
like that of the Egyptian. 1 Samuel 30. 11, 12. who was so outwearyed that he
fell off from his company and sunk in the Wilderness. David often complains
that he was weak, that his spirit failled, his soul fainted, this throat was
dry, his eyes failed whilst he cried upon the Lord and waited for him. And no
wonder it is that the Saints so often weary and faint by the way: but a great
wonder it is, that any of them should hold up to the end: They have such long
stages in the Race that is set before them, and those in a thirsty Wilderness
where hardly they can drink of the brook by the way: and they must run it so
often about with fresh parties whereof possibly the worst comes last upon them,
when they are already so much exhausted, that there is great reason, for him
that would wager upon their heads, to ask, whether they have so much confidence
remaining as to answer that Question Jer. 12. 5. If thou have run with the
footmen and they have wearied thee, then how can thou contend with horses?
and if in the land of peace wherein thou trustedst they wearyed thee, how will thou do in the swelling of Jordan. But the Lord that makes the Question must
answer, and one Prophet must Answer another: and how Jeremy could do all that,
Isaiah can tell Chap, 40. from the 28 verse to the end: the everlasting God,
the Lord that created the ends of the earth faints not, neither is weary,
etc. Let the people of God in their Wilderness expect to have their hands full
of it, and as much as shall put them to a strict necessity either to believe or
utterly to give it over. Psalm, 27. 13. I had fainted unless I had believed to
see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Now this is the
Wilderness: and thus is answered the first thing in the point, What is the
Wilderness.

II. The second thing to be considered in the point is, Wherefore does the Lord
bring his People into the Wilderdess? The Scripture shows that for one or
more of these five Reasons the Lord does this.

1. He does it for their sin: and that in these five Respects. 1. to convince
them of sin. It is long many a time ere the Lords sinful People will see or
acknowledge their sin: yea they will say they are innocent when their
transgressions are most evident. Jer. 2 23. and therefore verse 35. I will
plead with thee, because thou say I have not sinned. Such as are kindly
Melancholians may know by experience, what effectual impressions the change of
places has to the changing of men's minds: and for this it is necessary often
times that men be sent to learn that in the Wilderness, which they could not,
it may be they would not, see at home in a land inhabited: Jer. 22. 21, 22. I
spoke unto thee to thy prosperity, but thou saidest I will not hear, and
therefore thou shall go into captivity. Affliction is quick-sighted, and
necessity is wise and Ingenious: affliction according as it is blessed, or not
blessed of God, has very contrary effects upon men: Solomon tells us that
affliction makes a wise man mad: and he that is greater than Solomon tells us,
that affliction sometimes makes a mad man wise Luke 15, 17. it brought a
distracted Prodigal to himself. Many men think it a piece of Wit and Gallantry
to mantain their sinful courses in a Day of prosperity; and if he be a
beneficed person or one in place, he is ill worthy either place or benefice who
is so scant of Discourse, that he cannot (if this our craft be in danger to be
set at naught Act. 19. 27) make an Oration in defense of Diana; and at least,
cannot say to his Companions with more truth than Wit, though yet with more Wit
than Honesty, Sirs ye know that by this Craft we have our wealth, ib. verse 25.
Yea if the Lord by his servants plead with some men in Prosperity for their
iniquities, anon he shall have a reply till he bring forth his Rod which is
sitted for the back of fools; and is the only cogent argument with such
persons. Take two instances shortly, one is Isai. 31. 2. those people were bent
upon Idolatry, and when they were reproved and threatened for that by the Lord,
then they were confident in the assistance of Egypt: and when yet they were
taxed for that, no doubt, they would tell the Prophets, Self-defence was not
unlawful, and many such witty stories, till the Lord concludes the dispute with
that, yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back his
words, but will arise against the house of the evil doers, and against the help
of those that work iniquity. And now let those great Wits and grand Disputers
say to it Jer. 13. 21. What will thou say when he shall punish thee? Say to
that Gallants, or you have said nothing. The next instance is Ezekiel. 17. from 11
verse to the end; Zedekiah had given an Oath of fealty and subjection to the
King of Babylon, he Rebels against the King of Babylon and breaks his Oath:
the Lord pleads with him for that, O! might he say (mark you the Language of
our times) it was a forced Oath made against his will: yea, may be, it was an
unlawful Oath for him to subject himself and the Lords People to Heathens by a
bond: and therefore why might not he take his occasions to break it, if once he
had but strength to maintain the breach? And, may be, (as Papists think that
Faith ought not to be kept to Heretics, so they call Protestants) he thought
neither ought it to be kept to Heathens: But ^ mark from the place 1. against
the Popish whimsy that it is called significantly the King of Babylons Oath, in
the 16 verse. I mark 2. In the same verse against other Covenant-breakers. That
whatever by Zedekiah was or might be alleged, it was all but a profane
despising of the Oath: for until once it be lawful to take Gods Holy and
fearful name in vain; it shall never be any thing else but Prophanity and
Perjury to break Covenant upon interest. I mark 3. from the 20 verse against
all Patrons of Perjury, and such as teach Rebellion against the Lord; the Lords
great Argument, which usually he reserves to the Conclusion of such Debates:
well, says the Lord, in the 19 verse, he has sworn an Oath, and has broken
it: but I will let him know what an Oath is; I will Swear another and will keep
it: as I live says the Lord, surely I will recompense it upon his own head.
And in the 20 verse, I will spread my net upon him, and he shall he taken in my
snare, and I will bring him to Babylon and will plead with him there, for his
trespass that he has trespassed against me. And this was performed 2 Kings 25.
6, 7. and 2 Chronicles. 36. 20, 21. Prosperity to many is as the day light to Owls
and Batts, it daz'ls their eyes, and blinds them, that they do not see their
Errors till it be too late. Zedekiah saw not his faults till he saw them
without his eyes at Riblah in the Land of Hamath. To say no more of this: if
other Arguments will not convince men that are guilty of Perjury, there is a
necessity they must go to Babylon for Instruction. As the Lord lives, (they are
the words of God, and it is their meaning) Perjury shall get a convincing
stroke. It is a Scots Proverb, As sore greets the Child that is beaten after
noon, as he that is beaten before noon: The Church of God and his Saints in
these Nations have gotten a forenoons correction; but woe to them that get the
afternoon strokes. See the Parables Ier, 24 throughout. To conclude this
reason then; Let us not seek conviction of our sin the length of the
Wilderness, nor at the rate of bitter Affliction: but let us all take the
Council Ier. 6. 8. Be thou instructed O Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart from
thee, lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited:

The 2d. Account whereupon the Lord brings his People into the Wilderness for
sin, is, for the vindication of his Glorious and Holy Name from all appearance
of connivance at, or partaking with his peoples Sins, Numb. 14. 21. As truly as
I live, says he, all the earth shall be filled with the Glory of the Lord;
that is, with the Glorious manifestation of his Justice against his Peoples
Sins: And he often threatens, that those who profane his Name and make it to be
Blasphemed, he will return their shame upon their own Faces. If any of us has
a Friend who is lewd and dissolute and debauched, we are ashamed of him;
because his Faults reflect upon us: And therefore we hold our selves obliged
for our own Vindication to testify our displeasure against him. And so it is
with the Holy one of Israel and his sinful People.

The 3d. Account is to imbitter sin to them, Jer. 2. 19. Know therefore and
see, that it is an evil thing and a bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord
thy God, and that his fear is not in thee. As Abner said to Ioab of the war, so
I say to every one of their sin, 2 Samuel 2. 26. Know thou not that it will be
bitterness in the latter end? Prosperity sweetens sin to Sinners, which of it
self is sweet enough to their corrupted Palate: But the Gall and Wormwood of
affliction gives it its own kindly relish.

The 4th. Account is, that he may put a stop to his People in their course of
Sin. Thus Hosea 2. 6. I will hedge up thy way with Thorns, and make a wall,
that she shall not find her Paths; and verse 7 She shall not overtake nor find
her Lovers: Many in prosperity are so engaged by custom to courses of Iniquity,
which nothing but affliction can interrupt and put a stop to; and they must
take their march into the Wilderness to divert them off the Paths of
Wickedness. O that all who are in Affliction, and in the Wilderness, would take
this advantage of their impetuous over-hailing Lusts and Idols; and had Wisdom
to improve such a good occasion, of a perpetual Divorce and Separation, from
the sins that were wont easily to beset them, and as easily to prevail with
them! It is not time, when people are in the Wilderness, to rush every one to
their course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle, never once asking what is
this I am doing: But it is then seasonable Daniel 4. 27. To break off our Sins
and Iniquities; Least we go further on, than that we can safely retire our
selves.

The 5th. Account is, that they may truly repent and thoroughly return from Sin
to God. In the 7 verse of this chapter, when by affliction she is put to a
stand in her course of sin, it is yet intended further that she return to her
first Husband, and this is brought to effect, Hos: chap. 6. verse 1. Come,
says she, and let us return unto the Lord: For he has torn, etc, Simple
cessation from sin, without true conversion in time of affliction, may put a
person or People to Pharaoh's Expenses of multiplied Rods and Plagues one after
another, with the hazard of utter destruction in the end. Learn we then in the
Wilderness to say as is meet to be said unto God, Job, 34. 31, 32. I have born
Chasitsement, I will not offend any more: That which I see not teach thou me;
if I have done iniquity I will do no more, Let us turn thoroughly from all
iniquity, and that with all our Heart. And thus to the first reason and its
several respects, Why the Lord brings his People into the Wilderness: It is
their sin.

2. The Lord brings his people into the Wilderness for their Trial and
Exercise, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. The Lord did all that unto thee, to prove thee, to know
what was in thine heart, whether thou would keep his Commandments or not.
Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. Tribulation sets all graces on work in the Saints: Thus the
Lord dealt with the Church Psalm. 44. from the 17 verse to the 23, and Psalm 66.
10. Thus he dealt with Job. The Lord is come to these Nations with his fan in
his hand, he is winnowing us as Wheat, and he will thoroughly purge his floor
Matthew. 3 12. and who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when
he appears? for he is like a refyners fire, and like fullers soap; and he
shall sit as a refiner and as a purifyer of silver: and he shall purify, the
sons of Levi, and purge them as Gold and Silver, that they may offer unto the
Lord an offering in righteousness. Malach 3, 2, 3. Now the secrets of many
hearts are discovered: now we ^ee the ground of men's stomachs, and what
corruption and rotten stuff has been lurking under ^he beauty of untryed
profession. Would not some have said, am I a dog? if that which they have how
done had been told them a few years ago. Now it is seen Daniel. 11. 34. that
many did cleave to the Covenant with flatteries; but the next verse being the
35. says further, That some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them,
and to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end, because it
is yet for a time appointed. Therefore blessed is he that endures to the end.
And let him that stands take heed lest he fall. The strange discoveries, the
great stumbling, and many off fallings ^f men in these times, afford me the
serious and confirmed thoughts, how few there are that shall ^e saved, and how
hardly these few. Malachie's ^efiners fire comprehends both all the trials of a
present time, and also and specially, the great and solemn last trial of the
Judgment of the great day, when many a man's work shall be burnt up, and himself
shall be saved, yet so as by fire. 1 Cor. 3. 15. ^hen shall all the sinners and
hypocrites in Zion be afraid and surprised: for that they cannot dwell ^^th
devouring fire, nor with everlasting burnings. Isai. ^3, 14. There will be many
amissing that day in the Congregation of the righteous, that here ha^^ sitten
chief in the Assembly. In general this is the verity: but toward the
particular persons of ^^ there is, I must walk with Charity, as toward ^^ self,
with fear and humble Jealousy: This o^^ all would remember, that they who
cannot endu^^ the wide sieve of larger trials in a present time, wi^^ never be
able to abide the narrow search of a stri^^ judgment at the end of time. But as
the Lord will have his People tried, so he will have the^^ likewise Exercised
and their Graces employed. Idleness is a hateful and unhappy evil in People. We
fa^ an idle man must always have something to work he, that cease to do well,
will soon learn ^^ do ill. To prevent that, the Lord puts work (...) his
Peoples hand: for he has not given the^ Graces and Talents, to hide in a
napkin under the earth, but to be employed and improven to use and therefore he
appoints affliction as a ta^^ master to call forth all their Graces to work^
and to receive the Tale of every man's Work, that it may be known what profit
they make. The time of affliction should be a bussy time, like Eating time and
Harvest, to the People of God. But alas! to many may be said in truth, that
which Pharaoh said to the Israelites in cruel scorn, ye ^^ idle, ye are idle
Exodus 3 17. Only his inference and mine run very contrary. ye are idle, says
he, and therefore ye say, let us go and do sacrifice to the Lord But ye are
idle, say I, and therefore ye say no^ let us go and do sacrifice to the Lord
Now, if the Lord bring his People into affliction for their Exercise, hence it
is consequentially inferred, that if their Afflictions do not Exercise them to
purpose, they are not like to come out of them in haste. I fear many but play
with their Afflictions, and look upon all the sad sights they see in the
Wilderness, but as so many farleyes, fit to entertain their curiosity and to
cause them gaze: And I exhort all to be serious with their Afflictions.

3. The Lord brings his People to the Wilderness, that they may be the more fit
to receive the impressions of his will, and communications of his Goodness.
Thus we see throughout this Chapter, the Lord designs jointly her Reformation
and Consolation by all these bitter threatenings and afflicting Dispensations.
And Chapter 5, 15. of this ^ame Prophesy of Hosea. I will go, says the Lord and
return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face: In
their Affliction they will seek ^e early. And (as the whole have no need of the
Physician, but the sick) they now finding the disease of their Affliction to
purpose, and so being the better fitted for the Communications of the Lords
goodness, in their deliverance, return to him in this confidence, that he who
has torn will heal them etc. and that his coming to them, verse 3d; shall be
as the rain to the earth, which being parch^d with drought is well ready for a
shower. People ^n Prosperity readily are not so fit to receive either the
impressions of Gods will; for then speak to them, and they will not hear, Jer.
22. 1. Or the Communications of his Goodness: for then they an say we are
Lords, and we will not come to thee. Jer. 2. 31. But Affliction fits them
better both for the one and for the other. In prosperity, as in the noise of a
City, every thing is heard, but nothing is hearkened to: and the common noise
swallows up the most distinct and audible voices in a confused insignificant
sound. But in Affliction, as in a Wilderness, the stillest whisper of a voice
is soon discerned and seriously attended to. Likewise i^ prosperity, as in a
plentiful City or Country, men enjoy all things, and esteem nothing: but in
Affliction, as in a Wilderness, wanting all or many things, they account the
more of any thing. In a Word, the Lord in the Wilderness and by Affliction is
tuneing his People to Obedience, that he may bring them forth singing the Songs
of Deliverance. Gods commands and his mercies will have another kind of luster
and relish to a Soul coming out of a sanctified Wilderness. Formality in
Religion, with much vanity and many superfluities wait but too well upon
Prosperity: but the cold wind of the Wilderness blows these all away, and
strengthens the vital heat of the inward man, and makes solk more Religious
than formerly with less noise and ado. Prosperity is an unthankful Piece: for
readily the more it receives, the less it accounts of what it receives; and (as
a full Soul loathes the honey comb) with a fastidious insolency it thinks, and
by falsely thinking truly makes abundance of mercy a very misery: but (as to
the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet) the Wilderness, and an afflicted
lot blessed of God, will give a man a good stomach for a piece of the bread of
Adversity, and a Cup of the cold water of Affliction; and will teach him to say
Grace to it thus: I am less than the least of all thy mercies Genes. 32, 10. So
said Jacob when he was coming from his twenty years travels in the Wilderness
of his Afflictions in Padan Aram. Prosperity extenuates, sanctified Adversity
aggravates mercies: to it any thing less than Hell is a mercy. Lament. 3. 22.
It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed: to it any mercy is a great
Mercy: a great mercy is an extraordinary one: and an extraordinary is a
marvelous incomprehensible one. Prosperity counts its mercies by Subtraction,
it will take its Bill with the unjust Steward, and for a hundred it will write
fourscore, and for fourscore, it will write fifty: But in the Wilderness men
learn to cast up their Mercies by Multiplication with the help of Division: in
the same place cited Lament. 3. 22. That we are not consumed, to some might
seem but one mercy, and that a poor one too: yea but the lamenting Prophet
finds mercies in that mercy. And truly the mercies of the Lord are homogeneous
things, whereof every part has the Nature and Denomination of the whole: as
every drop of water is water; so the least piece of any Mercy is Mercy: and the
afflicted, humble, thankful Soul loves to anatomize and diffect the Lords
Mercies into parts, as Physicians do humane bodies, that they may inform
themselves the better of the number and nature of the parts, and of the frame
and structure of the whole. The 136 Psalm has this common with those Mercies
which it recounts, that there is more in it than every one can see: This only
to my purpose, everyone may see, how the Psalmist tells out the Lords Mercies
by parts, and insists upon one and the same Mercy, to show that every part of
it is a Mercy; and that, as all the rest, derived from the underived,
uncreated, unexhaustible, and ever running fountain of the Lords Mercy that
endures for ever. Prosperity, like the Widow and her Sons in the matter of the
oil, loses and comes short of many Mercies for want of the vessels of faithful
accounts and thankful acknowledgments. The Saint in the Wilderness as the
Disciples in a desert place, obeys Christ's Frugal command, it gathers up the
remaining Fragments of mercies that nothing be lost, and with those it fills
whole baskets: As by the blessing and miraculous Power of Christ, the broken
meat, after that Dinner, whereat so many thousands were well filled, was more
than that which at the first was set down whole. O! but it is good holding
house with Christ! It is good to have our portion, be otherwise what it will,
with his presence and Blessing, and to have it coming through his hands. And as
the power of divine contentment can make (...) the half more not the whole; so
the Wilderness will teach the People of God, the mystery of improving Mercies,
to make the increase more than the stock. This, as the rest of divine Arts, is
best professed in the Wilderness: and therefore it is that the Lord sends so many
of his most hopeful Children thither to be bred: and there they are continued
till the (...) past their Course and taken their Degrees, and then they return
Masters of the Arts able to teach others, and to comfort them with the same
comforts wherewith they themselves were comforted of Christ. 2 Cor. 1. 4.

4. The Lord brings his People into the Wilderness, that he may lead them by,
and deliver them from that which is worse. Exodus 13. 17, 18. And it came to
pass when Pharaoh had let the People go, that God led them not through the way
of the land of the Philistines, though that was near: for God said lest
peradventure the People repent when they see war and they return to Egypt; but
God led the People about through the way of the Wilderness of the red sea. The
Lord prepares his People a place in the Wilderness from the fury and
persecutions of men. Rev. 12. 6. And albeit before, I called Persecution one of
the parts of a Wilderness-Condition; yet I would have it understood, that every
one that comes into the Wilderness, is not led through all the Wilderness, nor
made to see all the evils thereof, nor do all Afflictions tryst upon every
afflicted person: for often times God makes one a mean to prevent and escape
another: even as in the case in hand, the Lord sends sometimes his People to
enjoy David's and Ieremys wishes in the Wilderness, that so they may be ridd of
ill neighbors: for we say in the Proverb, Better be alone than in ill Company.
And likewise the Lord by bringing his People into the Wilderness delivers them
from the contagion and vexation of the sins of those with whom they conversed
aforetimes. Albeit the Wilderness, as I before said, be a place of temptation;
yet the Lord, by some one tentation which his People can better guide, many
times leads them out of the way of some other one or more which might be of more
hazard to them. Surely it is no small mercy to be out of the way, when
tentations are marching through all the land in solemn procession, and they cry
before them, bow the knee, and when the wicked walk on every side, who but the
viles^ men, (Psalm. 12, 8.) would covet the preferment of the midst? And would
not any person of a Holy breath, prefer a Cottage in a well aired Wilderness,
to the foul winds and corrupt infectious air of these plaguey times? The plague
of a general defection which (as the Pest does other deseases) has engrossed
all abominations, is now so common, that except it were with Aaron Numb. 16.
48. to stand between the dead and the living with the incense of much
intercession, that, if it be possible, the plague may by stayed, I should think
him a person of that stoutness which they call rashness, and of a pretty well
confirmed, if not of a much hardened heart, who otherwise could gladly come into
the Company of, or mix himself with the men of this Generation. We say when all
freits fail, fire is good for the farsey: if God cure this Generation of one
Plague by another, Remark how the Plague followed in London, the next year 1660.
I shall think it no more than is necessary: for Psalm. 14. 3. generally they
are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy; there is none that does
good, no not one: And now I think I hear a voice from Heaven saying of this
Generation, as that other Rev. 18. 4 said to John, of Mystical Babylon; come
out of her my people, that ye may not be partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her Plagues. And there is another great mischief that the Lord
leads his People out of its way -- in bringing them into the Wilderness, and it
is the Plagues that come upon wicked men, and all Gods enemies. The People of
God want not their own visitations, but they are not like the Plagues of the
wicked, their enemies. Isai. 27. 7. has he smiten him as he smote those that
smote him? or is he slain according to the slaughter of those that are slam by
him? Yea the Saints Afflictions are excellent Antidotes and preservatives
against the Plagues of their enemies, who are not as, but indeed are the
Ungodly and the Wicked. We see the properity of the Saints Afflictions Psalm.
94. 12, 13. Blessed is the man whom thou chasteness O Lord, and teach him
out of thy law, that thou may est give him rest from the days of adversity,
till the pit be dug for the wicked. A strange thing a man's motto to be
perussem nisi perussem: I had perished, if I had not perished: and that
chastisment should hide a man from the day of adversity: But both the History
of Scripture, and the Saints experience from time time in all Generations, do
yield abundance of particular instances in confirmation of this General
assertion. It appears by Lots slowness to depart, that he took it as a grief to
go out of Sodom filthy as it was: and yet the Lord by that is sending him out
of the midst of the overthrow. It is no doubt a grief and great Affliction to
many of the Saints and Servants of God, that they are removed from their people
and place: But when judgments come upon aplace, better to be away than in
place. And in the judgment of judicious and great Divines, it prognosticats no
good to a place, when the Saints and Servants of God are driven out thereof.
Let any read Muscuus upon Math. 24. Alas then for her that bare me, and whose
Breasts gave me suck! for the City the place of my Nativity and education, for
the word that is past upon her, and the Prophesy: When it shall be said to
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, go here or go there; go to the south, or go
to the north, but go not to Edinburgh, then woe to thee O Edinburgh. These are
the words and Prophesy of Mr. Robert Rollock which are to be seen in Print
before the translation of his book upon the Colossians, And is not this the
time spoken of.

5. The Lord brings his People into the Wilderness, to Humble them, that they
may know of whom they hold mercies, and learn afterward in prosperity to carry
soberly. When Israel was upon the entry of a land flowing with milk and honey,
Moses insists wisely throughout the book of Deuteronomy upon the Memory of
their case in the Wilderness, and tells them plainly Chap. 8. verse 2. The Lord
did all that to humble thee: To this end it was that the Lord commanded the pot
of Manna to be kept by the Ark; and for this was institute the feast of
Tabernacles. Prosperity is an insolent Piece, and will readily cause men forget
their maker that has done all these things for them, and came a freehold of
mercies: we are Lords say they, and therefore we will come no more unto thee,
Jer. 2. 31. Or else they will give the Glory of their mercies unto Idols, in
this same Hosea 2. 5. I will go after my lovers, says she, who give me my bread
and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my drink: and therefore the
Lord is concerned for the mantainance of his right, to put them out of
possession, till they make a legal entry by a humble acknowledgment to him
their righteous superior, and be repossessed by a novo damus, as is clear from
this Chapter And many other ways the insolency of Prosperity is expressed to
the dishonor of God, and damnage and hurt of our neighbors, by Prophanity,
Presumtion, carnal Confidence, Intemperancy, Oppression, and the like: and
therefore says the Lord, Zeph. 3. 12. 13. I will leave in the midst of thee
on afflicted and poor People, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord, and
the Remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity. He that knows how he has gained
his Estate, should know how he imploys it, and they that come to mercies
hardly, should use them well and humbly. If ever God bring his Church and
People again to good days and Prosperity, O! Let it be remembered that once we
were in the Wilderness. And thus to the second thing in the point viz.
Wherefore does the Lord bring his People into the Wilderness?

Follows the Use which is the 3d thing in the point. The first Use is of
warning, and I would sound an alarm, and proclaim a march into the Wilderness
to all the People of God. Our Leader and Commander, Jesus Christ the Captain of
our Salvation has long since taken the field, and is gone out on our head Heb:
13. 12, 13. Let us then who have taken the Sacrament and Military Oath of
Christ, and have given our names unto him, go forth unto him without the camp
bearing his reproach. The cloud is now lifted up from over the Tabernacle: and
therefore it is time for the Children of Israel to set forth: yea the Ark of
the Lord, his Ordinances and his People with the best of their Leaders are
already in the fields, and are suffering hardship as good soldiers. Let us not
then for shame lunch at home, let us learn the Religious Gallantry of Uriah the
Hittite that valiant man, 2 Samuel 11. 11. And Uriah said unto David, the Ark
and Israel and Judah abide in tents, and my Lord Joab and the servants of my
Lord are encamped in the open fields; shall I then go into mine house to eat
and to drink, and to ly with my Wife? as thou live, and as thy soul lives, I
will not do this thing. It is time our loins were girded, our shoes were on our
sect, our staff in our hand, and our stuff and provision upon our shoulder: for
we must to the Wilderness, and what if we go out in haste? It is good to be in
good Company: it is better (if Moses had any skill) to suffer affliction with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season Heb. 11. 25.
They who will not suffer with the people of God may suffer with worse Company.
They who will not go forth with Lot unto the mountains, may possibly sit still
till they get brimstone and fire from Heaven, and the smoke of Sodom about
their ears: for he that will save his life unlawfully shall loss it unhappily:
and he that will loss his life in Resolution, may find it in Reality. Even as a
man does, in stepping of a Ditch, with any thing that is either of weight or
worth to him, his Clock, his Case of letters, or Papers of concernment, his
heavy purse or the like, lest he loss and indamnage himself and them both, he
casts all over before him, and so coming over with the less trouble, he lifts
all again upon the other side, and so losses nothing of that which he cast
away, but that he might keep it and himself both; whereas if he had kept all
about him, he might have lost himself and all together: but all is not ost that
is in peril: Let us then with cheerfulness turn our face toward the Wilderness.

The second Use shall be for Information to all such of the Lords People, as
are either upon their way to the Wilderness, or are already arrived there: they
would not think strange of such a condition: it has been, it is, and it will be
the lot of the Lords Children Cant. 8. 5. the high way to Christ's mountain of
Myrrh and hill of frankincense lies through the Wilderness, and there he comes
forth to meet them, and leads them up in his bosom, leaning upon his own arms.
There does no strange thing befall the Saints when the Lord brings them into
the Wilderness: for even as Moses Exodus 3. 1. led his flocks into the backside
of the desert (and was not that a presage of what followed, when he led Israel
as a flock through the Wilderness?) so does the Lord often times with his People:
albeit the Wilderness is a solitary unfrequented place where no foot of man
comes; yet in it you may take up and trace the footsteps of the Lords flock
who through much tribulation have entered into the Kingdom of God, and there ye
may follow them who through faith and patience have inherited the promises. The
Saints will find the footsteps of the flock in their greatest Wilderness, and
may be helped with the light of precedent Examples in their greatest darkness.
For now that the Lord through so many ages, has led his Saints to Heaven, by
so many different paths of Dispensations, (for there is but one common road of
Religion, the Kings high Way) I doubt there is any untroden path remaining to
be discovered by this Generation. I only fear one difference, which makes
indeed a great odds in lots, be found betwixt our case and the case of those
that have gone before us, and it is this; That they were better men in as ill
times, for worse I would none. But in that, I pray whom shall we blame? and
know we not how that should be helped? See that ye walk circumspectly as wise,
and not as fools: redeeming the time; because the days are evil. Ephesians. 5. 15,
16. If ill times find no good men; let ill times make good men; and good men
will make good times, or else bad times shall make good men better. But of the
Parity of cases I said much in the Preface.

The Third Use of the point shall be for Direction: bsince the People of God
may thus expect to be rought into the Wilderness, it concerns them to take
their directions for the Wilderness: for our direction in such a condition, I
shall, without insisting, briefly hint at some things I to be avoided. 2 dly
some things to be endeavored

Things to be avoided by such as are brought into the Wilderness, are I
Unbelief. Psalm. 78. 22, 23. the Israelites believed not God in the Wilderness,
and therefore he was provoked Heb. 3. 18, 19. the Apostle tells us expressly,
that those who believed not, their carcasses fell in the Wilderness, and for
their unbelief, they could not exter into the land of promise.

2, Discouragment would be avoided Numb. 14. 1. the People through
Discouragment cried and weept for the report that the spies gave them: and
frequently els-where, they expressed their Discouragement upon the emergency of
every new difficulty, their cry was always, that they should die in the
Wilderness: and in that they read their own fortune, Numb. 14. 28. for the Lord
was provoked for their unbelief and other sins, to do to them as they had said.
Beware of Unbeliefs bode-words; for like the Devil's responses their
accomplishments are always evil to those that take them. In all the World I
know no such ready way to Apostasy, and utter forsaking of God as
Discouragment. Experience has said so much to confirm this, that I shall not
need to bring reason into the field: But this I must say, have the experience
of Discouragment who will, they have it to their expenses. And if I were to
die, I would leave Discouragment this testimony that it is dear bought misery.

3. Avoid Murmuring, fretting coffeehouse with the Lords Dispensations with
complaints of his unkindness. Numb. 14 2. all the Children of Israel murmured,
and Chap. 6 42. they murmured against Moses and Aaron: But Moses could tell
them, what are we, that ye speak against us: nay but your words are against the
Lord; yea and Numb 21. 5. it is expressly said, the People spoke against God and
against Moses. And still their tune was, w^y have ye brought us up out of
Egypt? Just like many in our Generation, why say they, your Re^ormation, your
Covenant and your Ministers have served you well: but verily their words are
against the Lord: for we own his name in these, and glorify him whom they
dishonor. When the Children of Israel murmured in the Wilderness, they had
forgotten how once they groaned because of their oppression in Egypt: and in
that they may be more excusable than we: for the Red sea had ridd perpetual
marches betwixt them and their oppressors; but we get not leave to forget our
oppression in the times of our former subjection to them, who derive their
power from her who is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt Revel: n. 8. I mean
Prelates who are indeed the house of the Elder brother, but fallen back, for
that they have come short of the blessing; and now hold of the Pope, the
younger, who has supplanted them handsomely and got betiwxt them and the
Birthright; so that now the Elder serves the Younger: those, I say, pursue
even to the Wilderness, according as it is prophesied Rev. 12. where John saw
the Dragon pursue the traveling woman into the Wilderness.

4. We would beware of Tempting God. Psalm. 106. 14. they tempted God in the
desert, and what that temptation was, see Psalm. 78. 18. 19. 20. They limited
the Lord, and said, can God furnish at able in the Wilderness? can he give
bread also? can be provide flesh for his People? whatever our temptations be in
a Wilderness, though we should fast till we be as Hungry as Christ was in the
Wilderness, yet let us learn of him, not to tempt the Lord, by limiting him to
ordinary means, since it is written that man shall not live by bread alone, but
by every word of God, neither let us rashly nor presumptuously cast our selves
into any needless difficulty, nor cast our selves down from a pinnacle of the
Temple: for that again it is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.
Just thoughts of God, and these are large ones) would fit the Saints with a
present help in all imaginable difficulties, Psalm. 46. 1. God is our refuge and
strength, a very present help in trouble.

5. We would beware of unmortified, imperitus, clamorous lusts. Psalm. 106. 14.
They lusted exceedingly, in the Wilderness, and Psalm. 78. 18. ^hey sought meat
for their lust. God had given meat for themselves: but they must have meat for
their lasts also. Truly he had need have a good rent that would keep a table
for his lusts: for lust is so ill to satisfy, that albeit one World serves all
the men in the World, yet all the World will not satisfy the lust of one man of
the World: Witness ^e who weept that there were not more Worlds to conquer. But
he who must have his lust as soon served as himself, that man is not for the
Wilderness. I shall advise all that are brought into the Wilderness, to do with
their lusts, as Moses did with his Wife and Children when he went with Israel
into the Wilderness, send them back, dismiss them for fear they make more ado.
Solomon prefers the Wilderness to the Company of a clamorous angry Woman in a
wide house: but how miserable must he be who lives in Company with those
scolding wretches, his craving clamorous lusts even in the Wilderness.

6. We would be ware of Apostasy and turning back unto Egypt: Numb. 14. 4. They
said one to another, let u^ make a Captain, and let us return into Egypt: And
verse 3. Were it not better for (...) (say they) to return into Egypt? Whatever
we me^^ with in the Wilderness, or whatever may be before us O let us never
think of going back into Egypt Luke 17. 32. Remember Lots wife, Remember Heb
10. 38. that the just shall live by faith: but if any mo^ draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him, sait the Lord Remember (as I have said even now
we find our Egypetan oppression more grievos than ever.

Now for positive Directions and things to b^ endeavored by all, that are
brought into the Wilderness, take these. 1. And before all, we would labor for
the Pardon of sin, and the presence a reconciled God: This was David's great
su^^ Psalm. 79, 8. O Remember not against us former inquities, but let thy
tender mercies speedily prevent u^ for we are brought very low: and in the 9
verse, he us, O Lord, for the honor of thy name, and purge away our sin. And
over and again in the 80 Psalm, as in many others, his request is, make thy
face to shine upon us. Moses was very peremptory in this: for Exodus 32. 32. he
says, and now if thou will, forgive this sin: if not, blot me I pray thee out
of thy book, which thou have written: and in the 33. Chapter 15 verse he adds,
if thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. Unpardoned guilt and an
unreconciled God, will be very uncomfortable Company in a Wilderness.

2. As Moses in the Wilderness Numb. 13. we would spy the good land that is
before, of the twelve that were sent, only two, Joshua and Caleb were faithful
in their report: Moses himself trusted their Relation, and put them on to
pacify the clamorous People. Faith and Hope are the two only faithful spies,
that will be sure to give such a report of their Discoveries, as may both
confirm Believers, and compose the tumults, and quiet the clamours of
unbelieving spirits. This was it, that sustained the Apostles, without fainting
in all their Afflictions: this was the star that guided them through their
Wilderness. 2 Cor. 4. 18. We look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen. In our way through the Wilderness we would raise our
estimations of Heaven, thither we would direct our expectations, and thence we
would derive our sure consolations, we would see if the spies can bring us
down, now and then, a branch of the Grapes of the Land for our refreshment: and
if our Father will honor us with a present of the first fruits of our
inheritance, or a Cup of the new Wine of the Kingdom, that we may (as we use
to speak) Remember him in the Wilderness. Psalm. 116. 13. that we may take the
cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord. In the History of Isreal's
travesl, Exodus 19 2, we read, that when they came to the desert and pitched in
the Wilderness, they encamped before the Mount, and Moses, in the 3d verse,
went up unto God. We would so order our camp in the Wilderness, as that we may
be always within sight of the mount: We would labor, in all our wanderings, to
keep a clear sight of Heaven, and to have our head within the clouds; as it is
said of Moses Exed. 24. 18 Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and got him
up into the mount.

3. The People of God in the Wilderness would remember much, both what God has
done formerly to his People in the like condition, and what he has promised to
do for these that afterward shall come into it. Albeit the Scripture generally
all over abounds with matter to this purpose: yet for the first, what God
has done, recommend specially the four last books of Moses which are an exact
journal of Isreal's travels in the Wilderness: for the latter, what he has
promised to do, read the 35 Chapter of Isatah throughot with Chap. 41. from
verse 16. to 22. with 42, 1^ with 49. 9. 10. 11. 12. with 61. to the 9. with 6
24. 25. See Ier. 12. 10. 11. 14. and to the en^ with Jer. 23, to the 5. See
Ezekiel. 34. throughout. Psalm. 107. to the 9. with this 2 d chap. of (...)
throughout, all these (as I said not to exclude other places which may be
obvious to those that are better versed in Scripture, I do Recommend.

4. In the Wilderness, we would be much in Intimate and more than ordinary
fellowship with God: as I cited of Moses before, we would enter the Clouds and
go up into the Mount to God: and we shall be no homlier than welcome. Cant 4,
8, invites us to this. We never find David higher upon it, than in the
Wilderness. We owe that sweet 63 Psalm to the Wilderness of Judah, in the 8
verse where of it is said, my soul follows hard after thee, thy right hand
upholdeth me; and in the 5 verse, my soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and
fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyfal lips. If a Soul make a
visit to God from the Wilderness, they may expect Joseph's Brethrens
entertainment, they may resolve to Dine with him at noon. Our Lord Jesus
learned this of his Father, This is a desert place, says he, and we cannot send
the People away fasting lest they faint by the way. Yea and after they may have
that sweet Music; my soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and
my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips; and Psalm, 57. 7, 8. my heart is
fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, O Lord, says he, I am now well at my heart; I
will sing and give praise: Awake up my Glory, awake Psaltery and harp; I myself
will awake early: and that was also a Wilderness Psalm. We owe the 4: Psalm
to the Wilderness likewise, and the 84 whereof more anon. Take we then the
direction, that the times of our affliction be times of more than ordinary
Communion with God.

5. In the Wilderness we would be diligent to seek good occasions and means for
the relief of our Afflictions, and supply of our wants: Need must make virtue
with us, Psalm. 84. 5 6. Blessea is the man in whose heart is the ways of them,
who passing through the valley of Baca, make it a well. We must not like the
unjust Steward, refuse in this case both to dig and beg: we must use all means
lawful both spiritual and natural, with God and men: we must with Nehemiah,
both Pray to the Good God of Heaven, and supplicat the King. Nehemiah 2. 4, 5.
The day has been when the Nobles and Estates of Scotland and our Courtiers,
would have suited and courted the King for a Commission, to build the City of
the Lord and of their Fathers Sepulchers, the Church owning that Faith wherein
their Fathers Died, who have left there to Posterity the Sepulchers and lasting
Monuments of their Fidelity, Zeal and Religious gallantry: when a Great man
would have pleaded for a liberty and protection to a faithful Minister. Then
Israel and the Lords People in their bounds, in commendation of their Zeal and
Diligence sang that song Numb 21. 17, 18. Spring up O well, sing ye unto it:
the Princes dug the well, the Nobles of the People dug it by the
direction of the Lawgiver with their staves. But now since our Princes and
Nobles turned herdmen to the Philistines, and servants to Prelates, their work
has been to stop, and take away, and strive for Isaac's wells, to deprive the
People of God, more ways than one, of those occasions of pure and plentiful
Ordinances, which they had dug and drunk of: had with labor provided and
with refreshment enjoyed. See the case in ane Allegory Genesis 26. from the 17.
verse to 23. I fear when this generation is gone (and if carcasses fall not in
the Wilderness, if God make not a clean field, if he do not root out, and make
a speedy riddance of this evil Generation from the face of the earth. wiser men
than I are much deceaved) that Nigrum theta or black mark shall be found
written upon the Sepulchers of most of our Nobles, Nehemiah 3. 5. that the put
not their necks to the work of their Lord. And when it is come to that, then
who knows but the sons and little ones of our Nobles may be Well-diggers; And
as it was in the case of the drought, Ier. 14. 3. may come to the waters and to
the pitts; may be such as shall seek out, and labor for the means of their
Souls refreshment. The Lord may bring the little Ones of those transgressors.
whose carcasses fall in a Wilderness, into a land flowing with milk and honey,
Numb. 14. 31, 32. Mean time, let us be digging in the Wilderness, let us seek
occasions for our Souls, and where we do not find them, let us make them.

6. In the Wilderness, we would thankfully receave and improve thriftily all
offers of accidental occasions that providence lays to our hand. Psalm, 84. 6.
the rain also fills the Pools, that is, the Lord will now and then be giving
his out-wearyed People, some unexpected means of present relief and
refreshment, which they must acknowledge and use, till they get better and more
lasting occasions. Rain water in a Pool, is neither so good nor so enduring, as
a spring or fountain of living Water: and yet the former is good, where the
latter cannot be had: for to the hungry Soul, every bitter thing is sweet, and
little will do a poor man good. If God give us an occasion of a good Sermon, or
a Communion, or make any other good means to drop upon our heads, as
unexpectedly as the rain falls from the Heaven; or if we have the benefit of
the neighborhood of a faithful Minister for the time, these things, howbeit
for their nature and virtue they be fountain water, yet herein the best of them
is but like a Pool, that they are of an uncertain endurance. For such is the
condition of these Wilderness-times, that where one day you have a fountain,
the next day you have nothing, or an empty cistern: nor is there throughout all
the land, so much as one Rehoboth Genesis 26. 22. one well that the Philistines do
not strive for. Therefore we must drink for the drought that is to come, we
must hear for the time that is to come; Isai. 42. 23. we must make the best we
can of every occasion that remains, or accidentally offers for the time, and
we must feed upon the little Oil in the cr^ise and the handful of Meal in the
barrel, till there be plenty in the Land.

7. In the Wilderness we would make use of good Company: yea we would make much
of it where ever we can have it. Psalm. 84 7. they go from sirength to strength,
as our Translation reads it, but the Original has it, They go from company to
company, or, from troop to troop. Indeed solitude and want of good Company is
not the least of the evils of the Wilderness, as I showed above, in the
description of the wilderness: and I believe the People of God in these times
will bear me witness in this. But we would seek good Company and make use of
it. Mal. 316 the fearers of God, that were then in the Wilderness, spoke often
one to another. But wandering and unsettlment (another great mischief of the
Wilderness) will not let the Saints lodge together: and for that the word of
the Psalm says, they go from Company to Company: when they are driven from one
Company, they must draw in to another. Many men never grow good till they are
going to die (and indeed, in this World, he that minds to be good, may make
him for another World; and blessed be God, we know of another) even so the
Saints often times scarce begin to know the usefulness and sweetness of one
another Company, nor to use it accordingly, till they must want it. Nor do
they any thing worthy of their Society, till they be going to separat. I said
in my heart, that this also is vanity and a sore evil. Learn we then more
timely to make use of good Company.

8. In all our motions and removes in the Wilderness, we would follow and be
Ruled by the Cloud of Gods presence: thus Israel was guided through the
Wilderness, See Numbers 9. from the ^5. verse to the end. The Cloud was a
visible token and Sacrament of Gods presence with them. We would so live and so
move in the Wilderness, as that we keep always in the presence of God, I mean
his propitious comforting presence, whither the presence of God directs us,
thither let us go, be it East, West, North, or South, be it fore ward backward,
to the Right hand or left hand And where we cannot abide with Gods presence, if
the Cloud of the Lords presence be liftted up to us off a place, be it
otherways never so commodious and sweet; let us not take it evil to leave that
place. If God say to us, as to Abraham, Genesis 12. 1. get thee out of thy country
and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, unto a land that I will show
thee; Let us, with Abraham, obey and be gone: let our desire be only with
Jacob. Gen, 28. 20. that God may be with us in the way, and then let him take
us through fire, through water, through a Wilderness, or what he will. If the
Cloud remove from Him a wealthy and pleasant place, where are twelve wells of
water and threescore and ten Palm Trees, so that we may there encamp by the
waters, Exodus 15. 27. to the Wilderness of Sin, an impleasant and a scant place,
where we may be threatened to be even slain with hunger, Exodus 16. 3. we must
march with the Cloud. In a word we must so carry our selves in our whole
course, as that we may have the Lords presence and propitious countenance
whatever we do, wherever we be. In this case, let us sing the ^4 Psalm. The
earth is the Lords and the fu^^ness thereof, the world and they that dwell
therein, And Psalm. 4. v. 6, 7, 8. must be our song. Let men project and pursue
for themselves places of pleasure, preferment and profit, (as most shamfully
they do) let them carve and cut out Fortunes and Portions for themselves, and
let them with noise divide the spoil of a Church that is fallen into the hands
of her enemies, who are the wicked of the earth; and of many faithful Ministers
who like the man in the Parable Luk: 10, 30. have fallen among thieves: But
stay till mischief and evil go a hunting, and then their ill come Places shall
not know them. Psalm. 140 11. evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him;
but in the mean time, what comes of the poor outcasts and wanderers? Why, they
shall not want a place to go to; in the 13. verse of that 40 Psalm. the upright
shall dwell in thy presence: They may travel through places enough; but be
their harbor what will, that is there home. And as it is a hidden place to
Worldlings, so it is a hiding place to them, Psalm. 31. 20. thou shall hide them
in the secret of thy presence, until the Lord return to build up Jerusalem,
and then he will gather the outcasts of Israel, Psalm. 147. 2. for he that
scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him as a shepherd does his flock;
for the Lord has redeemed Jacob and ransomed him from the hand of him that was
stronger then he: Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and
shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, Ier. 31. 0, 11, 12. and
foreward to the 15 verse. Take we therefore the conduct of Gods presence in the
Wilderness, and let us be thereof so observant, that by the least wink of his
eye we be directed (Psalm. 32. 8. ^ will guide thee with mine eye to sit still,
or let out, to turn to the Right hand or to the left at his pleasure: and be
our turnings in the Wilderness what they will, be sure we are not out of the
way, so long as we enjoy Gods presence, and the comfort of the light of his
Countenance. And that will make us with Mose, Heb. 11. 27. endure all that we
meet with, who endured, as seeing him that is invisible.

9. In the Wilderness we would live by faith, and learn to take God for all
things, Psalm. 84. 4 blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be
seeing and enjoying many things, that will make them praise thee; But what if
they be put to travel through the valley of Baca? then in the 5 verse, Blessed
is the man whose strength is in thee. He is the fountain. Psalm. 36. 9. and he
it is that makes all the streams of his Peoples consolations to flow in their
seasons, Psalm. 87. 7. all my springs are in thee. O but it is well lost that is
found i God: and all that is happily wanted which is supplied in him. O for
more of the fountain! O for a larger faith to draw at this deep Well! O Noble
Well! a Well that in all our journeys will follow us. 1. Cor, 10. 4. we read
that the Israelites drank of a spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock
was Christ. We may still encamp and ly about these waters, be our marches what
they will in the Wilderness. This is the only Rehoboth, the well of Room: the
Philistines cannot trouble this Well: It is of ^ higher spring than that
enemies can get up to stop it: if the Lora make his paths to drop fatness, if
they drop upon the Pastures of the Wilderness, see who can hinder it: for the
rain waits not for man, nor stays it for the son of man; therefore blessed is
the man (Ier. 17. 7, 8.) that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is;
for he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her
roots by the river, and shall not see when heat comes; but her leaf shall be
green, and she shall not be carful in the year of drought, neither shall cease
from yielding fruit. O let us entertain those large thoughts of God that I have
now so often recommended, and then without boasting we may say with him, that
was as often in the Wilderness as another, Psalm. 34 2 my soul shall make her
boast in the Lord. If they be spiritual, sanctuary mercies that we miss, then
remember Ezekiel. 11. 16. Although I have scattered them among the Countries; yet
will I be to them a little Sanctuary in the Countries where they shall come.
Remember and sing 84, Psalm. already cited, with Psalm. 63. and 42. If they be
remporal earthly mercies that we desiderat, then remember Psalm, 24. above cited
with, Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 3. the Lord led thee through the Wilderness and humbled thee
with hunger, and gave thee Manna, that he might make thee know that man does
not live by bread only; but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of
the Lord, does man live. I leave it to every one to try what is in God and in
the blessing of God. And in the mean time, let us learn to take more upon trust
with God. There is no waste ground in God: meet his People with scant where
they will, they will meet with none in him. Jer. 2. 31. have I been a
Wilderness unto Israel? says God: they could not say he had. Even as Christ
said to his Disciples Luke 22. 35. when I sent you without purse and scrip, and
shoes, lacked ye any thing? and they said nothing: why? many truly of the
Saints and servants of God in these times, who cannot boast of much wealth, yet
do not speak of want: many wonder how they live and yet they are both living
and Life-like, And for one, I shall say that first and last, once and again,
God has cast my lot more to satisfaction, than I could have chosen with most
deliberation, hereby teaching me that which I have taken for my Lesson, and
till I can say it perfectly by his grace, I shall still be learning to choose
nothing for my self: and though I shall not say with Leah Genesis 30. 18. God has
given me my hire, yet I may be excused to think that God has given me a hire;
for albeit Moses's respect to the recompense of reward Heb. 11. 26. and it may
be not that either, but rather a free love and respect to the name of God,
(hallowed be that great and precious Name) Rev. 2, 3, give the chief
determination in all an upright Man's most serious deliberations; nor would he
(as he shall not) be reckoned with those men Math. 6. 2. who have their reward;
yet my present satisfaction with my condition outvyeth, till it is envyed of,
the lot of those who have sought a fortune by more turns: Let Ravens hunt, and
catch, and rugg, and Prey, and croack over what they have gotten, and cry from
more, I judge him happy.

-- Cui Deus obtulit
Farca quod satis est manu.
That has enough and finds no want
Tho his allowance be but scant.
And I have learned 2 Kings 5. 26. that this is not a time to receive Money,
and to receive Garments, and olive-yards, and vineyards, and sheep, and oxen,
and men servants, and maid servants. I fear something worse than the Leprosy
of Na^nian cleave to the Gehazi's of this time. If God will give me my life for
a prey, in all places whither I go, by his grace I shall not seek great things
for my self: for I fear he will bring evil upon all flesh, and will break down
what he has built, and pluck up what he has planted, even the whole land.
Ier. 45. 4, 5. I love tacitus pasci a morsel, be it of green herbs, with
quietness: and I hope I have learned Philip. 4. 11. in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content. Yea and I am the more content, that I find my case
somewhat common in the time. To confirm it I give you a story. A vapouring
Time-divine who has changed his gang twice already, and possessed two honest
men's Churches, one after another, seeking a fatter Pasture, lately met
accidentally with an honest deprived Minister of his old acquaintance, and
seeing him in case better than wont, asked confidently; ha sir, how is it that
you look so well upon it, in this World? The other, a Notable Man, gave him a
Notable Answer: why, thus it comes, said he, we go in God's common. Gods common
is better pasture than the Worlds enclosure: and what wonder if we who go i^
Gods common, look better on it than you who go in the Devils enclosure. At this
the petulant man kept silence, and iniquity stopped her mouth. I Remember it is
said Psalm. 112. 10 the wicked shall see it, (that which befalls the righteous
to his satisfaction and honor) and be grieved, he shall gnash his teeth and
melt away: the desires of the wicked shall perish. Now as we would by faith
take God for all things else in the Wilderness; so in the case of fainting and
weariness, which as I showed in the description, is the last and not the least
evil of a Wilderness-condition, we would take him for our strength, Psalm. 48. 5
Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee Psalm. 73. 26. my flesh and heart
fails: but God is the strength of my heart: Cant. 8. 5. The Church coming up
out of the Wilderness, l^aneth upon her beloved: Isai. 12, 2, The Lord Jehovah
is my strength and my song: Isai. 33. 2. be thou their arm every morning:
Haback. 3. 19. the Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like
hindes feet, and he will make me to walk upon my high places: to the chief
singer on my stringed instruments: if strength quite fail, and be exhausted, he
makes the weary to renew their strength: if strength be weak, and the Soul
drives heavily, and comes up with a slow pace in Duty; then he shall run: if
when they winn to that, they fear it shall not last, nor they be able to
continue at that rate; then they run and weary not, they walk and do not faint.
Isai. 40. 31.

10. And lastly, In the Wilderness we would long and haste much to be through,
and press with importunity for a delivery: This we see in David. Psalm. 42.
Psalm. 63. Psalm. 84. and Psalm. 107 6. those who wandered in a Wilderness cried
unto the Lord in their trouble. And Moses who had been long in the Wilderness
was very earnest to have gone over Jordan, to see the good Land, though for his
fault at Meribah it was denied him. Deuteronomy, 3. 25. 26. This direction is nothing
so strange, as is the disposition of those to whom it is meant: For I begin to
observe many who have seen the Lords Glory and Power in the Sanctuary, but too
modest, not to say worse (be it from desponcency, or from some worse quality)
in their Suits for a restoration of these Mercies: Either the length of our
affliction has put us so far out of memory, or the deepth of it has put us so
far out of hope of better days, that as if there had never been, nor never
should be better days, we content our selves with the present. Truly it
astonishes me to see such a Spirit of slackness possess many; as if the Lord
had said to us, Ier. 29. 5, 6, 7, 10. Build ye houses and dwell in them, etc.
For thus says the Lord, that after seventy years be accomplished in Babylon,
will I visit you, and form my good word toward you, in causing you to return
to this place: Our disposition looks like those that were to have a seventy
years affliction and long continued Captivity. And indeed considering Daniel 9.
13. All this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our Prayer before the Lora
our God, etc. I observe, that Security and a slack disposition is the
attendent, or rather the presage and forerunner of a continued Affliction: And
by the contrary a Spirit of restless importunity, is a comfortable Prognostic
of a speedy delivery: See it confirmed in the instances of Daniel, Nehemiah,
Ezra, who upon the very point of the deliverance were stirred up, and with
themselves stirred up the People by Prayer and Fasting to ask Mercies of their
God. Take then the direction Isa. 62. 6, 7. Ye that make mention of the Lord,
keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make
Jerusalem a praise in the Earth.

And thus with patience I have got through the Wilderness, and considered the
intimation of the Churches condition, which is the second thing in the words of
the Verse. In conclusion, be it minded only, that all that has been said to
this point, does alike concern the Church in general and Saints in particular:
For neither I nor any other, who from this mount of contemplation do view the
Wilderness at a distance, can expect to have it said to us, as was said to
Moses of the Land beyond Jordan, Thou shall not go over into it: but rather as
was said to Abraham: All the Land which thou see shall be thine: Arise and
walk through the Land, for to thee will I give it. Not to speak of what we have
had, or at the time have, none of us can promise in the Life of our Vanity,
that we shall not have, if not at once, yet successively, one after another,
all the described parts of the Wilness for our Lot.

I will allure her.
THe third thing in the words is, The Lords Design, I will allure her. Hence
the Doctrine is, That the Lords great Design in the vicissitudes of all
Dispensations to his People, is to gain them to himself; that he may have more
of their Kindness and Service. The point is confirmed; 1. From the account
Scripture gives of Gods various Dispensations to his People: Take but this
Chapter for an instance; he both afflicts her and comforts her, and all that he
may have her heart. 2, From the first and greatest Command in the Law of God,
which is, That we love him with all our Heart, etc. As the Law is understood to
be the mind of the King; so the greatest Command of God is the surest Evidence
of his Will concerning this, That we abide only for him, and do not play the
Harlot, nor be for another man, Chap. 3. 3. It is easy courting where we may
command: And in this the Lord has he advantage of all other Lovers: The
Soveraignity of his Propriety in us, bears him to challenge our Heart and
Service, without once asking our consent, and to resent every repulse and
refusal, not simply as a displeasure, but really as a wrong, in defrauding him
of what is his own, by a just Title of many respects, antecedent to our
voluntary consent. 2. The Lords design is so manifest in his kind way with his
People, that as it cannot be hidden, so it seems he would have it known that
every one may think him a Suter: Even as when a man frequents the House of his
Beloved; presently, by his frequency and other circumstances of his Carriage,
the meanest Servant of the House discovers his design: Yea, and the Lord is not
ashamed here expressly to tell his Errand, I will allure her. Some men if they
intend a match with, and have a design upon a person, they set their designs
abroad; either in Policy to further them, and thereby to know how the person
intertains such Reports, that accordingly they may behave themselves in their
intended Address; or else in vain Glory to vaunt of them: So the Lord causes
the Report go loud of his blessed purpose, that it may be seen he is both
serious in the matter and glorious of it, to have sinners love him. Now the
Lord allures either Morally and Externally, or Internally and effectually.
Morally and Externally, while he courts Souls with Arguments and Motives fit to
take with rational and ingenuous Spirits. Effectually and Internally, when by
the Power of Grace he makes such fit Motives and Arguments have their due
weight and work upon Hearts. According to this division, for explication of
this Blessed Design of the Lords alluring his People, I shall first touch upon
some of the chief Motives that are fitted to this purpose, (for to reach them
all I presume not) 2 dly, I shall treat of the inward Power of Grace, that
makes these Motives effectual upon the Soul. And 3dly, shall conclude the point
with Use.

1. Of motives, the first is his own Glorious Excellency outshining every
shadow of likness, let be equality: Who is a God like unto thee? And that I am
now upon a love design, and upon the employment of Eleazer Abraham's servant
Genesis 24 to seek a Wife to my Masters Son, I am concerned as a Friend of the
Bridgroome to express my self in the proper terms of such a Subject: And O
that my heart could indite good matter, that I might speak the things that I
have made concerning the King! Let it then be condescended, what is required,
by any but willing to be satisfied, to commend a person to the heart of his
beloved, and in him you have it. 1. for his Dignity and Descent, he is the
King, and the Kings son: 2. For his Induements, in him are hidd all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge: yea and he is full of grace and truth: and
if you speak of a Spirit, a great Spirit, Isat. 11. 2. 3. the spirit of the
Lord rests upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
Counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, and
shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord etc. 3. For his
Beauty, he is white and ruddy, the chief among ten thousand, and fairer than
the sons of men 4. For his Disposition and Humor, he is tender, compassionat,
loving, meek, condescending, kind and Gracious: O but the Soul may have many a
good day, and much sweet contentment in his Company! 5. For his Estate and
Fortune, he is the possessor of Heaven and earth, the heir of all things; and
there is no lack to those that have him, and they have him that love him. 6.
For his Use and Virtue, he is all, and in all, and in him we are complete: 7.
For his Necessity, he is the person that cannot be wanted, by any that would be
happy: Deuteronomy. 30. 20. he is thy life, and the length of thy days. And if any
think they may do as well elsewhere, let them answer the question John 6. 68.
Lord to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal Life. Now this is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O Daughters of Jerusalem. Cant. 5. 16.

The Lords second Motive and external allurement is his Words: Words are very
charming and enticeing things: and how forceable are right words? says Job.
Hence the Latins wisely give the name of verba dare, to that which the Court
calls a complement, but the Country plainly calls a Cheat. Hence the way of
Fishing which catches by the Ear, applauded of the greatest Wits, approven and
much practiced by Lovers, the most ingenious because the most serious Anglers,
who busk their hooks with words, and bait with the artificial flee of
Complements. Hence, as the world goes, he is the finest man that can say
fairest to it: and albeit Solomon both a Wise Man and a great Preacher and
Spokes-man has said Proverb. 17. 28. even a fool when he holds his peace is
counted wise; yet with most men, even a wise man, if he bold his peace, is
counted a fool: But the truth is, multum ille assecutus est qui been didicit
loqut, been qui tacere non minus assecutus est, he has attained much who has
learned to speak well: and he has attained no less who has learned to hold
his peace well. But to say no more in general of the allurements of Words: how
specially excellent are the words of the Lord to the purpose of Soulconverting
and heart-alluring? Zach. 1. 13. They are good words and comfortable words,
Jer. 15. 16. Thy words were found and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me,
the joy and rejoicing of mine Heart. Gold and Treasure is alluring unto any,
Honey and Apples to Delicate Persons: And if it were even the mortal forbidden
Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil; yet if it be good for Food,
and I leasant to the Eyes, and a Tree to be desired, it must be had, if the
price should be Death, Genesis 3. But the words of God are more to be desired than
Gold; sweeter also than Honey and the Honey comb, Psalm. 19. 10. Psalm. 119. 72,
103. verses. If nature could propine the World with Golden Apples as a present
of her first Fruits, sure those would ravish the Hearts of the greatest
Potentates, and would raise Wars among Princes for the possession and keeping
of the Tree that bare those, they would be (...) Apples of Strife, properly and
indeed: And the Words of God, which are the Flower and first Fruits of all fit
Words, are Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, Prove. 25, 11. They Nourish
Solidly, Comfort Cordially, and Enrich Mightily. How charming the Lords Words
are, we have famous instances in the Gospel, that with his Words he catched
those, that were sent and intended to catch and entrap him: he sent them back
with this Report, never man spoke like this man. And here in the ^^xt it self,
I will allure her, says the Lord, and I will speak comfortably unto her.

The third. chief Motive and Allurement is, The Works of the Lord and his
Doings, He has done for his People, and is daily doing to them, that which
cannot but rationally entice any ingenuous Soul to be for him: If God had not
loved us, I should have wondered at every thing he does for us: Love is the
chief of the ways of God to us. God loved the World. God so loved the World, A
Wonder indeed! But after that stupendous portent of his Works to us, That he
loved us, I shall wonder at nothing he does for us: For what will we not do for
those we Love? But again, I must wonder, that he loved us, and in this love to
us, he was humbled and emptyed for us: For us he came into the World: For us He
took the likeness of sinful flesh, and the form of a servant: For us he
suffered Temptations, Crosses and Contradictions in his Life, and for us he
tasted death; He gave him ^^s for us: He came under the Law, and Sin, and the
Wrath, and Curse of God for us: For us he drank the Cup of astonishment, which
would have made all the Elect tremble to Eternity. Yea and he rose and was
victorious over death for us: ^e has also ascended Heaven for us, and there he
interceeds for us: he is our Friend at Court, he stands in the way there, that
nothing pass against us: and when there is hazard he warns us, and by his Word
and Spirit he keeps intelligence with our Souls, and gives us daily accounts of
the true state of our Spiritual business: Thence he issues daily many favors
on our behalf, Psalm. 103 2, and forward. Forget not all his Benefits, who
forgiveth all thine Iniquities, etc. And his negative Mercies are not the least
part of what he does for us: That he prevents and holds off us so many
temptations, suares and evils that otherwise would even overrun us: and that
for all these he waits to be gracious to us, at the voice of our Cry when he
shall hear it: And in a word that he is so wholly taken up for us, as if he had
nothing else to mind but us. Now to a rational ingenuous Spirit, and every one
that deserves to be called a Man, all these will be the Coras of a Man, and
Bands of Love. Hos. 11. 4. Yea there is some secret alluring, quality, in the
saddest and darkest of Gods dispensations to the Soul of the Saint. Hence we
never find the Godly Soul more fond so to speak) of its beloved, and more
earnest upon him, than in the time of desertion, which of all dispensations is
the most afflicting to such an one. If the Lord withdraw, such an one will fall
down sick of Love to him; and then go tell him O ye Daughters of Jerusalem,
that I cannot live in his absence: And if he do not come quickly skipping like
a young Roe or Heart; yea, and if he take not the nearest way over the mountains
of Bether, he may come too late, to lay his hands upon the eyes of his
distressed Beloved, Psalm. 28. 1. If thou be silent to me (says David) I shall
be like them that go down into the ^^t: O Lord, I cannot live, I value not
Life, if thou be not the God of my Life: I have resolved I shall never be glad,
till thou be the health of my Countenance, and make me glad with thy Works: For
I see little difference, betwixt Sorrow and Joy, if thou be not my chiefest
joy. And in our Text, the Wilderness is the alluring place to this ungracious
froward Church.

The fourth chief Motive wherewith the Lord allures his People, is, his Gifts.
Gifts and tokens use to pass betwixt Lovers, and accordingly in this Chapter,
the Lord allures this whoorish Church with Gifts: So verse 15. I will give her
her vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope. A Gift
is a tempting and enticing thing: and therefore the Lord has forbid Judge, the
taking of Gifts; For a Gift blinds the Eyes of the Wise, and perverts the words
of the Righteous: And therefore Isai 33. 15. He is a rare man, That can shake
his Hands from holding Bribe^. And the more strange it is that men can take so
largely from God, and not be thereby enticed after him. Solomon says, A man's
gift make room for him, and whithersoever it turns it self, it is so
prosperous, that Every one is a Friend to him that gives Gifts, Prove. 18, 15.
and 19. 6. But let us consider Gods Gifts: His Gifts are 1. Free Gifts: And
what is freer than a Gift? For if it were not free, it were not a Gift: None of
us can earn the east benefit at Gods hand; For who has given to the Lord, and
it shall be recompensed to him again? But of him, and through him, and for him
are all things, to whom be Glory for ever, Romans 11. 35. 36. 2. His Gifts are
good gifts, he is the giver of all good; and from him every good and perfect
gift descends, he will withold no good from him that walks uprightly. I
confess, That sore evil under the Sun. Eccles. 5. 13. may be seen in all other
Gifts as well as Riches, That they are often keepea for the (...) hereof to
their hurt. But God never gave men that Gift, (they have it of the Evil One) by
abuse to turn good Gifts into evil for themselves. 3. His Gifts are Rich and
rare Gifts, Grace and Glory, and every good thing: yea himself: For the
Covenant Gift, is, I will be their God: yea our Selves and our Souls He gives
Life and Breath, Act. 17. 25. ^er. 38. 16 He gave us this Soul. 4. His Gifts
are large Gifts, Act. 17. 25. He gives all things, and 1 Cor, 47. What have
thou that thou did not receive? And here I observe, what a great advantage in
his alluring us the Lord has of us all by his Gifts. If we possess and keep
still his Gifts, we cannot handsomely refuse his suit for our kindness and
service, for no ingenuous Woman will possess or retain that man's Gift whom she
minds not to entertain. But if any should presume disdainfully to return the
Lords Tokens to him, and to send back his Gifts; then he has yet the greater
advantage: For if we send back all his Gifts, and return all to him that ever
we had of him, then must we needs with all send back and return our selves, and
our Souls, and all that we are, or have, or can: For he gave all these; and he
requires no more than what he gave. So that of necessity we must either be all
for God, or we must be nothing; or else we must be most base in being anything
that we are not for God, and in retaining his Tokens, when we have rejected
himself. And now let wild ungracious sinners, look how the^ shall come
handsomely off: And this I would recommend, especially to such as claim to more
^ a Spirit and Breeding than ordinary: if there be any Gallantry, here is the
opportunity to show themselves men. 5. His Gifts are frequently renewed or
rather continually heaped Gifts, He loadeth u^ daily with his (...): He is
still giving and daily sending variety of ^^^. Mercies, and he is still heaping
Benefits upon us: and these (if we intertain the Giver, and give him our
Consent) we are to take tokens for good, and an earnest of greater things to be
enjoyed; For the Valicy of Achor is a door of hope.

The Fifth chief Motive, wherewith the Lord allures his People, is, his
Carriage and Demeanor toward them. A goodly Deportment, a quair Behavior with
an obliging Carriage is very taking. Davia's and Daniel's Behaviors did much
to allay, if not to vanquish the fury and malignit^ of their malicious Enemies.
The Carriage of (...) Vespasian the Emperor was such, that thereby he was, and
was called deliciae generis humani, the darling of mankind. But, O, how
transporting is the Lords way and Carriage toward his People! Secular Lovers
use to frame their Carriage, as well as their Clothes, into the best fashion
and dress, and they study to make their entries (...) with all their Sails up;
and would seem to be rather what they should be, then what they are, and indeed
be: They put on their best Behavior with their best Suit, only at Shows and
Solemnities; for as they do not wear their best Clothes, ^o neither practice
they the best Manners, always at home. But as the Lords Carriage to his People,
is alluring, at his first appearing, and in his first address to their Souls;
so they may expect to have it always the same: For He is God and changes not,
and all that is but his ordinary. But behold his Carriage, I pray you; with
much Patience he waits upon his Peoples consent, as if their Love were worth
the waiting upon; and indeed it it be not so, it is enough that he account it
so; in much mercy he overlooks many faults in them, and puts the best
construction upon many of their unhandsome and unkind Actions: In much kindness
he makes them many a visit: With much earnestness he invites them, with much
respect he entreats them, calling them by all their best names, in discretion
fitting their Titles to his design. In much condescendence and tenderness he
complyes with them, and applies himself to them, and all this he does so
equally, constantly and faithfully, that they must say, if they be ingenuous,
that all his ways to them are Mercy and Truth: And for all this he is content
so ^ar to condescend, as to submit himself to their reasonable and impartial
Consure: O Israel what iniquity have thou found in me, and wherein have I
wearted thee? testify against me, Micah. 6. 3. Surely, if ever I did any thing
below my self, it was in matching with thee. ^f I had insisted upon particulars
in this, and the Motives already mentioned, where had my rest been? But of Gods
Carriage and Way with his People this is the sum, that it is not the manner of
Men. And I think the Lords ravishing conversation with his People, would easily
pass into Admiration with him, who professed ( ^^ov. 30 19) that he could not
know matters much more easy. O that the secular Courtier might, after many
changes o^ shapes and fashions at last be turned into a seraphick lover! And
that the ingine and wit which is thrown (where it evanishes) into the Air of
vanity, were employed to court the Uncreated Beauty of that ever blooming
flower of Eternity.

The Sixth chief Motive wherewith the Lord allures his People, is, the Example
of others, who have led them the way in loving, choosing and commending him.
Example is an alluring thing: And the World is more ruled by Example than by
Law. Example oft-times usurps upon Reason; sometimes it agrees with her; but
seldom is it subject to Her. And thus while men ask rather quid fit, what is
done, nor, quid fieri debet, what ought to be done, Many follow the broad way
that leads to destruction, while but few do find the narrow that leads to
Life, Many choose rather to go to Hell in company, than to go to Heaven alone.
But in Religion and in Travel, I would hold the rule, to choose day Light
rather than Company: Nor would I willingly wait for any man till Night, who in
the dark, Might lead or mislead me whither he would. If once a man turn his eye
off the fixed Light of Scripture, the wandering Star of Example may lead him
whither he knows not, and lodge him where he would not. Now how the Lord
allures his People by Example, see Cant. 1. 3 4 There the Church finds others
before her, whom she would gladly follow: The Virgins love thee, draw me, we
will run after thee; Lord I love good company well, and therefore let us all go
together. And as she finds good Example before her, she leaves the like after
her, that allures others to follow her, as she had followed others, Cant. ch 5,
and 6. Whither i^ thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among Women, ^^hither is thy
beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee: And all this by the Lords
direction, chap. 1. 8. Go forth by the footsteps of the flock. O that God would
raise up many Lights of Religion in this dark Generation! Many who might be
exemplary in Piety, who might go before others, ^s the hee-goats before the
flock, Jer. 50. 8. O that God would perform more in our days, that which he
has promised of old. Zach. 8. 21. the inhabitants of one City shall go to
another, saying, let ^s go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of hosts; I will go also. Mean time, let us follow the Examples we have,
and that the Example of those who have chosen and owned the Lord and his way,
may be the more alluring to us. Consider 1. that many of them were Kings and
Great Men: Religion and the strictness of Godliness is too far above every man,
to be below any man: I fear those who think Godliness below them, find it too
far above them Prove. 24. 7. wisdom is too high for a fool. 2. Many of them were
Wise men. Let our Sages, Senators, and our Counselors remember this: and if
they say there are few Godly men Wise, I can say to them, there are as few Wise
men Gody and chosen to obtain mercy. 1 Cor. 1, 26. not many wise men after the
flesh are called and chosen. But truly, till the Cabi^^^ Councils of secular
heads, and the Conclaves of the Clergy find me amongst them all, four men whom
they will undertake to match for wisdom with Moses, Joseph, Solomon, and
Daniel, I cannot but think, that Godliness does as well become a Wise Man, as
Wisdom does a Godly man: withal consider, that Godliness and Wisdom are one in
Scripture. 3. All of them were Righteous and truly Holy Men, strange it is
that so many should choose to be wicked, whilst none can en^ure t^ seem or to
be called such, and who but the worst man takes it worst to be told of his
faults? And as strange it is, that every one should choose to seem and to be
called Righteous and Good, whilst so few do choose indeed to be such. But is it
no^ as much the Glory of true Godliness, that Hypocrites and Profane Persons
love to go in its Live^y, and to be called by its name, as it is their reproach
to have or hold the form of Godliness, whilst they deny the power thereof? 4
They were Impartial and Uninteressed men, that (except upon Heaven) could not
with the least color be suspect of any design in their doings: yea did they
not renounce and go cross to all Worldly interests of nature, Education,
Credit, Profit, Pleasure and the like? 5. They were Resolute and Constant in
what they did. Indeed if the Saints had Repented their choice, they might have
renounced Religion when they pleased, as is said of the Patriarchs. Heb. 11.
15. that if they had been mindful of that Country, from whence they came out,
they might have ^ad opportunity to have returned, but now they desire a better
Country, that is an heavenly. I should think it a poor office to persuade men
to that which might repent them: but if they, whose example commend, and whose
Practice gladly I would persuade, did with Constancy and Confidence, without
Relenting go through and pass the difficulties of the flatterings and Frownings,
the Fears and Hopes, the Threats and Entreaties of a present World, may I not
conclude, that Godliness is that which is not to be Repented of?

It now follows to treat of the inward power of Grace, which makes these
external motives, effectual upon the Soul. If any should attempt by ^^rce to
storm the Soul of man; it is so sure to be ^^zed to the ground, and brought
utterly down ^^ nothing before it yield (for voluntas non potest cog^* the
will, which is the Fort Royal of the Soul cannot be forced) that the Assailant
may resolve to loss it, before he win it, and to win only the expensive loss of
all his labor, and to triumph ridiculously over a nothing: for nature and
invention have made the Soul a strength impregnable and unaccessable to any
power without: and all attempts thence, may certainly prove ineffectual, except
a ready course be taken, to gain a correspondency with these within. Also
sinners are naturally very shie and ill to be courted: But the Lord as he is
good at all that is good, is excellently good a^ courting and allureing an
untoward heart. Others, it may be, have got from her at once, their leave, with
a repulse: yea my servants in my name, have possibly been so served: but, wild
as she is, I will not leave her so: I will speak to her my self, and I Will in
gage, I shall quickly cause her say yea: therefore behold I will allure her, he
can but say to a Soul, follow me, and it leaves all and follows him: he can
catch a sinners heart from him ere ever he is aware. Ier. 20. 7. O Lord, thou
have deceaved me, and I was deceaved, thou art stronger than I, and have
prevailed. He can mix a Love-cup to the Soul, that shall cause it speak of him
when he is gone, and follow him faster than ever it fled from him, and that
even when he seems to flee: we remember thy Love more than wine, the virgins
love thee; draw me, we will run after thee Cant. 1. 2, 3, 4. yea more, he can
make an ointment, the very savor whereof shall cause sinners love him: because
of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as ointmen poured out,
therefore do the virgins love thee; yea he ^an give a Soul-charming virtue, to
the very words of his name; and cause the very naming of him, kindle a flame of
love in the Soul, that many waters cannot quench: thy name is as ointment that
is powered forth. He can open with his finger the ^stest lock that is upon the
heart of any sinner. Cant. ^. 4. my beloved put in his hand by the hole of the
^^or, my bowels were moved for him: and if it ^o not open freely, he can drop a
little mirrhe from is finger upon it, that shall make it easy: ^ rose ^^ to open
to my beloved, and my fingers droped myrrh, verse 5 and 6. yea without once
asking liberty, he ^an ravish a sinners heart: and when ever he comes upon such
a design, he coms rideing in King So^^mons Chariot, the midst whereof is paved
with love, ^^ the daughters of Jerusalem Cant. 3. 9. 10. and after the Kings
Chariot, follows a large train, the Chariots of Aminadab, waiting to convoy and
bring ^p, his willing people, Cant. 6. 12. and if once the ^^ul is got up into
the Chariot, the King bids drive, the 13 verse, return, return O Shulamite,
return, ^urn; and then farewell thy Fathers house. Psalm. 5. 10. forget thine
own people and thy fathers house. ^ow the Chariots of Aminadab, the Chariots of
the ^ords willing People, run upon these four wheels. ^ plain terms, the
inward power of Grace, where^^ the Lord allures sinners, and gains them to
himself, consists and is carried on of these Four. ^1. A sound and clear
Information of the understanding, and Illumination of the mind: as it is ^^ten
in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God. John 6. 45. out of Isai.
54, 13. with Ier. 24. 7. and I will give them an heart to know me. 1 John. 5.
20. he has given us an understanding, that we man know him that is true. If a
man by nature and study were never so judicious and learned, yet ere he b^
converted and effectually allured, to engage thoroughly in Covenant with God, he
has need to be taught of God, that the eyes of his understanding being opened,
he may know that which passes knowledge; Otherways, it may seem a strange
saying: but it is that which is noted in the Scripture of truth; and the
Scripture expressions of opening the eyes, giving an understanding, and the
like, make it clear. That the meanest Saint and convert has more knowledge of
Christ, and sees somewhat in him, that the most Subtle, Seraphick, Resolute,
or Angelick Doctor unconverted cannot see. So that whatever differences there
be betwixt Saving and Common knowledge, there is certainly a difference even in
regard of the intensive degree (...) clearness: or if it be not so, let any man
tell (...) what such expressions mean, 2 Cor. 4. 6, that God who commands the
light to shine out of darkness, hat^ shined in our hearts, to give the light of
the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: and verse, 3 and the Gospel is
hid from those that perish, for Satan has blinded their minds; and no doubt,
many of these had more natural judgment, and learning with more of the means
also, than some of the^ that believed. To conclude, there is greater odd
betwixt a Saint and a Rabbi, than betwixt a Ra^^^ and an Idiot: for the last
two (I now suppo^ them unconverted) are neighboured in Nature; but Grace
separats the first from them both.

2. The inward power of Grace consists in a powerful inflection and Bowing of
the Will. Psalm. 110. 3. thy People shall be willing in the day of thy power:
the Lord finds sinners Unwilling, he works on them not willing and he makes
them Willing. The Will (as I said before) is the strongest hold of the Soul,
and the most wilful piece of the man: command the Will and you command the man:
the New Will (say Divines) is the New Man; and therefore the Lord is concerned
to possess the Will: and this he does wherever he savingly allures a Soul: for
he scorns any should say, that they serve and follow him against their will,
all his Soldiers are Volunteers: his People are a Willing People. I find a
Godly Man once saying (and all such must say it often) the good which I would
that I do not. Even as by Conversion often times the greatest sinner becomes the
greatest Saint; so the Will, before Conversion, the most obstinate and
unplacable enemy, does afterward become the most kind and trusty friend to God:
for in the midst of many exorbitancies of affections, and irregularities of
Practice, and Conversation, the Will retains its loyalty, and persists in its
duty to the Lord: and when the whole Soul is in an uproar, and confusion, like
that of the City of Ephesus Act. 19. 32. (a most lively Representation of a
Soul in Perturbation) wherein some cried one thing, some another, for the
Assembly was confused, and the more part knew not wherefore they were come
together: All this while the Will is at ready to protest for the Lord, as the
superstitious Ephesians were for their Diana. And when in a disorder, all plead
liberty, I consent unto the Law (says the will) Rom, 7. 16 and 25 with the mind
I serve the Law of God.

3. The inward power of Grace consists in a sweet Inclination of the Affections
Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy
seed, to love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy Soul.
The Psalmist Prays Psalm. 119. 36. incline mine heart unto thy testimonys, and
Psalm. 141. 4. incline not mine heart to any evil thing. The Affections are
ticklish things: By much working and subduing, with frequent turnings, they
become as ductile and formable as the potters clay, whereof he makes a vessel
as it pleases him. Like those we call Good Natures, they are sweet Companions,
but not so sure: And as readily you do not leave them, as you found them; so
you shall hardly find them where you left them; nor know you when you have
them, or when you want them: They are primi oc^upanti^, they can refuse no
body: They welcome all comers, follow all Counsels, comply with all Companies:
And in a word they are complete Conformists: And they are courted by so many
Lovers, that it is much if they turn not common strumpets, to the dishonor and
grief of this concerned chaste Suter, Who is broken with such whorish Hearts,
Ezekiel. 6. 9. Again, they are like an Instrument with many Strings, they make
sweet Melody in Gods Service, but with the least wrong touch, you Mis-tune
them. Indeed the Saints have their affections frequently to Tune, and it
requires a time to do it: This causes that the Affection of Grief, which is the
Basse of the Soul, is oftest in Tune, and keeps in Tune longest with the
Saints, Psalm. 57. 7, 8. When David's Heart was fixed, his Harp was out of Tune:
when his Faith had got footing, his Affections were to seek. The Case is common
and too well known to the People of God: In Preaching, Hearing, Reading,
Meditating, Praying, Praising, or any other Duty of our Life, the Affections
often times do not answer. But Grace has a skilful hand, and is a Musician so
expert, that if the Tenor of the Will be but well set, and the Base of Godly
sorrow record well, ordinary failings in the other parts, shall not be much
discerned.

4. The inward power of Grace making outward Motives effectual, consists in a
Cheerful, Ready Motion of the Locomotives, and an actual up-stiring of all that
is in a man, by an Act Elicitive of the Imperated Acts of the Understanding,
Will, and Affections: So the Schools express it: But to speak plainly, it is
Grace causing us to perform indeed and with our Hand, that which it has caused
us to know, will, and Love with our Heart: For says the Apostle, It is God
that works in us, both to will and to do, of his good Pleasure, Philip. 1.
13. And if Grace assist not in this, as well as in the rest, this, to do, may
make much ado, and cause even an Apostolic Spirit have a hard pull of Duty,
Romans 7. 18. To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good,
I find not. And by this their defectiveness and short coming in the point of
doing, the best of Saints may be convinced, that of themselves, they fall as
far short in the other points; and that it they cannot go the least step
without Christ's hand holding them up, they could far less have walked the whole
length of their Duty: The Apostle's inference is remarkable to the purpose: I
know, says he, that in me, that is, in my (...) dwells no good thing, for to
perform that which is good I find not, albeit that to will is present with me.
So that he who of himself cannot do, neither of himself can he know, will or
love that which is good. Fail in one, fail in all. This consideration of it
self, may refute the whole and half P^^agian, Popish, Lutheran, and Arminian
Crot^hets in the point of Grace. And this shortly is the method of Graces work
Converting a Soul, and alluring a Sinners heart. The Understanding says, Gods
will is true, the Will says it is good, the Affections say it is sweet, the
Practice and whole Man says it is done. Thy will he done; and if it be thy
will to save me, and have me to thy self, then Lord, I am thine, save me; for I
seek thy Precepts, Psalm. 119. 94. But in the Natural Birth, we know not how the
Bones do grow in the Womb of her that is with Child; far less can we reach to
Perfection the Mystery of Regeneration: and if we know not the time when the
wild Goats of the Rock bring forth, nor can mark when the Hindes do Calve, how
shall we be able to Cast the Nativity of the Sons of God? For John 3. 8. The
Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can
not tell whence it comes, or whither it goes: So is every one that is born of
the Spirit. If we know not the way of a man with a maid, Prove. 30. 19. how
short may we well be judged to have come in our Accounts of the Lords method of
courting and making Love to the Souls of his People; and yet we are instructed
from the Word of God, to give of all these, an account sufficient to Salvation,
with all necessary instruction and comfort. And the like account the Saints are
to expect from the Spirit of God, which searches all things, even the very
deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10.

The Use of this point I dispatch in these few words of Instruction. 1. We are
taught from this, that sinners naturally are very untoward and untractable, to
that which is good: they must be allured, enticed, and as it were beguiled and
deceased unto that which is equally there Duty and Mercy; Ier, 20. 7, O Lord
thou have deceaved me, and I was deceaved. 2 Cor. 12. 16. The Apostle, who was
as a deceaver and yet true, being crafty, caught the Corinthians with guile. It
is indeed a pia fraus a Godly beguile, to beguile a Soul to Heaven and to God.
I wish more were thus beguiled, and that many such deceavers may enter into the
World: nor can I say in this deceit, whether the deceiver i^ the Honester Man,
or the deceived the Happier.

2. This teaches Ministers the Art of Preaching, They must be both serious and
dexterous: as friends of the Bridgroom, and Ambassadors for Christ, they must
be so well acquaint with the laws of love, as to be able (a Divine blessing
concurring) to allure the wildest and most froward Soul. A Minister would be a
Seraphick lover, one of the order of Peter: Peter, love thou me? Lord thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee. Peter, feed my lambs, feed
my sheep. If our way with sinners, be not the most taken way, let it be the
most taking way, and so we shall not mistake the way. Many Ministers are but
cold Suitors for Christ, and why? they are troubled with an error of the first
concoction, they err concerning the end: they seek their own things, and not
the things of Christ, they serve not our Lord Jesus, but there own belly: they
eat the fat, and cloth themselves with the wool, but they feed not the flock:
put them to trial, and it will be found they cannot read the Bible: they lisp
like the men of Ephraim, for Shibboleth, they say Sibboleth; give them but to
read that short text 2 Cor. 12. 14. they read it, I seek not you, but yours;
and if they read right, I seek not Yours but You, they are the greatest of
liars. In a word, they are like many in our days (and those are even like them)
who court the fortune more than the person: in this age, a rich man needs not
want Children; let him make Images of his Silver, and these shall not want
matches, such who for their generosity deserve, as often they get, the reward
of a silver crucifix. But as he that finds a wife, though he find her in her
shirt, finds a good thing, and obtains favor of the Lord, Prove. 18. 22. So
he that wins Souls, though he win not a penny with them, is wise. Prove. 11.
30. Truly the alluring way of preaching is ars longa, a thing not soon
learned, but where God does give the tongue of the learned. This art has many
precepts, which I am fitter to be taught, than to teach: and till God send the
time of teaching, I take this for the time of learning: who are these that come
up from the Wilderness, both better men and better Ministers?

3. We see this in the point, That Religion is an alluring thing. It deserves to
be written in Gold: Lord write it upon my heart: it has that in it which may
abundantly endear it to any free Soul. Some who could stand before an armed
enemy, have fallen before a naked beauty, Let Sampson and David be witnesses in
the case: saw thou ever the beauty of the Lord? for how great is his Beauty?
and how great is his Goodness? saw thou ever the beauty of Holiness? a
beauty as rare as Rich, a singular beauty! a beauty Active and Communicative,
it makes all those beautiful that enjoy it: it is not so with the Richest
Worldly beauty: an unbeautiful Husband may have a beautiful Wife, whose beauty
cannot make him comely: none truly love and espouse Religion but it makes them
comely with its beauty. O how would such a beauty be courted in the World? have
thou not the pourtrait of this beauty in thine heart, the Chamber of her that
conceaved thee? I should hold my self everlastingly obliged to him that would
give me a well done copy: and though I did not like it, for him that did it,
yet would I love it for them that it is like. And if this my discourse for
Image and likness could say unto God, thou art my Father, and to Religion and
Godliness, thou art my Mother and my Sister, The Piety of my vanity, might
excuse the vanity of my Piety, to boast of my Relation to that lovly Family,
that brings forth all beauties. I have seen the Heathen Venus their Godess of
love and beauty, painted with a flaming heart in her hand, (a pretty emblem of
that Scripture Hos. 4. 11. Whoredom takes a way the heart) beauty makes
daily triumphs with men's hearts, as the Garlands of her victories or the
spoils of her captives, who are no enemies: for amongst the many (as there are
many) singularities of seminine victories, these are not the least, that Men
conquer none but enemies, Women none but friends. Men take captives against
their will, women's captives are all consenters to their own bonds, nor do they
once desire to make their escape. Men punish their captives with pain, Women
please theirs with torment, and torment them with pleasure. But O can thou
behold the beauty of Holiness, and have thy heart at command? Needs must the
lively truth of Godliness be very desirable, when a lying show and dead picture
of it is so lovely, Mark. 10. 21. Jesus beholding the young man loved him, for
the appearance of good he saw in him. How transporting must true Godliness be
in the Abstract? and is not the profection of Piety, the perfection of beauty?
since in the concrete and in its imperfection it is so ravishing Cant. 49. the
Church with one of her eyes ravishes Christ's heart, a cheek-view, a glance and
half a look of a Saint is very alluring. But what if both her eyes be to him?
then as one wounded, he cries, Chap. 65. turn away thine eyes from me, for they
have overcome me. He falls before his friends, who rose over all his enemies:
the Saints beauty overcoms him that overcame the World, it captivateth him that
led captivity captive, it triumphs over him who triumphed over Principalities
and Powers, it conquers him who conquered death: for love is strong as death:
Set death in the way of love, it can despise and go over it. If jealousy
dispute Christ's love, he is ready to vindicate himself upon the highest
adventure: tell me (says he) what token shall I give thee? what shall I do for
thee? If thou love me, thou must die for me. O jealousy cruel as the Grave!
I love thee, and will wash thee in mine own Blood: I love thee, and will give
my self for thee: O love strong as Death! O death-conquering Christ! O
Christconquering Love! O Love-conquering Beauty of Holiness! Look upon
Holiness, let thine eyes but observe her ways: Love her, and give unto her a
present of what thou have. But what is thy Petition, O Queen? and it shall be
granted thee? what is thy request and it shall be performed? If I have found
favor in thy sight, O friend, and if I please thee, then give me thy Heart,
Prou. 23, 26. My Son give me thine hears: her Authority might command it, her
Beauty might rob it, but her Modesty and Love does Friendly desire it.

I would not have my discourse fall in the hands of the ungodly: For wickedness
proceeds from the wicked (as says the Proverb of the Ancients, 1 Samuel 24.
13.) But if I were to speak to ungodly Sinners (O Lord open my closed Lips,
then shall I teach Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be converted
unto thee. Psalm. 51. 13.) I would show them, what I have yet to add, in the
behalf of lovely Holiness: I would sing to my Beloved, a Song of my well
Beloved. But the alluring subject, the Kindness I owe to Godliness, with the
respect I have for all that love and serve her, invite me to speak, what I
know: and therefore, beside all the alluring Motives to Godliness, mentioned in
the Explication, I add these things to be considered, wherein she excels all
her Companions, her Rivals, and all that would partake with her in our
Affections. And I shall but point at some Heads, leaving room for the godly
Soul, to enlarge in its Meditations, upon the particulars in consideration.

1. Godliness brings the Soul upon the greatest Interest: The interest of
God, of the Soul, of the Kingdom that cannot be moved, the Crown that fades
not away, and the things not seen that are eternal; that which eye has not
seen, nor the ear heard, nor has it entered into the Heart of man to conceive,
even that which God has laid up for those that love him, Angustus est animus,
quem terrena delectant, They are not ill to please, who can be put off with
things Wordly. But the Saint is the only person of a great Spirit, who indeed
minds high things, even as he is born to great things. The Books De natura, or
of Nature, are too mean a Subject for a Saint: all his Studies are de Anima, de
Caelo, and de Deo: his Lessons are of the Soul, of Heaven, and of God. His
ditan is (...), he minds the things that are above.

2. Only Godliness has that in it, that can maintain and advance his greatest
interest. What can all the Pomp, Pleasures and Profits of the World do to a
Soul? Do these things make a better man? Lay all these to a wounded Conscience,
and they will be as he that takes away a Garment in cold Weather, as Vinegar
upon Nitre, or as he that sings Songs to a heavy Heart, Prove. 25. 20. they
may make it worse, they cannot make it better. A mean subjects Rent cannot bear
the Charges of a Crown, nor can all the imaginable affluence of Worldly sensual
Pleasures, (the delights of the Sons of Men) fill up the Accounts of a man's
Happiness. Are not all things worldly, under an Ancient Curse for man's sake?
And shall that which is cursed, make us Blessed? The Wisdom of Solomon (and who
shall come after the King?) has tried the Experiment of all things Sublunary,
that they are but vexation of Spirit, and a very Vanity: And will a man fill
his Belly with the East Wind? The most refined Spirits and artificial Extracts
of natures fullness, has no more fitness and congruity to satisfy a Soul, than
Chaff or Sand has to nourish a humane Body: Nor did Nebuchadnezar eat Grass
with the Oxen, until his heart was made like the Beasts. Moreover, the Glory of
all things transitory has not the Civility to see the Soul to its rest: But
serve it like wicked Companions, who have debauched a man all the day, and
leave him to dry a Kennel at night. O when the Soul shall run out into
Eternity, and Death shall draw the Courtain upon all things Worldly, Then it
shall be seen, that the things that are seen, are but Temporal: And then if the
Soul would return to call but for a cup of cold water, of all its sensual
Pleasures, it cannot have passage: For there is a great Gulf fixed betwixt, So
that they who would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass to us
that would come from thence, Luke 16. 26: To close this consideration, Remember
that the wise God called him a fool, a great fool, a rich fool, Who, for that
his Barns were full, would say to his Soul: Soul, thou have much good laid up
for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry, Luke 12. 19, 20. But
O! the revenue of Godliness: God and the Light of his countenance, Christ and
his Merits, the Holy Ghost with his Comforts and Graces, the Justification of
Faith, the Peace of God, the Joy of the Holy Ghost, the hope of Glory, are
things of great Beauty, to please our Souls withal.

3. The Consolations, Joys, Pleasures, and Delights of Godliness are the
choicest of any: For however (as the Proverb is) a small thing will make fool
fain, and as little makes him sad; Yet the Delights of a Wiseman, are such as
are the things he delights in, Ps. 4. 7. Thou (thorough the light of by
countenance) have put gladness in my Heart, more ^^an in the time, when their
Corn and their Wine in^eased. O Lord, I am as far above the envy of the
ungodly, as they are below mine. The Worlds great prejudice against Godliness,
is, that they fancy it an unpleasant thing, void of delight: But ^^tum est in
organo: And no doubt if men found that delight in Holiness, which they do in
wickedness, we should quickly have the World a Pro^lyte to Godliness. O then
that my Words were weighed! and that the World would give me a air hearing but
in this one consideration; no doubt, I had then gained. Delight is a very
alluring thing, and trahit sua quemque voluptas, every one follows whither his
I leisure and Delight ^ads him. Nor is it any wonder that so it be; ^r Delight
and Pleasure is the very flower and ^ossome of Happiness, the accomplishment
and ^st act of Blessedness, differing from Virtue and Godliness, as the
Flourish from the Tree, the Rose ^^m the Bush. The Scripture places the Saints
^lessedness, both in the Estate of Grace and Glory, Pleasure and Delight. That
Delight is a man's ^lessedness in the state of Grace, see the Command, Psalm. 37.
4. the Promise Isai. 64 5. the ^^ints professed practice, of whom Christ is the
chief, and chiefly meant, Psalm. 40. 8. The Motive given by the Spirit of God,
Prove. 3. 17. And that Delight has the same place in Glory (if any that have
heard of such a thing as Heaven, did ever once doubt of it) it is more than
clear from, Psalm. 16. 11, Revel. 21. 4. with many the like places. If men knew
to do the Epicureans right in their opinion of Felicity, and could speak as
Philosophers, and not as taunting Satyricks, I could rather be, than be called
an Epicurean: For Imperious custom, (even like Diotrephes, who in all things
loves the preheminency) has usurped sofar upon the World, that she prevails
equally in men's Words and practices, calling things as she lists. Whence a
sensual Sow wallowing in the mire of Lust, must bear the name of an Epicurean;
whercas, in Truth, an Epicurean is no other than a man placeing Happiness in
rational Pleasures and intellectual Delights worthy of men: Even as I,
according to the Scripture, have placed it in those Delights that are Spiritual
and becoming a Saint. The cutting off of a Member deserves not the name of a
Cure, but is the Uncomfortable result of the desperate wits of Extremity and
Necessity, in a deplorable Case; and an expedient intending the preservation of
the whole, with the loss of the part: For better it is to go to Heaven with one
Eye, Hand or Foot, than to be cast into Hell with two. The Stoical Apathetick
method (if the Stoic be not as much wronged as the Epicurean) is but a pitiful
cutting, at best a curb, no ways a Cure of a corrupt World. A man will suffer
much before he suffer the loss of his Limbs: and he has wrought but an
undesirable Cure, that by cutting off of a Member has made a man creple or
maim: The World will want much before they want their Pleasures and Delights:
And indeed who would choose to be miserable? Wherefore the only expedient
method in this case, will be diversion, whereby men may save their Members; the
World may enjoy Delights and Pleasures, for measure as much greater as for
quality better, than formerly in their courses of Iniquity; only they must not
run any more in the Channel of Sensuality, but in the vein of Religion and
Spirituality. Consider then the Delights and Pleasures of Godliness, and then
let reason say, who has the sweetest Life, the Saint or the Bruit.

1. For their nature, they are unspeakable and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. the
Word is significant in its own Language (...), a glorified ^oy; a very Heaven
upon Earth: A Joy of the same Nature, though not to the same degree, with that
in Heaven. The Saints Delights in Earth, are a cup of the same Wine, for kind,
which they shall drink in the Kingdom of their Father, though it be not of so
high a color, nor of so rich a relish to us here in the Cellar, as it is to
them at the Kings Table. Holiness is much mistaken in the World, and so is
Heaven and Happiness, which is no other, than the top and upper and of
Holiness, or Holiness in its Holy Days Clothes. If men would consider this, I
suppose some should be as afraid of Heaven as they are of Holiness: Yea I am
really of the mind, if God should open a door in Heaven to a Profane Liver,
and say, Come up hither, that he should not dare to enter: The Beauty and Light
of that Glory, so contrary to Darkness, would dazzle and confound, and utterly
undo him. If a man should be permitted, yea commanded to throw himself into a
burning Fiery Furnace, like that of Babylon, durst he yet do it? Yea though he
were very cold and never so much needed to be warned. And who among Hypocrites
or Profane Livers shall dwell with devouring Fire? Who amongst them shall
dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33 14. In a word, men must either say
that it is a great Unhappiness to be in Heaven, or that it is their great
Happiness to be more Holy.

2. The pleasures and delights of Holiness are of the highest descent, they
spring from the rock of Eternity. And O! how pure? how wholesome? how pleasant
must they be? The pleasures which God gives his People, have himself for their
spring, and life for their virtue. Psalm. 36. 8. 9. with thee is the fountain of
life.

3. They have the deepest root, and so farrest in upon the Soul: as the
delights of Hypocrites, Worldlings and profane persons are but the dreggs; so
they are but the scruse and pairings of pleasures: their pleasures are but
Skin-deep: in the midst of all their laughter, the heart is sad: they are as
Hypocritical in their delights as in their duties. The Soul and Conscience of a
wicked man has nothing like Christ but this, that they are never seen to
laugh: they are men of sorrows indeed, and many sorrows are their portion: That
is appointed to them of God. Psalm. 32 10. with Isai. 65. 13, 14.

4 The Consolations, Joys, Pleasures, and delights of Godliness the most strong
and efficacious: in the multitude of their frighting, repenting, tempting,
doubting and inquiring thoughts, Gods comforts delight their soul. Psalm, 94.
14. These turn their mourning into dancing, they make them sing in a Prison,
and rejoice in tribulation: But Affliction makes a wicked man soon to forget
his pleasures, as waters that pass away: yea and the memory of their former
delights, is to their present sorrows, as he that sings songs to a heavy
heart, and their song is, miserum est fuisse saelicem: It is the greatest
misery to have once been happy.

5. The delights of Godliness are pure and chaste delights, they are such as the
Soul enjoys with Gods blessing and approbation, yea with his command. Psalm. 37.
4. delight they self also in the Lord; the pleasures of Godliness are our duty.
And for their Chastity, they are like the pleasures that a man has in the
company of his lawful Wife. Prove. 5. 19 Let her breasts satisfy thee at all
times, and be thou ravished with her love: the word in its own language is, Eire
thou always in her love: If a man must play the fool, let him do it lawfully:
and if it be an error, it is an innocent one to err with Gods approbation. But
the delights of wickedness are impure, whoorish and strange delights such as a
man has in the company of a harlot: and why will thou my son be ravished with
a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger? Prove, 5. 20.

6. The delights of Godliness are secure and safe delights. This follows from
the former. Here the Soul is ridd of all fear of going too far: there is no
excess in those pleasures: Ephesians. 5. 18. in wine there is excess: but be filled
with the Spirit; there is no excess in that, the more you drink of that the
more sober you are: and also in the delights of Godliness, there is no fear of
the sad after-claps of sorrow, that conclude sinful pleasures: for the end of
that mirth is heaviness. Prove. 14 13. The ungodly man's sinful pleasures are but
a showr-blink that ends in a tempest: their delights are like the pleasures of
drunkards, who drink and swill till their head ache, and their heart be sick:
and they have their sentence with Babylon. Ier, 51. 39. In their heat I will
make their feasts, and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and
sleep a perpetual sleep, and not awake, says the Lord

7. This follows from all that is said, The pleasures and delights of Godliness
are constant and enduring pleasures. John 16, 33. your joy no man takes from
you. As the World does not give the Saints joy and delight, so neither can it
take these from them. The Saints delights in Godliness, are like spring waters
that will rise as high as they fall in their courses. As they descend first
from Heaven, so they never cease running till they ascend thither again: they
are like living running waters, that make what turnings they will, about
mountains or whole countries, in end they fall into the Sea: The River of pure
pleasures, that makes glad the the City of God, has its outgoing into the Sea
of that fullness of joy, that is in Gods presence, and that ocean of pleasures
that are at his right hand for evermore. And now I go forth unto the streets,
and stand in the open places and cry: O all ye who love pleasures turn in
hither, taste and see that the Lord is Gracious. I am so little an enemy to
pleasures, and so much an Epicurean in opinion (as you see) that if any man
shall show me pleasures more pleasant than those of Godliness, I am content to
change for the better: and that shall be when men and beasts make an exchange
of Souls; water and wine of natures and virtues; and Heaven and Earth shall
change places; when evil shall be good; black shall be white; bitter, sweet;
darkness, light; crockedness, straight; heaviness, light; when cold shall be
hot; and time shall be Eternal.

4, Godliness is the only perfect, harmonious, and uniforme of all the Souls
lovers: what lame and defective pieces are all her companions? I said as much
in the description of the inward power of Grace as may show, how exactly
commensurable her perfections are to all the powers, and to the whole capacity
of a man: she satisfies the understanding, will and affections; and exercises
the whole man. But of her defective companions, some want the head as error,
superstition, profanness: whatever of the will and affections, and practice be
in these, yet they are against the truth of a well informed judgment: some want
the heart as Hypocrisy and formality, whatever of knowledge, profession or
practice be in these; yet the will and affections do not consent: some want the
hands and feet, and are mere trunks; as all those who pretend to know, will and
love their Masters will, but do it not. And for their moral qualifications, The
first is a fool; the next is a knave; and the last is a sluggard. But complete
Godliness has the head, heart hands and feet, with all the parts of a perfect
man: and is a wise, trusty and active piece. And as it is complete and perfect
so it is most uniforme and harmonious. Ungodhliness is a City of Division, a
Babel of Confusion, it parts chief friends, and puts a man at variance
with those of his own house: the wicked are like the troubled Sea: their lusts
are continually fighting and warring one against another, and altogether
against Holiness: whence are Wars and fightings, but from your lusts? Iam. 4.
1. Ungodly men's lusts are like themselves, for extremes they are, and they are
like extremes that differ alike from themselves and from the mids: A varice
differs as much from Prodigality her Sister Vice, as from Liberality her
contrary virtue. But Godliness sets a man at one with himself: it is a
heart-uniting thing. Psalm. 86. 11. unite my heart to fear thy name. It makes a
good understanding betwixt the understanding, the will, the affections, and the
whole man. And blessed be the Peacemaker, shall she not be called the Child of
God?

5. Is it not the great Glory of Godliness, that as many do suit her, as few do
espouse her, and she has as many pretenders, as few matches? Are not all men,
her pretenders? Do not her greatest adversaries pay her the Devotion, at least
of a complement? Is not their great request to her, like that Isai. 4. 1. only
let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach? Do not her greatest
enemies Glory to be called her servants? Call an evil man good, and you cannot
please him beeter: for he hates as much to be called evil, as to be good; And
loves as much to be evil, as to be called good. And it is yet as much her
Glory that few do enjoy her. But pray, whom does she reject? are they any but
the Ungodly? those unworthy Persons that were brought in upon her, and came to
mock her: nor does she despise any that have not first despised her: or should
she prostitute her self to such as care not for her? none get a Rejection from
her, without their own consent: and they take it before they get it: for as
none are Godly, so neither are any Wicked against their will.

Lastly, Beside the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come, which makes Godliness profitable to all things 1 Timoth. 4. 8. It is the
ready way, even in ordinary probability, to give a man honor, wealth, and
pleasure, and to continue these with him, yea even in this World: (I would
these times did give a better testimony to this Observation: but I hope the
Observation shall stand when some are fallen; and shall continue, when these
times are past way) for that these things are as naturally purchased by good
and virtuous, as lost by lewd and wicked practices. And how shall a man have
Honor, who prostitutes himself to courses wherein he has none, but base and
unmanly persons for his Companions? Are not Pages, Grooms, and Lackeyes, as
good fellows as their Lord himself at Whoreing, Drinking, Swearing, Carding,
where all are fellows? Is not my Lord well Honored, when he sends his man to
convoy a Whore to the Chamber, who (because upon the Road he uses to lead the
way for his Master, thinks he will do him the like service here, and serves him
with his own remains? But who does not Reverence the Presence, and Honor the
Face of a really Good man? Yea many a time such an one has more Reverence than
God himself with Evil men, who dare do many things in the Eyes of God, that
they will be loath to do in presence of such a man? Yea how convincing many a
time is the Carriage of a Godly man to his greatest Enemies? Surely thou art
more Righteous then I (said Saul to David) and when a Man's ways please the
Lord, he makes even his Enemies to be at peace with him, Prove. 16. 7. An
excellent Divine (I think it is Greenhame) says well; Let not a Saint be
afraid of Men; for that by his Prayers, he has more Power of their Hearts,
than they themselves have: And the Scripture says the same, 1 Pet. 3. 13. And
who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? And how
well had it been with the Profane Ruffian, that he had spent that Time,
Strength, Estate, and Credit for God, in the way of Godliness, with the sweet
and sure gain of his Soul, which he has wasted in riffling and base living,
with the evident hazard of his Soul's ruin, if that may be said to be ruined
that was never repaired, nor in case. But be it yet that the godly man
attaineth not to these advantages Temporal; The Peace of Righteousness, the
Contentment of Soberness, the Considence of Faith, and the Rejoicing of Hope,
do more than compense all that is wanting elsewhere, and cause that a good man
is satisfied from himself, Prove 14. 14.

Now let all that has been said, be a reproof of the Worlds hard opinions of
Godliness, and give cheque to their unkind dealing with her, as if she were a
sorry Piece, to be desired by none, but such as would be miserable. I have not
yet traveled so far, but that I can remember from whence I set forth: In my
entry upon the point, I told my Erand was with Eleazar Abraham's Servant Genes.
24. To seek a Wife to my Master's Son, and to Espouse and bring home Souls to
Christ: And now to conclude, Let me with them, Genesis 24. 57, 58. Call the
Damsel, and enquire at her Mouth, Will thou go with the man? And she said (so
be it said unto me) I will go.

The fourth and last thing we learn from the point, in a word, Is, to put a
good construction upon all Gods Dispensations to his People; for his thoughts
toward them are Thoughts of Peace, and not of evil, to give them an expected
end, Jer 29. 11. And in compliance with the Lords great design, in the
vicissitudes of all our Lots, let us learn to give him more of our Hearts: For
he brings his People into the Wilderness, and there he allures them. If these
Melancholy times do but make us more tractable, condescending and kind to
Christ Jesus, we may well expect, that he will speak comfortably unto us.

I will bring her into the Wilness, and will speak comfortably unto her.
ANd thus I am led by the hand into the fourth and last thing proposed to be
considered in the Text. The juncture and coincidence of the Churches affliction
and the Lords Consolations. I will bring her into the Wilderness, and I will
speak comfortably un to her. Hence the Doctrine is, That the Lord uses to
tryst his peoples sadest afflictions with his sweetest consolations. He is a
God that comfort those that art cast down: It is his way and use, The
Apostle 2 Cor. 1. 5. abounded in consolations by Christ, as their sufferings
for Christ abounded. And reading through all the Scripture, I never find the
Saints more indulged with the sweet consolations of God and his kind
manifestations, than in the greatest afflictions. Reasons of this are, 1. His
free love and kindness. So it becomes him with whom the fatherless find mercy:
He loves and preserves the Stranger, he is a Father of the Fatherless, and a
Husband to the Widow, a Judge of the oppressed out of his holy habitation: He
will be known in adversity to be a Friend. 2. Their necessity: Then they need
consolations, and then they come in season: Prove. 30. 6. Wine should be given
to those that are of heavy hearts: When I said my foot slippeth, thy mercy Lord
held me up. This was a mercy that came in good season. 3. Their fitness: As
then they most need consolations, so then are they fittest to receive and
intertain them. The Lord will not have his Consolations to run by and be spilt,
by pouring them out into full vessels: But Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst, for they shall be filled. I spoke before upon the second part of the
Text* how afflictions fits for consolations; and that therefore, God sometimes
brings his people into the Wilderness, that thus he may fit them.

Most sweet are the Consolations wherewith the Lord trysts his people in their
afflictions. 1. He draws forth to them the bowels of ^ost tender compassions.
In all their affliction he is afflicted, Isa. 63. 9. Jer. 31. 20. Since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are
troubled for him, Zach. 2. 8. He that touches you, touches the apple of his
eye. It is a very acceptable consolation to an afflicted person, to mourn with
them, and to be touched with their condition: And the Lord cries alas at every
touch of affliction that comes upon people: Nor need they fear he shall forget
them: For whatever is a man's pain, it will not fail to put him in mind.

2. He ownes them and takes notice of them, when others sight them and care not
for them, Psalm. 31. 7. He knows their Soul in Adversities, Psalm. 142. 4, 5. I
looked on my right hand and beheld, but there was no man that would know me,
refuge failed me: No man cared for my Soul: I cried unto thee O Lord, I said
thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the living, Jer 30. 16, 17.
and forward: The Lord promises with great Mercies to own his Church, because
in the 17 verse, They called her an outcast, saying, this is Zion whom no man
seeks after, Lament. 1. 12. It was nothing to those that passed by, to see
all that she suffered. But her desire is frequently throughout the Chapter,
Behold O Lord for I am in distress. Yea and he will behold, For his eyes behold
the things that are equal, Act. 7. 34. I have seen, I have seen the affliction
of my people, which is in ^gypt, and I have heard their groaning. This is a
time, wherein there be few to Resent the wrongs done to the Church of God and
his Saints and Servants, and fewer there be to right them: And therefore that
Prayer is good, Psalm. 17. 2. Let my Sentence come forth from thy presence: Let
thine eyes behold the things that are equal: And the Saints may have justice
for the asking: For he Beholds mischief and spite, to requite it with his
hand, Ps. 10. 14.

3. He vouchsafes them a more special presence, Ps: 91. 15. I will be with him
in trouble, Psalm. 23. 4. In the valley of the Shadow of death thou art with
me, Isai. 43. 2. When thou passest through the Waters I will be with thee, etc.
The Lord is ever near to those that fear him: but in affliction he goes very
near them. They have always his special presence, Ps. 140, 13. The upright
shall dwell in thy presence. But in trouble they have a more special presence.
His presence is either a secret supporting presence, whereby his people are
held up, they know not how: For many a time when the Saints look back upon
those times, wherein they said, their strength and their hope is perished from
the Lord, and see the way that they have come, they wonder how they have win
through: But God was with them whilst they knew it not. Or else his presence is
a manifest comforting presence, and that the Scripture calls his visiting of
his people.

4. Then the Lord vouchsafes his afflicted people many a kind visit: And in
those visits, 1. He salutes his people with Peace: He will speak Peace unto his
people, and to his Saints: in the world ye shall have trouble (says he) but in
me ye shall have Peace. 2. He gives a hearing to all his peoples Confessions,
Complaints and Petitions: Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble. 3. He
speaks his mind to his people, both concerning their Duty and the issue of
their lot. The times of the Lords visits to his afflicted people, are the times
wherein he communicates most of his secrets to those that fear him. The Soul
that goes through manifest afflictions, is ordinarily the wisest and most
experienced Soul: Heman the Ezrahit, who was so sore afflicted, even from his
youth, was one of the wisest men in his time. Speculation speaks of cases like
a Geographer, Experience speaks like a Traveller: That says that which our
ears have heard, this says, that which our eyes have seen, declare we unto
you. 4. In his Visits, he gives his people tokens for good: He comes never
empty-handed to them, But gives them such things, whereof they may say in their
straits, when he seems to have forgotten them, Lord whose are these: 5. And
further (as the original has the words of the Text) he speaks to his peoples
heart: He satisfies them concerning his Dispensations, and convinces them of
the equity and kindness of his dealing with them. He gives them such rational
accounts of his dispensations; as makes them say, he has taken the best way
with them, and makes them sing, thou have dealt well with thy Servants, Ps.
119. 65. And by convincing them that good is the Word of the Lord, Isai. 39. 8.
He makes them say from their Heart, that if variety of lots were in their
offer, they would choose the present: O but that speaks well: I will speak to
her heart: I will even speak as she would have me. Thus he comforts by his kind
visits.

5. He comforts his people in affliction, by being all things to them, and
doing all things for them. Thus we find the Saints in their afflictions making
applications to God, with Titles suited to their condition: And it is God (faith
the Psalmist) that does all things for me. He is the Shepherd of Israel: If
they be scattered, he gathers them: if they go astray, he leads them; if they
want, he feeds them, and makes them Lie in green Pastures, by the still waters:
If they be in hazard, He is their refuge: Are they sad? He is the Health of
their countenance: Are they weak or weary? He is their strength, and with him
is everlasting strength: Are they sinners and guilty: He is the God of their
Righteousness: Is Law intended against them? He pleads their cause; and stands
at their right hand: Is the judge an unfriend to them? He is their judge, and
their Sentence comes forth from his presence: Do Kings or others command them
to be Afflicted, Fined, Beaten, Imprisoned, Confined, Banished? Then Psalm 44.
4. Thou art my King O God, command deliverances for Jacob: Have they no
Friends, nor any to do for them? He that is the kind Lord can cause men show
them the kindness of the Lord: That which the Scripture calls the kindness of
the Lord. 1 Samuel 20. 14. has as much in it, as may show us, that the Lord,
makes men Instruments at his pleasure, to show kindness, and do a good Office
to his people. And when the Saints and Servants of God come to count kindness,
I hope there will be found more of the kindness of the Lord, than of men, in
Courtesies that are done them. I am so little a Patron of unthankfulness, That
I shall thank him kindly, and pray (as our Scots Proverb is) The Lord reward
him that does me good, whether with his will, or against it. But truly when
from men I meet with less kindness, where I might have expected more; and more
where I might have expected less; The Meditation of this Scripture expression,
To show the kindness of the Lord, has taught me the more earnestly to ask
mercies of my God, and to leave the expressing and dispensing of it to himself,
by Means and Instruments of his own choosing: He can make a Babylonian Enemy to
(...) his own Servant Jeremiah well.

6. To add no more, for that has all. The Lord comfort his afflicted People
by Christ jesus, 2 Cor. 1. 5 This is the Saints unchangeable Consolation, in
all changes of Dispensations: and truly our Consolations will come to a poor
account, if Christ be not the sum of them all. in all Cases and Conditions:
Christless comforts will leave us comfortless Christians.

The Use of this point shall be, for strong Consolation to the Saints in their
greatest afflictions. The Lord has laid it straightly upon us, to comfort his
People in their afflictions, Isai. 40. 1. 2. and here, he takes it upon himself
to be their Comforter: He has given this Name and O she to his Holy Spirit,
The Comforter; and shall not the afflicted People of God with these words be
comforted, and comfort one another? But according to the rule of Scripture.
Comforts and Duties must be matched together: Nor must we expect in the event a
Separation of those things, that God has joined in the intimation. Wherefore,
if we would have much of the Lords heart, Let us give him much of ou^s: If we
would have him comfortable to us, we must be kind to him: If we would have him
speak comfortably to us, we must give our consent to him: If we would have him
speak to our Heart, we must be to his Heart: for so the Text runs, Therefore
behold I will allure her, I will bring her into the Wilderness and I will speak
comfortably unto her. Now to the God of all Consolation, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, be ^ll (...), and Dominion, and Praise, for ever and ever. Amen.

Written in the Wilderness 1665

FINIS.

