Love Letters Between POLYDORUS. The Gothic KING, AND Messalina, Late Queen of
ALBION.

PARIS, Printed for J. Lyford. MDCLXXXIX.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THE Famed and no less true History of the Amors of Messalina, late Queen of
Albion, having met with so general an acceptance in the World, that few Books
of more seeming solid worth have attained to (as is easily demonstrable from no
less then Fourteen several Editions that have been Emitted in less then Ten
Months, Viz. Five in French, Four in English, Three in Dutch, and Two in
Italian, and that Two at the Instance of several Great Personages in diverse
Courts of Europe, the said History, I say, having been received with so
universal applause, has occasioned some of no mean intelligence to think it not
unworthy their care as well as charge to procure these Letters of Amor
(guessing that the Powerful Magic of Gold and Louis d' Or's would have no less
influence over some cropsick Spirits in the Court of Gaul than in other
places;) they made forthwith seasonable applications thereof to an open-mouthed
Gallant of a near Considant of Messalina's, who, among other participations of
his Mistresses Favors, not only gained them a sight of the Originals of these
following Letters, but time also to transcribe them, the being it seems the
only agent for their safe delivery.

Whether they have lost by the Translation or no the Originals (which I am
credibly informed are already extant in French) will easily show, but the
Translator assures me, the Truth anh Substance of them are punctually followed
and observed.

The first Letter.
Messalina to Polydorus.
FOrtune that fickle Goddess has Conspired and basely sided with my Rebel
Slaves, and now like an impetuous Torrent they roll on, and in Confusion drive
my scattered Troops before them, Virtue and Loyalty have lost their name;
Relation, Friendship, all that should be dear is gone, and every hour some
winged Messenger of Fate confirms our certain Ruin: Whether shall violated
Majesty retire? There Is none here that offers injured Innocence protection: No
sense of Duty; no Remorse or Pity; Pity did I say? Forgive me thou sacred
Guardian of Imperial Heads; that Majesty must needs be cheap and vile, unworthy
thy great care, that can meanly stoop to the unthinking Crowd; no, rather
mighty Polydorus, let me stand the hated Object of Spite and Scorn, ever once
admit a thought or act a thing which even thy great Soul would blush to own:
It Is true, the natural weak composure of our Sex, disables my Officious hands
from mighty Action; but Oh! the fervent boilings of my Soul would even inspire
the Boasted Courage of Man to something more than usual Undertaking: I swear by
thee thou God like Man, if poor Lycogenes's baffled Fate, at first had trod the
Paths I boldly drew, His Crown, had stood, the aim and envy not the prize of
his now vaunting Rebel Christian Foes; but now Oh! Polydorus all is lost, and
Fate, poor envious Fate has done its Worst: Where was thy mighty busy Genius
then employed? Thy Genius that exemplary Scourge of haughty Rebels. How with
his lofty God-like Mien would the have come and stalked and star'd the Rebels
into Duty: Where were thy Thundering Firey Ministers of certain Death? Whose
bellowing loud reproaches had made the amazed Invader blush and shrink, or
tamely stand the Victim of thy just displeasure: But why do I thus rudely Chide
my only constant Friend and great Protector: Thy manly Soul unused to poor
clandestine ways to Victory, was like my poor Lycogenes and me securely wrapped
in virtuous Innocence, while the poor Thief contrived and basely stole a cheap
and easy Conquest. But surely Providence has well designed, at least to
enlarge brave Polydorus Fame: It Is left for none but thee great Prince to
retrieve what poor Lycogenes, alas! could not prevent; remember then what is
owing to thy honor, think you are the great Protector of the Pagan World: What
shall I plead for injured Innocence and Sacred Majesty profaned? And surely
Polydorus, I may say there is something due even to Love and Me.

Messalina.
The second Letter.
Polydorus to Messalina.
Upon the News of the Prince Anaximander's descent into Albion.
THe Gods, great Princess, have at last been kind, and by this happy juncture
seem to own the justice of my Love and my Pretensions, now my kind Stars have
given a blessed occasion to vindicate my long neglected Vows, and now my feeble
contemplative Sighs (which yet, till now, did never unregarded fall) shall soon
give place to more material proofs, and leave your unbelieveing cruel heart
without excuse: Oh! that I might Blaspheme and wish the Universe Were all
combined to cross or shock your well fixed Grandeur, Ease, or Pleasure; how
like another Jupiter methinks would I dart out my never missing Fires on their
Rebellious Heads: How would I singly baffle their united strength, and with
your Charms alone inspired, would prove my Power as well as: Love invincible:
Speak my loved Princess, Speak, name but the bold Invaders doom, and I like
Fate, nay more quick, will cut his trembling shrinking Thread, and drive his
puny crawling Fame into its Primative Obscurity: Say, shall I ravage, burn,
destroy, or bury that ungrateful envious Isle in the cursed grumbling Womb of
its own Mother, Sea: Oh! how I tremble, rave, and burn, for fear his harsh ill
croaking Trumpets, grate my Royal Messalinas Ears, and discompose or fright my
lovely Queen: Sometimes methinks I see whole Bands of her Rebllious Slaves
advance, stretching their sacreligious hands against her sacred Person; when
with an awful true Majestic frown, she quells their audacious blind Rage, and
makes it dwindle into slavish Flatterys: Sometimes with noble pity she laments
their rash unthinking Zeal, and with officious Charity, would press Favors the
Gods alone beside can offer, which, cursed ungrateful Brutes, they rudely
slight and disavow. Prepare my lovely charming Queen prepare, leave that
unhappy barren Isle, barren indeed and void of every Good, till thy more
powerful Rays warmed their cold heavy Spirits, and with thy proper Stock,
did first enlarge their narrow Stores of Beauty, Wit, and Virtue: Come, come
my Saint to some more fortunate Abodes, come and receive a Crown which none
dare hope or can deserve but thee: A Crown which none can give, or can as well
defend, but

Polydorus.
The third Letter.
Pedro to Polydorus,
I Humbly presume to acquaint you Majesty, that the Prince Anaximander's
Landing in the West of Albion, was followed with the unnatural defection of
some of my Master's best Troops; whereupon the King Lycogenes in a great
Council, declared his suspicion of the remaining part of his Army: However he
resolved to meet him and head the Army himself; but alas! in vain, for as the
Prince advanced, they all showed their unwillingness to engage, and his
greatest Confidents sought but an opportunity to desert him: He is now returned
to Alba-Regalis, and he has resolved in his Closet Council to repose the two
dearest Pledges he has in the World, in your sacred Majesty's care and Royal
Protection; I mean his most Royal Consort, and the Cambrian Prince his Son,
already private Orders are given for all necessary accommodations, and it is
resolved that they Embarque within these three days at farthest: I am your
Majesty's Devoted Servant,

Pedro.
The fourth Letter.
Messalina to Aspasia.
IT IS true my dear Aspasia, too too true, and my Prophetic Soul has proved too
nice a Harbinger of my Misfortunes: Talk talk no more Aspasia of Devoirs and
Duty, thou stand a fairer Candidate to Rule than I: Time every minute
threatens our weak Government, Thou stand'st surrounded with whole Bands of
faithful Slaves, whilst poor Lycogenes is forced to flee, poorly fly even from
his own Army: How great a Paradox to after Ages will it seem? When in the
Records of the Albion Kings, it shall be said, Lycogenes at the Head of 40000
Men, lost Albions Crown without a stroke: Gone dear Aspasia are those happy
times, when every day brought forth some new Coined Pleasure, and every heart
with Emulation strove to fall a glorious Victim to Messalina's Eyes. Ah! fading
Joys, how quickly are ye fled? Ah! fickle Greatness, on what a slippery Ground
is thy Foundation laid, bred from the fickle Air of Popular Applause, and like
the Abortive Embryo in the Womb, can never claim perfection: But tell me o ye
dark Mysterious Powers, did your Almightiness then Create us wretched Mortals
for your sport alone: Come lay your terrifying Thunder down a while, and give
Oppressed Virtue leave to argue: Where is that boasted Justice which you claim
and fix amongst your highest Attributes? where is that reward, that happiness
you promise to Pious indefatigable Zeal? When did your Altars less neglected
stand, or when more numerous were your bowing Slaves? When was the growing
Power of your cursed Heretic Foes with so much Zeal and Industry pursued? and
if ye had but even Winked all our endeavors had been for ever extinguished.
But oh! Aspasia now I go too far, and vainly would confine Incomprehensive
power: Come dear Aspasia let us raise our heavy fainting Spirits, and believe
that Providence has yet some Joys in store, and by this taste of sorrow, would
instruct us how to enhance and value future Blessings: Come think this Flight
naught but a Royal Progress; (in this more happy than in cursed Albion) that
now free and unconfined Walk, free from the censures of our Rebel Spies; now we
may talk, and laugh, and love, and pray, and in each others Breast unlade the
secret Revels of our thinking Souls: Oh! I have ten times more to impart, but
interrupting business, noise, and hurry, scarce gives thy unhappy Messalina
leave to say Frewell; o recommend, my dear, to thy best wishes, thy

Messalina.
Postscript.
Whatever secret Orders our present cursed necessitys may extort from the King
my Husband, be sure thou charge Latroon, with all his Art and Courage, to
maintain Iberia as the last Stake of our Glorious Fortunes; I doubt not
Polydorus will be kind, and open us an easy passage to our Thrones again; the
Torrent swell so high, and runs so violent, we have reason to hope our Troubles
will not be lasting; in the mean time see all things in as good a posture as
the Face of our Affairs will permit, and make have to attend us at our court
in Gaul.



The fifth Letter.
Aspasia to Messalina.
IF the dear hopes of Revenge did not mittigate the excessive Grief for your
Misfortunes, I should have blushed to have Signed this poor mean tender of my
Faith and Love, otherwise than with my last dear Drops of Blood: No my Royal
Mistress, I had never survived the unhappy Tidings of your forced departure, but
that my high-flown Soul, sure by Prophetic Rage inspired, bid me not only
live, but hope I should at least revenge these barbarous Affronts offered to
sacred Majesty: Yes most illustrous Princess. there is yet more than a
glimmering hope of our Success; the Gods indeed can be severe, but not unjust,
and though your Rebel Slaves may boast some small Success against your juster
Arms, yet Providence in kindness, has reserved whole Bands of Valiant Iberian
Slaves, whose Loyalty shall prove the Rebels Scourge, and brand the name of
Albion for ever: Oh! Then my dear loved Mistress do not grieve, this little
gust of seeming happiness, which yet your Foes do so much magnify, shall like
some fatal Pestilential Air return, and prove the Plague of all their cursed
Posterity; those specious names of boasted Liberty, Religion, Property, etc.
They so much urge, and which are still the Harbingers of their intended
Villainies, shall soon be exposed to a Test they will never bear; and like the
superfluous Dross cast out for ever. Think mighty Princess as thou go, how
dearly they must pay (and quickly too) for this poor short-lived Scene of
fading Glory; Look back on that presumptious spot of Land, and pity its
unbridled insolence, that like some little outcast from its Mother Earth,
being kept and nourished by the unwary Sea, durst now lift up her proud
rebellious Head, and vainly would give Law to both her Benefactors; poor feeble
Vermin, whose mean obscurity has hitherto been their only preservation; when
mighty Polydorus, that Lord and Potentate of more than half the solid
Continent, shall once vouchsafe to bring his conquering Arms against them, how
then will they seek for Royal Messalina's Favor, and from her mediation only
shall have leave to live, adore, and boast of Slavery: But why, my lovely
Queen, should we disturb great Polydorus's more important Conquests, send but
that Royal Pledge of all our future happiness, that little Hero of the Albion
World, the Cambrian Prince, him, as the Scythians once their Infant King, we
will with Loyal and Officious Zeal surround; and when we march against our
Rebel Foes, He in his Royal Cradle shall advance and give a double edge to our
Revengeful Swords; and while your dauntless Slaves* (flushed with the
Encouragement of their just Cause, as well as presence of their Infant Prince)
shall cut at every Stroke some blooming Branch of fresh Victorious Laurel for
his Brow, We, whose ungainly Sex Nature has made unfit for such rough Service,
will stand at distance and survey the Field at once to prompt and praise the
Loyal Courage of your Conquering Slaves: Thus will we Fight and Pray with such
Success, that Fortune blushing and ashamed to own her own great Attribute in
Constancy, shall come a Suppliant to your Royal Feet, confess her weak Attempts
against your Power, and even change her Nature to remain your fixed and
faithful Slave for ever: Believe me Royal Mistress, 'twill be so, for sure they
are something more than common thoughts that thus inspire the Soul of your
Majesty's faithful

Aspasia.
Postscript.
I have already given Orders for a Galley to transport me to Gaul, nor can the
longing Lovers antedate their tedious minutes more, than I, till I come to
condole your sacred Majesty's misfortunes, and Congratulate however your
Safety: Latroon has already issued out Commissions for the raising Seventeen
Regiments, and in a Months time doubts not of having Thirty thousand Men
complete to take the Field.



The sixth Letter.
Messalina to Polydorus After her flight from Alba Regalis
HAVE Polydorus, have, it is Royal Messalina calls; the grizly Lions Claws are
spread against me, and nothing but thy powerful Arm can save me; hark how his
hungry Whelps do yell and roar and scent in every Corner for their Prey,
prepared at once to Seize and to dedevour me: Well cruel envious Fate, thou
have not yet overcome me, in spite of thee i will live, and live a Queen; I Will
find a way to countermine thy partial vain decree, and in a careless wise
neglect, drown, all thy poor designs and resolutions; yes mighty Polydorus, now
I come full with a sullen Joy, for having thus overcome the insulting Pride of
my Rebellious Slaves, see how the more obedient Waves bow down, and with a
pleasing murmur, (such as of longing Lovers when they meet, and in harmon^ous
discord chide each others absence) they proclaim their pleasure for the
presence of their Queen: Hark how the Winds do gently fan my Sails, and like
officious Pages wait behind me, and with all decent speed direct to my desired
Harbor: Sometimes my hopes do antedate that pleasing into pain, and then my
needless fears suggest a thousand difficulties: Ye Gods what new Invention's
this ye have found to plague me; avert the false ill boding thoughts ye Powers
and take this airy Demon from me; my evil Genius vainly would suggest that
God-like Polydorus could be false, that he could slight, and with a proud
neglect look odly on his Royal Messalina; methinks, o no, I do but idly dream,
I hear thee in a disdainful Tone, complain, and ask, is this the so much
boasted Albion Queen? Where are those Roses that like blushing Cupids sat on
her lovely Cheeks? Where are those Eyes, those all commanding Eyes, whose every
pointed Ray would so surprise and blind the unweary gazer? Where Is that famed
Beauty, Wit, and Mien, etc. Oh! wretched Messalina say no more; forgive me
Polydorus, for I rave, and my blind Fears suggest impossibilitys; Greatness has
double Splendour in Distress, as Roses double sweetness when in Tears; and
Polydorus Soul is far above that gilded Pageantry that fills and reigns in mean
desires: It Is true thy Messalina comes like the poor Shipwrac'd Mariner from
the devouring Sea, not stocked with all the Riches of the East, as when I
parted from thy bounteous Land, and came to purchase (as cursed Fate has made
it) but an imaginary Crown of poor Lycogenes; yes, yes indeed thy Prodigal's
returned bare and dispis'd by those who stand enriched with her too bounteous
Stores: Well let them vainly boast their ill got Prize, that like some venomous
Canker will overspread and ruin all their Peace and Happiness; methinks my
cooler thoughts incline my tender Heart to pity their misguided Zeal: But oh!
like furious Madmen they run on, and slight the sound advice of their
Physician; Oh! the blind hurry of Plebian rage, how like devouring Flames
before the officious Winds, they unresisted break through all that stands
before them, and like those Flames, which some thick daring Wall has stood, by
chance, the shock of their impetuous fury, they strain shrink back and hide
their blushing Face, and creep and seek even unto those they have ruined for
protection: Be thou then Polydorus, that kind God, that can alone withstand
and baffle their unwealdy Valor: Arm, Polydorus, Arm, and reinforce the
mouldring Fortune of my poor Lycogenes: It Is thy Victorious Arm alone can bow
the stubborn Genius of that haughty Isle; It Is left for thee alone to fix the
tottering Crowns of poor unhappy Princes; and think great Prince, since I can
hardly yield by other Merits than my own to Reign, from thee alone I could
vouchsafe to take, and none but Polydorus dare bestow a Crown on

Messaline.
Postscript.
I have with Sebastian and Elvira sent before me the small remainders of my
broken Fortune, all that in such Confusion I could keep, except that dearest
pledge and hope of all my future Ioys, I mean the Cambrian Prince, whom,
Polydorus I presume to recommend to your peculiar Care and Protection: The
Marchloness de Tomazo I have ordered with all convenient speed to attend your
Majesty at Luteria, and take your Instructions; I design to land at B -- aux,
but am fearful of meeting with any Straglers of the Albion Fleet, I shall be
obliged to embarque on one of the small Royal Galleys, and leave my Safety to
your Consideration.



The Seventh Letter.
Polydorus to Messalina.
WHat shall I say or do, thou Mourning Excellence? How shall I moderate my
growing Ecstasies, my Joy unspeakable for thy Arrival in my happy parts? Alas!
with modest decency I would condole and curse the fatal Cause that makes my
Princess grieve: But oh! can Saints be sad when they enjoy the dear blessed
presence of their Deity; or, shall the Sick repine at their Recovery, because
the luscious Palate was not pleased with the Application of some bitter
Medicines: Oh! let me, lovely Princess rather bless, at least relent and pity
that unhappy Isle, that would so tamely part with all that rendered it
desirable; mean and obscurely did they spend their time between the glimerings
of Day and Night, the Sun scarce deigning once a Month to visiit, and never was
familliar with their Tents, until he substituted thee my shining Queen, with
thy bright Eyes to represent his Glorious self; 'twas then they first could
boast their much enlightened Land, and sit and bask in thy refulgent Glory;
poor wretched Slaves, their starved Appetites unused to such delicious fare,
heedless and greedy to the Banquet run, and without measure fed and surfieted:
And sure the Sea-gods were themselves a sleep, or startled at thy dazzling
Excellence, or charmed with the Music of thy Siren Tongue, forgot to send
their foaming Harbingers to fetch thee to their longing Arms. Oh! had they once
conversed or known thy Charms; Charms which the Jealous Nymphs and Godesses
soon saw, and therefore fearing thy dread Rivalship, clasped their enchanted
Godheads in their Arms, and with officious have conducted thee out of their
Watery Territories, well fare their Jealousy and too just fears, that has so
sure and swiftly brought my lovely Angel to my wishing Eyes, welcome, Ah!
welcome bright Divinity, welcome as is the dawning Light to the Night-straying
Traveller: What mean those liquid Pearls, that balmy Dew, that silently creep
down thy blooming Cheeks, and drown thy spreading Roses? Why do thy Eyes like
falling Stars point down, as if with thy Rebellious Slaves they would conspire
to rob the of thy Beauty, as thy Crown? What can my Royal Messalina want or
grieve for, when Polydorus is so nigh: Say do thou think thy Grandeur is
impaired, mark but the thickning Crowds of bowing Slaves, that with entegrety
and Loyal Zeal, press and are proud to pay their strict Attendance: See how the
shining Nymphs of Gaul repair, and with amazing Joy prepare to welcome their
great Diana.

Polydorus.

Imperfect in the Original.
The eighth Letter.
Polydorus to Messalina, After the first Visit at St. Ger --
It Is true, long Absence and devouring time, by this might well have been
supposed to have worn the faint Ideas of indifferent Charms; it is also true
that Polydorus Heart, which cares and mighty business still has pressed, has long
a Stranger been to those soft Pleasures which serve to alleviate the toils of
Princes; but what can Royal Messalina thence infer? But that the Almighty power
of her sublimer Beauties scorned to be tied to common rules of time or place;
and that though absent, like the Sun in Clouds, her influence still does
operate on all, as present, in its bright Meridian glory: Yes cruel unbelieving
Queen, it is true, that time nor absence has had power to heal the fatal Wound
your pointed Lightning gave; my too, too tender heart does still retain the
impression which your early Beauty's made, my aspiring hopes, though in
disguise, did still pursue the wandering Steps of their loved cruel Object,
resolved like valliant Warriors never to yield to the suggestions of a faint
despair: No mighty Princess, Polydorus heart, in Love as well as War's
Invincible, those Charms which once my greedy Eyes sucked in, and run with
speed to inform my amazed heart; those dazzling Charms I say do still employ my
anxious thoughts, my covetous desires; nor did your absence otherwise allay or
stop the rage of my devouriug Flames, than just to allow my panting heart a
breathing, which now your presence has again enflamed; and by the addition of
diviner Beautys (which hitherto your cruel cunning had reserved) as it were by
Ambush, my unwary Eyes surpised, and fixed me now your everlasting Slave: Yes
mighty Nymph, I do not blush to own I am totally Subdued: Your never erring
Shafts have found an easy passage to my yielding Soul, and now the pleasing
Poison trills through every Vein, through every Pore: In vain I strive, in vain
apply, to expel the insulting Tyrant from my Breast; too sure he is rooted,
mingling with my Blood, till he at length become a part of me: Well my almighty
Conqueror, since my Stars, conspiring with your Power, have thus Subdued me,
tell me the Conditions you appoint your Slave; declare the manner how you will
be Worshipped, oh! speak, command, for my officious Zeal waits with impatience
now to be employed: Say lovely Messalina, can thou yet vouchsafe to admit
poor Polydorus in the crowd of thy admiring Slaves? Can thou suspect his
Loyalty or Zeal? And if thy Smiles may be by man deserved, can thou misdoubt
his power? Ah! no my lovely Queen can never mistrust what many years experience
has confirmed; too often she has proved the strength of my enclining Heart,
conquered, disarmed, and left at pleasure breathless: Such Messalina is thy
Power, such thy victorious Beauty: Ah! lovely Queen, what then remains to make
thee Glorious, but

Polydorus.
The ninth Letter.
Messalina to Polydorus.
AFter so long a Series of Misfortunes, which with malicious have have crowded
on me, my cruel FateI hoped, even for its own convenience would have stopped,
and for variety have turned it self to some less weary Object: Oh! the eternal
Powers, that boast with equal Scales to poise the World, tell me, is loss of
Riches, Glory, Power, so trifling insignificant a punishment for the frail
Errors of a humane Life, that in your zealous Fury you can thus contend, each
striving to exert and wreak his powerful Malice on a wretched Queen; was it not
sufficient that my Royal Birth was first exposed to the malicious, base, false,
Censure of my Slaves? Was not the mighty Sacrifice of three fair crowns which
at one Offering you severely claimed sufficient to atone for all the poor
neglects my weak misguided nature made? Must I for ever stand your aim and
mark? Or is my Debt so unaccountable that my whole stock of life shall scarce
defray it? Yes cruel Polydorus now I see this is the sad Estate of wretched
Messalina; ah! poor neglected virtue, whether art thou fled? If not in godlike
Polydorus's Breast, where can thou hope to find, Alas! a safe Retreat? Oh!
cruel Friend, for spite of my self, I still must call thee so: Do then my loud
tongued Wrongs serve for harmonious Music in thy Ears? Are then my Sufferings
(which even my Enemies admire, and some do pity) so easy, or so well made up,
that thou could rather seem to congratulate my Triumph, than lament or help
my shattered Fortune; hard hearted Prince, could thou then think that
Messalina's Ears, that labor yet with the triumphant noise of my Victorious
Rebel Slaves, could stand with ease and patience to listen to the soft trilling
of a Lovesick Passion? Ah! faithless Prince, are thus my mighty hopes
beguiled? Is thus thy glorious Court (the Sacred Refuge once for injured
Innocence) changed, and designed my only Ruin and Destruction? Oh! no, it
cannot, must not be, I sure mistake, and Polydorus ferven tender of his heart,
is naught but the result of his highest Friendship; Yes glorious Prince, I can
endure to hear thou love, and love with mighty Zeal thy Royal Messalina;
love as the Guardian Angels do their tender Charge, and with like Purity and
Innocence.

And sure since Gratitude may well exact for such high Merit, suitable returns,
believe me Polydorus, thou have no mean share in the most solid thoughts of
Messalina: since universal Fame has long vouchsafed to adopt thee her chief
Favorite and Friend, since all thy Sex without distinction bow, owning, in
spite of envy, thy just praise, since the fair Goddesses of all the Earth do
with officious emulation strive to pay their just acknowledgments to thy great
merit, since all thus languish, covet and desire a share in Godlike Polydorus
heart, shall Messalina only stand and tempt the force of so almighty power; no
mighty Prince, see thy submissive Slave, I own my self enlisted in the Roll of
all thy innumerable Debtors: But oh! cursed Fate, that made me stake my Credit,
to render me at last a shameful Bankrupt: It Is so, great Polydorus, Messalina
now can only make returns to all thy Princely bounties in bare and thin
acknowledgments, that heart, those Eyes, which heretofore would stand, and
gaze, and think, and with, and boldly rove over all the beauties of thy Manly
Face, are now ( I dare not say unluckily) confined, strict bounds are set to
all my pointed steps, and sharp-ey'd virtue waits with busy care to guard my
Looks, my Words, my Thoughts, my Actions: Ah! then be good and kind my lovely
Prince, and think what is due from Polydorus to his Friend, what is due to Honor
too from Messalina; think that those Charms which grace thy lovely Person, need
not the bait of thy persuasive Eloquence, if Honor, Duty, Virtue, did not
stand and bid defiance to thy utmost force; deaf to the harmonious Music of
thy Tongue, and blind to all thy glittering persections; rest then my
Polydorus, rest content, and let my watchful Ears, which by thy busy tempting
Charms are forced to wake; have rest, and think that Fate alone withholds all
thou can hope or wish for from

Messalina.
Postscript.
I received just now Letters from rebellious Albion, which by Tomazo I have
herewith sent that you may better understand and judge of my Affairs there* All
things go on with a high hand, and without speedy Assistance I fear will grow
desperate: Poor Lycogenes is much perplexed for fear Latroon should be
over-reached by the christian Grandees of Iberia: If I have any power with
Polydorus, I would wish to have the Affair of Iberia dispatched with all speed.



The tenth Letter.
Polydorus to Messalina.
WHat means my lovely Messalina thus to start, and what is this amazing cause
of her displeasure, what new affrightning tidings have disturbed her Ears, or
what foul ghastly sight has thus surprised her, tell me thou dear tormentor of
my Soul what strange and wondrous accident has thus provoked thy zealous
Exclaimations? When first I read those dear but cruel lines, all fragrant with
the fresh Impression of thy hand, I thought no less then Murders, Rapes, and
Villainys unheard of, could so extort and raise thy fatal Indignation; each
word raised Terror in my guilty Soul, and every line seemed to have born the
dreadful visage of my Executioner; At length my recollected Senses made me
look, and mark, examine, call and ask, where is this bold Usurper, Villain,
Ravisher? what impious Intruder can this be, that dares presume to assault the
well-known guarded Breast of my almighty Queen? These, cruel Messalina, were my
Thoughts, my sad Expostulation; till running with my eager Eye along, I soon
perceived, too sooon alas! I found, unhappy Polydorus was the man whom you had
thus marked out with signs of blackest Infamy: Ah! cruel Tyrant Love, through
what ambiguous paths do thou conduct me? What strange and different methods
do thou take to oppress a heart that never tebell'd against thee? Cruel
Messalina, is this then the Reward of my long-vow'd continud zealous Passion?
Are then my Sorrows (greater than ever yet despairing Lover felt) so easily
become thy sport? Is It not enough thou never would vouchsafe to crown my
faithful Services with one poor smile? That thou thus cruelly can seek to add
to the heavy weight my groaning Heart lies under; and instead of Cordials to my
fainting Spirits, thou pourest Poison into my akeing Wounds, and can endure
to brand the truest, most sincere and loving heart with (Oh! I rave to think
it) Ingratitude, the worst of Crimes: But am I, cruel Queen, ungrateful when I
Love? And is that then become a Crime in me which (all that have been happy to
have seen thee) account a pious Zeal: No mighty Nymph, if 'twere a crime to
love thee, think but what an innumerable Company of Pious gazing Slaves each
look of thine would every moment Confound and Cast into the utter Regions of
Perdition; and 'twere a Crime indeed to think those lovely Eyes and Heavenly
look's, which surely are the Fountains of all Life, could change their wonted
Natures, and effect a power of killing all their humble Votaries, and that come
with pious Zeal to kneel before them: Kind Heaven allows the meanest Wretch on
Earth to come and bring his Mite of Incense with him, let also thy Divinity
vouchfase to accept the adorations of thy Slaves, and if from any offerings
they bring, there is any dare presume to a reward, vouchfase thy Polydorus then
to plead, who brings with him a heart sincerely true, and if by man thy love
may be deserved, will prove it self not most unworthy thy Protection.

Subscribed in haste, Polydorus.
Postscript.
I just now received a visit from Lycogenes, which he made me in order to take
measures for his speedy embarquing for Iberia. My lovely Queen, thou can not
be insensible how the urgency of my own affairs (which I havs just reason to
apprehend will grow very thick and difficult upon me) have put some restraint
on my resolutions to have equipped him for a descent upon Albion, though by our
Ministers we are persuaded to give some way to the present brunt, and form such
considerable Forces, in the mean time, in Iberia, as may speedily and
effectually, bring about our Designs; and though the Justice of his Cause, his
own Personal Valor, and the formidable assistance he will have with him, may
justly take away all apprehension of failure, yet I can never look on the
complement of his designs, other than the result of my adorable Queens Prayers,
and it were a sort of Sacrilege to question the success, when so prevalent a
Saint as my Royal Messalina espouseth our Cause.



The Eleventh Letter.
Polydorus to Messalina. Just after Lycogenes departure from Gaul.
WHY should my lovely Queen, with fear and frivolous disputes, thus
aggravavate, at least, continue the sorrowful remembrance of her past
misfortunes? Why are those eyes, where charming Cupids should disport, and in
their comfortable Sunshine bask and play, with Pearly melancholy showers
overwhelmed? Why should the memory of a quite spent Storm, drown all her hopes
of future happy days? Revive, revive, dear charming Saint, and think the worth
of these most precious drops, have far out-bid all that malicious Fortune can
impart: Why should thy blooming Beauties fall a Sacrifice to the faint
pleasures of unfortunate Lycogenes's Crown? If it is Ambition fills thy lofty
Soul, if Rule, Dominion, Empire be thy aim, look on some glorious Diadem, that
may sit bright and easy on thy brow; think of that Kingdom which the united
strength of all the well-known World can scarce disturb, much less subdue. If
numerous attendance be thy care, think of that place whether all the universe
do flock, and with officious pomp should wait thy every Motion, let not the
narrow bounds of one weak barren Isle press thy capacious thoughts, but think
when thou have Polydorus in thy Arms, thou have, like Cleopatra once, the Lord
and Arbiter of even more than Caesar's World, why should thy lofty and unbounded
Soul, stoop to the moldy prescripts of doting feeble Age, or which is worse of
crafty whining Priests: Great Monarchs to themselves should be a Rule, and
virtues from their wills should have their Denominations, it is fit that poor
Plebeian Souls should stoop and learn, while every action of their Prince
should be, as an infallible director; Duty, Religion, Conscience are but names
Preached up to keep the otherwise Tumultuous World in order, Honor a mere
fantastic spright is urged, only to hint discretion in our actions, and so
preserve the opinion of the busy spying world, alas it is utter Blasphemy to
think the Gods should deal of pleasures ^vch infinity, only for us to gaze on,
not to use, and it is as bad to think such multiplicity for every chooser they
would give, that we should niggardly our selves confine to one, and that
perhaps misguided choice, oh no, my lovely Queen, let us pluck and Eat was the
opinion of our first wise Parents: Let not thy Roses, that with beauteous
sweetness lift up their blushing Cheeks, as if ashamed to hang so long
neglected on their yielding Branches, fall murmuring as 'twere to the ground,
and pine away to melancholy paleness, think that one hour thou losest now of
Life, carries an Age of Youth and Beauty with it. Time, on the foolish and
deformed, sometimes may be said justly to attend and wait, but Beauty, Youth,
and Wit, have no spare hours; each minute, with a hasty soot, steps on, and
leaves the unwary gazer in confusion. Let Us then, my lovely Queen, in time
repent; let us not provoke the angry Boy too long, those Darts which hitherto he
Shot were dip't in Juice of fresh plucked Roses, fragrant Ointments, if there
which easy fly do fail to warn us, let us beware, his deadly Poisoned shafts,
stand ready bent and fixed for fatal Execution. Come, let me fly then to thy out
spread Arms, let me embrace thy tender Snowy Limbs: Oh! let me Suck that Balmy
Cordial Breath, kiss, kiss, thy rolling Dying Eyes, and ravish all thy
Beauties. Come, let me print young Cupids on thy Lips, and Kiss them into Life,
and warm perfection. Oh, the Transporting Joys! Oh, ecstasy of happiness! If
such the thoughts, so killing be the dreams of what my panting soul longs to
enjoy, how shall I bear the essence of my joys? The substance will orewhelm my
fainting Spirits, if thus the fleating shadows can transport. No, do not, do
not grant, frown, storm, complain, and call whole Troops of armed virtues to
thy guard! Tell me of honor, gratitude, civility, and thunder loudly in my
ears, threaten disdain, scorn, and dire revenge, if ever I attempt, nay ask it
of thee, do this and more, and think too thou art kind for sure the joy must
needs be more than Sensible Man can bear. But oh! the weak resolves and poor
designs of Hearts bound up in magic Chains of Love, were but thy lovely Arms
once spread, did but thy wishing eyes with one dear languet call thy Polydorus
to thy Breast: Were Serpents basilisks Mountains of Fire, or fury's with their
grizly looks between, and dared to interpose and stop my ready passage to my
Queen: Gods! with what fury would I cut along, Armed with powerful Love, would
meteor like glide through their thickest fury: No, no, my Princess I did vainly
rave, 'twas lovesick folly, if thou would have thy Polydorus live, look with
compassion on his wounded Heart, and gently breath new life into his almost
cold desparing Soul; warm now with gentle fires his Dying Spirits, and think it
not the least of all thy glory's, if in the counting up thy numerous conquests,
thou can with unexampled pride relate, the gift of Life and happiness to
mighty Polydorus.

The Twelfth Letter.
Messalina to Polydorus.
WHAT shall I do thou Universal Conqueror, whether shall I retire to hide me
from the danger of thy all powerful Love; oh! thou subtle, invincible deceiver
of our Sex: By what strange magic is it thou thus do draw, even the most
wary, nice resisting hearts with, within the plainly dangerous Circle of thy
alluring Tongue, oh! Virtue, Conscience, Duty now defend me, come now Exert
your utmost power and force, for less than your united strength will never
repel, those vigorous attacques are made against me: No, no alas, my Feeble
Panting Heart, proves me already more than half overcome, and though some
Sparks of innate Courage yet remain, which vainly would support, and prompt my
fainting Spirits, yet Fate, and Godlike Polydorus Charms; which never sure knew
pity or repulse, come thronging into my forsaken Breast, rifling each corner
with a Covetous Pride; and lead my now defenseless Heart in Triumph. Yes, yes,
Great Conqueror, I see thy power; and now can wonder at my own Resistance, now
I can see thy Dear commanding Charms, thy winning Graces, now I can hear and
with Emphatick skill distinguish each accent of thy sweet Harmonious voice; now
I can stand and with amazing silence hearken to the persuasive Rhetoric of thy
Tongue, each look, each word and action new supply fresh matter to my Love and
Admiration; now I can Smile and pity those poor Hearts who with all heat and
eagerness pursue, and toil for the dull fading toys and pleasures of Riches;
Popular applause and Glory. Ah poor mistaken wretches, did they but know those
worlds of pleasures, I in Love enjoy, how soon they would quit those weak unworthy
trifles, (which they, as drowning men catch hold of Straws with blind,
destructive zeal pursue) and strive with eagerness to grasp the solid
never-failing Rocks of Love and Pleasure: Yes Polydorus, I am grown a wonderful
proficient in thy Art, thy generous Rules do so convince and move, have had so
powerful an influence over my Soul, that I can now with pleasure hear thee
plead, and teach the wondrous precepts of all knowing Love, I now without a
groan, or figh can hear a doleful tale, of Kingdoms lost and Kings Dethroned,
unmoved I stand when some State Politician, needs will tell of Tumults, Rebels,
Wars and Revolutions; alas all these stand on the slippery precipice of Fate or
chance; and since without our power, why should we grieve: It Is true good
manners and Civility exact my wishes for Lycogenes, the Gods themselves can
witness how my Prayers go up with equal zeal for him as me, but yet kind Nature
wisely did ordain self preservation always should take place; and since the
circumstances of my Fate deny, all other Succor than my vows and Prayers, the
World can never dare condemn that care; (Nature and Providence allow and teach)
I take to mitigate the smart and pain of my almost incurable misfortunes, yes
this alone might well be thought a Plea sufficient, even for an erring faulty
Love, but when I think I only make returns (poor as they are) to the Divine
unvalluable passion of Godlike Polydorus, my Love seems then to claim
Regeneration, is Sanctified, and rises free from all impure contraminations:
Take then my Heart thou only brave great man, take to thy self that Heart which
Fate by a thousand signal circumstances has declared was from the first
designed for thee; and thee alone, and surely thou do best deserve that
treasure, who best know how to value it. It Is true, I had even from my own
Lycogenes something of zealous formal Reverence, a blind obedience whensoe're I
called, he with all Dutiful submission paid but yet methought 'twas such a
timorous zeal, as Servants pay to their commanding Lords, my haughty Geniu
foro'd a just compliance, but yet it looked like Duty more than Love, and where
the payment is but just our due there is left but little Room for thanks or
Praise. Beauty like puny Stomachs should be bribed with Picquant Sauces and
provocatives, nor should they ever wait the leavy motions of distant Cooks and
tedious preparations, Loves Squeam^sh appetite will quickly Pall, and therefore
my little Cambrian Prince, just now attends me, and by a seeming Providence,
comes in to interrupt my farther raving: Oh Polydorus! Oh wretched Messalina!

FINIS.

