A Letter to a Friend: WITH REMARKS Upon two Pamphlets, lately published, In
Defense of TRITHEISM; VIZ. A BRIEF ENQUIRY. By J. T. And THE SOCINIAN SLAIN. By
J. H.

In mala causa non possunt aliter, at causam
Malam quis coegit eos habere!
August. LONDON; Printed, Anno Domini, M.DCC.

SIR,
I Have, at your request, read over two little Books you were pleased to put
into my hands; viz. The Brief Enquiry, which I find was written by J. T. and,
The Socinian Slain, written, as it is reported, by one J. H. And really, Sir,
when I have perused such Discourses, written with an Air of Candor and
Sincerity; and when I see the Authors so very zealous in defending their own
Mistakes, and find them loading with heavy Aggravations the Opinions of others,
I cannot but extremely regret the ill usage of those important Truths they
undertake to confute: and I assure you am at the same time no less concerned
that so much Zeal, as these two Writers have expressed, should be misspent in a
wrong Cause; and not barely so, but in opposition to the most Natural and most
Scriptural Notion that the best of Men, and the best of Christians have ever
had of the Deity.

How unhappily have these Men, and a great many others who have earnestly
contended in these Controversies, in conclusion proved nothing so effectually
as this, That Education and Interest are irresistible; that they will put such
a biass upon a wise Man's Judgment and manner of reasoning, which without
extraordinary Care and divine Assistance, will become almost insuperable to him.

I say almost, and not altogether insuperable; because I Am persuaded there is
no Man so much under the power of Mistake in the common necessary Points of
Religion, but may be undeceived, if he makes his Enquiries with any tolerable
degree of Candor and Ingenuity.

But when a man sets up for absolute Certainty in a controverted Point, and
speaks and dictates like an inspired Writer, there remains no remedy for his
Errors, till he is cured of his Infallibility.

What opinion these two Persons have of their own Performances, is certainly
known to God and their own Consciences alone: but they give abundant
satisfaction to the World, that they are Men who have not temper enough for any
Contronversy, nor skill enough to manage this.

The late Bp of Worcester, Bp Chichester, Bp Sarum, Bp Gloucester, Mr. How.
The most eminent Writers both for Learning and Dignity, have written against us
with the Decency of Gentlemen, and the Temper of good Christians; they make it
appear that they can be candid and charitable to an Adversary; and how warmly
soever they are engaged in the Debate, yet they keep within the bounds of
Religion and good Breeding. And tho the Cause they engaged in was never to be
confuted, yet it is owned, if it could have been, they certainly had done it.
But this Brace of Writers have taken up the Dispute, when the field was quitted
by the most sober and most learned of our Opponents: and when the most
celebrated University of Oxon had decreed in our favor, and condemned the
vulgar Tritheistic Trinity, and the Rev. Dean of Paul's had in his State of the
Socinian Controversy, with a Modesty that became a Man of his Dignity and
Learning, handsomely retracted, or at least prudently softened whatever had the
countenance and appearance of Tritheism in his former Writings.

With what good Grace then can these two Writers of the lowest Class, who, it
may be, were never taught in any Class, undertake to revive the Debate that was
given over by the best and wisest Gentlemen of the Tritheistic Party? Do they
think they can say somewhat better than any that have written before them? sure
they are too modest to be of that opinion: or is it because they will say and
argue as no body would besides them? this may be true enough indeed: for they
both of them argue and prove in that unusual Method that one may see at the
first blush, that they understand not what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

They knew (certainly) when they began to write, that this Controversy,
whatever others might be, was terra incognita to 'em both; and yet, which is
very much to be admired, they are as positive and as decretory as if they acted
by Legantine Authority from the Holy See, and came not to debate, but decide
this controverted Point.

The Brief Enquiry, Pref. tells his Readers with very great gravity --
Gentlemen, pray take notice, I write only for Truth; but I remember the time
when he durst not dispute for it, and made an honest and true confession that
he could not.

And he adds, (ibid.) That Christian Charity must not be abused toward those
who root up the Foundations of Religion: no, nor must it be abused toward any
Persons whatever, nor on any account whatever. To abuse Christian Charity would
be a great abuse indeed; but to abuse it for the sake of ill Men, would still
be a much greater abuse. But I suppose he would insinuate that the Unitarians
root up the Foundations of Religion, and that to treat 'em charitably, would be
to abuse Christian Charity, which ought not to be done. God forgive him for his
uncharitable Insinuation, and we will too; but let him remember there is not a
more scurvy abuse of the Christian, nor of any Religion indeed, than to affirm
that it teaches us not to exercise Charity toward Men of a different Opinion.

But tho the Brief Enquirer be so very wary how he abuses Christian Charity;
yet, to the great scandal of all pious Christians, he cares not what abuses he
flings at Christ and the Christian Religion, provided he can expose the
Unitarians: for, abating a few pages, a good part of his Book consists in
odious Comparisons of Christianity with Mahometanism, and Christ with Mahomet:
and if Christ be not the Supreme God, and of the same Essence with the Father,
he wickedly infers, to the just abhorrence of all that love the Lord Jesus in
truth and sincerity, P. 14 and 51. That Christ was an Impostor and Deceiver;
that the Jews justly sentenced him to death for Blasphemy, and rejected his
Apostles; that the Christian Religion is Idolatry and Superstition, and the
Messiah is not yet come, etc.

And these terrible Inferences are not made en passant, and by the by; but he
continues to copy Monsieur Abbadie's rude, scandalous, and impious Expressions
for several pages together.

If, says he, p. 15. Jesus Christ is not true God, of the same Essence with the
Father, the Mohammedan Religion is preferable to the Christian, and Mahomet a
greater Prophet than Christ, because the Christian Religion brings in Idolatry,
and the Mohammedan abolishes it, etc.

How gladly would the Brief Enquirer, prove the Mohammedan to be the better
Religion! why else dos he take that for granted to prove it, which every Body
denis; viz. That the Christian Religion brings in Idolatry: for there is no
Christian, but the Antichristian Enquirer, and his Abbadie, who insinuates a
Charge of Idolatry against the Christian Religion upon account of the Honor
therein given to Christ. Even those Christians who are for a coequal Adoration
of three coequal coeternal Beings, abhor the charging Idolatry upon the
Christian Religion; much less will they, or can they be thought to countenance
so detestable an Accusation, who declare for the supreme Honor and Adoration
of one single Infinite Allsufficient Being, who is the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

He proceeds in his detestable Inferences, and asserts, p. 16. That the Worship
of Jesus Christ is Idolatry, if he is not God. How! dares the Enquirer assert,
that to honor him whom God the Father has honored (2 Pet. 1.17.) and highly
exalted, is Idolatry that to give him a Name above every Name, and confess him
Lord, to the Glory of God the Father, is Idolatry? Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. see Joh.
5.22, 23. What Notion I wonder has this hasty Enquirer of Worship, and of
Idolatry! I dare be his Security that he is a perfect Stranger to the true
Notion of either of 'em, how loudly soever he may declaim with the dreadful
Charge of Idolatry: for I would demand of this bold Enquirer, where is the
Idolatry? if the Holy Jesus have all the honor and veneration paid him, but
that alone which he himself gave to his Father and our Father, and to his God
and our God, to whom he ascended. Yet this Bold Enquirer, p. 16. takes a fresh
start from this very Charge, too too like a good Mussulman, to extol his holy
Prophet Mahomet for a very considerable Teacher, and a great Reformer of
Mankind. How deplorable a Case is it, that some Men write just as they have
lived, like true Mahometans; and have presented the World with a fair occasion
to conclude they would be extremely gratified if their Arabian Prophet's
Religion were established in England: for a good Mussulman may keep a good
Conscience, and a brace of Concubines at the same time: for they are not
incommunicable.

The Enquirer, p. 16. to show you his good liking of Mahomet and his Doctrine,
insists upon it in a large Vindication and Encomium on both; How can we but
have a great opinion of Mahomet He has taught Men so and so, etc. What can
bespeak a Man more inspired of God? Surely he was a very great Prophet, and all
he has taught ought to be owned as Divine. P. 17, 18. He is a greater Prophet
than all under the Law, yea preferable to Christ himself; which, says he, p.
19. will appear if you consider his Doctrine, or the success of his Ministry --
He has established his Religion upon firm Foundations, and taken wiser Methods
--, and was much wiser and better than Christ; he had greater Candor, Truth
and Charity, greater care of, and zeal for the Glory of God than Jesus Christ,
who makes himself one with the most High God. P. 21. If Christ was not God,
Mahomet spoke more truly and plainly than Christ, had more Wisdom, and took
more care not to entangle the Souls of Men. P. 22. Nay if Christ was not true
God, he was an Impostor, and his Disciples Deceivers, and the Christian
Religion is a Cheat, Superstition and Idolatry. What a terrible Outrage is here
upon the Christian Religion! These are the execrable Consequences the confident
Enquirer presumes to draw from his obscure, equivocal and unexpounded Premises,
and has taken a scandalous liberty of publishing this Raillery upon the
Christian Religion in a Chistian Nation, and with his own name in the Title
Page: Are these the Fruits of his Zeal and his Orthodoxy? Must Christianity it
self be decry'd and vilify'd, if it be not the thing he mistakes it to be? Is
this the rare Method of confuting the Unitarians? this will rather serve to
confirm 'em in this Truth, That they and the Christian Religion must stand and
fall together; and he that designs to confute them and what they maintain, does
in effect undertake nothing less than a Confutation of Jesus Christ, and the
Divine Writings of the New Testament.

What this Enquirer is maintaining in the remainder of his Book is a full and
complete instance of this: for he produces Text upon Text, and one Scripture
upon another, to show that another distinct Being is a most High God, beside
him who is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and unless you will
grant him this Sense, and admit this Proof to be sufficient, he will reject the
H. Scriptures, and give the preference to his beloved Alchoran: for that
teaches, as he informs you, That none other but the eternal Father is God, p.
21. whereas he looks upon it as certain and evident, that Jesus Christ and his
Apostles taught, that another, nay a third distinct Being, are truly and
properly Gods, coequal in Nature and Perfection, and have equal right to Divine
Honor and Adoration. P. 24, 25, 26. That Jesus Christ is God in the highest
and chiefest sense, he begins to prove from the Names, the incommunicable Names
of God ascribed to him. Yet Jesus Christ no where once styles himself God, or
ascribes to himself the nature of God; and God has no incommunicable Name, that
I could ever meet with; no Name but what is given to other Beings besides
himself. If the giving the Names of God to any Being besides him, be Blasphemy;
J. T. I doubt will renounce his Bible as well as Christ, and embrace the
Doctrine of the Alchoran, which some affirm best suits with his Life and good
Opinion. He finds in his Bible the Names of God given to Angels, good and evil,
to Princes and Prophets: nay he himself takes all the pains he can, to prove
that the Names, the incommunicable Names of God are given to Jesus Christ. Now
if the Man Christ Jesus be not God, then Mr. Tailor has proved that the Names
of God are not incommunicable, for he proves that they are given to Christ: so
that it must follow, either that the Names may be given to different Beings in
a different Sense, or that God and Jesus Christ are but one Being, or that the
Scripture-phrases are misapplied, which it may be he will rather incline to
believe.

But he goes on to inform you, p. 25. That Jehovah is a Name only belongs to
the most High God. Psalm. 83.18. Thou whose Name alone is Jehovah. This is a
very pleasant Proof: for if there be another Person or Being besides the
Father, of whom it may be said, Thou whose Name is Jehovah, then the Father's
Name alone is not Jehovah; for J. T. says it belongs to another Person or
Being, who is a Son, and not a Father: so that this proof destroys it self; for
if the Father's Name alone be Jehovah, so as that Name is not to be given to
any other besides him, then Jesus Christ who is another Person or Being besides
him, has not and cannot have that Name given or ascribed to him: but if Jesus
Christ has that name given or ascribed to him, which is also given to his
Father another distinct Being, then the Psalmist must be mistaken in saying of
the Father, Thou whose Name alone is Jehovah, and the Name is no proper Name
for one Being, but is only a proper Name in that Sense that the name [John] is,
which belonged John the Baptist, and John the Evangelist, and still belongs to
diverse particular Men.

P. 26, 27. The Enquirer proceeds from several divine Perfections to prove,
That Jesus Christ was truly God from eternity: how well he has done this, is
not worth while to examine; others having done it to good purpose, and I may
consider 'em elsewhere; tho it may be truly said of his Proofs in general, that
they prove one God too many for the Christian Religion, if they prove Jesus
Christ to be a most High God from Eternity: for if Jesus Christ was truly so
from Eternity, that Jesus Christ who was so, was not that very God who was his
Father, and the Fountain and Origin of his Being; but an eternal God, derived,
originated and begotten by another eternal God even the Father, who is an
underiv'd, originated and unbegotten God; and so even in the Nicene, nay in the
Athanasian Sense, God the Father was the first, the Supreme, and the most
Divine Being or Person in the vulgar Sense. And in this all the Books that have
been or can be published on this Subject, must of necessity center at last,
viz. That Jesus Christ, one distinct individual Being or Person, is an eternal
God, because the Descriptions and Characters of another divine Person, to wit,
the Father, who is on all hands granted to be an eternal God, are, as some
suppose, frequently given to him: so that rather than they will admit Words and
Phrases to have a different Sense according to the different Objects whereof
they are spoken, they choose to lay down Premises that necessarily and
unavoidably infer, that there are two or three coeternal and coequal Beings, or
Persons of the same sort or kind of Divinity. And as the Enquirer says in
another Case, p. 29. We may as soon deny the light at Noonday, as the
clearness of this Evidence.

After this he proceeds to cite Scripture by wholesale, and to interpret Texts
in that manner, as if he were resolved to fulfill those words of St. Peter, 2
Pet. 3.10. which the ignorant and unstable wrest, as they do the rest of the
Scriptures, to their own destruction.

How bold he makes with the Prophet Isaiah and St. Paul, is almost a scandal to
relate: for he proves St. Paul to contradict the Prophet in express terms: P.
32. St. Paul, says he, knew that Isaiah had asserted there was none to be
likened or compared to him, i. e. to God, and yet St. Paul with the greatest
assurance asserts, that Jesus Christ was in the form of God, and was equal to
him. i. e. What Isaiah expressly denis, St. Paul as expressly affirms, that there
was one who might be compared to God, because he was absolutely equal to God;
that is in plain English, there are two coequal Gods, really distinct Beings,
but of equal and like Perfections.

The Enquirer had neither Skill nor Judgment to examine the great number of
Texts he has cited; but thinks to gain the point by a Poll, he has pressed all
the Texts he could meet with into his Service, and hopes, I suppose, that some
amongst the crowd will pass for good Testimony; and so they do in the opinion
of the Crowd: But for the Trinitarian Gentlemen that are Men of Learning and
Reading, they have with great candor and sincerity acknowledged, that most, if
not all the Texts produced by this unstudied Preacher, are no good Proofs of
the matter for which they are alleged; some I am certain are as much to the
purpose as Pharaoh's Dreams, or the renowned Ecce duos gladios: And I don't see
but ecce duos gladios is as good, and Catholic Proof for two distinct Gods, as
it passes for in the Church of Rome, for two distinct Jurisdictions.

P. 46. But the Enquirer will have the Disciples of Christ to be the worst of
Men, for applying Texts which speak of God in the Old Testament to Jesus Christ
in the New, if he was not of the same Essence with the Father. God forbid it!

But does he not impose upon himself and his Readers, by the terms [same
Essence] for they may signify either one Being, or one kind of Being: if the
former, then Jesus Christ will be the Father, and his own Father: if the
latter, then the Father is one most High Being, and Jesus Christ another of the
same kind, and the Holy Ghost a Third, and so we shall have three distinct most
High Gods.

But the Enquirer in p. 48, 49. falls upon the odious Proof of Jesus Christ
being guilty of Blasphemy, and fixes the Jewish Calumny in the strictest Sense
upon him, That he made himself equal with God, i. e. that he made himself
another God; for equality necessarily requires two at least: or that Jesus
Christ made himself equal to the Father, whom the Jews, ^s our blessed Savior
assures us, looked upon to be the only true God, John 8.^4. How ready is the
Enquirer to join hands with the Jews in an unjust Accusation against our B.
Savior! for he tells you, p. 49. These are the things they alledg in their
defense for crucifying Jesus Christ; and we demand, says the Enquirer, how any
Man or Company of Men, that deny his Divinity, can take off the force of 'em.
So that J. T. has made good the Accusation against Christ, and by an abominable
and wicked way of reasoning, he will put a Dilemma upon his Savior, and, prove
him and God, as Dr. A -- x somewhere styles him; or guilty of Blasphemy; for
which the Jews unjustly condemned him.

In P. 52 and 53. he launches out into a new Subject, and tells you, The
Elements in the Eucharist represent Jesus Christ to the Trinitarians giving up
himself a Sacrifice and Satisfaction to divine Justice; but to the Socinians as
a mere example of patience and submission. i. e. the Elements represent God the
eternal Son offering himself to God the eternal Father, to satisfy the Father's
Justice; the Son having none it seems to satisfy. How strange a Representation
is this of Christ's Death and Sufferings! yet a very familiar one with the
Solifidians.

Let me desire the Gentlemen who are Favorers of his Book, to reflect a little
upon the Character and Quality of this pious and zealous Defender of Tritheism,
and I Am much mistaken if they don't acknowledge that so lascivious a Vindicator
is a very improper Champion for their beloved Tritheism, that admirable and
wonderful Mystery.

For if the Unitarians are attacked, and their Doctrines exploded by Men of
such a profligate Life, and flagitious Crimes, as the Brief Enquirer has led
and committed in the face of the World; they will have very little reason to
fear their cause, tho both Unitarians and Tritheists too have great cause to be
ashamed of such a scandalous Author, whom in his 55th Page you will find very
busy a proving the poor Unitarians Heretics, and their Doctrine Heresy, and
thinks no doubt he has proved the point as fully as bis own People proved him
an Adulterer, and his Grimes Adultery. I should be sorry I confess if the
former were as true as the latter, but should have been very glad for J. T's
sake if the latter were no truer than the former. But I would feign know of the
Enquirer and all his Abettors, which is the greater Heresy, to assert as the
Tritheists do, That there are three eternal, most perfect, coequal Beings; or
to maintain, as the Unitarians do, that there is and can be but one supreme
most perfect Being, who has no equal, and with whom no other Being is to be
compared. If I must be an Heretic, for my part I would choose for my opinion
the latter of these two Heresies.

But the Enquirer is clearly for the first; yet he owns, P. 59. There are few
who are capable of understanding so great a Mystery: So say the most
considerable Defenders of the Mystery, both English and Foreigners. But the
Unitarians say, and can prove, as they have often done, that it is a Mystery of
Human Invention, and not of Divine Revelation; and by the way, it is such a
Mystery, that the Enquirer, one of the meanest of its Defenders, could not say
one wise word in vindication of it at a public Dispute: And how could he help
it, the Mystery being incomprehensible?

But he assures you, P. 69. that The common People firmly believe the Mystery,
tho they cannot comprehend the manner of it. I answer. The Faith of the common
People is a gross Tritheistic Faith, like that of the common Preachers, of
which no wise Man, nor thinking Christian, can be very fond. I Am sure the
Learned Dr. S -- th, and the most Celebrated University of Oxford have no value
for it, but have solemnly condemned it, Nov. 25. 1695.

But the Enquirer has now done with his Proofs, and begins his Remarks upon the
Unitarians, who are said to be, P. 60 Men of holy and pious Lives, etc which
many. Trinitarians are not, the Enquirer, for one; and therefore is so ready to
engage St. Paul, to condemn Heresy in the Faith, more than Impiety in the
Morals. How gladly would some Men have their pretended Orthodoxy atone for
their real Immorality, and be accounted good Christians for a mysterious Faith
without Charity and good Life!

The Enquirer admits the Unitarians to be Men of pious lives; but what then,
Will that alone qualify 'em for Church Communion? No by no means, P. 62. If
after all means used they persist in their Heresies, they are to he rejected:
let their Lives and Conversations be never so exact, they are be to rejected by
the Church; which shows they are not good Christians, and that their Piety is
but seeming, not real. Let me recommend for once to all and singular of his
Reader or Readers, this elaborate Lipotiwhichet as one of his Masterpieces; and
I challenge 'em to match it in all the Sayings of all the Seven Wise Masters in
Christendom, Bevis of Southampton, Crispin, or King Pharamond: For I Am sure
that this is true Mother-Wit, and a perfect Original of his own Understanding.

But what if one should argue, The Enquirer is really immoral, and but
seemingly Orthodox, therefore he ought to be cast out of the Church; Would not
this look with a far better Grace than his Argument? viz. You ought to be cast
out of the Church, ergo, you are but seemingly pious and good Christians. No,
no, the Enquirer will reply, By no means [You ought to be cast out of the
Church] is a stanch Reason at all times to prove Heresy and Impiety, and when
all other Arguments fail, this will do: for whoever ought to be cast out of the
Church, can neither be a good Man, nor a true Christian. The Enquirer and all
his Friends are agreed that the Unitarians ought to be cast out of the Church;
and then to be sure they are no good Christians.

But what if the Unitarians should think the Enquirer ought to be cast out of
the Church, Would not this prove him no Christian too? Yes certainly, if his
own Argument be a good one: but his Congregation I hear have done him that
piece of Justice already, and the zealous Excluder is himself excluded, and
declared in his own Style, Incommunicable: which seems to be a remarkable
instance of Divine Vengeance upon him, for vilifying his Maker, reproaching his
Savior, extolling Mahomet, decrying the Christian, which is the best Religion,
and the Unitarians the truest Professors of it. He who wrote to encourage
Schism, and Division, has his own Church first broken and divided, and then
himself upon full evidence sentenced, and declared incommunicable by that very
dividing Party, who were his unwary Admirers. How righteous are thy Judgments,
O God! Psalm. 73.25. Whom have we in Heaven but Thee? and whom is there on Earth
that we ought to esteem or adore in comparison with thee?

God grant him repentance unto life: he is at present in the gall of bitterness
and bond of Iniquity; for that reason under the Church's righteous Anathema;
his pretended Orthodoxy could not rescue him from the Censure: and without a
solemn Renunciation of his former Life, of whatever stamp his religious
Opinions are, he must unavoidably fall under the Maranatha of an affronted
Deity.

Thus, Sir, I think without a Spirit of Prophecy, I may foretell the unrepenting
Enquirer's Doom: but I am yet to tell you the Fate both of the Arguments, and
the Author of the Socinian Slain, P. 1. who talks so much of his Weapons, that
I am tempted to think him rather a Master of the noble Science of Defense, than
a Master of Arts. Whoever and whatever this Writer is, I wish he had been
inspired with a Spirit of Meekness and Humility, before he had undertaken this
Task, and then we had met with more Charity and Modesty in his Discourse: and I
heartily wish he had taken the Spirit of Truth for his Guide, and then he had
made a better use of the Sword of the Spirit, than he has now done with the Arm
of Flesh.

But alas for him, he knows not what Spirit he is of, tho his Readers may
easily see that he has a Spirit of Envy and Uncharitableness; and that he has
not the Civility of a Gentleman, or the Temper of a Christian, by his ill
Language, and abusive Reflections in the 2d, 38th, 48th, 52d, 53d pages.

But the Unitarians must be decry'd at any rate, and so that be done, it
matters not what the Arguments are. He would not t^ouble himself to stand to
pick and choose; or if he did make a choice, he has taken the most inconclusive
and the most ill-natured he could light upon.

Socin. Slain, p. 2. When (says the Socinian Slain) a Neighbor's House is on
Fire, or the Air infected with the Pestilence, and the Enemies of God and his
Servants are in a Combination, and lie in wait to deceive the Ignorant and
Vwary, it is every Man's Duty to extinguish the Flame, etc. This is very true;
and the Unitarians have a good Title to these Considerations: But what has any
Athanasian or Tritheistic Writer to do with 'em? The Fire, and Pestilence, and
Craft of Athanasius have done too too much Injury to the Christian Faith
already; and has deceived this very unwary Writer, and all his Elect, if any
one can truly be said to be deceived by another, who imposes upon himself by
such inconsiderable Sophistry, as runs through bis whole inconsiderable
Pamphlet.

He first takes it for granted, that by the Holy Ghost we are to understand a
single intelligent Being or Subsistence, distinct from the Father, the most
High God, and then takes upon him to prove that this Being is the most High God
too. We will be so civil to him for once as to admit the first to be true; but
the Holy Scriptures, and the reason of all Mankind will never admit the second
to be so too: for if they are not one, but two distinct individual Beings, they
cannot both be the most High God. Yes, replies the Socinian Slain, that must be
granted me too, as I will make it appear by twenty demonstrative Arguments.
Twenty Demonstrations is a round number, but one good Demonstration is as good
as a thousand; and I can produce a thousand at any time of the day out of the
1st and 2d Book of Chronicles, as good and as conclusive as any of the 20 in
the Socinian Slain; but then I must expose my self and the Holy Scripture too,
as the Socinian Slain has done; but God forbid I should be guilty of his
Faults.

But the Socinian Slain, p. 3. tells you, The Holy Ghost made the Heavens and
the Earth, and cites for a Proof Genesis 1.2. Who I pray is this Holy Ghost? a 3d
Divine Being, distinct in Number, Will, and Understanding, i. e. distinct in
Person from the Father and the Son. If so, then we have three Creators, three
Gods, three distinct Beings of infinite Wisdom and Power, which is two too many
for Divine Revelation, and the most evident Reason of Mankind.

No matter for that, the Socinian Slain will rather choose to have it so, than
have his Arguments exploded as absurd: And therefore on he goes, right or
wrong, with his wonderful and surprising Proofs, and tells you in the next
place, that, P. 4. The Holy Ghost is omniscient, and therefore, etc. And 1st,
He is so, because he knows all the deep things of God; and 2ly, because he
knows all the deep things of Man.

The latter of these two may be known without being omniscient, and the former
are known to God alone. Infinite Mind can only know what is in infinite Mind;
but then that infinite Mind is but one.

If he believes the Holy Ghost is one infinite Mind or Understanding distinct
from another infinite Mind, and yet knows all that the other Infinite can
comprehend then this Author's Faith is condemned by the Universal Church, the
late Oxford-Decree, and by the Holy Scriptures: but if he believes God to be
one infinite Mind and Being, who alone is conscious to his own Thoughts, and no
other Being besides him is privy to 'em, as every Man knows his own Mind, and
no other Man can know what is in his Mind till he reveal it to him, which is the
true Sense of 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. we are agreed, for undoubtedly God knows all
that he knows.

The rest of his Arguments are all of a piece, till you come to the 18th,
unless you will except the eleventh, where he tells you, The Holy Ghost is the
most High God, because Sin and Blasphemy against him are unpardonable; Now this
seems the most concluding and decisive Proof of all the 20 Demonstrations; nay,
as the Author manages it, it will prove more a great deal than ever he designed
it should. For if the Holy Ghost be God because Sin and Blasphemy against him
are unpardonable; then the Father and Son cannot be so, because all manner of
Sins and Blasphemies against them will be forgiven, Mat. 11.31. And now let
this Writer consider if he has not finely proved the Deity of the Holy Ghost,
and excluded the other two Divine Persons from the most sacred Order of his
most high Gods. He has given the 3d a greater Prerogative than the 1st and 2d
Persons, and so instead of proving him God equal to the Father and the Son, has
proved him God superior in this respect to both: which is such a way of
proving he never had been guilty of, had he but consulted his own Reason, or a
good Commentator; and if he did it knowingly, it is very likely to be an
unpardonable Sin.

The Socinian Slain has but one Argument more that merits a Remark, and that is
his eighteenth. The Holy Ghost, says he, P. 21. is one God with the Father and
Son, and therefore is the most High God; I mean with respect to his Essence,
since every Body will grant that the Father is so. What dos this Author mean by
one God with the Father and Son? one Being with the Father and Son, or that the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are but one single Being? If this be his meaning,
tho it be not well expressed, yet it looks more like a Divine Unity, and is
indeed the nominal Trinity, and not the Tritheistic against which I write. Or
dos he mean by one God with the Father and Son, that the Holy Ghost is a God of
the same Divine Kind with the Father and the Son? If this be his Sense, as some
other Passages seem to countenance, then without breach of Charity, I must
charge him, tho I am sorry for it, with downright Tritheism or Polytheism,
which I take to be a much heavier Accusation than any he can charge, or has
fairly brought against his real Well-wishers the Unitarians.

But the Author has another ambiguous Phrase in his Proof, and that is, That
the Holy Ghost is most High God, with respect to his Essence. What, is he not
so then with respect to his Person? if he be not so in Person, I don't see how
he can be so at all; for what he is not as a Person, he is mot any other way;
for all he is, is Person: No, no, the Socinian Slain can find out a way wherein
he is the most High God, tho he be not so in Person. How I pray, not by Proxy
certainly? No, but in Essence.

Now I would fain know of the Author of the Socinian Slain what Essence
signifies in this place, and in other Passages of his Book, for he seems to use
it in no certain Sense: which is unfair.

The Schoolmen have used a Term in their Metaphysical Writings: 1. For common
Nature, or kind of Being. 2. For particular Nature, or single Being. And 3. For
essential Properties of Being.


Will this Author be understood in any or none of these Senses? If he mean by
Essence, common Nature, or kind of Being; then Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are
three individual Gods numerically distinct in their Beings, but of the same
sort or Species of Divine Nature: this I think bids fairest for his Sense.

Or dos he mean by Essence, single Being? then Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
but three Names for one single Almighty Being, and the proper Notion of Persons
in the Godhead will be lost in this Sense: yet this sometimes must be his
meaning, or what he says can have no meaning. And I suppose, he does net
understand the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be three Properties of one Deity.

But let the Author, or any one for him, once ascertain the Sense of this term
[Essence] and the Controversy will soon determine it self: but he and his
Authors too, are unwilling to be plain in this matter, lest the Mystery
vanishes, and Truth should stare 'em in the Face.

Yet after all, methinks the Author of the Socinian Slain, has in some Passages
expounded his meaning, and plainly owns a plurality of Gods; and if the Reader
considers what he says, and how he speaks in some places, he will see there is
no Reason to doubt of it.

I will grant that he sometimes forgets himself, and speaks of Almighty God as
one single Being: but his whole Book will correct that meaning; for he contends
throughout, that religious Worship and Adoration are equally due, and to be
paid to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and in all places speaks of these
three as three distinct individual Beings. For instance, in his 30th page he
styles the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Intelligent Almighty Principles of
Operation, who created the Heavens and the Earth.

In Page 31, 32, 33, 36. these three are spoken of as so many distinct Beings,
in as plain terms as the Wit of Man can express it; and how wary soever other
Writers have been, the Socinian Slain will not and cannot but be understood in
every Page of his Book discoursing of the Holy Ghost, as a real, proper, and
absolute Person in the Deity, really and entirely distinct from the Persons of
the Father, and the Son, in as true and proper a sense as the Person of Peter
is complete in it self, and numerically distinguished from the Persons of James
and John. And if you would know of him how these three intelligent Beings, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one; he frequently inculcates this Answer, That
they are one in Essence, and one in Nature, or of one Divine Essence, and of
one Divine Nature: which is just the same reply that every Body makes to this
Question, In what sense may Peter, James and John, three distinct intelligent
Beings, be said to be one? Why the Answer is, They are one in Essence, or they
are one in Nature; or they are of one human Essence, and of one human Nature.
Now it is plain that Divine Essence and Nature, as well as human Essence and
Nature, are abstract Terms in such Passages as these, and signify common
Nature, or sort of Being, comprehending diverse particulars, or several
Individuals under it.

The Soc. Slain therefore, and all his Party are for a Specific Trinity of
three Formal, Individual, Intelligent, Almighty Beings or Principles, contained
under one common Nature, or of one divine sort or kind of Being. And can any
thing be more formal and palpable Tritheism than this? He disputes for a
numerical Distinction of these three, and asserts only a specifical Unity: nay,
he asserts the equality of these three Almighty Beings, and maintains an equal
Right that all the Divine Three, or the three coequal Gods have to our
religious Worship and Adoration, p. 19, 30, 36. ad finem. And when this is the
Sense and Language of all his Book, can he with any reason take it unkindly if
he be understood to teach and maintain the Doctrine of three Almighty Gods? In
short, if that be not his Sense, all he writes and says must be Nonsense, how
orthodox soever it may be thought by his Favorers. And whatever may be the
Issue of some Men's Doctrines unfairly represented, P. 53. and the Tendency of
some Men's Opinions untruly and disingenuously stated: it is as evident as any
thing can be, that this Writer's Doctrines and Opinions are in themselves, and
in their own nature, Heretical, Antichristian, Polytheistical, and Basphemous.

The Unitarians are charged without Reason, and without Scripture by their
Adversaries, with teaching Doctrines that lead to Infidelity and Atheism: Would
to God this detestable Charge were no more true, when brought against the
Socinian Slain and his Tritheistic Brethren! But whilst they continue to hold
and profess that there are three infinite Minds, three eternal Principles,
three Almighty Creators, three distinct individual most perfect Beings, three
coequal Divine Persons or Deities, to whom they pay distinctly Divine Honors
and religious Adoration, and anathematize and persecute to the death, when the
State permits 'em, all others of a different Opinion: They must excuse all the
thinking and considerate part of Mankind from embracing their Faith, and
believing their Contradictions.

And the Tritheists must pardon the Unitarians, who heartily love their
Persons, but detest their Errors, if they are compelled to declare that
Tritheism, or the Doctrine, Belief, and Worship of 3 infinite Beings, Minds, or
Gods, with distinct and coequal Veneration, is no Scripture-Doctrine, no
Scripture-Faith, no Scripture-worship; but a horrible abuse of the true
Christian Religion, a violation of the Law of Nature, a stumbling block to the
Jews and Mahometans, and a revival of Polytheism, or a plurality of Gods.

And it is in vain for the most learned Tritheists, and much more vain for these
illiterate Tritheists, to set about the confuting us, with one Book and
Pamphlet after another. We know what they can say, and what they dare not say:
We see what they drive at, and guess at their Designs; but till these equivocal
Terms in their Books, viz. Nature, Essence, Person, Subsistence, Hypostasis,
and the like, are better explained, and set in their true light, we defy our
Tritheistic Adversaries, with all their craft and subtilty, to purge themselves
and their Writings from Sophistry and Equivocation.

And until they confess one infinite Mind, or intelligent Being, even the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be the most High God, and that no other
Being is to be compared, or equally adored with him (because all other Beings
are from Him, and he is from none; because all other Beings besides him have a
Father, Cause, or Author of their Beings, and he has none; but by the
Confession of our Tritheistic Opposers, and all the Tritheistic Creeds, is the
Fountain and Origin of all Beings) Until they will acknowledge this first of
Beings to be the most High and Supreme God, or God in the chiefest Sense, and
give Him peculiar Honor and Adoration as such: We will tell 'em beforehand
their Undertaking to confute us is desperate, and our Principles are
irrefutable: tho they should write in defense of Tritheism as many Volumes in
Folio as there are Stars in the Firmament, or Sands on the Sea-shoar, they will
never be able to prove their Tritheism either true or possible, as long as any
Bibles remain in Christendom, or Reason continues, in use among Men. But when
our Reason has left us, and our Bibles are gone; they may decree and impose to
good purpose, tho they can never dispute with success.

In the mean time, there is not a single Unitarian, but will heartily pity the
mistaken Tritheists, who have a Zeal, but not according to knowledge; and be
always imitating the Blessed Jesus in praying in the same manner, and to the
same Object as he did, even to his Father and our Father, to his God and our
God, that the thoughts of their hearts may be forgiven 'em, Joh. 20.17. that
they may know the Father to be the only true God, and glorify him, chap. 17.3.
even as Christ himself glorified him, chap. 17.4. that they may be sanctified
through the Truth, and like true Worshipers worship the Father in Spirit and in
Truth, as Christ himself did, Joh. 14.16. For the Father seeks such to
worship him, who bow their Knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto
whom be glory in the Church by Jesus Christ throughout all Ages, world without
end. Amen. Ephesians. 3.14-21.

Now the God of patience and consolation grant, Romans 15.5, 6. that the
Unitarians, and their mistaken Brethren the Tritheists, may be of one Faith,
likeminded one toward another, according to Jesus Christ; that we may with one
mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: And
let all the People say, Amen.

Thus, Sir, have I given you some general Remarks upon these two new Writers,
and their successless Performances: and tho my leisure will not admit me, and
the merits of the Authors do not require me to make a distinct reply to every
particular Text they pervert; yet I Am satisfied these few Observations and
Replys I have made, are sufficient to obviate the Scruples they have raised in
the Minds of a few unwary Christians. I am,

SIR, With great Veneration, Y. v. h. S-t, A. B.

The Oxford- Decree Englished. At a Meeting of Mr. Vice Chancellor, and the
Heads of Colleges and Halls in the University of Oxford, November. 25. 1695.
UPON occasion of a Sermon lately preached before the University of Oxford, in
the Church of St. Peter's in the East, on the Feast of St Simon and Jude last
past, these words amongst others were publicly spoken and asserted, viz.
[There are three infinite distinct Minds and Substances in the Trinity] Item,
[That the three Persons in the Trinity are three distinct infinite Minds or
Spirits, and three individual Substances,] which words gave many Persons just
cause of Offense and Scandal.

Mr. Vice Chancellor, and the Heads of the Colleges and Halls being now met
together, in their General Meeting, judge, declare, and decree, That the
foresaid Words are false, impious, and heretical; disagreeing and contrary to
the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and specially to the Doctrine of the
Church of England, publicly received.

Wherefore they order and strictly enjoin all and several the Persons committed
to their Trust and Care, that for the future they do not maintain any such
Doctrine in their Sermons, or elsewhere.

By the Decree of Mr. Vice Chancellor and the Heads.

Ben. Cooper, Notary Public, and Register to the University of Oxford.

There was added in the London Account this Postscript, viz. [ It may be noted,
that the Propositions abovementioned, are Dr. S -- k's, in his Discourse of
the Trinity, and the Defenders of it; and wrote against by the Animadverter,
etc.

FINIS.

