THE World Bewitched, etc.

Vol. I.

THE World Bewitched; OR, An Examination of the Common Opinions CONCERNING
SPIRITS: Their Nature, Power, Administration, and Operations.

AS ALSO, The Effects Men are able to produce by their Communication.

Divided into IV Parts. BY BALTHAZAR BEKKER, D.D. and Pastor at Amsterdam.

VOL. I.

Translated from a French Copy, approved of and subscribed by the Author's own
Hand.

Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1695.

TO Mr. Feyo John Winter, Doctor of Physic; Formerly Burgermaster and
Counselor of State in the City of Leeuwarden; As also Deputy to the States of
Frieseland; And Elder of the Walloon Church in the same Town.
Most Honored Cousin,
I Am bound to you since a long time with such particular Obligations, and my
Duty ties me to you with such strict Bands, that there is no Man in the World,
besides the own Brothers of my Dear Spouse but I ought to prefer you before
him. I have dedicated to them the two first. Books of the World Bewitched, and
amongst all my Friends, whose Names I intend to prefix to each part of the
French Translation, I have made choice of you for this, that is, the first of
all, and going to be published. It Is above thirty years since I have the Honor
to be acquainted with you, and about fifteen, since I am allied to you by your
Marriage with the Lady Henriette Fullenia, the nearest Cousin of my Spouse,
both from Father and Mother's side. It Is likewise very near twenty years, since
I was so happy as to see you a Member of the first College of the States of
Friesland, on whose direction the good or had success of my Affairs depended at
that time. When occasion has offered it self, I received from you Testimonies
of a just favor and an ingenious distinction. Your Marriage tied more strictly
the Bands of the Friendship you had for me; and I have had the pleasure to see
it lasting to this day. You gave me lately an obliging proof of it, when you
were pleased to present from me to his Highness, Prince Henry Casimir of
Nassau, Hereditary Governor of our common Country, etc. my Friesland's
Divinity; which I had taken the liberty to dedicate to him. For I was not in a
capacity of presenting it my self; because the great Employments of his
Hig^^ess calling him at every moment to different parts of his Government, I
could not be sure so much as an hour of the place, where I might meet with him.
This circumstance procured me the Honor of receiving by the next Post a Letter
from that Prince, containing very express Marks of his Affection; in which he
also declared, that my Dedication had not been unpleasant to him. But I have
still another reason that ingages me to present you with the Translation of
this Work, with which you seemed very much pleased. It Is your particular
Concern in the Affairs of the Churches, in whose Tongue it is written, and in
general in all those of our Holy Religion: To this you incessantly apply your
self with a Zeal worthy of Imitation and Admiration, discharging still in the
Walloon Church of your City, the Honorable Function of Elder, which you have
formerly discharged many times; as well as in the Church of your Mother Tongue.
Farther, I thought fit to cause this Treatise to be Translated my self, lest
some others should undertake it, having been advised, that the Translation of
it had been begun in this Town, and elsewhere, without my knowledge; which
however is happened, but since the late Synod of North-Holland; the proceedings
that were made against me, having only been of use to excite the curiosity of
the public, as to this matter. And therefore I have prevented the designs of
those, who intended to make this Translation, and provided at the same time,
lest any should appear under my name, without my consent, and my revising of
it, as I may assert that I have done this. It comes from a Frenchman, who has
carefully applied himself to the study of our Tongue, and seems to me to
understand his own very well. For though I am not conversant with it so far, as
to have Translated my own Book my self: yet I think that I am able to judge,
that I should not have better succeeded, nor more expressly have rendered my own
Thoughts, if I had been in a capacity of undertaking it. Besides, this
Translation being almost verbal, because the quality of the Work required it;
It is so much the more difficult, and worthy that its defects should be
overlooked. I think at least, that no other difference will be perceived,
betwixt it and the Original, but that of the Tongue; no real change having been
made in it. I own that several matters of Fact have been added, and inserted in
diverse places of this Book; but nothing has been left out, so that the Reader
shall have no occasion of complaining of his Losses; but rather of being glad
of the new advantages that accrue to him. I also have added after the Preface,
an Abridgement of the whole Work, as a preliminary, that gives a general view
and notion of it, including in substance, the Contents of the three last Books,
that are to be successively Translated; the second being already far advanced.
I only earnestly wish, that you may be as well satisfied with my Dedication, as
I am with this Translation. So that all that I have to do, is to commend you,
and all your Friends and Relations, to the Grace of God, which I heartily beg
of you all. But lest any French Copy, of any of these Four Books, should be
published under my name, besides, those that are printed in this Townt for
Peter Rotterdam, the first of which is dedicated to you; I declare that I own
no other, but such as are subscribed by me, as this is, wherein I assure you
with my own Hand, that I am,

Most Honored Cousin, Your most Obedient, And Obliged Servant. B. Bekker.
Was Subscribed in the Original, Amsterdam, July 18, 1693.
A PREFACE, TO THE Whole WORK in General, AND THE First Book in particular.
IF ever any Author thought the Treatise he was publishing, needed an
Introduction, methinks that I may not only have the same Opinion of this; but
even that I cannot forbear it. Two particular Reasons oblige me to it, one of
which concerns the circumstances of what happened during the impression of this
work, and the other, has relation to it is contents. Both these Reasons has
something extraordinary, but the latter especially appears still more strange,
because of the former; and therefore I intend to give the Reader some
explanation upon both.

Having formed a design to write upon the matter treated of in this Book, I
begun Eight Years ago in my Preface to the Book of Comets, to give some hints
of what I intend to explain here more particularly. I had chosen for the
subject of my public Sermons, the Prophecy of Daniel, when I was come to the
11th v. of the 2 Chapter, in which the Magicians confess, they were not capable
of expounding the King's Dreams; I drew from that Declaration, such inferences,
as evidently showed what must be believed concerning the extent of knowledge,
ascribed to the Devil; afterward judging it convenient to examine his power,
and whether it extends as far as is ordinarily said; the first occasion I had
of ascending the Pulpit, I took my Text on Exodus Chap. 8. v. 18th, and
examined why the Magicians could not as easily produce Lice, as Frogs and
Serpents. The late Sieur de Tamininga, Lord of Belleingweer, a learned and
pious Gentleman, heard my Sermon, and liked it extremely; thinking that if what
I had proposed, were printed, it would obtain the approbation of understanding
persons, and inform the ignorant. He exhorted me himself several times to print
that discourse, and employed other persons to desire me to do it; but I was so
taken up with other business, as may be judged by the Books I have published,
and by the assistance I have afforded my friends in the Edition of theirs, that
I could not answer his expectation so soon, tho never absolutely denied to do
it. Since that time, I preached twice again on the same matter, on occasion of
the Witch of Endor, whom Saul went to consult, and of the Dev^^ who tormented
Job, many persons pressed it hard upon me, to publish my Opinion on this
subject. In 1689, as I was explaining in the Hospital Church, the 19th and
following verses of the 5th Chap. to the Galatians, I searched deeper into this
matter, expounding the Greek word (...), which the French and Dutch
interpreters have translated Poisoning, and the English, Witchcraft. But as I
could not comprise in a Sermon, whatever was to be said upon this subject, I
referred my hearers to a fuller instruction, in a larger volum that I was going
to publish. I have given an account why it was not undertaken before, and now I
shall inform the Reader, why it has been so long in the Press.

Going from Francker to Loen, where I was called to be a Minister, I promised
my Bookseller H. Nauta, that to keep our old acquaintance, I would give him to
print the first Treatise I should compose in Holland; almost as soon as I was
come thither, there appeared a Comet in the Years 1680, and 1681, which gave me
occasion to write a Book, Entitled, An Examination of Comets, which I put out
in 1683. But as the Bookseller desired the Book might be somewhat larger, and I
found it inconvenient to take care of a long impression beyond Sea; I obliged
him to continue it for that time; promising him, that, if he ever reprinted
the same Treatise, I would either increase it; or add some other to it. I had
no occasion to keep to the first promise, no body having said or written any
thing against it, that required a more particular explication. And therefore I
thought fit to hold my Second promise, by adding to my Examination of Comets,
another tract upon a matter somewhat relating to it, and on which I had
meditated a long time. To that end, I composed an Examination of Magic, and
Witchcraft, that contained very near as many sheets as that of Comets; and I
caused in Autumn last, a new Edition to be made of the latter, on purpose to
join it to this new Treatise. But having sometimes especially in November 27th
1689, publicly confuted, in the Pulpit, the common Opinion; two days after, a
Book was delivered me coming from England, where it was Printed, and Entitled,
A Relation of the discovery of some Witchcrafts, in which very many particular
things were said to be contained. I thought by the reading of it, that it would
quickly be translated into our Tongue, to satisfy the curiosity of People. And
as my Opinions are directly opposite to what is laid down in that Book, I
perceived it might breed prejudices against what I had so freely and openly
declared in the Pulpit, and such as I should scarce be able to destroy
afterward; because of the apparent strength of the proofs brought forth in
that work; for that Reason, I rather chose to translate it my self, than to
leave it to another, adding some remarks, fit to open the Eyes of the Reader,
by discovering the grounds on which such relations are laid; that he might not
thereby be in danger of being confirmed in the vulgar error; but that he might
make use of these Annotations, until my complete work concerning Magic and
Witchcraft were printed, which was to be, according to my expectation, in the
following Months. But besides the inconveniences of the Weather in Winter, and
the distance of the place where it was printed, viz. beyond Sea, together with
the Book of Mr. Ainsworth, for which the same press was employed, caused a
great deal of delay; during that time, I had leisure to review my Treatise of
Magic, and to increase it so, that it became much larger, than that of Comets;
besides, the translation and publishing of the English Book, procured me
letters from several learned Men, and afforded matter to many Conversations, as
well with those that were of my Opinion, as with those that were contrary to
it. Thus having had occasion to search deeper into this subject, to give new
explanations of my Opinion, and to confirm them by new Reasons; this works went
on always increasing, and the order and disposition of it was so far changed;
that from a small Book it became a bulky Volumn. In the mean while, the
impression that was made at Leeuwarden, seemed to me, not only slow, but also
very inconvenient, by Reason of the faults of the Press; of which I could not
so well purge it, but that the first Book is still full of them. I resolved
therefore to print the Second part at Amsterdam. Some time past, before that
could succeed; however, without any inconveniency to the Book, for the Reasons
just now alleged. The cause of this slowness being unknown, some were not
afraid to publish, that I had lost courage, and durst not attempt to enter the
Lists with the Devil: those Rumors, the questions that were continually put to
me, and the writings that were sent me, when my Treatise was just coming out,
obliged me to publish the two first Books, in which I mentioned something of
the two last, that they might the better please the Reader. Besides I hoped,
God would give me the Grace to make an end of the whole work, and to add what
the Readers might think wanting or convenient. But it could not be performed
before the end of 1690, as I intended it, and the Bookseller desired it, for
his own Interest; for the Frost that came in on a sudden, retarded the
execution of it; it being not possible to send the Three last sheets to
Leeuwarden, and to get from thence those that were printed there, by reason of
the Ice that put a stop to Navigation; so that I could have no Copy to present
my friends with. I hoped still however that it might be done, but the Frost
continuing, my Book thus imperfect was published, and came without my knowledge,
into the hands of many People in Friezeland. It was therefore only seen by
piecemeal and without coherency, which gave occasion to some of the Readers,
and others that had heard of it, publicly to pass heard, judgments upon it;
even some intended, as I am informed, to make me explain my self more
precisely, had I not done it in the Book it self. For at last, when they read
it entire and in order, they all agreed, I had given all the explications that,
could be wished, either as to the Reasons that had moved me to write it; or as
to to the scope I proposed to my self, which appears in the Preface, and in the
first Chapter of the Book; or as to the necessity and usefulness of its
publishing, which I have shown in the same Chapter, and the last but one. They
were just the places that were wanting, for which Reason I wrote to the
Bookseller of Leeuwarden, and forbad him to give out any Copy of this Book,
until the whole was complete. Besides, during the Frost, I had time to add two
Chapters to the end of the Second Book, and to enlarge the Preface, in order to
inform the Reader of my Opinions, and the purity of my intentions, which has
not proved altogether fruitless; for I have heard that most of those, that have
read the Preface and the work afterward, have been satisfied, as they have
told one another and my self; whereas those that had taken upon them to
criticize it, had read but some loose parcels of it, or had not read it at all,
or perhaps had not so much as vouchsafed to read it.

Things remained a while in that state, every one enquiring after the Reason
that hindered the publishing of my Book, and how it happened that I had none my
self, since it had been sold in Friezeland for some time. The Thaw came at
last, and many Persons arrived with News of the Edition of my Book, but brought
no Copies along with them, save some privately, and as stolen goods; then every
body wondered, a Book should have been put out, in these Provinces, and it
should not be found in Holland, where the Author lived; and not only my Brother
Pastors should not have seen it, but I should say, I had none my self to
present them with. At last I received 26 Copies of it from Leeuwarden, but had
scarce one for my self; my friends came and took them away themselves, as they
were sowed; and most of those that asked for them, could not get 'em, unless
they came just when they were sowed up. So greedy Men are of Novelties,
especially when they can hardly get 'em.

Nitimur in vetitum, semper cupimusque negata. So much we love, and seek, what
is denied. However it be, the Book could not be exposed to Sale before the 11th
day of March. A long time after I had sent the last Sheets to Leeuwarden, to
Mr. Nauta, Bookseller, who had had the Book perfect in his hands for a long
time, A Bookseller asked 50 Copies from him, and thought to receive them
speedily, but had none sent to him. In the mean while, I find my self much
perplexed. I was desired, during two Months, by my best Friends, to communicate
this Work to them, which they had never seen, and had heard commended; for this
reason I wrote to Mr. Nauta, I would take all the Copies upon me; and pay them
at such reasonable rates, that he would be satisfied with it; he need but to
send them to me without delay, with the first Vessel. Then I thought to consult
with my Friends, whether I should sell the two First Books, that had already
appeared imperfect in Friesland, and elsewhere, or whether I should keep them
until the whole Work was finished. The first seemed to be the best Advice, to
avoid the suspicion, that I durst not publish my Book, or that I was forced to
suppress it, because of many things that were spread abroad to discredit it;
however, the last counsel suited better with my inclinations. I conceived that
a Work that was at first but a small Treatise, tho it had since been much
enlarged, would be more favorably received, and prove of greater use, if it
were given complete at the same time to the public; that the design and
cohering of it might be better seen, its Doctrines be more easily comprehended,
and the happy effects it was able to produce be more plainly perceived, which
is chiefly done by the last Part. But as the causes before alleged, had
already once smothered this design, so they did it again this time; for
perceiving by the Letters of Mr. Nauta, it was impossible to agree with him, as
to the price, and that it was unlikely he should ever do it, I was at last
forced to give up the Book to him, that I might (with the Blessing of God,)
pursue my design. So having altogether broken with that Bookseller, I have
agreed some Months since, with another of this City, Mr. Daniel Vanden Dalen,
to put diverse Presses going upon it, and re-print the whole Work, revised and
corrected, that I might incessantly publish all the four Parts, one after
another, in the form in wnich the Reader now sees them. For as to the 750
Copies which Mr. Nauta had printed of the two First Books, and are most of them
still upon his hands; they being an inconsiderble number, that could not go
very far, and the hasty Edition of the Book, being as yet imperfect, seemed to
give room to a new Edition, that the Pulick might be more speedily satisfied. I
therefore here present the Reader with the First Book, enlarged with a new
Chapter, that I thought necessary to add at the end. I hope, with the Blessing
of God, that the three others shall successively appear every Month; and I
persuade my self, that the reading of the First Parts, will excite some
Curiosities for the later; and that altogether may invite the Reader to a
serious consideration upon the Contents, and capacitate him to judge more
soundly of this matter than he did, while this Treatise appeared but in part,
and confusedly. This is what I had to say, as to this Edition, that was made in
such an extraordinary manner, and published without my knowledge.

I come now to treat of my scope, and what has obliged me to embrace the
Opinions I assert in this Book. In all my Studies I was always inclined, not to
rest upon probabilities, but to search into the whole matter, and to get a
clear and distinct knowledge of what I should know. Besides, many strange
things had happened to me in Friesland, upon the first Writings I had
published, and experience had assured me, how little one ought to rely upon
the Judgment of Men, especially when what they are accustomed to teach, is
called in question. For is it not wonderful that my Book upon the Catechism
should have been unanimously condemned in Friesland, tho amongst above 200
Ministers, who consented to that Judgment, none could allege so much as one
solid Reason against it; and that afterward it should have been twice
unanimously approved of, without any change, as to the Doctrine and the
controverted Points, having been made in it? This has confirmed me in this
persuasion, that a true Christian, especially a Doctor of Divinity, ought
groundedly himself to enquire into things, without resting upon the Judgment of
others, that he may obtain a full certainty of the object of his Faith, and the
matter of his Precepts. Since that time I resolved only to follow the Holy
Scripture, and Reason, in such things in which it ought to supply the silence
of the Sacred Writings, and to assure my self by those two means, of what I was
to believe, and to teach others, without taking the trouble of following the
steps of other Men; never putting Pen to Paper, but to write upon those
subjects, the importance of which I was convinced of, or had not been
sufficiently explained and examined. I have therefore endeavored to free, as
much as possible, our Holy Doctrine from such errors, as most Men appear to me
to be taken with; or at least, to set in order, such things whic I conceive to
be confused; Whether I was the first that discovered it, or whether I needed
only to promote what had been begun by others. There are other Reasons that
have engaged me in that design. For having sworn in the University of Franeker,
faithfully to maintain the pure Doctrine of the Reformed Church, and defend it
both by words and writings, in all necessary occasions; I may now say with
Prudentius, and as it becomes my Age.

Per quinquennia jam december,
Ni fallor fuimus: septimus insuper
Annum cardo rotat, dum fruimur sole volubili.
Vicinum senio jam Deus applicat.
Quid nos utile tanti spatio tempor is egimus?
Two score years are past, the third is running,
Since the Sun's light is upon me shining;
Old Age comes on, What have I been doing?
But it would be too long to enter into particulars, I shall only say that I
intend to employ the rest of my Life; first, to the Duties and Functions of my
Ministry, which the circumstances and largeness of this Town make more painful
than in other places; and than to make an exact enquiry after whatever is
falsely believed in the World, and the Erroneous Opinions that are entertained
without any other ground then that they are every day told and heard of. For my
most earnest desire is, to see Men become more wise and honest than they are,
th^ugh very few sincerely intend it, or at least do their Endeavors to attain
to that perfection; most ^art choosing rather to believe, and to do, what is
commonly believed and done, than to be at the trouble of freeing themselves
from Errors. In the mean while; what past in Freiseland, when my first Book
appeared abroad, ought to have taught me, how dangerous it is to write upon
such matters; there being neither favor nor profit to be expected for such
Authors as rid themselves from all prejudices; and having no regard, either for
the Credit or Power of the Faction, whose Sentiments they reject, resolve to
follow only what the Scripture teaches, or Reason dictates to them, and to
embrace no Opinions, but such as are founded upon those two Grounds. Perhaps
after my Death the usefulness of this Undertaking will be known; and though I
dare not hope that it will be done in my Life time; yet I publish it my self,
to learn the Judgment of the public, to defend my Works, and to enlarge or
correct them, according to the Light I may acquire anew, or that shall be
communicated to me. For methinks, I am more able to do it, and to be
Interpreter of my own Words and Thoughts, than those that may afterward adopt
my Opinions, and have some regard for my Memory.

As for the rest, though my intention and scope may be plainly perceived by the
first Chapter; yet I shall add, that no Men in the World are more remote from
any Atheistical Sentiments, more persuaded of the Divinity of the Holy Writ,
and more disposed to render to God the Honor and Reverence due to him, than
those, who as I am, are opposed to the common Opinion of the Power and Virtue
of the Devil. Whoever shall read this Book with attention, and without
partiality, will undoubtedly be persuaded of it; at least, I mean, that there
is enough to satisfy those that absolutely reject the Principles of Descartes,
concerning the use of Reason; and at the same time such as give too much extent
to those Principles; and that those two Parties will equally approve of the
manner in which I distinguish Spirits from Bodies, and both from God, without
however establishing any thing as to their Operations that cannot be proved by
plain and necessary Inferences. So that I powerfully confute the foolish Errors
of Spinosa, who confounds God and Nature together. I believe not that there is
any Author, who has more solidly established the infinite difference that there
is betwixt God and the Creature, and the inconsistency of the Properties of
Bodies with those of Spirits, then I do here; as was necessary to be done to
lay a firm foundation to this work, that is wholly grounded upon that
Principle, at least as to those things that are the object of the Light of
Reason. Besides, I have this internal satisfaction, that I confirm by an
evident proof the Doctrine of our Churches, that tends still to diminish the
Honor paid to the Creatures, in order to increase that which is due to God.
This Book witnesses for me that I set up the Glory, Power, and Wisdom of the
Sovereign Master of the World, as much as they had been taken from him, to be
communicated to the Devil. I banish from the Universe that abominable Creature
to chain him in Hell, that Jesus, our Supreme King, may more powerfully and
securely reign. Though his Empire that is to endure to the last day, is
likewise to subsist in the midst of his Enemies, that are here upon Earth, that
is amongst the People of the Devil, or such in whom Sin keeps still imprinted
the Image of the Devil. With that intention I am not afraid to explain in my
second Book several passages of the H^ly Writ in another Sense, than they have
hitherto been taken: But if by the publishing of such new explications, one
aimed not at the Honor of God, and only sought to impair and stain the
Reputation of those that are of contrary Opinion, he should take more to heart
his own Credit than the Glory of God. As for me, who have formerly been in
Opinions contrary to those I speak of, and which are still held by the greatest
part of Men; I willingly propose my present Sentiments, but only with a sincere
intention of glorifying God, and bringing Truth to Light. I think not therefore
to be blameable for not sticking to the vulgar explications, I had formerly
followed, and preferring before them those of some Persons, who have not done
what I now suppose to be obliged to do. Yet I am not alone in these Opinions;
for they are agreeable to those of many others, some of whom have appeared in
the World even after me. And though they have produced and asserted in Writing
those new Interpretations and Translations of the Bible, but by way of
Exercises, and to show what subtilty and parts they acquired in their Youth, by
the alteration of such Expositions as had learned Men for their Authors; yet as
for me, methinks that in my old Age I ought to make use of my own Eyes, and to
speak with liberty. As for the rest, if there are amongst us, who, to multiply
the proofs of our Opinion, and diminish those of the contrary Party, stretch
the Holy Scripture too far, that is their own fault, and not ours. We presume to
be provided with better Arms, to dcfend the Fundamental Truths of the Church.
But it must be observed as a general fault, that the reading of the Bible is
undertaken with a Mind full of its own prejudices, or those of its Masters; and
that it is generally explained according to those Notions, without any other
Reason or Ground but that of chance, or of some cases that have occasioned the
choice of such parts as is then followed. I take the Vail from those
prejudices, and show what Method is to be observed to undertake the explication
of the Holy Writ, without any prevention. For I hold it for certain, that none
would have explained such passages of the said Writings as I here treat of, so
as they are usually Interpreted, had he not been imbued with a prejudice of the
great and extraordinary power of the Devil, or had he not intended to confute
some particular Errors. I have already proofs of it; for several learned and
pious Persons have very much approved of my Method of examining those Texts,
and the searching into their Sense; and having treated in my Sermons of the
chief Points of this subject, I am informed that many People show a great
impatience to see my Writings upon it. I have frequently been in Conversations,
where the most important matters, especially those that are contained in my
second and third Book, were discussed, and they seemed partly satisfied with my
Explications, and in hopes of being fully convinced by those they expected from
me: I refer my self to their Judgment, to know whether their expectation has
been deceived or fulfilled; being persuaded that if they do not agree to some
particulars, yet they will approve of my intention, and contribute their
utmost, that the greatest part of the things I propose may be received and
relished. If I were so capricious as to disturb my self on account of what may
be said and believed of my design, and to make more of the number than of the
quality of the Readers, I should undergo great hardships: For I doubt not but
most Men, having little meditated upon this matter, will think that I commit a
great Sin in publishing this Treatise; not however in reference to the first
Book, where I only relate the various Opinions of the several Nations from very
credible Authors, without declaring my own Sentiments, or confuting those of
others. Neither do I believe that the two last parts will be found fault with,
but only the second, where the most important Doctrines are discussed, will
raise some difficulty, and not please every one. It will especially seem
strange, that I make so little account of the Devil, and endue him with such an
inconsiderable Power. For matters have been carried so far, that some Men think
it a piece of Piety to ascribe many Miraculous Effects to the Devil, and to
hold for rash and impious People those that cannot believe, that he does what
is testified by thousands of Witnesses. If any contradict their Opinion, he is
taken for an Atheist, that is, such as denies the Existence of one God, though he
is only guilty of the Crime of not believing two, viz. a good and a bad. But
those that are of your Mind, deserve themselves to be called Ditheists, or such
as believe two Gods: [as the Arians] got the name of Tritheists, because they
believed three Gods [of different nature.] If any desire to put a new name upon
me, in reference to my Opinions, I willingly yield to that of Monotheists, that
is, who believes but one God, and one Savior Jesus Christ; upon whose words I
wholly trust, where he says, Fear not them who kills the Body, but fear him who
can destroy both Soul and Body, Mat. 10.28. I fear him much less, who has no
power either over Body or Soul, and trouble not more my head with the judgments
of those Judge 6.13. In the name of the Lord the God of hosts, I encounter that
Goliath; let us see who will lend him a helping hand! It any think to have
reasons so strong as to confute my Opinion, I desire him to propound them, with
as much softness, as I am favorably disposed to hear them; but at the same
time I entreat him to spare to himself and to me, an unprofitable labor, and
to wait till he have read the whole work, from the beginning to the end, before
he makes his objections. By those means he shall perfectly know whether those
particular and private places which he has read, and with which he had not been
satisfyd, have afterward been explained, and made worthier of his approbation,
by the concatenation of the whole Treatise, and the reasons contained in it:
For it would be troublesome to view and examine again, all the places of my
Answers I would quote. So that it must not be take ill, if I give none to those
that shall follow another Method, and would make me waste with them the time
that can be better spent.

Revised, enlarged, and given to the Printer, March 16. 1691 May 26. 1691
August 1. 1691


I may assure here, that nothing has been taken off, from what is contained in
the Edition of Leeuwarden. It Is true, something has been added in some places,
for the better understanding of the matter; as may be seen at the end of the
Original, where a whole Chapter has been added, in which, the last Chapter of
the Friesland Edition is comprised. It seeming to me it was convenient to
enlarge a little more in that place; more exactly to show the use and design of
the search I make in this First Book, after the various opinions of all
Nations, and better to discover the foundation of those prejudices, that have
so long kept us from examining the true state of the matters contained in the
following Parts. Many other additions have been made to the French Translation,
which it is not needful precisely to mark. The curious may compare the
Translation with the Original.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE Whole Work; What has been the design of the Author, and
what is his Method.
AS the two first Books of this work that I published at first, have been
differently received, for Reasons alleged in the Preface; It will not be amiss
to represent to the Reader, what has been properly my design in these four
Books, that I have Entitled, The World Bewitched, nor to show what foundation
I built upon, and what way I take to find out the truth. For although I express my
self clearly enough in the beginning of the work, and in the Preface to the
first part; I know nevertheless, that is not sufficient to destroy the
prejudice wherewith, the learned themselves appear more biassed than the
Vulgar; which I should never have thought; but it seems at present, I have
found out the Reason, which is, that the most part of those which do not put
themselves to the trouble to pass through all the Degrees of the Schools,
aspire to Sciences and sublime knowledge, but for their particular pleasure;
they are the People that love liberty, and to whom it matters not, who is the
Master that instructs them, provided that they may learn something; or if they
are greedy of rarities, they have not so much respect to the mode, nor to that
which is New or Ancient, as to the beauty of the matter, and to that of the
work. On the contrary, it is with those who pass through the Schools, as with
those who live in Shops, where every one has his way, every Master has his
Method in the work he makes. In one Town they make the same things after one
fashion, and in another, after another; when one is taken up with the mode, he
often rejects what is pleasing, without any other Reason, then because it is
not as commonly used in the World. And we have a strangeness for all novelties,
so long as they have not the common vogue; although otherwise, we might approve
them, and have them cheap enough; but as soon as Custom has introduced them,
one begins to seek them out, and to be disgusted at the former. Sciences are
subject to the same inconveniences. Those that we send to the Schools,
continue in the road which has been marked out to them for their exercises;
they endeavor to form themselves upon the model of those which have most
reputation, or of those who are the nearest to their first prejudices; so this
is disapproving the part they have taken, not to be apt to take any, and to
preserve our own liberty, and thus we expose our selves very much; but one runs
a greater risk, if willing to ascend higher, and search things in their
Fountains, it happens at last, that we find our selves out of the ordinary
Road, and that we are obliged to take another. Hinc illae lachymae, From thence
proceeds all disorders.

The common Opinion of the Devil, of his knowledge, power, and Operations, and
of People which are accused of having commerce with him, began by little and
little to become very suspicious by the help of natural light, which I have
common with others, which was strengthened and purified by the Scripture; so
after I had well examined it, I was in doubt, whether I ought to maintain it
any longer, or abandon it, not only by Reason of the truth, but also because of
the Piety which it seemed to contradict: My Conscience it self compelled me to
it; for I was obliged to answer those that asked me, and to take care of my
Conduct, because of the disposition I saw the People in. It was the Duty of my
charge, and every Day occasions offered themselves, my pain increased every
moment, by the continual necessity I found my self in, to speak and act as
others did, or to oppose the public with words or actions, which agree not
with my Character, which is to be complaisant, and to agree with all the World,
as much as is possible. Besides I found not as yet foundation enough to act
after an other manner, which made me at first resolve to make an exact search,
after the Original of this common and general Opinion, to know whether it was
founded upon truth. But because I make this examination, a priore and not a
posteriore, as they in the Schools, I have proposed the state of the Question,
but at the end of the first Book; where I discovered in the 22th Chapter, how
many of the Opinions, which I have related; (which are all those that ever were
in the World upon this subject,) The Protestants have at last got together, and
formed those which they retain to this Day. In the 23th Chapter I compare them
with the Opinions of other Nations; and in the 24th Chapter, I show by what
means they have been introduced amongst us; and what keeps us so strongly tied
to them: So in the first Book, I examine what is the rise of the Opinion
concerning the Devil, and in the following Books, I discover what sentiments we
ought to have of him.

An Abridgement of the First Book.
IN the First Book I run over all the World, to find whence this Opinion has
its Original. And for this purpose I have omitted neither time nor place. I
observe that the subject ought to be examined in two Respects; In respect of
the Devil, to find what is his Knowledge and Power; and in respect of Men, to
see what they learn and effect by his means. But because these things are
preternatural, or are so thought to be, and that by consequence they are known
only to God, I have judged it necessary, to know what are the Opinions of Men
concerning the Divinity, and Spirits in general, either good or bad, and of
human Souls separated from their Bodies by death, which are also Spirits: I
make a search of all these things, First, in the Books of the Ancients, and
afterward in the Moderns of all Religions, and amongst all Nations,
distinguishing them into Pagans, Jews, Mahometans and Christians, in reference
to the present state of the World. I begin with the Ancient Pagans, which are
for the most part Greeks or Romans, known to us by Greek and Latin Books they
have lest us: which I treat of in the 2d, 3d, and 4th Chapters; for there are
very few Histories of other Countries and other People, which are come to our
knowledge. There you see what they believe touching Gods, and Spirits, which
are neither Gods nor human Souls; and as to the estate of the Souls after
death: You read there also what means they used to attain that knowledge, and
to operate things beyond the power of Nature, by the means of those Spirits,
such as they believe them to be. I come afterward down to our time, and
examine all the Pagans in the World; first in Europe, in the 6th, Chapter;
after in Asin, in the 7th and 8th Chapters; then in Africa, in the 9th Chapter
and at last in America, in the 10th Chapter; which gives me occasion to
demonstrate in the 11th Chapter, that the Pagans as well Ancient as Modern,
have had a notion of the Divinity, that is all powerful, but that they have
associated to him, inferior Gods. That the Greeks have often called them
Demons, and likewise Gods, as most of the Pagans do at this Day; which Demons,
or inferior Gods, have every one their share in the Administration of the
Universe, directing the affairs of Men under the name and Authority of the
Sovereign God, and being as Mediators between him and Men: They converse also
with these last, who can, by their means, know and effect things above the
power of Nature. This knowledge gives some the name of Diviners, and these
Operations cause others to be called Magicians and Sorcerers; in consequence of
which, all the effects that we cannot give a Reason for, or find the cause of,
are attributed to these Demons or inferior Gods,

The Souls of the Dead are also ranked amongst the Demons, and according as
they have behaved themselves well or ill upon Earth, the good or evil which
happens to Men, is attributed to one or the other. It is that which has given
occasion to distinguish the inferior Gods, into good and bad.

After the Pagans, which know neither the true God nor Religion; I treat of
those which have the Holy Scripture among them, of whom the first are the Jews,
having known God a long time before all the others, and received his Word in
the writings of the Old Testament, where they have learned, that in truth the
Souls of Men are immortal, but that there are no Demons, or inferior Gods, such
as the Pagans fancy. That God alone by himself rules the Universe, and that
none can have knowledge or produce effects beyond the strength of nature, for
that belongs to God only. I observe farther, that Judaism in the state into
which it is insensibly fallen, since the coming of Christ, and as it is at this
Day, is very much mixed with Paganism, or at least very much infected with it;
whence proceeds the practices of Divinations and Sorcery, that are in fashion
amongst the Jews, Chapter the 13th.

After that I represent, that the Mahometans who acknowledge but one God, and
created Angels good and bad, and the Devil as chief of them. That the
Mahometans, I say, who have admitted the Books of the New Testament, and
reverence Jesus Christ as a great Prophet, have nevertheless mixed in all their
Opinions, a great many of those of the Pagans, which they have for the most
part received, and that they are no less inclined to Divinations and
Witchcraft, Chapter the 14th.

After the Jews and the Mahometans, who keep a kind of mean between the Pagans
and the Christians; I pass to these last, and distinguish them according to the
time, before Popery, under Popery, and since Popery. By this means I show, that
the primitive Christians since the Apostles, have insensibly introduced amongst
them, many Opinions of Paganism and Judaism, which have been increasing under
Popery till they attained to the heighest pitch, and that they had ascribed to
the Angels, the Souls of the deceased, especially to the Devil, all the
Miracles which the Pagans attributed to the Demons, the Devils, and inferior
Gods, Chapter the 15th to the 21.

In the mean while, I take notice, that among the Ancient Christians, there
arose a Sect called the Manichees, which had admitted in particular a great
many Pagan Opinions, and made the Devil almost equal to God. And I show, that
their Opinions have insensibly been propagated, in Christianity, even to our
times; after that I come to these last Ages, and to the Doctrines of the
Protestant Churches, among which I rank all those that are Called The Reformed,
that is, all those that are separated from Popery; upon which I remark, that
the more we are remote from Paganism, either for time or place, there is the
less credit given to all those things which respect the Devil and his Power.
Nevertheless I show, that part of our People, not having comprehended enough,
what are the foundations of the Protestant Doctrine, nor in what it differs
from Popery, are taken with the common Opinion of Devils, to whom as well as to
Men, that have Communication with him, they attribute more easily so many
marvelous effects, and so much above the power of nature, then others do, who
have more meditated and reflected upon those Doctrines and variations. Chapter
the 22th and 23.

Lastly having compared all these Opinions together, I conclude that the common
Opinion which has been in request amongst us to this day, had it is Original
from Paganism, not that the mere use of Reason should produce such thoughts,
but on the contrary, the ill use that is made of it. It is because we suffer
our selves to be seduced, and blinded by a false appearance of Piety, without
having recourse to the light of the Scripture, that we fall into such
Extravagancies, with which we are pleased, and love to continue in them. I
prove that these are thoughts that never were inspired to the Christians by the
Holy Scripture, by reason that those who read it less, and understand it less,
give more Credit to these sort of things, and because all the World is already
prevented before they read it, and meditate upon it.

For by these Reasons I endeavor to bring the Reader to consider, whether the
Scripture gives occasion to believe all those things that are ordinarily said
upon that subject, or to believe them so as they are said; or whether such
Sentiments have not taken root in us from our tender Youth, and been confirmed
by Custom. At best, I have a very strong presumption for that Reasoning, that
when we believe beforehand, that such a thing is, there is a great disposition
to turn our Reason, and the Expressions of the Scripture to that side, and to
believe that the inclination we have of it comes from Reason, and even the Holy
Writ leading us thitherto. Moreover, we receive the first Interpretations, and
the Commentaries upon the Scripture, from the hands of those ancient Doctors,
touching which I prove, Chap. 15. that they have been all prejudiced, some
more, others less, in favor of many Pagan Doctrines and Opinions, which have
unawares given occasion to that Sense in which the Scripture has been expounded
by them. These are the Contents of the 24th Chapters, and the conclusion of the
first Book.

An Illustration upon the three last Books in general.
In seems to me that for all these Reasons it is easy to conceive, that this
first part of my Treatise is not so unprofitable as some imagine. They will
that regard be had only to the second Book, and that the first should not be
insisted upon, because it consists but in Historical narrations, which conclude
nothing. But as far as I am capable to give a reason for the structure of my
own building; I say the Second Book is founded upon the First, according to the
proofs I am persuaded I have lawfully drawn by good consequences, Chapter 14.
For if it were otherwise, I had reason to be surprised; that of so many, who
exclaim against my Second Book, passing my First, none has taken notice of my
error in this point, and declared it to me, very few having done so much as
reflected upon it. But in vain they attack the Second, if they admit the First.
They in no wise see the end I aim at, nor the order I have followed, as ought
to be done, in an exact search after the Truth. But they undertake to confute
my Second Book, because it offers a larger field to their censures, by
different things expounded in an opposite Sense to that of the literal; like
those ignorant Disputants, who let slip the antecedent Propositions, and deny
the consequence that is necessarily drawn from it. I have reason to complain
for passing an overhasty judgment upon the half of my Work, without staying
till it appeared entire, and they have seen the following Part, and the
Connection; no circumstance of time required that precipitation, for I had not
lost a moment to publish the two last Parts, had they not hindered it by the
disturbances they have given me. I believe not that the whole extent of a
project, or its economy, may be perfectly seen, while it is but half done. So
it is but at present that some judgment may be past upon this work, since it
begins but now to appear altogether, and to be a perfect Body with all its
Members.

The Second Book and the Third, consist in the search after Truth, and what of
certainty may be had, as to the Sentiments that have been upon this subject of
Spirits, and Men who have communication with them, that is, with evil Spirts. I
examine in the Second Book, what concerns Spirits; and in the Third, what
concerns these wicked People, who seek to deal with them, according to the
division that I have proposed in the beginning of the First Book, Chap. 1.
Sect. 8. As to the Fourth, I shall say hereafter, what connection it has with
the former, and its usefulness.

Touching the method I take, to make, by degrees and in order, this Search
after Truth; if whatever I have written upon this subject, be attentively
considered, you will undoubtedly know the injustice of those who impute to me,
that I offer chiefly new Propositions of my own head; that I take the greatest
trouble imaginable to wrest the Scripture, and my reasonings to accommodate
them to it; or that I make use of Reason, as of a Rule with which I would
measure Scripture, and adapt it to the same. On the contrary, it is impossible
not to see, that I never had as yet the least thought of building upon such a
foundation; but that I have run through all the World, and all times, to
discover where Men may have found the foundations of these Opinions, which I
have undertaken to find out. For when one has attained to that knowledge, he is
in a condition to judge solidly, whether those Opinions or Practices are
grounded upon good or bad Reasons. I declare then, that I have not examined all
the diverse Opinions of the Pagans, Jews, Mahometans and Christians, as well
Ancient as Modern, nor their Doctrines and Practices, with an intent to give
explanations of them, nor to main^a^n them, or confute them, but only to
consider them in themselves, and to expose them as they are, without making any
Judgment, or producing any proofs to support or destroy them; which is an
extraordinary labor that none would ever undertake, unless carried by the
desire of truth. So far I lay no foundation. I that am a Christian and a
Protestant, and have no desire to become either Papist, Jew, or Pagan. If I
found nothing solid in the search I make, I consent that they continue to say
and believe concerning Spirits in general, and Devils in particular, all that
is wont to be said, and all that can be imagined.

But although, I have not as yet found the bottom I seek, and that neither
Popery, Judaism, nor Paganism considered in themselves, having there withal to
furnish me, I have notwithstanding a solid foundation, which is common to me
with those People: And I have further another particular, which I have in
common but with part of them. The first is reason, which is the light of all
men in general, when it is found pure in them, and neither perplexed, nor
obscured by prejudices or passions. The other foundation upon which I rest, is,
the Scripture inspireed by God, which is equally pure in it self; And and to
the reading of which we ought also to apply our selves, as if one had never
read them; that is to say, with an entire disingagement of all humane
prejudices; and from those that may proceed from the versions of the Hebrew and
the Greek, which are the original languages in which it has been written; he
must meditate upon it, without any regard to the interpretation which have been
made by all sorts of Doctors, either Ancient or Modern.

These two foundations are not Subordinate one to the other, but subsist
equally together. Philo the Jew, loving very much to search allegorical Sens^s
in Scripture, and not approving what St. Paul wrote upon the subject of Sarah
and Agar. Galatians, Chapter 4. v. 2. has been the first that has applied to the
Scripture and to reason the distinction of Mistress and Servant; saying, that
you must thereby understand, that Philosophy and humane understanding ought to
be submitted to the holy writ. This application is become so familiar to
Divines, that it has been received as an undeniable maxim, since Philo took a
fancy to propose it.

It is however a truth, that reason ought to precede Scripture, because the
latter presupposes the former; I understand sound reason, to which the
Scripture ought to present it self, and make it self known as divine; after
that, Reason comes to the help of Scripture, teaching us things wherein
Scripture is silent, and the Scripture likewise comes to assist reason,
discovering to us things which are above it, and above the reach of our
understanding. We must nevertheless confess, that the Scripture is above
reason, not as mistress, for they have every one their particular Empire and
Direction: But as being more noble and excellent; because it is in this God
manifests to us, things which no humane understanding ever could comprehend, 1
Corinthians 2.9. notwithstanding it happens sometimes that they meet both in
the same way, where they lodge together in the same house, and by consequence
they often lend one another the helping hand, but they do it freely, although with
this difference, that reason as an inferior, always shows a great respect for
the Holy writ. When therefore it is said a Christian ought to submit his
understanding to the word of God; it must be understood, the understanding such
as it is in the Estate of corruption, obscure by he Clouds that surround it,
and infected by the st^ins that d^^^^gure it. And such it is in respect of
things which are above our reach, which are only manifested to us in the word
of God; and which we are obliged to believe as Scripture discovers them, although
we comprehend them not. But it does not follow from thence, that we ought to
believe those things, such as men teach us by their expositions, or even by
their translations, without a great certainty that they are faithful. So then
the word of God considered as it is originally, and in it self, and proceeding
from God without any respect to the interpretations that have been made by men;
and reason not such as is born with us, and when it is perplexed with
prejudices, and blinded with passions, but reason purified by the same Spirit
which has inspired the Scriptures; the Scripture I say and reason, are the two
only lawful and true grounds of the knowledge we can acquire, as well in things
Natural as Spiritual.

But there is yet another distinction to be made upon this Subject, that is,
that reason is the ground and rule of our knowledge in natural things, since
the Holy writ never treats of them purposely to instruct us, and discover them
to us, and that it speaks of them only as of subjects; the nature of which is
known to us as much as is necessary to make a good use of them, as well in
civil matters as in Spiritual. In what concerns our Salvation, the word of God
is the only ground of our Faith, and the rule of our Life without being in the
power of our reason, to add, to take from, or to change any thing in it, tho it
ought to be employed on this occasion, in two manners; the first is to try the
Scriptures that are said to be divine, in making use of the knowledge that Men
have naturally of God, to know whether the Scriptures present to them, such
Characters of truth as are agreeable to that notion. The second is, to
comprehend by the sense of the word contained in them, the doctrines there
proposed for our Salvation.

Further we must be persuaded, that Scripture and Reason are mutually helping,
to one another, in such matters as are of their Jurisdiction; for if the
Scripture speaks not sometimes naturally of things naural; Nevertheless as it
never proposes any thing false, it is the part of reason to instructus, after
what n anner the Holywrit must be understood in these places, according as the
matter required; as Psalm 19. touching the description of the course of the
Sun, and in many other like places. Or if there be any thing in nature, that
our proper experience has not sufficiently discovered to us to pass a safe
Judgment, and that we be obliged to rely upon the Credit of others, who perhaps
are not much more knowing than ourselves: The Scripture may also in this
occasion afford us some light; As in what is said of the Rain, In the Evening
and the Morning in Judea, Jeremiah 6.24. the little rain that falls in that
Country in the time of Harvest, and the few storms that are seen there, 2 Samuel
12.17. of the violence of the East wind upon the coast of Asia and Palestine in
the Mediteranean Sea, Psalm 48.8. and the like. But that which is most
considerable is, that the Scripture it self instructs us of some certain
natural things, to which the reach of reason should never attain, they are so
much above it. Such is the beginning of the World, especially that of Man, by
the immediate creation of God out of nothing. And such is the original of the
darkness and corruption in which reason and understanding is plunged, as they
may perceive by the help of such sound and pure remained light, as is in them.

These are the general Principles I presuppose, which I believe to be such,
that there is no Body, in what particular Sense he may be, that will contest
them. Upon which I come to examine what is true in all the relations I have
faithfully made in my first Book, and which are the Sentiments, or the ordinary
Discourses of all Men upon that subject. But it is manifest, that I have not
made to my self any particular Principles; and much less put Reason and
Philosophy above Scripture: Even the contrary will be seen as clear as the
Noonday, if you take the trouble to read my Writings with attention, and
without Prejudice: For I observe as to this respect, as well as in reference to
Comets, (in which Treatise I have followed the same order, of which I am amassed
it has not been perceived) the Question ought to be discussed of one side with
relation to Nature, and on the other with reference to Holy Writ; and therefore
I begin with Reason, which is inferior to the two others, to search into
Nature as in the lowest School, what it teaches most pure touching God and
Spirits, and particularly the Devil. For since the Pagans have presumed to say
so many things of the Demons, that they had not learned of the Scripture, of
which they had no knowledge, it seems to me that I am not in the wrong to
examine what there was that was grounded upon Reason; and of what Opinions it
seems to be the principle, or what are those that are derived from another
sourse. But as what I could discover by the deepest and most exact search I
could make in that lowest School, is yet but inconsiderable; I ascend a degree
higher, where I find a Mistress superior to this first, that is, the
Scripture, that I begin to consult in the 8th Chapter of the second part. Now
as in the seven first Chapters, where I walk as in Nature alone, I lay aside
Scripture to try how far human Understanding may attain by its own strength; so
I leave reason behind, as soon as I enter into the Sanctuary of the Word of
God, whose Oracles are infallible.

What I say here, that I have no longer recourse t^ Reason; I understand it in
this Sense, that I take (...) not as a foundation, or as a rule by which I may
expound the Scripture; But I exclude it not as a means, by which I acquire the
understanding of the Scripture; for on the contrary I cannot want it in this
respect, were it not for my Reason and Understanding in relation to God, I
should be in the same rank with Beasts; but it is not to Beasts that God
speaks, but to Men, that is, to rational Creatures. Reason may act alone
without Scripture, in things that are of its Jurisdiction, for Arts and
Sciences are the objects of Reason: From thence they proceed, and thereby they
are learned, that is, Man uses his own light for that purpose, without having
recourse to the instructions of the Word of God, and without having occasion
for them. But for the things of an higher Nature, which concern the Will of
God, with relation to the Salvation of Man, the Scripture is the true principle
and solid foundation upon which our trust is founded; although Reason ought to
concur with it, to understand and comprehend under the direction of the Spirit
of God, the Sense of the Scripture. So in this second examination of the second
part, where the certainty of the knowledge which proceeds from Scripture alone
is treated of, I am nevertheless obliged to employ my Reason, to the end it may
serve me to examine what Scripture contains; not that it may reach so far as to
comprehend the things themselves; but it ought nevertheless to comprehend what
the Scripture it self says, and that things are such as it says, although I
conceive them not such as they are.

But see here the knot of the difficulty, that is that every one cries out, that
the Scripture says such or such things, because he conceives that the Scripture
says them, and when the Scripture may be understood two ^^ys, we easily embrace
the Sense which best suites our Notions. If already, without too much
examination, we have sufferd our selves to be prejudiced with Opinions, of
which we would however be better satisfied, and find some more particular
instruction in the Scripture; It is not sought with that impartiality and
liberty of Mind which are necessary; but we still incline toward the
prejudices. If there is the least appearance that we may, by wresting the
Scripture, adapt it to the Sense we would have it, we never fail to do all our
Endeavors in order thereto, and afterward imagine to have found there
sufficient proofs in favor of our Opinion, because it seems to say what we
desire* As we see two Counselors explain the same Law, each for the advantage
of his Client; and that they never want Reasons on both sides to confute the
contrary Arguments; so that they appear each to have the right on his side; and
that it is very difficult to extricate what they have so much perplexed.

But it is said, that I my self do what I condemn in others; and for me, I
maintain that those, who are conscious of their guilt and worthy of censure,
cast that imputation upon me, seeing me explain so many passages in another
Sense than that with which they are prevented, without any other Reason than
because it is ordinarily received. They are persuaded that this change proceeds
in me from the same cause that I discover in them. See the true cause that
makes them say I wrest the Scripture; not that I really wrest it, but rather
that I keep not as a Slave to their Interpretations. But I make, say they, a
false Supposition, and after I endeavor to give to the Scripture a Sense which
agrees to that Supposition; That may be, but to know what it is, you must
examine after what manner I make the exposition of the Scripture; and whether I
turn it toward my prejudices; and therefore it is necessary that I explain a
little more clearly every one of the Articles I treat of.

The Principle, they say, I suppose is, that a Spirit cannot act upon a Body,
nor upon other immaterial Spirits. That Is the burden of the Song, and what
they make me say over and over every where, and is so confidently published,
that even my Friends can scarce forbear crediting it; as there come every day
occasions, which make me know it. It is a prejudice that passes from hand to
hand from one party to another: It insensibly spreads it self in all the Minds,
and in that Disposition the reading of my Book is undertaken: but they seldom
read it entire, from one end to the other, as it would be but just and
necessary to do; they only read some separate places, viz. those they are
referred to, and especially those in which I dispute upon the Operations of
Spirits: For I may boldly say, that of those that have read my Book with
attention, I find but very few which hold the same Discourses: On the contrary,
they take quite another party, viz. that of Truth. So that I defy all those
that have read it, to mark so much as one place where I put as a Principle of
my Opinion touching the Devil, That a Spirit cannot act either upon a Body, or
another Spirit. What is then the foundation of this noise, which is so strongly
and so generally spread abroad, and which is the cause of the great prosecution
that is made against me? It is this general prejudice which proceeds from the
common Exposition of the passages of Scripture upon this; that is, That a
Spirit, as a Spirit, and so much the more as it is a Spirit, can without Body
act upon all sorts of Bodies, and upon other Spirits. I require proofs of this
Thesis; and because this demand is unthought of and extraordinary, and upon
which by consequence every one is not prepared, my demand is taken for a
Negative. But before I lay my self that foundation, which ordinarily is not
called in Question, I examine first the Grounds upon which these People
themselves rest their Opinion, or upon what they ought to establish it,
according to the Idea they have of Spirits; I say, according to the Idea they
have of Spirits; for, whether according to the Principles of Descartes, they
distinguish them from Bodies the more neatly then other Philosophers do, or
that they grossly attribute something corporeal to them. These two Idea's
nevertheless proceed as yet equally, from that they conceive the Operations of
Spirits upon external Objects, whether Bodies, or other Spirits, as a property
of the Spiritual Nature; and from that they include them in the notion they
have of that Nature: and it is by this means, that instead of considering the
Body as an instrument which is necessary to the Operation of Spirits, or at
least proper to them, they look upon it as an obstacle to the liberty and
virtue of the Operations of a Spiritual Nature, Thence comes that every Body
cries ^ut so differrently against me, some saying, that Descartes's Philosophy
has spoiled me, and that is the fruit which is reaped by his Followers,
desiring to cast upon it the Errors that they accuse me of: Others, who being
in the same prejudice, yet are Cartesians at bottom, give out, that I
understand not the Philosophy of Descartes: But whatever my Learning and
Experience be, I intend to have to do but with sensible People, and leave the
others at full liberty to pass upon the Doctrine I teach, such Judgments as
they please.

An Abridgment of the Second Book.
As to what concerns my Second Book see the method I have taken. I begin with
the distinction of names, in fixing at first, what must be understood by a
Body, and a Spirit, to avoid all equivocations: which I have done in the first
Chapter. I speak of God in the Second, proveing not only, that the supreme
Being which I denote by that word, is only one, but also that there is not the
least communion between it and created things; directly confuting the Opinion
of Spinosa, upon this subject; which I pretend to do with more force and
evidence than any hitherto, because ordinarily they undertake to demonstrate by
the most perfect and incomprehensible Essence of God, the manner and virtue of
the Operations of created Spirits, which I absolutely reject, as a way which is
used to lead us into error. By consequence I cannot admit the arguments which
are taken from the nature of God, to demonstrate in what manner acts a Spirit
which is his creature, and has nothing common with him, but the name. After, in
the Third Chapter, I prove by arguments drawn from the sovereign perfection of
God, that there are none of those sorts of Spirits, that the Pagans esteem to
be Gods and ediators of Men toward the supreme Divinity; because the Reasons
of those that ground that belief upon the perfection of God, are directly
opposite to this perfection.

We then having taken off the imaginary Spirits, I come to those which we
certainly know to exist; that is, our Souls that are a part of our selves, and
which by consequence, are better known to us by our own experience; this is
treated of in the fourth Chapter, where I prove as much as is possible their
immortality, and that they subsist even out of the body: I employ for this
purpose, Reason and Scripture, because they are two ways, that equally conduct
us to the knowledge of the Soul; the first by experience and by our own
Consciousness; and the second by the particular instructions God gives us of
the estate of the Soul, after this life: but I quote not the Scripture in this
part of my Treatise, where I examine but what concerns nature only. Neither do
I judge it necessary to do it afterward, because it is a point that a
Christian looks upon, as already sufficiently established; and supposes it when
he will engage in a dispute upon this subject. Besides, I reject as
superstitions and fables, whatever, proceeds from the invention of Men,
especially of the Heathens, which is the matter of the fifth Chapter. So we
come to know with certainty, that such a Spirit, that is the Soul which truly
exists, has a body with which it lives, and without which it may still live,
and to reject all the other Spirits, of whom the greatest part of the World
falsely believe the existence. But besides those Pagan Opinions, we hear every
day mention made of Angels, not only by Christians, but also by Jews and
Mahometans. The Question is, Whether Reason alone is capable to discover to us,
that there are such Spirits, destitute of a proper and peculiar body? Upon this
point I show in the sixth Chapter, that our understanding without the help of
Scripture, cannot penetrate farther, than to comprehend, that it is possible,
but not certain, that there are Spirits. For this Reason, I have not judged it
necessary, to examine the Operations of these Spirits upon bodies, or upon the
other Spirits; because it seems to me ridiculous to trouble ones self with the
examination of the Operations of Creatures, the existence of which is not
established as certain. And therefore I have spoken in the first Edition, but
by the way in verse, which is at present, the seventh Sect. of the sixth
Chapter. And therefore it is manifest how wrongfully many People would persuade
themselves, that I have composed my work only, To deny the Operations of
Spirits upon bodies, and upon other Spirits. And besides, that I ground upon
this negative, all my explications of the passages of Scripture; but that I may
avoid this persecution for the future, I thought fit to insert in the new
Edition that is made of my Book, a whole Chapter between the sixth and seventh,
so that this new Chapter is at present the seventh, and the seventh is the
eight, and so of the others following. There I pretend clearly to show, that
the proofs related upon that subject, strike not at all to the end, and cannot
be considered as true proofs; which I mean as to what concerns nature, and as
to what Human Reason may conceive of it self, as destitute of help from the
word of God.

After that I come to the word of God, and then I employ Reason no more, but
keep to the Scripture only and I search in it, what it will teach me, touching
Spirits, which is now the question; there I find that under the name of Angels,
it gives us to understand, such Spirits as are the Ministers of God, toward
other Creatures. But there is nothing discovered to us, touching their Essence;
neither is their any thing in the History of the Creation, as to their
Original, or the manner of their fall; for which Reason, part of them was from
the beginning rejected from God; notwithstanding, the Scripture puts these two
things for certain, which is the subject of the eight and ninth Chapters.

I consider afterward the properties and Operations that the Scripture
attributes to them, and I endeavor to know, what is their proper nature, their
power upon other Creatures, either spiritual or corporeal. But the passages
that speak of these things do not appear to me to have been understood
otherwise, than those that attribute also to certain Men, that is, to Prophets
and Apostles, the works that they have done in dispensing the miracles of God.
That which gives me occasion to say, that as this dispensation surpasses the
force of those to whom it was entrusted, it cannot make us know what was their
proper nature, whence I take occasion to infer the same things touching Angels;
this is in the tenth and eleventh Chapters.

That which could not be discovered by the means of the name, Original, or
Operation of those Spirits, I endeavor to learn by the means of their orders,
of which is made an ample mention, in the twelfth, fifteenth, and nineteenth
Chapters of my first Book. But I draw not any light from thence, save that
Angels, as well good as bad, have each their head; that the Prince of good
Angels is called Michael, and that of the bad, named Diabolus, the Devil; that
is in the two and twentieth Chapter.

Yet I leave it not here; I consider again, that the Scripture attributes in
many places, some particular administration to Angels, I examined to know what
it is, first as to the good Angels in general, in the thirteenth Chapter, whom
the Scripture often makes appear, and always for particular revelations to the
faithful, either to work extraordinary miracles, or execute God's Judgments
upon Men by punishments, or by deliverances. But I conceive not that what is
said of this Ministry, is different from what is related of that of those holy
Men, who have been employed in the works of God and his miracles, that they in
no wise operated by their own virtue; by consequence I find nothing as yet
which may give me a certain knowledge of the proper Angels, their power, or
their Operations.

Afterward I come to a more particular examination of the principle passages,
especially of the manner of speaking of these three persons, which appeared to
Abraham, of the two others that appeared to Lot, Genesis, Chapter the
eighteenth and nineteenth: and in making reflection upon this History, and
comparing it with other instructions of the Holy Scriptures; It seems to me,
that I am in the right to conclude, that those Angels, that is to say, those
Messengers, were Men as they named themselves; not being able in the mean
while, to determine what must be understood by the Angel of the Face of God,
which conducted Israel in the desert, Exodus 23 Chap. and by the Angels, by whom
God gave his Law upon Mount Sinai. I propose only my thoughts, and what seems
to me may be understood by it, by a Collation of the passages of the Holy writ,
which make mention of the manner of that Divine conduct of the Israelites, in
the desert, Chap. 15.

I pass farther and examine what is said in the Scripture concerning the
Angels, with relation to some certain Persons, Nations, and Countries: And I
conclude from thence, that what has ever been variously written upon this
subject by particular Authors, is not founded upon Scripture, because all the
passages made use of to ground those Opinions, speak but figuratively.

At last coming to the Devil, and to the rest of evil Angels, I see that this
name has been given as well to ill Men, as to evil Spirits, and even first to
wicked Men. So I examine in the 17, 18 and 19 Chapters, what may most
conveniently be understood by the Chief of evil Spirits; but in making the
examination of all the particular passages which are usually applied to the
Devil, I find that the name of Satan or Devil, is used in some of these
passages, and that of Demon and of Daemonium in some others. And that there
are several denominations ordinarily applied to the Devil, which obliges me to
double my cares, that I may discover what ought to be understood by Devil,
especially in the History of the fall of the first Adam, and in that of the
temptation of the second. This is the matter of the 20 and the 21st, Chapters.
The other passages which contain the name of Satan, appear to me to be
different from these, of which I treat in the 23, 24 and 25 Chapters. I examine
afterward in the 26 to the 30, what are the Daemonia, and those that are
called Possessed. And lastly, in the 31st, Chapter, what must be understood in
all the other passages, where instead of the name of Devil, and of Demons,
others quite different are used.

And therefore as the principal operations attributed to the Devil in
Scripture, consist in the fall of the First Man, and the assaults he made upon
our Savior in the Desert; Thence I take occasion to examine, Whether those
Accounts may serve to the Opinion of the power of this evil Spirit, and of the
power of his operation upon Men? But it seems to me, that in the narration of
Moses, touching the fall of Man, that happened by the discourse of a Serpent,
nothing is said that ought to carry me to conclude, that the Devil himself can
act immediately upon the Soul and Body of Man. Here I keep to that discovery,
without going any further. Those that are of another Opinion, find that this
conclusion is drawn from that Relation, with a full evidence, and ask how the
fall of Man could happen otherwise; rendering themselves guilty of the same
fault they reproach me with, by pretending to know themselves, how the thing
came to pass, and to be able to render the reason of it. But he that judges,
ought not to speak of it so positively, declaring he knows nothing of it, and
finds nothing revealed upon that point, he is presently accused of denying the
same thing it self, and of not believing the matter of Fact, because he grants
he is not acquainted with the manner of it. The celebrated Voetius has however,
explained himself upon this subject very near, as I do, for in the first part
of his Disputes, page 915. speaking of the fall of Man, he says, upon the
Question, to know how, and in what manner? it is not possible to give so
satisfactory an answer; but it may be seen that there remains still something,
which the weakness of our understanding cannot comprehend, nor likewise how the
Devil seduced Eve.

Examining the temptation of our Lord by the Devil, I agree that the Tempter is
the evil Spirit; and I believe that the literal Sense may very well pass,
supposing that it was a wicked Man so called. But I show, that understanding
these words of the evil Spirit, literally; the quite contrary may be inferred
from what is ordinarily gathered from thence. Thereupon, if I be asked how I
understand and explain that narration? I answer, That I believe that the thing
was done in a Vision. See how Schultetus speaks, who as well as Voetius, has
been a member of the national Synod of Dordrecht: in his Exercit. Evang. Lib.
11. Chap. 3. the question is to know, whether the thing really happend, or in a
vision? he answers, it was in a vision, and after gives some reasons, which
however I do not judge so strong as mine. None has right to require from me,
that I should precisely explain my self upon the passages of Scripture, and
upon others: from which they suppose to draw strong proofs in favor of that
Opinion, the truth of which I here call in question; nor that I should declare
what sense I give them, especially to those who mention the fall of the first
Man in Paradise, and the temptation of our Lord in the Desert. For I have had
no other design on this occasion, but to examine whether these passages,
understood according to the Letter, afford sufficient proof to make us admit
the consequences that are usually drawn from thence, and to establish the
common Opinion which is had of the craft and power of the Devil to act upon
Men. If it were necessary to proceed farther, and to examine all these passages
to the bottom, in order to penetrate their true sense, a whole Book scarce
suffices. I refuse not however to do it, and hope to undertake it, as soon as
the Divine Providence will furnish me with occasion and leisure.

I show, as to other passages of the Holy Writ, that they cannot be understood
of evil Spirits, but only of ill Men; and of the works of God, not of those of
the Devil; tho without hesitating, these passages are ordinarily applied to the
Devil. I maintain in the 22 Chapter, that it was a Man which brought David to
number the People, Chap. 23. that the passage, wherein the fight of Michael
against the Devil, is mentioned, is very obscure, and that there is a great
uncertainty in the present Opinions upon that point, as all Divines grant; and
that by consequence, nothing can be concluded from them, especially if it be
supposed, as some learned do, that the Devil was but a mere Man. I show in
Chap. 24. That the Spirit of Python that is spoken of in the 16th Chapter of
the Acts of the Apostles, can no ways be applied to the Devil. Neither does the
famous History of Job, always alleged one of the first, as a proof of his
power, being well examined in its whole extent, attribute to him the least part
in the evils, which by the Providence of God, happened to that Holy Man. As to
the Angel of Satan which tormented St. Paul, I place him in the same rank with
the fight against Michael, that is in uncertainty, there being no ground to
pretend to a perfect understanding of this passage; and therefore I look upon
it as insufficient to prove any thing which is the matter of the 25th Chapter.

But as the Possessed are universally alleged for a certain proof of the great
power of the Devil, and that we read so many times in Scripture, that the evil
Spirits have been cast out by our Savior Jesus Christ, I beslow five Chapters
upon examining what is in it. I see that the term of Diabolus, which we
Translate Devil, is not found in any of the passages in which those Relations
are contained; but only that of Demon, which I illustrate in the 26th Chapter.
In the 27th I show, that the most dangerous diseases, especially those of the
Head, were usually ascribed to Demons, or even called by the name of Demons;
and in the 28th, that our Savior Jesus Christ, has not changed the usual way
of speaking, but made use of them according to the custom of that time; neither
did he always immediately confute all the errors, in the 29th and 30th
Chapters; so that the cure of Daemonia, was not properly an expulsion of
Devils, but a miraculous cure of incurable Diseases.

I come after to other passages of Scripture, where neither the names of Devil,
Satan, or Demon are made use of, but those of the Prince of the World, Prince
of the power of the air; Prince of this Age, of Lordships, Powers, Dominions,
and the like; And I show that there is not the least cause to apply them to the
Devil; but that the Style of Scripture leads us of it self to understand by all
these names a certain order of persons.

Having then examined all, I could not conclude, that the Scripture, considered
truly and without prejudice, attributes to the Devil this power and these
operations, which the prevention of Commentators and Translators discovers in
it: I grant it has been very troublesome to me to be obliged to take this party,
and to confute and censure very famous Men and most approved interpreters: It
even seemed to me, that I exposed my self very much because I know that a more
advantageous opinion is had of those that are not known, and that a Prophet is
neither esteemed in his own time nor in his own Country. For this Reason I did
first resolve not to meddle with those of Scripture, where I found my self
constrained to go from the expositions ordinarily received. But at last,
considering that my work would appear but imperfect, and that they would not
fail to object those famous passages, to which I should be then obliged to
answer; I at last prevailed with my self to venture in the main Sea, and to fly
before none that came to attack me; further I do not believe that any one can
show me, that the interpretations that I make, are founded upon the light of
reason and humane understanding, or upon any other particular proposition I
should have asserted; such as this is said to be, that a Spirit cannot act upon
a body, nor upon other Spirits I have made use of for this effect, but of the
ordinary means that the knowledge of Languages afford us; so there is no more
unjust accusation then that which is raised against me upon this subject.

And therefore when I compare with the analogy of the whole Scripture, with the
grounds of our Divinity, and with the rules of true Piety; whatever is
ordinarily published concerning the understanding of the Devil, his power, his
operations, his apparitions in diverse places in the World, his Dominion, and
the Kingdom which he raises against that of Jesus Christ; I conclude not only
that they are not grounded upon these three principles, but also being
considered with all the necessary attention, they appear contrary to them. In
this place I begin to enter into dispute, and to draw my conclusion from
arguments which the Scripture and reason furnishes me with; having by the means
heretofore established upon those two principles, searched after the ways how
plainly and without equivocation to understand the state of the questions which
properly and particularly cocern the Devil. This is not then the point in
question, to dispute of the meaning of those passages which mention the fall of
Man, or speak of Angels, some of whom appeared to Abraham, and others wrestled
with Jacob; or of the tentation of Our Lord Christ in the desert; nor of the
sense of those that say David was tempted by Satan, and that Job was tormented
by him, and the like places; but the Chief point, the scope of all this search,
is to know what to believe concerning the Devil.

Upon this I bestow the five last Chapters, and in the three first of these
five, which are the 32th, 33th, and 34th, I am not afraid of calling Reason to
my assistance; after having shown that the Scripture is silent upon this
subject, for I presume to have made appear in the 32th Chapter, that the
apparitions of Evil Spirits are contrary to true Reason, and that the Holy
Scripture affords no proofs of it. Afterward, in the 33th Chapter, I show,
that the knowledge that the Devil may have, as well of things Natural as Civil,
and above all of things Spiritual, which concern our Salvation, is nothing of
what is believed. I rest as yet upon the same foundation of Scripture and
Reason, to prove the Empire of the Devil is but a Chimera, and that he has
neither such a Power, nor such an Administration as is ordinarily ascribed to
him, which is contained in the 34th Chapter. At last, after having treated of
all those things with all possible exactness, I come to the conclusion of my
second Book, where I show the importance of this examination by reason of the
great value the vulgar put upon the Devil, and his Operations in the World. My
Opinion is, that these sorts of Discourses shake the Grounds of the Doctrine of
our Salvation, and cause a great damage to Piety in diverse occasions. I
demonstrate the first. of these things in the 35th Chapter, and the second in
the 36th.

As to the Doctrine, I prove in this place what I have asserted in the first
Chapter of my Book, viz. that the common Opinion concerning the Devil is
opposite to the proofs that Jehova is God, and that Jesus is the Messiah, and
that the Books of the Prophets and Apostles are the Word of God. In what
concerns Piety, I show, that the Service of God is thereby greatly weakened;
that the Filial fear is very much diminished by that they have of the Devil;
that the esteem that the holy Angels deserve, is almost destroyed, that the
glory and virtue of the miracles of our Savior Jesus, are very much lessened,
that the vanity of Man is maintained and increased; and that the comfort of the
humble is cut off, or at least, suffers a great diminution. That is whatever is
contained in my second Book.

An Abridgment of the Third Book.
After having thus simply treated of what concerns Spirits, and particularly
the Devil, according to the knowledge that sound Reason can furnish us with,
according to that which may be drawn from the word of God, where Reason ceases;
I pass still following the order and division established in my first Book,) to
those Men, who, according to the common sentiment, have communication with
Spirits, especially with the Devil. The same order to which I have kept in my
second Book, is also observed in this; for in the eight first Chapters, I make
an exact scrutiny of all which may contribute to clear the subject I treat of,
and afterward in the seven last, I show what light the inquiry has afforded
me, and how far one can rely upon what I have discovered.

I propose at first the true state of the question, showing that the query is
not, Whether Magic is possible, for I grant it; but whether there is a Magic,
which by the virtue of agreement made between Men and the Devil, may discover
hidden things, predict those that are to come, and produce effects above the
force of nature. This is discust in the first Chapter.

Following the distinction that I have already heretofore many times set down,
I make in the first and second Chapters, the search required, and that first by
the light of Reason; which I divide it into two parts: in the first, I examine,
whether it be possible to conceive that Men have any commerce with Spirits;
that the one and the other may rely upon mutual help, or that they may act one
upon another, In the second part, I examine whether there is Reason to believe,
that there may be express compacts between them; that they may mutually
contract, and reciprocally perform the conditions of their Covenants. I
expressly deny the first of these, founded upon the Reasons alleged, Book 2.
Chap. 2. and I unfold a little more precisely in the 2 Chapter of this, what is
contained in the first, which I defend against the arguments of Glanvil an
English Author. I bestow the third Chapter upon confuting those compacts of the
Magicians with the Devil, as ridiculous and altogether incredible; and I answer
at the same time, several objections and shifts of Glanvil, convincing him by
his own Reasons that are sufficient for that purpose. I pass afterward to the
Scripture, as to an upper School; from the 4th Chapter to the 7th, I undertake
it over from the beginning to the end, to find out with the utmost exactness,
what it discovers to us upon this point, and upon all it is dependencies either
by it is expressions, or by the examples it affords us. Than I begin to
establish what we may believe of it according to Scripture.

As an Introduction to this examination, I relate all the names it gives to
that sort of People, to their trade and art, and I compare the difference to be
found between the translations of our own Interpreters, as well as between the
translation of others.

This examination is but general, but afterward I come to particulars, whether
the Scripture speaks of that sort of People, of their trade and arts, so as it
is ordinarily supposed. This I do from the fifth Chapter to the 12th, but
finding it expresses not it self as they give out, I examine what sort of
People they can be, and what the Scripture really says of them, from the 13
Chap. to the 17th.

I discuss the first of these, as well by Scripture as Reason, and proceed by
degrees; searching, first, whether these of whom the Scripture speaks, have a
particular communication with the Devil; whether they make their predictions
and enchantments by his undertaking or by his power; and at last whether they
have between them covenants for that purpose. The passages of Scripture which I
examine upon this subject, are of three sorts, some contain Histories of that
kind of People, and of their Witchcrafts which I show in the 5th 6th and 7th
Chapters, viz. In the 5th all the enchantments of the Egyptians; in the 6th,
those of Bilsa, those of the Priests of the Philistines, and of the Witch of
Endor, and many others, by whom the idolatrous Kings of Israel fell into great
Sins, especially when they came to the Court of Babylon; and in the 7th
Chapter, the enchantment of Simon and Elimas, who are called enchantors; those
of the maid servant which was in the Town of Philippi, who had a Spirit of
Pithon, and those of the seven Brothers Exorcists. Afterward I come to the
examination of the names, of words, of actions, and circumstances, as well by
themselves as comparing the Dutch translations of the Scripture, with those
which have been made in diverse Languages, by different Translators, and by
comparing with the texts, the explications which are given by so many different
interpreters. All the passages where those things are contained, being examined
very attentively, give cause to conclude, that the Magicians or Enchanters have
been very mischeivous People, whose Doctrine and morals were very much
corrupted; but they do not furnish any probable argument to assert, that these
People had a particular communication with the Devil.

The second Order of the passages of the Holy Writ upon this subject, consists
of those that contain the express Laws, which condemn that sort of People, and
forbid them the exercise of their Function; which I examine in the 8th and 9th
Chapters. But I find no other Reasons for those Prohibitions and the
punishments inflicted upon them, but their Idolatry and Cheats, both of which
are Criminal, and not becoming the People of God.

The third Order consists in those Reasonings and Proverbial Expressions,
dispersed through the whole Scripture, that have relation to those things,
either to the Persons themselves, or to their ways. I examine therefore whether
nothing can be understood in those places, whence some consequence may be drawn
to illustrate the subject in hand: But having bestowed the whole tenth Chapter
upon it, I find nothing more than before.

Now as in the third Chapter, I have examined by the light of Reason, whether
there is cause to believe the possibility of the communication of Men with the
Devil by express Covenants, I do here the same by that of the Holy Writ. For in
the two following Chapters I run it over again, and insisting upon all the
passages, where the least mention is made of Alliances, or Compacts, that are
not made with God but against Him, sinfully and with an evil design; I find not
so much as one that speaks of those Agreements made with the Devil, or any
thing like it. Upon this I bestow the 11th Chapter. In the 12th I run over
again the whole Scripture from the beginning to the end; From the Covenant of
God with Abraham, to our Savior, and examining whether from whatever has been
said upon that subject, there is any occasion to infer, that the Devil may
likewise on his part make his detestable Compacts; I demonstrate, that the
Opinion, which supposes such Contracts between the Devil and Men, by virtue of
which they are said to have performed all their Witchcrafts, can by no means
consist with what is contained in the Doctrine of the Holy Scripture; nor with
the Dispensation of God's Covenant, as well before the Law as under the Law,
and much less under the Gospel.

Thus I plainly show, that the vulgar Opinion of Magic, and of its
Dependencies, by no means proceed from the Sacred Writings, but on the contrary
is altogether opposed to it. Afterward we must consider what the Scripture
says concerning those that practice that Art, and what Testimony it gives of
their Actions. This I do two ways, in the five following Chapters. The first by
offering, in the 13th and 14th, the lively Picture which the Holy Writ gives of
those Men in several places; and the second by showing what Opinion must be had
of them according to the Character given them.

But expounding to the Reader the force of those things, I make yet this
distinction: That I first offer the Persons to his view, that he may know what
might be expected from them; what their aim may be; why they were interrogated;
and on what the great Men and the vulgar bestow their time. Afterward in the
14th Chapter, I consider them in themselves, with their Arts and Crafts,
showing the Reasons that moved the People, especially the Kings, even those of
Israel, to be infatuated by them.

Afterward it is required to know what Judgment must be made of them, according
to the Holy Writ, which I show in the three following Chapters. In the 15th, I
assert, that in whatever they did, they showed neither real Power nor Virtue;
that they knew nothing of what they ventured to foretell, or to discover as very
much concealed; and that in reality they effected nothing of what they boasted
of, or of what they undertook to effect; but that they applied themselves to
deceive by outward semblances, wherein consisted the chief part of their Art.
In the mean while, as the Holy Scripture ^^ms, by its Expressions in some
places, to ascribe a great virtue to Conjurations and Enchantments; I examine
in the 16th Chapter, what is the Sense of those places, and I conclude that
after an attentive Meditation it will not be found that it says upon that
subject what it appears at first to say.

All these things being thus enquired into, it remains to show wherein properly
consists all the Evil; why those Men with their Arts, especially the
Israelites, that had a hand in their Crafts, are so defamed in the Bible; why,
since that time they have been in as great hatred amongst Christians, who have
mortally detested them, and punished them with the utmost rigor; And lastly,
for what Reason the Laws have been so severe against them, and prohited all
their Arts, as well under the Old Testament as under the New. This is the
Enquiry of the 17th Chapter. I have hitherto spoken only of those who pretend
to a Converse with the Devil, and to be in a Covenant with him; I add in this
place a Chapter, which is the 18th, where I mention those to whom he is an
Enemy, whose Mind is supposed to be troubled, or their Body to be tormented by
him; those are the possessed, as they are ordinarily called, but I enlarge not
much upon that subject, having already fully cleared it in my second Book, from
the 26th Chapter to the 30th, where it came to pass.

Having thus ended the first part of my third Book, I show what Judgment must
be made of all those things, which I consider in two Respects. First, I
establish from the 19th to the 20th Chapter, what may rationally be thought of
it; and in the last Chapter, I show what is the Duty of a Christian, and how he
ought to behave himself in such occasions.

A double judgment may be formed upon this subject. First, concluding that the
Vulgar Opinion is altogether groundless and condemnable, as appears by the
19th, 20th, and 22th Chapters. Secondly, By establishing what must be held of
it.

Concerning that first and common Opinion; As in the Writings made against my
second Book, some expressions of our Liturgy have been objected, I show in the
19th Chapter, how weak are the Grounds upon which are founded the principal
Doctors, whose Doctrines are in short in Voetius; and that the Proofs they
allege are not taken from the Sense of the Holy Writ, well examined and
searched into; but only from the external sound of Words, if I may so speak,
upon which we are wont to insist, as well as upon the Idea's that first offer
themselves to us, when we consider them but superficially. To which I add, that
Liturgies must be understood in the Sense of the Scripture from whence they are
drawn, and to which they relate in all those places, where it is spoken of the
Temptations and Seductions of the Devil, Spiritual Combats, Witchcraft,
Predictions, Enchantments, and even in all others where the agreeableness of
Style, and the Series of Idea's has caused something to be added that seems to
have a relation to it. But moreover, in the 20th Chapter, I demonstrate, that
the Errors spread amongst the vulgar concerning the Works of the Devil, and his
Adherents, are absolutely opposite to the same Liturgies; even so far, that
amongst the Doctors of the Reformed Church, none but those that are of my
Opinion can pretend to conform in this point to what they subscribed when they
took Orders; which I understand only as to the Doctrine and Truth. I show
again, in the 21th Chapter, that this Opinion makes very bold attempts upon
Piety; that it diminishes the veneration due to God, that it extremely weakens
Faith and Charity, and that it exposes Christianity to the attacks of the
Unfaithful, and that it causes great distractions and prophanations in our
Prayers.

Lastly, I proceed further and to come to a conclusion, I discover in the 22th
Chapter, what must be believed of all these things, and in the 23th I declare
what must be done. But as in the 32th Chapter of the 2d Book, I have treated of
apparitions in general, I speak here of presages and predictions in particular,
examining what is possible or not, as to these things, and to what causes they
must be ascribed. These causes, according to the Proofs I have related in this
place, are natural, but the Devil meddles not with them: I propose my thoughts
in the same manner upon the Conjuring up of Ghosts, the divinations of the
pretended Magicians, and all sorts of apparitions and possessions, which are
said to be caused by their malice, by Virtue of the compacts they have
contracted with the Devil; and lastly I show what sort of Magic is practicable
in the World and which is not.

I declare in the last Chapter but one, what opinion must be had of those men
that credit Apparitions and Witchcrafts; And stick not however to converse with
those that meddle with those detestable Arts; And in the last Chapter, what is
our Duty, and how we are obliged to behave our selves in that respect. We must
double our devotion and veneration toward God, our moderation and charity
toward our Neighbors, our modesty in our actions, and our zeal in the
exercises of Piety. Such are the Contents of the 3d Book.

An Abridgment of the 4th Book.
There would be reason to believe that this subject is exhausted; but it seems
experience carrys it above Reason; and being grounded upon matters of fact and
instances, it seems that it will not favor us: Our Adversaries appeal to its
Tribunal, and plead their cause with so many strong and aggravating reasons,
that it seems they design to overwhelm us by their multitude. This
consideration obliges me to add this 4th Book to the 3 preceding, and to
examine what experience actually teaches, that it may be no more objected, that
by my new Doctrine, I undertake to contradict opinions received and established
through all the World; where almost no place is to be found, but it affords
plain instance of the operations of the Devil; of which I dare even deny the
possibility. I distinguish therefore those Instances into those, that any one
may gather from his own experience, and into those that are grounded upon the
relation of others; there is no doubt but what one has experienced himself, must
prevail over all the rest. But to omit nothing, I first show how far one may
trust to his own experience, and afterward how far we may rely upon the
testimony of others. I dismiss the first of these questions, in the first
eleven Chapters; and he Second in the 21 following, adding two others at the
end as a conclusion of the whole.

I distinguish again each of those parts into two others; having thought
convenient to ground upon many examples; the instructions and illustrations I
give upon both, that no body may easily be deceived. What I establish as to the
first part is contained from the beginning of the 5th Chapter, and the examples
are the matter of the following Chapter to the 11th: But I could not so exactly
follow the same method in the 2d part, having thought necessary, or at least
useful, in some places, to mix with examples the illustrations I give at first,
and with the illustrations, the instances I produce afterward.

I therefore show in the first part, that there are few Men amongst us, that
are capable of passing a solid Judgment upon that sort of things, and that
besides that our occasions will not allow either to examine, or to search into
whatever could be necessary, to attain to a naked and full knowledge of all the
matters of Fact. I ascribe the first of these faults, to the prejudices with
which we are imbued, or to the terror with which we are surprised, at the sight
and hearing of what passes. This is the subject of the first Chapter: I
demonstrate in the 2d, that this cause also proceeds, from that we know not
sufficiently how far the strength of nature may extend its operations: In the
3d Chapter I assert, that we know not more of the things, the Images of which
nature may only show us, when they are not real, nor we so far knowing as to
observe all the tricks of men; nor of sufficient Authority to observe all the
circumstances of their Actions: I say again, we are not Skilful enough to
penetrate the Force and Virtue of Arts, which increase proportionably to the
exercise we make of them, and of the care we take to cultivate them, and make
us look upon mere natu^^ ^acidents as effects of Magic. Of these I have
alleged many proofs in the first Chapter; showing afterward in the 5th, that
often we want only the occasion to discover the Mysteries of the Artifices of
Men, and the secrets of the operations of Nature.

I begin in the same 5th Chapter, to produce some instances of Apparitions. In
the 6th, I speak of the Possessed and Bewitched, as far as I am acquainted with
them, and thereupon I declare in the 7th, what judgment I make of that famous
Parot, which was thought to be bewitched, comparing that case with another
known to me from my own experience. From those bewitchings of the Body, I pass
to the Enchantings of the Soul, and mention in the 8th Chapter, what I have
seen my self happen to many persons in several places, especially at Franeker.
In the 2th I describe a very remarkable History, which happened in the same
Town, and which has been the greatest occasion of exercising my self upon this
subject. To this I join the Imposture of the Witchcraft of Campen that has been
lately discovered, of which I have been informed, both by word of mouth and
writing, by understanding Persons that were present, and have themselves laid
open the whole Intreague, having had a full knowledge of the whole matter, from
the beginning to the end. Wherefore I have inserted the Narration, word for
word, in the 10th Chapter. In the 11th I relate the Cheat of the Vrsulin Nuns
of Londun in France, whose History having been lately published, manifestly
discovers the delusions of the pretended Possession, and withal^ of the Magic,
with which they charged the innocent Priest Grandier, whom they caused to be
burnt.

The illustrations I have made upon the First Part, make the instructions I
am^^ give upon the Second, more easy. I bestow 12 Chapters upon them, still
following the Rules I have before proposed, which to my best knowledge, are
universally approved of; viz. To admit as Truth, no Advices, Narrations, (...)
Testimonies, how confidently soever they may be told, before we have examined
them with a full exactness, and made experiments upon all those cases and
instances, the truth of which is proposed to us as undeniable.

That I may, if possible, leave no perplexity, on darkness in my work; I make
yet a distinction upon this last point. For I propose in four Chapters, all the
Instances I have been obliged to insert in several places of my First Book, to
facilitate the understanding of the things contained in it, beginning with
those that concern the Ancient Heathens that are in the Third Chapter of that
Book, and in the Thirteenth of this.

Those that relate to the Modern Pagans, in the 6th, 8th, 9th and 10th Chapters
of the Firk Book, are contained here in the 14th. Those that I have drawn from
the Jews and Mahometans are the matter tof the 15th, and those that were
afforded me by the Papists in the 19th, 20th, and 21st, of the First Book, are
confuted in the 16th of this.

Afterward I run over the whole Universe, from the 17th to the 32d Chapter,
relating and examining the most famous examples, and those that are thought to
be the strongest proofs for the common Opinion. I allege first in general,
those that are most ordinary and familiar, concerning Apparitions and Magic.
Such are the Apparitions of the Fairys, that were so much talked of in our
Country, as the Fairy of Rosemberg, and the like, in the 17th Chapter. In the
18th I speak of those that pretend to be invulnerable to Sword and
Musquet-Ball, and I prove that all the Discourses and Narrations made upon that
subject, are altogether false. I come afterward to examine particular
Relations. And First, of those that can have no particular name, or properly be
called Apparitions, Divination, Witchcraft; or Possession; because they are
made up of several kinds of Witchery, of which Possession uses to be the
Principal. This is the matter of the 19th and 20th Chapters. In the 21st, I
pass to Apparitions; in the 22 to Divinations; and afterward to Witchcraft,
from the 24th to the 32 Chapters.

I relate but Three Instances of the First sort. The First, is the going out of
the Children of Ha^^elon in 1284. The Second, is the Devil Zechariah, whom
Volscius mentions in his History of the Churches of Sclavonia, which Instance I
expound in the 19th Chapter, as a Specimen of whatever may be invented or
practiced as to this. The Third is, the story which happened Twelve years ago
at Bolsward, that was published with very extraordinary circumstances: I relate
it in the 20th Chapter.

I come afterward to such Cases as have a particular Reference to Apparitions
and Witchcraft, or enchantments, if there be any such. Of the First kind, I
produce the famous Devil of Mascon; And having taken off the vail from the
Cheat, I deal in the same manner with the Spirit of Tedworth, that was lately
brought again upon the Stage to frighten me. The Question is, Whether they have
succeeded in that Design? of which, the Reader shall be able to judge by the
21st Chapter. He will likewise find in the 22, a full description of the
Phantasm that appeared a year ago at St. Aneberg; and of another Story which
happened the last Summer at Lauzanne, contained in a Letter, written with the
hand of a Minister of that Town, whom they would trouble with it, which I think
sufficient to show what Opinion must be had of Apparitions and Phantasms. But
as to Divination, there occurs the most singular and ingenious Story which I
ever heard of, that happened whilst I was writing this Treatise; and having
begun at Lions a Year ago, is still in force to this Day. It concerns a Man,
who by the motion of a Wand, he carried in his hand, boasts of discovering
springs of Water, hidden Gold and Silver, Robbers and Murderers. I give a
short account of the different relations made of it, with the judgments of the
learned that are all contrary to one another, and I examine what may be thought
of it after a serious consideration,

But before I speak of Magic, I examine in the 23 Chapter, such proofs as are
drawn from the very confession of those that are detained Prisoners, as guilty
of that crime; and I demonstrate, that nothing in the World is less worthy of
credit, than such confessions. Thence I take occasion to examine the
proceedings and enquiries of the Judges that take notice of it, and show their
nullity and injustice.

Afterward I come to the chief proofs, that have been alleged for Magic,
either far or near, long ago or lately; and begin with a case which happened
within the walls of our City of Amsterdam, in the house of the Orphans about
the Year 1570, whilst the Inhabitants professed as yet, the Popish Religion, to
which I add another story, which happened at Hoorn, in 1670, with that of
Antoinette Bourignon, which she has related her self; all the circumstances of
it having happened in her sight at the Hospital of l'Isle. In the 24th Chapter,
I show what judgment must be made of such stories. In the 25th I speak of that
Woman of Abbekerk, that thrice published, she was become miraculously with
Child; and has been held not long ago every where for a famous Magician, in the
Years 1658 and 1659.

From that sort of People that are only looked upon as Magicians by the Vulgar,
I come to those that have been condemned for such, by the sentence of Judges,
and by consequence put to Death. I mention not such as have been set down by
Schottus, and some other Authors, because it would be to no purpose, since they
may be seen in their writings. I only relate such new instances as are come
into my knowledge, that I may leave no room to objection, nor be charged of
having past by such matters of fact as might have perplexed me, and to which I
had nothing to reply. For that Reason, I first examine what happened in our own
Country, from the very time of the Reformation, and mention in the 26th Chap.
the History of those that have been burnt here for Magic, as one at
Schoonhove, and 4 at Vtretch; as also another story, of one that being accused
of the same crime, had been condemned to the Rack, by the Court of Holland, and
was acquitted by the supreme Council. This happened in the Years, 1591, 1592,
and 1593. Thence I go over to Denmark, and in the 27th Chapter, I make an
examination of that black Art that was said to be practiced 80 Years ago, at
Kogen in Zealand, a Province of that Kingdom. I likewise examine all the other
particular events, worthy to be taken notice of, that happened in that Country,
and were published several times in the Danish Tongue, and from that translated
into Latin and Dutch. To which I add a story of another unhappy wretch,
executed this very Year. From thence I go over to Sweden, and in the 29th
Chapter, I relate what is inserted in the Royal Records, concerning that famous
Magic that began to appear in 1669, and again in 1670; and a third time in
1674, to which I add another sentence delivered to me by a person that saw the
execution of it, at Golnaw in Pomerania.

I afterward mention the Magic practiced in the West of England, the
falsehood of which I discovered my self, and gave the History of it to the
public. This is the matter of the 30th Chapter. The 31th contains a judicial
information made at Harlingen, with a letter written to me upon that subject
from Leuwarden, which contains several other matters of fact concerning Magic,
happened about the Years 1667, and 1668. I conclude this Chapter with the
relation of a case that happened in the City of Amsterdam 7 Months ago, which
has been lately communicated to me, the particulars of it having been
discovered whilst I was writing this 4th part.

Some People may suppose it useless to add narrations of a less consequence,
after having shown the groundlseness and delusions of more considerable facts,
But I thought, that in reference to the Vulgar, it was convenient to add here
another Chapter, that is the 32th, where I relate the Story of a Child in
Friezeland, it was supposed to be bewitched, of which I have had a full account
by the letters of his friends and relations; that by this specimen any one may
judge of all the narrations of that nature, that are so much credited by the
common People; who take such matters of fact for undeniable effects of Magic.
As for the rest, should I make an enquiry after all the examples that are
reported to prove the Operations of the Devil, I should never compass my end.
And therefore I persuade my self, that I have alleged a sufficient number of
them to satisfy the Reader, who shall not be able to doubt of their truth;
because I have produced such as are most known, lately happened, and in
neighboring places; or at least attended with one of those 3 circumstances,
and consequently may be examined with great convenience and certainty, and
testified for the most part, by living persons.

Thus I put an end to this Treatise, and make my conclusion, briefly rehearsing
all the proofs related in the 4 Books, each in it is place. These proofs show
that there are no natural Reasons, nor Revelations in the Holy Writ, no certain
experiments, that give us cause to ascribe to wicked Spirits, all the
Operations and effects that are generally supposed to proceed from the Devil or
from Men, his Confederates. This is contained in the 33th Chapter, whereupon it
must be remembered, that what I say concerns only the common Doctrine and
Opinion. Afterward it is not difficult to show, how wrongfully such a
superstition is cherished and increased, instead of moderating it, or even
rooting it out, if possible. In the 34th Chapter, I charge with that fault,
Clergy Men and Divines, more than Princes and Magistrates; because the former
are more particularly obliged to meditate upon those matters, to watch over the
preservation of the Souls committed to their care, and to attempt the cure of a
Disease that is so contagious, and feeds upon the very Bowels.

But because it is probable, that this undertaking will but slowly proceed, I
will in the mean while propose to the Reader and my self, the lesson of the
Apostle in his first Epistle to Timoth. 4.7. Reject profane, and Old Wives
Fables, and exercise they self to Godliness. I show, in the 35th and last
Chapter, that this is what I chiefly intend in this work, and that I obtain my
end in most of those that undertake the Rending of it, with suitable
dispositions. Besides I hold it for certain, that those who take occasion or
pretense from thence, to accuse me with error and libertinism, are Men
themselves that have not for the word of God, all the deference that could be
wished. This I demonstrate in particular, with so great evidence, that I have
already had the satisfaction to see that my work produeed a great fruit, when
but one half of it appeared. So that I hope by the blessing of God, it being
now finished, I shall gather as plentiful a Harvest, as the sorrows which it
caused to my Enemies, whilst I was publishing it, were uneasy and smarting.

THE CONTENTS OF THE First Volume.
CHAP. I. OF the Importance, Necessity, and Usefulness of the Matter, and in
what Order it ought to be Treated of. Page 1. CHAP. II. That the Opinions of
the Heathens, concerning God, and Spirits, are to be found in Greek and Latin
Authors. Page 8. CHAP. III. That those Opinions are the Sourse and Basis of the
Art of Divination. Page 22 CHAP. IV. That all the different sorts of
Witchcraft, that have been in use, proceeded from the same Original. Page 32
CHAP. V. That we see still amongst the present Pagans, the same Doctrine. Page
38 CHAP. VI. That this Conformity must be sought, first, in the remains of
Paganism in Europe. Page 43 CHAP. VII. That the same Sentiments are to be found
amongst most of the Nations of Asia. Page 51 CHAP. VIII. That the Witchcraft
practiced amongst the People, proceeds from the same sourse. Page 63 CHAP. IX.
That the Opinions and Practices of the African Heathens agree at bottom with
the Sentiments and Customs of the other Pagans. Page 69 CHAP. X. That very near
the same Opinions and Practices, are to be found in America. Page 75 CHAP. XI.
Where all the Sentiments and Practices of so many different Heathens, are
usefully compared together. Page 89 CHAP. XII. What are the Opinions of the
Jews, and how necessary it is to examine them. Page 100 CHAP. XIII. That the
Witchcraft anciently practiced, and still in use amongst the Jews, proceeds
from the same Original. Page 115 CHAP. XIV. That the Doctrine of the Spirits,
and the exercise of Magic, are also in request amongst the Mahometans. Page
127 CHAP. XV. That some of the Heathen Opinions upon this subject have, in
process of time, crept in amongst the Christians. Page 140 CHAP. XVI. That some
of the first Christians derided the Conjurations of Spirits, and others
credited and practiced them. Page 162 CHAP. XVII. That it is necessary to
compare all those various Doctrines and Practices of the Jews, Mahometans, and
Christians; and to examine wherein they differ, and in what they agree
together. Page 168 CHAP. XVIII. That the Doctrines ascribed to the Manichees,
are a mixture of all the preceding, and the original of the Opinions most
common to this day. Page 176 CHAP. XIX. That the Opinions and Practices already
mentioned, have been most or all introduced in Popery, which has added to them
new inventions of Men. Page 182 CHAP. XX. What is the Doctrine of Popery
concerning Apparitions of Spirits, and how they torment Men, either by
themselves, or by the Ministry of other Men. Page 197 CHAP. XXI. That several
means are practiced against Attacks, and the Illusions of the Devil and
Magicians. Page 211 CHAP. XXII. That neither the Opinions that are received
among us, nor our Practices go usually so far; and that is for that reason,
that our Authors are not found to agree so well together, upon this subject.
Page 220 CHAP. XXIII. That of all these Opinions put together, there result
some certain propositions, in which they differ, and others in which they
agree. Page 236 CHAP. XXIV. That all that has been related, shows upon what
foundation the Christians in general, and the Protestants in particular, say
such extraordinary things of the Devil. Page 244
THE World Bewitched.
VOL. I. Containing the Opinions of all Nations, from the first Ages till the
present time; concerning God, Spirits, and their Customs.
CHAP. I. Of the Importance, Necessity, and Usefulness of this Matter, and in
what Order it ought to be treated of.
I Promised to undertake this Work a long time ago, and it is yet longer since I
projected it: It Is now at last come to its perfection; but I am afraid to
venture too much by the publishing of it, my own Experience in several
Occasions, and my frequent Conversing with very Rational Men, together with my
particular Study, have a thousand times afforded me the occasion to consider,
Whether it was possible, that whatever the Vulgar, and the Learned say of
Devils, and whatever they ascribe to them, were true? I would not have spared
so much time as to search into this matter, had not I perceived that the
Opinions of most Men, and perhaps of all the World, are only grounded upon an
unsure and wavering Foundation. This has moved me impartially to examine
several things, which my Calling, and common Conversation offered to me. This
examination forced my Mind to reject many Opinions which I had admitted at
first, only because they were common; though grounded upon insufficient
Reasons, as I came by degrees to be sensible of; so that I find that at present
I know much less than I formerly imagined to do, especially as to the subject
in hand. This, however, I do not say with a design to Censure, or Destroy, what
others have Written: I only intend to join my Thoughts to theirs for a fuller
Instruction of such Readers as love Truth, and are enquiring after it.

Sect. 2. I am not afraid to mistake, if I say, that whatever belongs to this
matter has not been exhausted. Those that have written upon it before having
been somewhat retarded by Prejudices, that stick to their Mind, though they had
freed themselves of many others; for I own they have proceeded so far as to
destroy most of the works of the Devil; at least so far as 'twas necessary to
free Men from Superstition and frivolous Fears: But, as for me, I would, if it
were possible, altogether overthrow them, and not leave one Stone upon another,
that should not be demolished. And therefore I Will try whether I can bring my
Countrymen to my Opinion, especially those of my Profession, desiring them to
read this Treatise with as little prejudice as I have written; and not to
suffer themselves to be persuaded by other Reasons, but such as proceed from
Natural Light, from a clear Interpretation of the Holy Scripture, and from
certain Experiments. I have right to require these Conditions from the Reader,
since they cannot be rejected by any Rational Person, that they are a Law to
which I submit my self, and that the great consequence of the matter requires
them.

Sect. 3. I am Confident, and I hope, that the Reader will more plainly
perceive it hereafter, that no point of the Christian Religion is more
important than this; and that no certain and sufficient proofs may be had of
all the others, than by rejecting the Opinion commonly received amongst the
Vulgar, concerning the Craft and Power of the Devil. Can it be imagined a small
Matter to know whether the Devil has a Kingdom upon Earth; and what are the
Limits that separate his Dominions from that of God Almighty? Or is (...)
unserviceable to examine, whether such a cursed and detestable Creature can do
more wonderful things than God ever did; and consequently, whether the trust we
repose in God, and the fear we have of the Devil, ought to be equal? Such
Thoughts ought never to enter into a Christian Heart; yet they creep into it
unawares; at least I think so, and can scarce doubt of it: for the more I
search into this matter the more it seems evident to me; that whoever entirely
believes all that it used to be ascribed to the Devils and his Angels, and all
that is commonly said of them, both by the Learned and the Vulgar, saving the
bottom of the Doctrine publicly received and taught in our Church; he can have
no convincing proof that JESUS is the Messiah, or that there is but one God:
And if in this Writing I do not make the Reader very sensible of it, I grant
that I have composed it to no purpose.

Sect. 4. But if I succeed, it will at the same time plainly appear, that it
was altogether necessary to publish this Treatise, because the Vulgar are still
confirmed in their Errors by Men of Letters, and of great Name; who, being full
themselves of those prejudices, make use of their Tongue and Learning to lead
others into the same Labyrinth. To that end they wrest several Expressions and
Histories of the Holy Scripture; which being not accurately examined, nor
conferred with others, give a great probability to the common Opinion
concerning the Devil; but if taken in the ordinary Sense, they prove evidently
opposed to other clear Expressions concerning the Fundamental Articles of our
Faith: It follows, that such a Sense cannot subsist without overthrowing the
grounds of our Salvation; that I can hardly bear, since a long time the nicety
with which Points of small consequence, or at least of little certainty, use to
be treated of; since one cannot discuss them without getting into a suspicion
of entertaining Erroneous Opinions; whilst, in the mean time, we are not yet
agreed upon Matters of the utmost consequence; or if we are agreed upon them,
it it is without any foundation: And therefore, since none was ever found fault
with for defending an Article of Faith, or giving out a new Explication of it;
so I persuade my self, that I do well by publishing the Illustrations upon a
matter, on which the whole Edifice of our Salvation is grounded; in order that
whoever will carefully and impartially examine it, may become Wiser and
Learneder.

Sect. 5. As to what concerns this Book, I will at first set down the subject
matter of it before the Reader. The design is to examine to the bottom what the
Devil can do, and what he really does; that is, How far his Knowledge extends;
either in Natural or Supernatural Things. Either as to the Presence, as it is
concealed from Men; or as to the Future, as it is contingent, or possible, and
not necessary. Moreover, what Direction or Power he has to operate in Nature,
what Communication he has with Men, with the Human Soul, and with all sorts of
Bodies? That he should transmute himself into them, or put on their various
Forms: That he should act upon the Soul, or upon the Body: That he should
direct Thoughts, Words, Actions, and Gestures: What is his Power over the
Beasts and Fruits of the Earth; Over the Air and Winds: What his help may
contribute to the Knowledge of Man and his Actions. Herein consist Auguries, or
Soothsaying, Witchcraft, the Art of Conjuring up Ghosts, and of Divining
Dreams. All which things are methodically (and in the same order that is
mentioned here) treated of in this Book.

Sect. 6. But because the perfect Knowledge of them depends upon another, viz.
which is the Nature of a Spirit, wherein it consists, and how it is
distinguished from that of the Body: (for Devils are undeniably Spirits, and
Man is composed of a Body and a Spirit) so it will be necessary in this
Treatise to proceed farther, and to examine first the Nature of Spirits, Good
and Bad, and then that of Man. Besides, God himself being a Spirit, but
infinite and independent, we ought not to pay our selves with the conformity of
the Name; but by reason of the manifest difference betwixt the Creator and the
Creature, we are obliged more particularly to examine, how much the increated
Spirit differs from those that are created; and amongst these last, how much
those that are immaterial, and those that are united with a Body, differ from
each other.

Sect. 7. However, such a difficult piece of work cannot be undertaken, without
knowing the different Opinions and Practices upon this Subject; and without
special Considerations upon them: Now, whoever shall reflect upon what is said
and practiced, as to this matter, through all the World, and withal upon the
converse, which Men may have with the Spirits, and the Operations that may
attend them, he will undoubtedly desire to be well informed of all these
things, that he may distinguish betwixt the Truth and Falsehood of those
Opinions, and what is lawful and unlawful in those Practices. For these Reasons
I describe all the Sentiments that have been received amongst Men, in all Ages
and Places whatsoever, concerning God and the Spirits; what means Men have made
use of to conjure them up and down; and what they may be able to operate by the
help of those Spirits: whence proceeds a sufficient matter for a more
particular examination of what sound Reason, and the Holy Scripture teach us,
as to this Point, and what experience testifies of it.

Sect. 8. To treat of these things methodically, I have divided this Treatise
into four Books. In the first I propose the Opinions and Customs of all
Nations, in all Ages, Countries, and Religions, concerning the Deity, and the
good and bad Spirits. I say the Opinions and Customs; for in the matter we
undertake to treat of, we must take a special notice of these two things; the
Knowledge, and the Action; Since no Fruit can be perceived from the Knowledge,
but by putting it into Practice. Besides, we fee every where that the Behavior
of Men, either in the Words or Actions, has a relation to the Doctrines they
have been taught. For this Reason I have again divided in two parts, the
examination of what is contained in the first Book. In the first part I enquire
what Knowledge may be had or Spirits, of their Power and Operations, according
to Reason and the Holy Scripture; which Enquiry is the matter of the Second
Book. In the other part, which is the subject of the Third Book, I examine
those Sciences that are said to be grounded thereupon; as Witchcraft,
Divination, Conjuring, and the like. Moreover, as Men use to have recourse to
experience, not only in things which are not discovered by Reason, and of which
the Holy Scripture is silent; but also especially in this Case, in which
Reason, and the Holy Writ, are made to speak, according to the certainty which
we suppose to have acquired by Experience: This Consideration has furnished me
with the matter of the Fourth Book, in which I examine all that Men testify
ever to have experienced in themselves, or profess to have done.

CHAP. II. That the opinions of the Heathens, concerning God, and Spirits, are
to be found in Greek and Latin Authors.
Sect. 1. THat we may the better search into the bottom of this matter, it will
not methinks, prove unserviceable. First, to examine the various Opinions of
other Nations, and then those that are received amongst us. As to Foreign
Nations, we have to consider those that are not Christians, and such
Christians, as may be called Spurious. The First are the Heathens, who never
worshipped one true God, or the Mahometans, who keep as the mean betwixt them
and us; or the Jews, who Worship one God only. The others are Christians, who
are extremely corrupted, and plunged into strange Errors, both as to the
belief, and to their Worship, such as those of the Roman Communion. After we
have observed the disposition of all these Nations, she shall more easily
examine what is believed and practiced amongst us. As to the Heathens, we must
distinguish betwixt the Customs that were formerly in use in those Countries,
in which Christianity is at present established; and betwixt those that are
still practiced amongst those Nations, that have not yet been illuminated with
the light of the Gospel. We shall now proceed in that order.

Sect. 2. Europe, which is now most or all Christians, and those parts of Asia
and Africa, which are in the Turks possession, and of which very near one half
professes the Christian Faith, were formerly buried under the frightful
Darkness of Paganism, as are still most or all the rest of the World. Formerly
the Greeks, who inhabited those Countries, that are in the Grand Seignior's
Dominions, were the most famous People in the World, by reason of their
Learning and Religious Worship. Next to them came the Romans, and most of the
Nations, who still keep Communion with the Pope of Rome. For proportionably as
the Romans extended the limits of their Empire, so they subjected the conquered
Nations, to the Worship of their Gods, and to their Religion, so that their
Doctrine and Worship spread every where, and drew to themselves an Universal
Awe and Veneration. From them therefore we must know the Customs of our
Forefathers in the time of Heathenism; but we cannot accurately discover what
was their Belief concerning Spirits, unless we know, at least in general, their
Opinions and Practices, concerning God and inferior Deities,

Sect. 3. But the great difference and Divisions, that were amongst the
Heathens themselves upon this Account, leave us extremely in the Dark, as to
the Opinions that are to be ascribed to them. However, we may agree upon this,
viz. to take that stupendous number of differencies for an Uniformity; so that
it may he affirmed, that in all Ages, the Pagans have Unanimously believed,
that there is but one Sovereign God, the First Universal cause of all things;
since the First Doctors of their most famous Schools, and the heads of their
principal Sects, have generally taught this Doctrine to their Disciples. The
Opinion of Pythagoras, that Old Father of the Pagan Religion, may be seen in
Lactantius, who writing against the Heathens, did doubtless not intend to spare
them; however he says, that Pythagoras owned one God, an immaterial Spirit
diffused and extended through all Nature, who gives Life and Sense to all
beings. Plato, who has deserved the name of Wise, by all the succeeding Ages,
agrees with him, as to this point, as appears by his discourse to the
Athenians, in his four Books of the Laws. Gentlemen, says he, God in whom,
according to the Ancient Testimonies, is the beginning, the middle, and the end
of all things, penetrates every where, etc. And Aristotle, his great Disciple,
who for Two Thousand Years, has been esteemed the Prince of Philosophers,
plainly says in his First Book of Metaphysics, Chap. the 7th. that God is
Eternal and perfectly good, so that the Eternal and Infinite Life consists in
him. From this capital point they infer this other Belief, that the good and
evil, which befall Men, proceed from the First and Universal Deity, as Plato
more largely explains in the forementioned place. Equity, says he, Eternally
attends him, which is the Avenger of those that forsake the Law of God, but
happy is he, who sticks to it, and follows it constantly.

Sect. 4. But how advantageously soever they may speak of the supreme Deity, it
nevertheless appears, that they do not ascribe to him Independency, nor the
immediate direction of all things; since they divided the Government of the
World betwixt several Gods, to each of whom they assigned his particular share.
It Is very probable that the Caldees and Persians, observing how Human affairs
were often here below obnoxious to considerable changes, which proceeded from
Heaven, took occasion from thence, to contrive two supreme Deities, proceeding
from that First being; one of whom they called Oromasdes, and gave him the
direction of Heaven; to the other, named Arimanius, they ascribed that of the
Earth. The Romans afterward gave them the Greek names, viz. to the former that
of Jupiter, and to the latter, that of Pluto, whom they at First looked upon as
the God of the Earth. And because all the wise held for a certain Truth, that
the Heavens surpass the Earth in perfection, they placed the supreme Deity in
Heaven, and the other Gods under it, each according to his Dignity: And as they
conceived that the Sovereign God could never cease from being good, so Jupiter,
who had the Empire of the Heavens, was in great credit amongst them; but Pluto,
the God of Hell, obtained but an ill name.

Sect. 5. It is here, methinks, the proper place to distinguish the Doctrines
of the Pagans into such as had either Religion, or Nature, for their object. In
the latter, they enquired after the First and Second Causes of all things, of
their Motion and Changes, without any reference to Religion. Thus came upon the
Stage Plato, with his Idea's, and Aristotle with his Intelligencies, Plato
called Idea's the principles that flow from the Divine Nature, that subsists
with him, and by which all things subsist; each of them being as an Engraven
Image of him, from whom they all proceed; so that they all partake of the
Nature of their Original, and are such as the principal, from whence they flow.
When I confer the sentiment of Pythagoras contained in the words of Socrates,
related in the Parmenis, with what Plutarch says in his First Book, Chap. the
10th, of the Opinions of Philosophers; and Laertius in the Life of the same
Pythagoras, as also Cicero, in the First Book of the Tusculan Questions. Fifty
Eight, wherein he explains the meaning of that Philosopher, it seems to me,
that nothing can be better nor more plainly expressed, concerning this subject.
As for Aristotle his Opinion was that there are substances distinct and
separate from matter, who put the Heavens into Motions, supposing Heaven it
self (...), a Body in a continual and restless motion; that the Stars are of an
Eternal Nature, and that wh^t moves, must be more durable and precede that
which is moved. Thence he inferred, that there are as many permanent and
immovable substances. This is what he teaches in his Metaphysics Book the
14th. cap. 18. And what is called by his Latin Interpreters, Intelligencies.

Sect. 6. But when they proceed to Religion, there arise still among them more
considerable differencies, which may be plainly perceived in the Book of
Plutarch, Entitled, The Opinions of Philosophers, and elsewhere in the same
Author, as also in the Book; which Apuleius, a Platonist, more Ancient than
Plutarch, has written of the Life of Socrates. The sum of what he says, comes
to this; that the Deity is divided into Four, as into some Degrees that
descend from high to low, and that the three last Degrees are again subdivided
into several others, which they call (...), and (...), Gods, Demons and Heroes.
Plato, says Apuleius, has divided the whole Nature into three, with relation
to Spirits in particular, believing that there are Gods, Superior, Middle, and
Inferior. Of which Three sorts of Gods, it is convenient to say something.

Sect. 7. As to the Superior or Celestial Gods, he says, that their habitation
is in Heaven, that they are Immaterial and Eternal of their own Nature; but
that there are some, which are in some sort visible in the Stars, though others
cannot be perceived by corporal Eyes, but only by those of the Understanding.
After he has distinguished those Deities into Sexes. like Mankind, that is,
into Gods and Goddesses; he mentions these 12, viz. Jupiter, Apollo, Vulcan,
Mars, Neptune, Mercury, who are Six Gods, Juno, Diana, Venus, Ceres, Vesta,
Minerva, who are as many Goddesses. The dignity of these Celestial Gods,
notwithstanding the liberty which the Poets often took to contrive other
Accounts of them, 'twas esteemed too high, that it should allow them to descend
and converse with Men, though they governed their affairs, each in his
Jurisdiction. But the same Plato believes, the Stars are but improperly called
Gods, and only in reference to the Divine and Immutable conduct, that is
observable in them. The names of the fixed Stars, which are reckoned amongst
the visible Gods, are contained in this Verse.

Arcturum, pluviasque Hyadas, geminosque Triones -- But leaving those Gods to
Plato, of whose making they were, the Stars, which are called by Ignorance
Planets, or erring Stars, were also accounted amongst the Gods; the Sun was
called Apollo, and the Moon Diana, to which these Five were joined, Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, called also the Morning and Evening Star, and Mercury,
though they appear but ordinary Stars. Another source of the Pagan Errors in
their Divinity, is the Conformity, betwixt the name of some Stars, and those of
their invisible Gods, they believed, that there were Deities in the Stars, who
acted by them, or that the Stars were Gods; who having life in themselves,
communicated it to other Creatures, as it was believed by Alomen, whose Opinion
is related in Clemens Alexandrinus.

Sect. 8. We may still perceive some Remains of that Opinion in the names of
the Days of the Week, in the English, French, and Dutch Tongues, as well as in
Latin, for they still name by one of the Seven Planets that Day, on which they
believe them to have a particular Influence. As Lunae Dies, Lundi, Monday,
Maanday; Martis Dies, Mardi, Duigsday, an Abbreviation of Dyssenday, which is
still in use in Zealand, and Brabant. Mercury Dies, Mecred, Wednesday,
Woonsdag, from Wodensday, the Day of Woden, the name of Mercury amongst the
Ancient Germans and Dutch, because he was the God of Merchants, and the
Messenger of the Gods; Jovis Dies, Jeudi, Thursday, Donderdag, because Jupiter
was esteemed the God of Thunder; Veneris Dies, Vandredi, Friday, Vrydag, from
Freda, the Ancient name of Venus in the Dutch and Saxon Tongue; whence it
comes, that the Frisons called that Day Freed, and whence undoubtedly comes the
Dutch word Vryen, to Court a Woman. Saturni Dies, Samedi, Saturday, Saterdag.
Solis Dies, Sunday, Sondag, but in the French Tongue, it has lost it is Ancient
name, in remembrance of the Resurrection of our Lord, and is called Dimanche
from Dies Dominica.

Sect. 9. Let us proceed from the Gods to the Demons, or Spirits of a meaner
Order. Thales of Milet taught, if we believe Plutarch, (...), that the World is
full of Spirits, namely, the Air, which they inhabit, and the Earth in which
they converse amongst Men; the Greek word (...), comes from (...), I know, as
signifying one that is very Learned, because they believed that those Demons
knew whatever is important to Men, either for their Happiness or Misery, and
that they were as the Mediators of Men toward the Gods. And it is observable,
that (...) likewise signifies to Mediate, so that the Demons import so much as
Mediators. And therefore they have also been called (...), the Mediators and
Directors of Men, and have been placed according to the Opinions of the
Heathens, betwixt the Heavens and the Earth, viz. in the Air, and consequently
betwixt the Gods and Men.

Sect. 10. Though the Opinions were divided, as to their Nature, yet they
agreed in these principal points, that they were Spirits, that they were
Mortal, and however, that they were no Gods, as Plato writes in his Timoeus,
which explaining more at large in his Convivium, he says, that the Demons have
a Nature which is the Mean betwixt God and Men, (...). But what virtue have
they? That of explaining and declaring to Men, what things belong to the Gods,
which are their Commands, and how Sacrifices must be performed; As also, that
of offering to the Gods, what comes from Men, viz. their Prayers and
Sacrifices, so that they being in the middle, comprehend the Nature of both, as
binding and uniting the whole together.

Sect. 12. As to their Administration, Plato explains it thus. From them come
to us Predictions, Auguries, the worship of Sacrifices, Conjurations, Orations,
and the whole Art of Magic. The Deity meddles not with Men, but those Spirits
are the Directors of all the communication and converse of the Gods with us,
either wakeing or sleeping. The Demons therefore being by their Nature
Mediators, betwixt the Gods and Men, and being besides, Spirits, and almost
Gods, could not be better called, then Spirits of a middle Order, in relation
to their Nature; or Mediating Gods, in reference to their Functions, in how
great consideration those Spirits were, and what was the Sentiment of the
Ancients concerning them, may be learned from St. Chrysostom, Tom. 6. Less.
66. Entitled, Against those that say, that the Demons direct the Affairs of
Men.

Sect. 12. But, what will be most useful to observe, was, that there were
Demons of a Superior, and others of an Inferior Order; and that some were
esteemed Good, and others Wicked (...), Good and favorable; whereas the other
were (...), Evil Spirits, or by a more particular explication of their
Qualities, (...), Wicked, dangerous, Enemies, Cruel. However, these Demons,
either good or bad, were not believed of all Nations, to be of the same
Dignity. There were some, amongst whom, (...), imported as much as Deity, and
(...), Divine, even in Plato, the Sovereign God is called, (...), the greatest
Demon. However the general use was to distinguish the Gods from the Demons, as
has been already observed, and as Aeschines expresses it in his Clesias, O
Earth, Gods, Demons, and Men, whoever ye be, that desire to know the Truth! and
therefore Plato, in the place already quoted, may rightly say, (...), that
those learned and middle Spirits, are in great numbers and several kinds. But
it is not necessary to speak more of it, for perhaps it would only induce us
into several errors; there is so much uncertainty in Plato, and others that
have written upon it, they are so much opposed against one another, and even to
themselves.

Sect. 13. As to the Heroes, they were extraordinary Men, and so far above the
vulgar, that every where, especially amongst the Romans, they used to
consecrate and deifie them, after their Death, which was called (...), a
Canonization. Herodian in his Fourth Book, Chap 2. makes a particular
Description of that Ceremony, with all the Circumstances of it, on occasion of
the Death of the Emperor Severus. Besides we generally find in the writing of
the Ancients, that they paraell'd them with the Demons; Plutarch, relates in
his Opinions of the Philosophers, Chap. 8. Book First, That Thales, Plato, and
the Stoics believed, that the Demons were Spiritual substances, and that the
Heroes were Souls separated from the Body, which were good or bad, as Men had
been Virtuous or Vicious, this was especially the Doctrine of Pythagoras who in
all things that relate to Religion has had more Disciples then any of the
Ancient Heathens, and is yet the most followed by those that are not
Christians. He teaches that those Demons and Heroes brought in Dreams,
Diseases, and Cure to Men, and even to Cattle, and laboring Beasts; according
to the Testimony of Diogenes Laertius, confirmed by Plato, and not contradicted
by Aristotle.

Sect 14. Apuleius, in the Book formerly quoted, more particularly
demonstrates, that the powers, which put the natural passions of Men into
motion, which govern them, and Lord it over them, as also the Souls separated
from the Body, are called Gods, and Demons, or Spirits; that the Soul born with
the Body, dies not however with it; and that she bears the name of Genius, when
they are separated from each other. This meaning cannot, methinks, be better
expressed, than by naming those Souls, Associated Spirits, or Spirits peculiar
to one subject, since every Man has one within himself. The others, that is
those that are separated from the Body, or the Souls of the Deceased, are
commonly called Manes, as though remaining, because they remain of ^^^^^st
after the Body; for Which reason, I shall name them, Surviving Spirits.
However, as to the Latin word, it seems rather to be derived from Manis, an
Ancient obsolete Term, which signifies fine and good; as immanis imports, as
much as Ugly and Cruel; because the Manes were ordinarily taken for Benevolent
Spirits.

Sect. 15. Some of this last sort remained in the House of the deceased, to
watch over his Successors, and were called Lares, or Domestic Gods; but the
others erred at random, and as Exiles, according as they had deserved by their
wicked Life: They could cause but vain Fears to virtuous Persons, but to the
vicious a just Terror, and all sorts of Pains. They were called Lares, Night
Phantasms, and Spectra. Diogenes writes, that most of those things were taught
in the School, of Plato, as it still appears by his Book, Entitled, Phoedo.
They had also the name of Lemures, which is supposed to come from Remures, and
this from Remus, Brother to Romulus, who frightfully imagined to see the Ghost
of his Brother Remus, after he had killed him. If those Narrations were true,
such Spirits might be called terrifying Spirits. Ovid in the Fifth Book of the
Fasti plainly says what must be understood by that Name.

Mox etiam Lemures animas dixere silentum. The Soul of the Dead had the Name of
Lemures. Sect. 16. The Lares, or perhaps the Geniues are called by Macrobius in
his Third Book of the Saturnalia, Chap. 4. Penates, that is, Born together,
Quasi penes nos natos: For, as that Author pursues, it is by them that we
breath, by them that we have our Body, and by them that our Soul subsists: But
it is, better to call them Gods, and Governors of Countries, to distinguish them
from the Lares, who were particular to each Family, as they were both
distinguished from the Geniuses, and looked upon as taking care of the
exterior of Man, as the Geniuses did of the interior. However it must be
confessed, that there is but Confusion and Darkness to be met with in the Books
of the Heathens, concerning those Names, and their pretended Signification,
they having not well known themselves what they Worshipped, as Gods, or as
Spirits; neither need we take much trouble in unravelling what they themselves
knew not; since the memory, both of them, and of their Demons, is long since
extinguished upon Earth; This being the Lot of the Heathens, and of their Gods,
Jeremiah, cap. 10.

Sect. 17. Whether this last sort of Gods, or Spirits, were called Genii,
Manes, Penates, or Lemures, it plainly appears that they believed the
Immortality of the Soul; which Opinion being confounded with that of Demons,
gave occasion to contrive those sorts of Spirits. Plato in his Book Of the
Soul, Entitled Phaedo, induces Socrates, speaking near his Death in these
Words. Above all, the Soul must be immortal, and unperishable, and consequently
it must go to live, (...), in invisible places; or, as others pretend to infer
from the Etymology of the Word, in agreeable Places. Marcilius Ficinus has
Translated it in Latin, apud Manes, by the surviving Spirits, as I have named
them above; but a little after he Translates, apud Inferos, in the
Subterraneous Places: which proceed from that they placed the Soul of the
Deceased under the Earth. Cicero, in the first Book of the Tusculan Questions,
Sect. 26. shows both in these Words. We believe, that the Souls survive because
all our Reasonings lead us to that Opinion. Reason ought also to teach us where
they are; whence Ignorance has taken occasion to invent subterraneous places,
because Bodies being put into the Earth, and covered, with Earth, (humo, whence
comes humari to be Buried) thereof it has been believed, that the Dead still
live under the Earth. Now (...) is the same word which the Interpreters of the
New Testament sometimes Translate by that of Hell, sometimes by that of Grave;
none of which agrees with the Sense of Socrates, or that of Plato: For at the
end of the forementioned Book, Socrates derides Crito, who asked him how he
would be buried. He believes, says he, That I am that dead Body which he shall
see anon; signifying, that they might indeed Bury his Dead Body, but as to him,
that is, his Soul, he should pass, (...), to the assured Felicity of the
Blessed: which very much differs from the Grave or Hell. And therefore it is
certain, that Socrates, who spoke so, believed the Soul to be Immortal, and
that Plato, who writ his Words, was of the same persuasion.

Sect. 18. But there were others, who though they were of the same opinion, yet
having not acquired so much insight into the State of Souls separated from
their Bodies, invented Transmigrations and Purifications. The Druids, so famous
amongst the Ancient Gauls, held together the (...), or Transmigration of Souls,
with their Immortality; For they unanimously taught, according to the Testimony
of Caesar, Book 8. Chap. 18. Non interire animas sed ab aliis post mortem
transire ad alios: Souls die not, but that after Death they pass from one to
another. The ancient Egyptians were of the same Opinion, and Herodotus writes,
that they were the first who taught the Immortality of the Soul: For, says he,
their sentiment is, that the Soul being deprived of the Body, passes into
another Body, which is then born; and after she has thus walked through all
sorts of Bodies upon Earth, in the Sea, and in the Air, she at last returns
into a human Body. Thence it was that Pythagoras had his Doctrine, which he
brought over into Greece, whence it passed into Italy. Lactantius explains the
Opinions of that Philisopher in his Seventh Book de Proemio, Chap. 8. In these
words; Pythagoras as foolishly asserted, that the Souls passed into other
Bodies, from the Bodies of Men into those of Beasts, and from those of Beasts
into those of Men again, and that his own had formerly been that of Euphorbius.
Plato and several others have partly followed him, which we shall be obliged
frequently to mention hereafter.

Sect. 19. But Socrates, as Plato relates in the forementioned Treatise, which
contains his last Words, leads the Souls to some places, where they shall be
Blessed or Tormented, without Bodies: He sends those who shall have done Good
into the Upper and Aetherial Regions, where he believes the most pure part of
this Orb to be, and where the Soul shall Eternally live without the Body, in an
unexpressible Felicity. Whereas he condemns those of the Wicked to the
Tartarus, which is a deep and frightful Abyss, where they shall be punished
according to their Deserts. From that Gulf of Torments he draws four Rivers, to
which he gives as many Names, very fit to express his Notion, viz. Oceanus, a
precipitate Torrent; Acheron, a Torrent of Torments; Pyriphlegeton,
Conflagration; and Cocytus, Bemoaning. Here Sinners, who have not been
altogether incorrigible, are to be purged with many Pains and Vexations, more
or less, longer or shorter, according to their Deserts. There you have the
original of Purgatory, or of that purging Fire, still believed by the Roman
Church. However, Socrates gives out that Narration but for a Chimaera: For
before he begins it he calls it, (...), a pretty Fable worth hearing; and at
the end he says: But no Man of Sense ought to maintain that Opinion so, as I
have related, though I esteem it rational and just, to show that it goes very
near so, in reference to our Souls, and their Habitations; since it plainly
appears that the Soul is immortal. These Words of a Dying Man, who exhorts,
those that were present to be at all times ready for Death, persuade me more
and more of what I have already said, that the Heathens expressed themselves
variously upon these Matters; and that they speak otherwise, when they consider
them in reference to Religion; than when they conceive them in relation to the
enquiry after Natural things; but at the same time they show, that they were
not very certain of what they said, nor of What they believed.

CHAP. IV. That those Opinions, are the Source and Basis of the Art of
Divination.
THE Opinions of the Heathens concerning Spirits, being thus explained in
short, will give us an easy understanding of whatever is read in their Books,
concerning their Customs and Practices upon this Subject, and the Arts that
arose from them; These Arts were directed to two ends, to which Man is always
inclined of himself; that is, to know much, and to do much. Divination was used
to acquire an unlimited Knowledge, and Magic, to produce wonderful effects.
Our present design necessarily requires to speak clearly and distinctly of both.

Sect. 2. As to the First, we find in the Authors, and in several others, that
every one was eager to obtain the favor of the Gods, whether great or little,
and that they earnestly sought to please the good Spirits, and to turn off the
evil. To this end they built Temples, established Forms of Prayer, consecrated
Priests, offered Sacrifices, instituted Festivals and Games of all sorts.
Besides that, they used several means to discover the designs and inclinations
of the Gods, together with the happiness and misfortune of Men; to which they
supposed to attain, either by the Knowledge they might receive from the help of
the Demons, the communication of the Penates, of the Remures, by the means of
Oracles, Conjurations and Witchcraft, or by the observation of the influence of
the Stars, the motions of the Air, the dreams of sleeping Persons, by conjuring
up Ghosts, by enchantments, for which they made use of Carcasses, by
Prognostics drawn from the days of the year, the hours of the day, or the
meeting of Men and Beasts. Whatever was practiced as to this point amongst the
Romans, was called Divination, that properly signifies an exercise of things
concerning God, of which, Cicero has written a particular Book. Polydore Virgil
in his first Book, Chap. 24. relates, in what consisted all those Arts.
Wherefore I shall extract out of that Author, and several others, what is
necessary for the understanding of this matter.

Sect. 3. There, were two, sorts of Divinations Anciently in use amongst the
Greeks and the Romans, the one was rightly called Natural, but the other
Artificial, they held for a Natural Divination, what ever a particular, free,
and voluntary Action of the Mind of Man, without the help of Reason, or any
Conjecture, or Prognostic, portended as future, as it often happens in a
Dream, and even without Sleeping in the Fits of a raving Fever, thence the
Goddesses called Furies, had their Name and 'twas believed, that some Priests,
and even the Sybil, Erythrea had begun to utter their Oracles in such
Paroxysins. Jupiter Hammon, and Apollo of Delphos, gave their Answers in such a
way, and by such sort of People of which their Priests themselves boasted. And
as those Persons were esteemed sincere, and to act in the course of Nature, the
vulgar ascribed to their affected furor; what a long Observation and a frequent
experience caused them to discover, or to foretell upon concealed or future
things. The chief and most famous of those divining Arts were Astrology, the
Art of Haruspices, or foreteling, by the inspection of the Bowels of sanctified
Beasts, besides Auguries, and casting of Lots.

Sect. 4. Astrology was called by the Greeks, a Conjecture drawn from the
Stars; so that Astrologers may be named Divines by the Stars, the communication
of the Gods with the Stars, of which mention has been made before, the
operations of those Celestial Bodies, and the influences upon the inferior part
of the World, and upon Men, and even upon one another, gave occasion to
believe, that from thence may be drawn conjectures useful for Mankind; but I
shall not enlarge upon this point further; because I treat of it as far as it is
necessary in my Examination of Councils, Chap. 8. where is to be seen, what
rank is to be given to those that are called Genethliaci, or Planetarii, which
we usually call Fortune Tellers; who by the inspection of the Stars, especially
of the Planets, in the instant that a person was born, foretell what
inclinations, what fortune he shall have, and of what sort of death he shall
dye; which Art is not yet abolished in the World: but because there will be
occasion to speak of it afterward, I shall present the Reader only, with a
short account of the three others.

Sect. 5. Donatus derives the Word Haruspices, and Haruspicina, from Haruga a
Sacrifice; and Exta Entrails, it being the Art of foretelling future things,
by the inspection of the Entrails of Beasts, that were sacrificed to the false
Gods, as tho those Gods had imprinted some signs on the Bowels of the Victims
that were offered to them. To this sort belong the Case recited by Apian in his
second Book of the Wars of Alexandria, and by Cicero, namely, that no Heart was
found in an Ox, which Julius Caesar sacrificed, the first day that he sat on
the Golden Seat; wherefore the Diviners told him, that such a sitting could not
prove happy to him.

Sect. 6. To those Arts M. Tullius adds two others, viz. that of Prodigies, and
that of Lightning. Prodigies, Ostenta, comes from Ostendendo, to show, to
signify, because when something extraordinay in Nature offered it self to the
sight, they drew presages from it; as it was done, if we believe Herodotus, in
his 7th Book, when a Mare was big with a Hare, at the time of the invasion of
Greece by Xerxes, for from thence the Divines conjectured, that his powerful
Army should fly before the Grecians, as a Hare before the Hunter. Such
accidents were also called Portenta, Monstra, Prodigia, Signs and Monsters.
Such also were Thunders and Lightnings, Fulmina and Fulgura, as Virgil says, De
caelo tactas memini praedicere quercus. The thundered Oaks foretold me that
event.

Auspicium, Auspice, and Augurium, Augury; the former so called, from viewing
the flight of the Birds, and the latter from observing their Song and Cry, made
the whole employment of those that were called Auspices and Augures: they were
very famous amongst the Ancient; for at Rome, that sort of Divination was
preferred before all the others; and the College of Augures was extremely
reverenced. No Affair of importance was undertaken without consulting them, to
know whether it should succeed, or not. That so much exalted Art observed the
Birds three ways, in their Flight, in their Singing, and their Eating: As to
their Flight, they made their observations upon the Praepetes, that is, on
swift flying Birds; as to the Singing, they drew their conjectures from
Oscines, or Singing Birds; and as to Eating, they observed the young Chickens
Amongst the 4th sort is ranked the case of the Emperor Augustus, from whose
hands an Eagle took a piece of Bread, whilst he was yet a Child, carried it
into the Air, whence softly coming down, she let it fall; which gave occasion
to the Diviners, to foretell the happiness of Augustin's life, if we may
believe Suetonius. To the 2d, way or the Divination by Singing, this Verse of
Virgil may be applied, Saepe sinistra cava praedixit ab ilice Cornix. The
ominous Crow foretold it on an Oak.

For the 3d, sort, they used the Tripudia solstima, which were a sort of
Skipping and Dancing, during which, if the Chicken fell upon the Meat, that was
fallen from his Bill on the ground, called Solum, and swallowed it greedily, it
was a happy Omen; whereas, if he let it stand, an ill success was to be feared.
Thus was foreseen the defeat of Hostilius Mancinus by the Numantines; because
the Chickens had refused to eat, and were fled from their Coops.

Sect. 8. Sortilegium, or Casting of lots, was a disposition of some Letters
mixed together, and drawn at adventure, by the first Child to be met with;
those Letters were engraven on the Bark of an Oak, according to the ancient
Custom, and disposed as many different ways as was possible, to see whether
they should render some Sense or none. Whence the good or bad fortune of the
Inquirer was inferred. When Tiberius, says Suetonius in his Life, undertook a
journey into Dalmatia, and at Pavia consulted the Oracle of Geryon by Lots, he
was obliged to make use of another way; for he was answered that he should cast
Golden Dice in the Spring of the Fountain Apona; which having done, it was the
greatest point that appeared to his Eye, which is still to be seen under water
at this day.

Sect. 9. There is yet another way of Divination, famous, even in the Holy
Scripture, viz. by expounding of Dreams. I shall be obliged to speak of it more
at large another time, because the Omirocritici, or expounders of Dreams, are
nor yet banished out of the World, and that some, especially of the French
Court, begin to revive that Art. As to the Heathens, as often as the Demons,
Geniuses and Larvae, meddled with their Dreams, it was to offer them something
particular, by which, according to the usual Rules of their Art, they might
know the good or bad success of future things.

Sect. 10. Our Ancestors in the time of Paganism, had amongst them a Custom of
that nature, as Tacitus relates. Divinations, and casting of Lots says he, are
as much in fashion amongst them, as any where else. They cast their Lots in a
very simple way, for they cut the branch of a Fruit-tree in several little
Lots, on each of which they make a particular mark, and then Confusedly throw
them on a piece of white Cloth. There the Priest, if matters of State are
treated of, or the Father of the Family, when it concerns him, or his house
looking to he Heavens, lifts up thrice each little Lot, and gives the
explication of the marks printed on them; if they dissuade, no farther
consultation is made that day; but if they allow to proceed, they go to the
Diviners for an Answer. There is yet another particular way of predicting
amongst that people, by the means of white Horses, that were never backed, and
are kept together in a Forest at the Public Cost. They hunt them, and the
Priest, King or Governor sitting on a consecrated Chariot, observes their
Neighing and Foam. There is no Divination more esteemd than this, not only by
the People, but even by the Great Men and the Priests; the latter are looked
upon as the Ministers of the Gods, and the Great Men as those that are nearer
and better known to them.

Sect. 11. But it is not sufficient to have explained 'the names of those 3 or 4
ways of making the Heathen Gods speak; for though they be the chief, yet I find
that several others have been in use, called by the Greeks, ^egromancy,
Pyromancy, Aeromancy, Hydr^mancy, Geoma^cy and Chiromancy: the 1st. relates to
the dead, the 2d. to the Fire, the 3d. to the Air, the 4th to the Water, the
5th to the Earth, the 6th to the Hands. Polydore Virgil gives us a description
of each of these Arts, in the 23 Chapter of his 1st. Book.

Sect. 12. Necromancy, or the Divination by dead Bodies, is made by something
perceived on a Corpse, which gives occasion to the foretelling. The ignorance of
the Greek Tongue has made some believe, that (...), which signifies dead, was
derived from the Latin, as though it had been Negros, from Niger Black, which
mistake caused Necromancy to be called the Black Art; which name is used at
present to signify all sorts of Witchcraft, Enchantments, and Diabolical
Illusions. Under this sort is comprehended Sciomancy, or Divination by the
shadows in which they conjured up the Ghosts or Shadows of the dead, to
foretell future things. It would be a great proof of the power of this Art, if
what Lucan relate in his 6th Book, were true, that a Ghost conjured up,
foretold the whole success of the Battle of Pharsalia. Sciomancy differed from
Necromancy herein, that the latter requires Blood, and made the dead Bodies
appear, whereas the other conjured up only Ghosts.

Sect. 13. Pyromancy was, according to Polydor? a Divination by Fire, when they
supposed to know something by the means of Fire, for which purpose Observations
were made upon Lightning, or some other extraordinary Fire. Instances of it are
to be read in Livy, and in the First Book of Dionysius Halicarnass. where it is
related, that the Wise of Tarquinius the Ancient, seeing a Flame surround the
Head of Seruivs Tullius, foretold, that he should become King of Rome.

Sect. 14. Acromancy, or the Divination by the Air, consisted observing
Tempests, and extraordinary Clouds; as when Pliny relates in his Second Book,
that there Rained Iron in Lucania, which in his Opinion signified, the Defeat
of Ceassus, by the Parthians. He likewise relates in his First Book of the
Second Punick War, that their Rained Stones in Picenium, which he takes for a
forerunner of the Evils, that Hanibal was bringing to Italy. Those Divines are
called in the Hebrew Bible (...) Jidnoni, Diviners by the Clouds; amongst this
sort may be ranck'd the Capnomancy, which consisted in observing the motions of
the Smoke of Sacrifices

Sect. 15. Hydromancy, or the Divination by Water, arose from something
particular, which they fancyed to see in the Water. Varro relates upon this
occasion, that a Youth saw in the Water, the Image of Mercury, who declared to
him, in 150 Verses, the whole course, and all the events of the War against
Mithridates; St. Austin, in the 9th Book of the City of God, says that Numa
Pompilius, the Second King of the Romans, was the Inventer of that Art, and
that by the illusion of the Demons, he made appear upon the Water, the Images
of the Gods, who gave him Laws, for governing his People, with goodness and
Justice.

Sect. 16. Geomancy, or the Divination by the Earth, was made by the
Observation of the Clefts and Chasms, of an Earth quake, I could not find any
particular Description of it, tho I was never so inquisitive after it; but I
suppose, that to this may be referred, what is related by Livy, Decad. 1 Book
7. Sect. 6. concerning Marius Curtius. In the same Year (which was according to
the Calculation of Calvisius 357 before Christ;) either by an Earthquake, or
some other strange commotion, almost one half of the Market of Rome, was
swallowed up. There was a great Depth, and most frightful Chasm, which could
not be filled, what trouble soever was taken for it, tho People carried Cattle
thither continually. The Oracles of the Gods were consulted, and the Diviners
answered, that the things in which the principal Strength of the Roman People
consisted, must be Consecrated to them in that very place, if they desired to
establish for ever, the Republic of Rome. And as they were troubled to know,
what was the thing to be Consecrated; a warlike Young Man called Martius
Curtius derided it, asserting, that the chief Strengh of the Roman People,
consisted in Valor, and an undaunted Courage, to confirm which, he got on
Horseback, and precipitated himself into the Abyss.

Sect. 17. Chiromancy, or Palmistry, considers the Lines of the Hands, to know
the Fortune of Men, whereupon Juvenal says in his 6th Satyr.

-- Frontemque manumque
Praebebit vati,
His Hand and Head, he would show to the Divine. Whence appears, that Physiognomy,
that is, accordeing to the Etymology of the word, the Knowledgs of Nature; but
by use, the Observation of a Man Shape, must be comprehended under this sort,
for this Art foretells things by the Looks, the Features and Lineaments of the
Face, by which the Genius and Humor of Men are to be discovered.

Sect. 18. Now all these things are natural, tho they were abused to attain to
a supernatural knowledge. But Art was made use of in other means, which were
the works of Men's Hands, that might well be called a Bewitching Pomp; in that
rank was contained the Axinomancy, a Witchcraft made with an Axe, Hatchet, or
the like Tool. The Lecanomancy another Witchcraft, in which they used a Caldr^u
full of Water, on the bottom of which, they fancyed, that the Demons came to
walk. The Catoptromancy, a Witchcraft made with Looking-glasses, in which they
supposed that blindfolded Children saw what 'twas desired to be known. The
Keskinomancy, in which they used a Seive, and a Thousand other Impertinencies.

CHAP. IV. That all the different sorts of Witchcraft, that have been in use,
proceeded from the same Original.
Sect. 1. I have hitherto treated of those Arts, that to say properly, are
Sciencies, supposed to be acquired several ways, by the Communication with the
Gods, or with the Spirits. Now I shall Treat of Magic, which refers to Action.
That name is now determined to that particular practice, tho it has been given
in general to all the other Sciencies, of which I have spoken in the foregoing
Chapter. If comes from the Grecians, tho it be not a Greek word. It Is
universally believed, that it is a Persian word; now that Tongue had Anciently
many things common with the Hebrew, as well in the Style as in the Etymology;
But in Hebrew (...) Hagah, signifies to censider, to reflect and (...) Mahgeh,
thinking Person, one who tells Secrets and Mysteries. I have explained what the
Magi were in my Commentary upon Daniel, Sect 62, where the matter required it;
they, were at first honest Men, who endeavored to penetrate into the secrets
of Nature, by lawful means, and attained to the performance of things above
the common Belief, Nam quod ego apud plurimos lego, Persarum lingua, magus est,
qui nostra sacerdoss. for as I read, in several Authors, a Magus in the Persian
Tongue signifies a Priest in ours. These are the words of Apuleius in his
Apology, and Plato calls Magic, (...), the Cure of the Gods, 'and Porphyrie
(...) says, that Divines and Physicians were called by the Persians, Magi;
which title was given to both in the Country. Hesychius likewise says, that a
pious Man and well informed in the knowledge of Divine things, or a Priest is
called Magus, (...); and Cicero de Divinatione, sapientum and doctorum genus
magorum habebatur in Persis; amongst the Persians, the Magi were looked upon as
Wise and learned Men.

Sect. 2. It Is very probable, that when those Men were got at Court and in
great esteem amongst the Vulgar, their Art was not sufficient to keep up their
Reputation; then they begun to use Craft and Cheats, and even some of them,
abused that Art so far, as to join Malice to Deception, and not to spare either
the Goods, or the Blood or several Persons; so that as on the one side, the
Pagans extremely honored that sort of People, because of their Wit and parts;
so they despised them upon another Account, and had a great hatred for them.
Thence proceeded that some have Anciently been famous in the Magic Art, as
well for the good, as the bad use they made of it, as Apollonius of Tyanis,
whose Life has been written by Philostrates, and Elymas, who resisted St. Paul,
Acts, 13. Verse 8. And the Wisemen of Egypt and Babylon, who were called to
expound the Dreams of their Kings. Genesis Chap. 4. Verse 8. And Daniel, Chap. 2.
Verse 4. Even Moses, Daniel, the Wisemen of the East, who sought the King of
the Jews newly born; all those Men were famous for Magic, tho Authors speak
variously of them, either with or against them, there is so much difference
betwixt the same Sciences and the same Actions, by the good or bad use that is
made of them. Nevertheless, it was properly that Art, to which we now give the
name of Magic. Agrippa of Nettinheim, distinguishes it in Two sorts, one of
which may be called Natural Magic and the other Artificial; because the first
having Natural causes, produces Natural Effects, but the Second being an
invention of Art, Nature has no share in it is Operations. I mean that as it is
necessary in all Arts and Handicrafts, that Nature should supply the matter and
power of Action, tho the Workman imploys them this or that way, only by the
rules of his Art. It goes even so with the Artists of whom I speak, and not as
which a Husbandman, who can only prepare the Ground, cast his Seed upon, or
plant a Tree upon it, but must expect the Harvest and Fruit from Nature it
self, helped with his Art.

Sect. 3. They believe, says Agrippa, that Natural Magic is but the highest
Degree of power, in Natural Sciences; for which Reason they call it the extreme
and last perfection of the knowledge of Nature; saying, that it is the active
part of Natural Wisdom, which, by the help of Natural power used in proper
time, operates wonderful effects, and raises Admiration. The Moors and Indians
made a special use of that Magic, that is, as much as it was able to produce
effects, by the power of Herbs, Stones, and other things of the same kind.
Moreover, says again Agrippa, for that Reason, Natural Magic is that, which
penetrates the Virtues of all Natural things, and which with a subtle
discerning, having exactly searched into their Indurations, and Sympathies,
discovers so far their secret powers, that by them it produces wonders, which
amaze Humane understanding; not so much by Art, as Nature, to which, as to its
Sovereign Art submits it self, and only lends her the helping Hand. Thus we can
by Natural ways produce ripe Fruits before their Season, and even infects, only
by supplying the want of time, by Natural means unknown to other Men; as it is
done, tho in a less Degree of perfection, by Gardners, each of whom, strives to
be the first in getting early Fruits, helping Nature by Art, and still however
by the means of Nature her self. The difference only consists in this, that a
Magus, who wholly gives up himself to his study, penetrates much farther into
the knowledge of the power of Nature, than the Vulgar, and even those learned,
who care not to take that trouble upon them. But as all these things are done
without the particular assistance and concourse of God and the Spirits, they
concern not the present question; however we mention them, that we may learn to
distinguish them from the subject in Hand, and all it is dependencies, of which
we intend to give a clear and undeniable notion.

Sect. 4. We have hitherto seen the Magic of the Pagans, included within the
bounds of Nature. Now I desire the Reader to remember what I have said in my
Commentary upon Daniel, Sect. 26. viz. That to the Magic anciently in use
Mathematics, Physic, and Divinity were ordinarily conjoined; some giving up
themselves to one of those Sciences, and others to another, whence proceeded a
difference of Names, betwixt the Students of Magic; some of whom were called
Mathematicians, and others Physicians, or by a more odious name, Poisoners. The
former applied themselve chiefly to perform wonderful things; and the others to
perpetrate Wickedness. Amongst their Wonders may be counted the Wooden Dove of
Architas, that fly'd, and the Statues of Mercury that spoke; but the employment
of Poisoners was to annoy Men, their Goods and their Beasts, by many things
commonly unknown. And having learned the Virtues and Properties of them by
their Study, they put them, in use in such a concealed and imperceptible way,
that one could scatce belieye what he saw effected; and this is, what they
really operated. But as to what they boasted of besides, or perhaps, imagined
themselves capable of; it was, that by the virtues of Simples, and some other
Drugs mixed together, they could transform Men into Beasts, Beasts into Men,
Beasts and Men into other Beasts and Men, conjure up Ghosts, or raise the Dead
out of their Graves, etc.

Sect. 5. Now we must speak of Magic merely Artificial, which may rightly be
so called, because Nature has no share in it; but that is a work of Art alone,
which however presupposes Nature; one may also very fitly give the names of
Witchcraft, Conjuration, and Enchanting in general, to all the various
practices that are made of it; for we call Witchcraft whatever is operated by
the power of the Devil, with the communication of Men, which is never done,
without using some sort of Conjuration, and Enchanting. That Art which required
of its Professors a particular way of living, always consisted in the use of
some certain Signs and Words, that they uttered or wrote, and in extraordinary
Gestures, in consideration of which, the Demons were ready at all times to
discover to them hidden things; and to operate in their behalf, supernatural
Wonders. This was therefore the opinion of the Heathens, that besides natural
Magic, they believed themselves capable of producing the most wonderful
effects by the power of Demons, whom they knew how to make comply, by their
Conjurations, to whatever they desired.

Sect. 6. We must carefully observe this, because, natural Magic is not
commonly accurately distinguished from the Artificial, either by the Ancients
or by the Moderns; and that which belongs to one, is frequently attributed to
the other: even those that meddle with it, having committed as many mistakes as
the others. For some of them, says Agrippa, are come to that height of Folly,
as to believe, that by the different Concourse and Aspects of the Stars, with
the interposition of time and proportions duly observed, they may, in a
certain instant, acquire a sensible Idaea of Celestial things, and a Spirit of
Life and Understanding; which being Interrogated by them, will give them
Answers, and discover 'em hidden things. On the other side, they ascribe to
Nature what is above her power, which I cannot better express, than by the very
words of Agrippa, who proceeds thus. I desire you to take notice, that those
Magicians, not only rake up into natural things, but even in a manner remove
Nature out of her place; which they endeavor to do by Motions, by Numbers, by
Gestures, by Sounds, by Voices, by Congregations, by Lights, by the
Inclinations of the Mind, and by Words. Thus it was that the Inhabitants of
Psilli and Marsi conjured Serpents, and put them to flight; thus Orpheus by his
singing allayed the Tempests, for the sake of the Argonauts; Thus, as Homer
relates, by some certain words, the blood of Ulysses was stopped. There was a
punishment ordained by the Law of the 12 Tables, to those that should use such
sort of Enchantments against Corn.

Sect. 7. It must not seem strange to us that things should be so, in the
Pagans time, for Magic considered in general, and in it self, was esteemed,
because of its depth, and honored as Divine, taking the word in the sense of
the Heathens, and as it may be attributed to their Deities, which have been
des^ribed before. Besides, Magic was reverenced, because of Efficacy and
Power, beloved for its serviceableness in the good use of it, but hated and
detested, by reason of its malignity, and the disturbance it caused, when it
was abused. The same Agrippa will tell us, in the words of Porphyry, which was
the opinion of the most ingenious Heathens upon that subject. Porphyry says he,
treating of Witchcraft, and of the Magic of Divine things, concludes at last,
that it may render the Souls of Men capable of receiving Spirits and Angels,
but he absolutely denies, that one may approach God by that Art.

CHAP. V. That we see still amongst the present Pagans, the same Doctrines and
Practices.
WE have spoken as much as it was necessary for our subject, of the Doctrines
of the Ancient Paganism, which reigned in the Countries we, inhabit. We have
also spoken of the Nations, who introduced most of those Arts and Sciences, of
which we treat, It is now fit to consider the Modern Heathens, to know how far
their Sentiments and Practices concerning Spirits can reach, without the Light
of the Holy Scripture, which never shined upon them. It is the more necessary
to enter into that examination, that we shall see, withal, the Customs of very
many Nations, arid that the proofs they shall furnish us with, of the
uniformity of Opinion, (that which we contend to be amongst the Heathens) will
then be more general and extended, then such as are drawn from the Writings of
those we have already spoken of, of which Christianity has taken place; since
they inhabited only a small part of life World, and have given us in their
Writings but a slender account of the other Heathens. So that all these others,
the number of which is far more considerable, are absolutely unknown to us.

Sect. 2. Experience teaches us, that we cannot better divide the World, then
as into three great Islands; one part of which was known to the ancient Greeks
and Romans, though not perfectly: The second part is come to our knowledge,
since about two hundred years: The third is yet for the most part unknown. The
first is called for that Reason the Ancient World, divided into Europe, Asia,
and Africa. But in the North of Europe, which continent is not much greater
than one half of the other, there are still many Heathen Inhabitants. In Asia
the Christians are hardly the tenth part of the People, and about the third
part of the rest follow Mahomet; so that the greatest number is still Pagans.
The Mahometans take up the North of Africa, and the Heathens possess the two
third parts Eastward: The half of the third part is filled with Mahometans, and
the other half by imperfect Christians. In the new World, called America, or
the West Indies, the Southern part is almost as big as Africa; and the
Northern, which is not yet fully known, is perhaps as big as Asia. All that
Country is Heathen, save a small number of Christians, gone thither from
Europe, viz. some Spaniards, Portuguese, English, French and Dutch, who bring
over from time to time some Heathens, though very few, to Christianity; at
least, the English are now very earnest in it. In the mean while; those
Europeans may inform us of the State of those Nations, as to what concerns
their Belief and Religion, of which they have gotten a great knowledge, by the
Commerce they have with them. But as to the Austral Country, (which is known
only by the Conjectures that we can make upon its Circuit (their being no
Inland Sea) it is perhaps as big as Europe and Asia together. Now that great
part, having never been enlightened by the Doctrine of our Savior, must be
presumed to be still altogether Heathen.

Sect. 3. But it will perhaps be said, to what purpose is all that Narration? I
answer, that having shown the Reader that three parts of the known World,
considered as divided into five, are still Pagan, he cannot but infer, that we
are not sufficiently informed of the Customs and Sentiments of the Heathens
concerning Spirits, by the Books of those Nations that subsist no more, and who
never made up the tenth part of the Inhabited World: and therefore we must not
keep there; but it is likewise fit to examine the Opinions of those many
Nations, who are not yet Christians, whose uniformity upon this question,
notwithstanding so many other things, in which they differ, and with all the
great distance of the places they Inhabit, which cuts of all manner of
Communication betwixt them; so that the greatest part of the one never heard so
much as one word of the other: That Uniformity, I say, is an evident proof of
the good, which the common light of the Understanding remained in Man after his
Fall, has preserved in him; and of the evil which the general corruption has
brought to the fame. And when we come to the examination of the Sentiments of
the Christians, that will help us to distinguish betwixt those general Truths,
and those impure mixtures of Corruption. For these Reasons, I shall now speak
of the Belief and Practices of the present Heathens.

Sect. 4. But I need not to treat largely of it, for an entire Volume would not
suffice. Neither do I intend to write a History, but only to give Instances, in
order to show what the most pare of the Nations known to us, think in this
matter. It Is not convenient to proceed in this enquiry farther, then it is
requisite to show that all those People agree together, as also with the
Ancient Nations, tho there is never so great a difference in their Language,
Country and time. The way is already more than half traced out, by the
diligence of Carolinus; who, in his Modern Paganis^, has extracted, out of more
than 50 Authors, whatever the Heathens of our time Believe and Practice as to
Religion, in all Asia, Africa, and part of Europe. It Is pity he has not lived
long enough, to inform us of the Opinions of the new World. It would have
proved very serviceable to me, for it would have spared me the trouble of
consulting a great many Writers, whence I have extracted them.

Sect. 5. In the mean while it will not be useless to observe, that all the
Authors which Carolinus has followed, and which I am likewise obliged to
follow, are Christians; and therefore they have set down the Belief and Worship
of those Heathens, only upon the particular Information they received from the
Heathens themselves, or the things that they saw them practice, so that they
cannot afford us such a clear and neat knowledge of what they relate, as is
that which may be gathered from the Writings of the Ancient Heathens, who have
themselves, in their own Tongue, treated of their own Affairs. And therefore we
cannot rely so much upon the descriptions of the present Heathenism, which are
made by Christians who undoubtedly have but seen or learned part of the
Sentiments and Customs of the People they speak of, and who perhaps, are not
disposed to make such a simple and natural relation of them, as could be
desired. Now I find that all those Writers are in the fame prejudice, when they
tell us, that there are many Nations who adore the Devil himself, vexing
themselves with grievous pains, and cruel torments, to be his Martyrs: But the
mistake of those Authors, seems to me to discover it self, for he that has been
quoted before, says in the 7th Chap. of his 1st. Part, pa. 56. That Trigaltius
testifies, that most of the Chinese interrogated the Devil, or Familiar
Spirits, as they called a them, of which there are many amongst them, and that
they esteem it rather a Divine, than a Diabolical operation. I believe that
it is the same with all the other Nations, woh are accused directly to adore the
Devil, and am persuaded, that if the thing were strictly examined, it would be
found, that they have not so much as a Notion of what we understand by the word
Devil.

Sect. 6. For it is easy to conceive that those that have not the same
knowledge and sentiments of God with us, cannot also have the same Ideas of the
Devil, that the Christians have, since he, that knows not God after the manner
of the Christians, cannot also know the Devil; and that is impossible that any
rational Creature should know the Devil as he is, and adore him. For as to what
is said by the Apostle, concerning the Heathens, that they offer their
sacrifices to the Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20. It Is not expressly said to the Devil, as
to the Chief of the wicked Angels, no more then in St. Matthew. 25.41. But to
him, as the Chief of the Demons, of which we have formerly spoken. And it is
observable, that the Greek word used by St. Paul, is not that of Devils but
Demons, which is the name the Heathens gave to a sort of inferior Gods, as has
been already said. After that Observation, let us see what conformity may be
found, betwixt the sentiments of the Ancient Pagans, and that of the Modern
Heathen, as to Spirits; we shall begin with Europe, thence proceed to Asia, and
Africa, and at last, go over into America.

CHAP. VI. That this Conformity must be sought, 1st, in the remains of Paganism
in Europe.
Sect. 1. IT has been already said, that there are some Pagans in the extremity
of Europe, especially in the Northern parts, but they are so brutish and wild,
that it is easier to see what they do, than to conceive or guess what they
believe. They are Laplanders and Finlanders, especially those Swedish Dominion,
with whom we are best acquainted, by a description drawn from the best Authors,
which Scheffer has made in his Swedish Lapland; and therefore I shall declare
as much as I judge convenient for my design; First, what he says of these, and
afterward what is added of the others; yet without giving credit to whatever
is written, of which I scarce believe one half to be true. This however, is
certain, that those People, though under the Dominion of Christian Princes, viz.
those of Swedeland, Denmark, and Muscovy, are as fond of their Pagan
Superstition, and continue as zealously, though secretly, their ancient
practices, as they have little knowledge of Christianity, and inclination to
embrace our Faith. In the mean while, Scheffer has made of late such an
accurate description of Lapland, and upon such certain information, that one
may, methinks, surely rely upon what he says; and as he frequently intermixes
in his Narrations, other Laplanders and Finlanders, it may be probably inferred
that he esteems them all very near alike in Belief and Worship: which may be
confirmed by this reason, that what other Writers say of those other Nations,
is pretty agreeable with what Scheffer relates of Swedish Lapland. And
therefore I shall follow him only, though I ought not to say him only, since his
Book contains whatever the others had written before him. Let us then First
^ee, which are the sentiments of those Pagans, and afterward we shall speak of
their Magic.

Sect. 2. The objects of their Worship are divided into three sorts, as into so
many degrees: the most sublime are Thor, or Thordoen, which is properly the
Thunder; Storjunkare or Stourra-passe, which signify Holy and Great; and
Baiwe, that is the Sun. The first has also the name of Tiermes, which in the
Laplandish Language, is as much as the noise of the Thunder, because that God
is believed to be the Master of Thunder, and seems therefore to be their
Jupiter. He is also named Aijeke, that is, Great Father. The Laplanders ascribe
co him an absolute Power over the Life and Death of Men, over their Health and
Diseases, and over the wicked Demons, who live on the top of the Rocks,
Mountains and Lakes. They believe that he restrains those Demons, when they vex
Men too much; that he chastises them, that he sometimes Thunder-strikes 'em,
and puts 'em to death, esteeming it to be the chief employment of the Thunder,
as the eminent Latins imagined that Jupiter cast his Thunderbolt upon the
wicked, and all other Criminals; for that purpose they give him a Bow, which
they imagined to be the Iris or Rainbow, that he might dart his Arrows, wound
and kill all the wicked Demons. They call in their Tongue the Iris, Aijeke
dauge, the great Fathers Bow, that is, the Bow of the Good and Beneficent God,
who preserves them as his Children, and defends them against the Insults of
those wicked Demons. They imagine that God has likewise a Hammer, which they
call Aijewetchera, with which he strikes on the Neck of the Demons, and breaks
their Head. Storjunkare, or Stourra-passe, which signifies the Governor of the
Country, is amongst them as the Great Pan or as Diana, having the Country and
Woods under his directions; Fishes and Birds are also at his disposal, and all
Anima^s and w^ld Beasts, acknowledge his Empire, it is by him (...) they are
happy in hunting, and without his leave they cannot catch any thing. True it
is, that Aijeke or Tiermes governs Gods, Demons, and Men; but Storjunkare, in
quality of Vicar of that God has the conduct of all those other things. Barwe
that signifies the Sun, as Paiwe does the Day, is adored by them for the good
he does to the Earth, but they particularly venetrate him in Summer time,
because they always see him, that he has restored them his Light, dissipated
their Darkness, brought Heat and expelled Cold.

Sect. 3. The Manes of the Romans, mentioned before Chap. 2. Sect. 15. Are
among the Laplanders Inferior Gods, which they call Sit. They erect no
Figures to their Honor, and content themselves with offering Sarcifices to
them; we find in no writing, what sentiments they have of the power of those
Sit, nor for what reason, they make them Offerings. The last sort of those
Inferior Gods, are the Juhles, or Inhlaforket, that are a Vagabond Crowd, whom
they believe to wander in the Air, and through Forests and Mountains. But I
find also, no where what good or hurt those Spirits, may, in their Opinion
procure to Men, only they believe them Inferior to the Sit; however, they pay
them also some Worship, behind their Cottage, at a Bow shot distance, which
Worship ends in a superstitious Sacrifice. They consecrate to them neither
Images nor Statues, no more then to the Manes; they have likewise no Image of
Bawe, or the Sun, either because he is visible himself, or because the most
secret Science of their Mysteries accounts him but one God, with Tiermes. There
is but Ayeke and Storjunkar, who have Statues erected to their Honor, those of
Aijeke are of Wood, and those of Storjunkare of Stone.

Sect. 4. It Is upon those Opinions that their Divinations and Witchcraft are
grounded, and hereupon I cannot but make this observation, that by reading
Scheffer, and comparing what he fays of his own, with what he has collected
from other Authors, it may easily be perceived, that the Witchcraft of the
Northern Nations extends not so far as is commonly reported. But then we must
credit what Scheffer assures us from his own experience, in the following
words, Chap. 12. Tho the present Laplanders do not frequently nor publicly
exercise Magic, their Ancestors having been more addicted to those
superstitions, of which most of the modern Laplanders are free, and tho the
Country be purified of that sort of Witchcraft, ever since the King of Sweden
has forbidden, under grievous pains, to use Enchantments: yet there are still a
great number amongst them, who make it their whole study and employment. The
cause of it is, that every one of the Laplanders is persuaded, that Magic is
indispensably necessary to him, that he may avoid the snares and insults of his
Enemies. To this he adds, That they kept Schools, in which Children are taught
that Art, and that Parents are often their Tutors in it. That they exercise
them in it, required their assistance, and are present at the performance of
those detestable practices. But what is yet more strange, is, what this Author
farther relates, That the Fathers bequeath, as an Inheritance to their
Children, the, wicked Spirits that were in their Service, that by their help
they may overcome the Demons of other Families, their Enemies.

Sect. 5. What they pretend to effect, by means of their Gods and Spirits, is
to discover some things by Divination, and to operate some others by
Witchcraft; for Divination, they make use of a Kannus, which is like a Drum,
and must be made of a particular Wood, and rather of Birch-tree than any other.
There is a Skin, or Membrane, extended upon the Body of that Drum, wherein the
Laplanders draw several Figures with a red color made of the Bark of
Alder-tree, bruised and boiled; they beat it with an Instrument like a Hammer,
6 Inches long but not bigger then the little Finger, not so much to make a
noise, as to cause a bundel of Brass Rings, that lies upon it, to move, when
that bundle begins to leap up they observe the parts and Figures toward which
it moves, and Divine by the Situation, Motion, and rest of the bundle, on the
place which signifies the design they have formed. The manner of this enquiry
is not always the same, for they make use of several, different from one
another, by those means they discover, what passes in Foreign Countries, how
distant soever they may be; they know the good or bad success of the Affairs
they have undertaken, they cure Diseases, they find out what Sacrifices and
Victims are most pleasant to the Gods of the Land. These that desire to know
the State of their Friends or Enemies, living a Thousand Miles from that place,
have but to go to a Laplander, who discovers it this way. He casts himself upon
the Ground, and becomes tike a Dead Man, and his Face altogether livid. He
remains in that state an hour or two, according as the Country, whence he will
get News, is more or less distant, and when he awakes, he tells whatever passes
in that Country, especially as to what is enquired after. There are yet some
other particulars, as to that way of Divining, gathered from several Authors,
but it would be too long, and even unserviceable, to relate them.

Sect. 6. They have yet other sorts of Witchcraft The First is, a Twisted Cord
with several knots, which they use to raise Winds on the Sea, so they do, as it
were, sell the Winds, and profer them to Merchants, that are detained on their
Coasts, by Tempests and contrary Winds, having agreed upon the price, and
received it, they give him a string with three Magical Knots, on which lies
this Condition, that as soon as they have untyed the First, there rises a fresh
and pleasant Gale; when they have loosed the Second, the Wind grows stronger,
but when they have untied the Third, there arises such a Tempestuous Storm,
that they are no longer able to govern their Ship. This sort of Trade is used,
especially in Finmarke, amongst the Danish Laplanders, because the Neighborhood
of the Sea afford them more occasions of it, then any where else, But the
account that Scheffer gives of their other sorts of Witchcraft, shows that he
himself gives little credit to it, They have little Magical Darts made of Lead,
very short, being no longer than ones Finger, they dart them to the remotest
place against their Enemies, of whom they desire to avenge themselves; and by
that Witchcraft, they send upon them such dangerous Diseases, with such sharp
pains, that for the violence of them, they often Die within three Days. Thy
have also a kind of Flies called Gans, which they let out of their Ganeske,
that is a Leaden Purse: And Daily send some of them to annoy and vex their
Enemies. But we have not a perfect knowledge of whatever they practice on these
occasions. There are also some Laplanders, who for this purpose, make use of attire, which is a round Ball, as big as a Walnut; it has a particular shape, as
is described in Scheffer's relation, and it has also some motion. They sell
this Tire, and the buyer may send it upon whomsoever he pleases, he shall be
most cruelly tormented with it.

Sect 7, But enough of the Laplanders, let us now speak of other Nations. Litgau
says, that the Wild-Irish adore the Moon, as well for their own preservation,
as for that of their Flocks, and that they direct to her this Prayer amongst
others, Leave us as Healthful, as thou finds us. Whence I infer, that they
hold something of the Ancient Paganism, that ascribes a Divine Virtue to the
Influence of the Stars, tho it seems by this form of Prayer, that they
attribute not to them, a full and Sovereign power, in the Administration of the
World.

Sect. 8. As for the remains of Paganism amongst the Samagites, a People
situated betwixt Lithuania and Livonia, we are taught, that they much Worship
the Sun and Moon, the Fire, the Thunder, the Groves, and Trees exceedingly
high; which shows that they go farther than the wild Irish, and believe that
there are Demons in the Air, and upon Earth, that reside in all those objects.
But it may be seen in Olaus Magnus, what account they themselves make of the
Gods of Thunder, and of the Spirits in the Air. For says he, they not only
pretend to give succors to their Gods in their quarrels they have with their
Enemies, endeavoring to imitate the Thunder with the beating of Hammers, but
are not afraid even of Fighting against them with Arrows and other Arms, they,
shoot in the Air. There are also places in Lithuania, where the Inhabitants
adore a, Domestic God, called Dinstipan, that is, The Director of the smoke or
Chimneys.

Sect. 2. The Tartars Keremisses, a People of Eastern Moscovy, believe
according to Olearius, that there are malicious Spirits, who may at pleasure,
cause several disturbances and vexations to Men in this Life; for as to the
future, they have no notion of it. To prevent those pains, or turn off those
Spirits, they offer Sacrifices to them, near Rivers, they likewise adore the
Sun and Moon, because they perceive much good is done to the Earth, by their
Operations. But we find nothing considerable left in writing, as to their way
of exercising Magic.

Sect. 10. The Islanders have more relation to the Laplanders and Fuilanders,
the greatest knowledge we have of them, comes to us from the writings of
Blefkenius, they also believe Domestic Spirits, who wake them in the Night, to
go a Fishing, being persuaded, that if one should go thither without the
Advertisement of these Spirits, he could not make a happy Fishing. The same
Ditmarus Blefkenius, sailing from that Country to Portugal in 1633, received
from one Jonas a Handkerchief, with three Knots, to be loosed at Sea, in case
he wanted Wind. They use to make these Knots, softly muttering some words,
Besides that they boast, that from the place where they stand upon the ground,
they may cause Vessels at Sea, to stop or to Sail on. But I shall yet keep by
me for some time that Handkerchief and it is Knots, to try hereafter, how they
may be untied; I shall also leave those Vessels at Sea, until I examine what
may stop or promote their Voyage. So that having nothing more to do with
Europe, we shall go over to Asia.

CHAP. VII. That the same Sentiments are to be found amongst most of the
Nations of Asia.
Sect. 1. THE Inhabitants of Asia, as far as that Continent is known to us, are
not so dull as the Northern Europeans. The Chinese, Japanders, Sianese,
Peguans, those Indians that are known from ancient times, and those from the
West of Bengala, surpass all the rest in civility and ingenuity; but the
Chinese carry it before all other Nations. Let us allow them to explain their
own Sentiments, and give us an account of their practices. We shall hear them
unanimously grant, that to speak properly, there is but one Divine Being, whose
virtue extends every where. However, when they came to consider the various
objects of the Divine Administration, and his different effects. they divided
the Government of the World, betwixt two Principal, and many Inferior Gods, as
the Ancient Heathens, of whom we have spoken.

Sect. 2. Thus the Japanders have entrusted Chaca and Amida with the supreme
administration of all things, and Tanconida, Benjamonda, Homocanda Zoiola, Pipi
and Jisus, with the particular directions of the Heavens, whither the last
leads the Souls of the deceased. The principle Sect amongst the Chinese, is
that which follows the Sentiments of Conr futius, who is esteemed a great Saint
amongst them. That Sect, says Carobius, in the words of Trigaltius,
acknowledges and adores one only God, believing that he governs and keeps all
things here below. They also venerate the Spirits, but much less than that
Deity; neither do they ascribe to them so great a Power. All these People
imagine a graduation from the Great Gods to the Inferior Gods, and from them to
the Spirits; for these pretend that the Sovereign God, has set over the Heavens
Laocon, that is, the Minister of the Great God, and upon the Inferior World
Cansai, who has under him three Spirits, Tanduam, Teiquam, and Tsuiquam: the
first of whom has the direction of the Air; the second of the Earth, and the
third of the Sea. Amongst the inferior Gods, who are very numerous, they reckon
the Inventors of Arts, especially Sichia, Quanina, and Neoma, a God and two
Goddesses. Amongst the Tartars, those of Sarmacande, who border on the Empire
of the Great Mogul, are Mahometans. But amongst the others, particularly those
of Niuche, on whom the Empire of Chinais now depending. The Deity is likewise
divided into two; the one is the God of Heaven, and the other of the Earth; but
they make the condition of the first, so high and sublime, that it may be
easily perceived, they acknowledge but one God indeed.

Sect. 3. The Peguans believe a Supreme Deity, called Duma, who is Good, but
admit also of a 2d, who is Bad, and for that reason is accounted to be the
Devil by the Christians. They esteem besides, that there are a great number of
Gods, each of whom has his particular Office; the Chief are Carco vitas, the
most ancient of all, on whom the other depend, Oisnna, the mover of all things,
Apalita, the Leader of the Pilgrims, Fotoco their Intercessor by Duma, who
especially prays for the Souls of the deceased, that are condemned to the
darkness or the Gulf, in the House of Smoke. The Siamois acknowledge one God,
who inhabits the Heavens, with many other Gods inferior to him, amongst whom
they place the deceased, who have been their Lawgivers.

Sect. 4. Amongst the Inhabitants of Java, in which Island is situated the City
of Batavia, belonging to the Dutch East India Company; some believe the
Transmigration of Souls. The Cingalois in the Isle of Ceilon worship four Gods,
betwixt whom they believe the Government of the World to be divided; and withal,
venerate the Souls of the deceased, whose Lives have been virtuous; so that
both the one and the other, believe the existence of Demons. But those of the
Javanois may be good or bad, whereas those of the Cingalois can be but good.

Sect. 5. Those that inhabit the North of the Cape Comorin, and reach to the
Dominions of the Great Mogul, though they be much divided in their Sentiments;
yet agree in this point, that there is a Supreme Deity, called either Vistenau
or Esuara, who, however Governs the world only by the Ministry of inferior
Gods, of whom Brama, who is the Creator and Director of all things, is the
Chief. Some say, that all these three depend upon Tsechti, as upon the only
Sovereign God. But after all, the difference is not so much in the thing as in
the name. They all believe that Brama gives to Indre or Deuendre a Supreme
Authority, over 8 principal Directors of the Superior World, who they place
higher than the Earth, and nevertheless under Bramalocon, which is the abode of
Brama. Of these eight, seven receive the Souls of the dying, who have led a
good Life, and the eighth receives that of the Damned. They likewise believe
that those Gods have been begotten and married after the manner of Men; that
they have sometimes appeared upon Earthy, in a bodily shape, and that Vistenau
himself has been seen under more than ten Forms as Rogerius relates to have
learned it from the mouth of a Bramine.

Sect. 6. Going farther Northward into the Kingdoms of Gusuratte or Cambaie,
Decan and Bengale, subject to the Great Mogul, you will find above fourscore
Sects, amongst which there are four Principal, whereof one called Chevravac,
hardly believes the existence of one God: However taken together, they all
confess that there is one, who presides over all the rest, and on whom they all
depend. Even that Sect, that will scarce believe the Existence of Gods worship.
Tiel Tenquer, who is esteemed a general Saint, showing thereby that it is
easier to forsake God with the Mouth, than with the Heart. The Sect named
Samaraet constituted, under Permiseer their Sovereign* God, three other Gods,
each of whom has a share in the Government of the World. They say that Brama
has power over all the Souls, and distributes them to Men and Beasts, as he
pleases; that Baffiuna teaches Men the Commandments of Permiseer, and provides
with all things in this life, those that are obedient to him; and that Mais
calls to Judgment before Permiseer, the Souls separated from the Bodies, who
sends them according to their deserts, into the Bodies of Men or Beasts, to be
afterward with them purified of their Fits in a certain purging Fire. The
Gentives in the Kingdom of Goleonda, believe also one only God, who has been
from all Eternity; but in process of time, has associated himself to some
inferior Gods, chosen from amongst Men; which notion is agreeable with the
Semidii Indigetes, or Heroes of the Ancient Romans.

Sect. 7. Those Ancient Persians who have remained in their Religion, since
Mahometism has settled in their Country, deserve to be taken notice of. Some
remained in Persia, and live for the most part at Ispuhum, the Capital of that
Empire. Others have retired into the Indies, especially into the Kingdom of
Gusuratte, where they are in great numbers. Here you have the belief of the
people in the very words of Carolinus, extracted from de Laat, Varenius, and
Tuist, They believe that there is one God present every where, who Governs all
things a^ pleasure, without needing the assistance of any one; though in the mean
time he has seven Ministers by him, almost of the same Dignity with himself,
who have each their particular Office, of which they are accountable to him.
The 1st. is Hamalda, the Governor of Men. The 2d. is Baman, who has inspection
over the Beasts, and the Creatures of the Sea. The 3d. is Ardi Best, who
preserves Fire, and hinders it from going out. The 4th. is Sariuard, on whom
Metals and Minerals depend. The 5th, is Espendaar, who takes care lest the
Earth should be filled with filthiness, and grow wild; The 6th. is Arendaar,
who has the direction of the Waters, and who takes care that they be not soiled
with nastiness: The last is Amadaat, who has the inspection of the Trees and
Fruits of the Earth, and of Herbs. All these Gods are only Inspectors and
Directors; it being not in their power to inflict death upon any thing, or to
give it a new Life, for they are solely established to give an account to the
Sovereign God, and to inform against those that have ill used, corrupted, or
violated the things, that are under their keeping:

Sect. 8. Besides those 7 Ministers, there are yet 26, of an inferior Order,
each of which has his particular district. Sorach is the first, whose Office it
quickly to bring the Souls separated from the Bodies before their Judges, viz.
Mees, Resna and Saros. The 4th. is Beram Carrasedaats, who directs War at his
pleasure. The 5th is the Sun. The 6th, is Anoa, who has dominion over the
Waters. The 7th. is Ader, who is established over Fire. The 8th is Maho, who
governs the Moon. The 9th. is Tiera, that is the Rains, 10th. Gos governs and
preserves Cattle. 11. Tavardi takes care of the S^uls who are in Heaven. 12th.
Aram brings Joy to the World, and banishes Pains and Sorrows from thence. 13th.
Goada rules the Winds, though he be not the Wind himself. 14th. Dien gives to
Nations information and understanding of the Laws, and inclination to keep
them. 15. Appersone affords Riches. 16th. Astaat gives Understanding and
Memory. 17 th. Assamaan has the inspection of Wares. 10. Gimninaat, has the
conduct of the Earth. 19. Marisipant is the God of Goodness, which he
communicates to those that have recourse to him. 20. Armira is the director of
Money. 21. Hoem is the Author of the conception of Women, and gives life to
their Fruit. 22, 23. Dimnia and Base are established to succor those that stand
in need of them. The three last, Befadeer, Defemeer and Defyn, stand by God to
serve him, and are always ready to perform his Orders. These are the Names of
those 26 Ministers, whom the Country men of Persia honor with the Title of
Gestio, or Saint, and whom they believe to have Authority and Power all the
things that are under their direction: For which reason they also adore them,
trusting that they will be their Intercessors to God, and obtain from him
whatever shall be necessary for their good.

Sect. 9. Having thus sufficiently spoken, as to the Gods, we'll now treat of
the Spirits, though we find but little information upon this point in Authors,
saving in what concerns China, and the East Indies, on this side the River
Ganges. I only find mention made, that the Japanders, in a place not far from
Osacca, venerate a God or Spirit, named Tiedebaie, lest he should hurt them,
and that another God called Goquis, frequently appears to them in a humane
Shape. In the Town of Micao. They worship in a Statue of a frightful Figure,
another Spirit, to whom the Christians give the name of King of the Devils.
There is no Pagod in all Japan, says Carolinus, which is so frequented, nor
enriched with so great Presence, because thereby they think to redeem their
sins.

Sect. 10. Martinius, Kircher, and Trigaltius, three Jesuits, have written
large Histories of China, but very little insisted upon this matter: However,
considering what they observe of the Worship of that People, it may be
concluded that they believe the existence of Spirits, as we shall show
hereafter. The Siamese likewise venerate some wicked Gods, though against the
sentiment of many of their Doctors, under pretense of charging those bad
Spirits of such evils, of which they will not make God the Author. It is said
of the same Nation, that they give two Spirits to every Man, one of which makes
them to be good, and the other evil.

Sect. 11. But the greatest knowledge we have of the Opinions of those
Countries comes from the Coast of Choromandel. Carolinus, who has gatherd what
Rogerius says of it in many places, says, That they believe good and bad
Spirits, that is, Angels and Devels; They name the Angels Deuetas, and the
Devils Ratsiasias: They hold that both were begotten by Men; and that their
common Father was Cassiopa, the first Bramaine, or Priest and Legislator; The
Mother of the Deuetas was Diti, and that of the Ratsiasias was Aditi; both
Wives of Cassiopa.

Sect. 12. There are two sorts of Deuetas; For such Men as go after their
Decease into the Happiness of the Worlds under the Sun, and above the Earth,
are also called Deuetas, but those places are not for them an eternal abode,
since after the succession of some Ages, they must come back into the World,
and be Born again. As to the other Deuetas, who are in great numbers, they
never depart from their Abode. The Sun, Moon and Stars are in that number, they
ascribe unto them both Soul and Life.

Sect. 13. The Ratsiasias are also of two sorts, some of them are Wicked Men,
who are condemned for their Sins to wander in the World, and to suffer Hunger
and Thirst, which they cannot satisfy but by the Alms that Men hand them:
Wherefore they often appear in a human shape, to beg something from them, but
they have no power to hurt them. Besides these, there is another sort of
Devils, or Ratsiasias, properly so called, because they are the Children of
Aditi, and are very Malicious. They have power to molest Men, and even to cause
much trouble and vexation to the Angels, or Deuetas. They may walk every where,
except save in the abode of Brama, and in the Heavens. They are described with
huge, frightful, and stinking Bodies, they are said to be Male and Female, to
procreate Children, and to be subject to Death.

Sect. 14. There Is enough concerning the Demons of the Pagans of Asia; but as
most of those Nations are Pythagoreans, and believe the Metempsychosis, they
also supply us with Heroes: For, (says Baldaeius, in his Book of the Idolatry
of the East Indies) the Modern Heathens believe that Man is happier in this
Life than the Beasts, by reason that he has a Body, by which the Soul may exert
her Operation; but they agree not that a Man is more noble than a Beast; nor
that he has a Soul more excellent than it has. And when they are asked, why
Beasts reason not, they answer, because they have not Bodies capable of
exerting the qualities of a Soul, as a Dumb Man who wants a proper Organ to
utter Words, and may be nevertheless very Wise; or as some People, who have a
great deal of Knowledge and Learning, but have no more readines^ to express
themselves than Children who cannot do it. He that shall Read this will be less
surprised at what follows.

Sect. 15. Nothing certain can be said of the Japanders, because the Jesuits,
who relate their Opinions, agree not together. It appears however, that there
are amongst that People three sorts of Opinions concerning human Souls, and
their Essence. The first is, That the Soul of Man differs not from that of
Beasts. The second, That Men have a Soul of another Nature than that of Beasts,
but still Mortal. The third, That the Soul is Immortal. They likewise believe
the Metempsychosis, and that the Soul going out of the Body is determined to
enter into another Body, either of Man or Beast, by the conjunction that is
then made of the Sun and Moon with other Stars.

Sect. 16. The Chinese are likewise Pythagoreans, Martinius testifies it very
plainly, as to one of their Sects, in these Words. Chiquiao is a Sect, which
our People esteem to be the first introduced in China, after the Birth of our
Savior. They believe the exchanges of Souls inwardly and outwardly. They
Honor Images, and imagine that the Soul after Death passes in punishment of
her Sins from one body into another; for which reason they abstain from what
ever has had life. That Narration is confirmed by Trigaltius, who says, That
the Parents are not afraid of killing their Children to be discharged of them,
when they are encumbered with too many, asserting, that by that means they
procure them a better Condition; since instead of Poverty, they afford them by
Death the occasion of going into other Bodies, and being Born again in the
House of Richer People, where they will live more at ease. The Peguans seem to
have the same Sentiment by the Relation Piuto, when by the Tomb of their Rolym,
or High Priest, they let loose a great many Birds and Fishes, which they kept
Prisoners, believing them to be as many human Souls, who will keep company to
their Rolym in his way to the other World.

Besides we read in Corolinus, out of Artus, in his Speculum Mundi, That the
Wise Men of China have invented three places for those that depart this Life.
Nachac is a place of Torment; Schuum one of Delights, such as the Paradise of
Mahomet; and Miba, or Nibam, signifies an entire, privation of being, or a full
Destruction of Body and Soul. All the Souls have their abode in the two first
places, or depart from thence, to go to and fro through the World, and often
pass from one Body into another by new Birth, until they deserve. to enter into
the Nibam, that is, to be annihilated. Le Blanc speaks of it somewhat
differently, in a Relation extracted from a Franciscan Monk. He says, That the
Chinese believe that Men become Gods at last, after they have passed through
the Bodies of several Beasts, Birds, and Fishes; and that they imagine that the
Souls, after the course of many Ages, having been well purified in some proper
places, and returned several times into new Worlds, are at last introduced into
Paradise, cast down to Hell, or reduced to nothing.

Sect. 18. As to the Opinion of the Siamese in this point, we must learn it
from the Relation of the Jesuits in their Journey to Siam, in the years 1685.
and 1686. because that Book is the newest and much credited. Thus then writes
Tachard, p, 297, 298. Edit. Amsteled. Metempsychosis is one of the Fundamental
Points of their Religion, so that the Life of Man passes in continual
Transmigrations, until he be sanctified, and deserves to be God. They admit of
Spirits, but such as are nothing else than Souls, who always inform some
Bodies, until they have attained to Holiness or Deity: Angels are Corporeal,
and of different Sexes, and consequently may beget Sons and Daughters. Those
Angels are never Sanctified nor Deified: but to them only belongs to watch over
the Government of the World, and the preservation of Men. They distribute them
into seven Orders, or Hierarchies; some of which are more perfect and noble
than the others; all which they place in as many different Heavens. Each part
of the World has one of those Intelligences to preside over what is done there.
They likewise impart them to Stars, to the Earth, to Cities, Mountains and
Forests, and even to the Winds and Rain. And because they are persuaded, that
those Angels examine the conduct of Men, and are witnesses of all their
actions, to reward those that are commendable, by virtue of the merits of their
God; It is therefore to those Intelligences and not to their God, that they use
to apply themselves in their necessities and miseries, and to thank them for
the favors they suppose to have received from them.

Sect. 19. They acknowledge no other Demons but the Souls of the wicked, who
making their escape out of the Hell, in which they were detained; wander
through the World a certain time, and do as much hurt to Men as they can.
Amongst those unhappy Spirits, they rank untimely Births, Women dying in
Childbed, those that are killed in a Duel, or guilty of some crime of that
nature.

Sect. 20. The Heathens of Java believe likewise Metempsychosis, as well as
those of Sumatra, the Malabars, and the Inhabitants of the Coast of Cormandel.
All the Benjanes in the hither East Indies, agree upon no Article of Religion,
better than upon this. Most of the Bramines, that are not engaged in any of
these two Sects Schaaruakka and Pasenda, admit the immortality of human Souls,
and say that there are some, who being separated from the Bodies become Devils,
because of their sins; and that the time of their first punishment being
finished, they must wander in the Air, and there induce an intolerable Hunger,
it being impossible for them to draw so much as the Leaf of an Herb, or to
supply their wants with any other thing, besides what Men bestow upon them in
Charity. I had mentioned that Opinion, speaking of the Ratsiasias.

Sect. 21. In a word, when we gather all the Observations made in this Chapter,
and before it, to discover the Opinions of the Heathens; we find that, though all
their Superstitions be grounded upon very different Causes; yet they all tend
in the main to the same scope, that is, to worship one sole Object, as the
Supreme Deity, and yet to associate Spirits to him. I cannot better express
that Thought, than by the very words of Carolinus, which, are as a
re-capitulation of what has hitherto been said. Some esteem, says he, that the
Souls are mortal, others esteem them immortal; some establish the
transmigration of Souls, others are not of that Opinion: and how much differ
those that assert the Metempsychosis between themselves; some, as those of Java
believe, that the Soul goes into the first Body she meets with; others believe
that she is sent into such or such Body, according as she has merited by the
good or evil she has done, which is the Opinion of the Banjanes. Some affirm,
that the Souls change their abode but once, others three times, and others
teach a vast number of Transmigrations; others make them pass only into Men,
who must also be strangers; others again send them into Man and Beasts; but
others at last make them pass only in the Females of Men and Beasts; which is
the imagination of the Thearauachs; others have yet quite different Opinions.
In a word, it may be rightly said upon this subject, Many Men many Minds; for
there are almost as many Opinions as Persons.

CHAP, VIII. That the Witchcraft practiced amongst the People, proceeds from
the same source.
Sect. 8. AS the name of Withcraft is given to whatever is supposed to be done
by the help of the Devil; I cannot but judge that many persons are called
Sorcerers and Witches, who perhaps are not so, and that this must be ascribed
to the same prejudice, which I have mentioned before, speaking of the worship
of Demons. And therefore I intend to examine hereafter, what these People
really are. It is sufficient to advertise here before hand, that all the
Heathens must not be taken for Magicians, Sorcerers, and Inchanters; because
many Writers have called them by such names, giving them indifferently in their
Writings to all the He and She Priests, and to all those who discharge any
Office, Ministry, or employment in their Religious Worship, and in their
Sacrifices. But I design to insert in this present Chapter, whatever is known
to us of their practices, or of their communications with any of the inferior
Gods or Spirits, good or bad.

Sect. 2. The veneration which that People have for the Sun, Moon and Stars, is
sufficient to establish the choice of Days amongst them: whence proceeds wha^
Pete^ Vaudenbrook has observed, speaking of the Benjanes of Narsinga. That as
to happy and unhappy ^ours they judge of them by the course of the Stars, w^^c^
^he^ o^s^^^e with great nicety. Trigaltius in (...) Chap. ^9, says, that there
is no Su^ (...) in China, as that of observing the Feast and Working days, and
that they rule the whole conduct of their Lives, upon the disposition of Time.
To that end there are Printed every year two sorts of Almanacks made in the
Emperor's name by his own Astrologers, which contributes to set off this
delusion for a Truth: there is marked every day what is good to be done, or not
to be done, and to what hour must be deferred, what offers it self in the
intervals of the fortunate, or unlucky moments.

Sect. 2. Carolinus has, methinks, made a good Abridgment of what follows in
Trigaltius, which therefore I intend to make use of. There are other Books,
says he, besides those that more particularly treat of this matter, and even,
there is a sort of Teachers, which only subsist from what they get in
prescribing happy Days and Hours to the Querists, tho they have but a small
reward for it. They are so much bewitched with those predictions, that they
often deferr an importunate Affair, or a long and dangerous Journey, till they
have found out a Day or Hour of good Omen. And tho it sometimes happens, that
at that Day or Hour, there falls a great Rain, or a contrary Wind blows, yet
for all that, they begin the undertaking or journey in their perfixed time,
should they only proceed 4 steps, or dig out but a Basket full of Earth from
the place where they intend to lay the Foundation of a House. That was also the
employment of those that were Anciently called Astrologers and Mathematicians,
of whom we have spoken before.

Sect. 4. They are no less superstitiously curious, in observing the time of
the Birth, to foretell the condition of the whole course of ones Life. Those
calculators of ones Nativity, are the same with the Ancient Genethliaci before
mentioned, Chap. 3. Sect. 4. There are many other Diviners, who boast of
foreteling future things by the Observation of the Stars, by the inspection of
the Face, by the Dreams, by the posture of the enquirer, by his manner of
sitting or standing, and this sort of Men are in great esteem amongst the
vulgar.

Sect 5. Rogerius gives a larger account of what has been said, concerning the
choice of Days, amongst the Chinese, which is likewise practiced amongst other
Nations, as especially the Inhabitants of the Coast of Coromandel, where they
use Almanacks, like those of China; and call them Paniangam. That Author says,
That they are two sorts; one, that shows what must be done, and the other, what
must be laid aside at every Hour of the Day of the Week, and what shall succeed
or not. For a Specimen of it, he relates the predictions of Sunday, from Hour
to Hour. They reckon in that Country 30 Hours, betwixt the Rising and Setting
of the Sun.

1. Good for all Affairs of Council and Reasoning. 2. Undertaking shall
prosper. 3. Shall not succeed. 4. Who means to get an Advantage, shall not get
it, but his Enemy. 5. Good for Trading Profitably. 6. Good for Rejoicing and
Undertaking whatever concern Merriment and Science. 7. The Courting of Women,
shall succeed at a pleasure. 8. Trade without gain. 9. As the 6th Hour. 10. No
Project happy. 11. Physics and things taken for Pleasure, will not prosper.
12. Who aspires after Victory shall obtain it. 13. Good for buying Cows and
other Beasts. 14. Good to take a Servant. 15. Bad to enter into a New house, or
to go a visiting. 16. Good to lay the Foundation of Houses, Villages or Towns.
17. Unhappy Journeys. 18. Good to pay Visits to the Great. 19. Good for
Erecting Statues in the Pagodas, to the Honor of the Gods. 20. Unhappy for all
sorts of Undertaking. 21. Nothing to be gotten. 22. Who gives Battle, shall
loose the Day. 23. Good to make Friends. 24. Good for Fighting. 25. Good for
keeping Council. 26. Unprofitable Trade. 27. Who lies with a Woman shall get
her with Child. 28. Every Undertaking shall succeed. 29. Shall not succeed. 30.
Good for Planting.
The Night is likewise distributed into several Hours, as also the other Days
and Nights of the Week.

Sect. 6. That Superstition has proceeded so far as to have stained an Art very
commendable in it self, and one of the liberal Arts. For, according to the
Relation of Daviti, extracted from Osorius, the Malabars, who use to begin
their Year with the Month of September, have recourse to Superstitious
Observations, in Order to mark the First Day and Hour of it. That Day all those
that are above the Age of 15, cover their Eyes and Face, that they may see
nothing, and cause themselves to be brought into the Pagodes of their Idols,
where they presently uncover their Faces, and quickly cast their Eyes upon the
First Object before them. If it happens to be the Statute of some Idol, for
which they have a particular Veneration, they fancy they shall pass the Year
most happily.

Sect 7. Those that observe the cry of Birds, have a very great relation with
the Malabars, and agree with them almost in the same things; for Carolinus says
after Rogerins, that they observe what sort of Birds fly near them, and to
what part, whence they draw a favorable or sinister Augury. They say that when
a Ash-colored Crow, whereof there are great numbers upon the Coast, comes to
touch some body in flying, it forebodes very ill. viz. that he that has been
touched or some of his Friends, shall Die within 6 Weeks. Linschoten gives very
near the same account of the Decanins, and the Inhabitants of Gurusatte,
saying, that if the First Object they see in the Morning is an Ash-colored
Crow, they will not go out of their House for any thing.

Sect. 8. Daviti says after Mendoze, that the Heathens of the Islands, called
by the Spaniards Philippines, have some she Diviners named Holaoi, whom they
honor as Priests, Who converse daily with the Demons, (at least in his
Opinion,) and that they publicly before all the People, make strange postures,
and a horrid noise, during which, the Spirit of Divination seizes upon them,
and gives by them answer to whatever is asked. The same Author adds, that they
have a particular sort of Divination, in which if they meet a Cayman in their
way, they return home. Whence appears, that they esteem that meeting
unfortunate.

Sect. 9. Besides that, all sorts of presages are in credit amongst those
Nations, who draw them from whatever offers it self to them. If any body
sneezes before them when they go out, of their House, they presently step in
again, for they esteem it a very bad Omen. Peter Vandenbroek affirms the same
of the Inhabitants of Narsinga, and adds, that when they go out in the Morning,
if they meet with some bad Augury, they return back, or stay till a more
favorable offers it self. We read in Carolinus, which are according to them,
good or bad Signs, which he has transcribed out of Tuisk, and Vandenbroek. Here
they are. Besides sneezing and flight of Birds, there are several others ill
pregages; as an empty Cart, a Dog who has nothing to Eat, a Buffle, an Ass, a
Guilded-he-Goat, an Ape, a loosened Heart, a Goldsmith, a Carpenter, a Barber, a
Tailor, a Cotton-Merchant, a Farrier, a Weaver, a She-Widow, a Dead body, all
People coming from a Burying, before they be washed, and having changed their
Dress. It Is also an ill Augury to meet with one that carries Butter, Milk, or
brown Sugar, or sour things, as Apples and Lemmons, or one that carries Fire,
and any thing used in War. But it is a good Omen to meet with an Elephant a
Cammel either Laden or Unloaded, a Horse better Unloaded than Laden, a Cow,
an Ox, a Buff Laden with Water, for Unloaded it forebodes nothing but Ill; a
He-gcat, a Dog Eating, a Cat on the Right Hand; likewise to meet one carrying
Meat, Curds or white-Sugar, a Cock, an Unicorn running strait out in the way,
and a Hundred things of that Nature are esteemed so fortunate by them, that
they boldly pursue their way with hopes of a good Fortune. Tereira adds, that
they believe it a very ill thing, and even a Sin to Eat before Sunset.

Sect 10. This is what I emended to relate as to Divination, upon which point,
and especially upon Witchcraft: I am surprised to find so little in the
writings of so many Authors, whom I have consulted with great exactness;
neither do I remember to have learned any thing more particular in the
Conversations I have had with Gentlemen that have made long Journeys into the
Eastern Countries; but I wonder most of all, that Baldaeus, whose chief scope
in his writings, is to treat of the Idolatry of the Eastern Countries, makes
almost no mention of it. The only thing I find in him, concerns the Conjuration
of Serpents. The Inhabitants, says he, of the Coast of Coromandel, and some of
the Cingalese and Malabars, know how to Enchant Serpents; so that by their
Songs, they make them Dance, which is strange and wonderful. When they require
the Oath of any Person, they put his Hand in a Pot, where there is a Serpent;
if he be not wounded, they hold his Oath to be true, but if he be bitten, they
believe him Perjured. Peirard adds to this, that they Conjure the greatest and
most subtle Snakes not to be hurt by them, and Baldaeus reports the same.

CHAP. IX. That the Opinions and Practices of the African Heathens, agree at
bottom with the Sentiments and Customs of the other Pagans.
Sect. 1. THE Heathens of Africa being duller than the others, because the Men
of Letters, are most or all Mahometans, we can have little knowledge of their
Opinions, unless it be by their practices. From them only, we may infer their
belief, as to die matter in hand: and tho Travelers have left us but few
Observations, I shall nevertheless examine them two ways, to know what sort of
Creatures are esteemed and worshipped as Divine, by those Nations, and
afterward what sorts of Divination and Witchcraft are in use amongst them.
Amongst the best writers, none have given more Information than Carolinus, whom
therefore I shall take for my leader; but add to his Narration, what I shall
think convenient out of other Authors in proper places.

Sect. 2. Those Africans, that without living under the Law of Christ, or that
of Mahomet, having nevertheless some knowledge of God distribute the Deity
amongst several Creatures, as do all other Heathens. They give the first share
to the most visible and shining, as the Celestial Lamps, which they look upon
as Lights placed in Heaven, by the Sovereign Creator, for a proof of his
Eternal Power and Deity. The Inhabitants of D^mute, a Country lying very near
the Equinoctial L^ne, those that live under the Dominion of the Great Negus,
and those of Ballagata in the Kingdom of Monopotapa, have time out of mind
adored the Rising Sun. Those of the Kingdom of M^ngibur, Subjects to the Great
Negus, render him the same, worship, and hold him for the Creator himself.
Those of Suarim, capital of the Kingdom of Morat under the same Empire, have
the same Faith. But they say, according to the relation of le Blanc* that
Heaven is only for the Gods, by which they show, that they acknowledge other
Gods, who are doubtless inferior to, and in less credit than the Sun. Those of
Songo, in the Kingdom of Congo, look on the Sun and Moon as Husband and Wife;
and as the First and Second God. They adore the Earth, as the Mother of all
things. They worship likewise some Birds, particular to the^^ Country, and as
it seems what ever comes into their fancy.

Sect. 3. When those of Jaloffe in Guinea discover the Moon, they adore her
with great Cries. They have the same Custom at Mandimanca in the same Country,
where the Moon is named Bariomari, or the Goddess of the Night. Daviti says,
that the Berbeseins, in the Kingdoms of Ale and Brocale, worship her at the
foot of certain Trees. But other People of Guinea, make even of certain Trees
and Herbs, their Fetissos or Gods. They worship the speckled Starry-Hern, as a
Divine Bird. Amongst the Fishes they venerate the Tunny as Fetissos, and put
them before the Emperadors or Emperor's Fishes, which they venture to Fish, but
not to Eat, until they have cut off their Sword, which being dry, becomes then
a Fetisso too. When it Lightens or Thunders upon very high Mountains, fear
makes them believe, that those Mountains are likewise Fetissos. The Lybians,
divided into 4 Nations, do all agree, that there is a particular virtue and
even Deity in Garlic. Some Inhabitants of Capo Verde worship the Moon and
others the God Conculi, because of his Malice.

Sect. 4. Few among them believe the Mortality of the Soul, or if they do,
their Faith is attended with many doubts, and mixed with the Opinion of the
Metempsychosis; so far the Sect of Pythagoras reaches. The Inhabitants of
Mongibur in Ethiopia, make a favorable reception to strangers, provided they
be no Christians, who they esteem less than others. The cause of that kind
reception is, that they imagine the Souls of their Relations or Friends may be
passed into those Persons. They admit pains and punishment during this Life,
but without any larger explication of it. In Guinea, the Hollanders were told
in 1600, that the belief of the Country was* that the Souls of the Deceased
came again upon Earth, and that they took from Houses, what they stood in need
of; so that when they have sustained some loss, they easily suspect, that those
Spirits have taken it away. The Inhabitants of Capo Verde imagine, that after
their Death, they are transformed into white Men, and in that State come to
dwell upon Earth.

Sect. 5. I find no other particular Observation on the sentiments of those
Nations, and much less upon their practices. In the mean while, what may be
learned of it, sufficiently shows, that they proceed from the same Original
with the others; they have very near the same Gods and the same Oracles, which
they get from their Gods by the same means, viz. Divination and Witchcraft. In
The new History of the Abyssines, by Ludolf, may be seen, how the Inhabitants
of the Kingdom of Zendero, have themselves in the Election of a King. He is
chosen from the greatest Men of the Kingdom, who go together in a Wood, whither
they expect the flight of a certain Bird, that nearks by his Cry, who is to be
their new Prince; As they have a great Inclination to Witchcraft, the new
Prince gives immediately a proof of his Proficiency in that Art; for as soon as
by his Conjurations, he has Notice of his choice, he draws by the same virtue,
Lions, Tigers, Vipers, and Dragons about him, and in the middle of that stately
Pomp, he is received by all the great ones of his Kingdom, who go to meet him.
This is what that Author relates, and the pure Truth in his Judgment; but we
shall examine hereafter, what virtue such a Witchcraft may have.

Sest. 6. The Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Baiafar, on the East of that Benin,
are accused to be the greatest Magicians in the World, because they boast of
obtaining Rain, and causing Thunder and Lighting, whenever they please, and
even of effecting all they desire. The Brames in the Kingdom of Loango know how
to hinder, by their Enchantments, the Fruits of the Earth from being taken away
by Thieves, who are in great numbers amongst them, and yet not so bold as to
touch any thing; where there is a Basket with a pair of Goats Horns, Parrots
Feathers, and other trifles of Nature, because they are consecrated to their
God Maguschi, otherwise Moquische, or Mohilo, of whom however Daviti has no
reason to believe, that he is the Devil.

Sect. 7. When those of Guinea, meet not with a happy Fishing, they compel
their Gods with their Conjurations, to drive Fish into their Nets, which is
done by the frightful noise of the Fetisseres, who are their Priests Wives, or
by branches of Trees hanging about their Neck, supposing those Trees to have a
Divine virtue, as has been observed; or by the beating of Drums, or by some
words that the Fetissero, or Priest mutters, as grumbling against his Wife, or
by some Corn, or other matters, variously Painted, and thrown into the Sea. If
the King happen to have occasion for Money, and impatiently desires to know,
whether there are Merchants in the way from whom he may hope to get an
Advantage, the Fetissero goes with his Wives to interrogate a Tree thereupon,
at first he makes a great many postures, then offers Sacrifices, uses Ashes,
the branch of a Tree cut on purpose, Water drawn sucking from a Beason into his
Mouth, wherewith he besprinkles the said branch, then he says some words to his
Wives, upon whom he likewise makes aspersion; afterward he pronounces the
questions aloud; then there is heard, without seeing any thing, a Voice
answering, which sometimes manifests it self under the shape of a Dog, but
that is only practiced for things that concern this Life, especially for the
Kings prosperity.

Sect. 8. But they use another sort of Witchraft either for the King or the
Subjects, to obtain a good condition in the future Life. When any body comes to
Die, they choose a new Fetisso for that time, whom they entreat to conduct the
Soul of the Deceased into the other World. The nearest Relations come together,
kill a Hen, and dress her, then they dispose all the Fetissos or Idols of the
Deceased upon a Line, hang about them several collars of Peace and Beans, adorn
them with many Garlands of green Herbs, and besprinkle them with the blood of
the Hen. That Is the Duty of the Men. That of the Women, consists in bringing
the dressed Hen in a Dish, and placing her in the, middle of the Fetissos, thnn
one of the Men begins his Conjurations, by drinking and throwing a mouthful of
Water, or palm Wine upon the Fetissos. He takes 2 or 3 leaves of those
Garlands, which he rakes up, and makes a little round Ball of it, he puts it
between his 2 Fingers, and many times betwixt his Feet or Toes, whence he draws
it out, greeting the Fetissos as many times; when he has squezed all the
moisture out of that green Ball upon his Gods, he makes another, and then
another, till all the Garlands be spent, then out of all these little Balls, he
makes one, with which he rubs his Face, which raises it to the dignity of a
Fetisso, and causes it to be kept as an excellent preservative against all
sorts of Evils, and a certain succor in the War. Thus they pretend to bring
the Dead to a quiet State.

Sect. 9. They also use Birds in their Divinations, viz. The speckled Hern,
because (says Carolinus, who has supplied us with the former Narration,) it
lows as much as an Ox, when it sticks it bill into the ground When they
undertake to Travel, and hear it crying, they extremely rejoice, saying that
the Fetisso comes to promise them a happy journey. They put Corn and a Vessel
full of Water, near the place where they have heard the cry, that the Fetisso
may find Meat and Drink, thence proceed that many of those Vessels with Mays,
Rice, and other grains, are to be found every where in the Woods and Fields.
But enough of the Pagans of Africa, let us go over to those of America.

CHAP. X. That very near the same Opinions and Practices, are to be found in
America.
Sect. 1. THE Christians keep under their Dominion the greatest part of what
has been discovered of the Western Continent, which is known only, since 200
Years, and commonly called America or West Indies. They keep down the pulick
Idolatry and Witchcraft of the Inhabitants, as far as their Authority will
extend. But as those Nations are Heathens at the bottom, and live to it,
whenever they are at liberty, privately continuing their Ancient practices. I
shall therefore speak of them, as they are in themselves, to show their true
sentiments, and Ancient Customs: for that end, I shall make use of the newest
Authors, who have published Relations of the Southern parts of that Country,
whom Montanus has compiled, and when I come to the Northern parts, I shall
abound with Instructions newer and very much credited.

Sect. 2. In Southern America, which is the nearest to Africa, Brazile is the
first County to be met with in the North-East, and Peru over against it to the
West. The Cannibals, who are Originally of Southern America, have extended
their Idolatry, through all the Islands, lying betwixt this and the Northern
part. All the other parts of the South, and the middle of the Country, having
not yet been discov^^ed by the Europeans, and being consequently unknown to us,
we can say nothing of it, then begin with Brazile.

Sect. 3. Tho that Country be the best known of all, yet we can say but little
upon the matter, For the Brasilians ( says Daviti, Peviard, Leri, and
Abbeville,) have neither God nor Religion. The Toutinambres however believe the
Soul to be Immortal, and that those who have performed their Duty, that is,
espectially, who have often beaten their Enemies, go into the Ouaioupia, a
place seated behind the Mountains, where they dance in delightful plains; but
those that have not done it, go to Jeropari, a malicious God, by whom they are
to be tormented; they likewise believe, that there are Spirits, and it may be
said, that they have some knowledge of God, and that they design him by the
name of Toupan, because they use to call the Thunder Toupanremimogan, that is
to say, the Action of God.

Sect. 4. They have also their Caraibes or Diviners, who frequently foretell the
fruitfulness or barrenness of the Year, Rain or Drought, and whatever may
benefit Man upon Earth. These Caraibes at the same time, are their Surgeons,
and boast of curing immediately bodily pains, by sucking or blowing, which they
have persuaded the Vulgar so well, that there is not one even of the eldest,
but he is ready to obey their Commands.

Sect. 5. The Tapuiens, othewise Maraguites, who are divided into 6 or 7 sorts,
lie farther into the Country. They acknowledged two Gods, a Good and a Bad;
they pay no, worship to the Good, because, he is good natured, and never hurts
any person, but they pray very ardently to the bad, because he kills those that
do not reverence him. They undertake neither Journey nor War before they have
consulted their evil God, which is performed with great Ceremonies, by virtue
of which, they ascribe to themselves the power of foretelling future things.
Thus sound the words of Arnoldus Montanus, in his description of America, p.
373. As to their Divinations; of which there is a very special account in this
place, we shall be more particularly informed of it, when we examine them
hereafter.

Sect. 6. Viracocha is the Sovereign God of the Peruvians, whose name they
explain more at lange, by those of Pachacama and Pachayachakik the Creator of
Heaven and Earth: for which reason they also name him Osapa, the Wonderful,
according to their Opinion. He operates in the Sun, and is there visible. They
venerate the Thunder as the God of the Air. Pathamama is the Goddess of the
Earth, or the Earth it self considered as such, and Mamacocha is the Sea. They
likewise pay a Religious Honor to the Rainbow, but especially to Colca. Among
the Stars, the Constellation Vre^chillai, Lyra, the Harp, is the God of the
Shepherds, and the Constellation Machacuai, the Serpent, preserve them, as they
suppose, from Serpents; and Chiuguichiachai has under his power Lions, Tigers
and Bears. Moreover, they believe, according to the Relation of the same
Montanus, That no Creature moves upon Earth, but at the same time the Heavens
represent another like to it; and that Earthly Creatures are in the keeping of
the Heavenly, every one under that which is like to it, which provides for its
best advantages, and preserves it. Thence, have proceeded the Names of the
Stars, Chacana, Toperatcha: Marmana, Mirma, and several others.

Sect. 7. They also believe that Fountains, Rivers Rocks, the tops of Hills,
some Herbs, especially the root Panpas, that has a strange Figure, are as many
Gods; there is almost nothing that has an extraordinary shape, or a particular
virtue; but they place a Deity in it. Comparing all those things together, it
appears that that people acknowledge Superior and Inferior Gods; the virtue of
the first operating by the last, and that they hold the Celestial Bodies for
Gods, because they act upon the sublunary, which are of a particular and
necessary use to Mankind. Thus the Heathens endeavor, each according to his
fancy, to acknowledge a Deity in Heaven, and to adore it upon Earth.

Sect. 8. The immortality of the Soul, the punishment of the wick^d, and the
rewards of pious Men after this Life, are generally believed in Peru, but not
the Resurrection of the dead, says Montanus, page 307. However, it is strange
that a People who have such a gross Religion, and such material Gods, should
nevertheless believe that the Soul subsists though they hear nothing of it after
the death of the Body, and that they could not imagine that the Body which
subsists still for some time, before their Eyes, though without Life, can
return to its first State, as Trees, Herbs and Plants, which dye and revive.

Sect. 9. The Statues of their Gods, that are of many strange Figures, and some
very frightful, are used to utter Oracles in their Pagodes. Some, says
Montanus, give their Answers, as formerly did the Diabolical Oracles of Delphos
and Dodona; he calls them Diabolical, following the common Opinion, that the
Oracles of the Heathens were not pronounced by God, but by the Devil. But it
may be seen in the Book of Anthony Vandale of Oracles, how little ground that
Opinion has: and we shall also treat of it in its proper place.

Sect. 10. As to their practices, no people is so much esteemed in Peru as
those we call Exorcist^, Magicians and Diviners, because they discover private
Robberies, even such as are committed in very remote Countries, and foretell
good or bad fortune, which happ^^s, says Montanus, by their converse with
wicked Spirits in dark places. They declared to the Spaniards the victories
their Countrymen obtained, or the Battles they lost in the Low Countries, the
very same day, that they were fought. There are also in Peru, many She
Diviners, who shut themselves in their Houses, where they make themselves
drunk, with Chica, mixed with the Herb Vilca, till they fall down on the place,
and when they awake, and come to themselves again, they answer all the
Questions that are proposed to them.

Sect. 11. The Cannibals who take the Name of Caraibes, and dwell to the North
of Southern America, acknowledge the Sun for their Sovereign God: but in the
mean while each B^ie or Priest has his own, which he calls out to himself in
the most frightful Nights, by Songs or enchanted Verses, in the midst of the
smoke of Tobacco. The Devil (says Montanus, but I would rather say the Spirit)
utters his Oracles by the means of dead bones, wrapped up in Cotton. Those
Heathens have at all times, but especially, in case of death, much to endure
from the Piais or Magicians, (but methinks Montanus had expressed himself
better, had he said Priests, rather then Magicians.) One of the greatest
disturbances they cause is, that when they are consulted, they persuade People,
that such or such has caused them to interrogate such a deceased; which incites
the nearest Relations of the deceased to avenge themselves of those, that have
disturbed his Rest by that action.

Sect. 12. Montanus adds to this also, The Caraibes follow a most strange
Opinion concerning the Soul, every one believes to have as many Souls as
beatings of the heart. The chief of which is still the Heart it self, which
after the death goes to Icheiri, or the God that is particular to him, where he
lives in the same condition that he has done upon Earth; for which reason they
kill the Servants upon the Tomb of their Masters, to go and Minister to them in
the other World. The other Souls that consist in Beatings of the Heart have two
sorts of abode. The Maboias wander in Deserts and Woods; and the Ormiceous keep
along the Sea, and overturn Vessels. The Souls of warlike Heroes go into the
fortunate Islands, where the Arouages are their Slaves. Blo^dy Cruel M^n go out
of this life eternally to wander in dry Wildernesses behind high Mountains, to
carry the Yoke of the Arouages, a People that was expelled out of its ancient
abode, if we believe the account that is given of their Destruction. From all
this it appears that this Nation acknowledges almost no other God, but their
own Souls; of which they have very near the same Sentiments that the ancient
Greeks had of their Demons and Heroes.

Sect. 13. Richard Blome, an English Author, has published of late in his
America, a large account of the Opinions and Practices of the Carabes, where he
speaks of the Isle of St Vincent. They have, says he, some Natural Notion of a
Deity, or Supreme Being, but who is too much pleased with the enjoyment of the
Sovereign Happiness, to disturb himself with the Wicked Actions of Men, and
whose Goodness is so great that he is averse from avenging himself of his
Enemies, when they refuse to pay the Honor due to him: They likewise believe
that there are good and bad Spirits, and that the Good are Gods, each of whom
has his particular Admistration; but that the Universe was not created by them,
though every one of them may be the Creator of the Country where he is venerated,
and which he governs.

Sect. 14. They never call upon their Gods, but to let them come to them, which
is done by the Ministry of the Priests, and for the 4 following reasons. First,
to be avenged for some injury received. Secondly, to be cured of their
Diseases. Thirdly, to learn the success of the War. Fourthly, to expel the
great Devil, or rather the wicked God Mapoia, whom they never adore. Thence may
be inferred, that they believe good and bad Spirits: besides, they acknowledge
the immortality of the Soul; which Opinion is the Original of Demons and
Heroes, since as they suppose, they are the Souls of the Deceased, which, they
call to their assistance against their Enemies.

Sect. 15. The Description of their Witchcraft, is to be found in the same
place after this manner. When their Priests call upon many of their Gods
together, they seem to dispute and quarrel with one another, so far as to come
to blows; sometimes they hide themselves amongst Dead bones, which they draw out
of Graves, and wrap up in Cotton, whence they utter their Oracles. They use
that Witchcraft to bewitch their Enemies, for which purpose, the Witches must
have something that has belonged to the party to be bewitched: the Spirit seizes
sometimes upon the body of those Women, whence they give formal answers to
whatever is proposed to them: They serve up Meat to those Spirits in places
separated from the Commerce that is kept with them. The Boy or Priest that has
brought it, being gone out, they hear the Dish move, and the Devil (according
to Blome,) or the God (according to that People) moves the Jaws, and makes a
great noise, as if he chewed the Meat, that has been served to him, tho in the
Morning they find that he has not touched it.

Sect. 16. I shall yet give a more particular Relation of the Caraibes drawn
from the description made by de la Board, who was sent by the French King, with
the Jesuit Simon, to convert that People, what he has in his Relation
subservient to our design, viz. to know their sentiments concerning the Deity
and the Spirits, and to be informed of their practices, is as follows. Louquo,
who was the First Man, and Caraibe, and consequently the Common-Father of all
the others, was not made by any, but descended from Heaven, here below, where
he lived very long. He had a great Navel, whence he brought out the First Man,
as well as out of his Thigh, making there an Incision. There happened many
stories during his Life, that would be shameful and infamous to be reported; he
made little Fishes from scraps, and little bits of Manjou, which he threw into
the Sea; but the great from great parcels of the same Root. He rose again three
days after his Death, and returned to Heaven. Terrestrial Animals are come
since, but they know not whence. They believe that the Heavens have been from
all Eternity, but not the Earth, nor the Sea; that neither of them was in that
fine disposition, in which they now are: their mover and first actor Louquo,
having first made the Earth soft, smooth, without Mountains, but they know not
whence he had the matter of it; the Moon followed immediately, but eversince she
saw the Sun, she got away, and hid her self for shame, and ever since showed
her self but at Night; they attribute the Eclipses to Mapoia the wicked Spirit,
who endeavors to kill them. They more esteem the M^on than the Sun, and for
that Reason, rule the days by the Moon, and not by the Sun, never saying a
Month but a Moon, nor how many days shall you be on your journey, but how many
nights, shall you sleep abroad.

Sect. 17. Their Opinion concerning the Demons, Inferior Gods and Heroes, may
easily be learned. They believe that all the Stars are Caraibes, and that
Racunnon was one of the First, whom Louquo made, he was changed into a great
Snake, that had a Man's Head, and always stood upon a Cabalas, which is a very
thick hard, high, and straight Tree, but he was since transmuted into a Star.
Savacon another Caraibe, and since a Star is the Captain of the Hurricanes, and
of Thunder, and it is he that causes great Rains. Achinaon, a Caraibe and Star,
causes little Rains and great Winds: the Star Couromon raises a Wind, that
makes the Sea ebb and flow. They reckon and mark the Years by the Constellation
Chirities, which is by them the name of the Pleiades. Cavalnia is the Captain
of the Zemeans. Limacani is a Comet sent by the Captain of the Zemeans to hurt,
when he is Angry. Joalouca or the Rainbow is a Zemean too, that makes the
Caraibes sick when he finds no Victuals. If it appear to them at Sea, they take
it as a good Omen, and say that it comes to accompany them, and procure them a
good Voyage; but if it appears at Land, they hide themselves within their
Cottages, fancying that it is a Foreign Zemean, that has no Master, that is to
say, no Piaie; and therefore can do nothing but hurt, by his Evil Influencies,
and undoubtedly seeks to kill some body.

Sect. 18. There are several other things, of which they make Zemeans,
especially such as cause some terror or amazement, as Bats, Which they name
Boulliri, that fly by Night about the Houses; they believe that they keep
them, and that such as kill those Creatures, become Sick. They have so many
sorts of Boule Bonum, that is to say, bad Omens, that I cannot resolve my self,
to relate all their Trifles and Dreams.

Sect. 19. Their Religious worship chiefly consists in such Divinations and
Witchcrafts, as are agreeable to their strange notions. As Soon as they fall into
a Disease, they fancy themselves to be bewitched, and if they can catch the
Woman they suspect, they kill or cause her to be killed; for they commonly
assault Women, not so freely daring make bold with Men: But before they kill
her, they exercise an unheard of Cruelty upon the poor Wretch, their Relations
and Friends go to catch her, and cause her to rake up the Ground in several
places, until she has found what they suppose she has hidden, and often that
miserable Woman confesses an untruth to free her self from those Tortures. When
they have gotten that proof of her being a Witch, they put her to Death in a
most Cruel and Barbarous manner, related by the Author, who adds, that the
Caraibes fancy to have several other means to preserve themselves from
Witchcraft; for Instance, They put in a great Gourd, Hairs, or some bones of
their Deceased Relations, which they keep in their Carbet for some Witchcraft,
and say that the Ghost of the Deceased speaks therein, and advertises them of
the designs of their Enemies.

Sect. 20. Divinations are made by the means of Zemeans, that is to say,
familiar Spirits, Each Picas or Boie having his own, and ruling himself by the
advices of his detestable Oracles. Thus to know the event of their Diseases,
they cause a Piaice to come at Night, who immediately orders all the Fire of the
Cottage to be put out, and the suspected Persons to be gone, then he withdraws
into a Corner, where he causes the Sick to be brought, and having smoaked a
little Tobacco, he bruises it in his Hands, and blows into the Air, shaking and
snaking his Fingers. It Is said that the Zemean fails not to come at the smell
of that precious Incense and Perfume, by the Ministry of the Boie, who
doubtless is in a compact with the Devil. There being interrogated, it answers
with an audible Voice, and as it were at a distance, to the Queries put to it.
Afterward he comes near the Sick Person, strokes and gently handles several
times the afflicted part, still blowing upon it, and sometimes drawing, or
feigning to draw out of it, Thorns, little parcels of Manioc, Wood, Bones, or
little Fishbones, which his Devil supplies him with, persuading the sick that
it was that which caused his pain. He often sucks the Aching part, and
immediately goes out of the Cottage to spew up, says he, the Venom. Thus the
crazy distempered is cured, rather by Imagination than reallity; It Is
observable, that he cures neither Agues nor Wounds, as those of Arrows or a
Knife. Not a word is to be said in that Diabolical Assembly nor any noise to be
made, no not so much as to let a Fart otherwise the Zemean flies away. The
Caraibes believe that all the time the Piaie goes above, and comes back only,
when the Zemean is gone. As a Gratuity, they present in their Cottages, without
other Ceremony, the Zemean, and the Piaie too, for the trouble he has been at
in calling out the Spirit, some refreshment, as some Ouicou and Cassavies, upon
a Matouton, or little Table, having them there all the Night, if in the Morning
they find if untouched, they nevertheless persuade themselves, that the Zemean
has fed upon it, but has only Eaten and Drunken the Spiritual part; whereas if
all be consumed, for which the Priest never fails to provide as much as lies in
his power; it is the Zemean that has Eaten it up. They likewise never make a
Feast, but the Zemean has his portion.

Sect. 21. Going over into the Continent of Northern America, we meet with the
Mexicons, the most considerable People of the Country. Thomas Gage an
Englishman, who became a White-Fryar in Spain, and is a judicious and credible
Author, saving in what concerns the superstitions of Popery, says in the 20th
Chap. of his First Book, That there are above 2000 Gods in the Town of Mexico,
the chief of whom were called Visilopuchli and Tescatlipuca, A little after the
Author adds, They believed that those two Idols were two Brothers, that
Tescatlipuca was the God of Providence, and Visilopuchli that of the the War,
for which Reasons, they worshipped and honored them both above all the others.
He also mentions another God, whom they extremely venerated, he had spoken in
the foregoing Chapter of Quetavatlei the God of Light. I know not whether this
last is Quetsaolcoalt, whom Montanus calls the Gods of Merchants.

Sect. 22. Going thence to Guatimale and Amatitlum, under the Dominion of
Spain. The same Author speaks much of the Magic of the Inhabitants, which they
have neither forgotten nor forsaken, tho they make an outward profession of
Christianity; to show that they meddle with Divination, he relates that they
observe, whether they are the First that see the Beasts going before them in
their way: That they likewise observe the flight of Birds, and whether they
sing out of their season, about their abode: they also believe, that their Life
depends on that of some Beasts, which they keep in their Houses as a Familiar
Spirit, so far that they are seized with terror and shake, whence it is pursued
by Hunters; and fall into a Swoon, when it is caught,

Sect. 23. Going over from New-Spain into New England, we shall be sufficiently
informed by the Relation of Richard Blome, who says, that the Inhabitants of
that Country, tho the dulest and most Savage People in the World, have
nevertheless Gods, Priests, and a certain form of worship. The First and most
venerated of their Gods, is that who does them most hurt, whom they call Okea;
they converse with him, and he transforms himself into their shape; they
likewise adore whatever they think able to cause them an unavoidable damage, as
Water, Fire, Thunder, Lightning, great and small Guns, Horses, the Hedghog, at
whose sight they were most frighted the First time the English brought one
thither. They believe it to be the God of Swines, and that they had undoubtedly
incensed him. When they design to make War, they consult with the Priests and
Diviners, before they undertake it.

Sect. 24. The same Author relates almost the same things of New York, formerly
called the New-Netherlands; he especially reports the manner of their
Enchantments, and discovers their Cheat, of which we shall speak in the last
part of this work; but we may put here, what he says of the Marylanders. They
believe a Sovereign God who has made all things from all Eternity, and even
Inferior Gods, of different dignities, to make use of their Ministry, such are
the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars; they believe that all things have been formed
of Water, but that Men had their Original from four Children, whom the First
Woman in the World conceived from one of these Gods.

Sect. 25. As to the Souls, they believe that those of the Virtuous are taken
up to the Gods, to enjoy an Eternal happiness; but that the Souls of those, who
have led a wicked Life, go to burn for ever in the Popogusso, or that extremity
of the World, where the Sun sets down. Upon this subject they recite. That they
perceived a Man to move in his Grave, a day after he had been Buried, whence at
last he went out, and came to Life again, he declared to them, that he had been
almost precipitated into the Popogusso, but that one of their Gods had
preserved him from it, and given him leave to return to the World, to warn his
Friends, they should beware of that frightful place. Another being likewise
risen, related, That his Soul had remained alive, whilst his Body was in the
Coffin: that she was gone into a spacious place, planted on both sides with
fine Trees covered, with excellent Fruits, that at last, she was come to a
place full of Magnificent Buildings, where he had found his Father Deceased
some time before, who had enjoined him to come back and tell his Friends what
happiness was prepared for them, if they put themselves in a State of obtaining
it, by a Virtuous Life; whereupon he was come back into the World. Thence we
may plainly perceive the Opinion of that People, upon the State of the Soul,
separated from the Body, and that they are more polite and enlightened, than
those mentioned before.

Sect. 26. The Inhabitants of Virginia hold also Okea for the supreme God, tho
they confess the God of the Christians to be above him; because the Christians
can do more Execution with their Guns, than they with their Bows and Arrows;
for their Religion, and that of the most part of the Neighboring Nations is all
turned to the War, and to obtain a happy success of it. A Counselor of one of
their Kings being in England in King James the First time, says, That Okea
often appears in his Pagode, whereupon 4 Priests enter into it, uttering
strange Words, and making Gestures and Postures no less surprising, These call
others again, whom they cause to come in, after the same manner, and the God
declares his Will to them, Upon this Declaration, they take their measures in
all their Affairs, either journey or any thing else. If they desire to go a
Hunting, he precisely teaches them, where the Beast will be found; they receive
his Advices with great satisfaction, and never fail to follow them, which often
succeeds, He appears to them in the shape of a comely Indian, and after he has
showed himself for some time to his 12 Confederates, he goes up into the Air
whence he came.

Sect. 27. The same Author gives us the sentiments of the Inhabitants of
Carolina, which is part of Florida, bordering upon Virginia, as we have heard
him before, relating those of the Inhabitants of the Island St. Vincent. They
likewise hold Okea to be the Supreme God. Good and bad Spirits are looked upon
to be inferior Gods, and they offer Sacrifices to the least, as well as to the
greatest Gods. They also believe the Transmigration of Souls, and when any body
dies, they bury with him sufficient provision for his maintenance, and all
sorts of Clothes for his use, when he shall be in the Elysian Fields, which
they fancy to be beyond the Indian Sea. The Author gives the name of Elysian
Fields to the places he describes, because of the Relation he has found betwixt
them and those the Greeks have called by that name.

CHAP. XI. Where all the Sentiments and Practices of so many different
Heathens, are usefully compared together.
Sect. 1 HItherto, we have but gathered the various Opinions of the Ancient and
Modern Pagans, and related their Customs without passing any Judgment upon
them, neither is it time to do it as yet; we must first see of what use it may
prove to be informed of all these things: to which end we must again consider
together, what has been hitherto related, to see what will be the result of it.
On the one side, we find that Nations, that extremely differ in the Opinions
they have concerning the Gods and the Spirits; yet on the other side, they
wonderfully agree upon the same subject. They differ in the Names they give
them, which is not strange, the Tongues being so different, and all the Nations
not ascribing the same properties to Spiritual Beings. Thence proceeds a second
difference, that they make not their number equal, nor distinguish them in the
same manner, as to their Dignity and Administration, or as to their Operations,
as it has particularly been shown in the 2 Chap. Sect. 21. concerning the
Inhabitants of Asia. But the difference to be found amongst them is not
material, and must be accounted as inconsiderable, comparatively to the
conformity that is betwixt them all, that looks as a work to which they should
unanimously have conspired.

Sect. 2. Whatever has been hitherto quoted; is either collected from the
Writings of the Pagans, or taken from what passes amongst them, and relates
partly to their Sentiments, partly to their Practices. They agree in their
Sentiments in two respects; as their understanding is yet in some manner
illuminated by the natural Light, or as it is darkened by error. I shall mark
both these conformities, and at the same time, the places in which they have
been before related, where the instances are to be found: because it would be
too long and tedious to repeat them every time, and that I may hope the Reader
will take the trouble to look them over, or being all fresh in his memory, he
will excuse me from an unnecessary trouble.

Sect. 3. As to the first conformity, if we attentively reflect upon so many
instances and testimonies as are contained in the 2d, 5th, 6th, 8th, 9th and
10th. Chapt. We shall perceive, that those, that are least provided with human
Light and Reason, agree nevertheless upon the most important points, referring
the Reader to the places where the Instances are set down. All the Heathens
therefore, whether Ancient or Modern Europeans, Asiatick, Africans, North and
South Americans agree in these five principal points, which are of an
undeniable Truth.

1. That there is only a first Being, or a Supreme Divinity. Chap. 2. Sect. 3.
Chap. 7, Sect. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7. Chap. 10. Sect. 6, 11, 16, 24, 27.

2. That there are Spirits, who have had a beginning, and that they are
distinguished from humane Souls: Chap. 1. Sect. 2, 9, 10, 11. Chap. 7. Sect. 2,
9, 12, 18. Chap. 10. Sect. 3, 13.

3. That those Spirits are either good or bad, some Friends and others Enemies
to Mankind: Chap. 2. Sect. 11, 15. Chap. 7. Sect. 9, 10. Chap. 10. Sect. 5, 13,
14, 27.

14. That humane Souls dye not with their Bodies. Chap. 2. Sect. 15, 16, 17.
Chap. 6. Sect. 3. Chap. 7. Sect. 2, 3, 5, 6, 12, 20. Chap. 9. Sect. 4. Chap.
10. Sect. 8, 12, 14, 22, 25, 27.

5. That the Good or evil we have done, will be rewarded or punished after this
Life. Chap. 2 Sect. 18. Chap. 7. Sect. 2, 5, 6, 8, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Chap.
10. Sect. 3, 12, 25. for if in the Sentiments of Epicure there appear something
contrary to this last proposition; I shall speak of it, and explain it in its
proper place.

Sect. 4. But the proof of the obscurity, that is spread over their
understanding, discovers it self in their other Opinions: for it is observable,
that in all their Reasonings, even those in which they speak the Truth, they
must take two ways; by compelling the Divine Majesty to descend from Heaven
upon Earth, and by raising the humbleness of Man from the Earth to the Heavens.
So that they have too high an Opinion of the Creature, and too despicable of
the Creator. That mistake, which proceeds from a confused Notion of what
belongs to the Divine Nature, and to that of Created Beings, leaves them to
gross errors, and that are source of their Idolatry and Magic. For it is easy
to perceive, that none of those practices flow from those 5 Truths just now
mentioned, but only from a false and erroneous Idea, as we shall see, if we
hear in few words, the result of the preceding observations.

Sect. 5. Concerning the Divine Essence we see, First, that they conceive the
Divine Greatness and Excellence, only with relation to their Ideas of the Human
Nature, since they ascribe to the Gods, both Superior and Inferior; an Human
Original, Marriages, begetting of Children, etc. Chap. 7. Sect. 5, 6, 17. Chap.
10. Sect. 16.

Second. That they have too vile and abject Thoughts of the perfections of God,
fancying that he would tire himself, and impair his Glory and Felicity, if he
should take in his own hands the direction of all things. Chap. 2. Sect. 4.
Chap. 10. Sect. 13. For which reason they have associated with him inferior
Gods, as Governors under him, Chap. 2. Sect. 7.12. Chap. 7. Sect. 2, 8. Chap.
10. Sect. 6, 7, 12, 13.

Third. That they fix not Goodness as a nccessary Idea to the Deity; since they
have almost all a wicked God, as well as a good. Chap. 2. Sect. 4.12. Chap. 7.
Sect. 3. Chap. 10. Sect. 5. However, with this difference, that they always
place the good above the bad; tho some honor them most, who fright them most,
as the Tapaians, and the Inhabitants of New England. Chap. 10. Sect. 5.23.

Fourth. That they easily confound the Creator with the Creature. Chap. 4.
Sect. 7. Chap. 6. Sect. 2, 3. Chap. 10. Sect. 6, 7, 17, 23, 24.

Sect. 6. Concerning Spirits, it may be observed,

First, That they make not a suitable distinction betwixt Spiritual and
Corporeal substances. Chap. 2. Sect, 1, 6. Whence proceeds, that they have
attributed, not only to the Spirits, but also to the Deity it self, bodily
motions and properties, diversions affixed above in the Heavens, in the Air,
upon Earth, or under it. Chap. 2. Sect. 14, 16. Chap. 7. Sect. 6.14, 18. Chap.
10. Sect. 12, 25.

Second. That considering the Spirits or Demons as inferior Gods and Ministers
of the great God, they distinguish them into several Orders, as into so many
Degrees, according to the administration they have been been entrusted with.
Chap. 2. Sect. 6, 14. Chap. 2. Sect. 7, 8, 11, 12 13, 18.

Third. That conceiving not what difference there is betwixt the Soul of Man
and that of Beasts; Some are fallen into that gross error, as to ascribe to Men
and Beasts, a Soul of the same Nature. Chap. 7. Sect. 14. Without which, it had
been impossible that the Opinion of Pythagoras, concerning the Transmigration
of Souls, into the Bodies of other Men and Beasts indifferently, should have
taken so deep roots, and have spread so far into the World. Chap. 2. Sect. 17.
Chap. 7* Sect. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

Fourth. That from the same source this Sentiment has visibly proceeded, that
the Spirits are wandering, as well as the Souls of Men after their death. Chap.
2. Sect. 15. Chap. 6. Sect. 2. Chap. 7. Sect. 19, 20. Chap. 10. Sect. 11.

Sect. 7. What contributes most to the vilifying of the Deity, is, that they
deify even Men, either during their Life, or after their Death. Witness the
ancient Greeks and Romans, who transformed the Passions of Men, and the Motions
of the Heart, into so many Gods and Goddesses; or as the modern Cannibals, who
are very near of the same mind, as has been showed, Chap. 2. Sect. 14. Chap. 7.
Sect. 5, 6. Chap. 10. Sect. 14. which however is not commonly used, but after
death, as appears by the Apotheosis of the Ancients, Chap. 2. Sect. 13. and was
no where brought to such a light, as amongst the Cannibals, as has been said,
Chap. 10. Sect. 12, 16. That they believe the whole race of the Gods issued
from their Ancestors, and that they themselves are of Celestial Origin: from
the same spring is derived the Sentiment of the Existence of the Genii or
Zemeans, that is of helpful Spirits, the description of whom may be seen in
several Authors.

Sect. 8. It is now easy to conceive on what ground are founded the Divination
and Magic of the Ancients, that are the same with the predictions and
Witchcraft of the modern Heathens; for, as to their foretelling or Divination,
it is grounded upon this.

First, Every God has his People, whom he favors and protects, or his own
property; for which Reason, they put questions to him, concerning that which is
to happen to his People, and what is to be done on that occasion.

Second. That every God has his Enemy; for which Reason, every one looks for
help against the Gods of whom he is to receive damage, and implores the
assistance of such Gods, as are esteemed to be their most violent Enemies.

Third. That every Man has his God or particular Spirit, and therefore every
one mistakes his own passions, and whatever comes into his fancy, for divine
Inspirations and motions; especially when Dreams supply him with the occasion
of it; not knowing that the employments or accidents that have preceeded the
Dreams, are the Origin of them, or being hindered by his prejudices, to make an
exact enquiry after their possible cause.

Fourth. That it is by confounding the Deity with the Creature, that there have
been introduced so many sorts of Divinations and Prognostics, drawn from the
Stars, from the Thunder, from Birds, Mountains, Woods, Waters, and from all the
things in which it is believed that some Deity is discoverable.

Fifth. That from the belief that the Souls of the Dead are wandering about
their Corpse; it was easy to take occasion to conjure up Ghosts.

Sect. 9. Concerning the Witchcraft, we shall only make the following
Considerations.

First, That it is not strange, that distinguishing not only created Spirits,
but even the Gods, into good and bad; they should endeavor to set them one
against another, and to defend themselves by the help of the good, or of some
of the wicked, against another; or to avenge themselves by the power of one
God, of the wrong they suppose to have received from another.

Second. That having forged to themselves so many sorts of Gods and Spirits
superior and inferior, it is no wonder, they should believe to destroy the power
of the less, by the assistance of the greater.

Third. That having so base thoughts of the Gods, whom they subject to the same
passions as Men, and thus Deify human passions themselves, they act
consequently, by stirring them up against their Enemies, as it comes into their
fancy.

Fourth. That putting some of their Gods so low, and in so great a familiarity
with the Spirits, they seem to assume to themselves, the quality of their
Directors, and to be able to make the Divine Operations, even in the most
hidden things, subservient to what use they please. Chap. 6. Sect. 4.

Sect 10. There is yet something to be said upon Divination and Witchcraft
together, which partly concerns the thing it self, and partly the gestures of
the body used in it. What concerns the thing it self, comes to this.

First, That the Opinion of the Heathens, concerning the Genii or familiar
Spirits, and the Spirits wandering about Graves, makes 'em believe, that
something may be operated by the means of Graves, and Carcasses; for which
Reason, they use the bones of the Dead in their Witchcraft, and consult them in
their Divinations, in hopes of getting an answer from the Gods or Spirits,
which operate in them, or abide near them, Chap. 10. Sect. 11, 15.

Second. That according to this, their belief of the existence of so many sorts
of Spirits, whereof most part are wicked Spirits, that walk and wander every
where; they are always ready in any unforeseen disease, Mortality, or sinister
Accident, to cast the suspicion upon their Enemies or Envious, who have
bewitchd them for believing that the inferior Gods or Spirits act according to
the Will of the Men to whom they belong, they must consequently believe, that
those Men will not fail to effect reciprocally, the one against the other,
whatever the help and power of the Spirits will allow. Now those suspicions,
that will surely move Men to seek by whom they have been bewitched or the
cause, matter, and foundation of Divination, Chap. 10. Sect. 8, 16.

Sect. 11. As to the postures used in Witchcraft.

First, The Corpereal Ideas, which they have of the Spirits and of the Gods
themselves, move them doubtless to use so many outward gestures in their
Conjuration, Chap. 10. Sect 16. But there is still another Reason of that
Custom, viz. That the Priests, who are Impostors, make use of them to impose so
much the easier upon the simplicity of the Vulgar.

Second. Considering how the Opinion of Pythagoras, is become almost Universal,
it may be, methinks, conceived at the same time, how it was possible, that Men
should place some Virtue in Letters and Numbers, by gathering and disposing
them, in such or such a way, and consequently in the pronunciation of some
certain words; for the same Pythagoras has believed, that the Virtue of the
Deity, influenced the proportion, and Harmony of Numbers. Now the Letters of
the Alphabet being employed to mark the numbers, not only amongst the Greeks
and Hebrews, but by all the other Nations that have some knowledge of Letters,
it follows, that there is not one word, but it can make up a number whence it may
rationally be inferred, that such or such a word, composed in such or such a
manner, of such or such or such Letters, more or less, has according to their
Opinion, more or less power in Witchcraft.

Third. Besides the ordinary numbers, they use also Names and Characters, as it
is seen at this day, especially amongst the Laplanders and Finlanders, whose
enchanted Drums are spotted with the like Characters, Chap. 6. Sect. 5.

Sect. 12. But I have nor yet spoken of what is most important in these
Conjurations, that are used, as well for Divination, as Witchcraft, which
consists in this, that they are part of the Pagan Religion, and even make it
wholly up amongst some Nations, especially in the West Indies, Chap. 9. Sect.
6. Chap. 10. Sect. 16. And it is almost impossible it should be otherwise, since
their whole Religion turns upon their Opinion of the Gods, or draws it is
Original from thence.

First. They look by no means upon their practices, nor the scope they aim at,
as things evil of their own nature; but only by the bad use that is made of
them, wherefore anciently, the Magi and Diviners, were found amongst the King's
Attendants, and in the Temples, as are still at this day the Brainines, in the
East Indies, the Fetisseros in Guinea, the Baivas or Piais in Peru, and the
Country of the Cannibals, etc. and several others of the same quality, so that
no body is acknowledged for Wise, Doctor, Priest, Prophet, nor becomes
Councellor of State, unless he be Diviner or Magician, in the sense that has
been set down. The Holy Scripture shows the same in the persons Jannes,
Jambres, Balaam, Daniel, and his Companions, of which we have said something
before, Chap. 4. Sect. 1, 4. And it may be observed in the general instances
that have been alleged, that the Heathens had public Schools to teach those
Arts, that the Priests especially instructed the ^^ople in that Ministry, and
trained them up from their Youth, which is still practiced amongst the brutish
and dull Laplanders.

Second. We see at the same time, for what Reason the entrails of sacrificed
Beasts, and some Meat and dressed Herbs, were employed in their Witchcraft and
Divinations; viz. because in their Opinion* something divine was mixed with
them.

Sect. 13. It Is therefore certain, that all their practices were grounded upon
a certain knowledge, and partly upon vain conjectures, and very great errors;
for to seek the Deity and to fear it, is an effect of the natural knowledge of
God, which Men keep in the midst of their greatest corruption. But to admit so
many sorts of Deities, of such a low rank, and such a contemptible Nature, and
to serve him in so many different ways, is an effect of the corruption of the
mind; which, let it be said in reference to those that acknowledge one God, or
Spirit, and who believe the Immortality of the Soul, to which believe the
Opinion of the Epicures is not wholly opposite tho they seem to deny both, or
at least, to call them in question; for Epicure and his modern followers, deny
not so much the existence of a God and of Spirits, as they are earnest to
persuade such, as believe both, that their practices belly their Faith, and are
not agreeable to their principles; and therefore it is impossible that one
should be both an Epicure, and a Sorcerer, or a Diviner: And on the contrary,
no Heathen ever endeavored to contradict the Hypotheses of Epicure, without
admitting those Arts and their effects.

Sect. 14. For a greater certainty, it will be convenient to hear those
Philosophers speak in their own words. Gassendus has collected part of what
they say, Sect. 11. Chap 6. It Is the same thing that God should govern the
World by himself, as some affirm, or as others assert, by Ministers generally
called Genii, or Demons, for when all is done, things go nevertheless their
usual way in great part, as tho there were no such Ministers. And tho it were
granted, that there are some, they could not be such as they are fancyed, viz.
of Human shape, and conversing with us, I will not say that being for the most
part wicked they could not lead a long and happy life, because malignity is
joined to Ignorance, and tends to ruin; That Is what they say concerning
Spirits, let us then speak of what is practiced upon that Account, They use to
allege Divination as a proof both of Providence and of the existence of
Spirits, but I look with sorrow upon that Human weakness, which seeks for
Oracles, even in Dreams, as tho God being set upon Stilts, came by frightful
visions to forewarn Men in their deepest Sleep, of what is to happen to them;
as tho fortune and chance were not sufficient to produce such events, without
mixing God, not only with the Sun and Moon, and several other kinds of
Annimals, but also with all sorts of Stone and Brass. Those that speak so, make
it evident, that they rather have to deny the existence of God and Spirits,
than to acknowledge them such as the other Heathens believed them, and to be
obliged to own themselves Sorcerers and Diviners, by granting, that they exist.
So much for Paganism, it is time to proceed further,

CHAP. XII. What are the Opinions of the Jews, and how necessary it is to
examine them.
Sect. 1. WE have hitherto only considered Paganism, which has no other light
but that of Nature; now we shall enquire, what those that are illuminated with
the light of the Holy Scripture, believe or practice upon that account, In the
mean while, it must be observed, that they are not all of one sense, being
divided into Jews, Mahometans, and Christians; which difference proceeds from
the inequality of the light they have received, or made use of; I shall begin
with those that are at greatest distance from Christianity, and consequently
the nearest to Paganism. It seems that the followers of Mahomet, should have
that place; so much the more, because we have favorable prejudices on behalf
of the Jews, as having Anciently been the People of God. But notwithstanding
what they have been, they are now so much degenerated, that the belief of the
Mahometans, may be said to have more conformity with ours, then theirs has,
both detest Idolatry, and acknowledge one God, and take his word for the rule
of their Faith. The Jews receive only the Old Testament, but the Mahometans
admit also of the New, adding the Alcoran or Mahomet's Law, to those of Moses
and Christ, in order to correct and perfect them both. The Jews do almost the
same as to the Law of Moses, by the Addition of the Talmud, which contains the
traditions of the Ancient. But if the Opinions of both parties were deeply
searched into, perhaps it would be found that those of the Mahometans favor
more the infalibility of the Law and Gospel, than those of the Jews, that of
the Law alone. Add to this, that Christ is acknowledged by the Mahometans for a
great Prophet, and honored in that quality, whereas he is horribly blasphemed
by the Jews. For these reasons I say, that the Mahometans are half nearer to
us, than the modern Jews. But what need we any farther proof, since as to this
matter, it is plain that the Jews are less from Paganism than the Mahometans,
as shall appear by the proof I shall produce.

Sect. 2. As long as we have had to do with Heathens only, we needed but to
make an inquiry after their Opinions concerning their Gods, the Spirits, and
the Souls. But here the Question is not concerning the plurality of Gods, for
tho formerly the Jews have been extraordinarily inclined to Idolatry, they have
now such a great aversion for Polytheism, ever since 2300 years, that they are
returned from the Babylonian Captivity, that they will acknowledge but one
Person in the Divine Unity. They believe, by the light of the Holy Writ, that
this only God is Almighty, and sufficient to himself, and to all things, which
he has created of nothing and governs and maintains alone. Amongst his
Creatures they reckon Angels and Men, and think that the last have a Soul more
excellent, than that of Bruits, though far inferior to the Angelical Perfection.
Such has been in all times the belief of the Jews, and so far is more
agreeable to the Christian Faith, then that of the Mahometans, as we shall say
hereafter.

Sect. 3. But the state of the Jewish Religion, whilst the first Temple stood,
must be well distinguished from that into which it is insensibly fallen. The
Jews of that time were Orthodox, save only those who suffered themselves to be
carried into Idolatry, and undoubtedly they had no other Opinion of the Angels,
Demons, and Souls of Men, but what the Holy Writings still teach us; so that if
we still look upon them as different from us, it is because we consider those
of latter times, when their State was in its fall, and Christianity in its
growth. But though they be now divided into two Sects, that of the Carraijim, who
only follow the Holy Writ; and that of the Rabbanim, who adhere to the
Traditions of their Doctors; there is yet but the latter, which deserves to
come into consideration, the number of the former being altogether
inconsiderable, they being a remainder of the Sadduces, which are hardly known
in Europe, whereas, the other may be called the posterity of the Pharisees.

Sect. 4. Though we design only to insist upon the latter, yet a more particular
difference may be observed betwixt the Ancient Jews, and the Modern. By the
Ancient Jews I understand here, those that lived in the time of our Savior, of
his Apostles, or a little after. Philo, who was the Learned and Wisest, is of
an Opinion not far from that of Plato, when he says that the Stars are
animated, and that they move circularly by their own intelligence. Ben Maimon
is in that point of his Sentiment, of which he has made an abridgement in these
words. All the Stars and Celestial Orbs have a Soul, Knowledge Understanding,
and a lasting Life, knowing him by whose Word the Universe was made. Each of
those ^reatures, according to his Excellency and Dignity, prais^s and glorifies
his Author, following the example of the Angels: but as they know God, so they
understand what they are themselves, as well as the Angels, who however, are
above them. Their Knowledge being inferior to that of the Angels, and superior
to that of Men This is to be read in the Book of that Author Entitled, Of the
Grounds of Faith.

Sect. 5. If we come more particularly to examine their Opinions as to the
Spirits, whether Angels or Human Souls, we shall not find the Ancient and
Modern Writers agree well together. Philo, who is amongst the former, believes,
That the Air is full of Spirits, the most perfect of whom never assumed Bodies,
but go to and fro, ascend and descend from Heaven upon Earth, for the service
of the Great God. That there are others, inferior in Dignity to the first, who
take on Bodies, of which they are deprived by death, and into which some of
them return. But others being wearied of this life, go up higher, and live
there in peace. But there are others, the most pure and excellent of all, who
have a sublime and Divine Understanding, despise Terrestrial and perishing
things, are the Ministers of the Almighty, and as the Ears and Eyes of the
Great God, those see and hear everything. The Philosophers call them Genii, and
the Holy Writ names them most properly Angels, that is to say, Messengers; for
they are really Messengers, who carry to Children the Orders of their Father,
and to the Father the Prayers, of his Children: wherefore it is said of them,
that they ascend and descend. This is contained in the Book of Dreams written
by Philo.

Sect. 6. If you now desire to hear the Jews of the latter times, and their
Opinions upon the Nature of Angels; Vorstius will tell you most truly, in his
Annotations upon the Grounds of the Faith, written by Maimonides, that they do
not perfectly agree together: For some believe: That those Spirits have been
created of the most subtle Elements, as Rabbi Juda relates it, in his Book,
Entitled Cusri. Chap. 4. Sect. 4. Others, as the Author of the Book Jezira,
hold, as the same Rabbi Juda assures us, that the Angels proceeded from the
Holy Ghost. We find also in the Book Chagiga, fol. 14. That by the word of God,
administering Angels are created every day. But Maimonides speaks of his own,
more wisely upon this subject, and generally upon all others. The Angels, says
he, in Chap. 2. Sect. 4 Have an Essence that subsists without Matter, not
having Bodies, but being Essences, distinguished from one another.

Sect. 7. Upon this difference of the Angels, in the opinion of the Jews, I
think it better to propose what has been said by the same Author, than to quote
any other; because there is none amongst them, that may be compared to him,
either for Learning or Judgment, as not intending to impute to them more
foolish Doctrines, than those that are admitted by their most authentic
Writers. Thus then Maimonides expresses this Opinion. When the Prophets say,
that they have seen the Angels as a fire, and with wings, they speak after the
manner of the Prophets, and by a simile, designing only to show, that they are
neither corporeal nor heavy. In this sense it is that God himself is called a
Consuming fire, viz. improperly thus, likewise this passage must be understood,
he makes the Winds his Angels, or, as it is in some Translations, The Spirits,
for the Hebrew word (...) Ruach, having those two significations of Spirits,
and of Winds. And therefore the Angels being material are essentially
distinguished betwixt themselves, as by degrees, the one being above the other;
to which the Author applies these words; For a higher than that high, takes
notice of it, and there are yet higher than they are. Not that they are placed
one above the other, as it is done amongst Men; but as we ordinarily say of two
wise persons, that one is wiser than the other, and that the Cause is more
excellent than the Effect. So that he pretends that God himself has produced
those of the first Dignity, who have brought for h those of the second, and
these, those of the third, and so forth.

Sect. 8. Jewish Authors ordinarily establish ten Degrees or Orders, who are
distinguished by their Names, in the same Maimonides, and in the Book Midrasch
Bereshjit, descending from the highest degree to the lowest. 1. Chayos
Hakkodesch. 2. Ofanim. 3 Oralim. 4. Chasmalim. 5. Seraphim. 6. Malachim, or
Angels. 7. Elohim. 8. Been Elohim. 9. Cherubim. 10. Yschim. The signification
of most of the Names, is very uncertain and far fetched. However, I shall
translate them as briefly as I can, and as I can best guess by the explications
they have given of them. 1. Living Holily. 2. Quick. 3. Powerful in strength.
4. Flames of Fire. 5. G^owing Sparks. 6. Messengers. 7. Gods. 8. Sons of God.
9. Images of the Temple. 10. Men. It Is believed that the first are so called,
because they are originally Holy, in a more excellent manner than Men; and that
by their influence, they are the cause of the life of all the Creatures
inferior to them, which God has created by their Ministry. The name of Men may
have been given to the last, because it is supposed that they use sometimes to
appear by the order of God in a human shape. They only also, says Maimonides,
were those who spoke by the Prophets, and are in the nearst degree to the human
Knowledge.

Sect. 9. That Is the difference which is amongst them. I shall yet set down in
the words of the same Author; how those ten Orders are distinguished from God
and Men. All those living Beings, says he, know the Creator in an excellent
degree of knowledge; each in reference to his Order, and not in relation to his
Excellency. For which reason, the first Degree cannot conceive the Creator,
such as he is in himself, because their Understanding is too short to attain
unto him. However, they approach nearer to him, than the Beings of an inferior
Order, and each of these Orders, unto the 10th. knows the Creator more
perfectly than Men, who are composed of Matter and Form.

Sect. 10. The Cabbalists, who have traced out the way to the Magic of the
Jews, are not contented with these Ten Orders, but divide all the Creatures
into four Circles. The 1st, is the Circle of the exhalations, Avilos, called
otherwise Zephiros, Lights, so much exalted in all ages by the Jewish Doctors,
who will not have them called either Creatures or Essences of the Creator, but
perfections distinct from him, as Manasse Ben-Israel explains it more
particularly, putting them into parallel with the Ideas of Plat^, and esteeming
them to be the Principles of all things. He counts 10 of this Order, the Crown,
the Science, Prudence, Majesty, Valor, Beauty, Victory, Glory, Foundation and
Kingdom. They name the second Circle, that of the Creation, in which are the
Angels separated and distinct from all Corporality, and divided into 10 Orders,
the names of which are set down, Sect. 8. They place* in the third Circle
Jetzira, that is, the forms, amongst which they reckon such Angels, as have any
communication with Bodies. The 4th Circle contains all the other Creatures
named Alchiia or compounded Beings.

Sect. 11. If I would relate more at large, whatever the Jews have written of
the Angels, and the Opinion of each of their particular Doctors, there would
not be much agreement betwixt what I shoul say, and what has already been said;
they differ so much from one another. However, here follow the Thoughts of some
of their Ringleaders. They speak of three sorts of Angels, the first, is
altogether free from Matter, and there are four Troops of that sort, which have
each their Captain, that stands at one of the corners of the Throne of God.
Michael is on the Right, Gabriel on the Left, Vriel before, and Raphael behind:
This we learn from Rabbi Eliezer, in his 4th Chapter. Those Names have a very
pregnant Sense. Michael, that is, unless it be God; Gabriel, God is my
Strength; Vriel, God is my Light; Raphael, God is my Physician. They never
appeared to the Eyes of Man, nor in a human shape, unless in a Vision, and to
the Prophets only. The good Angels, whom God employs in the Administration of
the World, are in the second Rank. They have often appeared to the Prophets in
an human shape; they dwell above the Celestial Orbs, and are called the Army
of Heaven. But the Devils, or Schediim, that are the wicked Angels, or as they
use to speak, Kacodaimones, the Bad Demons, of whom mention has been made,
Chap. 2. Sect. 12. have their abode under the Moon, and are the Executioners of
God's Wrath and Judgments. But as to this last sort, we must more particularly
enquire after the Belief of the Jews.

Sect. 12. They call the Devils Angels of Destruction or Death, Satanim,
Satan's, or Adversaries. Philo, that was Contemporary with the Apostles, will
best teach us what they think of it. Thus he writes in his Book of the Giants.
Moses used to call Angels what the other Philosophers name Genii. Here he takes
the ^^rd Genii in too large a Sense, or he confines that of Angels to too
strict a Signification; according to that which has been observed before, Chap.
2. S. 13, 14. They are, pursues that Author, the Souls that fly into the Air,
which none ought to account a Fable; and therefore it gives a more particular
explication of it. As we ordinarily say that there are good and bad Spirits,
and good and bad Souls, it is the same with the Angels: Some of them are called
good, and are Messengers that go to and fro, from God to Men, and from Men to
God, who are unreproachable and constant in their excellent Ministry; but on
the contrary, there are others that are Profane and Execrable, and may well be
called Damnable, without fear of Lying.

Sect. 13. The Jews report very differently the origin^l of Spirits. Manasse
Ben Israel asserts, That they were produced by God himself on the second day of
the Creation. Prob. 23. Rabbi Eliezer relates their fall in these words, Chap.
13. The Administering Angels say to God eternally Blessed: O Lord God of the
Universe, What is Man that thou should put such value upon him? What is he
besides Vanity? For he can but somewhat reason upon Terrestrial Things. God
answered, do you pretend that I only desire to be Exalted and Glorified by you,
here above. I am the same there below that I am here. Who is it amongst you
that can call all the Creatures by their Names? There was not one amongst them
that could do it: Whereupon Adam rose and named all the Creatures by their
Names, which the Administering Angels seeing, said among themselves; Let us
consult together how we shall do to make Adam Sin against his Creator,
otherwise he is like to become our Master: Sammael, who was a great Prince in
Heaven, she has been before mentioned, Chapter 12. S. 8.) was present at this
Council with the Saints of the first Order, and the Seraphins of six Troops.
Sammael chose some of the twelve Orders to acco^^^^ny him, and came down below
to visit all the Creatures, whom God, eternally Blessed had created. He found
none so cunning and so proper to deceive, as the Serpent. The Author comes
afterward to the Seduction and Fall of Man, upon which he tells as many
Stories as he has already done: So was the Seduction of Man the cause of the
fall of the Devil. Afterward he relates how God punished Adam, Eve, and the
Serpent, and imposed on each of them his proper Pain. He called them all three
before him, charged by his Sentence. Adam with nine Curses, and condemned him
to Death; but he precipitated Sammael, and his whole Troop from the Heavens,
the abode of his Holiness: He cut off the Feet of the Serpent, (for it had
before the shape of a Camel, and Sammael rode upon him) and he cursed it above
all other Beasts and living Creatures. That Is the Fall of the Devil, according
to the Opinion of the Jews; for we must not charge this Story upon Eliezer
alone: The Targums, that contain the most ordinary and received explications of
their best Doctors, mention this Fable in several places.

Sect. 14. They give yet another original to the Demon, feigning him to be
issued from Lilis; That Is (says Manasse) the Name of the Wife of the Devil;
who, according to the Opinion of some, had been the Wife of Adam, (...), Lilit.
Is a word to be found in the Holy Scripture, Isa. 34, 14. which our
Interpreters translate Satyr, the French Lutin, and the Dutch Duyuell; but we
must hear Rabbi Elisha, who in his Thisbi has set up the whole Legend. We find
in some Writings that for one hunderd and thirty years, during which Adam
abstained from his Wife, there came she Devils to him, who grew big with Child,
and brought forth Devils, Spirits, Hobgoblins, and Night Phantasms. I find
again in other places, that the Devils have been brought forth by four Mothers,
Lilis, Naome, Ogera, and Macholas. We likewise read in the Book of Ben Syra,
Quest. 60. that Nebuchadnezar asking him why most Children died within the
eighth day of their Birth; he answered, because Lilis killed them, of which
matter there is more largely treated in the same place, but I shall not write
more of it, because I don't credit it. By that Narration may be seen, how gross
the Fictions of the Jewish Doctors are, since there are Men amongst 'em, who
cannot believe them, how apt soever that Nation may be to be imposed upon.

Sect. 15. But, as if those four she Devils had not been sufficient to People
the World with wicked Spirits, they have invented a third sort from what is
mentioned, Genesis 6.2. That the Sons of God seeing the Daughters of Men, that
they were fair, took for Wives such as they liked. From very ancient times, the
Jews by those Sons of God understand the Angels. Wherefore Josephus says in his
first Book of the Jewish Antiquities, Chap. 4. That several Angels of God,
mixing themselves with Women, begot a very insolent Generation. He even knows
the Names of those Angels that were carried to that excess of Letchery; Aza and
Azael were the chiefest amongst them, being both enamored with the Beauty of
Naema, Cain's Daughter. Thence proceeded the Giants mentioned in the same place
of the Holy Writ; who, as we may infer from that Narration, must have been half
Devils, and half Men. Asmodee, the wicked Spirit of Sara, Daughter to Raguel,
of whom mention is made in the Book of Tobit, was likewise issued from that
Marriage; but others affirm him to be Sammael. If it be asked, how Spirits have
the faculty of Generating; Eliezer explains that difficulty in his 22th
Chapter. When they were thrown down from their Holy abode, their strength and
shape became like to that of Men.

Sect. 16. But not to fill up this Book with Tales, they had rather imagine, as
some Heathens have done, Chap. 2. S. 12. that those wicked Spirits are half
Angels, and half Men. Whereupon Vorstius in his Notes upon Rabbi Eliezer,
relates the following words, taken from Rabbi Scheem Toob, in that place where
Rabi Nitron speaks of Lilis. The power of the Devils, Night Phantasms, and
Wicked Spirits, which we sometimes see in a human shape, proceeds from the
concourse of that Chief of theirs; and as to their state, the Opinion of the
Learned is, that they resemble Men as much as they do Angels; because on the
one side they are not such a subtle substance as those of the other Spirits;
and on the other they are not composed of such a gross matter as that of Men.
If we desire to know why those cursed Creatures are called by the Jewish
Doctors sometimes Spirits, and sometimes Male and Female, as though they were
Men; the same Toob will tell us in his 5th Chapter, as Vorstius relates in the
22th Chapter of Rabi Eliezer, where he speaks of a second Order of Spirits
considered as distinguished into ten Orders. From that Order proceeds in the
Universe two sorts of Spirits of Error, or Satyrs, who behave themselves like
Men, who appear to them in their Dreams in the shape of handsome Women,
transforming themselves now into Men, then Women.

Sect. 17, It Is now time to learn their Opinion concerning human Souls, at
least if they understand themselves distinctly enough, to inform us of it: For
it already appears, from what I have quoted out of Philo, Sect. 12. that the
most Learned do not stick to an accurate distinction betwixt Angels and Souls;
And Josephus that famous Historian, almost as ancient as that other Author,
says in his seventh Book of the Wars of the Jews, Chap. 25. That the Spirits
called Demons are those of the worst of Men, who fall upon the living and kill
them, if not hindered from it. Thence it appears, that he ascribes something
Corporeal to those Spirits, so much the more that he fancies that they may be
expelled by the Root Baaras, or by some other formerly showed by Solomon, as
the same Author intimates in his eighth Book of the Jewish Antiquities: But I
am to make a large mention of that sort of Enchantment, in the following
Chapter.

Sect. 18. The Book, which the learned Hoornbeck has written against the Jews,
contains in short their Opinions, as to the Nature and Original of Souls. Their
Opinion (says he, Page 319.) is, that the Souls were all created together with
the Light, the first day of the Creation; and not only that they were Created
together, but by Couples; the Soul of a Man and that of a Woman; so that
thereby it may be easily understood that Marriages must be very happy, and
attended with great Sweetness and Tranquillity, when one marries with his
peculiar Soul, that is, with that which was created with her: Whereas they
cannot be but unhappy, and turn to the punishment of Men, when they are bound
to a Body whose Soul was not created with the Soul of him that Espouses her. We
have to strive against that Unhappiness until we be rid of it, and that we may
be united by a second Marriage to the Soul that was made our Partner in the
Creation to lead a happier Life. Manasse Ben Israel gives a more large account
of that belief in several places, as in his Conciliador, Quest. 6. Page 12. In
his second Book of the Resurrection, Chap. 13. as also in the third Book, Chap.
9. and in his Treatise de Termino Vitae, Sect. 8. page 207. which he more
largely confirms after the Jewish manner in his third Question.

Sect. 19. As to the State of Souls after Death, the Metempsychosis of
Pythagoras is also received amongst the Jews, which Transmigration they call
Gilgul, that is to say, the Revolution of Souls; for they imagine that after
Death, the Soul wanders for a year about the Body, whence she is gone out, and
goes still rambling, till she meets with another Body, into which she may enter
to be born again with it. They fancy that this happens three times, as it is
observed in the Thisbi, upon the word Gilgul, in this manner. The Opinion of
the Cabbalists is, that every Soul is created thrice; to let us understand that
she introduces her self successively into the Bodies of three Children or Men.
This they hope in some manner to confirm from the Book of Job, chapter 23. v. 19.
according to that they say, That the Soul of the first Man entered into the
Body of King David, and is now to pass into that of the Messiah; that Mystery
being contained in the three Hebrew Letters of Adam, (...); taking the (...) as
the initial Letter of the name of Adam, the (...) as the first of that of
David, and the (...) as the first of that of Messiah. Their learned hold, that
the Souls of the wicked pass into the Bodies of Beasts, each Soul according to
the nature of the Sins she has committed. Thus the Soul of a Man that has
debauched his Neighbors Wife, is to enter into a Camel; And therefore, (says
David) I shall sing to the Lord, ki gamal alaii, (...), because he has
delivered me from the Camel; as they interpret it, using this Reason, that when
the Hebrew word (...) is punctuated, it is read otherwise, and pronounced
Gamaal, which signifies a Camel.

Sect. 20. There are some however who believe that the Souls of the wicked
perish with their Bodies. Josephus says of the Pharisees of his time, that they
asserted the Transmigration of the Souls of the good only, but that they sent
those of the impious to the eternal Torments, in his second Book of the Wars of
the Jews, Chap. 7. The Sadducees, according to the Testimony of the Holy
Scripture, believed neither Resurrection, nor Angels, nor Spirits* in St.
Matthew. Chap. 22. v. 23. and in the Acts, Chapter 23. v. 8. but now the Jews have
invented a great many Chimaera's, that powerfully confirmed them in their
Magic, and the practice of their Conjurations; for, as it has already been
said, the Soul separated from the Body must wander a whole year about her
Corpse, during which the wicked Spirits that abide in the Air, and are called
(...), Malachi Chabbalah, or Devils of Torments, and have yet several other
Names, find occasion to make them reenter into their Bodies, as they have power
to do, when they are required to it by Conjurations. Thence proceeds in their
meaning, That the Witch of Endor, called again the Soul of Samuel into his
Body, because he had not been dead a whole year. Manasse Ben Israel teaches the
same Doctrine, and assures us, it is that of the Ancients, which he has
extracted, especially from Gemara Siabbas. There are some however, who have
more rational Opinions, as we shall see in the second Book, when we have
occasion to examine that instance.

CHAP. XIII. That the Witchcraft anciently Practiced, and still in use amongst
the Jews, proceeds from the same Original.
Sect., 1. WE have examined the Opinions of the Jews upon that matter, as much
as they differ from the holy writ; for as far as their belief is consonant to
it, we receive and approve of the same. Let Us now see what they practice as to
Witchcraft, the Holy Scripture may fully convince us of the great inclination
that People ever had for it; which doubtless proceeded. First, from the
practices they had seen in Egypt, and of which perhaps they had not abstained,
but had seen the continuation of them in the Country they inhabited, that was
surrounded and intermixed with so many Nations addicted to that Art. It Is for
that Reason the Law gives them such frequent warnings to beware of it, Exodus,
22, 18. Levit. Chap. 18. v. 31. Cap. 5. v. 27. Deuter. Chap. 13, 8, 9, 14.
Isaiah, Chap. 6. v. 12.20. And that he threatened them so severely, because they
could not resolve to forsake that impious exercise, as may be seen, especially
in Manasseh King of Judah, 2 Kings, Chap. 21. v. 6. 2. Cron. Chap. 3. v. 6.
That Sin became general in the midst of Israel, or the Kingdom of the 10
Tribes, so that the Scripture says, that They used Divinations, and observed
the cry of Birds, 2 Kings, Chap. 17. v. 17. In the Apostles time, there were
Seven Sons of the same Father, one of the high Priests, who took upon them to
be Exorcists and to conjure Devils. Acts, 19. v. 13, 14. But all these things
made no part of the contents of their Law, and on the contrary were the effects
of their Rebellion, so that Judaism was not properly answerable for them, until
they were taught by the Rabbis themselves, and at last introduced to make up
part of their Religion. Such are the Doctrines, which I have represented in the
preceding Chapter, to which the practices of the present Jews, are perfectly
agreeable.

Sect. 2. The inquisitive Lighfoot, has showed by many proofs that the Jews at
their return from the Babylonian Captivity, having entirely forsaken Idolatry,
and finding they were destitute of Prophets* addicted themselves by degrees to
Witchcraft and Divination, about the time of our Saviors coming. The writings
of the Talmud, that are full of Instructions for that purpose, and are
nevertheless in great credit among them, give upon that subject a testimony not
advantageous to them, especially since, in the following times, they used the
same Arts against Christianity. Lightfoot assures us, That after the
Destruction of their City and Temple, there were several Impostors amongst
tbem, who eagerly addicted themselves to Magic, by which they got afterward
into great reputation, and that the expounding of Dreams was a pretense they
made use of, to commit a vast number of Deceits and Villainies. We see,
continues that learned Author, in the Book Maarsar Shemi, fol. 45. Col. 2, 3.
That Rabbi, Joseph, Ben Calpata, Rabbi Ismael, Ben. Jose, Rabbi Lazarus, and
Akiba, made it their whole business, many of their expoundings are related in
the place I have quoted out of Lightfoot, and from several things contained
therein, it may be inferred, that they instructed their Disciples in those Arts.
In the Book Shabbat, fol. 3. Col. 2. mention is made of a Phantasm, that
appeared to one of their Bigots, whilst he was meditating the Law, and fol. 8.
Col. 2. fol. 14. Col. 3. all sorts of Conjurations are treated of, some to cure
Wounds, others against the sting of Serpents, against Theft, and even against
Enchantments; this I have Collected from the Second part of the works of
Lightfoot, page 147. where many other things of that nature are to be found,
but not necessary to relate, and much less to extract out of the own Books of
the Jews.

Sect. 3. However it will not be besides the purpose, to add, what the same
Lightfoot has gathered from several of their writings, especially from the Book
Sanhedrin, concerning their Bathkol or the Daughter of the Voice, which is the
name the Jews gave to the Echo, pretending it was an Oracle, that under the
Second Temple, supplied the want of the Vrim and Thummim, with which the First
Temple was honored. This is known by all that are but a little acquainted with
the Jewish affairs, and have read some of their writings, but here are proofs
that show they made use of Bathkool Divinations. Rabbi Jochanan and Rabbi
Simeon, designing to consult Bathkool, to go and see Rabbi Samuel the
Babylonian, they passed before the School, and heard a Boy reading what is
contained, 1 Samuel Chap. 25. verse 1. Samuel is Dead. They observed that, and
found that the Samuel they sought was Dead. Here follows another story, Rabbi
Jonah, and Rabbi Josah, went to visit Rabbi Acha, while he lay sick, they said
let us hear what Bathkool will say, and immediately they heard a Voice of a
Woman that said to her Neighbor, The Candle goes out, to which the Neighbor
answered, Pray don't let it go out, nor extinguish the light of Israel,
Lightfoot, Tom. 2. p. 167. It is as sure that those words proceeded from
Bathkool, as it is certain, that Elijah is present at the Circumcision of the
Children of the Jews, as it is commonly believed among them and as all the
learned know.

Sest. 4. But besides those singularities, we may take notice that all their
Witchcraft is founded upon two grounds, the influences of the Stars, and thy
apparitions of Spirits, the reason of the former ground is, that tho they
esteem not the Celestial lights to be Gods; yet they ascribe to them a
particular virtue, working upon, and influencing Human Actions, as well
external as internal senses. We have already heard Philo and Ben. Maimon upon
that matter. It Is very usual with them to say, The Planets make such a one
Wise, or Rich, as Buxtorf relates it in his Lexicon Talmudicum, out of the
Books of the Sabbath, these are happy influences or Constellations, that are
called Mazzal-toob, but Mazzal-ra is a malignant Star, under which one is born,
or whose virtue influences him all his Life. Buxtorf says again upon the
Authority of the same Book, That the Planet of the Day of ones Birth,
influences him not, but only that of the Hour. And even, we find in that Book
which is the Genius of every Man, according to the Planet under which he is
born, He who is born under the Sun, will be handsome, free, not dissembling, but
of an unconstant humor. Under Venus, he will be rich and letcherous. Under
Mercury, skilful and of a good memory. Under the Moon, sickly, and unstedfast.
Under Saturn, unfortunate. Under Jupiter, just; and Under Mars, happy. Which is
the same with all the other Constellations. In the mean while it is commonly
said, That there is no Planet in Israel, because all the Jews seem to be born
under one Planet, being all of the same Genius and Conduct; therefore we must
conclude, that those distinctions concern only strangers, and that Israel has
the skill of foretelling their good and bad Fortune. However they are much
disturbed when the Moon is Eclipsed; because they take that accident as an ill
presage to them, which is an evident proof of the unstedfastness of the Jewish
Nation.

Sect. 5. As to the Spirits, Manasse, Ben Israel, discovering the true ground
of the Jewish Divinations, leads us to the wicked Spirits, saying, That some of
them are skilful and shrewd, and others foolish and dull. The most skilful,
flying from one corner of the World to the other, sometimes learn what is to
happen. For this Reason he acknowledges page 18. That several Conjure up those
Spirits, and do wonders by help of the black Art. We read even in some
Cabbalistical Books, as in Pirke Chalos, and Ratsiel, and in some others, the
names of those Spirits, and the form of the Conjurations used for that purpose,
There are also to be found all the presages that may be drawn from the various
sorts of Apparitions. If those Sprits appear to a Man alone, they forebode
nothing good; if they appear to two persons together, they presage nothing ill;
but it never happens, that they show themselves to three in a company.

Sect. 6. The ways and means they use for their Witchcraft and Divinations, are
to be observed in the Ceremonies of their Feasts, and the whole course of their
ordinary Life. Every one knows that Marriage is the lawful way to beget
Children, which makes them believe one must needs know how to preserve himself
in that occasion, from the wicked Spirits. There is none but has read the Book
of Tobit, how he expelled the Devil Asmodee, by the inspiration of the Angel
Raphael, and how they took together a Fish, which as some suppose was a Pike,
as to the Heart and Liver, says Raphael, if the Demon, or wicked Spirit
disturbs any Person, whether Man or Woman, he needs but make a perfume before
him, and the party shall be no more vexed, Chap. 6. v. 7. When he was married
with Sara, he remembered the words of Raphael, and took the Ashes of the
perfumes, put the Heart and the Liver of the Fish thereupon, and made a smoke
with it, which when the Evil Spirit had smelt, he fled into the utmost parts of
Egypt, and the Angel bound him there, Chap. 8. v. 23.

Sect. 7. If that Narration is esteemed Apochryphal by the Protestants, that of
Josephus deserves not a better name, when in the Second Chap. of the 8th Book,
of his Jewish Antiquities, he deduces the Original of Magic from Solomon, and
lays the foundation of it, upon the wisdom of that King, nay he asserts, That
God himself had inspired him with that Art so powerful against Demons, for says
he, He has made use of Witchcraft to expel diseases, and has left in his
writings, forms of Conjurations, by which the Devils that molest mankind are so
far banished, that they never dare come back again. And that sort of cure is
now in great request amongst our Nation. It consisted according to the
description given of it, in the use of some certain Root, which they sealed up,
and put under the Nostrils of the possessed. At the same time they uttered the
name of Solomon, and the words of his Conjuration, and so was the Devil forced
to fly. He declares to have been an Eyewitness himself of an operation of this
nature, made in the presence of the Emperor Vespasian and his Sons, on the
Person of one Eliezer. We will examine in our 4th Book, how the sight of
Josephus was then disposed; but in the mean while, we could wish he had
explained to us, whether this Root is the same with that he mentions in the
28th Chap. of the 7th Book of the Jewish Antiquities, which he calls Baaras,
because of the place where it grows, since he also ascribes to this last, the
wonderful virtue of expelling Demons; for according to his relation, one needs
but touch the possessed with it, and the Devil is forced to run away, but of
this more in the 4th Book.

Sect. 8. Here follows how the present Jews are molested all their Life by the
wicked Spirits, and how they beware of them. When a Child comes into the World,
the terror of Lilis comes with him, to seize upon the Spirits of the Parents,
because that Lilis intends to kill the Boys, within 8 days of their birth, and
the Girls within the 21th. The remedy of the German Jews, to preserve
themselves from that danger, is, To draw circular lines with Chalk or
Charcoles, upon the 4 Walls of the Chamber, wherein the Woman lies, and to
write upon each Circle Adam, Eve, let Lilis be gone, they also write upon the
Door of the Chamber the names of the three Angels that preside over Physic,
Senoi, Sansenoi, and Saumangelof, as Lilis her self taught them, when she hoped
to drown them all in the Sea. This is related by Elias in his Book entitled,
Thisbi, to which he gives no great credit, as he himself witnesses. I cannot
omit what Buxtorf says in his Lexicon Talmudicum, concerning the weapons
wherewith they arm themselves against Phantoms. A Vail spread over the Face,
hinders the Phantasm from knowing him that is frighted, but if God judges that
he deserves to be terrified for his sins, he causes the vizard to fall down,
that the Ghost may see and bite him.

Sect. 9. But what terror soever the Devil causes to them, they nevertheless
believe, that if they take their opportunity, they may prevent his endeavors
without trouble. To this the choice of days is of great use, and they have so
great a regard for them, that they do no longer deserve the reproach, that was
cast upon them, of Not understanding the signs of times. The same Buxtorf, in
his School of the Jews, will supply us with a specimen of that Custom, At the
great day of propitiations, they appease Sammael with a present, for on that
only day in the whole Year, he is allowed, by a compact with God, to accuse
Israel of their transgressions. Besides, they believe themselves so cunning as
to cheat the Devil. The First means they use for that purpose, is to blow upon
the Corn, withal their strength, from morning to night, fancying to make
Sammael forget the quality of it, by the fright they cast upon him. The First
Day of the Year is also fit to put another cheat upon him, for as on that day,
God sits in judgment for the examination of Sins, they endeavor to hinder
their Enemy from bringing his accusations against them, by concealing from him
the date of the Day. The subtilty they use in that occasion, is that they
forbear to read, either the beginning or the end of the Law, as Sammael
supposes, that they shall do that Day, and thus they never fail to catch him.
They also abstain as much as they can on the 17th day of the Month Tammus, that
answers to our June, and the 9th of the following Month on which falls their
Second fast to go from home, and especially avoid to make any journey of 4 or 5
Miles, or to appear in a Court of Justice, because that time is the reign of a
wicked Spirit called Ketelmeriri, bitter Destruction, a name drawn from Deuteronomy.
Chap. 32. v. 24. Where Moses however speaks of quite other matters.

Sect. 10. The Cabbala chiefly uses such Witchcraft, as is made by numbers and
Letters, and is in great request amongst the Jews. It even teaches to apply to
it the sacred word of God, and withal some sentences and discourses, or only
some proper words and particular names, to which the Jews ascribe a great
Virtue; whether they attribute it to the power of the apparition of absent
bodies, or of incorporeal substances, or whether they presume to effect by that
means, strange and wonderful things. Malka Scheva, or the Queen of Sheba, that
went to visit King Solomon in his glory, has been often conjured up, as they
fancy, and has appeared to the superstitious, In short, as to what concerns the
other extraordinary effects, which they boast to produce, they are held for
great forcerers, even by Christians, over credulous in this point; for there
are Germans, who look upon them as Men, that can stop conflagrations, and
quench Fire, by throwing upon it some bewitched things; that can draw two or
several sorts of Wine out of the same Vessel, and are capable of producing many
other wonders.

Sect. 11. To speak of the other uses, they make of names in Witchcraft, it
must be granted, that they make no more difficulty to mix the name of God with
it, than that of the Devil. The famous name of (...) that which we use to read
Jehovah, when punctuated, is multiplied by their Doctors, by 12, 42, and the 72
Letters, which they dispose and make words of them, and apply them to
Witchcraft. For that Reason, they call it Shem Hamphorash, a name explained or
divided. They believe it to have a great Virtue; by him Moses killed the
Egyptian, by him Israel was preserved from the hand of the destroying Angel in
the Wilderness; and by him Jesus Christ expelled wicked Spirits. Thus they
blaspheme the Second Person of the Holy Trinity, not being able to deny his
power. It is easy to be informed of all these things in their own writings, and
by their own consent. The name of the Devil is likewise of much force to his
great loss and sorrow. That force proceeds from the 4 Hebrew Letters, that
compose this name, with the Article perfixed to it, (...) Hassatan that make up
just the number of 364, that is, of all the days of the Year but one. Now the
Jews pretend, that by Reason of the Virtue of that number 364, included in the
name of Hassatan, he is deprived of the right of accusing them during a like
number of days in the Year, and therefore he has but one remaining, in which he
may do it, so that if he chance to neglect that day, or to be then deceived or
puzzled, he may well be sorrowful, and the Jews very glad, all this is grounded
upon the passage of Zacharia, Chap. 3. v. 2, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan.

Sect. 12. They also pretend to find a great Virtue in the reckoning of
Letters, and their disposition into several different orders* They write on the
forepart of Houses, and the Walls of Chambers, some strange Characters of no
less extraordinary names, which they use to give to those Angels, that are
established over the plague, supposing by that means to be sufficiently se^ure
from the burning darts of that consuming scou^ge. The word (...) Diriroon is
likewise an infallible preservative against the Pestilence, when it is written
22 or 23 times, that is as many times as there are Letters in their Alphabet,
of which they put one every time before that word, beginning with the first
Letter, and ending with the last. They have likewise excellent remedies against
Agues, the word (...) that is made up of Six Letters, being written 6 times in
as many different files, (...)
leaving out a Letter of every file on the left side, is, in their Opinion, an
excellent remedy against the quartan Ague, the stumbling block of the
Physicians. By this any one may perceive how great Virtue the Jews ascribe to
Letters, Characters, and Names. Here you have another Mystery taught in the
Book Aroda Zara, It Is dangerous to drink at Night, (...)
why? because that makes People blind, but if one be dry and he drinks, what
then? here is the remedy. The Hebrew word (...) Shebriri, that is, lost sight
or sudden blindness, being written as it is here in the Margent, and hung about
the Neck, cause the blindne^^ to go off, as much as we see decrease the first
Letters of this word, until they be altogether vanished, and the blindness
gone. Those Instructions are to be found in the Lexicon Talmudicum of Buxtorf.

Sect. 13. By this short Specimen of their Witchcrafts, may be seen the
Relation that there is, betwixt the Practices and Doctrines of their Rabbis,
contained in the foregoing Chapter, from which, doubtless, those practices
take their Original.

First, Their opinions of the Materiality, as I may say, of good and bad
Spirits, Chap. 12. Sect. 8.10, 14, 15. was the cause that they ascribe to them,
external and visible shapes, with effects of the same nature, as they have been
described, Sect. 6.8. For material Causes act materially, whereas Spiritual
things are for those that are Spiritual. 1 Cor. 2.13.

Second. It was no hard matter that the st a^ge Thoughts they have of Sammael,
Prince of the Devils, and of Lilis his Mother, according to some Chap. 12.
Sect. 13, 14, should carry them to practice Conjurations, by which they hope to
put Mother and Son to flight, or at least to turn them off. Sect. 7, 8, 9.
Whoever is so credulous in that point, is very apt to mistake in all others.

Third. Their great and general esteem for the Cabbala, that ascribes so much
power to Letters, Names and Numbers, is the original of all the sorts of
Witchcraft, that are performed with Letters, Numbers and Characters. Sect. 10,
11, 12. And it is no wonder that a Nation, who has lost the vivifying Spirit of
the Letters of the Holy Writ, should now so curiously, and with so much
trouble, seek the help of those Letters destitute of the Spirit of Life.

Fourth. It must be observed, that being anciently used to Prophesies, Visions,
Vrim and Thummim, they now bethought themselves of the empty sound of Bathcole,
and the influences of the Stars, to supply the want of the advantages they had
lost.

Sect. 14. When we recollect all those things, we easily perceive, that tho the
Jews are not partakers of the Pagans Idolatry; yet they have a near Relation to
them, as to the Opinions and Customs they have not drawn from the Holy
Scripture. Nay, they go farther than the Heathens, and are in a more
Diametrical opposition to the Principles of their own Doctrine, than the
Heathens with those of their Religion; for the Jews conceiving plainer than
they do, that there is but one Creator and Director of all, sufficient to
himself, and having such a strong prejudice against all the Gods invented by
Men, and against whatever has any nearness to Idolatry. It Is not easy to
forgive them their dependency upon the Stars; their fear of the great Devil
Sammael, nor their Faith for the virtue of Words, Letters, Characters and
Numbers; since the Heathens were obnoxious to those faults, only because they
had not a sufficient knowledge of the Supreme Deity, and did not rely so much
upon him as they ought to have done: whereas they trusted too much upon the
Creatures, which they had Deify'd themselves. However, our amazement will
diminish, if we observe that all these Doctrines have been drawn from Paganism,
and have been received amongst them, only by an effect of the natural
inclination and eagerness of that People, for such Fables and Inventions,
without considering, whether or no they were agreeable to the Rules of the Law.
But the utmost blindness is to persist in them to this very day, without
reflecting upon the State, in which the Divine Justice has put them, by an
entire destruction of their Commonwealth, and scattering of their Nation
amongst the Heathens. In the mean while I desire the Reader to observe, that
hitherto we have met with nothing, of whatever is called Witchcraft, Phantasms,
or Diabolical Apparitions, but it draws its Original from Heathenism.

CHAP. XIV. That the Doctrine of the Spirits, and the exercise of Magic, are
also in request amongst the Mahometans.
Sect. 1. WE cannot say many things with great certainty, concerning the
Mahometans, upon the matter in hand, for we must learn it, either in the
Alcoran, that is the Law of Mahomet, or from the Precepts of their Doctors,
which very much differ from the Law. As to the Alcoran, I would not trust to
any but my self, and therefore have read it, sheet by sheet, from the beginning
to the end; but could not gather any particulars, relating to our subject,
except that little which I shall mention hereafter. Besides, there are come to
my hands but very few writings of the Mahometans: yet I have read some very
credible Christian Authors, that treat of their belief, whom I shall presume to
make use of; because every one knows, that during their abode amongst those
Nations, they have examined very impartially and narrowly, such things as they
relate. Now there is none but knows, that the Doctrine and Worship of that Sect,
as they are contained in the Alcoran and their other Writings, are involved
with many Fables and Fictions, which are generally received as Truth amongst
them, but explained in a very rational sense by the Learned, which makes it,
that they are not so intolerable in that respect, as that they are false and
groundless. And therefore, it is but reasonable to use this circumspection that
knowing that sort of People to be Men of sense, as there are many in other
Sects, we interpret their Fables only with relation to that, which is clearly
and significantly expressed in other places, and in reference to the tendency
they seem to have, in what is related of their other Opinions.

Sect. 2. It is also reasonable to relate at first, what is to be gathered from
the Alcoran, and to join to it afterward, what other Authors supply us with,
either as to the Doctrine of the Spirits taught amongst the Musulmans, that is
the Faithful, as they love to call themselves, or as to their practices in
Witchcraft and Divinations. But because the Book of Laws collected after the
death of Mahomet by his Disciples, that are the most famous Doctors of the
Musulmans, is not uniform, as to the Order in which it is translated in several
Languages; for the convenience of the Reader, I design to follow the division
observed by du R^er, in his French Translation, and by le Verrier in his Dutch,
who both div^de the whole work into 113 Chapters.

Sect. 3. First of all, it is amongst them a fundamental point, repeated above a
hundred times in the Book of the Law, that God is but One, and has no partner:
in which they perfectly agree with the Jews, even in reference to the Holy
Trinity, as has been already mentioned, Chap. 12. Sect. 1. Marmol says however,
in the first part of his description of Africa, Page 128. Edit. Paris. That the
Morabites, a Sect of Mohammedan Arabs, hold that the Heavens, Stars and Elements
make up but one God together. The Sahis, another Sect of the Turks, believe
that there is some Deity in the Sun and Moon, because of the influence those
two great Lights of the Universe, have upon sublunary Creatures, according to
the Relation of Ricaut in his description of Turkey, Book 2. Chap. 12. De la
Vall in his journey, Book 4. Chap. 17. says, that amongst the Persians, several
Mahometans ascribe assisting Forms and Intelligences to the Sun, Moon and
Stars, by which they are quickened and directed, as our Bodies are by our Souls.

Sect. 4. In most, or all the pages of the Alcoran, mention is made of the Holy
Angels, of the wicked Devil, and of the Original of Devils, far more
rationally, than in the Books of the Jews. For they make the Angels immaterial,
though they believe that they appear in a Corporeal shape, as is to be read in
this passage of the 5th, Chapter. The Angels, say they, are the only constant
and immutable Creatures, there being no others endued with such Properties.
Thus is this passage quoted by Levinius Varnerius in his Miscellanies, who has
extracted it from some other Book. But this is a reasoning of the most thinking
part and the best Philosophers amongst them. For Mahomet himself believed that
the Angels had been created of some certain Matter, as he gives us to know in
one of his Fables, to be related anon. He often speaks too grossly, and gives us
occasion to doubt whether he understands in a proper or figurative Sense, what
he so frequently says, that the Angels go to and fro, hear the Law, have
Beings, and even are distinguished into Males and Females; for he believes that
distinction of Sexes to be found in every thing; See his 52, Chap. pa. 594. He
no less vilifies the Dignity of Angels, ascribing the cause of the fall of some
to their refusal of paying an extraordinary Honor to Adam, who was wiser than
they were, and conversed more familiarly with God. For God taught Adam the
Names of all things, and Adam taught them to the Angels, Chap. 2. pa. 5.
Lastly, the great number of Guardian Angels, whom he gives to every Musulman,
evidently infers, that one of his Disciples was looked upon by him of greater
worth than several Angels.

Sect. 5. Mahomet has very plainly expressed, in several places of his Book of
the Law, his Opinion upon the Nature and Original of Devils, who at the
beginning were created in the rank of the Angels, whence they fell for their
envy. Thus in the 6th, Chap. Page 109. he introduces God, speaking to him. I
have created and made thee, I have commanded the Angels to adore Adam, which
they have done, save only the Devil. This place must be understood with the
distinction, brought by Levinius Varnerius, out of a Turkish Book, Adoration
belongs to the Great God as a Worship, but it may belong to others as a mark of
Veneration. In that Sense it is that Adam was adored by the Angels, and Joseph
by his Father and Brothers. Mahomet proceeds, relating what God said to the
Devil. What hinders you from adoring Adam, as I have ordered you? The Devil
Answered, Because I am Superior to him, since thou have created me out of Fire,
and Man out of Clay. Hereupon I said, Go out of Paradise, it is not the abode of
the proud; thou shall be in the number of those that are covered with infamy.
He replied, Let me be here till the day of the Resurrection. Why, said he, have
thou tempted me? I shall, said he, turn Men from the right way, I shall hinder
them by all means from believing thy Law, and even let the greatest part fall
into ungratefulness. I said to him, Go out of Paradise, thou shall be rejected
by all the world, and deprived from the effects of my Mercy, and I shall fill
Hell with those that shall listen to thee, and follow thee. The same Relation
is repeated in the 14, 16, and 37 Chapters. Page 293, 381, and 511. And tho he
mentions but one Devil, as the Chief, he nevertheless believes a vast number of
good and wicked Angels; for in the 7th, Chapter he speaks of thousands of good
Angels, whom God sent once from Heaven to his assistance, whilst he prayed; he
likewise mentions the Demons in the plural number, as Chap. 6. We have created
Hell to punish Devils and Men.

Sect. 6. His distinction betwixt the state of Angels and Devils is not to be
rejected in all respects: such as they are toward God and the Faithful, such
he describes them to be one toward another: Chap. 7. Page 198. God said to his
Angels, I will be with you, confirm the steps of the true faithful. Chap.
11.278. The Angels tremble in the presence of God, Chap. 20. Page 360. They are
not ashamed to ador^ him. And again, Chapter 15. Page 296. God orders his
Angels to go down, and sends his inspiration to whom he pleases. This, as he
believes, particularly happens some certain Nights; Chap, 96. Page 284. The
Angels descend at night upon Earth, by the leave of their Lord; and visit the
true faithful, till the break of the day: Chap. 12. Page 290. They will visit
the faithful in the Garden of Eden, they will salute them, and say, here is the
reward of their perseverance; here is the Eternal Grace.

Sect. 7. As he holds that the Angels are always ready to serve God, on behalf
of the Faithful; so he believed them no less forward, in performing his Orders
against the impious. When, says he, Chap. 5. page 155. the wicked are at the
point of death, the Angels stretch out their hands to seize upon their Souls.
And further, P. 172. The Angels of death shall kill those that blaspheme God
and his Commandments; Chap. 7. Page 203, 204. Thou have seen that the Angels
have put to death the unfaithful, and stricken them, before and behind. A great
power for the executing of God's Judgments, is ascribed to them: for an Angel
is sufficient to destroy all the Inhabitants of the World, as Levinius
Varnerius quotes it out of a Turkish Book.

Sect. 8. He forgets not the evils caused by the Devil for the seducing of Man.
The first was his having them banished from Paradise, Chap. 1. Page 7. He
caused Adam and his Wife to sin, and to fall from the Grace in which they were,
Chap. 2. Page 8. God advertises Mahomet* that the Devil would make him afraid
of the unfaithful, Page 150. The Devil will make them forget my Commandments,
Page 160. Think upon the day in which I shall gather all the People, and say to
the Devil, O thou Prince of the Devils, why have thou rebelled against me?
Chap. 56. Page 608. For the Devil has puffed up Man, and made ^im revolt from the
Commandments of God. He seems even to believe, that the malice of the Devil
extends as far as the Stars, with which, he says, God has adorned the Heavens
and which he preserves against the attempts of the Devils, Chap. 40. Page 534.

Sect. 9. Such are his Opinions as to the Angels in general; but as to their
particular Ministry, Thevenot relates, That the Turks acknowledge Guardian
Angels, but in far greater number than we do, for, say they, God has ordained
70 Angels for an invisible Guard to each Musulman, and there happens nothing to
any person, but they attribute it to them. Each has his particular Office, one
watches over one Member, and the other over another; one is so subservient in
this, and the other in that Affair. Amongst all those Angels, there are two who
preside over all the rest, sitting one on the Right, and the other on the Left
hand, and being called Kerim Kiatib, that is to say, Merciful Writers: That on
the Right hand keeps account of the good Actions, and that on the Left of the
bad. They are so merciful that they spare him, if he commits any sin before he
falls asleep, hoping he shall repent, if not, they set it down, but if he
repents, they write, Estig fourillah, God forgive. They accompany him every
where, unless when he goes to the Necessary house, whither they let him go
alone, waiting for him at the door where they again take possession of him. For
that reason, when the Turks go to that place, they go in with the Left Foot,
and when they come out, they put the Right Foot foremost, that the Angel who
sets down their good Works, should seize first upon them. Mahomet himself
confirms that Fable, saying, Chap. 52. Page 594. Think, O Man, on the day when
thou shall see near thee, thy good Angel on thy Right hand, and thy bad Angel
on thy Left, who have noted and written whatever thou have done.

Sect. 10. It Is observable, that this Fable has its Original from the
immortality of the Soul, and the resurrection of the dead, which the Turks
believe, and are plainly expressed in the foregoing words and elsewhere: as
Chap. 12. Page 280. The faithful shall go into the Garden of Eden: but to the
unfaithful he says, Page 288. Hell is the place to which you are destined.
Chap. 52. Page 594. God takes up the Soul of Man, as he thinks fit, to send her
into one of those places. But first, she returns into the Body after its
burying, to undergo the strict examination of two frightful Angels, Munquir and
Guauquir; the Fable which Thevenot relates upon their account, and that of the
Beasts, is so gross, that I should be ashamed to recite it at large.

Sect. 11. In the mean while it will not be unserviceable to our subject, to
give a more particular instruction of their belief upon the state of the Dead.
I will not here speak of their Carnal Paradise, because I treat not of all the
points of the Mohammedan Religion, but only of what concerns the the Spirits;
they acknowledge that there are appointed two very different places, one for
the damned, and the other for the saved; that is to say, there are Men, who
have done so many good works, that at the very hour they expire, they are
admitted into the happiness of Paradise; but there are others, who having not a
sufficient Faith, are subjected to I pains for their Sins, until they be all
expiated; after which they enjoy in Paradise, the same felicity with the
others, that are gone in first. But as to the unfaithful and wicked, they go to
burn forever in Hell, where there bodies are as often repaired by God, as they
are reduced to Ashes, that their torments may be Eternal: That Is the substance
of what Thevenot writes, Chap. 20 and 31 of his journey, and Ricaut says almost
the same thing, Chap. 2.6. and 12.

Sect. 12. The transmigration of Souls from one body into another, not only of
Human Souls, but likewise of those of Beasts, is also believed by some
Mahometans. Ricaut testifies, Book 2. Chapter 12. That one of their Sects, called
Munasichi, holds that Opinion; and takes occasion from thence to relate how one
Roboroski, a Polander, was dealt with by a Drugist, that was angry with him,
because he had kicked his Dog, for they believe, That the Souls of Men after
Death, enter into the bodies of such Beasts, with which the Nature and temper
of the bodies, that were animated by those Souls, had most relation; that the
Soul of a Glutton passed into the body of a Hog; that of a Letcherous, into
that of a He-goat; that of a Generous person, is destined to animate a Horse,
and that of a Watchful Man to quicken a Dog. To this he adds, several
circumstances, which the curious may see in his own Book. He likewise asserts
that the Sect Eschrakin, that is, illuminated, is likewise Pythagorean, but
that it holds not much of the Doctrines of the Alcoran, tho most of it is
followers are the Schicks, or the Preachers and chief Doctors of the Turks.
They have more rational Opinions than the others, concerning the immateriality
of Spirits, and the Heavenly happiness.

Sect. 13. For the Sahins or Sahis, of whom mention is made before, scarce
believe that the Soul is immortal. Delavalle in his 4th Book, Chapter 23. describes
some Persians that are like them, they are calied elh eltabquid, that is,
People of truth or certainty. They constitute the Essence of the Soul in the
mixture and union of the 4 Elements, as far as I can observe by the explication
he gives of their belief. The Soul returns to God in the same manner as she
proceeded from him, for she proceeds from him, in as much as he is the Author
of that complication, of the 4 Elements, and she returns to him, in as much as
he separates them. That Sect is very numerous, tho looked upon as Heretical by
other Persians.

Sect. 14. Every one of those various Opinions, is discoverable, by the
practices of it is followers. Delavalle relates Chapter 17. that the Persians have a
great veneration for the greatest and eldest Trees, because they persuade
themselves, that they are the abode of the Souls of the blessed; for which
Reason they call them Pir, that is, An Ancient Man, or Scheich, the Eldest, or
Iman, Priest, supposing that the Souls of the Priests and Old Men, dwell in
such Trees. There are others, who having learned from Pythagoras, to enquire
afrer the Virtue and Mystery of numbers, are addicted to all sorts of
Witchcraft, as the Inhabitants of the Coast of Coromandel, Chapter 8 Sect. 5. They
boast says Marmol, Book 2. Chap. 3. page 131. That the Celestial Spirits appear
to them, and communicate to them an entire knowledge of the affairs of this
World. They are much feared and reverenced in Africa, as being great sorcerers.
The rule they keep was composed by one Boni, named by the Arabs, The Father of
Enchantments and Witchcrafts; the last of the three Books he has written is
called The secret of the Divine Attributes; and treats of the Virtue of 90
Names of God. But it is fit to mention here, a sort of Cabala in great request
with part of those Nations, and like that of the Jews, save that it is not
drawn from the Holy writ, for they name it a natural Science, but say, that he
must be an Astrologer who presumes to put it in use.

Sect 15. The same Author adds, That in Great Cairo, and the Towns of Barbary,
there is a vast number of People that runs up and down, and pretend to three
sorts of Divination; some divine by the black Art with Draughts and Figures,
some with a glass Vessel full of Water, into which they power a drop of Oil,
that becomes very thin and clear, wherein they pretend to see Troops of Devils
marching in order of Battle, some by Water, and others by Land; as soon as they
stop, Queries are put to them, and they answer by signs with the Eyes and
Hands. But to that Witchcraft, little Children are required, for the great ones
see nothing, whereas the others look into the Oil, and being asked, whether
they see the signs which the Devils make, they answer yes, which gives them
great credit, and gets them plenty of Money. The Catoptromancy of the Ancients
was something like that, Chap. 3. Sect 10. That sort of People are called in
Mauritania, Moralcimines, that is, Enchanters, because they boast of bewitching
the Devils by words. The third sort of those rambling Diviners, are Women, that
make People believe, they converse with Devils, some of whom are white, and
others red or black. When they are about to Divine, they besmoke themselves
with Sulphur and other stinking drugs; after which the Demon, as they say,
seizes upon them, and they change their Voice as tho be spoke by their Mouth;
then the enquirers approach and ask with great humbleness, what they desire,
and having received an Answer, go away leaving a present in the Witches House.

Sect. 16. The Bumicils are doubtless great forcecers too, These fight against
the Devils, as they say, and go all bruised and covered with blows in a great
fright; often at Noon day they counterfeit a Skirmish before the People, two or
three hours long, with Spears or Zagaies, until they fall down all laden with
blows; but having rested a while, they come to themselves again, and walk. I
could not hitherto discover what rule they follow, tho they are held to be
Monks. There are others in Barbary maimed exorcists, who boast of expelling
Devils, and when they cannot compass their end, they say that the party is
credulous; or that it is a Celestial Spirit. These draw Circles, or write some
Characters, and make marks on the Hand or Face of the possessed; then they
besmoke him with stinking smells, and make their Conjuration. They ask the
Spirit how he is entered into that body, whence he comes, what he is, how he is
called, and at last order him to be gone.

Sect. 17. I must yet relate something out of Ricaut concerning the Turbes.
There is a sort of Dervis called Mevelevi, who turn with great skill and
swiftness at the sound of the Flute, affirming, that it is by devotion and the
example of their Patron Mevelava, who always turned in that manner, without
taking in any nourishment during a fortnight, whilst his friend Haraze was
playing on the instrument; at the end of which, he fell into an ecstasy,
wherein he received from Heaven, the rules of his order, with many wonderful
revelations. Now his successors, who are inclined to Laziness, and yet cannot
be quiet, follow his example in this manner. Some learn Legerdemains to amuse
People and apply themselves to Magic and Conjurations, by the help of familiar
Spirits. From this place, in which the Author speaks of his own Head, it
appears that he acknowledges some such Spirits, and argues about them according
to his Opinion. Afterward he makes some quotations out of Busbeek that are
very pertitent to our subject.

Sect. 18. There is, says he, in Egypt, a Cloister consecrated to a Saint,
called Kederlei; the Dervis that dwell in it, boast that by the Virtue of
Kederlei they bewitch Serpents and Vipers, and handle them at boldly as
innocent Beasts. Others are not afraid of the stings of Vipers, or Asps, and
put them with the Hand into bags, as we do worms, where they keep them. Others
enchant Snakes by certain words, and make them stop on a sudden, when they are
creeping on the banks of the Nile, some of them pretend that power to be
Hereditary in their Family, and to pass from Father to Son; and others boast,
that it is a gift of God, in reward of Virtue and Holiness. I have heard some
Travelers say, there are Men in Persia and the Indies, whom our People looked
upon as great sorcerers, because they made Serpents dance and stand upright in
a box at the sound of their Voice, at the winding of a Pipe, or the playing of
some other Musical Instrument. This will be matter of examination hereafter.

Sect. 19. Whatever has been hitherto said of the Mahometans, makes it
sufficiently known, that amongst them, as amongst other Nations, their
practices are answerable to their Doctrines; for if their Witchcraft and
Exorcisms proceed not all from their superstitions, yet they are not
inconsistent with them. It is strange, that such as ascribe a Soul and Life to
the Celestial Lamps, that acknowledge the Stars to influence, Human Actions,
and search for Mysteries, in numbers, letters and names, should be addicted to
Witchcraft and Divinations, and make them part of their religious worship;
neither is it surprising, that not conceiving Angels, as altogether immaterial,
they should fancy Apparitions, either waking or dreaming. It Is yet less
strange, looking upon them, as Creatures of a dignity inferior to their's,
since they establish great numbers of them for the guard of each Musulman; they
should invite and call them to their service by Witchcraft, consisting in
Characters, in which they imagine a secret virtue for that purpose; or if they
should believe, by the same means and Virtue to be able to expel wicked Angels,
their mortal Enemies. But it is time to come to the Christian World, and to
examine in what state things are at home.

CHAP. XV. That some of the Heathen Opinions upon this subject, have in process
of time, crept in amongst the Christians.
Sect. 1. WE must not wonder that great, part of the Doctrines above mentioned,
have not yet been banished by the light of the Gospel. For what Man naturally
conceives, is not always darkness, neither is the illumination which the Holy
writ affords to the understanding, always efficacious; so that a Christian,
often better knows what he ought to know, then he does what he ought to do.
This plainly appears, in that Man is readier to search after the Truth by his
reason, than to put it in practice by his Virtue. The cause of it is, that our
natural curiosity that has contributed to the fall of our first Parents, has
been since increased and strengthened by the effect of the fall it self; and
that it drives us on so much the more to desire to know much, as our
understanding is become less capable of true conceptions. But the corruption of
Man allows him not to make such Progress. And therefore we must imagine, that
whatever is practiced amongst such or such People, especially as to Religion,
always and only proceeds from their belief and Doctrine. This will quickly be
known to us, if we take the trouble of considering Christianity, such as it
formerly was, and still is at this present.

Sect. 2. I shall name ancient Christianity the six first Centuries before the
Pope and Mahomet arose: However, I shall not consider it as it was established
by our Lord and his Apostles, which will be done more conveniently hereafter,
but with relation to the succession of times: In the mean while a careful
distinction must be made between the Opinions of the Church, or of the Chief
Doctors of her Communion, and the Errors of those she has condemned. We must
afterward take notice of what certainty may be had both of the Practices and
particular Sense of those that have been branded for Heretics. For we pretend
not to impute to Christians what has been rejected by the generality of them,
nor to charge the Heretics with whatever is said of their Errors. Now, one
may, methinks, take for Opinions generally received in the Church, those that
have been taught by their Chief Doctors without being contradicted by the
others, as far as it appears by any Writing, though they must not for that be
taken for Articles of Faith. And likewise, though the Heretics should have
been charged, as to the Doctrine, with some Opinions they owned not, yet it is
not conceiveable that they should have been falsely accused of Acts of Magic,
the possibility of which they did not so much as believe. After that
Observation let us see what the most famous Christians of the Primitive times
have believed, as to Spirits and their Operations, and at the same time what
they relate of other Sects and People.

Sect. 3. Following still the same Order, I shall first speak of the Angels,
and then of the Souls separated from their Bodies. I shall pass by the first
Century, in which the Apostles lived, because in my second Book I take their
Writings for the Rule of Faith, and for the Fountain whence Truth must be
drawn. But we must examine those that have followed them from Age to Age, and
see what was their Opinion upon those two Points, without presuming it was
grounded upon Rule, or Ecclesiastical Assemblies, which appears not. And though
those two Points are of the highest consequence, yet every one had still
liberty to express his particular Opinions. However, for other Opinions of less
consequence, and I durst almost say of nothing, Men have been dealt with as
Heretics, and the whole Christian World must be called together to come to a
conclusion. And therefore I shall only make use here of such Explications of
the chief Doctors, as I have read my self, which I shall endeavor to translate
faithfully, and word for word, as much as possible.

Sect. 4. We shall first hear in the second Age, Tatian, Clement, and Justin,
concerning the Nature of Angels. Tatian indeed ascribes not a gross material
Being to the Angels, and yet he seems to attribute to them some Corporeal
Being. Here are his own Words that seem very strange. All Demons are so as that
indeed they have nothing Carnal, but their Composition is Spiritual, and as a
Fire and Light. The Nature of their Bodies can however be penetrated by none
but such as are endued with the Spirit of God. What he adds afterward is more
Consonant to Reason, That the Demons are not the Souls of Men. He believes not
however that Souls are simple Natures, but that they are composed of parts
(...) because he believes they cannot be conceived as Corporeal, without having
a Body, and that the material part cannot rise without the Soul. Several
Doctors of that time speak very near the Words, though they explain not
themselves so openly, so that they must not be looked upon as very far from
that Opinion, as will more plainly appear, when we mention the fall of the
Angels.

Sect. 5. Clemens Alexandrinus in his 6th Book of Miscellanies, shows, that he
holds the Angels for the Inspectors of Men, and those that inspire Wisdom into
them, that each Country, and perhaps each Man, has his own. A little after he
says, (...). God has distributed amongst Angels the Inspection and Care of each
City and Nation. He says also, (...). The Divine Power distributes good by the
means of Angels, whether they be visible or invisible. Justin favors that
suppposed visibility of the Angels, or at least he tolerates it, since he
asserts in his 4th Apology, That God entrusted the Angels with the Conduct of
the other human Affairs under the Heavens, some of whom fell off, because of
their Conversation with Women, from which issued the Demons (...), page mihi
44. St. Athanasius, who was of the same mind, explains those two things more at
large in his Ambassy. As to the first, he says, That God created the Angels to
take care of the Affairs of Men that are under their direction, so that God
takes indeed a gen^^ral view of all things, but as to the particular
Inspection, he has left it to the Angels constituted over them. As to the
second, he speaks the same Language with the others, that the love of Women
made some Angels fall into Apostasy, whence proceeded a sort of Demons.

Sect. 6. Justin that enters more into particulars, as to what concerns Demons,
declares that he knows none that has that Divine Power of preserving, and
rewarding such as obey him; and therefore, that he knows none likewise that has
the power to avenge himself upon the Disobedient and Rebels. This he teaches in
his 42th Question, having said before in the 40th, That a Wicked Spirit that
has been once expelled cannot torment him any more whom he had before
possessed. In the aforesaid 42th Question, he says, That when a possessed seems
to break his Bands and Fetters, it is the Demon that does it who has that
strength himself, but cannot communicate it to the Body of any Man. This is
very particular, and it will be fit to call it to mind again in another place,
wherefore I desire the Reader to observe and remember it.

Sect. 7. Irenaeus explains himself but obscurely concerning the State of Souls
after this Life, when he says, at the end of his Book, That they go to an
invisible place God has prepared for them. But Justin in his second Apology,
page mihi 58. explaining himself more at large, goes also more out of the
common road; for he affirms, that the Souls of the Dead have some power over
the living, saying, That Men being seized and cast down by the Souls of the
deceased, are ordinary called possessed and furious. It must be observed here,
that having spoken immediately before of human Souls separated from their
Bodies, (...), though the Latin Interpreter has used two different Words, viz.
first Animae, the Souls, and then Manes, the Ghosts. Mention i^ ^ade of the
latter in his second Chapter of this Book, S. 14. But in my Opinion, the same
word cannot be taken in two different Senses at the end of one period, and the
beginning of the following. He must therefore ascribe to the Soul of the
deceased, of whom he undoubtedly speaks in his first period, all the Operations
upon the living, which the Heathens used to attribute to other Spirits called
Demons, for he there speaks of the Heathens.

Sect. 8. Origin, who lived in the third Age, had strange Notions concerning
the Angels; sometimes he gives them a Nature but equal to that of Men: For
Writing of the Light, which St. John in his first Chapter, says to be our
Savior, he seems to believe that it was equally communicated to Man and
Angels, as may be seen more at large in his third Volume on St. John. But in
another place he makes so great a distinction betwixt Angels and Men, that
going from the first of Creatures endued with Reason, to the last, he puts the
Angels as betwixt God and Men: For he teaches, on 1 Samuel 28. that the first
Creatures are those which the Holy Writ names Gods; The second, those that we
called Thrones; and the third, those that bear the name of Principalities.
Afterward he calls in Question, Whether Man is the last of rational Creatures,
or whether such Creatures as dwell upon Earth, amongst which he ranks all the
Demons, or at least part of them, are inferior to Men? that is his Opinion in
his first Vol. St. John.

Sect. 9. He again intimates elsewhere, that as Men who have had the fear of
God in this life become Angels after their Death, as it is read in St. Matthew,
22.30. though there it is not properly, they become Angels, but they shall be
like Angels: So that the present Angels might formerly have been Men: Moreover,
he imagines that Angels and Men may dispute which are more perfect,
establisting betwixt the Nature of those two Subjects, the same difference
which our Savior puts between the first and the last, St. Matthew. 19.30. and
chapter 20.16. he ascribes to Angels, not only the Subregency of the World, in his
tenth Homil. upon Jeremiah, and constitutes, as well as other Doctors, Guardian
Angels upon that Principle; but he persuades himself that their Virtues and
Devotions may increase, as those of Men, proportionably to those of the Persons
they keep. Afterward he destines some to watch over little Children, and
others over the Adult, grounding his Opinion upon St. Matt. chapter 18.10. where
mention is made of the Angels of little Children that see the face of their
Heavenly Father.

Sect. 10. He has this particular Opinion concerning the Stars, that they may
have Light and Intelligence, and though he expresses not himself so plainly
upon that, yet it is a necessary consequence of his Principles, for upon the
Words in the Hebrews, 2.9. That Christ has tasted Death for all: He says first,
that by that all must not simply be understood all Men, but whatever, is
capable of Reason, (...). and amongst those, (...), Rational Creatures, he
reckons the Stars a little after, and upon that foundation he is not afraid of
making our Lord, not only the Redeemer of Men, but also of Stars that have
likewise sinned, because it is said, the Stars are not pure in his sight. Job
25.5. he repeates the same at the end of his 2d Volume upon St. John, denying
however that their Influences should hurt Men, notwithstanding what is read of
Lunaticks, Matthew. 17.14, 15. Writing upon Genesis, he likewise rejects
Astrology, to which he believes that some Angels having forgotten their Duty,
have persuaded Men to addict themselves.

Sect. 11. Tertullian in his second Book against Marcion, says, as to the
original of Devils. He has made the Angels that are Spirits, now, in as much as
the Devil was made by God, he is an Angel, and belongs to his Maker; but
inasmuch as he has not been made by God, viz. as a Devil, or a Slanderer, it
follows, that he has made himself so by forsaking God, and withal deceiving
himself. That Language is somewhat obscure. Origin speaks not better; for in
his first part upon St. John, he seems to recite a Riddle concerning the
Dragon, as having been one of the first created by God in a Bodily shape, and
before Man. He strains the Words of God to Job, chapter 40, v. 15. for he takes
them as they are now read in the Greek Bibles, as though there was this or that
Dragon, (whereas the Hebrew Text has Behemoth, that signifies a great Beast)
Translating the Verse thus, This is the beginning of what God formed, which he
mad: for a matter of laughter to his Angels.

Sect. 12. Tertullian explains himself more plainly as to the knowledge he
ascribes to the Devils, when he in his fifth Book against Marcion speeks thus.
Servants cannot know the Resolutions of their Masters, and therefore the
Rebellious Angels, and the Devil their leader, can much less know the designs
of God, whence I would willingly take occasion to assert, that the greater
their Crime has been the more remote they are from the knowledge of their
Creator. So far only he goes, as to the Secrets of God. But as to those of Men,
we hear the Doctors of that Age giving to the Demons a power over Bodies and
Souls. St. Cyprian establishes both, speaking of Idolatry. Spirits, (says he)
deceive us; they disturb our Life, and our Sleep, insinuating themselves into
our Bodies, raise terror in our inward Thoughts, bruise our Members, impair
our Healths, and cause us Diseases. Tertullian is of the same Opinion in his
Book, of Passions. The Malice of that inveterate Enemy never leaves him quiet,
but it increases his Rage when he sees Man fully delivered. In his Apologetick,
Chap. 20. he gives a more particular explication of what he believes as to the
Assaults made by Demons upon Soul and Body. He thinks, That having a very
subtle and thin Essence, they are so much the apter to act in an invisible and
insensible manner. He shows thereby, that he conceives created Spirits as the
thinest and subtilest of all Bodies, and therefore explains his meaning by this
Comparison. As it happens that a flame invisible to us burns Corn, and the
Fruits of Trees when they are in flower, or withers them whilst they blossom,
or corrupts them when the Flower falls off, and they are formed; or as an
infected Air communicates it self in a manner unknown to us, so the suggestions
of the Devil, by a secret contagion, seduce the depraved understanding of Man.

Sect. 13. Origin believes, that the Souls of Men existed together, before they
came to animate the Bodies; which he establishes upon St. Matthew. Chap. 20. from
Ver. 1, to 16. and in his 6th, Vol. upon St. John, having before proposed in
his 5th, Chap. the common Opinion of the Christians of his age, he asserts,
acco^^^^^ to the sense he gives to the Holy Writ, that (...) the Soul must be
distinguished from (...) the Spirit of Man from the (...) ^^ys, that the Soul
may app^ her self (...) evil, but that the Spirit ^f Man can (...) ^e^f only to
evil. In his 19th Chapter, he d^^^^^es on occasion of the sepalation of the
Soul at the point of death, that he believes she is taken out of the Body by
some Spirits, ordained for that purpose; and that the Spirits who have that
employment, are of a more noble Nature than the Soul they fetch. He puts a very
ingenious sense upon the Words of our Savior, in St. Luke, Chap. 10. v. 20.
and John, Chap. 10. v. 18.

Sect 14. Tertullian's meaning, as to the state of Souls after this life, to
the day of the Resurrection, is, that they are in a certain place, known by the
name of Abraham's Bosom, and situated betwixt Heaven and Hell, as he writes hi
his 4th Book against Marcion, That there is a certain and determined place
called the Bosom of Abraham. If you ask where that place lies, and how long the
Souls are to stay there; he will answer, as to the First Question, Sinum dico
Abrahae, regionem etsi non Caelestem, superiorem tamen Inferis. I call
Abraham's Bosom a a Region superior to Hell, though it properly belongs not to
Heaven. As to the other he will say, Refrigerium praebiturum animabus justorum,
donec consummatio rerum resurrectionem omnium plenitudine Mercedis expungat.
The Latin phrase is somewhat obscure, but it matters not to Translate the words
so much as to give the Sense, which is, That it will be a place of refreshment
for the Souls of the just, until the consummation of all things comes and
brings on the Resurrection, in which every one shall1 be obliged to give
account, and then receive a full reward.

Sect. 15. He calls in this place, the Subterraneous places, Inferos, Hell,
because he puts the place of Abode of the Damned, under the Earth, or in a
great Gulf, contained in the bottom of the Earth, and believes, that for their
punishment they shall go to burn in a material Fire: For about the end of his
Book of Penitency, he calls Hell Thesaurum Ignis aeterni; The Treasure of
Eternal Fire. Through the Chimneys of that Fire, come out sometimes frightful
flames during Earthquakes: and immediately after, he calls that Abyss of Fire,
Magni alicujus and inaestimabilis foci scintillas missilia and exaercitoria
jacula. The sparks of a prodigious great and unexpressible Fire. St. Cyprian
speaks so obscurely about the end of his Letter, against Demetrian, upon that
subject, that it seems he threatens the Soul with corporeal punishments, it
being a consequent of the Series of his Reasoning. Hell, says he, shall
Eternally burn for the Damned, and the punishment of a devouring fire, and most
glooing flames, will neither supersede nor suspend their Torments; there the
Souls with their Bodies, are destined to infinite pains. He seems to mean
thereby, that the Souls and Bodies shall have one and the same share; for
otherwise, he would have declared, what peculiar sufferings the Soul is to
undergo.

Sect. 16. In the 4th, Age, we shall first hear St. Athanasius he also
believes, that the Angels are not all of an equal Dignity, of which he gives a
formal explication according to his meaning, on the 31st. Question to
Antiochus, where having said something as to the Orders of the Angels, he
proceeds thus. Because those Orders are called Legions and Armies, we must
thereby understand such Orders as are established to teach, to defend, provide,
administer, help, as also such Orders as receive the Souls, and remain by them.
Now, as the difference betwixt the Celestial Orders, is known to us, we must
likewise know which is their State, and what Knowledge they have. The Thrones,
Cherubims and Seraphims are taught immediately by God himself, as being the
nearest to him, and raised above the others: These teach the inferior Orders,
and these again, others that are under them. The last of all are the Angels
(taking that Name in a particular signification, and determined to a certain
Order of Spirits, distinguished from all others;) and these are the Teachers of
Men. It Is easy to perceive that St. Athanasius has taken this from the
Writings of Philo and other Jews, as it is related above, Chap. 12. Sect. 4, 5,
8, 9, 10. But whatever it be, St. Athanasius being the Author of the Confession
of Faith, so much commended in our Churches, and quoted in the 9th Article of
the Low Dutch Confession of Faith, as a pattern of Orthodoxy, we cannot but
admit what he has written upon the present matter, as the common Opinion
approved of, and received by the Principal Doctors of that Age,

Sect. 17. I grant that some very exact Critics believe not this work of
Questions to be Athanasius's: but there is no less controversy, as to the true
Author of the Confession ascribed to that Father. However, both must needs be
very Ancient, and the former cannot be of much later Date than the age of
Athanasius; so that the proof drawn from thence, to show what was the Doctrine
of that time, is still of the same force. At least, none doubts but St. Basil
contemporary with St. Athanasius, has written the three First Books against
Eunomius, and therefore his Testimony will be admitted with less difficulty.
After St. Athanasius, or some other, whoever he may be, has descended from God
through the several degrees of Angels, to Men; St. Basil comes to teach us how
we are to consider the Holy Angels of God in their different Orders and
Administrations. He says, at the beginning of his 3 Book against Eunomius, That
all the Angels have indeed the same name, and are of the same nature; but that
some preside over whole Nations, and others take care of every faithful person.
Now, as much as a whole Nation is to be preferred before a single Man, so much
is the Dignity of an Angel committed over a whole Nation, above that of another
Another Angel, who has only the keeping of a single person.

Sect. 18. However, St. Austin, who writ very near 50 years after St. Basil,
expresses not himself so freely upon this matter in his Manual, Chap. 58. We
cannot, says he, precisely tell what passes amongst those Blessed Societies
above, nor what difference there is betwixt persons, etc. And as to the
signification of those four words, in which the Apostles seem to comprehend all
the Heavenly Societies, saying either Thrones, or Dominions, Principalities or
Powers, they shall prove as they can, what they assert; for my part I freely
confess I know nothing of it. St. Jerome his contemporary, for they both lived
betwixt the 4th, and 5th, Century, seems not to be so reserved; but on the
contrary, undertakes to prove what St. Athanasius and St. Basil had asserted,
whereas St. Austin seems to doubt of the Truth of their Opinions; saying in his
Commentary on the 46th Chapter of Isaiah. For many passages of the Holy Writ,
teach us, that each of us has his Angel, especially that of Matthew. Chap. Ver.
10. Take care lest you despise one of these little ones, for their Angels, etc
There are therefore in his Opinion, Angels for particular persons. He likewise
names in his Commentary on the 47th Chapter, -- Page mihi 476. Tom. 5. Angelos
praesides Judaeorum. The Angels presiding over the Jews. And upon Daniel, Chap.
7. ver. 2. he says, I hold the four Winds to be Angelical Powers, to whom the
principal Kingdoms have been entrusted, according to what is written, Chap. 32.
ver. 8. where instead of these words, the most High established the bounds of
Nations, according to the number of the Children of Israel, he reads according
to the number of the Angels of God, to ground his Opinion thereupon.

Sect. 19. St. Austin seems so modest upon the difference amongst the Angels,
is perhaps too reserved in what follows; for immediately after what he says, he
speaks of the Stars in too dubious a manner, saying, I see likewise nothing
certain upon that point, whether the Sun, Moon, and other Stars must be
comprehended in that Society; though some hold them to be luminous Bodies without
Knowledge and Sense. He seems not inclinable to that last Opinion, but is more
apt to believe that the Stars are a kind of Angels, or at least, of living and
understanding Creatures, without daring to determine, whether they are part of
the four Orders, to which he applies the names contained in St. Paul's passage
before quoted; whence it is easy to infer, that he was taken up with the
Intelligences of Aristotle.

Sect. 20. St. Jerome explains himself openly, as to the Ministry of the Angels
upon the 9th Chap. of Daniel, Angelorum duplex officium est aliorum qui justis
praemia tribuunt, aliorum qui singulis praesunt Cruciatibus. The Angels
discharge 2 sorts of functions, some are established to distribute rewards to
the just; and others, to inflict punishments on the Damned. It appears by the
series of his discourse, and by the passage of the Holy Scripture, at which he
aims; that he equally ascribes those 2 things to the good Angels, according to
that Opinion, that there happens neither good nor evil without the Ministry of
the Angels of God, and consequently he attributes nothing to the Devil.

Sect. 21. Lactantius shows what were the Opinions of his time, concerning the
Devil, of whom he makes a very large description, in the 7th Book, of his
Institutions, especially Sect. 8. which deserves, I should give the short of
here. He says, That God produced a Spirit altogether like him that was endued
with the Virtues of his Father. He seems, that thereby he should understand our
Lord Jesus Christ. Afterward he created another Alterum, not Alium, that
preserved not the perfections of his Celestial Original, because, according to
the meaning of ^actantius, he envyed that first Spirit, who remained faithful
and obedient to God his Father: Wherefore the latter bears the name of
Diabolus, Criminator, Accuser and Slanderer. The Author stops there and speaks
no more of it, but Sect. 14. He says, that God, for that Reason, has granted to
the Devil, power over the Earth, ab initio, from the beginning; but to prevent,
the Devil from seducing Men, he sent Angels to defend them, advertising them
withal, not to stain themselves by their Conversation with Men, but the Devil
seduced the very Angels so far, that they mixed with Women, and were cast down
from Heaven to Earth. If it were so, that old proverb would be verified, That
there would be no Devils, if there were no handsome Women.

Sect. 22. One thing's especially observable, that Athanasius in his First and
Second Book against the Arrians, is the first Author, as far as we know, that
applies to the fall of the Devil, that passage of Isaiah, Chapter 14. v. 12. How
art thou fallen from Heaven, O Morning Star? which is undoubtedly said of the
King of Babylon, because of the great figure he made in the World. Now the
Morning Star is called in Greek (...), and in Latin Lucifer, which words are
still to be read in the Greek and Hebrew Bibles, whence several that have
followed St. Athanasius have taken occasion to give the name of Lucifer to the
Prince of the Devils, which name he still bears. If those who understand not
the Latin Tongue, knew that is the name of the Morning Star, they would never
bestow it upon Belial, since it agrees so well to our Savior, who calls
himself the bright and Morning Star, Revel. Chapter 22. v. 16. to which St. Peter
undoubtedly alludes in his Second Epistle, Chapter 1. v. 19. Where he says, That
the Morning Star must arise in our Hearts. And our promises in another sense,
to give us The Morning Star, Revel. 2.28. So that the name of Lucifer is so far
from being that of the Prince of the Devils, that it is the most Christian name
to be read in the Bible.

Sect. 23. Let Us go back to Lactantius, he says that Monsters were generated
from that odious conjunction of Angels with Women, that are half Angels, or
rather, Half Demons, or half Men, thence he infers, Duo genera daemonum, unum
caeleste, alterum terrenum. That there are 2 sorts of Demons, one of Celestial
Demons, and another of Terrestrial; by Celestial, he seems to understand
Aerial; but after the word Terrenum, there follows immediately, Hi sunt immunedi
malorum quae geruntur auctores, quorum idem diabolus est princeps. These are
unclean Spirits, Authors of all the Evil that happens in the World, the chief
of whom is the Devil already mentioned. From this passage may be clearly
perceived, that he takes for Demons, those very same Spirits whom the Heathens
made their Gods, as has been seen Chapter 2. Sect. 9 to 13, which still confirms
more and more what I have asserted, Chapter 5. Sect. 4, 5. That the Heathen never
adored Demons, but in as much as they believed them to be Gods.

Sect 24. The same Lactantius tells us, that the Demons are indeed Spirits, but
Spiritus tenues and incomprehensibiles, Spirits of a thin subtle matter, and
imperceptible. This we have heard before from Origin and Tertullian. He
explains himself very clearly, as to the power he ascribe to their
understanding, saying, That they know many future things, but that it is not
possible they should discover the depths of the secrets of God. We have already
heard Tertullian confirming this proposition, by his Reasonings. However
Lactantius believes, that Divinations by the Contemplation of the Stars, by the
Inspection of the intrals of Beasts, and by the Observation of Birds, of which
mention has been made; Chapter 3. Sect. 4, 5, 7. Are Diabolical Inspirations, and
therefore holds, that they are still capable of discovering to Men many future
things.

Sect. 25. St. Jerome as far as I can conceive, constitutes not the same
difference of places betwixt the Spirits. Yet he believes, Ex Pauli dictis ad
Ephe Cap. 2. ver. 2. and 12. colligi Diabolos in aere vagari ac dominari. That
from what S. Paul writes to the Ephesians may be inferred, That the Devils are
wandering in the Air, and ^^igning there. And writing upon the 6th Chapter v. 12.
to the Ephesians, he explains more at large, that proposition, as containing
the common Opinion of the Christians of that Age. This is the Opinion of all
the Doctors, That the Air which is betwixt the Heavens and the Earth,
separating both from what it called the Vacuum, is filled with powers contrary
to each other. We must yet examine hereafter whence the Principalities, Powers,
and Dominions of this World, have received their powert? His Opinion upon this
last Question is, that they have it from God himself, and that they exercise it
more or less, as a less and greater pain is inflicted upon 2 different
Criminals, according as it is resolved to make their life more or less bitter;
he also supposes, that the unclean Spirits, as well as the Holy Angels, are
divided into certain Orders; which Opinion of his may be seen in his Commentary
on the 3 Chapter of Habakuk, As Christ is the head of the Church, and of every
particular faithful Man; so is Beelzebub the chief of all the Demons, who
exercise so many cruelties in this World; and each Troop of Demons has it is
particular Chief, and Captain under him.

Sect. 26. Lactantius must yet inform us what in his Opinion, the Demons were
able to Operate, in reference to Men. We see Sect. 14. that his Opinion in
general, is, That the Corrupted and Contagious Spirits wandered through the
World, endeavoring to comfort themselves under their loss, by procuring the
ruin of Mankind. Immediately after, he explains in particular, how they hurt
Soul and Body, They attack, says he, The Souls by their craft devises, and the
snares they lay before them; they seize upon them by their delusions, and by
leading them astray, they stick to every private person, and are always at his
elbow, creeping into every house, from door to door. And in relation to the
bodies, as those very Spirits are, according to him partly corporeal, and
partly extraordinary s^^tle, and consequently imperceptible, They insinuate
into Human Bodies, without being perceived, act privately within their Bowels,
impair their Health, cause Diseases, cast terror into the mind by Dreams,
overturn it, make it stray, and force Men by such vexations, to have recourse
to them. It seems however, that he intends to ascribe that power to the Devil,
only over the Heathens; because he disputes against them, and that they were
those that had recourse to the Demons, as believing them to be Gods; for over
the Christians, the Ancient Fathers attributed not so much power to them.

Sect. 27. We may learn from St. Athanasius, what were the Opinions of his
time, as to the Souls separated from their Bodies after Death. In the Book
before quoted, question 32. he asks, Whether the Souls after their separation,
have knowledge of what is done amongst Men, as the Holy Angels have; he
answers, Yes at least as to the Souls of the Saints, but not as to those of
Sinners; for their continual torments take them so much up, that they have no
leisure to think upon any other thing. The 33th Question is, What is the
employment of the Souls departed from their Bodies, Answer, The Soul separated
from the Body, is uncapa? ble of doing either good or evil. However he says a
little after, That the Souls of the Saints, animated by the Holy Ghost, praise
God, and bless him in the Land of the Living. He asserts, Question 35. That
after Death, the Souls never come to bring news of the state of the Deceased;
which would give occasion to many cheats, because wicked Spirits might feign,
that they are Souls of the Deceased, that come back to discover something to the
Living. I desire the Reader to observe this very attentively, for it will be
convenient to reflect upon it hereafter.

Sect. 28. St. Austin gives us a more large information, for tho he does not
expressly reject Purgatory, yet he confutes it every where, as appears from
several places of his Writings, that have been quoted by one of my
predecessors, Andrew Landsman, in his Book of the Apostasy of the Church of
Rome: yet this Father in the 69th Chapter of his Manual, expresses himself
thus, It Is not incredible, but something like may happen after this life, and it
may reasonably be enquired whether it is so, and what proof may be brought for
or against this Opinion, viz. that some of the faithful, come sooner or later
to the Eternal Felicity, passing through a certain purging Fire, in which they
stay longer or shorter, as they are more or less enamored with corruptible
things; however in that number, are not comprehended those of whom it is said,
that they shall not possess the Kingdom of God, unless by a convenient
Repentance, they obtain forgiveness of their Sins.

Sect. 29. We come down to the 5th Age, in which we meet with Theodoret, who
sufficiently explains, as to our design, the Opinions of the Doctors of his
time concerning good and bad Angels; for he proposes to us what he thinks of
the Angels, properly so called, as well in reference to their Nature, as to
their Understanding and Administration. As to the first point he holds, that
though they are not Corporeal, yet they are Circumscribed, and contained in a
certain determinate place; as he asserts in his 3d Question upon Genesis. The
Reason of this Opinion is, that he supposes every Angel has some proper
Administration, and is entrusted with the care either of a Nation, or Person;
but he makes still a more particular distinction in his 10th Exposition upon
Daniel, putting a Man under the guard of a common Angel, and a whole Nation
under that of an Angel of a Superior Order. As to their Understanding, he
briefly explains his Mind in these Words. Let none be surprised at what I
assert, as to the Ignorance of the Heavenly Spirits; for they neither know
future, nor other things, it only belonging to the Divine Nature; but as to
Angels, Archangels, and other Celestial Spirits, they know no more than what
they learn; and therefore the Holy Apostle speaking of them in the the third
Chapter to the Ephesians, v. 10. says, That to Principalities and Powers, in
the Heavenly Places, etc. See his Commentary on the 24th Psalm.

Sect. 30. Theodoret speaks afterward of the Demons in the same manner, for he
holds them not capable of making true Predictions. He says, upon Ezekiel, Sect.
8. That the Demons know nothing before it happens, unless it be by guessing,
and yet they venture to foretell. He nevertheless owns, in his tenth Book of
Oracles, that the Spirits have foretold something true, but by the Stars: For,
says he, whatever the Gods of the Heathens say, if it happens that they speak
agreeably to the Concatenation of things, they must needs gather that knowledge
from the Stars, which undoubtedly was done by such Gods as declared some things
that afterward fell out. It Is evident, that by Demons he understands in
general, wicked Spirits, who cause themselves to be venerated as Gods, and gave
false Oracles to keep up their Authority, and the Credit in which they were
amongst the Heathens. That Opinion was the most common amongst the Ancients,
and is in being even to this day, as we shall show hereafter.

Sect. 31. The Opinion of that time upon the original of the wicked Race, was,
that they issued from the Conversation of the Angels with Women. Severus
Sulpitius relates it not as a particular Belief, or, as received by some
Doctors only; but as a Story credited by all Christians; for at the beginning
of his Ecclesiastical History, he presumes to assert it upon the Authority of
Josephus, as much as if he had been present. His words are; In that time, that
is, after the Birth of Noah, Mankind multiplying exceedingly, the Angels whose
abode was in Heaven, being enamored with the Beauty of young Virgins, plunged
themselves in unlawful pleasures, forsook the Supreme Region, whose Inhabitants
they were, and ally themselves by Marriages with mortal Women, by that unhappy
Cohabitation, and their depraved Morals, they corrupted Mankind by degrees; and
from thence the Giants are said to be born; for the mixture of such different
natures must needs produce Monsters.

Sect. 32. As to the state of Souls separated from their Body, the Angels, and
wicked Spirits, this Age affords nothing but what has been observed, speaking
of the foregoing Centuries. Wherefore we descend to Gregory the Great, who in
the 7th Century joined his particular Opinions to the former. He was Bishop of
Rome, and his Memory is still in great Veneration in that Church, though he took
it very ill that John the Father, Bishop of Constantinople, and his
Contemporary, should have presumed to take upon him the Name of Universal
Bishop, to which he believed not that any Bishop had a right, and even held it
for a Mark of Antichrist. Besides, it is not without Reason, that the Roman
Church makes so much of him: For he has taken care to provide her with many
Legends so suitable to her Humor and Palate, and upon which she has put so
great a value, that she multiplies them every year. And indeed, St. Gregory was
not contented with the Fables of Origin, and other Doctors, of which mention
has been made, but he admitted whatever had been proposed hitherto as Doubts
and Questions, which he passed into Determinations and Decrees: And, as though
what had been maintained before had not been sufficient, he thought fit to add
something of his own: So that since his time there were not only 9 Orders of
Angels, but they knew also the Degrees of each, viz. Angels, Archangels,
Virtue, Powers, Principalities, Dominions, Thrones, Cherubims, and Seraphims;
as is to be found in his 34th Homily upon the Gospels. The Schoolmen that have
followed him fail not to take much pains to treat of each of these Angelical
orders, and to break their head with them, in which I intend not to imitate
them.

Sect. 33. It must be observed that at that time the curiosity to know whither
Souls went after Death, gave occasion by degrees to invent Purgatory; the
discovery of which has been so far finished amongst the Papists, that they go
now thither by thousands. Boethius, a Roman Consul, who lived about 63 years
before the Pontificate of Gregory, begun, in his 4th Book, Prosa 4. to give
some Notion of that place, by the Answer he makes to the following Question.
Does there in your Opinion remain no punishment for the Soul after her
separation from the Body? To which he Answers: Yes doubtless, and even it is not
a slight Pain; for I hold; that some Souls are very severely punished, whereas
others are purified by Grace. As to Gregory himself, who from a Soldier became
Pope, he blows heat and cold from the same Mouth, with as much sickliness and
levity as the Wind, against the Custom of the Popes, who use to decide so
positively and boldly. Upon the 7th Chapter of Job, giving advice to a Sinner,
he says, That there is no human Eye (that is no Grace of the Redeemer) that
casts looks upon the Soul, after she has laid off the Flesh. And farther he
adds; That when Holy or wicked Spirit receives at the point of Death, a Soul
departing from her bodily Prison, she remains for ever, and without hopes of
any Change, in the hands of him that has taken her; so that when she is once
raised to Glory, she can never fall again into Pain and Torments; whereas when
she is once cast down into the Eternal Abyss, she can never come out of it:
Upon the 10th Chapter he says again; He that is Condemned and delivered to
punishment by reason of his Sins, and brought to the place of Execution, has no
longer hopes of Mercy or Forgiveness. But this Pope does not always maintain
this Thesis; for he speaks thus in the 4th. Book of his Dialogues, Chap. 39.
Sed samen de quibusdam levibus culpis esse Purgatorius Ignis credendus est:
However it must be believed that there is a Purging Fire for some small Faults.
Upon the Penitential Psalms, he explains himself more at large. Post mortem
carnis alii aeternis deputantur suppliciis, alii ad vitam per ignem transcunt
Purgationis. After the death of the Body, some are condemned to endless
Torments, and others go to Life through a purging Fire.

CHAP. XVI. That some of the first Christians derided the Conjurations of
Spirits, and others credited and practiced them.
Sect. 1. WE are now to examine, whether the practice of Divination and
Witchcraft were in request in the first time of the Christian Church. Both were
equally rejected by those that were called Catholics and Orthodox: but we must
enquire upon what ground; for it was not so much because they believed 'em to
he deceiving Arts, the practice of which was impossible, as that they judge 'em
unlawful. Besides, they ackowledg'd so far the efficacy of Conjurations that
they did not at most reject 'em, but came in process of time to admit them in
the Ceremony of Baptism, which are, still called Exorcisms, generally used
amongst the Papists, and not entirely abolished amongst some Protestants. Though
this be not the place to treat at large of this matter, yet it may be premisde,
that this is their most ancient Original, as the Writings of some of their
Doctors plainly testify. But let us hear first, how the Laws of the First
Christians thundered against those that durst meddle with Exorcisms and
Conjurations.

Sect. 2. Here is the Proclamation of the Emperor Constantine, in the 9th Book
of the Code, Tit. 8. Book 5. De Divinatoribus. Let no body presume to
interrogate Diviners, or to consult Mathematicians and Astrologers. Silence is
also enjoined to Augurers, and Fortune Tellers. Caldees, Magicians, and those
that are called Sorcerers, because of the hainousness of their crime, shall not
be allowed to undertake or exercise their Art. The curiosity of those that
consult Oracles, shall be repressed. If any obey not our Orders, he shall be
punished by the Steel, till he be dead, Given at Milan, January 25. 337. Here
is another Proclamation of the Emperors Valentinianus, Theodosius and Arcadius.
If any be found guilty of Magic, he shall be arrested add delivered to
Justice, as an enemy of Mankind, etc. Given at Rome, Aug. 17. 389. The rest may
be seen in those Laws, and is sufficiently known to Civilians. Constantine, in
the beginning of his Reign in 312. had ordained the pain of Fire for such as
should be convicted of that Crime, and promised a Reward to the Informers, Law
the 3d. Tit. 8. de Maleficis comprehendendis and ad publicum pertrahendis.

Sect. 3. In the mean while, those pains were not inflicted upon that sort of
people so much, because, of their Cheats, as has been already said; as
especially, by reason of their Crimes, and the hurt they were believed to
procure to Men and Beasts, by mixing and perturbating the Elements by their
Witchcraft, which made them worthy of the most cruel punishments. This plainly
appears by the 6th Law made by Constantine and Julian. Anno 357. There are
several who are not afraid of confounding the Elements by Witchcraft, and
assaulting the Life of Man, who cannot defend himself against them; of
conjuring up Ghosts and asking their advice, to destroy their Enemies by wicked
ways, Whence it appears, a double Power was attributed to Sorcerers and
Inchanters; First, of confounding the Elements; and Secondly, of Conjuring up
Ghosts, making them appear, and discoursing with them. It was therefore
believed, that the Crime of that People consisted in their converse with the
Spirits, whose Power and malice they made use of to torment other Men. So that
it is no doubt but that Opinion was then general among the Christians, and even
amongst the Mob of the Heathens; or at least of the greatest part amongst them,
who lived and conversed with the Christians, so that either of them addicting
themselves to that Converse, whether they were persuaded of the Power of
Spirits or not, made themselves equally guilty, and obnoxious to the severity
of the Law.

Sest. 4. The chief Doctors of that time teach us the same, but I shall quote
only a few that will afford us sufficient proofs. I shall begin with Justin
Martyr, who lived in the 2d. Age, and shows in his 2d, Apology, that he
acknowledged the efficacy and virtue of the Heathen Witchcraft. In the new
Edition of Cologne Page 65. The Predictions themselves that are made by the
means of the dead, by young innocent Children that see Objects in a mirror; by
the calling up of the Souls of the deceased, and by those that are called by
the Magicians, Expounders of Dreams Paredri Assessores, Assessors. In short,
whatever is operated by those that are skilful in those practices, must
persuade you; says he to the Heathens, that the Souls have still some Sense
after death. What he writes in his Dialogue against Tripho the Jew, differs not
much from that First passage, ib. Page 311. That the Demons may be overcome by
Conjurations, in the name of Jesus Christ, but that no Jew can do the same in
the name of any King, Prophet or Patriarch; not even perhaps in the name of the
God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. He nevertheless believes, that the Demons, by
means of that sort of Diviners, that were called Ventriloqui, gave real Oracles
to those that Conjured them, as may be gathered from his 33th Question, and
from the Answer to it.

Sect. 5. Proceeding farther, whatever is needful for our design, is to learn
the Sentiments of the Fathers, as to the power and efficacy of the
Conjurations, that were practiced, both by the Heathens and Christians. St.
Cyprian, in the 3d, Century, sufficiently Declares, that in the Christian
Religion Baptism has power, by the Blessing of Christ, to expel wicked Spirits,
which gives occasion to believe, that they were possessed of Men, before their
being cast out by that Holy Sacrament. And indeed he writes in his 7th, Letter
of the 1st Book, That as Pharaoh, after much resistance, was at last drowned in
the water; so the Devil is yet now adays abused and tormented by the
Exorcists, whose voice is indeed only human, but attended by the Virtue of God.
For a little farther he says, when by the Saving water we receive the
Sanctification of Baptism, we may be sure that the power of the Devil is
overcome, and the person consecrated to God, freed by his mercy. It happens at
the same time, according to him, that Scorpions and Serpents cannot abide
water, so the infernal Dragon cannot endure the Water of Baptism.

Sect. 6. He ascribes the same Virtue to the name of Jesus, when in his Sermon
upon Baptism, speaks of mercenary Exorcists, de quaestuariis exorcistis
Obediunt Daemon^s Exorcistis, etc. The Demons obey Exorcists, saying, we know
who is Christ, and who is Paul, and being conjured in the name of that Jesus,
whom Paul Preaches, we withdraw. It seems to St, Cyprian, that things ought to
be so by the same reason that Baptism was valid, whether administered by Paul or
Judas: But he ought to have considered, that we have not the same certainty
that these Exorcists should have received their Office from God, as we are sure
that he had established Judas in his Apostleship.

Sect. 7. Lactantius, in the 4th Century, will yet give us some instructions.
And First, as to Conjurations, that we treat now of, he believed that they have
a great efficacy; for he writes in his Second Book, Sect. 15. That the Devils
are afraid of the Just that worship God, since being conjured by them in his
Name, they go out of Bodies, and being compelled by their words, as by stripes,
they not only acknowledged that they are Demons, but also declare their Names,
that are found to be the same, under which they are adored in Temples, So that
he believes that the wicked Spirit, how great a Liar soever he is, cannot lie,
when by Conjuration he is forced to speak, because the Divine Power constrains
him to say the Truth for that time.

Sect. 8. In the mean while he sticks not to that, but agrees with St. Cyprian,
that the modern sorcerers were able to enchant wicked Spirits, and by that
argument, pretends to prove to Epicure and his followers, that there are
Spirits in the World, and that Human Souls are immortal. To that end, he
expresses himself in these words, Book the 7th, Sect. 13. Certainly if
Democritus, Epicure, or Dicearchus, stood by a Magician, they should not make
bold to maintain by their Reasons, that the Soul is Mortal; what could they
answer? If the Magician by pronouncing some Verses, called up the Souls' from
subterraneous places making them appear to Men, speak to them, and foretell
future things; for if they still presume to persist in their error, they would
be forced to yield to such real proofs, and such visible effects.

Sect. 9. However, I cannot agree to what is read in his 2 Book, Sect. 14. That
the Art and Power of Magicians, Magorum, only consists in the Inspirations they
receive from the Spirits, that surprise Men, and deceive their Eyes by
Illusions, hindering them from seeing what is, and making them see what is not,
when it is required from them by Magicians. He seemed before to believe, that
the Demons actually produce some effects, and here he will persuade us, that
there is nothing but illusion: whatever it be, even that very illusion is still
an Operation of the Demons, and consequently approve of their existence and
action. In the mean while he agrees with himself in this, that he believes
sorcerers converse with the wicked Spirit, and that the Conjurations of the
former, force the latter to say and do what is required from them; but that all
the effects of Witchcraft are to be ascribed to them, and not to the Magicians.

Sect. 10. Lactantius was persuaded that bad Spirits had a share in all those
Arts, that made up the practices of the Ancient Heathens, and of which mention
has been made, Chapter 3. He even believed that they were all invented by those
Spirits, as appears by his own words, Book 2. Chapter 16. The things that they have
invented, viz. The Demons, are predictions, by the Stars, by the inspection of
Victims, and by the cry of Birds; these are the Oracles and Enchantments in
use, to consult the Dead, by Magic, Magia and all the other Evils to which Men
addict themselves, either privately or openly. All these things have nothing
solid nor true in themselves, but are received for such, by the credit they
borrow from the presence of their Authors, who know how to impose upon the
credulity of Men, affecting to make a divine power appear before them, of which
however, no profit accrues to them. I might quote here some Authors of the two
following Centuries, but observing no change in them that deserves to be
related, and fearing to insist too long upon this: I come to the bottom of the
matter, lest I should weary the Reader with unprofitable trouble.

CHAP. XVII. That it is necessary to compare all those various Doctrines and
Practices of the Jews, Mahometans, and Christians; and to examine wherein they
differ, and in what they agree together.
Sect. 1. THE 11th Chapter of this Book was designed to compare together, the
Opions and practices of the various Heathens, concerning Spirits. The natural
light that remained in our understanding, notwithstanding the darkness in which
it has been involved by Sin, has been able, without the help of the Holy writ,
to discover, whether those Opinion and practices, were founded upon true, or
false grounds. We have since heard, those that acknowledge the Authority of the
Holy writ, speak very differently, by which means, the light of Reason may be
increased, and it is corruption bettered. Let us now see what they have done as
to this, and how far their endeavors have attained. To that end, we shall
First consider, wherein the latter differ from the Heathens, what they have
retained of Paganism; and lastly in what points they differ from each other;
having always regard to that difference of Doctrines, and Worship, or Opinions
and Practices, that have been set down before.

Sect. 2. These 3 sorts of People, Jews, Christians, and Mahometans, rejecting
the plurality of Gods that were believed and adored by the Heathens, and
Worshipping one Only God, have overthrown whatever the others had invented,
concerning confederate, inferior, and mean Gods, or familiar Spirits, that were
born with Men and outlive them; and at the same time, have destroyed whatever
Conjurations and Witchcrafts were grounded upon such principles, by which Men
presume to acquire some certain knowledge, and produce some certain effects. We
have found nothing like, amongst the Jews and Mahometans; for tho they may have
something that appears like it, yet it is quite different, as we shall show
hereafter. And as to the Christians, we see that they unanimously reject all
these things, and look upon them as delusions and impieties; and as to what the
last, together with the Jews and Mahometans, have retained of the Opinions and
practices of the Heathens, it has been taken from the Philosophy of this last
Sect, and accommodated to the Holy Scripture, or gathered from it by false
explications. This I shall now briefly show, concerning the Spirits in general,
and the Soul of Man in particular.

Sect. 3. As to the Spirits in general. First, That Opinion, that they are
partly corporeal, received of old by the Jews, Chapter 12. Sect. 5, 11, to 15 By
the Mahometans, Chapter 14. Sect. 4, 5. and by the Christians, Chapter 15. Sect. 5, 14,
15, 23, 24, 31. draws it is Original from the Philosophy of the Heathens, as has
been shown, Chapter 2. Sect. 14, 16. Chapter 11. Sect. 6.

Second. The Opinion that ascribes some life and understanding to the stars, as
to the Sun and Moon; whether it be insignificantly expressed, as among the
Jews, Chapter 12. Sect. 3, 13. or only darkly as amongst the Mahometans; or
proposed as a doubt, as it has been by Origin and St. Austin, amongst the
Christians, Chapter 15. Sect. 11, 19. That Opinion, I say looks very Heathenish,
and differs not much from the Intelligencies of Aristotle, Chapter 2, Sect. 5. Nor
from the esteem which the modern Heathens have for those celestial Lamps, of
which mention has been made, Chapter 6. Sect. 2. Chapter 11. Sect. 2.

Sect. 4. We may also easily compare their belief touching Human Souls.

First, (...) ^^^inion of the transmigration of Souls, so common am^^gst the
Heathens, Chapter 2. Sect. 17. is not rejected by the Jews, but converted into that
of the revolution of the Souls, Chapter 12. Sect. 19. It is publicly t^ught by
some Mahometans, Chapter 14. Sect. 12. As to the Christians, it is true, that they
admit it not, tho something like it be found in Origin, Chapter 15. Sect 13. But I
must say by the way, that I see not how those that still hold, that all Human
Souls were created together in the beginning, and afterward each in his time,
introduced into their bodies, could solidly confute that Opinion of the
Metempsychosis.

Second. The Jews, Mahometans, and Christians, too easily credit the
apparitions of Souls, which takes place amongst the Jews, because they suppose
the Souls to wander for a Year, about the bodies from which they are separated,
Chapter 12. Sect, 20. Neither can the Mahometans reject that Opinion, since they
hold the Souls to be made up of the Elements, Chapter 14. Sect. 13. and that after
their separation from the body, they see and hear in Trees, Sect. 14. As to the
Christians, we find Justin, one of the First, who says, that a separated Soul
may yet operate upon living persons, Sect. 5. All the Opinions that are related
here, are drawn from Philosophy, or mixed with Paganism. But the Holy Writ,
either taken in its true Sense, or mis-interpreted, has given occasion to the
following, which we shall mention hereafter.

First, The opinion that the Angels have been created from Fire, Air, or the
most subtle Elements, which the Jews only hint. Chap. 12. Sect. 15. but what
the Mahometans publicly teach, Chap 14, Sect. 4. has likewise been received by
some Christians, Chap. 15. Sect. 4, 5, 24. because they thought it consonant to
what is said, Psalm. 104. ver. 4. That God makes Spirits his Angels, and flames
of fire his Ministers, 2 Kings 2.11. that Elijah was taken up into Heaven in a
Chariot with fiery horses, Chap. 6.17. That they defended Elisha, and that
Ezekiel, Chap. 1.4, 5. saw the likeness of four Animals going out of the midst
of fire; several other misunderstood passages have contributed to the
establishing of that Opinion.

Second. The Morning Stars rejoicing together when God ceeated the World, Job
38.7. gave occasion to Philo, as has been observed, Chap. 12. Sect. 4. to
confirm himself in that Opinion, that the Stars are Understanding Beings; as
has been likewise proved as to many other Authors.

Sect. 6. It likewise appears, that those that believe Spirits to be corporeal,
ground their Opinion upon the Holy Scripture.

First, for having no Idea of other Sons of God, that fell in love with the
Daughters of Men, as is mentioned Genesis 6. but of such as are distinguished and
separated from Men: And conceiving not the true nature of Spiritual Beings,
they fancied that the Angels had begotten those Giants, of whom it is spoken in
that place; add to this, that they could not think that those Nephilim (which
word we Translate Giants) should be other Creatures, besides fallen Angels, who
for that reason are called by that Name, which signifies as much as Rebels. We
have seen that Opinion received by the Jews, Chap. 12. Sect. 14. By the
Mahometans, Chap. 14. Sect. 5. and even by some Christians, Chap. 15. Sect. 5,
31.

Second. I grant that it may be inferred from thence, that there are Incubi and
Succubi, that is Devils, who now in the shape of Males, then of Females, lie
with Men and Women; that Opinion of the Jews is still now a days much dispersed
among the Christians, as shall be showed hereafter.

Sect. 7. Such are their Sentiments, as to the nature and fall of the Angels;
but as to their distinction into several Orders, and the share they bear in the
Government of the World, the same differences, or very near, are ascribed to
them that are atributed to the Heathen Gods and Spirits. Chap. 11. Sect. 6. And
that Opinion is strengthened by a misunderstanding of the Holy Scripture.

First, The Jews explain themselves clearly and largely upon the different
Orders of Angels. Chap. 12. Sect. 4, 7, 11. The Mahometans treat of it more
confusedly and obscurely Chap. 14. Sect. 16, 17, 18, 25, 32. but the Christians
speak of it, as though it could not be doubted but the Holy Writ understands such
a Hierarchy of Angels, by the different names it gives them.

Second. As the Heathens filled the Air with Spirits, or placed them above,
under, and in the middle of the World, Chap. 2. Sect. 6. Chap. 7. Sect. 2.5, 8.
So have the Jews, according to Philo, Chap. 12. Sect. 5, 12. Neither do the
Christians disagree from them. Chap. 14. Sect. 25. Supposing that Opinion to be
confirmed in the Scripture, Ephesians. Chap. 2.2. Chap. 6.12. and by several
passages in the History of Job.

Third. They agree together again, in that they acknowledge as many Guardian
Angels of Men and Nations, as the Heathens did their Titular Gods. The Opinion
of the Jews, as to this point, may be in some manner perceived by the
quotations that are set down Chap. 12. Sect. 4.10. That of the Mahometans, is
more clearly expressed, Chap. 14. Sect. 9. But that of the Christians still
plainer. Chap. 15. Sect. 6, 17, 18, 29. to which they have applied the passages
of the Holy Writ already mentioned.

Sect. 8. It goes, even so, with their belief of the Devils; First, we hear the
Jews, Chap. 12. Sect. 13, 16. The Mahometans, Chap. 14. Sect. 5. and the
Christians, Chap. 15. Sect. 21, 31. All speaking in a manner the same Language,
as to their Original and Fall. The last commonly quote the Scripture, Genes.
3.6. and Isai. 14.12. to maintain their Opinions, but they quote it, no less
adorned with their foolish fancies, upon the Nature and Creation of Spirits,
than the others do by their fabulous Tales.

Second. The Opinion of the Jews concerning the malice of the Devils, their
Virtue and Power to hurt, partly appears, Chap. 12. Sect. 12, 15, 18, 20. And
that of the Mahometans seems to be almost the same. As to the Thoughts of the
Ancient Christians, they are explained more at large, Chap. 15, Sect. 7, 12,
23, 26. In the mean while I find not that they have asserted any thing contrary
to the Opinion of the others.

Sect. 9. It is convenient to say also something of Purgatory, the spring of a
vast number of Apparitions and Witchcrafts.

1, Whether the Jews, Mahometans, and ancient Christians speak clearly upon
that subject, or obscurely and doubtful; yet they all agree in establishing a
purging Fire, or some such other Pain to be endured. Such are the Pains which
the Devils of Torments inflict upon the Jews at the time of Gilgul, or the
Revolution of Souls, Chap. 12. Sect. 20. The Mahometans are not remote from
that Opinion, Chapter 14. S. 11. but the Christians, Chapter 15. Sect. 27, 28, 34. or
at least, part of them, have blown up that Fire from under the Ashes, though
the others, whose number is far greater, have not the least inclination to
credit it.

2. However, those that are not altogether remote from them, reject not wholly
the Apparitions of the Souls separated from their Bodies, nor their various
Operations, to which Justin and Irenaeus have traced out the way for them, as
we have seen, Chapter 15. S. 7.

Sect. 10. But neither the Jews nor the Mahometans, carry Exorcisms and
Conjurations to so great a height as the Christians; in the mean while they all
agree in this.

1. That they are powerful upon the Spirits, by the means of Names, Words, and
Signs, that they have so much virtue as to force them to answer, to cast them
out, or to turn them off. The Practices of the Jews, Chapter 13. Sect. 6.11. Those
of the Mahometans, Chapter 14. Sect. 14, 18. and the Declaration of the Christian
Writers, Chapter 16. Sect. 5.10. make it sufficiently evident that their Opinions
are not much different as to this Point, though the last bring not them into
Practice.

2. The Reader shall not find in my Quotations a very particular explication of
Magic, properly so called, which, as it is supposed, causes so many
disturbances to Men upon Earth; unless it be this, that since on the one side,
the evils produced by those wicked Spirits are granted, and on the other their
obedience to Exorcists; it is easy to infer, that all the damage that
Magicians cause by the help of the Devil, must likewise be ascribed to them.

Sect. 11. When we compare all these things together, we see the Heathens and
Jews delivering their Opinions, as from hand to hand, to the Mahometans and
Christians; so that we easily perceive that both Jews and Christians, have by
degrees, and insensibly, received the Opinions of the Heathens, by whom they
were surrounded, amongst whom they were mixed, and from whom the Christians are
descended: And that the last have also borrowed much from the Jews, who have
delivered to them the Sacred Writings, with most of their particular
Interpretations, that have been greedily swallowed down, and since increased to
a great excess. As to the Mahometans, whose Law is a mixture of Heathen,
Jewish, and Christian Doctrines, and more composed of what is evil in them all
than of what is good; and therefore stored with more Errors than Truth; It is
not strange they should have so much agreement with those of the Nations we
speak of. We may observe hereafter how all these Opinions have insensibly been
cherished and increased by Popery, and have issued not only for the same
Spring, but also from another, whence Mahomet has drawn something for the
making up of his System. But as I have ended the 11th Chapter of this Book with
the Opinion of the Epicures, I think it convenient to make a particular Chapter
of those of the Manichees.

CHAP. XVIII. That the Doctrines ascribed to the Manichees, are a mixture of
all the preceding, and the original of the Opinions most common at this day.
S. 1. IF it were absolutely requisite to know the Opinions of the ancient
Heretics, at least of those that are called so, we would be at the same Pains
as those that endeavor to discover them: For their own Books that were then
condemned, being lost, it is not reasonable blindly to believe whatever their
Adversaries say of them, whose Zeal for the Truth was often mixed with human
Passions: So that they may sometimes impute to their Antagonists Opinions that
were not so bad as they gave out, either misunderstanding or wresting them.
Perhaps St. Austin has increased the number of Heresies to a hundred, for fear
he should diminish that of seventy which Epiphanius had before established in
his Preface, and 57th Chapter of the Heresies. For if Celsus could mark, in the
most remote Antiquity, and from the first times that we have any knowledge of
Books, but 100 principal Doctors of Heathenism, each of whom made not a
particular Sect, but only followed the footsteps of his Predecessors; how can
it be imagined that Christianity, that has the Word of God for it is Rule,
should have been in much less time more divided than Paganism, that was founded
on such weak and uncertain Grounds.

Sect. 2. St. Austin it seems should be chiefly consulted, as to the Doctrine
of the Manichees, since he himself had been infected with their poison, and has
particularly treated of that matter in his 46 Chapter of the Heresies; however, I
shall do it with great caution, by the Reasons just now alleged: besides that
these words of his Preface, Ad quod vult Deum, made him extremely suspected;
for he says, that in his little Book of Heresies, he shows a way, Vnde possit
omnis haeresis, and quae nota est, and quae ignota vitari. To avoid all
Heresies, whether known or unknown. For how can one provide himself against
what is unknown, and consequently signifies nothing? nay, I may boldly say,
that what is unknown cannot be called Heresy, since whatever deserves that
name, must be known; or perhaps St. Austin's meaning must be understood in this
sense; that discovering the nature and Genius of such Heresies, as are already
known, he has furnished us with light, and weapons against those that are yet
unknown, but may become manifest hereafter. However this being not the place to
insist longer upon this Reasoning, we shall return to our subject. The same
Father in his Book against the Manichees, imputes to them some things,
Quantumlibet negent ad se pertinere. Tho they deny them ever so much. But as he
treats not distinctly enough of all their Opinions, especially those that
belong to our design, I shall rather follow Danaeus, who has gathered the chief
points of their belief, as well out of the Book of St. Austin before quoted,
and the rest of his works, as out of many other Authors, from whom I shall only
relate what may be subservient to our subject.

Sect. 3. As to God and the Spirits, they are said,

First. To have established two principles, contrary to each other, one of
which was good, and the Author and Original of all good; and the other bad, the
Author of all Evil, and the Prince of darkness. That the first as they say, is
the God that has formed all things, and that the other is Hyle, that is the
matter from which all things have been formed, and which is esteemed by them to
be the Devil. Some distinguish the Devil from the Prince of darkness, and
translate not as we do the last words of the 44th v. of the 8th Chapter of St.
John. He is the Father of lies; but his Father is a lie, namely the Father of
the Devil.

Second. As to the good God, they say, that his Essence is dispersed as by
portions, through all the Creatures, and inherent to them, which they explain
by many wonderful Commentaries. This is what they think of God and the Devil,
in relation to their Essence and Existence, what follows concerns their
Operations.

Sect. 4. Third. The People of darkness formerly warred with the People of
light. The good God went himself to attack, the Prince of darkness, by some
certain principal Spirits, which he had produced of his own Essence, who
however, being too weak, were taken Prisoners; but Christ came to repair that
disorder, having been begotten by some certain first Man, who had been the
promoter of this War, and had begun it.

Fourth. That in the mean while, Christ himself is the Serpent that seduced
Adam and Eve.

Fifth. That Christ is now fixed amongst the Stars, especially, in the luminous
Globe of the Sun, in which sense they explain his Ascension to Heaven.

Sect. 5. Sixth. They believe the Metempsychosis in this manner; That the Souls
shall pass into the bodies of such a kind of living Creatures, as they have
most loved or abused, during their Life. He that has killed a mouse or a fly,
shall pass in punishment, into the body of a mouse or a fly, the state in which
he shall be put after death, shall likewise be opposed to that, in which he was
during his Life. He that is rich shall be poor, and he that is poor shall be
rich.

Seventh. They also give two Souls to every Man, one of which, is always
contrary to the other. But enough of their Doctrines, we leave the rest to
Danaeus, who ascribes to them 21 in all, because what he and other Authors say,
belongs not to our subject.

Sect. 6. However I am not apt to assert, that they have believed and taught
such gross Doctrines, as are imputed to them, and have been now related. For
supposing the common Opinion, concerning the Doctrine of the Manichees, that
they were chiefly extracted from the Philosophy of the Persians, (since Manes,
their First Author, was undoubtedly a Persian,) and that they are strangely
mingled with the Christian Divinity; It is unreasonable to have the same
Opinion of that People, that we have of other Nations, who never cultivated the
study of Nature and Human learning; such as those we have met with in the
Northern parts of Africa, and the Southern of America. It may well be, that the
Manichees ascribe to the whole Universe, a principle like that which is
observed in it is parts, viz. The active cause, and the matter, which Aristotle
established to be eternal as well as the World; and that afterward, matter
considered as insensible by a misinterpretation of the words of Moses, that
spreads in the beginning, darkness over the Abyss, and the Spirit of God moving
over it, should have produced those monstrous thoughts, of which we have given
some instances.

Sect. 7. Supposing they have established two principal causes, one of good and
the other of evil; but yet, so as that the First is uncontestably superior to
the Second, as much as light is above darkness, and the workman above the
matter he works upon; it is probable, that they had an Idea of God, as a Soul
infused through the whole Universe, that considered by them as the body, in
which that First cause continually operates. And as the contrary motions of
corporeal passions rise against the Empire of Reason that ought to govern them,
so they might believe, that the Animal Spirits proceeding from matter,
perpetually rebel against God, the Fountain of all Reason. Whence it would
follow, that God should not be more absolute master of the Universe, than Man
is of his body; thence has proceeded that Idea of two different Gods, one good,
and the other bad; the latter being still inferior to the former, who is indeed
the workman, but has not an arbitrary Government, there being a power in the
World, so great, that it is able to resist him.

Sect. 8. But whether I have made a just conjecture, or whether the Manichees
had other Opinions, then those I imagine; it seems nevertheless, that I may
reasonable suppose it, upon this foundation, that no Opinions so gross as those
that are ascribed to them; not only are not admitted, but not so much as moved
or propounded, as we shall see very soon in the series of this work; because
the principal points of those sorts of belief with their dependencies, have a
great relation with my Second and Third Book, as I hope to show at the end of
the Second. And therefore whether any one treats of the Devil and Spirits
according to the Holy Scripture; or whether he only follows his own sense and
right, it may (...) assured, that all his Reasonings will turn upon this notion
of his; that God and the Devil have each an Empire, one contrary to the other,
and that tho the Devil be subject to the power of God; yet his Empire is more
apparent. It is denied, that God now works any miracles, but some are rashly
ascribed to the Devil, that surpass all those that are mentioned in the Holy
writ. We believe that there are Angels, and gather from the Holy Scripture,
that they encamp about the faithful, and the Devil likewise is incessantly
active to do them hurt, if possible he can, but his abode is in Hell. However
it is very rare to hear any one say, he has seen an Angel in a vision, whereas
the Devil appears almost continually. If any thing has been either signified or
foretold, we never believe it to be the Operation of an Angel, but of the
Devil: one is possessed by him, and another bewitched; by his means, unknown
Tongues are spoken, strange things are said, others no less wonderful are
performed, and the most hidden secrets discovered. But you will scarce meet
with any that has so good Opinion of the power of an Angel; if we have any Holy
thought, or good inspiration, how inconsiderable soever it may be, we ascribe
it to the Holy Ghost, and seem not to believe, that the Angels are so much as
capable of contributing to it; since it never comes in our mind to think upon
them. But the Devil penetrates the most secret thoughts of Men, overthrows
their best designs, and incessantly excites them to Evil, if they are accused
and convicted of any crime, the excuse is always at hand, for the Devil has
done it, or at least has tempted them so to do.

Sect. 9. And therefore since neither the Ancient Heathens nor the moderns;
neither the Jews, the Mahometans, nor the First Christians, ever entertained
any such Opinions; and that it is manifest, they have a greater relation with
those of Manes, I cannot but believe that this Doctrine which begun to spring
up in the Third Century, was immediately opposed on all sides by Orthodox
Doctors, but yet spread very far into Asia, whence it having passed into
Europe, it has maintained it self there longer then it is believed. This will
not appear strange, if we make a serious reflection upon this, that Men writing
against errors, often aim at nothing else, but their own reputation and the
glory of having confuted them, whilst they themselves cherish those errors, and
keep them in their bosom, so that when they come, to examine themselves they
find at bottom, that they agree with those, whose evil Doctrines they fancy as
heartily to detest, as they appear outwardly incensed against them.

CHAP. XIX. That the Opinions and practices already mentioned, have been most
or all introduced in Popery, which has added to them new inventions of Men.
Sect. 1. IT IS now time to approach nearer our Age, and First to consider the
Papists, and then our selves; for we now know, that the chief points of the
doctrines to be examined, have Anciently made part of the religion of the
Heathens, Jews, and Mahometans, and even have been admitted by the First
Christians, whose purity is so much commended. Afterward, it was easy to
observe in the last Chapter where we spoke of the Manichees, that great part of
the Doctrines ascribed to them, have insensibly been introduced into the
Christianity of latter Ages. But Popery was not satisfied with this, and has
invented many new ones, to which Gregory the great, that would seem to oppose
Antichristianity, with which he supposed the East to be infected, has traced
out a plain way. For having himself usurped a great Authority over the Churches
of the West, it was no hard matter, for him, to let his own imaginations and
vain, institutions be received, and to transmit them to his successors. Since
that time it became usual in most Churches, to believe whatever Rome taught,
and to do whatever she wrote them by way of command; at last she changed that
custom into a right to her, and an obligation upon the other; neither Scripture
nor right Reason were consulted, when the determinations and Authority of the
Roman Bishop, upon Articles of Faith, were only allowed. Those determinations
were substituted instead of Reason; and when they needed writings to maintain
them, those of the First Doctors of the Church were ready at hand, which gave
too fair a pretense, of crediting whatever had been invented; for how strange
soever those new Doctrines appeared, yet they were easily swallowed down,
provided they were contained either in the writings of those Doctors, or in
others that were spurious and forged at pleasure, and falsely ascribed to them,
if they were but declared authentic by the Sea of Rome. It happened with this
matter as with all others, in which some change in the Worship and Doctrine,
has insensibly been made, or something new introduced, which continued in the
Church till the beginning of the latter Age, when part of the West was
reformed, and re-established in it is first state.

Sect. 2. We must now consider two things, viz. how far Popery has brought, in
process of time, it is unlawful Opinions; and then how far proceeded the
rejection made by those that reformed themselves as to the Doctrine and
Worship. For this reason, I shall speak in this Chapter of what the Papists
believed upon the subject I treat of, and shall relate their Worship and
practices in the following Chapter. I intend not to gather those Opinions from,
the decrees of the Popes, nor the Canons of their Councils and Synods, as I
have not done it, in what I have related concerning other Religions; but I
shall collect them from the writings of their principal Authors and Doctors,
and from sentiments clearly expressing them, few of which were ever
contradicted or confuted by any private person. So that whatever I shall
allege, being generally received for Articles of Faith, by those of that
Communion; they will have no reason to complain of, or exclaim against this
method, since in the following Chapter, I shall show, that those manifold
Opinions ascribed to them, are confirmed by the proof of a general practice.
But if I was to read over all their Authors to extract their Opinions, it would
prove too long and tedious a task; and therefore I shall only follow one of
their writers, who is fallen into my hands by chance, because he has read all
the others, and extracted from them whatever is subservient to our subject,
having put it in order, without omitting any thing, as tho he had done it on
purpose: since therefore, not only he is not of our Communion, but a Papist,
and a Jesuit too, I think the choice I have made, will not be blamed. This
Author is Gaspar Schottus, who is sufficiently known by the learned writings he
has published of late, and which he is not afraid to expose to our censure,
since in 1662, he dedicated his Physica curiosa, to the Elector Palatine,
Charles Lewis of glorious memory, who was of our Communion: this Book and
another entitled, Magia Vniversalis, or Universal Magic, of which he is
likewise the Author I design to make use of, laying aside all the others that I
had collected, and partly read for that purpose, for the glory of being an
insatiable reader is not what I aim at.

Sect. 3. Following the same order, I have before established, and which is
almost agreeable to that of Schottus. I shall first relate the Opinions of the
Doctors of the Church of Rome, concerning Angels and Devils, and afterward
touching human Souls, either in this Life or after Death. However, I undertake
not to make an abstract of whatever they say, but only to illustrate the matter
in hand, in order to prove what I have asserted. To that end I distinguish
again the Angels into good and bad, to examine what concerns either of those
two sorts. But first I shall speak in general of their Original, Number,
Nature, Equalities, and Power. As to their Original: Upon the Question, of what
Nature Spirits are, I shall reject the Opinion commonly received by several
Christian Doctors; That Spirits are in some sort Corporeal, because the Council
of Lateran, cap. firmiter, seems to establish, that they are altogether
immaterial; but all agree in this, that they have been created by God, and
constituted in a state of Grace, Physic. Cur. Book 1. Page 7. Though this last
expression be somewhat different from that of our Churches; yet I will not
insist upon it; but in the following proposition I shall observe what I intend
afterward to make subservient to my design.

Sect. 5. Thomas Aquinas makes the Angels innumerable. Others, following some
ancient Fathers, establish 99 to one Man. Our Schottus makes their number
amount to 1000,000,000,000 a Thousand Thousand Millions, more of whom are good
then bad, though he undertakes not to determine the number of each, page 9, 10.
This vast number of Angels, as well bad as good, are divided by way of degrees
into some certain orders, which are explained in particular, somewhat further
in that same Book.

Sect. 6. As to the power ascribed to good and bad Angels; 1. They can neither
penetrate the secret thoughts of one another, nor those of Men; yet they can
much better pierce into futurities then Men can do by the help of natural
Causes, and know for instance, whether the year shall be fruitful, whether it
will freeze very hard, whether it will Rain or blow, page 12, 13, 14.

2. It Is observable, that he ascribes to them the faculty of moving from one
place to another, though it be not done in an instant, and that of extending and
contracting themselves locally, page 17. 18.

3. He admits the Opinion of Ignatius Erkenness, that it is not necessary an
Angel should have a Body to move another Body, page 20. etc.

4. That nevertheless neither Angel nor Devil can act upon each other, unless
they meet both in the same place, page 21.

5. It is the common Opinion, that a Spirit may assume a Body in such a manner
as outwardly to be seen in a Bodily shape, by a Person whose Eyes are
conveniently disposed, without being perceived by another near him, though his
Eyes be as fit for it as those of the former, page 24.

6. It Is likewise the common Opinion, that each Person has his particular Angel
and Devil, p. 37, 38.

Sect. 7. As to the Holy Angels in particular, the Opinion of Lombard
concerning their Orders and different Ministries, has been always much credited
among the Papists; They believe that he speaks according to the Scripture, when
he constitutes nine Orders of them. Angels, Archangels, Principalities, Powers,
Virtues, Dominions, Thrones, Cherubims, and Seraphims. Lombard asserts, that
Dionysius the Areopagite has distinguished them so, but I have showed before,
Chap. 15. Sect. 3. that it is Pope Gregory, who has established that number,
though not altogether in the same Order. These nine Orders have been since
divided into three times three, the three superior Orders are the Seraphims,
Cherubims, and Thrones, and so forth, ascending again, and reckoning all nine.
Lombard explains this thought more at large, saying, That as the Martyrs are
one Order, and the Apostles another, and yet one Apostle is above another, as
one Martyr above another, he reasonably believe the same to be with the Angels.

Sect. 8. As to the wicked Spirits in particular, it is believed,

1. That they have not all been precipitated into Hell, immediately after their
Fall; but that part of them remained rambling without, and sometime return upon
Earth, or abide in the Air, p. 26, 27.

2. That there are six different places where the Devils commonly dwell, and
whence they effect their Malice and Power, and therefore are called in relation
to those places, 1. Ignean, or Superaereal Devils, 2. Aereal Devils. 3.
Terrestrial. 4. Aquatick. 5. Subterraneous. 6. Those that hate the Light. The
Abbot Trithemius, Delrio, and Agrippa, are quoted by our Author on that
account, page 28. 31.

3. They are as well as the Angels divided into several Orders: But the Papists
agree not together upon this matter; neither our Author, nor Agrippa, who has
treated at large of this matter, agree together, nor with others; but after
all, I relate here what is most generally received; to which I add, that the
Opinion of Thyleus, who divides the Devils into three Spiritual Dominions, and
nine Quires, is not rejected, page 36, 37.

Sect. 9. Their Power and Effects have always been much exalted amongst the
Papists; They hold for certain, that the wicked Spirits can do great wonders;
either by their Knowledge or Power. Mira hoc loco vocamus, (says Schottus)
quorum causas etiam sapientes ignorant, and digna admiratione censent, sive de
^aetero natura facultates transcendunt, sive non. I give here the name of
wonders to those Effects, the causes of which even the Wise are ignorant of,
and judge them worthy Admiration, whether or no they surpass the forces of
Nature, page 39, 40. It Is therefore his Opinion, That the Devils can produce
Effects that are above the power of Nature: For though he declares afterward,
That they produce, but apparently and not really, some Effects that are
peculiar to God only; yet he believes that frequently they really operate
others, which indeed are not proper to God, but which neither Men nor the
ordinary course of Nature are capable of effecting without the assistance of
those Spirits. To prove this Thesis, he quotes many Popish Authors, and shows
that they are all of the same Opinion. In the mean while he distinguishes what
the Devils are able to effect of themselves, from what they cannot do, but by
the means of Magicians and Witches, Page 40. to 50.

Sect. 10. The Consequence he draws from what has been said, is, That the
Devils operate some things by motion, others by the active virtue of Natural
Causes, and others by Illusion.

1. They allege 15 sorts of their Operations by their Motion from one place to
another, of which the five first consist in real Operations, and the nine last,
in mere Representations. Those of the first Classis, are, First, They cause
Fire to descend from Heaven, as it is related in the first Chapter of Job.
Second. According to the same History, they may raise Storms and Tempests.
Third. They may likewise cause Rain, bring fair weather, make Winds blow upon
the Sea, stop the course of Vessels, and overturn them. Fourth. They may
produce Earthquakes. Fifth. They may transport through the Air, or in some
other manner, the Bodies of Men, and all other sorts of Bodies.

Sect. 11. Our Author afterward relates what they operate by motions of mere
Representation to the internal and external Senses;

1. They render visible things invisible, by suddenly snatching them from the
sight of Men.

2. They make Statues, and other inanimate Objects move and walk.

They make them speak.

4. They make appear Man and Beast in their dead Bodies, as though they were
alive.

5. They take upon them Aereal Bodies, and by that means produce several
Effects.

6. They represent the Figure of all sorts of matter, either Gold, Silver,
precious Stones, or others.

7. They direct in such a manner the Animal Spirits of Men, that they maks
appear to them, past, present and future things in their own shape, and
persuade them that they see, hear, and do things that are not real.

8. They cause pineings and violent Diseases in human Bodies.

9. By Dreams they present to People, such objects as are absent and remote,
and forewarn them of future things.

10 They produce in Men the passions of Love, Hatred, Anger and Fury, from Pa.
51. to 54.

Sect. 12. The 2d sort of Diabolical Operations is no less credited; it
consisting in the active virtue of Natural things; and therefore it is believed,
that by the power of the Devil, whether he acts immediately, and by himself, or
by Wizards and Witches; Herbs, Fruits, Waters, and most other matters may be
mixed in some sort and degree, and with the proportions requisite for it,
whereby Food, Drink, Physic, or some other potion may be made up, that shall
cause a great deal of hurt to Man and Beast. It Is also believed that all these
things may be done by natural ways, but that they are more easily, readily, and
efficaciously performed by the power and craft of the Devil, without being
perceived by the most skilful Men, who can never do the like, Page 55.

Sect. 13. As to the illusions, they must be understood in this Sense, that the
Devils indeed do some thing, but not whatever they seem to operate. For it is
not doubted but the Devil can do whatever is possible to be done by natural
means and which may happen in process of time, by the ordinary course of
nature, without the cooperation of that wicked Spirit, as we shall say anon,
but he has this power by God's permission, to employ all the forces of nature,
for the producing of what effect he desires; whence often proceeds, that Men
either by ignorance, or because some extraordinary objects and events come
before them, believe things that are not in being, or persuade themselves, that
the Devil performs some certain effects that are not natural, In the mean while
it remains constant and undoubted, that the Devil has power to do whatever has
been already mentioned, as also whatever I am going to say.

Sect. 14. I mean to speak of illusions, which Schottus together with Delrio
and Molina declares to be of Three sorts; those that are made by the change of
the objects, those that are made by the change of the Air, and those that
happen by the change of the Organs of the senses.

First, Illusions are made by the change of the Object, when one thing is
substituted instead of another, that has been suddenly and imperceptibly
snatched away; or when an object is presented to the Eyes, in such a state and
manner as that, it produces a false vision; or when any object made up of Air,
or of some other Element, offers it self to the sight; or lastly when there
appears any thing composed of different matters, mingled together; so skilfully
prepared, that what existed before, receives thereby another form and figure.

Second. The change of the Air is made by these ways, when the Devil hinders,
lest the object should pass through the Air, and hit our Eyes; when he disposes
the Air that is betwixt the object and the Eye in such a manner, that the
object appears in another figure then really it is, when h^^ thickens the Air
to make the object appear greater then it is, and to hinder it from being seen
in other places, but the place he designs; when he moves the Air in the place
through which the object is to hit the Eye, that the object going through that
part of the Air, may also be moved, and that it is figure may be presented to
the Eye, otherwise then it is; and lastly, when he mingles and confounds
together several different figures, in order that in one only object, there may
appear many together, page 55.

Third. The Organs of the Senses are changed, when they are either transferred
from their places and altered; when their humors and active particles are
corrupted or thickened, or when such a shining brightness passes before the
Eyes, that they are dazzled, so that it seems, that a Man raves waking, p. 55,
56.

Sect. 15. As a consequence of all these things, it is held as an undoubted
truth, that the Devil can perform miraculous effects upon all sorts of
creatures, especially upon Men, viz.

First, That he can give life to Dead insects, and make them perfect Animals,
which however is against the meaning of Schottus, p. 129,

Second, And consequently, that he can produce and make appear true Frogs and
Serpents as was done in Egypt in the time Moses, p. 57, 58. 59.

Third. That he may discover and bring to Men, hidden treasures, and even if
occasion serves, make Money, p. 116. however Schottus says with reason, that he
is so ill natured, as seldom to do, as to this, all that is in his power.

Sect. 16. Concerning Man in particular, it is believed, that unclean Spirits
can Copulate in the shape of Men with Women, and in the shape of Women with M^^
so that as from that communication Children may be begotten, page 61. to 67.

2. That the Devil, as by a kind of Transmutation, may change Women into the
likeness of Men, and Men into that of Women, page 113.

3. That he transforms Men into the figure of Wolves, Cats, and other Beasts,
page 94.

4. That he may strengthen the memory of Man, and enlighten his understanding,
page 114.

5. That he may restore Youth to old Men, and repair their Faces.

6. That he may possess himself of the Body and Senses of a Man, and make him
as Exstatick.

7. That he may plunge Men into a deep Sleep, and make them capable of Fasting
whole years, page 104, 107.

8. That he may render Men invulnerable.

9. That he may cause all sorts of Diseases to Man, as also rid him of them, p.
102.

Sect. 17. I have kept the chief Article for the end; that is, That the Devil
carries over by night, through Windows and Chimnies, Magicians, Sorcerers, and
Witches, to the Sabbat, or their Assembling Place; though after all, many
Popish Writers deny it. But since it is the common Opinion, on which the very
Judges of Sorcerers partly lay the foundation of their Sentences, I intend not
to put it on the reckoning of the Papists in general, though our Author takes
it upon his own, page 67. and 80. For I will not wrong the Papists so much, as
to call it their own Sentiment, since there are Men amongst us that have the
same Opinion, as we shall hereafter: Yet there is one that is particular to
them, of which I have been informed of late by People that have lived amongst
them, and have seen a very, frequent practice of it, I mean the Monitores. When
any one has sustained a loss, or when it is desired to discover an important
Affair, or even a Trifle, a Monitory is obtained from the Bishop; which is an
act wherein the thing or the fact enquired after is specified. This Monitory is
published at the end of Parochial Masses, before all the People, and fastened to
the Doors of Churches, and at the corners of Streets, and after the expired
time, and necessary publications, they come to the ceremony of thundering it
out. After which it is certain, that three parts of the People believe and are
firmly persuaded, that those who knew any thing of the matter, and have not
gone in time to reveal it to the Rector, or other Priest commissioned by the
Bishop, never fail to fall into the possession of the Devil, to whom the
Monitory delivers them, after it is being thundered out, and that the Devil
transforms them most, or all the Nights, into Dogs, Cats, Wolves, Goats, and
other Animals, which is called to whurry as a Wolf. If one meet in the night
some Wild-Beast or a Domestic straying, he fancies to have met the Wolf-man,
and is ready to swear it. Some of the most thinking and less superstitious
part, at least believe that the Excommunication contained in those Monitories,
cuts off from the Communion of their Church, and delivers to the Demons those
that have not submitted to it, by revealing such things, as it is often very
convenient and useful to conceal.

Sect. 18. As all these things are said in general concerning the power of
wicked Spirits; so certain places are assigned to them, where they usually
produce their Effects: The common Opinion? is, that there are familiar Spirits,
Domestic, and Mountanous Devils.

1. The familiar Spirits, Spiritus Familiares, are those who always keep by a
Man, even when he calls not for them, whether they do it of their own accord,
or that they have been hired very cheap for that purpose. They serve him
faithfully, at least outwardly, whether or no he calls for them. They suffer
themselves to be shut up in Rings, Chrystals, Chests, and the like, and to be
carried away whither soever one pleases; These are the very words of Schottus,
page 134. Those Demons in Glass or Rings are according to the common Opinion,
shut in or fastened to them with some certain ceremonies used in that case; and
not by the virtue of any Conjurations or Exorcisms, nor by the power of him
that carries them, as it is believed by some; but they undergo this willingly,
or by the absolute order of the Prince of the Devils, whom they blindly obey;
or lastly, to deceive Men more easily. When they are in those sorts of Prisons,
and have been carried through several places, questions are put to them, and
sometimes they are forced to speak. Then they discover to Men hidden Things,
and foretell those that are to come. It is believed, that in our days a great
and victorious Prince carried one of these Spirits with him in his Ring, and
that he lost his sight in a Battle, a little after the Stone that was in the
Ring was broken into two pieces, page 143.

Sect. 19. Schottus and D^^^io relate out of Meletius, what is ordinarily said
concerning Domestic Devils. They withdraw into the most hidden places of the
house, upon piles of Wood, where they are kept with the most delicious Meat,
because they carry to their Masters Corn that they have stolen from other
People's Barns. When those Spirits intend to settle in any House, they make it
known by leaping up sticks of Wood, or throwing Dung into Pails of Milk. If the
Master of the House, taking notice of it, lets alone those* Sticks and the Dung
in the Milk, or even if he drinks of the Milk into which the Dung hat been
thrown, the Spirit appears to him, and lives with him. Those sorts of Spirits
are called by the French Gobelins, by the Dutch Guldelkens, and
Kabautermannekens, and by the English Hobgoblins. They appear in the shape of
Men and Women, as little as Dwarfs, or such as Pigmies were formerly imagined
to be. Schottus, says, That it was usual in former times to see many of those
Spirits in Houses, where they did whatever was necessary. They dr essed Horses,
they swept the House, carried Wood and Water, and did all sorts of Service,
page 145. he did well by saying 'twas formerly done, left he should be put to a
proof in this curious Age.

Sect. 20. He has taken from Georgius Agricola, the description he makes of
Mountanous Devils, saying, That they dwell in the Mines under the Mountains;
that they are cruel and frightful; that they make uneasy* and perpetually vex
those that work in the Mines: Some call them the little Hollanders, because
they ordinarily appear little, scarce three foot high, with an old wrinckled
Face, and in the same shape with the Miners, clothed with a Wastecoat and
Apron. Nevertheless, he says, that they are not so wicked as they love to play
Tricks, and to be merrily Roguish, especially when they will persuade that they
do the greatest part of the work in the Mines. When all is done, his Opinion
comes at last to this, that there are two sorts of that kind of Spirits, some
are good and the other bad; The latter are feared and detested by the Workmen,
whereas they look with pleasure upon the former, believing them to be of good
Augury. But Schottus being willing to grant that they are of a mean Order
betwixt Men and Spirits, holds them for bad Spirits, what good soever they may
do, believing that when it happens so they are forced to it by God, or that
they do it Craftily, to delude Men, Page 114. and 149.

Sect. 21. There is still more illusions made in relation to the shapes the
Devils take on, than in the other occasions abovementioned. I will not now
speak of whole Armies that are believed frequently to appear in order of
Battle, of which Schottus treats at large in the addition to his second Book*
p. 336. but of those that are called Hobgoblins and Fairies. Formally our
People speak almost of nothing else. Schottus writes thereupon, p. 339. Delrio
says, That there is a sort of Specter that appear as Women all in white, in
Woods and Meadows; Some are seen in Stables with Wax Candles lighted, some
drops of which they let fall upon the Mains of Horses, combing and twisting
them very neatly; those white Women are also called Sybils, and it is said, that
one of 'em named Haband, is as the Queen of the others, and commands them.
People believe their Apparitions to be of good Omen; but the Doctors look on
such presages as old Women's Tales, acknowledging in the mean while, that the
thing is true, or at least possible: And Schottus relating, p. 215. what
Cornelius of Kempen says, assures us, that in the time of the Emperor Lotarius,
that is about 830. several of those Fairies were to be found in Friseland,
where they dwelt in Grotes, or on the tops of Hills and Mountains, whence they
descended at night, to carry away Shepherds from their Flocks, Children from
their Cradles, and slip both into their Caverns.

CHAP. XX. What is the Doctrine of Popery concerning Apparitions of Spirits,
and how they torment Men, either by themselves, or by the Ministry of other Men.
Sect. 1. IN speaking of this last kind of Demons we are descended by degrees,
even to Specters and Phantasms. But First, we have observed that there were yet
two things to treat of, touching Spirits, that is, their Apparitions to Men,
and their Operations in the same. It is upon this subject of Apparitions, that
there is room to speak of Phantasms; which, according to the opinion of the
Papists, are good and bad Angels, or Souls of the deceased, which become
visible, or which are understood without being seen; either that they speak
intelligibly, or that they make only some sound and noise. There is yet this
difference in their Apparitions, that there are some Souls, which whether they
manifest themselves visibly, or whether they are only heard, work some effects,
whereas there are others, that operate nothing. Schottus freely teaches us many
things, which relates to them, that is, First, in what places Specters chiefly
used to appear; Secondly, what Specters and Phantasms are; Thirdly what they
act; Fourthly, to whom they particularly appear; Fifthly, what means there are
to avoid them, and be rid of them.

Sect. 2. Those places where Phantoms appear, Schottus persuades himself, that
there is no place in the World but that may happen. However, that there are
some, where it happens more frequently than elsewhere. As, 1. In Deserts* and
in solitary places, he grounds his opinion upon Scripture, Isai. 33.14. Apoc.
18.2. Tob. 8.3. And confirms it by the consideration of that which happened to
our Savior Jesus Christ himself, St. Matthew, Chap. 4. St. Luke, Chap. 4. It
is for this reason that the good St. Anthony was so hardly dealt with in the
Desert, by all sorts of Hobgoblings and Spirits, Page 226. 2. If one were in
the humor also, to believe a sort of Water Demons, our Author would very often
make them appear in Ponds and Marshes, Page 227. 3. If the Pagans have had,
since a long time, Gods of the Groves, the Christians will not deny but that
there are such, for they say that there are particular Phantoms in Woods and
Meadows, Page 229. 4. When they are to fight any bloody Battle, or after it has
been fought, many Specters have often been seen in the field of Battle, Page
230. 5. Phantasms often appear in Baths and Stoves, Page 232. 6. Which happens
also in Fortresses and Castles, Page 234. 7. In Mines and Caverns, as it has
been said before concerning Mountain Gods. Page 235. 8. There are seen more
Apparitions in places where Murderers and Thieves haunt, than in other places.
Page 235. 9. Holy Cloisters, Churches, and Temples of God's Worship, are not
also exempted. Page 237. As for me, I am very much persuaded that there is no
place in the World, where there are more Delusions and Apparitions made, or
rather, deceitful Visions, than in those places. 10. So it is no marvel, that
the same happens to every particular person in his House. Page 238.


Sect. 3. If one asks, what it is that appears, or What these Fantomes are, you
will not fail to be immediately satisfied. Sometimes they are good Angels but
most frequently evil Spirits, Souls of the deceased. However, in this occasion
there is said touching Angels very little, and that very uncertain; fortassis
etiam Angeli boni; sometimes perhaps good Angels, says Schotus. Page 247. But
concerning Demons he affirms very neatly, and with a great assurance, that they
are not all alike wicked. Because Phantasms are distinguished in mites and
tetric^s seu truculentos; in good and cruel: that which is found explained in
the same place by these words taken out of Cassien, touching some unpure
Spirits, as are ordinarily called Faunos, Faunes, Kabautermannakens, or
Hobgoblins; it is notorious that they delude Men, as by way of sport and
pastime, so that in certain places they post themselves ordinarily in the way,
and take them up, however, without tormenting the passengers; they are
contented to laugh at them, and make raillery, and play them some pleasant
pranks. And they seem rather to have a design to tire them, than to give them
any displeasure. But it is also known, there are others so evil and so cruel,
that it does not satisfy them to torment People, and cruelly to tear them
where they come, (this ought to be understood of the possessed) But they will
attack those who pass by, although at the same time they are a great way off, and
horribly treat them. See one that says he knows them very well himself; and
further, that no body is ignorant of it, he relyes upon his own persuasion, and
does applaud himself for it. Would it not be more mischievous than the Will
with a wisp himself, that sets upon passengers to suspect and confute his
belief? However, he is but a little while to be quiet, for we cannot avoid
troubling him, and showing his Error.

Fourth. The Souls of the deceased are either saved or damned, it is held for
certain, that those that are happy, are often seen to appear to holy Men for
their good, and that they appear still. The Legends contain an infinite number
of examples, which have been compiled from all sorts of Histories, even of
those which are the least worthy of credit, and that are enriched with a great
many new ornaments that have been lent them in compiling of the work. But there
are none which appear so worthy of remark as these apparitions of Souls, which
happen in consequence of Covenants, that have been made betwixt Holy People in
their life time, that is, when two or more have mutually promised, that who
should die first, should appear to the other, and come and tell him news of the
estate he was in, whether in Purgatory or in Heaven. The Author makes no doubt,
but the thing happens as it is agreeds; but he dares not decide, whether such
an agreement be lawful, in which case he believes, it must be made by a
particular inspiration from God, p. 333.

Sect. 5. There is no more doubt of the apparitions of Souls that are damned,
and they are grounded upon proofs of the same certainty, as the former.
Schottus reports an example drawn from Bencius and Delrio, which appears so
strong and convinceing, that he expresses himself thus at the end. It is a
story which is confirmed by the belief generally given to it, it is publicly
in all places, by many Books, and by a great number of letters, and the thing
has happened in the time and place mentioned. It is a Question to know, if any
thing may not be false or mixed with any falsity, because it has been published
a long time without being contradicted, either in word or writing? but it would
be too long to treat upon this Question here, it will be proper in another
place. However, if this History be true, it might confirm the sentiments of the
Papists, which say, That the Souls of the damned appear here upon Earth to the
living, to present to them, in a frightful manner, the torments they suffer in
Hell, to the end, they may bring them by that, to repent and leave off Sinning.

Sect. 6. Our Jesuit is too wise to speak much himself of Purgatory, he leaves
that to others; he held nevertheless with those of his Faith, That the Souls of
the deceased desire often of the living, the help of their Prayers and good
works, and that by consequence, the Souls in whatsoever place they may be,
expect those that are entered into Heaven, or into Hell, appear to Men, p. 253.
We see that he will not much trouble us with Purgatory, and instead of
perplexing himself with a determined place, he chooses rather to be at large,
in placeing Souls in loco dispensationis, in a place of dispensation; such as
the Schoolmen have forged it, whose Opinion, some of ours find not condemnable,
in what place soever those Souls may be, the Papists believe certainly, that
they appear often to Men, to the ends that have been mentioned. It is also the
common Opinion, that the greatest part of the Souls, are not those that are in
Paradise or in Hell; but those that dwell between those two places, or in
Purgatory; for frequent journeys from Heaven to Earth would too much disturb
the repose of the Souls, that are there; and Hell keep its Captives too closely
confined, to give them so much liberty; and if it be permitted me to divert the
public, I shall say, it would bring no profit to the Churches Coffers, whose
fire of Purgatory makes the pot boil much better, then all the flames of Hell
do, or all the heat of the Celestial fire.

Sect. 7. If one would know what all those fantoms do in the World, Schottus
will not fail to inform you, and even to mark with a great deal of care and
exactness, many different manners, in which they show themselves p. 269, etc.

First. They appear to the sight under diverse figures, as well of Men, as of
Beasts, or frightful Monsters.

Second. The Ears are often struck without seeing any thing, and even sometimes
in such an extraordinary manner, that it causes astonishment and fear: p. 271.

Third. The touch has it is share in it, if what the Author says be true, That
they move them sometimes to touch Men without doing them any harm, but at other
times, they push them so, that they drive them with violence, they make them
fall down, bruise them and beat them, that they even trouble them, and tempt
them to Letchery. p. 273.

Sect. 8. It is likewise necessary to know that which is written Concerning the
figure of bodies, in which Phantasms appear, he says, p. 287. That the Abbot
Trithemeus, Thyreus, Delrius, and others, (whence it apperrs, that it is the
common Opinion,) relate, Certain signs, by which one may know, if whether
Spirits who present themselves in a corporeal form, are Angels or Men, good
Angels or Devils; Souls of the blessed or damned; or Souls which are in
Purgatory to be purified there. However, he affords not a very ample
instruction upon this point, for the chief matter that he says of it, is, That
the Souls of the blessed appear with an Air of content and joy; that the Souls
which are in Purgatory have a more doleful countenance; but that those of the
damned, have a more frightful aspect with signs of despair. And tho it be the
common Opinion, that there are always some defects, or something disfigured in
the body, in which the Devil presents himself; notwithstanding, neither our
Jesuit, nor Delrius, holds it for certain; see that which the first puts for
certain, and as generally believed, p. 291. It is that when the Devil appears
and speaks, he always speaks the language of the Country where he is, so that
he must understand more languages than Mithridates; or every Devil can appear
but in his proper Country. But the voice of a Specter is always perplexed,
trembling, weak, and as muttering, as tho it were understood through a Tub, or
through the cheft of an Earthen Vessel, for says Schottus, The Devil can speak
no better. See according to this Author, and those of his belief, a good mark
to know him.

Sect. 9. We must not omit that which is given out as a thing certain, that a
Phantasm feels always cold when one touches it, Cardan and Alexander ab
Alexandro, are witnesses, that affirm it, and Cajetan gives a reason, that he
has learned from the Devil's own mouth, who being asked by a Witch concerning
this subject, answered, that the thing must needs be so, and that it could not
be otherwise; the Cardinal explained the words of the Devil in this sense, that
he will not communicate to a body he takes, that moderate heat which is so
agreeable, or that God will not permit him. The Witch was contented with that
positive answer, without putting the Question further.

Sect. 10. The Question now is to know, who they are which oftenest see
Specters? our Author answers pertinently to this Question, p. 292 and 293. And
his words deserve very well to be reported, as they are. The Souls which are in
Purgatory, appear rather to the Faithful then to the Excommunicated, or to
Infidels; and among these first, they appear rather to their Parents, to their
Allies, and to those which belong to them, in any manner whatsoever, then they
do to Strangers, because that they hope for succor from them, which they cannot
hope from others. The Souls of the damned appear particularly to those which
have been the cause of their loss, and of the torments they suffer. The
apparitions of Devils are made also with reference to the ruins of those they
persecute, and their ill will for Mankind, whom they take pleasure to torment.
On the first respect, those who are charged with a greater number of Sins have
most to suffer, in the second, the most Virtuous Men are the more exposed to
their attacks.

Sect. 11. After the Specters, let us come to the possessest, refering the
remedies against these two accidents, to the following Chapter. That which
happens to the possessed, gives occasion to know more particularly what the Devil
can act, Possessing, says Schottus, is an inevitable torment to Man from the
Devil, which is in his body, who acts there, and keeps him in his power for a
certain time. p. 521. Which he unfolds more particularly afterward, but as
there has been lately published, an History of the Devils of Loudun, and of a
possession very famous, said to have happened in the Town, the circumstances of
which, give a great deal of light upon this point, we will allege that which
will be proper for this subject, referring a more strict examination to our 4th
Book, which we shall not be afraid to do, nothwithstanding the Author appears
to be a Protestant, because that the most part of the stories this History
contains, are gathered from many Ecclesiastic Books, where they are grounded
upon Authentic public acts; and that the possession was declared true by a
decree of the Bishop. It was also confirmed by the blood of a Priest, who was
executed for a Magician, after having been condemned by an act made by a
sentence of Judges Commissioner sent by the French King, to examine this
affair, see then yet what Schottus says. p. 533. etc.

First. That a Man may be possessed by all sorts of evil Spirits, of what order
soever they may be, for it has been said in the 19th Chapter Sect. 8. That the
Devils are divided into different orders, and the History of the Devils of
Loudun, shows us, that one Elizabeth Blancheard, said to be possessed by six
Devils; by Astaroh and the coal of uncleanness, by the order of Angels; by
Beelzebub and the Lion of Hell, of the order of Archangels; by Perou and Marou,
of the order of Cherubins. p. 255.

Second. That all persons of what Sex, Age, Condition, or Religion soever they
may be, whatsoever kind of life they lead, either good or bad, may be possessed
by Devils.

Third. Although the most part are possessed without their consent, and in spite of
them, by evil Spirits, it is believed, sometimes, that there are some which
consent to it, there are those to whom are attributed Spirits of Pithon, who
divine by means of the Devil. Schottus p. 550.

Sect. 12. This Author explains to us more precisely, in what manner the Devil
enters into Men, and how he works.

First. Granting he can cloth all sorts of bodies as he pleases, and according
as God permits him, he can sometimes go and come, enter into Man, and come out
invisibly, and sometimes, also visibly and under the figures of small Beasts,
or insects, as Ants, Flies, Spiders, or under those little birds. This is the
common Opinions of Popish writers, although Schottus is not very much for it. p.
539. But he is in the wrong, for here is a proof, at least, as to his invisible
going in, and coming out, in the History of the Devils of Loudun; where it is
said, that a Devil called Bihemot, being gone out to seek a new Covenant, the
guardian Angel of the Nun that he possessed, seized upon him and bound him for a
Month, under the Picture of St. Joseph in the Church. p. 405. And that this
Religious fancyed, as tho I know not what should have gone out from her head,
which removed from her, as the Devil retired farther; and afterward the Devil
himself declared, that after having been tied in his body not to part from it,
he had at present, as well as his companions, the liberty of coming too and
fro. p. 408.

Second. Schottus howevever agrees, that evil Spirits give to the possessed, the
faculty of speaking strange languages that they never learned, and of revealing
secrets, which they could not know of themselves. p. 540. So it is that the Nun
of Loudun spoke Latin the best he could, assuring that she had never learned
it. History of the Devils of Loudun. And so it is that the Demons discovered to
the Jesuit surin, secret matters, in his thought or in his person. p. 273. or
that they went to kiss the right hand of one of the exorcists, for that the
Duke of Orleance had so desired it, and had declared his desire to another
exorcist. p. 297. Upon which one of them has writ, that the Devils answered
often to interrogatories, made to them by the exorcists, without expressing
them otherwise then by the inferior direction of their thoughts. p. 104. See
there the last effort of Divination to divine thoughts hidden, and in no ways
expressed.

Third. Schottus says in other places, that the principal operations of the
Devil, are made in the body of the possessed, and that they art little or nothing
upon the Soul; and that for this reason, they cannot make a Man loose his
Faith, nor Hope, nor Charity p. 534. But the Devil Isaacarum who knew more of
it then our Author, says, that Behemet had not only vexed Job in his body, but
that he had also troubled his Soul: and that it is for this reason, that he
sinned not in all that he said: History of the Devils of Loudun. Page 374.

Sect. 13. See what the Devil can do, and what he does very often, according to
the opinions of the Roman Catholics; be it that he makes use of the Ministry
of Men in these occasions, or that he uses them nor; those that he imployes in
his Ministry, are called Sorcerers, Enchanters, and Magicians. It Is steadfastly
believed, that those People have given themselves to the Devil, and have
covenanted with him, and signed it with their own Blood; That the Devil on his
part is observed to do all they desire during the course of their life, and
that the Magicians on their part give themselves to the Devil, and put
themselves into his possession all their days, or for a certain time that they
have mutually agreed together. If you would see an example very particular of
such a contract, you need but read the History of the Devils of Loudun, Page
271. but you cannot read it without being amazed. The Magicians, in consequence
of their Covenants, are to enjoy a great deal of pleasure, which will be
procured to them by the Devil, to do a great deal of mischief to others, and
cause a great deal of damage to their Cattle, and to their other Goods. Their
pleasure consists in solemn Assemblies, which are held in the night in places
the Devil appoints, and where he appears in all sorts of Figures: there they
dance, drink and eat in excess, and the Men and Women mix themselves carnally
together, and with the Devil himself, who for that purpose, sometimes
transforms himself into a Man, sometimes into a Woman. The Wizards and Witches
are transported through the' Windows, to places where they assemble, by virtue of
a certain Ointment they anoint themselves with; they ride mounted upon the
Devil, as upon a Horse, for he is obliged to serve them; and for this purpose
he transforms himself into a Goat, or some other Animal. Sometimes there are in
those Assemblies, strange Sacrifices, for the History of the Devils of Loudun
writes, Page 153. That they force the Devil Leviathan to surrender a Contract
written upon the flesh of the Heart of an Infant, taken in a Sabbat, held at
Orleans, and of the Ashes of a burnt Host.

Sect. 14. The disorders that they cause to Men, are to mischief their persons,
or their Cattle, to stir up Tempests, to spoil the Corn of the field, to breed
Disputes, to disturb the Society of Men, by a thousand means; some times they
do good with an eye to proper advantage; for some Money they discover things
lost; they declare if one is bewitched, or if not, and by whom it has been;
they teach what must be done to cure them that are so, or they cure them
themselves. Of this, Bodin in his Book, entitled Daemonamania shall fully
instruct, the reader, that will take the pains to read him. For no Authors are
more large upon that subject, than he and Delrio. In the mean while we will
look into their Sentiments, related by Schotus, more plainly than in their own
Books.

Sect. 15. He defines this unlawful Magic, upon which subject the Reader will
not forget the distinction heretofore made, Chap. 4. Sect 2. and 7. A Power by
which Man works certain wonders, which surpass ordinary Understanding, which is
done, not by any Art, nor by the force of his proper Faculties, nor by the
application of natural Causes, but by the assistanc of tha Devil, by virtue of
an agreement made with him. Mag. Universe. Page 1. Lib. 1. in Proleg. Chap. 7.
he establishes these sorts of Covenants as certain, distinguishing them into
two kinds; those which are made expressly with intention, and of deliberated
purpose; And those which are tacitly made. But we shall hereafter hear
Sennertus explaining himself more at large upon this subject. However, we find
in the same place, as well as in Schotus's Books this Maxim established as
certain, Quod Magicae hujus vis omnis nititur pacto, vel tacit vel expresso
cum Demone, ut probat Delrius, etc. That all the force of this Magic, depends
on an agreement made tacitly or expressly with the Devil, as Delrius proves it,
etc.

Sect. 16. This Author says further, That from the consideration of the ends
the Magicians have, viz. to act marvelous things by the Devils power, chiefly
proceed three sorts of Witchcraft; for they have sometimes, no other end but to
acquire the Art and Industry of producing miraculous effects for their proper
advantage or pleasure; or that of others: they sometimes endeavor to discover
things to come, or to know things past, and such present at are secret and
hidden, and cannot be discovered by any human power; sometimes they have no
other end but to acquire the Power, the Art, and the Means to hurt Men. This is
not the place to tell what the Papists believe Magicians are able to do, and
what in effect they do; because, in the preceding Chapter, one has seen what is
the power that Popery attributes to the Devil, who are likewise capable to
effect by the Ministry of Men, that is to say, of Wizards and Witches,
according to the conditions of their Leagues, all that they effect themselves.

Sect. 17. It will not be, however, besides the purpose, to cite Bodin, who
tells you in very precise terms, the Second Book, Chap. 4. how Men expressly
make Leagues with the Devil. And I grant that if it be true, that they are such
as he says, I am obliged to hold with him; these People for the most execrable
of all Men, since they renounce God and his worship, if they are in the
Communion of the Church; or that they abjure their Faith, if they acknowledge
not the true God, or if they are of some particular Sect, and engaged in
Superstitions, which is done in an express Covenant, to acknowledge the Devil,
and to adore none but him. He adds a little after, Sometimes the express
Obligation is but verbal, and without any writing; but sometimes it is also
confirmed by writing, for the Devil resolving to be sure of them who seek him
before he proposes any Covenant between him and them, he makes them give a
promise in writing (if they can write) and sign it with their own Blood. He
adds, further, that this obligation is made either for two, years, or for a
longer time; And as if the Devil feared that those that are wholly obliged to
him, should come to retract this, he is not contented to make them renounce God
in terms very precise; but besides, he makes an impression upon them.

CHAP. XXI. That several means are practiced against Attacks, and the Illusions
of the Devil and Magicians.
Sect. 1. I Know not whether I must put the rest I have to say upon the account
of the Papists only, there being but very few of our Profession who do not
believe it as they do, as I shall show in the next Chapter. I shall report only
in this, what means Popery affords to avoid all sorts of Devils and Specters,
and to divert them from us. The First means consists in the resistance, which
is sufficient against their Malice. The Second, consists in the finding out of
those that are guilty of these Abominations. And the Third, in the Punishments
that these People are thought to deserve. Schottus shall furnish me with that
which I have to say touching the first of these means: And I shall take from
other Writings what I am to relate concerning the second and third, to which I
shall join that which may be learned by experience.

Sect. 2. Our Author, who warrants that which he says, rejects diverse means,
and establishes many others; we must hear him as well upon those which he
rejects, as those he establishes. See these he rejects.

1. Malignant Injuries and Outrages never drive away Spirits, but some
insulting terms that are made use of in Exorcisms, which have been introduced
into the Church, contribute very much to expel them, page 304.

2. Neither Pike nor Sword, nor any other sort of Arms will oblige them to
retire, page 305.

3. Neither Fire nor Light that are not Consecrated, have any virtue for this
purpose, p. 308.

4. Neither will they withdraw, though they find the Doors and Windows open
before them, p. 308.

5. Though it is the Opinion of many People, who are of the Author's Profession,
that Spirits may be driven away by Smoke, by Perfumes, by certain Herbs, and by
Blows with Stones, they hold nevertheless, That no natural Virtue that may be
in material Subjects, can act directly upon Spirits, and that by consequence
there are no sensible subjects, such as those (as have been just now mentioned)
which may always expel Spirits from the places where they are, nor drive them
far from Men, page 308. and 312.

Sect. 3. On the contrary, he holds that the means following are absolutely
effective.

1. At first he stablishes two, against which there is nothing to say; which
are, a steadfast Faith, and an ardent Prayer, p. 214, 215. for they are conform
to the Maxims of Scripture. This sort of Devils cannot be cast out but by
Prayers and Fastings, St. Matthew. 17.20, 21.

2. But he establishes five others, which are invented purely by Popery. First,
The Relics of Holy Bodies; or, to say better, of those who are taken for such.
Secondly, The Sign of the Cross. Thirdly, Holy Water. Fourthly, Agnus Dei, that
is, the Lamb of God, imprinted upon a little round figure of Wax, and
consecrated by the Pope. They have, says Schottus, a ready virtue and
efficacious, virtutem praestantissimam, to put the Devil to flight, p. 322.
Fifth, To pronounce the name of Jesus, and to call upon the Virgin Mary his
Mother, p. 324. All these means are explained, every one in particular, in the
same place. They are also described, but a little more abridged, although in
the same sense, by John Davidi, Jesuit, in his Book Entitled, the Buckler,
printed at Balduc, in the year 1619. I shall report his own Words, lest the
Roman Catholics should accuse me of imposing upon them: See what he writes in
the 10th Chapter. Amongst the Consecrated things which have power against the
ambushes of the Enemy, we must rank these here. Holy Water, which is every
Sunday consecrated in the Church, and has its name from that Consecration. The
Baptismal Water that is Consecrated on the Vigils of Easter and Whitsuntide.
The Holy Water, that is called Gregory Water, that the Bishops consecrate with
Salt, Ashes, and Wine, therewith to consecrate Altars, and for other Holy Uses.
The Candels that are wont to be Consecrated upon the Feasts of the
Purification. The Branches Consecrated on Palm Sunday; Every one of those
operates its effect in being used in the same manner that they have been
Consecrated, besprinkling with Water, lighting of Candles, and putting or
planting the Branches in some particular place. The Agnus Dei's that are worn
about the Neck, or other places, according to the veneration due to them, being
Consecrated by the Pope himself, have also a Sovereign virtue to keep the
Christian from the Snares, and from all the evil designs of the Enemy, or to
preserve him by Sea and Land, from Fire or Water, and all other Perils. The
sign of the Cross is also of a Mavelous use on these occasions; It being the
Christians Duty to be always ready to make against all the Temptations the
Enemy can give them, as well within as without. The Church makes a profitable
use of it in all its Consecrations, in its Blessings, in the Administration of
the Holy Sacrament; but especially in the Exorcisms of Evil Spirits, and in the
Conjurations which are made upon People tormented by them: All which things are
practiced to resist the Wiles and Mischiefs of the Devil; and to repulse his
Attacks, to weaken his Force, and destroy his Power.

Sect. 4. The Roman Church alone, according to this Author, has the power to
use effectually these means, which it calls Spiritual. For see what he says,
All that which is not efficacious of it self, nor by some natural Virtue, nor
by the Institution and Power of God, both which are found in the Sacraments;
nor by the Ordinance of the Church, which acts but according to the Word of
God, and by the Virtue he communicates to her: All that, I say, which is not
efficacious by some one of these means, from which alone the Remedies employed
in any occasion whatsoever can draw their force; If one dares undertake to make
use of these things, and to apply them for Remedies, it is an action basely
Superstitious and opposite to the Will of God and his Word. Afterward he
begins the 11th Chapter in these Terms. As to the Sacred Word, whose power
affects the Enemy, the Exorcisms, or the Conjurations which are ordained by the
Church, have a particular Virtue: Such are the Exorcisms that are made use of
by the Ritual of Rome, and those that are found in the Manual made for the
Archbishopric of Malines, seen and approved by the Doctors of the Universities
of Lovain. If one has the curiosity to see all these Doctrines reduced into
practice, he needs but Read the History of the Devils of Loudun, which has been
already cited, where he will see from one end to the other, the usages of the
Roman Church concerning Conjurations and Exorcisms, which are unknown to all
other Religions, and of which those that read them have cause to be surprised.

Sect. 5. See how they proceed to find out the guilty, and particularly in
Germany. It is sufficient only to have the reputation of being a Sorcerer, and
you are as soon imprisoned, and interrogated; if you deny it, you are put to the
Torture, even two or three times; if you confess, you pronounce your own
Sentence, even of Condemnation. It is a long time since they take for a mark of
Conviction, when the Accused being in the hands of Justice, cannot cry, which
proof was found in the Process of the Curate that was burnt at Loudun, History
of the Devils of Loudun, etc. Page 201. for the Exorcist told him, Praecipio ut
si sis innocens, effin^das lachrymas. I command you to shed tears if thou art
in ocent, which not having done, they reported it for a proof of his crime,
that he shed no tears in suffering the wrack, nor after having suffered it,
when he was exorcised with the Exorcisme and Magicians. But, because it is
believed that the Devil will serve his subjects or confidents, with all the
skill and power he is capable of, there is a great deal of care taken to leave
nothing upon the Criminals, for fear that there should remain upon them some
hidden charm, by which means they may deliver themselves. For this reason they
take from them all their Clothes, and examine at the same time, whether they
have the Devils mark. So the Men and the Women are stripped naked, and all the
Hair is shaved off their Bodies: after this manner they used the Curate of
Loudun, for to prevent the help that he might hope to have from the Devils. A
Capucin Friar exorcised the Air, the Earth, and other Elements, Page 207. The
Corners, the Woods, and the Hammers of the Rack 208. they took off his Clothes
and gave him others, Page 205. he was shaved all over, and searched to find out
the Devil's marks upon his Body, Page 130. But not to be deceived in the
judgment, that shall be made of the crime, or of the innocence of the Accused;
the Jesuit David's reports four principal manners of making proofs, which is to
the purpose to mention here. They use a red hot Iron, hot Water, or cold Water,
and a Balance.

Sect. 6. I find the three first means in the first Book of the description of
America, of A Mountanus which appears to be taken from Boxhoorneus, thus they
are related. The Ordallia (which is the name given to this way of poof) was
Preached in the Low Countries after this manner, when any was accused for not
being a good Catholic or of being a Sorcerer, he fasted three days, in the
sight of the Priest, at the end of which, he went to Church, the Priest
clothed in his sacredotal Habits put upon burning Coals near the Altar, an
Iron wedge besprinkled with Holy Water. He sung the Song of the three Children
in the fiery Furnace, he said Mass, he put the Host in the mouth of the
accused, and prayed to God that it would please him to discover the crime of
Magic, of which he was suspected, in suffering that his Hand in which he was
putting the red hot Iron, might be burnt, or that he might not receive any hurt,
if he were innocent. These Prayers being finished, the accused was to go nine
steps in carrying the burning Iron in his Hand, after which the Priest wrapped up
has Hand, and sealed the covering that was put to it. The third day he took off
the seal to consider his Hand, whether it was sound and without wound,
otherwise the unhappy accused had but to resolve to be burnt alive all covered
with Paper, painted all over with Devils.

Sect. 7. The Ketelvang was no less painful, they had in the Church a Caldorn
full of boiling Water, upon which they had made the most terrible Conjurations,
that can be imagined, after which, to come to the conviction or to the
justification of the accused, he was obliged to put his Arm naked up to the
elbow, in the boiling Water, as hot as could be. This usage must be very
Ancient, and proceeded from Paganism, according to that which has been remarked
hereupon, touching the Ancients. Chap. 3. Sect. 18.

Sect. 8. We have a little more knowledge of the proof by cold Water, which has
been more common common than the others, and has been practiced long ago in the
West of England, of which we shall have occasion to speak hereafter. Montanus
has made likewise a short description of it. It was also customary to make use
of a proof by cold water in Canals, Brooks and Ditches; the Priest conjured the
Water, he tied the Thumb of the accused to his great Toe, one upon another in
form of a Cross, and threw him in to the water; if he sunk, to the bottom, he
was declared innocent; but if he was buoyed up on the water, he was condemned
as guilty.

Sect. 9. There is as yet a more particular proof, which is practiced in
Holland, although, not upon the Dutch themselves, but upon stranger, that are
weighed in a Balance. The Papist inhabitants of the Bishopric of Munster,
Cologne, and Paderborne, and many other more distant places have made use,
since the time of the Emperor Charles, to this day, of the public weights of
the Town D'Oudewater in this same Province. It is what I am going to tell you
more precisely by the contents of a Letter written by one of the Bourgomasters
of Oudewater to a friend of his, and related at the beginning of a little Book,
entitled (Sure means not to pass sentence of death unjustly.) The Bourgomaster
says chiefly in his Letter, answering to questions that had been put to him:
That all those that came from that Country for this purpose, unanimously
complained, that they had been unjustly accused of Magic in their Country, and
that if they were so unhappy as not to find proofs of their innocence in the
weights of the Town of Oudewater, with which it was necessarily required, their
Bodies should be in equal weight, for their justification; they ran a danger
upon their return of loosing their Life and Estate: Because the common belief
of that Country is, that those, who weigh less than the weight that is put
against them into the other part of the balance, (such as agreed upon, as will
be presently seen) are undoubtedly Sorcerers. The Burgomaster adds, that the
late Secretary Hoy had told him, that in his time there was a certain
Inhabitant of the upper Country, who having had a difference with one of his
Companions, he caused a discourse through the Country, that the other was a
Wizard: Some advised this pretended Sorcerer to go into Holland, and to be
weighed with the weights of Oudewater, to the end he might take off, by this
means, the calumny. He goes thither, but whether out of stupidity, imprudence,
or fear, or for not being well informed of what must be practiced, he returned
into his own Country without being weighed. They did not fail to ask him
whether he had undergone this Trial, which he could not show; upon which
suspicions being increased, it was believed he was found too light, and that he
was guilty. The discourse being come to the Ears of the Judge of the place, he
gave order to take him up; but he s^ed, and was concealed with a person to whom
had happened very near the like adventure, who advised him to return to
Oudewater; and indeed they went thither together. The accused was weighed in
the Scales of the Town, and returning into his Country, brought with him, at
this time, all the Certificates of the proof he had undergone, And then he was
re-established into his good Fame; and his Estate that was seized by the Judge,
was restored to him.

Sect. 10. Upon the second Question which was made to the Burgomaster of
Oudewater, he answered, That there is no fi^^d weight for to weigh people; but
they look upon their bulk, and at sight they proportion the weight to it. Upon
the Third demand to know where this practice had taken its Original; He
answered, that he could discover nothing of it. But that nevertheless, it
appeared from all these matters of fact, that (...) ^^lla^c of the Town of
Oudewater is in reputation in the Country, as has been spoken of, to produce
this effect, so that there are often persons that come thither to be weighed,
who have brought particular recommendations from the Town or Country they lived
in. They say further, that the Emperor Charles the Fifth gave this Privilege to
the Town of Oudewater, gave because of the faithfulness that is made use of
upon this occasion; and because they had discovered a certain Cheat, which was
practiced in the neighboring Village. However, it is but a public discourse,
and without certainty.

Sect. 11. I approve very much the judgment the Author makes of this practice,
but it is a thing I ought not to say here, to the end, not to create in the Mind
of any, prejudice upon the subject I treat of. However, this same Author which
has furnished me with all this Relation, and has not put his name but by N. B.
A. says, That during two years that he has lived at Oudewater, they have
weighed many persons for the same purpose. I have learned likewise since, that
this use still continues as yet, and pretended Sorcerers are there still.

Sect. 12. There are not many things to say touching the punishment inflicted
upon Wizards and Witches in Popish Countries, more especially in Germany. It
being undeniable, and generally received, that they deserve to be burned alive;
it is rarely seen that they are treated with less rigor. If the number of those
which have lost their lives in diverse places, and at diverse times upon this
occasion, might be brought together, and put in Arms, they would be more than
sufficient to destroy the enemy of the Christian name, and entirely destroy its
Empire. We shall make this examination in our Third Book, and the review of the
proceedings of the Magicians, to which the same Treatise of Sure means, etc.
will be of great use.

CHAP. XXII. That neither the Opinions that are received among us' nor our
Practices go usually so far; and that is for that reason, that our Authors are
not found to agree so well together, upon this subject.
I will at present leave the Papists and pass to the Protestants, whose
Religion and Doctrine is more pure. They suffer not themselves to stray so much
as others, about the matter in hand; for neither believing Purgatory, nor
admitting the invocation of Angels and deceased Saints, they cannot likewise
agree in their Opinions with the Papists, concerning apparitions and the
operations of Spirits, more especially in relation to these two points; and the
consequences that are necessarily drawn from thence, when they are admitted.
However it must be observed, that the belief and practices of the Lutherans
upon this subject, come much nearer those of Popery than the belief of the
People of our Communion. It is also to be considered, that there is among the
Protestants in general, a great deal of difference between the common People
and the learned; it is true, that there is likewise to be discovered some
difference between those two kinds of People* among the Papists, and even among
the Pagans. There appears no less among the Men of Letters in particular, some
holding the common belief and helping it, others rejecting it, and others at
least taking a kind of a medium between those two parties; so there are found
among us People, who believe almost all that is said of Witchcraft and
Specters. There are others, who deny all most all, but the greatest part,
partly admit that which is ordinarily said, and partly reject it. That being
supposed, we must still understand with relation to this distinction, what I
have to say in this work touching that of the reformed Religion. But however,
to abridge my discourse rather than extend it, it will be necessary, first to
propose the common Opinion and the ordinary practice; and afterward the
Opinion of People the most sensible, and the most thinking part.

Sect. 2. We frequently hear People make a great deal of discourse concerning
Apparitions, Phantomes, Witchcraft, and things of that nature. It is believed
in general, that Angels have been from the beginning all created by God, of
which one part having revolted against him, are become Devils. But afterward
continuing to speak of the Devil, he is spoken of as singly as the Enemy of
Mankind, and chiefly of the faithful, hunting continually after occasions of
doing ill. There is every where had a high Opinion of his understanding, power,
and action; he is conceived, or at least spoken of as one, and yet they make
him to be present in all places, he acts every where, he spies and sets his
Hand to every thing. I Will explain this here something more particularly.

Sect. 3. They attribute to him such an extraordinary knowledge, that it is
pretended he understands better all the mysteries of the Gospel, than all the
most learned and most understanding Divines, that he observes all our thoughts,
that he mixes with and acts upon them, from him proceed apparitions, and
presages, by which Men are advised of future things, before they happen to
them, more particularly when they are threatened with the death of some of their
friends, or some other evil accident. It is believed further, that a Divine may
declare where one shall find what is lost, whether a Man is bewitched, and who
is the Author of the mischief, and what means there are to deliver him and many
other such like things.

Sect. 4. The Opinion of the power of the Devil, has been doubtless urged to
excess, for neither God nor Jesus Christ have ever done any thing great or
mavelous but the People ascribe to the Devil, I have shown before in some
manner, Chapter 18. Sect. 6. That those thoughts proceeded from the Manichees. When
God permits him he can appear to Men in all sorts of figures, not only in those
of good and bad Men living or Dead, but also in those of several Beasts; from
this same principle comes the belief that is still in being, that wicked
debauched People transform themselves also by the power of the Devil, making
use of means designed for this purpose, into many shapes of Beasts, as of
Wolves, but particularly into that of Cats, and being so transfigured they pass
though the quarrel of a glass window, or the hole of a Bell, to go in the night
to the Sabat, as I have already said; or rather they ride on Horseback upon a
stick up the Chimney, and this belief to this time cannot be rooted out among
us, from the mind of the People; further it is imagined, that these same People
may, with the cooperation of the Devil, stir up tempests, shut the wind up into
a Handkerchief, and let it out when they will, which however is seldom
attributed but to the Laplanders and to Finlanders, to which the stories that
are made of their practices, have given occasion, so great is the credulity of
the People, even for the most absurd thing; they persuade themselves also, that
these People devoted to the Devil, learn of him the secret of making certain
ointments, by which they make themselves invulnerable against Swords or
Muskets; and that they obtain likewise great many other advantages from their
Master.

Sect. 5. It is not doubted but leagues are made between the Devil and
Magicians, by which means all these accident happen; People are even persuaded
of the effect of the proofs by Water, into which the accused are thrown, and of
a great many otherlike things; above all of the usefulness of the advice the
exorcists give, as that endeavoring to cause the person bewitched, to be blessed
by him that has done the mischief, which is held for an remedy infallible; if
the pretended Sorcerer refuses to do it, he may be forced to it by blows, and
by violencies Another remedy is to bake some certain things in some certain
Pot, for a certain number of hours, to a certain hour of the Day or Night. The
guilty is forced by this means, to come to the house, and consequently make
himself known, or the bewitched person swallows what has been baked, or carries
something about his Neck, or hanging upon his Breast. In short there are a
thousand other things which would be unprofitable and tedious to relate.

Sect. 6. The use that is made of all these Opinions, and the consequences that
are drawn from them, are to attribute to the inspirations and solicitations of
the Devil, all these extraordinary events, and almost all the sins that are
committed, especially, those that are most enormous. If a sudden tempest
arises, and that there is some in our company who is not very much our friend,
and is a little suspected of being a Witch, we do not fail of imputing to him
this disorder. If any one gives a little Cake, a Sugar plum, an Apple, or other
fruit to a Child, who comes very suddenly after to fall into a languishing
condition for a long time, he that has made this present is immediately
suspected of having bewitched the Child, and the means are made use of as we
have told you before, as a proof to discover the truth; if the Child recovers
presently after the trial, it is no more doubted, but that the disease was the
effect of Witchcraft, and that the suspicion against the Magician was well
grounded.

Sect. 7. I have spoken hitherto of the Opinions and practices of the common
People only, I shall now snow, that which our Doctors and our Men of letters
believe upon this point. There are none so credulous as the Vulgar; however
there is a very considerable difference to be seen in their Opinions, some
believing almost every thing, and others almost nothing at all. These two
Opinions so different, ought to be attributed to two Scots; to the one an
Illustrious King of Great Britain, which is, King James, the Sixth King of
Scotland, and First King of England of that name; and the other, to one of his
Scotch Subjects, a Scot by birth as by name, being called Reynard Scot; the
King held the affirmative as to the popular Opinion of Witchcraft, and
Apparition of Spirits, which his subject had already confuted. John Wierus who
lived in the beginning of the Reformation made by means of Luther and Calvin,
had from that time published his Opinion upon the delusion of Spirits and upon
the impostures of Witches, and he had taken a part which held in the middle
between those two Opinions; so King James in his Book of Demonology contested
with these two Authors, according to his express Declaration in the Preface.

Sect. 8. What is most important in his Book comes very near to this. In the
sixth Chapter of the first Book, there are descriptions so exact of leagues
that Magicians make with the Devil, that it seems as if the King himself had
seen the Original, or that they had been reported in the Council. In the fourth
Chapter of the second Book, the King puts for certain, that evil Spirits may
carry Men through the Air, or assume diverse forms, to visit the Magicians, when
they are in Prison. In the seventh Chapter, he says, that in the time of Popery
and Paganism, there was a great many more Apparitions; but that it was
observed, that since this last Reformation of the Christian Church, there have
been fewer Apparitions, and a great many more Witchcrafts. Concerning the
apparitions of Hobgoblins and Phantoms, of which he treats in the Third Book,
there are scarce any kind to which this Prince gives not credit, even to
Incubusses and Succubusses, which are Spirits, who, as Men, mix themselves
carnally with Women, and as Women with Men. In reference to the possessed, the
King agrees that the Popish Priest may drive out the Devil; but upon the proofs
that he has to convince one of the crime of Magic, he only says, there must be
no less than twelve witnesses, amongst which may be admitted, Infants, infamous
People, and even those that are taken to be Magicians.

Sect. 9. Now although the learned, as I have already said, extol not so much all
these things, nor teach them so expressly; and that by consequence, they credit
not so much what is ordinarily believed and said touching the power and
Operations of the Devil upon Men, and concerning that which they effect by the
means of Men; we must however observe, that they give so much extent to his
power and actions, that not only they help not to destroy the general Opinion
that is had of him; but also maintain it by different expressions they make use
of, and by the instructions they give. It is what is seen, especially in the
works of two English Authors, who explain themselves more plainly, and
precisely than all others upon this matter, which they treat from the
foundation; whereas others keep the same language only by occasion, and when
treating of other subjects, they are obliged to speak of them. The first of
these Authors is, William Gurnal in his great Book upon the Ephesians, 6.11.18.
entitled, The Christian in complete Armor, the first Edition is in the Year
1655. And since there has been Printed at London in folio in 1679. the sixth
Edition, He says, That the Devil being a spiritual being, extremely evil, these
two considerations ought to cause a great deal of fear to a Christian, p. 94.
Because he is a great Prince who surpasses Man very much in power and craft,
that his craft is observed by his marvelous knowledge, first, in spying proper
occasions to tempt Men, p. 36. Secondly, in his subtle and artificial conduct,
and in all the vices he makes use of for this effect, p. 37. Thirdly, in the
care he takes to make all the preparations necessary to attack us to his
advantage, every time he finds opportunity to do it, p. 43. Fourthly, In the
trouble that he stirs up in our Consciences, in reproaching us with our Sins,
and in the artifices that he uses, and the ambushes he lays p. 44. As to what
concerns the power and Virtue of the Devil, the Author holds in the first
place, That he has power not only on the Elements and corporeal senses, but
also upon spiritual substances of the World, and upon the Souls of Men, p. 74.
Afterward he declares what is the time and place of his Empire over his
subjects, viz. the time, in this life, over people of Darkness; the place, in
the World, for as much as it is plunged into impiety, p. 79.

Sect. 10. The other English Author is Joseph Glanvill, the title of which Book
is Saducismus Triumphatus, Saducism defeated, a Book, wherein he imploys a
great deal of Learning, to prove that Witchcrafts, Enchantments, Apparitions,
and Phantoms, are possible; and afterward that they are things practiced, and
which actually happen. The first Edition of it has been also in English at
London in 1661. after the death of the Author. He pretends, that what he
establishes as a certain Truth, is grounded upon Reasons and Examples: And I
grant, that as to the force of Reasoning, I do not know any Writer who has
better succeeded than he has. Here are his supposed Truths; That among other
effects, which are attributed to Magicians of both Sexes. First, Being anointed
with certain Magical Ointments they pass through the Chimney, and are
transported into very distant places. Secondly, That they are turned into Cats,
Hares, and diverse other Creatures and Figures. Thirdly, That they feel in their
own Bodies the same wounds that are made in the Bodies they borrow. Fourthly,
That in muttering certain unintelligible Words, and in making certain Gestures
extraordinary and ridiculous, they raise Tempests. Fifthly, That they are
sucked by familiar Spirits in the most secret parts of their Bodies. The Author
believes that the more these things are incredible and ridiculous, the more
certain they are. I shall examine his Reasons in my second and third Book, and
his Instances in my last, with more exactness than what other Authors have
written upon this Subject, for the consideration I have already alleged; that
he carries it above all others, as to the force of his Reasoning.

Sect. 11. All that has hitherto been sa^d, respects, first, the Devil, and
afterward Men, that are believed to have Commerce with him, considered
distinctly and separately from him. But an union must be made betwixt them. For
which effect, the Leagues already mentioned were invented, Sect 5. of this
Chapter, and heretofore Chap. 20. Sect. 13. Moreover, the Opinions which have
been reported having passed from Popery amongst us, and been admitted by many
Doctors of our Communion; yet I know not any who has taken their part so much
as Daneus, which is chiefly observed in two Points in his Description of the
Leagues, and in the effects he attributes to Sorcerers and Witches; for these
two things are found very amply treated of in his little Book, De Sortiariis,
Of Witches; but especially the first is described with more circumstances than
I have read in any Popish Author. So seeing this Doctor has been one of the
most considerable among us, and that having lived a little after the time of
Calvin and Luther, his Book, which was written 116 years ago, has not been
attacked nor contradicted that I know of by any Protestant Writer, but only by
Schottus; from thence may be inferred, that these Doctrines are not unknown to
us, nor rejected by the Protestant Churches. I am going to relate in short the
contents of this Author's Writings.

Sect. 12. See what he sets down in his fourth Chapter, Nullum non Sortiarum
cum Satana foedus iniisse, seque ei devovisse, That there is no Sorcerer but he
has made agreement with the Devil, and devoted himself to him: See the
description he makes of these contracts.

First, To secure the Person of the Magician, the Devil imprints a mark either
under the Eyelids, or between the Buttocks, or the Pallat of the Mouth, that
it may not be perceived in those places. The Author believes that there are
none exempt from carrying it: It is for this Reason, that the Judges order the
whole Body of those that are accused of this Crime, to be shaved, to know the
place that is marked, as I have told you.

Secondly, The Conditions of these Contracts imply that they shall renounce
God, and acknowledge Satan, and adore him for their God, and in Recompense he
shall assist them, and shall come to their succor as often as they apply
themselves to him, which he will never fail to do no more than the Witches on
their part fail to obey all his Commands.

Thirdly, After the Covenant has been thus mutually agreed upon, the Magician,
the morrow after, sacrifices to the Devil, a Dog, a Cat, or a Hen, that belongs
to him, by which means the Contract is confirmed a new.

Fourthly, Afterward the Devil causes in proper time and place, all the
Magicians to assemble where ever he prescribes; there he makes every one of
them give an account of the Mischiefs he has done by his Power and Means.

Fifthly, He sometimes takes the trouble to get them together, assuming a human
shape for that purpose, and making himself known to the Magicians only: At
other times he imploys some of them to go and Convene the Assembly, showing
them the time and place: This Assembly is not always general, sometimes there
are but a certain number which he has chosen to please himself.

Sixthly, If there are some, who through weakness of Body cannot go, he gives
them a Stick, or a Horse, of some Ointment to anoint themselves, by the virtue
of which being become invisible, he transports them through the Air.

Seventhly, He appears himself as Master of the Club, in shape of a Man, or in
some ugly He-Goat, or in whatever Form he pleases.

Eighthly, There they repeat their Oaths made to him, after which they sing and
dance in honor of their new God.

Ninthly, Afterward he furnishes them with such means as they desire, to do
mischief to such as they please. He teaches them to make up their Poisons, and
promises them to continue his assistance to them, and his service for their
occasions.

Tenthly, By virtue of these Agreements Satan fails not to work wonders in
favor of his Magicians, as often as they make the sign that he has taught them,
and ordered them to do, in which sign consists not the operative and active
faculty, as the Magicians believe, but it resides in the Devil, who operates
when warned by the sign.

Sect. 13. There is already a great deal, but however there are more things
which the Author ascribes to the Devil, and which may be gathered and inferred
from diverse places of this Book, where they are expressly contained, as:

First, That he often appears in human shape.

Secondly, That he sometimes troubles, and casts such a Mist over the Senses of
those that are engaged with him, that they fancy to have been in certain
places, and to have acted several things, though there is no truth or reality
in these Imaginations.

Thirdly, But he really carries them through the Air whither he pleases.

Fourthly, That by the Ministry of Wizzards and Witches, he can Poison Men
secretly from far, without touching them.

Fifthly, That the Devil, or the Magicians by his means, may raise Tempests,
and cause Rain.

Sixthly, He rejects the Opinion of those who believe the power of the Devil
has no longer any effect upon the Magicians, nor can act in their behalf, as
soon as they are in the Hands and Power of Justice; on the contrary, he
supposes, that the virtue of Witchcraft may be exerted even in Prisons; and
that oftentimes the Devil breaks there the Necks of those who belong to him:
These are Daneus's his Doctrines.

Sect. 12. Furthermore, the most common Opinion of the Doctors of our
Communion, is, That the Devil does not know things to come, but only of himself
he forms conjectures; that nevertheless the greatest part of Divines consult
him for their Predictions. That it is from him they learn what they discover to
other Men of things present, things hidden; as when there has been something
stoll'n, or some body bewitched, they declare the Thief or Magician. They
likewise ascribe to him some knowledge of the Thoughts of Men, since they fancy
that he disturbs and seduces them, and that he incites them to mischief. For
that is properly what we understand when we pray in our Churches for those that
are tempted and troubled in their Consciences. There are no errors produced,
there arises no Heresies in the Church, it is not afflicted with any
persecution, but the Devil has contributed thereto. All the places of
Scripture, that speak of the Devil, are understood with relation to these
Ideas: And it is upon these interpretations that these Opinions are grounded.
It is also by the same reason, that not only the Protestants, but almost all
the Christian Writers assert, That it is not allowed to consult the Devil, who
is the enemy of God, and of Men, nor to seek his help: They however agree, that
the Pagan Oracles have not always been given by the Devil, but that often they
have been the effect of the impostures of Priests, which has so often appeared,
that it is impossible not to know it.

Sect. 13. The power of the Devil is extreamlv boasted of, for there are very
few Doctors who doubt but he can assume a Body, and possess the Bodies of Men,
and transport and torment them several ways, as effectively, as he had actually
the impudence to do these things to our Savior Jesus Christ himself, and to a
great many people, of which the Gospel tell us that being possessed by evil
Spirits, they were delivered by our Savior. They also suppose, that the
opinion of the apparitions of Specters, is confirmed by Scripture, and that it
was the^ Devil (at least, according to the opinion of some) who appeared under
the Figure of Samuel. They think that it cannot be denied, but that he has
power over the Air and Winds, over Armies, over the Goods of Men, their Bodies,
and their Lives, which is proved by the example of what happened to Job. And by
the effects that the Magicians of Egypt produced in the time of Moses, which
are as so many sure marks of the power of the Devil, either to produce Insects,
as Frogs and Serpents, and to make a Transmutation of the Elements, either to
represent with an inconceivable readiness, things that are to be fetched from
far, or at least, so to dazzle the eyes of Men, to see what is not.

Sect. 14. As to the means which Magicians, Diviners, and Inchanters make use
of, scarce is there a person of good Sense, that believes they are efficacious
of themselves, but they will have it to be effected by the Devil, who operates
all that those miserable wretches imagine to act; and that the Covenants made
between him and them, oblige him to execute that which they require of him;
provided only, that they make use of Signs and that they employ circumstances
destined for that purpose, such as he has taught them. It is very prudently
observed, as is believed, that those Leagues are made two ways, which I shall
express in the words of Sennertus, taken from his Treatise upon this Question.
Whether one may be rendered invulnerable to the point of a Sword, and to
Muskets? where he says, That the Contract with the Devil is of two kinds,
mediate or immediate; express or tacit. The immediate, or express Contract, is
when any makes use of means, that he has been immediately furnished with by the
Devil. The mediate or tacit Contract is, when one makes use of the means,
which in truth have been ordained by the Devil; but not having been supplied by
the Devil himself, comes to him by the hand of some other person; which is
directly contrary to the Law of God, that forbids us to have other Gods but
him: For he says a little further, The consent is not altogether excluded from
the tacit agreement, because, whosoever is not as yet deprived of Reason, as
not to avoid the Precipices of Rocks, or the mouth of a Pit, he cannot but see
that such Words and Characters have not in themselves any virtue; and that by
consequence, before making use of them, we are obliged to examine by what virtue
they may produce such effects: for if one neglects to do it, it is certain a
tacit Contract with the Devil, who has promised to execute all the clauses and
conditions of his writing in favor of those who make use of the Words and
Characters therein contained, in consequence of which, he who makes use of it,
cannot pretend himself innocent of the crime of Magic. Such is Sennertus's
opinion, and as I may judge from my own experience, will not be confuted by our
Doctors, for I hear them generally hold speaking the same Language. Doctor
Wierius, a famous Man, who had very much meditated upon this matter, and had
studied it very much, establishes all these things a little more confusedly,
but yet very near upon the same foot.

Sect. 15. I have something to add here concerning Dreams. The common Language
of our Divines, is, that there are four sorts; Natural, Civil, or such as are
occasioned by the preceding conversation and actions, without Nature or Temper
having any share in them; Lastly, Divine or Diabolical. They hold that these
last proceed from the inspiration of the Devil, who disturbs the imagination of
Man, and represents to him fearful Figures, to disquiet or fright him, or to
transport him for some time into some place where he pleases: as we have seen
before, that he transports the Witches to their several meetings. In
consequence of this Doctrine, there are some of opinion, that the Dream that
Pilate's Wife suffered so much because of Christ, was a Diabolick Dream.

Sect. 16. But I find not any of these Doctors who have heretofore ever
attributed so little understanding and Power to the Devil; as to the knowledge
and effects already described, as Reynold Schot has, before quoted. We have at
this time Anthony Van Dalen, who ascribes no more to him in his Book of
Oracles: these two Authors hold that there is no other efficient cause of all
the things which are practiced, or which are operated, but the impostures of
Men; the Devil having no part in them. I learn also, whilst I am taken up in
this present Work, that the most sensible among us, attribute but very little
power and knowledge to the Devil: and that there are a great many more than I
conceived, who, as to the actions of the possessed and bewitched are of the same
opinion with Mr. Daillon, who in a French Book concerning Demons, maintains all
that which is contained in the Scripture, touching evil and unclean Spirits, is
not otherwise to be understood, than of certain Diseases to which the Jews used
to give such names, believing, however that it might happen, evil Spirits
medl'd with them at the same time. There Is lately come to my hands very
conveniently, a little Book of Mr. Orchard's an Englishman, Preacher in the
New-Netherlands, as I am told, in which the ancient and common opinion upon
this subject is confuted, as being directly opposite to the Doctrine and belief
of the Protestant Churches.

Sect. 17. But let us leave off speaking of these People, because, that of one
side there is no necessity here to handle them and because I intend to do it
afterward. It is not necessary to speak of them here, because my intention is
not to set down here what is not said of the Devil, and what is not attributed
to him; but my design is to relate that which is said of him, and to examine
whether it be true or no. It Is sufficient for me to hold the last Negative with
the English Writer, because I am much averse from maintaining the opinion which
ascribes so much power and virtue to Spirits; and especially to the bad. And
further, I shall be obliged to enter the List with Schot, Van Dalen, and many
others, who oppose the common belief that they had of this Power, when I shall
come afterward to examine the reasons and proofs upon which it is founded.
However, before I finish this First Part, I shall rehearse all that has been
said, and compare the opinions of Infidels with those of the Christians.

CHAP. XXIII. That of all these Opinions put together, there result some
certain propositions, in which they differ, and others in which they agree.
Sect. 1. I have from time to time conferred the Opinions that I have related,
first those of the Ancient and modern Pagans, in the 11th Chapter, and
afterward those of the Jews, Mahometans, and Christians of the six first Ages,
in the 17th Chapter. There remains now to compare those of the Papists and
Protestants, after which we will confer them all together; to that end, we must
break off the order that we have kept hitherto, and begin with the last; they
will furnish us with very certain proof, that there is no Opinion to which the
World is more engaged, than to that which is almost generally every where
taught and received concerning Spirits; for the Protestants have retained all
that which cannot be looked upon as a pure invention of Popery in particular;
and there are even some, whose belief upon this subject, go farther than those
of the Papists. The Christians in general believe all that is not particular to
the Jews and Pagans; the Jews and the Mahometans believe all that, according to
them, is not inconsistant with the belief of one only God; some will tell me
perhaps, that we must not wonder at it, and that naturally it ought to be so.
This is what we have now to examine, and there will be as yet room to speak
more plainly and fully afterward.

Sect. 2. Notwithstanding it is convenient to advertise the Reader, that
relating here the difference or the conformity of the Opinions of all Nations,
I mean only the Opinions of the more learned and are remarked amongst the
Doctors, or who are taken for wisemen in their Country, and capable of
instructing others in matter of Faith* and Religion. I intend not to speak of
particular Opinions, but of those generally received, taught, and confirmed by
practices; for as to the common People, either Papists, Jews, or Pagans, they
know nothing for the most part, but a little by hearsay; so that there is no
relying upon them, and it is sure without mistake, that for the most part, what
the most illiterate believe and practice, is contrary to the sense of Divines,
and of all those that understand any thing in the Holy Scripture. I will have
nothing to do with them upon this subject, having often tried my self how many
follies our own People say and believe, upon this account.

Sect. 3. So it is necessary to establish here as certain and undoubted, that
every Opinion that proceeds from Paganism as from it is Original, cannot at the
same time be founded upon the Holy Scripture. It is true, there never was a
Doctor either Christian or Jew, who has not applied some place in Scripture to
what he has proposed, but the Question is to know, whether the applications
were just, and whether the Scripture may be expounded in the sense put upon it;
for it may be that these Doctors having their imagination filled with their own
Ideas, believe in reading, to see things there which are not there, and that
their own prejudice causes ^o be sound there; of this the Reader may at first
judge himself, if he will but mind with attention what follows, where I remark
briefly what every Sect rejects, and what every one admits; and afterward what
the one have borrowed of others, and what they have retained to this time.

Sect. 4. Although the Protestant Churches, with one common consent, deny
Purgatory and all the places where they put Souls, except Paradise and Hell;
these two points, are Opinions of Popery. There has been some mention made of
them amongst the primitive Christians, neither the Jews nor the Mahometans
reject them, and they have been taken from Paganism* Whosoever rejects them, he
must reject together all the Doctrines and practices that are grounded upon
them. For this reason,

First. We do not believe among us, that the Souls of the Deceased are never
wandering, nor that they appear to the living, under any figures whatsoever, to
obtain help and comfort from them.

Second. It is not believed that the Souls of the blessed come back from Heaven
upon Earth, nor that those of the damned come back from Hell. It is not
believed, that either the one or the other appears to Men, to comfort or
afright them; and far less as yet, that the living can make agreements
together, to come back after Death and visit those they had agreed with, who
have survived them.

Third. By this reason, the Dead are never asked any Questions, nor any
religious worship paid to them.

Sect. 5. The Virtue of Conjurations is likewise unknown among us, either to
drive the Souls of the deceased, or to expel evil Spirits, with whom any should
be tormented. No other means is known sufficient for this effect, but Prayer
and fasting, taught by our Savior Jesus Christ, St. Matthew, Chapter 17 v. 21.

First. For this Reason it is not believed, that there is any body either
Priest or Exorcist, which is authorized to make such Conjurations, nor ought to
meddle with them, although a like practice was admitted in the first time of
Christianity; whether it had success by the power of God, or it was the mere
effect of the Artifices of Men, and that it has been a custom among the Jews,
Mahometans and all the Pagans.

Second. Neither is it believed, words, names, signs, gestures, and postures,
even tho they were taken from the Holy Scripture, have any power for this
effect, either of themselves or institution of the Church; because she has not
received any power from God, to give her Authority as to this point.

Third. They Conjure not the Devil in the Baptism of Children, as the Papists
to do; the Lutherans do the like, but not with the same intent, as the first,
that is, that the Devil is in the Infant, or that he is driven out by the
Virtue of words, which are pronounced; for they only retain this practice,
because of it is antiquity, it being indifferent of it self, at least such is
their pretense or excuse.

Sect. 6. Now that the Doctrines of the Protestants have been conferred with
those of Popery in particular; it remains to see what difference there is
between the Christians in general, and the Infidels.

First, The Pagans, the Jews, and the Ancient Christians have believed that
there is another kind of Spirits, which are placed between God and the Angels,
or which are in some sort corporeal, but it is not granted any more at this
time by Christians.

Second. Likewise it is not usual among them, to associate God, or the Spirits
to the Stars. As touching God, it was an Opinion purely Pagan; and ouching
Spirits, it was a Jewish Opinion; I know not whether it may be said, that the
Ancient Christianity had not some tincture of it.

Third. This difference of nature in the Angels, proposed by the Jews, is not
believed any more; it draws its Original from Ancient Paganism, and is admitted
to this day, by the modern Pagans; It Is true, that the Papists acknowledge a
difference of Order, but they put none in the essence of these Spirits.
Likewise, tho they make generally appear all sorts of Spirits, nevertheless the
difference is only in respect of places, of Persons, and effects, as we have
shown more fully, Chapter 19 Sect. 7.17. Chapter 20. Sect. 1.2.3. but it is no way in
respect of their nature, nor of their Original.

Fourth. There is not a Christian, be he Protestant or Papist, who believes,
that Spirits are truly capable of engendering; which is nevertheless the common
belief of all the Pagans, which is received among the Jews, and has not been
confuted sufficiently by the primitive Christians, among whom are found, some
who have expressly taught it.

Sect. 7. But the Pagans differ from the Mahometans and Christians chiefly in
two points.

First, That they mix and confound together the supreme God with other superior
and inferior Gods good and bad; and also the Souls of Men with all those Gods,
in such a confused manner, that it is impossible to comprehend any thing, and
that it is a Labyrinth from whence they cannot extricate themselves. On the
contrary, the Jews and Mahometans agree with the Christians, in this point,
that there is one only God, and that all that is besides him has been created
by him.

Second. In that, that not only they make no great difficulty to deify Men, but
that they make also the Gods return to the condition of Men, and that they
believe there are Men, the issue of the Gods; there are some of these errors,
which the Papists cannot boast of being entirely free from; for they may
reasonably be reproached, that they have substituted their Saints to these
imaginary Gods, and to those Demons of the Pagans; That they speak of Saints as
the Pagans do of their Gods; that they make them act in the same manner, that
these false Deities were supposed to act. But pure Christianity, such as has
been in all times upon this point, never make Gods a Man, nor never raises Man
to the dignity of God.

Sect. 8. There is notwithstanding some point upon which the Protestants are
not agreed, and upon which, nevertheless the Papists, the primitive Christians,
the Jews, the Mahometans, and all the Pagans agree, viz. The Tutelary Gods of
the Pagans, who were the guardian Angels in the first Christianity. We have
lately seen they are admitted without contestation among the Papists; the
Protestants in general, are not disposed to receive this Opinion; those of the
profession of France, Holland, and Swisserland, reject it; and nevertheless
there are some, but very few, that admit it, or at least believe, not that
there are sufficient reasons to oppose it; we shall examine afterward, which
is the soundest of these Opinions. In the mean while we must take notice before
hand, that what the Papists teach upon this subject, together with some of
other Christians that are not of their Communion, relates more to the light and
knowledge which they suppose that those Spirits communicate to them, than real
help they can expect in their actions, and in their manner of living; for it is
rarely seen, or to say better, it is never seen, that the People ascribe a
considerable deliverance, or a great oppression, that befall them to an Angel,
either their keeper or their enemy; but they never fail to ascribe it
immediately to the providence of God; or if they sometimes turn their Eyes to
another side, the Papists as to their particular refer all the good that
happens to them, to the protection of some great Saint, especially to that of
the Virgin Mary; but the Protestants, lest they should seem to favor the
belief of the Popish Saints, would rather say, if occasion serves, that the
Devil was the Author of it,

Sect. 9. There is also a difference to be taken notice of, betwixt the
Heathens on one side, the Jews and the Mahometans on the other, and all the
Christians on another; it is chiefly in the practice of Witchcraft and
Divination; which, according to the principles of the first, is a laudable
practice in it self, although often abused, as a great many good things are;
according to the principles of the second, it is only allowed and useful in
many occasions; and according to the last it is directly opposite to
Christianity. The reason of it is, that the Pagans hold for Gods, or at least
for Ministers and Ambassadors of the Gods, Spirits, which are looked upon by
Christians as unpure Spirits; and that the Jews and the Mahometans cause to
proceed from the Virtue of the Caballa* and the influences of the Stars,
whatever the Christians take to be Magic, Witchcraft, or Enchantments. It is
true, that in the time of Ancient Paganism, the Mathematicians have been put
into the rank of Poisoners, and that both were treated as persons equally
pernicious, to whom it was forbidden to exercise their art, as being unlawful.
But the occasion of these prohibitions, was only founded upon the ill use that
was made of this Art, which had been before not only permitted, but even much
esteemed. At this time the Christians have no longer any aversion for the name
of Mathematician, but that of Poysoner never received any good interpretation;
no that words are here to be disputed, for it is of things that we treat; and we
are to examine them, and not words. Perhaps there will be occasion to have some
regard to them, in our third Book; where without doubt, it will be necessary to
speak fully of these terms, and of many others.

Sect. 10. Let Us now see what conformity is found among all these People
together, Pagans, Jews, Mahometans, Christians, both Ancient and Modern, Roman
Catholics, Protestants and others. They all confess,

First. That there are Spirits distinct from God, and bodies: for tho some
contrive yet another kind of Spirits, as we have said; it is one of the points
in dispute among them, and now we are about to seek wherein they agree together.

Second. That there natures are different, some absolutely subsisting without
body, as Angels; and others being united to a body, as Souls.

Third. That, however, both are mortal.

Fourth, That of such Spirits as are united to a body, some are good to Men and
others bad.

Fifth. That therefore, Man has reason to seek the friendship of good Spirits,
that is, the Angels, and to take all possible care to divert from him evil
Spirits, which are Devils.

Sixth. That an infinite happiness or misery attends Men after this life.

Seventh. That likewise of the Souls of the deceased, some are bad, and some
good and holy; tho they seem not to explain themselves always in the same
manner, sometimes upon one of the points, and sometimes upon the other; it i^
nevertheless certain* considering the bottom of the matter, that their
sentiments are agreeable; see then in what consists the conformity of the
Opinions in general of all Nations, and in what they differ. We have now to
examine, what is true or what not, in all that has been related; and it is for
that purpose, I design my second and third Book, according to the division I
have established before, Chapter the first, Sect. 8. However we shall yet see,
what cautions may be drawn from all that has been said.

CHAP. XXIV. That all that has been related, shows upon what foundation the
Christians in general, and the Protestants in particular, say, such
extraordinary things of the Devil.
Sect. 1. BEfore I pass to my second Book, where I shall examine what is purely
the truth, we must search into all the quotations and Opinions that are
collected here, after the Original of this Opinion, so general and so deeply
rooted, touching the great power of the Devil, which we see, that all the
Christians, Protestants, Romans and others, carry so high at this time; there
is none who can deny but several things present themselves in these narrations,
that all the World easily perceives and are capable to produce such Opinions,
or to confirm them in the minds of M^n; neither that Scripture or Reason should
lead Men thereto, But they gather them from other places, and without examining
whether they are agreeable to those two rules, only worthy of being followed;
they respect them nevertheless because of the credit in which they have been
for a long time, and of the approbation that has been given them. Now, I intend
to show first* that all that is believed touching the great power of the Devil,
beyond what Scripture and Reason manifestly teaches us of it, proceeds not from
any of these two springs, nor takes it is Original from any consequences that
may be drawn from them, and afterward to discover what is the true cause of it.

Sect. 2. The truth of this proposition is easily known as to it is first
respect; because it is known, that the most stupid and those that partake least
of the light of Reason or of knowledge of the Scripture, are those which give
most credit to what is said upon the matter in hand. The common People,
Children, and Old Women, are much more persuaded of it than others; but the
more understanding one has, the more one is conversant in the Holy writ, and
the more experience he has gained by the conversation of the World, and by the
different accidents which have presented themselves, especially when experience
is joined to these two first Conditions, the less he will be apt to believe
such Opinions; I say he will be the less apt to believe them, because it must
be granted, that there are People of a great deal of learning and experience,
who not only receive them, but impl^^ all their skill and capacity to confirm
them, and cause them to be admitted; as King James the First, Bodin, Daneus,
and many others have done. But I think not that we must believe what they have
done, ought to be attributed to the evidence of reason, which have persuaded
them, but to their prejudices, and to a certain particular inclination,
according to which, every one turns himself toward such or such an object,
according to his inclination. It is by the motions of this natural inclination*
that the understanding being surprised, takes a disposition to follow it; and
when it has once addicted it self thereto, it makes use of all it is force and
light to maintain its choice* and to show that truth and reason have been his
guides to the part he has taken, which he fancies all other Men by the same
Principl^s are also obliged to take: That being supposed, it follows, that the
Opinion of a very small number of Writers cannot hinder that what I have
proposed should be true, as to the whole, or the greatest part: And it is my
advice, which methinks no body will deny me.

S. 3. It may be objected* as to what concerns Nature* that it cannot be said*
that what was never taught by the Pagans and Philosophers, who had not the help
of any other Light but that of Nature and Reason; or what they have left in
their Writings, was drawn from any other spring but Nature it self. I grant it;
But what have they taught upon this subject? All that we have reported before
in the ten Chapters, that are betwixt the first and twelfth: There every one
may see what it is; what are their uncertainty and contradictions; how
different and opposite among them are their practices. What foundation can be
laid upon a Philosophy, which has not sought but to accommodate it self to
capricious and prejudiced People; and which consists almost in nothing else but
the Tricks of Priests. Besides, it is not a pure Philosophy that has been the
original and foundation of Pagan Religions; but the Philosophy such as it has
been comprehended and understood by the People; that is to say, very ill in
part or in the whole, mixed with prejudice and great ignorance. The fear caused
by extraordinary and surprising objects, and the blind love every one has for
his own Notions, produced in that perturbation, drive Men to seek the means to
appease a power from which proceed those extraordinary objects, and which is
the cause of those evils they are not able to resist. These two Reasons, I say,
carry Men to practice, for that end, all sorts of means, although they know
them but by half's, or not at all. The greatest part of those who might
discover to them their Mistakes, and afford them better Instructions; either
will not give themselves the trouble, or choose rather to keep it secret, and
make use of the Error of the People, to the end to acquire more Credit, and to
be the objects of a greater admiration; as heretofore the Magi did; and as at
this time the Bramines and the Bonzes do: If there is any one who had better
inclinations, he dares not open his Mouth for fear of incurring the indignation
of the public; As Socrates whose boldness cost him his life, which was taken
away by Poison.

Sect. 4. We must therefore imagine, that there are not any of those that
addicted themselves to Philosophy, who from their youth had not been bred in
the Opinions, and exercise of the Religion of their Ancestors; So that they owe
unto the Schools the Prejudices that they had thereby already swallowed. They
found Masters who were no less prevented with theirs; either that they were
alike to those of their Scholars, or that they were different. If they were
alike* the Disciples were confirmed in those prejudices by their Masters; and
if they were different, they afforded them more matter to confound their
Understanding. Lastly, However it was, their Understanding could but remain
corrupted, and their ill disposition but daily increase. If this needed a
proof, and required less time, it would be no hard task to prove what I assert;
since I may name Persons, who may be living instances of it: But no body,
methinks, will require from me what I have just now said, being too evident to
be called in question. If there are some who never reflected upon it, in
relation to the Infidels, he need but make Considerations upon the Christians
and himself quickly to discover the Truth. A blind and brutish zeal for
Religion, or rather for what is called Religion, ordinarily precedes knowledge,
without which* however, there is no true Religion* nor sincere Piety. The Eyes
of our Understanding are insensibly used to objects, that continually offer
themselves to them* they turn of their own accord to that side, and afterward,
neither will nor can look upon others; or at least if they perceive others,
it is as through the former that da^ken the sight by their continual presence,
and by the weariness caused by their too much gazing upon them; so that without
the help of those comforting Spectacles, if I may so speak, the faculty,
weakened by want of habit, is no longer able to endure the Light. Let this be
observed beforehand, to be serviceable hereafter.

Sect. 5. And as to the Holy Writ, I think not that it may be taken for the
cause of the Opinions Men have of the Devil. Those Opinions being already
rooted in the mind as deeply as they can be, before the Holy Bible be ever
read; not to say, that the less we read it, the more we credit what is said
upon that account, and the more we are disposed to affirm it. Had we not in
matter of Religion, Dispositions alike to those of other Sects, and even to
those of the Unfaithful, we would doubtless make a good use of the sacred
Writings, and speak as they do. But to our great shame, most part of us, as
well as of other Sects, that pretend a Veneration for the Holy Writ, search not
in it after its Sense, being satisfied with the vulgar Interpretations, and
such as they have received from others. And therefore we keep to such
Explications as we hear in those Churches, in which those of our Communion use
to gather; unless we will be looked upon as fickle headed, and almost as
Apostates. In vain we endeavor to render the Reason of our Faith; that is not
the question, that way carries too far, and it would be too great a task to
examine all to the bottom. In short, to speak truth, we must confess, that if
we believe such great and wonderful things of the Devil, it is not because they
are contained in the Holy Scripture, since we suspend not our Judgment till we
have consulted it, but because we are persuaded beforehand, that it must be
explained and understood according to the Judgment we have already passed, by
reason of some expressions that seem to favor the common Belief, that the
generality of Men already have of the Devil.

Sect. 6. If we desire more particularly to examine how the Notion of these
things is formed in Men of Learning, by the means of Learning it self, and how
it is increased; I am ready to declare what I have observed for a long time, by
the experiments I have made. The first prejudices of Man are as ancient as his
knowledge, and begin from his most tender youth these two ways. When to appease
the cries of Children, or to calm their Passions, they are threatened with the
Bugbear, either by Words or Effects, either by making some extraordinary Noise,
or presenting to them surprising Objects; Experience has long since taught us,
that these Impressions being the first, are also those that leave the deepest
tracks in the Brain, and cannot afterward be rooted out but with great
trouble; when Children being more advanced in years begin to play in the
Streets, and to discourse with their Neighbors, they hear almost at every
instant, the name of the Devil pronounced, that is, as a kind of ornament to
the common Conversation: They hear Tales told of him under the specious title
of Histories, concerning Hobgoblins, Phantasms, and Witchcraft. Even their
Parents, and some of their Masters, by a deplorable mistake never check their
Children in their House, their Disciples in their Schools, nor their
Apprentices in their Shops, without mentioning the Devil in their Reproofs, and
enforcing their chiding with it. The Names of God and Christ are not half so
much used in those occasions, where they would be so lawful and serviceable;
but on the contrary they seem to be banished from the Mouths of most Men.

Sect. 7. When Youths are put to School, they read almost nothing from the
lowest to the highest Forms, in the Greek and Latin Books, but what concerns
the Demons and their Effects, as they were represented by the Heathens. They
are imbued with that Science before they attain to those that relate to the use
of this Life, and that are called Faculties. The infernal Gods and Goddesses;
as Pluto, Vulcan, Proserpine, are known very early, and grown familiar to
Youth, before they are sufficiently instructed in the knowledge of the true
God. They greedily imbibe the Epistles, Poetry, and Histories of the ancient
Greeks and Romans, where a frequent mention is made of the virtue of Dreams,
Miracles, Apparitions, Specter, coming out of Subterraneous Places, as
Caverns, or descending from high, as the Air. Those Relations read with
pleasure, are believed almost as the Gospel; or rather are to them instead the
Gospel. For if Parents are not pious enough to take care in their Houses of the
instruction of their Children, in what concerns Religion, and to have an Eye
upon their information, as to this point in the Schools; I believe not, that of
25 Books, which are made use of in the Latin Schools to learn Sciences, more
than one or two, are fit to inculcate the Grounds of Christianity to the tender
Youth. Those that go from the Schools to the Universities, carry their heads
full of thousands of Verses of Horace, Ovid, Virgil, and a vast number of
Passages and Relations collected from Heathen Authors, both Greek and Latin.
Those that r^turn home from the Universities to their Houses, carry still more
of them, but scarce bring back ten passages, or perhaps, so much as a passage
or a lesson drawn from the Word of God, for the foundation of their Faith, and
matter of their Devotion.

Sect. 8. In the mean while most of the young Men that go to the Universities,
newly coming from under the Rod, and hardly capable of discretion, are allowed
to make choice of their own Teacher: Which St. Paul reckons amongst the faults
of these last times, 2 Timothy 4.3. They choose the Exercises they are to make,
the Lessons they are to learn, and the Books they are to Read; which they do
not so much with an intent of Understanding the Holy Scripture; as of informing
themselves of the Controversies amongst the principal Sects, the particular
Opinions of our Doctors, who are already but too much divided, and whose
divisions are but too great. The curious Youth are more eager to learn such
things, than those they ought to know. Carried away by the heat of their Blood,
always ready to take fire and flight, they ardently apply themselves,
obstinately to defend the part of their Masters, and direct their Studies,
especially after the enquiry of such Reasons, as may help them to maintain the
Opinions they have embraced, and to confute their Antagonists. So that whenever
a passage of the Holy Writ is alleged, for, or against their Sentiments,
either in Divinity or Philosophy, they exert all their ability and subtilty to
wrest it, or to put upon it, such a Sense as favors the Opinion with which
they are prejudiced. Thus Truth is not enquired aft^r for it is own sake, and
Scripture and Reason are often alleged, but to set off with some likelihood
the private Opinions with which we are taken up.

Sect. 9. I hope that what I have just now said will easily be credited, if
attention be given to what follows. I say, that the Character of Philosophy,
such as is learned in the Schools, pours it self upon all the Interpretations
and Translations that are of the Holy Writ. It was the Opinion of Aristotle,
that the four Elements; Earth, Water, Air, and Fire, were included within one
another as by Circles, reaching from the Center to the highest place of the
Universe: So as that the Earth was the lowest, being mixed with Water in its
Superficies, and the Air above it surrounding the Terraqueous Globe. These
Propositions are granted by all. But that Philosopher also believes that Fire
surrounds the Air, as the Celestial Heavens divided into several Vaults do
Fire. These Vaults, to which the Sun, Moon and Stars are fastened, and are of a
subtle and incorruptible matter in themselves, surround one another, and turn
about us every year, every month, and every day, by the virtue of some certain
Spirits, called Assisting Forms. Those that hold that Opinion for probable, are
very apt to be persuaded, that the wicked Spirits dwell in the Air; because the
superior Spheres are too pure for them. When therefore those sort of Men hear
St. Paul mentioning the Prince of the Power of the Air, Ephesians. 2.1. Or the
Spiritual Wickedness in high Places, Chapter 6.12. they doubt not but St. Paul was
of the Opinion of Aristotle, and that by these words of the Holy Scripture, the
wicked Spirits must be understood. Thus those who by reading Plato, have filled
their heads with his Demons, fancy that t^is word is used in the Scripture in a
Platonic Sense, without considering that this Philosopher lived not in the
time that the Holy Writ was published* in which the former signification of
these Terms might be changed, as it daily happens; and without so much as
examining in what Sense they were taken by other Authors, contemporary with the
Sacred Writers; whether it is probable that other Authors, whose Books are lost,
understood 'em in the same Sense; or lastly, whether the Jews in whose Tongue
the Holy Scripture was written, and who consequently ought to understand it
best, put the same signification upon them.

Sect. 10. What I say of the ill use made of Philosophy as to this Point, must
not appear strange, for it extends to every thing. When Copernicus began to
assert, by Reasons that seemed very strong to him, that the Sun is fast and
unmovable, and that the Terraqueous Globe moves; Those that held the
Hypothesis of Ptolomey, pretended to explode that Opinion by clear and formal
Texts of the Holy Scripture; but those that maintained it, contrived
Explications to those passages, and wanted not plausible Reasons to set them
off. Thus those that after Descartes, believe Man has an Idea of God in his
Understanding, found the same Doctrine in St. Paul, and understood in that
Sense, these Words of his Epistle to the Romans, Chapter 1.19. That which may be
known of God is manifest in them; for God has showed it unto them. Even some of
Descartes's Followers have explained the History of the Creation in the first
Chapter of Genesis, according to the principles of that Philosopher, that is
quite contrary to the right meaning of this Narration, as the Author himself
confesses in his little Book, Entitled, Cartesius Mosaisans.

Sect. 11. It is the same with Divinity, as with Philosophy. Those that are
called the Fathers of the Church, that is, her First, or chief Doctors in the
Primitive times, the Authority of whom the Papists equal to that of the Word of
God, having been at first imbued with that false Philosophy, did not so much as
think upon freeing themselves of their prejudices, by a true Interpretation and
Translation of the Holy Scripture: On the contrary, they have poured their
preventions over, whatever they have writ; for whether they treated of such
Articles of Faith, as were most controverted; or whether they interpreted
passages of the Holy Writ; they have adhered to bare speculations, and applied
them to subjects quite different from those the Sacred Writing aimed at. St.
Austin in the 4th and 5th Century, has been fruitful in speculations; and
Origin in the 3d, has surpassed all the others in mis-applications, remote from
the scope of the Holy Penmen, as may have been observed by what has been
alleag'd from them, and several others concerning Spirits, in the 15th Chapter.
Their Homilies, that is their Sermons, contain but few Expositions of the Holy
Scripture, and still fewer Translations. It Is true, that Origin and St. Jerome,
have taken more pains than the others, and been also more puzzled, having
translated the Sacred Writings in those Ages, in which the knowledge of Tongues
was not much looked after, nor improved. In the mean while, what those Doctors
hape proposed upon many separate passages, dispersed through their Writings,
(upon which, instead of a serious examination, they have put the Sense that was
most favorable to their private Opinions) has ever been received and taught
afterward. Thus it is happened long after, the knowledge of Tongues not being
better improved, that their Interpretations have been admitted without
contradiction; only upon their own credit, and looked upon with that veneration
that is commonly paid to Antiquity, as though the World, in process of time, was
grown younger than before. By these means it is, that their Doctrines
concerning Spirits, and especially the bad, have insensibly been bequeathed, as
an inheritance to posterity.

Sect. 12. Since therefore every one is so much taken up with this Sect, and
pays so great a deference to those that are called the eminent Fathers; it is no
wonder that the Papists, who above all others, put a high value upon them,
should use their Language, and consecrate all their Expressions. And it is long
since the Protestants have observed, that these their Adversaries have founded
the Prayers for the dead, the worshipping of Saints, and the like Doctrines,
upon some expressions of the Fathers, that seem to favor them. When afterward
they were compelled to give some proof out of the Holy Scripture, they found
the first, together with Purgatory, in the 1st Epistle of St. Paul to the
Corinthians, Chap. 3.13. That fire shall try every Man's work. It Is almost the
same with those that are bred amongst the Lutherans; how great a Philosopher,
and how learned soever any one may be, he will find no reason, and much less a
necessity, to believe that Christ is locally and visibly ascended to Heaven,
but it will appear to him a necessary proposition, that our Lord, after his
Resurrection, penetrated through doors shut up, and that his Humanity is
omnipotent. How learned soever one may be in the Tongues, there are however,
frequent occasions, in which it can neither be seen or conjectured upon what
ground, the learned have given to some certain words, a signification that
favors the propositions they maintain, rather than their true natural Sense;
such as it is found in other Authors, and in ordinary use of a Tongue, that is
so familiar to them. Of these I might recite a thousand proofs if it were
necessary, and time would allow me.

Sect. 13. Besides, as much as Man has taken pains to acquire uncertain and
corrupted Sciences, so much has he been negligent of informing himself in the
best, the finest, and at the same time, the smallest part of Sciences, with
which he is ordinarily less acquainted; for as I have already said, the Youth
in the Schools run over all the Countries of the Ancient Heathens, only to make
a booty of Latin and Greek, before they do so much as visit Christianity; which
is only shown to them, as at a distance; they are yet of too tender a
constitution to be laden with such solid meat, and too young to be mixed with
such important Affairs; so that they are taught almost nothing of that matter.
It is not, thought convenient for them to know what Soul and Body are; wherein
consists the Essence of the Soul, or that of the Angels and Devils; and what
knowledge and operations those Spirits are capable of; and what share and
administration they take here below in human Affairs. No light is afforded to
them, that may dissipate the darkness that has been spread over their
understandings in their youth, nor blot out the impressions that have been made
upon them as to this point, by the means already mentioned; so that this
darkness and these impressions, destitute of Antidotes, do still penetrate
farther. Even those that follow the Principles of Descartes, though they
distinguish better than others, the nature of Soul and Body, as will be shown
in my Second Book, Chap. 1. Sect. 12, 13, 14. yet when they come to the
operations of such Spirits, as are not joined to a Body; either Angels or
Devils; and undertake to explain how they can act upon other Bodies, either of
Men, or other matter; they take as much freedom as they can, and go as far as
they can be carried, by the prejudices they have imbibed with all others,
before they studied Scripture, and Philosophy.

Sect. 14. That which may adorn the Human Mind with Light, and form its
Judgment, is what is less intended to be acquired in Universities, though they
seem to be the place where such a rare thing should be gotten, which most
unhappily affords not the means to grow rich; I mean Mathematics, and that
part of natural Philosophy, that discovers the nature and course of the
Heavens; not because they treat of our present subject, but for two other
reasons I shall add. The first is, that more certainty is to be found in
Mathematics, than in all other Sciences; because they are grounded upon
infallible Principles; such Students as are used to the certainty of these
Principles, will not acknowledge for truth, such as are not attended with a
full and entire conviction, and put a little value upon such Sciences, as have
not the same certainty. But the Second Reason is still more particular; viz.
That Mathematics, especially that part that treats of the knowledge of Stars,
manifestly discovers several things, that undeniably show the Sacred Writers
accommodated themselves to the style and capacity of the Vulgar, and speak of
the Heavens, Earth, Sun, Moon and Stars, not according to their own nature, and
as they are in themselves; but according to the common notions of Men. And
therefore those that are somewhat addicted to that Science, credit not so
easily the discourses of other Men, and are not satisfied with probabilites.
They are not disposed to fill the Air with Spirits, nor to fix them to Stars,
nor to confound Spirits and Stars together. But the mischief is, as I have
already hinted, that few Learned give up themselves to that part of the
Sciences, though it is the most useful and beautiful of all.

Sect. 15. All these prejudices with which we have been once filled, which have
been rooted in us more and more, by the ways already alleag'd, which have grown
by the new nourishment they daily received, and which have neither been
banished, nor weakened by the endeavors of a better informed Judgment; all
these prejudices, I say, are no where more sensible than in the subject we
treat of. And therefore we have destined this First Book, to establish this
Truth, and make it very plain; to the end, it might be clearly perceived, that
all those Opinions concerning the Devils, Divinations, and Witchcraft, draw
their first Original from the Heathens, who communicated them to the Jews,
during the Babilonian Captivity, where they had more conversation with the
Philosophers, than in the Land of Canaan, whilst they lived separated from all
other Nations of the Earth. There they insensibly took the tincture of the
Heathen Doctrines and Practices, at least, of such as seemed not directly
opposed to their Law. The first Christians springing from the middle of the
Jews and Heathens, kept likewise most part of the same Doctrines, and intended
to gain the Heathens by too great and easy a compliance with their Opinions.
Thus was insensibly laid the foundation, on which the great aedifice of Popery
is now founded and raised.

Sect. 16. Another Judgment may be passed upon that matter, if Popery were put
in parallel with Heathenism, and not esteemed the worse of these two. For why
should not they be held for Heathen Legends, what the Pagans have published of
their Miracles, Oracles, Gods, Aerial Specter, Dreams, and the like prodigies?
That is, why do we not call 'em Lies, as we rightly so name the Roman Legends?
Have we more reason to look upon as suspicious those wonders, the relations of
which are inserted almost in all the Books of the chief Roman writers, and to
look upon them as a branch of superstition, then to deal in the same manner
with those of the Heathens? Whence comes it, that we publicly laugh at (both
in our discourses and writings,) the sham miracles of the former, as being mere
delusions and trifles, and that we approve, both by our words and our Books,
the narrations that the latter make of the wonders seen amongst them, and that
we quote them as true, tho they be of the same matter and weight with the
others? The antiquity of those Authors and of the times in which they have
written, has it so much power and efficacy? and must we more easily credit
stories, because they are said to have happened a long while ago, and in far
remote Countries? But what is that to the main point? Truth fits not it self in
this manner to the inclinations of Men. Lies were anciently told as well as
they are now, and as well in Foreign Countries as in our own.

Sect. 17. It is methinks sufficiently proved, by all the quotations of this
Book, that there are no Miracles, Oracles, purging Fires, Apparitions of
Hobgoblins or Souls, Witchcraft by Letters and ^^aracters, or choice of Days,
either in Judaism or Popery; but they draw their Original from Paganism. What
Reason than may a Protestant have to reject the fables of the Talmud, and the
stories of the Popish writings, as soon as those fables and tales are
naturalized by Jews or Papists; and to hold them for truths, or at least, for
probable things, as long as Paganism cherishes them in it is bosom? All must be
rejected together, or the whole, whatever it may be, must be let alone. Why do
we not free our selves from all our prejudices, and associciate Scripture to
Reason, to ground our Reasonings only upon them, and to look upon them as the
only pure spring? What pains and trouble has not our credulity to those Heathen
tales cost us? How many learned Divines and Philosophers have puzzled their
brains, to ascribe to the Devil those Oracles, which they look not for the
effects of Human knowledge, and withal, such wonders as they could not believe
to be performed by Human power? So when it seemed, that the answers that were
given by the false Gods, and the effects that were produced among the Heathens,
were too extraordinary, and above the force of nature; 'twas thought fit to cut
the knot, that could not be untyed. 'Twas supposed that Spirits only could be
the Authors of all these things; a suitable power and knowledge was ascribed to
them; and at last the very manner of effecting them was determined; such is the
Original of that science, fals^y so called, the contradictions of which, the
Apostle commands a Christian to avoid, in his 1 Epist. to Timothy, Chap. 6. v.
20.

Sect. 18. The old Women's tales, as St. Paul call's them in the same Epistle,
Chap. 4. v. 7. which the Popish writers tell us, and the fables they rehearse,
would supply us with abundant matter of meditation, should we as much credit
them as we do the others. For what must not be said, if, supposing that Human
deceits have no share in them, we would examine how the Devil could produce all
the effects that are told in those narrations; we believe it more convenient to
spare our selves that trouble, by rejecting, as mere lies, the greatest part of
what comes from that side. But what Reason have we to deal otherwise with the
Papists than with the Heathens? It Is because of the particular hatred we have
for Popery, from which we have been separated not long since, and with which we
are in continual War; besides the Reformation of Doctrine and Worship that was
made in the Church, at the beginning of the last Century, extended not to those
Opinions, which were scarce taken notice of, and which had taken root even
before the decay of the Church was perceived; so that it was only purified of
such Errors, the rejection of which was judged absolutely necessary, in
conference betwixt Luther and Calvin. Not long after, when the Reformation was
carried farther, such points only were handled, as had some relation with the
former. It Is properly for that Reason, that in those public writings that are
called the Liturgy of our Churches, it was never minded to correct those
expressions, that had been so long in use as to Spirits and Devils, no
controversy having ever been raised, either amongst the Christians in general,
or the Papists in particular. Yet I doubt not but it had been done, had this
Article been taken so much notice of, and examined with so much attention as
the others were, or had but one half of the difficulties that are now proposed,
been alleged at that time.

Sect. 19. Moreover, amongst the qualities that are ascribed to Popery, the
picture of which I confess can scarce be more unshaply then the Original it
self; That of Antichristianism was thought very convenient, as that of
Antichrist to fit the Pope extraordinary well. Immediately the words of St.
Paul, in his 2 Epistle to the Thessalonians, Chap. 2. v. 3. to the 9th. were
explained in that sense, and it was thought that the Apostle had an Eye to
Popery when he said, That his coming would be in the efficacy of Satan, with
all Power, Signs, and Lying Wonders. By the explication the Protestants were
disposed to join together, Satan and Antichrist, that is the Devil and the
Pope, as two Brothers, and to draw that consequence, that Popery was the
Doctrine of the Devil. By which means it was easy to insinuate, that the Devil
interestes and has his vote in the tenets of the Papists, and that the Sea of
Rome is the seat of his Empire.

Sect. 20. Thence proceeds the style that is ordinarily used both in Discourses
and Books, even as to the smallest Controversies, that are raised about some
point of Doctrine or Worship; when any sticks not to the vulgar Opinions, it is
presently cried up, that the Devil's let loose; and uses all his violence and
crafty Devices to assault the Church. It Is said he is always ready to oppose all
our Motions toward good, and a thousand like. People are pleased to hear the
Devil so set off; they love the occasion of casting upon him all the faults
they are guilty of; and of applauding themselves for victory, when they have
overcome some Temptation which they imagined to have been raised by the
endeavors of that powerful Enemy. We look upon it as a piece of Eloquence not
only to take God's Name in vain but also incessantly to join that of the Devil
with it. In a word, the Almighty forms almost no project, but immediately the
Devil endeavors to destroy it; and the most vicious Men commit scarce any
Crimes, but they are driven to them by the Devil.

Sect. 21. With all those prejudices we undertake the expounding and
translating of the Holy Writ; for having never conceived the least doubt as to
these things, we had never occasion to examine whether they are really true.
But why should we take so much trouble, is it not far more convenient to
believe what is generally believed, and to speak as the other do. The enquiry
of Truth is an undertaking in which little assistance is to be hoped; and there
are so many guards on all the ways that lead to it, that it would prove very
hard to break through. It Is an ancient Proverb, That every one is not allowed
to go to Corinth. Whoever intends to overcome so many difficulties, cannot hope
to succeed but by his diligence, eagerness, and earnestness. To this end, I
know not a better means than to proceed to the Interpretation of the Holy
Scripture, as though it had never been interpreted before; to search into all
things carefully, to enquire after the Connection of all the Doctrines
contained in it; and to have recourse to Interpreters only to borrow some light
for dark places, but not to follow them as true and infallible Guides. This I
hope to put in practice in my second Book, if God gives me life.

Sect. 22. But doubtless this advice will prove serviceable only to my self,
and some few Persons who shall perceive its usefulness; neither have I reason
to hope that it should ever be relisht by the public; Popery being not so far
eradicated out of the Protestants Hearts, but that it springs up again from
time to time in some places, There is a fault, of which the visible Church was
never free; that is, the having too much deference for Authority and Tradition.
For though a great Respect ought to be paid to those that are established as
God's Ministers in the Church, and that several things concerning her external
Government, ought to be ruled by her Directors; yet we must not give up our
selves wholly to them. There is a great regard to be had as to this Point, and
a Mean to be chosen with much Discretion; lest to avoid the reproach of
Irreverence and Irregularity, we should ascribe too much to the Authority of
the Church, and the common Opinion of her chief Doctors: In this Sense it is;
that one of the most learned Men of this Age undertook to assert this Thesis,
Papatus est inseparabilis ab Ecclesia; The Popedom is inseparable from the
Church. As for me, who perhaps have more experience in this matter than any
other Person in these Provinces; I dare not hope this method should change, and
even have no Reason to believe it, considering what passes whilst I am taken up
with this present work. However, I shall prosecute my design, relying upon the
Grace of God, being persuaded that I write for maintaining the Truth, and that
I cannot forbear to do it, since I am informed of it. After all, as I aim at
nothing else but the Glory of God, and the defense of the true Faith; so I see
that my labor has not been in vain, but has already produced great Fruit. This
bears up my Courage, and inspires me with great ardour, to apply my self to the
composition of the following Books.

The End of the First Book.

