THE IRISH SPAW; BEING A Short Discourse on MINERAL WATERS in general. WITH A
Way of Improving by Art weakly impregnated Mineral Waters. AND A brief Account
of the MINERAL WATERS at CHAPPEL-IZOD near Dublin. With Directions for the
Taking of Mineral Waters, either strong, weak, by themselves, or with
Additions. By P. Bellon, Dr. in Physic.

Dublin Printed by J. R. for M. Gunne at the Bible and Crown in Castlestreet,
and Not. Tarrant at the King's Arms in Corn-Market. 1684.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE JAMES Duke of ORMOND, Lord Lieutenant OF IRELAND.
May it please Your Grace,
SPrings tend not more naturally unto their center, then this Discourse to Your
Grace, through whose courteous Invitation I have left my native Soil, to end
the remainder of my days, in the Service of my most Gracious King, in this his
Kingdom, under Your Graces Favor and Protection. This Nation, my Lord, which
is so sensible in its whole and in each individual parts of those vast and
innumerable Benefits and Advantages which it has received from the benign'd
influences of your Graces wise, prudent, and most politic Government, that in
a due sense of Gratitude sends up its daily Prayers to Heaven for Your Graces
Preservation.

That I might not remain useless during my stay in this City, till Your Grace
were pleased to appoint me a fix station, where I might be most serviceable in
my capacity, I thought it convenient to employ my hours of leisure in some
particular, which might tend to a general good.

The Crudities of the River Waters in these parts might have been a proper
Theme to insist upon: but it requiring peradventure a further Scrutiny then the
spare time which I may enjoy here would permit me to enter upon; I diverted my
thoughts on a Spring of Mineral Waters, at a small distance from this place,
the Subject of this Discourse.

Be pleased, my Lord, to protect, these few Sheets under Your Graces Favor,
together with their Subject the Spring by encouraging the search after some
other Head, so much elevated above this, as may place it beyond the
encroachment of common Waters on its Prerogatives; that amongst all the
wonderful goods and advantages which this Nation has received at Your Graces
Hands, there may be added Your Graces miraculous production of a Spring of
Health, from the midst of insalubrious Waters.

If in this first attempt, I am so happy as to please Your Grace, I have my
end, which shall never presume beyond the bounds of being

(May it please Your Grace) Your Grace's Most obliged, most humble, most
obedient Servant, P. Bellon.

THE IRISH SPAW; With a short Discourse on Mineral Waters in general, etc.
HAving been informed that near unto this City there is a Spring of Mineral
Waters, of which diverse persons have drank with good success, as to the Cure of
some particular Diseases; I thought this a fit Subject on which to entertain my
thoughts during my stay in this City, in order to discover its particular
Virtues and Use, by the anatomising of its parts, and by a Chemical examination
of those Metals and Minerals, from whence it derived its Virtues.

In this design I transported my self upon the adjacent places to this Spring,
and there examined the Soil, Situation, distance from fresh and salt Waters,
its Sediment in the Spring, the most proximate Hills. Next I considered the
Water it self, its Color, Odor, Taste, Brightness, Weight, and Softness; and
what Skin, Film or Skum it did afford on the superficies.

Having made some immediate observations on all these circumstantial accidents,
I applied my self unto such persons as might give me, what further observations
they could, as to the Strength of the Water, when it was first found, the
causes and proportions of its Decay, and its Effects, both internal and
external.

To this I added those observations which I made during the diverse trials and
examinations, which are usually performed with Galls, Oak-leaves,
Oaken-vessels, Alum, Spirit of Hearts Horn, distilled Vinager, Oil of Vitriol,
Oil of Tartar, mixing, heating, and boiling of it with Milk, and the like; All
which trials standing good (though weak) but having no effect at all on Milk.
In the next place I entered upon the more judicious and Philosophical way of
examination, by Fire, after a more particular method then is common, whereby
the Gass Silvester, or wild volatile Spirits are so preserved that Judgment may
pass upon them, as well and with as much advantage as on those more gross and
terrene parts, which are rendered visible, not only through common Distillation,
but by Precipitation also. By these examens I was informed of the Minerals with
which it was imbued, though not to that degree that I could wish, through its
late mixture with common Waters.

Having found that though this Mineral Water is tinged with such Minerals as
other efficatious Mineral Waters are, yet in so small a proportion as would not
raise any great hopes of success in the Cure of obstinate chronical Diseases,
but that like unto other weakly impregnated Mineral Waters in other parts, it
would require some Stimulator, to add more virtue unto its weakness; I thought
it convenient to give here a short account of Mineral Waters in general, to
mention the inconveniences which usually attend weakly imbued Waters, and to
offer at the means to supply those defects, and to render them not only equal
to the most powerful natural Mineral Springs, but even to surpass them. Which I
will endeavor to perform with the greatest brevity that I can possible,
considering the large extant of this Subject; after which I shall fall upon
this particular Water, which is the Theme of my Discourse.

That there is a universal Spirit, or Spiritus mundi, which God has
established for the continuation of the Species, which Spirit gives a life to
all beings, is a truth long since agreed upon by the Learned; but how, and
through what conveyers, this Spirit is communicated, and distributed into every
individual being, is that point unto which I would come as near, as this
Subject does require, without amplification.

Springs have been placed and appointed by a Divine Providence, in the Earth,
for the same use, as is the Air, on the surface of it, to be the Vehicles by
which this universal Spirit of the World should be communicated to all the
parts thereof; yet with this difference, that whereas in the Air that
uncontroled Spirit acts more in its purity; in the Waters it is attracted by
matter, and so becomes adherent to it.

The chief attracting matter of this Spirit, is by the Philosophers esteemed to
be Vitriol, in which is contained that subtle acid Juice of the Earth, the sole
cause of that universal Fermentation which precedes all natural productions;
this its external Green and Azurine colors, its internal acidity and its
magnetic property testifies; its Sulphur being that which attracts to it self
the universal Spirit, that opens, unites, gathers and coagulates the
subterraneous vapors, and forms them into Mineral and Metallic substances.

Without dispute Venus is most apparent in this Mineral; and therefore most
ingeniously feigned (by those Poets that were Philosophers) to be the Principle
or Mother of all natural production, which is manifested by its internal
Redness; that generative Blood of Nature, with which she ferments all her
Seeds, and of them produces such varieties of Minerals, Vegetables and Animals,
according to the nature of their respective Matrix.

This animated Vitriol is dissolved in the Waters as they pass thorough
subterraneous concaves, and thence distributed throughout the whole Globe, that
from thence, all things might receive their being, nurture and conservation.
But as these Waters in their progress, sometime do run through the veins and
over the beds of Minerals and Metals, so they are more or less impregnated with
the Medicinal properties of the said Minerals, according to the time of their
stay upon them, and the compactness or flexibility of their Natures, whence
arising to the surface of the Earth, they flow in continual streams of Health.

It was some reflections on this which gave occasion to a Philosopher to say,
Fontes definire Arduum est, cum praeter aquam quam habent naturalem, and in
sitam, Spiritum etiam habeant mundi, ex quo omnia producuntur cujus solius
Fontes sunt delatores per universam Terram, ut hinc omnia desumant and esse
suum, and alimentum, and conservationem. It is difficult, says he, to define
Springs, which (beside their natural innated Water) have the Spirit of the
world also, of which all things are produced, and preserved; the conducts of
which Springs are throughout the whole Earth, that from thence all things may
receive their being, nurture and preservation.

By what has been said it is easily conceived that Springs are not only of a
bare simple Waters, but of such as are impregnated with a Spirit of power to
work wonderful effects.

This Spirit (as we have said) is mixed and incorporated into every mix, which
makes it yield with more facility to that Water which is impregnated with the
same Spirit; so that thereby it attracts the Virtues out of the Minerals, and
appropriates them to it self, which a simple and unspirited Water could not do,
and then it may be thus defined.

A mineral Water is that which has its passages under ground, through the Veins
of one or more, of crude, and sometimes digested Minerals or Metals, by which,
through the assistance of that acid ferment which it carries along with it, it
is first insinuated into, and then impregnated with some proportion of their
Salt, Sulphur, or Mercury, in which three, all the qualities and virtues of
every mix do reside. But above all they are tinged and imbued with the most fix
of these three substances (yet of a dissoluble nature) namely the Salt, in
which is contained, according to the opinion of the learned, the most essential
qualities of every compound.

Mirum est certe amoris Divini symbolum maximum, etc. It is for certain a
wonderful argument of the Divine Love (cries out a Philosopher) that in all the
parts of the world there should be sound Springs endowed with such signal and
admirable Virtues for the Cure of all Diseases! That God of Nature, who to
manifest his infinite Love toward Man, has not only ordained an infinite
number of Animals, Plants, Trees, and Minerals also, not to be reckoned, for
the Cure of Diseases, but moreover has commanded the Springs to pour out
continual streams of Health in all parts.

But to give the Reader a farther inspection into the Constitution of a Mineral
Water, I must say that in the family of Minerals, some are of a more easy and
yielding nature then others, the more perfect, are the more fix, and not so
easy to give their tinctures, such are Metals, amongst which Gold and Silver
are the most compact, and concentred within themselves, Copper, Tinn, Lead and
Mercury, more yielding, and Iron the least locked up of the seven, by reason of
its abundance of crude and undigested Sulphur, which is not of power to secure
the Salt from dissolution in the bare open Air, as the rust which is so
constantly annexed to unhandled Iron does daily testify: But Minerals being of
a less perfect existance then Metals; are therefore more yielding to any
Menstruum or Liquor, in which they are immerged.

Now since that even from Metals may be expected a yielding tincture, full of
virtue and power to cure some particular Diseases; Iron being dissolved with
the most ease, though not esteemed by some of so cordial a Virtue as Gold and
Silver, yet endowed with diverse excellent qualities, it may reasonably be
expected to be proper against most Diseases proceeding from obstructions, Iron
being esteemed by all Authors, without contradiction, to be the most powerful
opener of all Obstructions, in what part soever settled; wherefore I do prefer
that Water which is impregnated with Iron before any other.

But all Mineral Waters are not impregnated alike, some more, some less,
according as they are animated with the acid ferment beforementioned,
proportionable to the yielding or compactness of the Mineral they pass over,
and answerable to their stay upon them; care must be had of choosing such Waters
as are most impregnated, which may be known by these following marks.

Contrary to the best quality of common Waters, which consists in their
lightness, the most heavy and ponderous, the most clear, of a dark greenish
Color, of an acid and brackish Taste, of a sulphurous Smell, and which is the
easiest evaporated, is the best. For its weight denotes a good proportion in it
of that which only gives weight to all things, namely Salts in general. Its
clearness shows it free from heterogenious parts, except such as are annexed to
all Waters, which in the Evaporation of them is found in the bottom of the
vessel, not much unlike a slimy mudd, in looks, smell, and taste, as well as in
consistency, in which (though of such a contemptible aspect) lurks the
essential Salt. But how to order that Earth either before, during the
Evaporations, and after, so as to extract that Salt without any detriment of
its qualities, Hic Labor, hoc Opus. However I have found these terrestrial
particles divested of the Salt, to be of a stiptick and astringent nature,
which could not but retard the Virtue of the essential Salt, and sometimes
create new Diseases in lieu of curing those already contracted, when the Water
is overcharged with them, which does frequently happen when they are drank too
soon after great showers of Rain, before they are perfectly settled and clear.
Its dark Color shows its Impregnation with a Vitriolick or Martial Salt, mixed
with some Sulphur, which Sulphur is also denoted by its Odor. By its activity
and aptness to be evaporated is more at large manifested the considerable
proportion of the said essential Salt; which by his native heat, joined with
that of the culinary Fire, the Humidity or Phlegm is therewith the easier
rarefied. Besides these the dark green Color which it receives from a
competency of this Vitriolick Salt of Iron, is an infallible sign of a Water
apt to yield a good proportion of that essential Salt, and consequently very
medicinal.

Moreover, that Water which is rough to the Palate, which at the first relish
discovers some acid, that terminates into a kind of an austere Bitterness of a
bituminous Odor, that dies the Excrements black, and sometimes the Urines of a
greenish Color, of an easy digestion, quick conveyance through the smallest
vessels, though taken in a small quantity, is to be preferred.

But a Mineral Water so qualified in all respects, is not to be found in all
places, in this our age, whither through that general decay of Nature, (which
in the opinion of some is very remarkable) I shall not now insist upon; but
thus much I here assert, that for want of such Waters, the sick are frequently
obliged to make use of such as are less impregnated, which being not powerful
to cure and eradicate formed Diseases, yet are generally known, and used with
some success in the removing of recent Obstructions, and in preparing the Body
for the reception of specific Medicines, ordained by skilful Physicians,
according to the nature of the Diseases. Which Waters might also be happily
used in confirmed Diseases, were they not to be taken then in such large
quantities (for want of sufficient Impregnation) to make them pass by the
pressure of their own weight, from which there frequently follows an unusual
extension of the Tunicles of the Stomach, and an extinction of its natural
heat, from which two accidents do commonly proceed Hysterical Passions,
Convulsions, Cramps, Palsies, Apoplexies, and the like, and sometimes immediate
Suffocations, which Inconveniences by taking too large quantities of weakly
impregnated Waters, I shall further insist upon from these four particulars,
Quantity, Quality, Time and Place.

First as to Quantity. A Gallon of Water is the usual height, to attain unto
any benefit by them, though sometimes six Quarts, nay two Gallons, have been
devoured, which Quantities are usually taken within the space of an hour, or
two, at the most; the half of this vast quantity to be contained at once,
sometimes in a Stomach which has been debilitated, either by the violence or
duration of the morbifick matter, the tedious persistance in a fruitless course
of Physic, or both; disenabled from digesting and distributing a small
proportion of a good Nutriment, much more incapable of dealing with such a
large quantity of a crude Liquor, so that it frequently happens that the Waters
remain in the Stomach, not passing at every fourth or fifth Glass, as might be
expected, and consequently not to be voyded again but by Vomit, except (as I
have already said) they be pressed down by their own burden (a very dangerous
thing to trust to): For when they chance to go off so on a sudden, it is with
such an impetuous course, that the weight and quantity meeting with some
obstructions in the smaller vessels and passages, thereby are caused great
Inflammations in the Meseraick Veins, Kidneys, Uriteries, Bladder, etc. with so
great a dilatation of the Vessels, to force it self out, that Swounding Fits,
Cold Sweats, and sometimes, without a singular suppliment of Nature, sudden
Death has followed, notwithstanding the use of common Salt, carminative Seeds,
mixtures of other Liquors with the Waters, taking of them in Bed, laying of
warm Clothes and Down Pillows over their Stomachs, the use of Cream of Tartar,
the heating of the Waters, and the like; which last renders them less,
powerful, by the loss of their most subtle parts, which are thereby evaporated;
the Waters remaining more crude and indigestible then before.

Secondly, if the Quantity is so nocent, well may the Quality. To have at once,
in a weakened Stomach, the forementioned quantity of Water, in which the virtual
substance does not exceed the weight of six or eight grains, (all the rest
being of a cold, raw, and undigestible nature) must needs be a wrack to our
Nature, who is contented with a little.

Thirdly, the Sick are limited to such particular seasons of the year, wherein
as the Proverb says, they must make Hey while the Sun shines, and frequently in
the midst of their course, are impeded by some great fall of Rain, which mixing
with the already too crude Waters, does instantly extinguish that small portion
of Virtue which they had, and so are deprived for that time from all kind of
Operation, by which accident the poor Patient is wholly disappointed of his
hopes, and abandoned to the cruel tyranny of a conquering and merciless enemy.

Lastly. And here I must except these Waters, near so great a place of all
manner of Accommodation, as is this City of Dublin, as well as others so
advantagiously situated. I say, that there are no persons who have seen the
great Inconveniences which attend most of the places of drinking the Mineral
Waters, but are already convinced of the great want of better Accommodations, I
mean in reference to the poor, weak, languishing, sick Creatures, which
Inconveniences most chiefly happen by the great concourse of people where
there is such a scarcity of Conveniences. For sick persons being, at the best,
fitted, not as their nice and peevish Humors would require, but as well as
they can, though when in their own habitations, being transported to those cold
and bleek, places, in danger of having added to their other Distempers, Colds,
Coughs, Agues; in a word, exposed to all the injuries of a piercing Air,
besides the stirring up of Humors, raising of Vapors, there confined into
some scanted Cottage, straightened of such necessary Refreshments as are
requisite for them, must of necessity prove, if well examined, more prejudicial
in general, then those Mineral Waters can do good. I speak not of such whose
plentiful Fortunes can render all places alike commodious to them, but of the
generality.

Thus much as to Mineral Waters in general, and the many Inconveniences which
attend the taking of weak impregnated Waters. Now if such accidents do usually
attend the use of weakly impregnated Waters, is it not a charitable act to
endeavor the removing of all these forementioned impediments? It is well known
that this has been already done in England and elsewhere; and no question but
that it may be also performed in this Kingdom, in supplying the Weakness of
these Waters, by joining unto a small proportion of them, the essential Salt
extracted out of others more strongly impregnated Waters, of the same nature
and operation with these. Whereby they will be rendered more powerful in their
Operations, enabled to carry themselves through all Obstructions, and that, not
by the violence of their own weight, but by gently insinuating themselves, and
by their penetrating qualities, piercing through the most remote opilated and
obstructed parts of the Body.

This, I humbly offer for the public Good of this Nation, unto which I have
been lately called, until I find some opportunity of being more serviceable.
Namely, an essential Vitriolick Salt of Mars, extracted out of Mineral Waters,
so far to be preferred before most of Mineral Waters, as a strong rectified pure
Spirit of Wine before a weak phlegmatic Brandy, or a Chemical Extraction before
a mere Galenick Potage. For any person that is not prepossessed with
prejudicate Opinions, against the scientifick Art of Chemistry, or too much
biased with his own Interest, but will confess upon trial that this essential
Salt, in which the Virtues of the Waters reside, being-first disengaged from
that large proportion of Phlegm, in which it lay drowned, and after mixed with a
less proportion of the same or with some other idoneous Vehicle, will thereby
be rendered, more convenient and easy to be taken, and received in the Stomach,
and there once received, more powerful and active both in it self, and its
commixture, to operate upon the peccant Ferment, to mix with the Chyle, and to
be conveyed with more facility and quick dispatch, even to the most remote
Digestions.

For this essential Salt is hot, piercing, searching, opening, and driving from
the center to the circumference, by which Qualities it does powerfully resist
all putrid and indigested Humors, the results of evil Fermentations, which
produce such a variety of Obstructions, in all parts of the Body, by
attenuating with its piercing heat their viscous and tenacious parts, which
choke up the small passages of the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, by which the
free and natural Circulation of the natural, animal and vital Spirits is
impeded. By its dissolving quality liquifying and mixing it self with the crude
Humors, and by its dilating faculty insinuating it self into the most remote
and last Digestions, there aiding Nature to overcome whatsoever is offensive to
her; nay, if timely taken, preventing all Obstructions, first caused by ill
Digestions in the Stomach, which at such a time produces a viscous Phlegm, in
lieu of a laudible Chyle; for Errors in the first Digestion, are not rectified
in the second or third. Thus Waters so qualified either in themselves, or
through the addition and assistance of such a Salt, mix themselves with the
natural ferment, aid and enable it to oppose, combat and suppress, all
preternatural Fermentations, disingage the Stomach from all Crudities, cause
the generation of a good Chyle, attend it to a perfect Sanquification,
circulate with the Blood, and driving forth all serossities, and other
impurities they are instrumental in the creation of quick and active Spirits;
so that by these means they may with Justice deserve the glorious title of
universal Restorers and Preservers, by cleansing, correcting and strengthening
all the natural Faculties, which being vitiated are the Causes of all Diseases.
And Natura corroborata est omnium Morborum medicatrix.

In the just Commendations of arightly impregnated Mineral Waters, I could
enlarge my self at pleasure on every particular; but my intention being more to
inform in the matter of fact, then to amuse with multiplicity of Notions, I
shall conclude this part of my discourse, and proceed to the other, which has
respect to the ways and methods of using them both, as to the prevention and
the extirpation of Diseases.

I have said that all Diseases proceed at first from a deviation of the
Functions of the Stomach: If therefore any persons are sensible of sick
intervals, Weakness, Oppressions, Rawness, Gnawings, Burning in the Stomach, a
dog-like Appetite, or a nauseating of Food, and the like; to intercept all
Diseases that would follow, let them by way of prevention, suppress those evils
in their buds with the use of Mineral Waters, in this following method.

First let them apply themselves to some learned able Physician, to have the
Humors well prepared, according to the Constitutions of the Bodies; for that
maxim Proemisis universalibus is always to be regarded. From the omission of
this caution do ordinarily proceed all the errors, and ill consequences, which
follow the unruly taking of any Mineral Water, though never so good, if you
will add the faults of the Patients, and ill Diets, which is the bane of all
the ill begun, and worse prosecuted, Cures.

According to the natural strength and vigor of the Waters you drink, or the
proportion of essential Salt you add to them, so must your Doses be; and this
learned by experience the first day.

Never begin to drink till the Sun be a little high, after the drinking of each
Glass of half a pint, walk or ride moderately, till the Liquor begins to pass,
either by stool or by urine; but those that are not able to perform either of
those two exercises, are to be easily agitated in a Coach.

Increase daily by one Glass, till you come to two quarts, for strong and
vigorous Bodies, which is the most that any must ascend to. When you are come
to the tolerable quantity, stay in it during 8 or 10 days, according as you
find your self able. When you are near bidding the Waters farewell, decrease for
four or five days, till you come to your first proportion.

All that is to be drunk every day, must be done at the furthest within an hour.

When you walk or otherwise exercise, let it be moderately, resting by
intervals, and use not a superfluous toil, which does not awaken, but rather
choke up Nature, and hinders the free Expulsion.

Put off your Dinner till you find that the best part of the Water is past, and
to that purpose, when the Waters work only by Urines, as those of Tunbridge,
you must measure your Urine in Glasses of equal dimensions to the former; but
where the Waters work both ways, a sign that the most are passed, is when the
Urine does come again to its natural yellow Color.

Let your Dinner be light, and your Supper lighter, of one or two sorts of
Meats, at the most, young, tender, of easy Digestion, and good juicy
substance, roasted, and not boiled. No Fruit, no Milk nor Cheese: no Veneson,
Tarts nor Spices; no Fish. Use well baked White Bread, good middling Beer or
Ale, clear, ripe, and well settled, and good French White Wine, or small
Rhenish, as Baccarach. All mixtures of Drinks, and adulterated Wines are most
dangerous.

You will do well to weigh your selves every morning before you drink, and
after, to know what alteration there is made by Stools and Sweats, if you have
any.

I forbear mentioning here any digestive Powders, Cordials, or the like, to
fortify the Stomach, because that having a Water sufficiently strong of it
self, or made so by the addition of the essential Salt, it has heat sufficient
in it self, to assist the Stomach withal.

Now a word to those that use weakly impregnated Waters (for want of better, or
not having the essential Martial Salt) for the opening of slight Obstructions,
and new found Distempers.

Let them consult their Physicians in order to have such digestive Powders and
Cordials, in readiness, as will best suit with their Constitutions, to prevent
all inconveniences.

The ordinary Remedies are the use of Mace, Cardamome, Anise, Foenel and
Caraway Seeds grossly beaten to powder, and mixed with four times as much of
Loaf-sugar in powder, of which, they take half a spoonful after Meal; this for
the digesting Powder. Their Cordials made of cold Mint and Balm-water, with a
little Wormwood, Cardamome, Hot Waters, and sweetened with Syrup of
Clove-July-flowers. They use also to take betwixt each Pint Glasses some Anise
or Caraway Comfits, Candied Orange-peels and the like.

The best way of mixtures or heating of the Waters is thus. First to mingle
with the first and second Glass, one or two spoonful in each of pure rich
Canary, secondly to have hard by the Well a Kettle full of Water with Fire
under, to heat it, in which Kettle put diverse Stone Bottles full of the Mineral
Waters taken within the Well, very well stopped, and when the Water is
moderately warm; take out of one quart Bottle but two Glasses at the most,
leaving the sediment behind. Thirdly, they may be taken in bed, a little warm,
bearing upon the Region of the Stomach a Down Pillow; when the whole quantity
has been taken, and by the warmth of the Bed, the Water begins to pass, then
the Patient must go to his moderate exercise, of walking, riding on Horseback
or in a Coach, according to the strength of the Body and his convenience.

These and the like miserable shifts are such glad to use, which drink too
weakly impregnated Waters.

To drink but few days the Waters of any sort, is to no purpose, the shortest
time, if nothing intervenes is one month, if the Waters pass currantly, and the
Patient find a good effect toward the romoval of some old chronical Disease,
he may go further. By all means if Rainy weather comes forcibly leave off
drinking, except you have at hand some of the essential Salt, to revive the
Waters. And from the beginning after three or four days trial, if the Waters
remain in the Body, and are not voided, leave off.

Some persons are costive during the drinking of such Waters, as only purge by
Urines; those, if they refuse Clysters, may take every third or fourth day
Stomachal purging Pills, a quarter of an hour before Supper, as those de
Ammoniaco, Mastichinae Fernellii, Stomachicarum cum Gum mis, de Hyera, or the
like.

When arrived to the end of this task, to draw out of the Body all that might
be lodged in the Veins, or elsewhere, one, two, or three Purgations, if needs
be, are not to be omitted, which done, nothing remains, but every one to make
much of himself, returning little by little to his ordinary manner of life,
within the Rules of Art and Mediocrity.

Now to come to this particular Mineral Water, near to Chappel-Izard; I say in
the first place, that as it is now situated, it is impossible to preserve it
long in its puris naturalibus, and without some mixtures of common Waters by
all the means imaginable. But with care and industry it may be traced unto the
foot of the neighboring Hill, some two or three yards high, from whence
undoubtedly it proceeds, and there guarding it round with good strong Clay,
then walling it in, and fixing a Basin over its rise, there it may be kept from
all dangers, but a sudden fall of Waters, unto which inconveniences all
Mineral Waters are liable. But so long as it remains on such a flat bottom, so
near to a running stream, liable to be overwhelmed upon every glut of Rain, it
will never be of any significant use, for the Cure of any chronicall Diseases,
though it may succeed with some in the opening of slite recent Obstructions.

For though I deny not but that in diverse places Mineral Springs have been
overflowed through their proximity to Rivers, and low situations; and yet
presently upon the retreat of the floods have remained as strong and vigorous
as before, by reason that the strongly impregnated Waters have kept them
stations, by the weight which they received from their own Salts, not
admitting, but of a very slight and superficial mixture, with the intruding
Liquor; yet when other Waters break under ground in to the course of the
Mineral Waters, and so roll together for some space, they are so mixed per
minima, and so wholly enervated that no good can be expected from them.

Though I am not of a humor to content my self with Pythagoras his Scholars
bare Ipse dixit, yet here I have been forced to take diverse things upon trust,
through the late accidental weakness of the Mineral Waters near Chappel-Izard.
But as to what has fallen under my inspection, upon those trials which I have
made, thus much I can say, that when I mixed some Powder of Galls with it in a
Glass, it turned purple; adding a little Alum, it turned blackish: Oak-leaves
in powder have made it of a subrufus brown, which has turned blackish with a
little distilled Vinagre. With Spirit of Hearts horn, I caused a white
separation to be made with some little sulphurious or bituminous Odor, which
was reduced again to its natural clearness, with some few drops of Oil of
Tartar. With Oak-leaves, or Galls being tinged, some few drops of Oil of
Vitriol have caused a separation of a black sediment. This Sediment being
examined, proves to contain a Vitriolick Salt of Mars. Its being mixed with
equal parts and boiled with Milk makes no alteration.

In the precipitation of it I have found a subtle Gass or sharp fume to arise
somewhat sulphurious, which speaks it to partake also of Sulphur.

In the Distillation in close Glass vessels, it has afforded a small proportion
of this acid wild Spirit, which has been turned red with powder of Galls that
were placed in the Receiver.

In the bottom of the Glassvessel I found a black sediment, not much unlike
mudd, out of which I have extracted some few grains of a Vitriolick Salt of
Mars.

All which examinations and trials make me conclude that this Mineral Water is
imbewed with a slender proportion of Iron, Vitriol, Sulphur and Alum; which
answers very properly to its effects, and to the Soil adjacent to it; and it is
my opinion that it partakes of Nitre also, though I found none.

I have been credibly informed, that when it was first found out, it had over
it a very thick scum of Rust, which denoted its passage through some Iron Mine,
how remote from its rise, it matters not. It had under that scum, a thin skin
or film, Cauda Pavonis, or Rainbow commonly called, for the variety of its
Colors, which it borrowed either from the Sulphur of Mars, or of common
Brimstone, which last I am more apt to believe, because that then it had a
strong bituminous odor and taste.

No great observations can be made upon the Soil through which it passes; it is
like unto most of the Earth about this place mixed with small pieces of a
glittering Stone, which, by chewing in my mouth I scaled so thin, that no Talk
could be more finely split, nor yield a more glorious luster and whiteness;
this, and some small particulars of a kind of courser Talk, called Lapis
Entalis, which Schroder mentions, together with a common grayish Sand, and a
Dust of the same color, is the compound of that Earth nearest to it, which
would give me occasion not to despair of finding some Aluminous Mine, or Talk
Veins in the neighboring Hills, if some pains were taken about it.

The Qualities and Virtues of the Minerals wherewith this Water is impregnated,
are these.

Mars, or Iron, is hot, dry, internally red, it consists of a double Mercury,
burning and black, of a red Sulphur and an impure Earth. It is piercing,
opening and corroborating; good against all Obstructions, debility of the
Stomach, all Fluxes: it is an Alkali, therefore a great dulcifier of the Blood,
etc.

Vitriol, there are diverse sorts, and of various colors; it is commonly white,
blue, and green; I have seen some in Poland that was yellow, and some red. It
abounds in a combustible Sulphur, and a corrosive acid; it contains a sweet
anodine Oil, difficult to be had; it is internally red. It is stiptick,
emetick, detersive, hot and drying: it partakes of the virtues of Mars and
Venus; it is good against all Inflammations, especially of the Eyes.

Alum, of Alum there are diverse sorts also, and diverse comprehend Vitriol under
the nature of Alum, of which it only differs in a metallic Sulphur; it is void
of Tincture. Paracelsus does attribute the Names of Salts unto external Ulcers,
according to the diversity of the congelations of Salts; if it is a red Ulcer,
he calls it Vitriolick: if without redness, aluminous; and because there are
diverse sorts of Alum in respects of Tastes, and some that are wholly insipid, as
the Alumen Entalis, plumosum, etc. There are likewise insipid tuberous Ulcers.
It is stiptick, drying, cooling, coagulating, and dissolving; it most
powerfully resists putrefactions, precipitates evil Ferments, allays the
Inflammations of the Bowels, and stops a Gangraine.

Sulphur, it is called the Rosin, the Lungs of the Earth, the second acting
principle, existant in mixed bodies: from it whatsoever is combustible either
liquid or solid is called Sulphur, or sulphurious. There are two sorts, one
that is combustible, and another that is incombustible. The combustible is that
which is burnt, and yields no smoke, but is inflamable: The incombustible
yields no flame, but remains fix and permanent: Sulphur is found either
coagulated, or liquid, in the form of a Bitumen; as it is found in the Mines
before it is separated by fusion from its earth it is called, Living. It
differs from Vitriol only in the external form, and each may easily be
transformed into the other; therefore they have much the same qualities and
virtues, only this last is more inflamable, and a particular friend to the
Lungs.

Thus much as to the Nature of those Minerals that have embued these Waters,
from whence may be gathered the reasons why it cures recent Obstructions,
cleanses the Reins, Uriters, and Bladder: aids Dropsical persons, cases the
pains of the Gout and Rhumatisms, procures an Appetite, fortifies the tone of
the Stomach, and corroborates the Visceras.

Now as to this essential Vitriolick Salt of Mars which I have mentioned, to be
used to add strength and energy to those Waters that are but superficially
embued with Mineral tinctures; it may seem strange to some persons, and I
expect that some will be sound amongst the ignorant mobile, that will deride my
Proposition; but Hos oblatrantes caniculos cum contemptu praetereo. I address
my self to the learned only, and to them I further add, that besides the
Extraction of this essential Salt from Mineral Waters, and the rejoyning of it
to others of the same nature, or to its former Vehicle, in a larger proportion
then before. I say, that of late days all Mineral Waters, either for drinking
or bathing, have been by some ingenious Artists so exactly imitated, after some
Philosophical Speculations used on the Natures of the natural Springs; nay, I
may say, outdone, that by those factitious Mineral Waters, as great Cures have
been performed in the Patients particular habitations, as any have been by the
natural Springs upon the place; and what is more, the Artificial Baths brought
to those several degrees of heat, as the natural ones have at the Baths,
without the aid or assistance of any culinary fire; to which have been added
all the other accidents, of Odours, Tastes, Colors, and of Tinging Silver into
a curious Solar tincture. All which things were once pretended to, at the place
which goes under the notion of the Dukes Balneo in Longaore, London: But how
performed, I leave to all ingenious persons to judge, that have used those
Baths, and drank of that Water. The Art of Chymy has a multitude of
Well-wishers, as many pretenders to, and more that court her designedly: But ex
quovis Ligno, non fit Mercurius. There are but few that make use of those two
things which Galen reckons as necessary concurrants to the attaining the
perfect Knowledge of Arts and Sciences, or the nature of any simple Medicine,
viz. Experience and Reason, from which there arose in his time two Sects of
Physicians, the one called Empiricks, the others Methodists. The Empirick did
only observe the Operations and Effects of Medicines, and never troubled
themselves concerning their Natures, or the reasons of those effects, but used
all Medicaments promiscuously, to the prejudice of many. The Methodists were
not satisfied with the bare finding out of the Virtues of Medicaments, but
added to the OTI the ALOTI, diving into the Nature of the same. These he termed
the two Legs of a true Physician, upon which he would have him to stand and
walk.

It is an easy matter to pretend to things, and after the picking here and
there some moldy Receipts, and Terms of Art, to cant, especially in Chymy,
before the unthinking multitude, but first to entertain Philosophical Notions,
and then to reduce them unto Mechanical real Demonstrations, belongs but to a
few. And now that my Reader may not put me in the number of the great Talkers
and little Doers, as to what I have in this Discourse proposed, I offer to
produce, after a month or six weeks time, sufficient quantity of the Essential
Vitriolick Salt of Mars, extracted from Mineral Waters, to supply this City,
every season of drinking the Waters, or all the year long, at the same
reasonable Rates that any true and genuine Essential Salt of Mars can be
prepared. I could make larger proffers yet; but I forbear, lest it should be
thought I were biased by Interest, or blown up with Ostentation. The curious
learned I shall ever be ready to serve, in giving them all the satisfactory
Demonstrations that I can possible, in every particular which I have mentioned
in this Discourse, or in any thing else that I am capable. Mean time, if they
please to spend some hours in the Trials of such Chemical Preparations as I have
faithfully delivered to the public in my Intruduction to the French Author, in
a Treatise, called, A new Mystery in Physic, discovered by Curing of Fevers
and Agues with the Jesuits Powder, printed for William Crook, at the Green
Dragon without Temple Bar, 1681. There they will find, wherewith to satisfy
their Curiosity, till they command me further.

In meliorem partem interpretari debemus quae nobis dubia sunt.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Had but just ended this precedent Discourse, when word was brought me, of a
new Mineral Spring found, in the Road that leads to the first, near the Gate; I
immediately went to examine it upon the place, and caused some of the Water to
be brought home to me for further inspection. But after all sorts of Examens, I
found these last much less impregnated then the others, though they participate
of the same Minerals with the first.

In both a Vitriolick Salt of Mars predominates; they have so weak a tincture
of Alum, that neither of them has the power to turn Milk, though for a long
time boiled together in equal proportions, which speaks these Waters to be
Alkalies, and consequently dulcifiers of Acids.

This last found Spring has, within less then a foot of it, another of fresh
common Water, which peradventure does commix with it, and may be the cause of
its weakness; and in my opinion, neither of these Waters can last long
untainted, except care be taken to trace them, on some more eminent ground,
where they may be secured from the insultations of violent Rains, Floods, and
Springs of common Waters.

To conclude, considering the visible decay of either of these Waters, though
removed but to the City from their Springs, especially the last, which would
scarce afford any Tincture at all with Galls, it were very requisite that these
Waters should be drank upon the place. To which purpose I could wish there were
better Accomodations and Conveniences, suitable to the occasions of the more
modest of the modest Sex.

To this purpose, if Rows of Tents were pitched on each side of the Green,
proportionable to the concourse of people, and a large Walk left between, it
would supply in some measure the natural conveniences, which a multitude of
Shrubs and Bushes, besides some winding Dales betwixt close Hills, in other
places of the like resort, do afford.

To which might be added, according to the laudable custom of Foreign Nations
(which has been taken up of late in some parts of England also) the
divertisement of Music, Bowling, Pins, Lotteries, Shooting, or any other
pastimes, to disingage the Mind from too serious or melancholic thoughts.

Ut sit Men's sana in Corpore sano. FINIS.

