THE Court Secret: A NOVEL.

PART. I.

Written by P. B. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for R. Baldwin, near the Black-Bull in the Old Bailey.
1689.

TO THE Right Ho^ John, LORD LO^ etc. Captain of the Band of Pensioners.
MY LORD,
THE Motives which have induced so great a stranger as I am, to shroud under
your Honors Protection, this little Historical Novel, is that Zeal, which,
from Heaven, animated your Breast, and pushed you forward, to be Exemplary in
the earliest endeavors of uniting your own Person, and those worthy Patriots,
under your Lordships Conduct, to our late Generous Liberator's aid, our now
most Gracious Lord and King, in the Freeing of our Distressed Country from
those many heavy Pressures under which it had lain groaning so long, and which
invited that Personal Valor, with which you so bravely Opposed the Multitude,
which only could resist, (though not without the forfeiture of their Lives,)
your no less Just than Generous Designs. I have entertained some hopes, My
Lord, that you would be pleased to look with a favorable Aspect, on a Piece
borrowed from a Design much like that, which stirred up your Honor to lay all
at stake, when the True Religion, and the Proper Liberty of the Subject, called
out so loud on all true English Men's Assistance. I am very sensible, My Lord,
of the fair opportunity I have at present, to enumerate, in a large Catalogue,
your Honors Noble Qualities and Virtues, according to our Modern way of
Dedications; and certainly, My Lord, I could not let pass so fit an Occasion,
of following the Mode, but that I had been perfectly informed, how much your
Honor abhors such Gross Flattery, which has raised in me a fear of offending
your Lordships Generous Temper, and made me rest contented, with the Relation
of those few, but true Passages, culled from a prodigious Heap, which, besides
the business I had in hand, Justice it self required from me, at the beginning
of this Epistle. May your Lordship long live on Earth, to enjoy the Fruits of
those Noble Endeavors and Achievements, and receive hereafter in Heaven,
those Rewards laid up for such, as like your Lordship, preferred the safety of
their Religion and Country, before their own Lives, and all other Worldly
Interests; So most heartily Prays,

My Lord, Your Honors most Humble Servant, P. B.

The Court Secret: A NOVEL.
THere are no States nor Empires, but, at some time or other, have felt the
dreadful Effects of those Rebellions, which, under the specious Cloak of
Reformation in Religion, have been stirred up and fomented by the Turbulent
Spirits of Wicked Ambitious men; and though our Europe can sufficiently supply
us with useful Examples of the same, yet it is not to be fixed wholly to that
little Corner of the World; all Countries that the Sun enlightens, have shared
in those general Calamities; amongst which, the Ottoman Empire will at this
present furnish us with a Story.

The Mohammedan Religion, which is singular in that vast Empire, is not without
Divisions into diverse Sects, of which the principal is that of a great Prophet
amongst them, named Haly, which was at first the same with Mahomet, but since,
through the Ambition Pride, and Luxury of its Priests, so altered and
disguised, by the introduction of an Idolatrous, Impertinent, Pompous way of
Worship, that there is not so much left in it, as its true Name; for the
Followers of it scorn to call it after its Founders Name, but distinguish it
from their true Ancient Religion of Mahomet, by the name of Haly's Universal
Religion.

Those Innovations were the Cause that a select number of the true Mahometans,
seeing so many Superstitious Ceremonies daily introduced into the outward
worship, and so much Idolatry in the Essential part of their Religion, and
every Age still adding new Inventions to that new superstructure, did withdraw
themselves from those so gross and palpable Affronts which were daily offered
unto the Deity, by taking from the Creator the Honor and Glory, which of all
right and due does only, and wholly appertain to him, to give to his Creature;
and they worshipped their God by themselves, in Holiness of Life, and Purity of
Doctrine, protesting against all those Innovations which had been foisted in,
by the proud Priests of the Sect of Haly. For which, the Priests of Haly's Sect
were not wanting in all their Arts, to cast dirt on the true Mahometans; they
proclaimed them Schismatics, Heretics, Dogs, and persecuted them in all
places with Fire and Sword, declaring that they deserved a worse Usage yet, for
having separated themselves from the Body of the Church; while they themselves
were the persons that had distanc'd themselves, and fallen off from the true
Mohammedan Religion, by their prodigious addition of new Inventions, not
becoming any sober, true Religion, while that those which they so much
calumniated, were the true Observers of the Mohammedan Religion, which they
still followed, and had only separated themselves from the Innovations of the
Halists, to avoid offering of those great Injuries to their God, which so
Idolatrous a Guilt as the Halists did practice, would have obliged them to do.

The Persians, who had more generally embraced the corrupt Sect of Haly than
the Turks had, were more numerous and powerful than the true Mahometans, and
their Emperors were such Zealous Maintainers of it, that, as their present
Emperor has declared, they had designed long since to root out of their
Dominions the Mohammedan Religion, but that the State Affairs would not till his
time admit of ^o great a Change. But he being wholly governed by the most
wicked order of Professors of the Sect of Haly, he followed their advice, and
began by the murder of his own Subjects, of the true Mohammedan Religion, that
Universal Reduction to Haly's Sect, of all the true Mahometans, which he
pretended to accomplish.

In that he has outdone all his Predecessors, for they contented themselves
with retrenching little by little, the Authority which Separatists (as they
called the true Mahometans) had obtained, together with the Privileges and
Liberty which they enjoyed in their own Empire, and in sending into the
Mohammedan Empire swarms of Emmissaries of the Sect of Haly: especially of those
from amongst them, which are the most Learned and most Wicked, and that amongst
all the rest of the distinct Orders amongst the Priests of Haly, have as
proudly as wrongfully assumed the Title of the order of Mahomet, had thence
called themselves Mahometists.

Selim, the first Turkish Emperor of that Name, who had Married a Daughter of a
Persian Emperor, of the Sect of Haly, did dreadfully feel the effects of the
Divisions which those wicked Mahometists had sowed amongst his People. For a
certain sort of disaffected Men to the Government both in Church and State,
under the pretense of Reformation in both, raised Arms and Rebelled against
their lawful Emperor, took him Prisoner, Murdered him, and chose the Aga of
the Janissaries to be their Protector, after they had caused the Sultana and her
three Sons, Selim the Second, Amurat and Osman, to fly from their Cruelty into
Persia. Where she attempted by the solicitation of the Mahometists, to have her
Children (who had always been brought up by Selim's particular Care in the
Mohammedan Religion, in which he himself had lived and died) to be brought over
to her own Persuasion, which being come to Selim the Second's Knowledge, he got
from her his youngest Brother, which he secured under good hands, but she
retained Amurat, which by that means was brought up in the Sect of Haly.

After the Turks had lived some years under diverse sorts of Governments, still
finding themselves, as often as they changed of Form of Government, after the
Death of him they had chose Protector, in a worse condition than they were
under the Reigns of their lawful Emperor, they recalled back Selim the Second
from his Exile; he and his two Brothers were received by the whole Empire, with
all the Expressions of Joy imaginable, he was seated on his Throne, Crowned,
and even Adored by his People.

Of Truth, never was Prince, except his Father, Endowed with so much Goodness
and Mildness, mixed with Majesty and Greatness of Soul. He had not been long
reestablished in his Dominions, but that, through the solicitation of his
people, who earnestly desired to be governed by an Offspring of so good a
Prince, he Married a Foreign Princess, of the same temper of mind as himself,
though an Halist, by whom he had no Issue.

This was a great Misfortune to him, because that his natural, mild, and good
disposition, did incline him infinitely to love Children, and the Conversation
of the (...) Sex, when he had a mind (...) bend his thoughts, and give (...)
self some Divertion from the business of State.

Cha-abas, the then Emperor of Persia, who had filled Selim's Empire with all
sorts of Orders of the Sect of Haly, especially of the Mahometists, who were
like so many Spies in Selim's Court, was informed amongst the rest of Selim's
Amorous Disposition, to which Inclination he gave the more scope, for want of
Children by his Sultaness, to pass his time with. There was sent over to that
purpose, a Persian Woman, indifferently handsome, of a mean Extraction, a great
Zealot of the Sect of Haly; with full instructions how to gain Selim's
Affections, and when that was done, how to govern him, get from him a certain
Knowledge of all the most private Consultations and Designs of the State, and
to influence him in all his undertakings; she soon got so much the mastery over
Selim's Heart, that through her means, all the secrets of the Port were known
in Persia, according to which, Cha-abas, and his Mahometical Counsel, did take
such measures, as did still tend toward accomplishing that great work, of
extirpation of Heresy (as they styled it) which had been so long contriving.

It was thought that the quickest way would be, in getting Selim to forsake the
Religion he was brought up in, and to bring him over to the Sect of Haly: very
particular instructions were given to that purpose to his Persian Mistress,
whom he loved the more, because she had brought him forth some Children, which
were the Darlings of Selim's Heart. She together with others of that Faction in
the Court, did use all their Endeavors to bring that great work about, and
finding him so firm and steadfast to his Principles in Religion, as not in the
least to yield to their Solicitations; Cha-Abas, with his wicked Counsel,
thought it fit to remove him from the Throne, to make room for his Brother
Amurat, who as you have already heard, was very zealous to the Sect of Haly,
and did privately profess it.

All things being fitted in Church and State for that great Change, upon which
depended the entire and universal destruction, of the true Ancient Orthodox
Mohammedan Religion, so long before designed, and privately whispered about, and
which could never be accomplished, till the Mohammedan Religion, as it was
particularly exercised in the Ottoman Empire, were first ruined. There was a
design framed of Murdering the Sultan, of sending over a Persian Army, all of
the Sect of Haly, of sending Commissions to all the Nobility, that were of the
Sect of Haly in Selim's Empire, and in fine, of setting up Amurat to be Sultan,
who should aid to bring in the Sect of Haly, and by his Power and Authority
maintain it, and should declare himself of that Sect, and the Maintainer of it.

The Storm was ready to break and fall upon the Ottoman Empire from Persia,
when the Plot was discovered, the Grand Council of the Divan being Summoned,
they took the business into consideration, sifted it to the bottom, and found
out all the contrivances, the Conspirators, and their Abettors; all those that
could be seized at Constantinople and elsewhere in the Empire, were put in
Prison, Examined. Convicted by Authentic and undeniable Evidences, to be
guilty of the Enterprise, which being against the Laws of the Empire, they
suffered the Condign Punishment which the said Laws had ordered to be inflicted
on such Notorious Criminals; after which, all the Priests of the Sect of Haly
were seized, that could be taken; and according to a Statute of the Empire,
whereby they are declared Traitors, diverse of them received the due Reward of
such Villainous Enterprises, which they had made against the Sultan and the
Empire. And all those in the Empire, of what degree and condition soever, that
were of the Sect of Haly, were divested from all Public Offices or Employes,
incapacitated for the future, from having any Sway, or bearing any Offices
either Civil or Military, banished from Court, and commanded to remain at
twenty Miles distance from Constantinople, on great Penalties.

Thus that great storm, which so severely threatened the whole destruction of
the Ottoman Empire, was dispersed, and the Empire reassumed again its pristine
Greatness, Quiet, and Natural Te^^^, all ^ersons believing themselves, and
secure from any fut^^ A^em, (...) o^ that Nature, by (...) wholesome Laws, tha^
Selim and his great Council did Enact upon this great Deliverance, amongst
which they would have made one, that should have excluded from succeeding to
the Throne, any Persons that should be of Haly's Sect, though they were in all
other respects qualified, and known to be the undoubted Heir to the Empire. But
Selim's tender Love and Affection to his Brother Amurat, would never permit him
to give his consent to it, so that it was not done.

Things were in this posture, when Roxana, of whom we are going to rehearse the
Story, began to appear in the World, with all those Charms, which made her as
many Slaves as she had of Spectators.

She was Daughter to Aladin, the Seraquiere or Lord Lieutenant of a Province, a
Person of a Noble Extraction, very Wealthy and Popular, and of the Sect of
Haly: She was Endowed by Nature with all the Perfections, which could
accomplish a Person of about eighteen or nineteen years of Age, and she had
received an Education proportionable to her Birth and Beauty. Her Father, who
perfectly understood the ways of the Court, thought it his best course, in
order to preserve his Fair Daughter from the censure of the World, to keep her
as far as he could from Constantinople, and to dispose of her in Marriage to
some Worthy Person, suitable to her Quality, and that great Portion which he
designed her.

But his Wife, being of another mind, and very desirous to see the Court, did
watch but for a time to go thither, and to bring her beautiful Daughter Roxana
along with her. She was not long without a fair occasion for that purpose. Her
Sister Marrying of her Daughter there, to a person who had a very considerable
Employ at the Port. The earnest Invitation which they received from her Sister,
to honor them with their presence, and some occasion which did call upon
Aladin, to give his attendance at the Port about that time upon earnest
business; made them to take hold of this Opportunity, so that they all came to
Constantinople, where Aladin had a very stately Palace of his own.

It was not long before Roxana's Beauty was blazed all about Constantinople,
even within the Gates of the Seraglio; amongst those who had had the happy
Opportunity of seeing this Beauty, one who was the Son of a Bassa, and who had
an House in another Street, whose Wall joined to the end of Aladin's Garden,
was the most passionate of all her Lovers. He had contrived so cunningly, a
hole in the Stone Wall, which answered to Aladin's Garden, that it could not be
perceived, it being so small in Aladin's Garden, and large enough in Ibrahim's
Garden (so was the Lover called) to put his Head in so, that he could almost
see all over that part of the Garden, that was next to that Walk. He had heard
of Raxana's Beauty, which had made him desirous to see whether her Face did
answer that Fame which was spread of her, and having learned that all the Air
that she took, was in the Walks of her Garden, which was not overlooked from
any house, but her Fathers; and that neither himself, nor any body else had
lived in his House, since the death of his Father, therefore he hoped to
gratify his earnest desires and curiosity.

He wanted not of opportunity of seeing Roxana, for she delighting in
Cultivating of Flowers, did Constantly toward the Cool of the Evening walk in
the Garden, and look after her Plants; one day, a sudden shower of Rain
falling, she was forced to retire into a little Summer House, where, sitting
down, she began to entertain her sel^ with her Woman, and the Subject of her
discourse being the marriage at which she had lately assisted, she asked her
Woman what she thought of the Bridegroom? who made answer, that she did think
him very accomplished. To which, Roxana replied, that for her part she could
not affect him, and then began to speak of a man as she would like, and that
she could Love. Her maid said, that such a man was not to be found in Nature;
to which she replied again, that she would have such a one or none, and that
she would stay till she found such a one. This discourse was clearly overheard
by Ibrahim, who had then cause to admire her Wit, as well as her Beauty; of a
truth he was so taken with both, that he resolved upon a Declaration of Love,
which he thought ought first to be ushered in by asking of her Parents Consent,
and immediately he set some of his Friends about it, but his Suit was so
rejected by the Father, who designed to marry her in his own Province, that
Ibrahim thought it needless to apply himself any longer to her Parents, but
resolved to endeavor the gaining of her Affections by all the means
imaginable; but how to come to the speech of her, or by what means to convey
his thoughts to her, was the business. After diverse thoughts on that point, he
thought it convenient to usher in his declaration by some pieces of Services,
such as he should be capable of performing, and which he should think would
please her best.

He had not been above two or three days in Town since the death of his Father
which was above two years before, and having scarce been seen at
Constantinople, he gave out to those few Friends which he had visited, that a
business of importance which he was to accomplish, in the Country, and which
had occasioned his coming to Constantinople, calling for him in haste back, he
would be immediately gone again; after which having taken leave of them, and
gone with his People out of Town a little way, he sent them all to his Country
House, under the care of his Steward, only retaining with him one Slave, who
was his Gardner, in whom he had reposed very great Confidence. He had lain at a
Friends House those two days he had been in Town, so that the Gates of his
House having not at all been opened, in the Night he returned into the Town,
where being come, he sent his Slave Moretto to get in such things as he should
necessarily want, and to bring them to him the next Night at the deadest time
of it, and that he should take a special care of not being seen, when he came
into the House by the stable door. After having given these instructions to his
Servant, who was an absolute Stranger in the City, he got privately into his
House, and having found in the Garden house some Tools, he fell to work, in
making a hole in the Garden Wall, through which he might Peep, and behold his
invisible Mistress. It was through that Hole, that he had beheld her, and heard
her speak; he observed how she ordered her Flowers and Plants, and once he
heard her say to her Maid, they would do much better, if they were removed in
the empty Bed, which was on the other side of the Garden, and that if they were
Watered early in the Morning, they would thrive much better; but that she and
her Maid were both too lasie to rise so early, and that she would not trust the
care of those Plants to any but her self, that when they were come to
Perfection, they might owe the whole obligation of their being to her own hands
and Care, and that she might take the greater delight in the use of them.

This Ibrahim took upon himself, as if his Mistress had spoken particularly to
him, he therefore takes the Resolution in the dead of the Night, to get over
the Wall into her Garden, and there perform all that she had mentioned to her
Servant, but because he thought the work might be too much for one pair of
hands to perform in some few hours, he commanded Moretto to follow him. They
got over the Wall, and the first thing they did, was to gather up every the
least bit of Rubbish which might have dropped at their coming over, which put
him in mind also to go toward the place where the hole was made, and examine
how that stood, he found much Rubbish fallen there, but some Weeds growing high
and thick in that place, as being somewhat out of the way, they did hide them:
however, for fear of any discovery, when those Weeds should be cut down, he
caused Moretto to gather them all up, and fill his Pockets with them, while he
himself took care to hide the hole under a large Leaf, which he might easily at
any time remove to the one side, with a little green Sprig.

This done, they immediately fell to work, Moretto dug up the Roots, and
brought them to Ibrahim, and he set them again in the other place; when they
were all removed, he watered them very well, out of a Cistern which was near
the little Summer House, in which he had last seen Roxana; while Moretto was
employed in smoothing up the old Bed, and cleansing all places so well, that no
footsteps nor any other things might be seen out of order. They after that,
got over the Wall again into Ibrahim's own Garden, and went to rest the
remainder of the night.

The Sultana having heard of Roxana's Beauty and Wit, she had a great desire to
see her, wherefore she sent the next morning, to invite her and her mother to
the Seraglio. This being such an honor as was not to be refused, they soon got
Aladin's consent for their going thither; where they were very courteously
received by the Sultana, who, finding Roxana's Beauty and Wit, beyond all that
she had heard, did present her with very Rich Jewels, and was very unwilling to
part with her so soon as that night, she was desiring their stay with her for
two or three days longer, which they knew not well how to grant, because Aladin
did expect them home that night, nor how to refuse the Sultana, who had been so
liberal to them, and who had required them to stay in so obliging terms, when
that News were brought to the Sultana, that the Janisaries had taken up Arms,
and were tumultuously assembled, to demand their Arrears, and the Heads of some
of the great ones of the Divan; that they were so outrageous, that it was not
safe for any one to appear in the street, this presently caused Roxana and her
Mother to consent to the Sultana's desires. So that they both remained in the
Seraglio four days, at the end of which, the Janisaries having been appeased,
with the Money which they had received for their Arrears, and a Months whole
pay advance, provided they would lay down their Arms, and retire every one to
their quarters, with assurance that those persons whose heads they demanded,
should be strictly examined, and if found guilty in the least, their heads
should go off, they all were dispersed; and Roxana and her Mother, having
thanked the Sultana for the honor she had made them, they returned home well
satisfied.

Roxana was no sooner returned, but she made ready to go visit her Nurselings,
she had taken the Key of that part of the Garden with her, which she usually
kept in her pocket, and that unexpected delay from attending them, having made
her think they were all destroyed for want of watering, she hastened in great
diligence with her Maid into the Garden; but how great was her surprisal, when
comeing within sight of the bank or border that she had left the Flowers
growing on, seeing nothing but the Mold, she presently concluded, that they had
all been burnt up by the Sun, but coming nearer, she could not so much as
perceive the least sign that any had lately grown there; and causing her Maid
to dig for a Root, and finding none neither, it increased her wonder, so that
she knew not what to think; but looking on her Maid, said she, by this very
misfortune happened to all my Flowers, may be gathered, that we should never
defer to another time what we can do at the present; had I removed my Flowers,
continued she, in that shady bed against that other Wall, as I intended before
the Sultana had sent for me, I might have found them all alive yet. All this
was said as she was walking toward another part of the Garden; being come to
the end of a quick-set, which took from her, till then, the sight of her
regretted Flowers, of a sudden presenting themselves all fresh and flourishing
to her Eye, it again did strik^^ner into such an amazement, that she stood
still, admiring, without speaking one word, which gave time to her Maid to say,
Certainly, Madam, it was out of your mind that you had ordered some body to
perform this Transplan^ation? Who, I? replied Roxana, and have the Key in my
pocket, and not the least remembrance of giving such orders, nay, never having
had the least inclination toward commanding any body about that work, but your
assisting of me? In this place, where I am certain not a man nor woman have set
their fool, but us two, since our coming hither; there is no such thing,
continued she, besides these Flowers look not as if newly transplanted, they
are all full ^^own, and hold up their heads, as if this had been their first
natural led, neither can I perceive one sign of any persons having been here,
and if I should mistrust some body coming over the Wall, all those houses that
abut on our Garden are empty. And who would have come over here, but with a
design of robbing me, rather than of preserving of those things in which I take
so much delight. Yet, Madam, said the Maid, something must be the matter, they
cannot, at your single command or desire, have transplanted themselves. I know
not what to say, nor what to think, replied Roxana; say nothing of the
adventure, till I have examined every body in the house in particular, even my
Father also. Come let us in.

Of truth it was surprising to find all those Flowers to prosper so well upon
their removal, but diverse things did concur to it. First, the transplanting of
them in the cool of the night, the quick dispatch of the work, the plentiful
and con^inual watering of them, by our new Gardener and his Man, and the
supporting of those that drooped at first, by soft and gentle props, which had
been removed when they looked up again, all which Ibrahim had done ever since
their removal; for you must know, that he having not seen the next day Roxana
as he used to do, (and he and his man by turns, had been incessantly on the
watch) he had sent him out to know what was the matter; which having learnt
from one of the Servants, and that no body had a Key to that furthest part of
the Garden, but Roxana, who was very curious and laborious in bringing up of
Flowers. Moretto did further of his own accord (being a good Gardener of
himself, inquire whether he might be admitted as Gardener, to the Father, or to
the Daughter, and promise having been made him of an inquiry into it, he had
brought the News of Roxana's absence to his Master, who had taken the
opportunity of Roxana's absence, to take a particular care of those Plants
which he had removed, as the greatest Jewels his Mistress delighted in, and as
Lovers use to fancy, by her special Command. He had likewise left upon the
Table in the Summer House, whence he fancied to have received those orders, a
paper of Verses, of which I here give you a Copy.

Our Mighty Prophet, cannot be alow'd
With such Perfections to have been endowed,
As you would have the man you choose to be,
In fancy only such Heroes you will see.
Yet Mahomet was good, was great, was just,
And in him our great Ala put his trust.
But if his Soul was filled with mighty Jove,
My heart is as brim full of mighty Love.
In this I go beyond him, I love more,
And you alone, Roxana, I adore.
Roxana was to pass by that Summer House returning, she cast her Eye that way,
and perceived the Paper, which gave her the curiosity of stepping in, and
taking of it up; she opened, and read it, and was no less surprised at that
than she had been at the Flowers removal, which made her to hasten the more to
the House to be better informed of those Mysteries, if she could possible; not
without great reflection on the whole. Being got in, the first thing she did
was to enquire of her Father whether he had employed any body since her absence
to work in the Garden? He told her no, and that he had not seen any person
appear in it besides the old Gardner, since her going to the Sultana's, though
he had walked in it more than usually, since he had been detained at home by
the Janisaries Tumults, and that as far as he could see in her Nurcery over the
Quick-set, he had not perceived any body. She, after this answer made as strict
an enquiry as she could possible of all the Servants and Slaves, one by one;
threatening some, and making fair promises to others, if they would discover who
had been in her Privy-Garden since three or four days; but all to no purpose,
none could inform her; Whereupon she resolved to set a Watch for some nights,
to surprise any person that should come over the Walls, and have them brought
to examination. But all was to no effect. In the mean time, Ibrahim was not
wanting in sending forth his Scout in the night, to learn how things were:
Moretto was told that Roxana was sensible that during her absence, some body
had got into her Garden, but which way she knew not, but upon suspicion that is
could not be without the old Gardner's knowledge, though he could not be
brought to confess any thing, she had caused her Father to turn him away, who
had readily complied with his Daughters desires in a business of that nature;
that they were now in want of a Gardner, and if he would offer himself, and
were expert at it, he might easily get the place, which was worth looking after.

Moretto having had these Informations, desired the Fellow to propose him the
next day for Gardner, which the other having promised to do, he returned to his
Master, full freighted with all this good News.

Ibrahim, who expected his return with the impatiency of a Lover, was glad to
see him, and more too, when he heard all the story, and that there was not the
least distrust from his House and Garden; but above all, when Moretto told him,
that with his leave, if his Master thought he could do him any service in it,
he believed that he could be taken as Gardener into Roxana's Father's House, in
the place of the old Gardner that had been displaced, upon Roxana's Suspicions.
I Will give thee leave, replied Ibrahim, and charge thee most strictly also, not
to lose so good and great an Opportunity of serving me, which if thou do
honestly, I shall not only set thee free, but shall also prefer thee to some
handsome Employment answerable to those great Services which thou shall render
me; but thou must first get me in all manner of provision for a Week, and then
go and engage thy self to that Service, from which I expect such great
advantages, as it may be contrived betwixt thee and me, but be thou sure still
to engage industriously Roxana as she passes by thee in some discourse, upon
thy particular skill in the raising of Flowers, that she may, if possible, have
a fancy to thy Service, or at least to some of thy advice; and observe exactly
all her actions and her words, that thou may give me a faithful account of
them. Thus was Moretto sent to get in Provisions after which he went to learn
of his Friend, what hopes he had of his getting him into that Family; It is
your fault, if you get not in this very day, said the Friend, I have proposed
the matter; it is hearkened unto, especially by Roxana, who has commanded me to
bring you to her Father so soon as I saw you next, therefore come in with me,
and I will show you to our Master, who is now walking in the Garden. So said,
so done; And Aladin did so well like of Moretto's person, promises of
performance, and brisk answers, that he immediately sent for Roxana, and told
her, he had met with a Gardner, who, he fancied to be more skilful than
or^inary in his Art, wherefore he designed to retain him, and that if she
desired it, he should also have an Eye over her Garden. This did Moretto
readily offer to do, pretending extraordinary skill, in the raising of Flowers
from seeds; she answered, that she wanted no body for that work, but that
having a design to remove some Flowers on the shady side of the Garden, seeing
that those did so well that had been already removed there she knew not how,
she would therefore employ him in stirring up the Earth, and fitting it for the
Transplantation. Moretto was not wanting in presently informing them of the
great Art he had in preparing of Earth, so that no Vermin nor Weeds should
molest the Plants. After which Aladin and Roxana retired; and Moretto fell to
work in the Garden.

In the Evening, Moretto took the pretense of g ing to fetch some Linen, that
he might l^w ^he liberty of giving his Mas^^ an Account of h^^ good S^^cess; he
told him all that had passed, and that he did not despair of finding
opportunities to serve him to some good purpose. They took their measures
accordingly, and that they might have a correspondency together without
suspicion; they agreed upon this following expedient. Moretto could not write,
but read very well his Master's Writing; Ibrahim therefore was to write what he
desi^'d to know; which he was to fasten to a stone, and this Stone he was to
throw in Aladin's Garden, presently after he had made a certain noise, and
which was to be answered by Moretto's striking upon his Spade, with the
Instrument that he used to clean it with, which was the sign he was at hand to
receive the Message; that Moretto having taken it up, and read the Contents, he
should fling over a white Stone for the Affirmative, and a black stone when it
was in the Negative. This Intreague went on very current for three or four
days, during which, Ibrahim did often see Roxana in her Garden; but one day
Ibrahim having heard the Signal, and casting the Stone short, so that it fell
on this side the Quick-set Hedge in Roxana's Garden, the door of it being shut,
and not knowing which way to come at it, he at last sought so long, that he
sound in a Corner next to the Wall at the foot of the Quickset, a space which
was more thin than the rest, he went to work about it, having first looked
about whether the Coast was clear, and with his Knife having made himself a
passage, which he industriously covered without and within, with the Branches
which he had left to that purpose, he got into Roxana's Garden, took up the
Stone, and could not forbear running hastily to the Hole in the Wall, to see
whether he could see or speak with his Master; by good Fortune his Master was
on the Watch, and hearing a noise he went to the peep-hole, where he saw his
Moretto, who told him of the occasion of his coming, which was to advertise him
that he should throw the Stones far enough, for fear that at some time or other
he should be discovered going to fetch them, through the hole he had made in
the Quickset. Ibrahim had so many Questions to make to Moretto, that it kept
him so long in the Garden, that he heard a noise at the entry of it. It was
Roxana, who, sooner than her usual hour, was come with a design to take Moretto
into her Garden with her, and show him, what she would have him to do; he heard
her speak to her Woman, and by the Voice, judged they were drawing nearer to
the place where he was. Ibrahim did not know what to advise him to he ^idding
him go hide himself in the Summerhouse, which Moretto would have done, but
beginning to perceive their Clothes, he could not recover that place without
^^ing discovered, at last being pressed to it, he fell a digging, and minded them
not. Roxana was wonderfully surpised, when she first perceived this new
Gardner at work in her Garden, she came up to him, and asked him how he came
there, and who had set him to work? he resolutely made answer, that finding the
door open, and having heard her say, That she designed to have the rest of her
Flowers removed to that side of the Garden, he had taken the boldness to step
in, and to shut the Door after him; and that when he was in, he could not
forbear trying the goodness of the Earth with his Spade, that he might give her
an account of it. The readi s of the Answer, and the boldness with which it was
given, did incline Roxana to believe the Story ^ be true: wherefore having
checked her Maid for having not shut the Garden Door when they went last out of
it; to which, the Maid protested, she thought she had; gave Moretto her
Instructions. And then she went into the Summer House, where Ibrahim, who was
still upon the watch, did see her pull out a Paper, which she read very
attentively; which done, Ibrahim heard her say, It is strange that I cannot
learn who wrote this Paper, and by what means it was conveyed here? it speaks
as if it came from one who knew my very thoughts. As if, Madam, the person had
heard what you had spoken the day before, said the Maid, when you asked me my
thoughts on the Bridegroom? Prithee what did I say, replied Roxana? That you
could not fancy such a Man, Madam, answered the Maid, and then, continued she,
you gave such a Picture of an Hero, as scarce could ever be found in any
Romance. I humbly conceive, Madam, that the Author of those Verses aims at
that, when he says, that even our Great Prophet was not so qualified, as you
require your Lover should be; and certainly, Madam, he that wrote those Lines
had a world of Love, at least he expresses much of Passion, and if his other
qualities answer that, though he should not be so perfectly accomplished in
beauty and shape as you would desire; he doubtless might merit much. Hold, not
so fast, replied Roxana, if you would not have me believe you had an hand in
the conveyance of the Paper here, and are become his Advocate: If I were Madam,
though I protest I am all Ignorance in this Mystery, replied the Maid, if his
good Mien, his Birth, his Riches, his Courage cannot be questioned that dares
lift up his thoughts to you; if, in a word all other things answered the
Greatness of his Soul, would you be angry I should serve a Person that should
express so much Love for you, Madam, whose happiness I wish for above my own.
But what do thou know, replied Roxana, but that he counterfeits, and that his
Body is as counterfeited as his Mind? But if otherwise, replied the Maid? well
Madam, give me leave to wish for your Content, that he were as I fancy him, and
that you could be satisfied of that with your own eyes. Thou speak of
impossibilities, replied Roxana, 'twas easy to have this Paper conveyed here,
but a man cannot so easily convey himself; besides, it were beyond, what my
Condition would permit me to allow of, without the highest resentment
imaginable. Yet a Letter of Submission and of Love from such a person would not
destroy you, Madam, replied the Maid. But how should I know still whether all
the rest did answer to that Love, or whether that Love was not merely pretended
to make him sport withal? Then Madam, said the Maid, he would be the worst of
men, and I should be sorry of ever having harbored one good thought of him in
my Opinion. Well, to tell thee the truth, replied Roxana, such a Person I
should be glad to see, if it did not cost me too dear. May you have your
desires, Madam, replied the Maid, and I wish I could have him informed of it.
Not for the World, replied Roxana, I have a great fancy that he had an hand in
the transplanting of my Flowers, though no mention is made of it in his Verses.
I have had the same Thoughts, Madam, replied the Maid, for why should not he
who knew your thoughts in one thing, know them in another also. Well, all that
I can make of it, replied Roxana, is, I fear, that some of my Servants have
been bribed to let a Person into my Garden, who being closely concealed, did
overhear all that I said and acted, according as his humor led him after it.
Pray, Madam, give me leave to consult a Caldean about it, said the Maid, I know
one that is very expert, and who has told me strange things concerning my self?
Do what thou will, replied Roxana, but take it all upon thy self, I will have
no hand in it. With that Roxana went out of the Summer House, ordering Moretto
to draw the door after him when he had done in the Garden.

You may imagine in what rapture Ibrahim was at all he had seen and heard; he
resolved to make good use of it, and to that purpose he did cast a little Stone
over, toward the place where Moretto was at work; who did guess at the meaning
of it, and having seen whether the Coast was clear, he drew near to the
peep-hole, where Ibrahim told him all that had passed; after which, it was
agreed that Moretto should ask leave to go to a Caldean which he had heard of,
who used to inform him as to Gardening, to know of him when the Stars and the
Moon were in the best disposition for to transplant those Flowers which Roxana
had commanded him to remove; that that should be an introduction by which,
through his Wit and good Management, he should insinuate to the Maid that she
could not employ a more Learned Man than that Caldean, if she should give him
the least hint of any desire she had that way; and if so, that then he himself
would in a disguise pass for the Caldean, and by that means work his own ends
to his full content. This being agreed upon, Moretto returned to finish his
work, and then he returned into the House, while his Master retired to rest,
and to expect his answer.

Moretto, whose Wit answered the great inclination which he had to serve his
Master, failed not of addressing himself to Roxana's Maid, to obtain leave of
going out, as he had projected; and he told her so many wonderful things of
this Caldean, that the Maid grew impatient of speaking with him her self, with
a design that if he did not answer exactly the expectation which Moretto had
stirred up in her by his recital, she would pass him by, and go to her old
acquaintance; and no sooner was Moretto gone, but that she acquainted Roxana
with the wonders which Moretto had told her of his Caldean; this set her as
much a-gog as her Maid, of hearing what he could say, but for fear any body
should have the least suspicion of it, she ordered her Maid to entertain him
from a low Window, and that she would be concealed in some convenient place of
the room, where she might hear all.

Mean time away gets Moretto in the dusk of the evening to his Master, with
such accoutrements as were proper for to make an absolate Caldean of him, he
fitted them upon him, gave him his Cue, and when it was dark they both got out
at the Stable door, and away they trudged toward Aladin's House, which, though
near, required many steps to get the right way unto it; being got thither, our
new Caldean stood at a little distance from the House while Moretto went into
give the Maid notice, who being upon the watch, bid him stay a little for an
answer, and went toward her Ladies Appartment: This gave Moretto some thoughts
that her Lady was to be made acquainted with it, in which he was presently
confirmed; for after the Maid had told him at what Window he should bring the
Caldean, he going out, turned back suddenly, to ask her if he should remain
with the Caldean, or come in again, he had a glimps of Roxana who was getting
into that low Room; he was bid to come in again, and leave the Caldean to
discourse with her privately.

Moretto presently informed Ibrahim of his new discovery; after which he
brought him to the appointed Window, where he left him, and so went into the
house, leaving his Master to manage those two Females.

The Maid asked him, whether he was the Caldean of whom their Gardner had given
so great a Character? he answered that he was the person, in a low voice; she
bid him speak louder without fear, because there being No body else that could
hear: no, said he, then I find you have a mind to play upon me, and seeing that
you will not deal with me, as I designed to deal with you both, added he, I Will
retire immediately, and Roxana shall not have the satisfaction which she
expected from me. At the word Roxana, both the Mistress and the Maid started,
and perceiving that he was going to be as good as his word, by moving from the
Window; Hold, said the Maid by Roxana's Command, and since nothing is hid from
your great Knowledge, speak boldly to us both! Do, said Roxana, and if thou
go on as thou have begun, I will highly gratify thee. Then say not one word
more, replied Ibrahim, for it were needless; I know your Thonghts, and as dark
as it is can read them on your foreheads as easily as the Verses in your
Pocket. Ask me no more questions, I say, continued he, no more than I ask you,
but hear with attention all that I know of your Thoughts, your Wishes, and
Desires. 'Twas by my great Art, my Infallible Art, that the Flowers in your
Garden were Transplanted; I caused those Verses to be Wrote, which you found in
the Summer House, after you had given your Maid an account of the
qualifications that man should have that you could Love. I infused into such a
Person the desire to see you, to like you, and to give you that short
declaration of Love in Verse: Ask me not why I did this for you, I see your
longing desire to do it, not one word. I read also that you would be glad to
see that so accomplished a Person, and foresee that you will love him, and that
your hearts will agree. I know that your Servant would have addressed her self
to another of my Profession, but he had not given you all this satisfaction. I
know your Parents will thwart his Love to you, and that it is not to be
slackned by their greatest severity; and that you will, nay that you must, for
the Heavens have Decreed it, I say, you must repay his Love with yours,
mutually enterchange your hearts, and by firm Promise make you both one Person,
'till time and Friends work your Parents to give their consent. I know, lastly,
that you would be glad to see the Person's Idea or Form, which you shall do;
hear it speak, Court you, as if it were he himself, if you dare with only this
your Maid, go to the Summer House this night at Twelve, where I engage nothing
shall appear, or be heard to affright you. And now I have done; when you would
hear more, send for me here again, or I Will come of my self when I think you may
want me: remember this night at Twelve, on which depends much of your future
happiness. He was Retiring, when Roxana holding a Purse in her hand, cried
hold, take this. At which turning his head, I despise your gilded dross, said
he, and move by Nobler Motives. So he retired.

It is scarce to be imagined, in what surprizal and confusion of thoughts our
Caldean left his Mistress and her Maid by his pretended miraculous Skill, they
took him for no less than a great Prophet; but the only scruple which was left
in Roxana's thoughts was, why he had, by his own Confession, so much concerned
himself in the interest of a Person so absolute a stranger to him as she was?
to which the Maid made answer, That though he was not pleased to discover his
reasons for it, she might conclude, that if she knew not him, it was probable
that he not only knew her, but had also some great Reasons that led him to act
as he did: and pray, Madam, give me further leave, added she, to tell you, that
I look not upon this Person as one of those ordinary men which we employ to
tell us our Fortunes. Nor I neither, replied Roxana, I rather take him to be
some Great Master in the Mathematics, who by his great Reading, and profound
Learning, joined to some conversation with Christians, who it is said are
incomparable in those foretelling Arts, has attained to this wonderful height
of Knowledge, as to read our very thoughts. And in that opinion, I have a great
desire this night to try this prodigious experiment which he has said he would
show me. There Madam, I leave you, said the Maid, and must acknowledge my
weakness, my fears and apprehensions, of I know not what danger, prevail too
much upon me, to venture so far. Thy panick fears, replied Roxana, I have as
much to hazard as you, and yet my desires are so great to see the shape of the
Person he mentioned, that I will venture on the thing. Madam, I confess, that
as you are of a greater Rank, you have more to lose than I, but then give me
leave to tell you, that you have also more to gain; for if I mistake not,
pardon my boldness, Madam, there is another Motive than bare curiosity that
leads you on, while I have neither interest nor curiosity enough to venture.
You cannot think it should be Love should push me on, replied Roxana, with a
Person that I never yet did see? But, Madam, there may be Inclinations and
Desires to see an Object so conformable to ones wishes, as our great Man has
promised to show you, said the Maid. I must confess, replied Roxana, that
nothing could please me more than to see such a Person as I have represented to
my self diverse times, and which I have never seen. Doubtless, Madam, said the
Maid, and it would not be very difficult for you to love such a Person too.
Thou come near to the point, replied Roxana; well, to encourage thee to
attend me with thy endeavors, I will confess to thee that I have had some
inclination toward that Person who writ the Verses which I found in the
Summer House, ever since I first read them; and that then, and diverse times
since, I have wished that that Person were qualified according to my desire. Be
sure to keep my Secret, now that I have made thee my Confident. This is to
engage you further, added she, giving her the ^^rse which our Magician had
refused, take it as an assurance of my further Favors, which I will always
measure by those Services that you will render me. There needed no more to
engage her Maid wholly to her devotion; she protested that she would go through
Fire and Water, and pass over the greatest difficulties imaginable: that she
was not only ready to attend her that night, but also to lay down her life at
any time for her Service: Thus they having spun the time away till the hour of
Ten. Roxana laid her self in a Day-Bed, which was in an open Room, joining the
Gardens, more to rave on the Adventure she was going about, than to sleep;
while she left her Maid watching, with strict charge to call upon her at the
appointed Hour; she having such an ascendant over her Mother, and now that
Aladin was still absent, as he had been for two days before, she disp^s'd of
her self and Servants as she pleased; which was the reason that she had
pretended that to enjoy the cool Air which came from the Garden into that Room
she had chosen to lie there that night.

If Roxana busied her thoughts one way, Ibrahim was not more quiet in another.
He hugged himself a thousand times for carrying on his Design so well, and
without the least suspicion; he thanked his propitious Stars as often, and wished
that he might but converse for some few moments with his Moretto, to take
further measures to finish the so well begun Work: He was weighing every
particular circumstance; his Fears and Hopes were ebbing and flowing according
as his thoughts did suggest him, when Moretto, who through his hole in the
Quickset had got into the Garden, so soon as he had seen the Coast clear, did
cast some Stones over into his Master's Garden, to give him notice of his being
at the hole. Ibrahim, whose solicitous thoughts did not hinder him from being
attentive that way, presently repaired to the place; where, hearing that it was
Moretto, he cast the Rope-ladder over the Wall, and bid him come over to him.
There he told him what he had done, and in what an amazement he had left both
Mistress and Maid; what he had promised them to perform that night at Twelve,
and what he designed further to act. But, my dear Moretto, continued he, do
thou think that Roxana will have so much Curiosity and Courage as to adventure
her self at the Place? Sir, replied Moretto, if the Character you have given
her of your own Person has touched her Heart, you may be sure that she will
pass over all dangers to see so charming an Object; and that she had some
propensity that way, is clear, by her desire to be present at the Caldean's
Discourse. However, replied Ibrahim, I will prepare my self for that purpose,
in which I must have thy assistance to carry all off without the least
suspicion. Then he told him how he had laid the Plot, what part he was to act,
and that he would perform the rest; he bid him put on that Caldean Habit which
he had worn, to disguise himself; that he should hide himself behind the Bushes
which surrounded the Summer House, so that he might see when they were got into
the House, that then he should pull the door close by a String tied to the
Lock, and keep it shut on the outside, till he should hear him to dismiss
them, and then he should let loose the door, slip off the string, and get as
fast as he could into the outhouses where he usually lay.

Ibrahim having made an end of informing Moretto how he should act, he gave him
some Lamps to set up in diverse places of the Summer House, with order to watch
their coming, and to fling a Stone for Signal of their approach; after which
Moretto got over the Wall in his Caldean Habit, disposed of the Lamps, fastn'd
the String to the Lock of the Door, and went to watch their coming.

Roxana in the mean time being too full of imaginations to get a moments sleep,
began to talk to her Maid, which was overheard by Moretto, as he was got to
the outward Quickset, which parted Roxana's Garden from her Fathers; this made
him Curious to lend an ear to those Voices, but what with their speaking too
low for fear of being overheard in the House, and with the distance he was at,
he could not understand what they said, so that he did not know who those
persons were; but he was soon informed of that, for Roxana having a mind to try
her own Courage as well as her Maids, in going into her Father's Garden before
hand, (for then it was but half an hour after Eleven) she had ventured out, and
they were walking toward the Quickset partition, on the other end of it that
Moretto's Creeping hole was so that he could distinctly hear the Maid say,
Madam, I know not what I ail, but a certain horror seizes me on the sudden,
which makes me fancy I see strange things about me. Thou art able, replied
Roxana, to produce fear in the most resolute, with thy strange fancies; and thy
talk so works upon my imagination, that methinks I see strange things also; I
find we are both very unfit for so great an Enterprise, continued she, and
seeing thou have not the Courage to hearten me up, I Will think of a timely
retreat, and desist from this attempt, at least for this night. With this she
turned back to go toward the House, still discoursing with the Maid.

Moretto, who had heard this, thought he had enough, and having the Caldean's
di^^^^ upon him, did resolve to break their new measures; to that purpose he
crept all along a Hedge which hid him from their sight, in order to intercept
their return, and to fright them into a compliance to his Master's designs: but
as he was making all the haste he could, he made a noise; which conduc^d to his
designs, for Roxana hearing it, and as fear augments all Objects, so it
increases Sounds, she imagined it to be much nearer to her than really it was,
which made her and her Maid remain moveless in the place where they were. This
gave time to Moretto to recover himself, and to get before them unseen into the
Room, where he found the Door open, not doubting but that they came from
thence; where he designed to stand, and to affright them back again toward the
Garden.

After that Roxana had stood listening a while, and heard no more noise, she
began to whisper to her Maid, that she wished her self in the House again. To
which the Maid answered, that it was her thoughts also; and added, pray Madam
let us get in so soon as we can; this she said, creeping softly after her
Mistress, that moved as slow as she could; they got at last to the door of the
Room, where the Maid, being more frighted than the Mistress, would have run in
first. But what a horror was she in, when she found the passage possessed by the
Caldean, which she knew by his Habit, with that small light of the Stars which
they had. She presently run back, giving a shriek, which made Roxana do the
like; but striking violently one against another it broke the violence of it;
so that it being in the deepest silence of the night, and far from the body of
the House, by good fortune it was not heard. But what with the fear and the
shock they had given one another they both had fallen, the Maid in a swoon, and
Roxana not far from it. This put Moretto into greater trouble than before, he
knew the hour was near, that his Master was in expectation of them, but how to
get them thither he knew not; he found that Roxana moved, which made him to
tell her, That she should not fear any thing so long as he was by her; that so
soon as he did foresee her fears coming upon her, and that she designed to
retire, and not give her self the satisfaction of seeing that which she most
desired, and on which depended all her future misery or happiness, he had
Transported himself to her aid, to strengthen her confidence, and to be her
Protector; That he very much feared some evil would befall her Lover or her
self for the want of Faith, and that if she would not bring her own or the
Persons ruin upon him, which she was to have seen, she ought to go on boldly,
being assured that under his conduct, she and her Maid would both remain secure
from all manner of dangers. All this he said, feigning his voice, pretending to
speak softly for fear of being overheard; but his design was to disguise his
voice that they should not perceive the change was put upon them. They had
never heard him speak but once before, and had not seen his face till then,
because that at the Window, the Street being lower than the Room Roxana was in,
they could not well see his face, so that he passed for current for the same
person in both their Opinions; I say in both their Opinions, because that by
this time the Maid was recovered out of her Trance, and had lain still and
heard part of what Moretto had said to Roxana, and was sitting on the ground at
her Mistresses feet, whom Moretto had raised up. Roxana being somewhat
comforted, assured, and affrighted by the danger she or her Lover would be in,
if she still persisted in refusing to go, told the Caldean, that if he would
accompany her, she would under his protection adventure on. He having again
spoken all he could to encourage them both, with assurance of his protection,
Roxana gave him the Key to open the door of her Garden, and he led them both
toward it. He was still in a peck of troubles for want of an opportunity of
giving Ibrahim the sign of their approaches, that the Lamps might be lighted.
And Roxana had more than once complained of the darkness, which she confessed
increased her fears; and to assure her, he had told her that he would order
lights sufficiently by that time they got there. I have but to speak a word,
give a sign to my Spirits, or cast a stone, and they will soon obey my will;
you shall see the Experiment of it, continued he, so stooping he took up a
stone, and flung it toward the Summer House; now, said he, observe how the
place will be enlightened to your desire. They had not gone two steps further,
but they began to perceive a Light in the Summer House, which still increased,
as they drew near. Moretto did entertain them as well as he could, with
assurances of safety, to take off all their fears; at last coming toward the
Summer House, he raised his voice on purpose, that his Master should not be
surpised at his coming with them, and said, Now, Madam, is the time for you to
banish from you all fears, and to fill your heart with Love, for I have done
for you more than I promised; I only told you I would bring that Person's Idea
to your presence, who wrote the Verses, but there is something which must still
remain secret, which makes me think I can never do too much for you, wherefore
I have transmitted the Person himself here; he was in his sleep when I did it,
but I suppose by this awakned, or will soon awaken at your coming. Moretto
being now come to the steps that went to the Summer House door, Ascend, Madam,
continued he, and then admire what I have done for you. With that, he led her
up, and put her into the house, then took the Maid who followed her Mistress,
and put her in also, and bid them go forward to the Table. As re-assur'd as
Roxana was, she durst not contradict her Guide, which gave him time to shut the
door upon them, and to retire. Roxana was wondering at the great and clear
light which so many Lamps as were placed there did give; when that Ibrahim, as
if newly awakned, being set off with the most advantageous Dress that he could
possible put on, and adorned with a world of Jewels, did raise himself from a
Day-Bed, on which he was lying, and, as if amazed, startling and staring. Is it
a Dream, or do I wake? said he; then looking about him, Where am I? continued
he. Then looking on Roxana, Ha! What do I see? the very Darling of my Soul, my
Heart's Delight, and all that I most desired. What good Angel has been so kind
as to continue and conclude my Dream with such a blessed Vision! Roxana, Divine
Roxana here, and I stand still, and not cast at her feet a Heart that is so
wholly hers! Pardon, sweet Angel, the Error that the great surprisal I am in,
at so fair a Vision, has caused me to commit; and deign to accept the offers of
an Heart whose greatest Glory is to be your Slave. With that he was going to
throw himself at Roxana's feet, when she moving her Body that way, But hold,
said he again, to himself, let not my excess of Joy render me too rash, and
lose the Blessing I enjoy in this bright Apparition, by drawing too near with
my Terrestrial Body: then falling back again, while he was speaking this, thus
he continued; If you are not but condensed Air, or some Etherial Spirit, who to
mock my Passion for a time, has assumed this glorious shape to render me
afterward the most miserable wretch living, when you again dissolve into soft
Air. Speak, give me some signs of Life; a Voice coming from so admirable a
Shape, cannot but be all Harmony to my Heart. At this Roxana bowing forward,
was going to speak, when he again interrupted her thus; By Heavens, it moves!
but one word, and I am blessed for ever. Then did Roxana say, Whoever you are,
that thus exercise your Wit and Fancy upon a Person who knows her self much
inferior to what the ecstasy you seem to be in leads you to speak; know that I
am the real Roxana, Mistress of this place. If all I hear and see is not
Enchantments, which I am apt to believe is, when I consider that Shape which is
before me, and those Expressions, which, whether true or feigned, real or
delusive, please my Ears and Heart? and if you are as real Substance as I find
my self to be, I may now say I have seen the reality of those things which I
before did only frame in my imagination; and since I find that all which that
Great man has told me proves true, even beyond my expectation, I am apt to
believe that all the rest he has told me will be of the same stamp. If he has
said, Madam, replied Ibrahim, that you should see a Person, in whose single
heart there was more Love contained for you, than in all the World besides,
(though all were too little yet.) If that he told you, that it was impossible
for that person to live a day longer after seeing you, without the hopes that
you would accept of an Heart which is wholly yours. If he has assured you that
from the first moment that person beheld you, he vowed to live eternally yours:
I am the person. In confirmation of which, I here lay my life, and all I can
call mine at your feet; protesting by our great Prophet, that I will never rise
again from this place, till you are pleased to accept and receive this free
(though unworthy) Gift I make you of my self. Saying this, he slung himself at
Roxana's feet; she extended her hand to raise him, but he taking hold of it,
and pressing it hard with his lips, No, Madam, continued he, never must I rise
from this place, till you have spoke my happiness. To which thus Roxana
answered, That I may the sooner relieve you from this unbeseeming and uneasy
posture, and to follow what the Heavens have decreed, in which peradventure
concurs something of my own inclination; for I cannot but think, when I reflect
on all that has been acted this night, that it is the will of Heaven. Here is
my Hand that I receive those offers you have made me of your Heart, in exchange
of which, I give you another, that was never any others but mine, and now
yours. And I, Madam, replied Ibrahim, do take the boldness to seal this
Contract on this white Author of my Happiness with my Lips. With this she took
him up; then said to him, looking on her Maid, Here is one shall be a secret
Witness of our secret Love, till we find means to get our Friends consents;
mean time, you know my Father's severity toward me, by which you may guess
that if he had been now at Constantinople, I should not have had this
opportunity, which I know not when we shall have again, because he is expected
here again to morrow. After this they fell to particular discourses about the
means they should use to see one another; and they agreed that Moretto, for
having been so instrumental to their mutual happiness, in bringing them to the
knowledge of the Caldean, should be admitted into the Confidence, not doubting
but that betwixt him and her Maid they should have such frequent news of one
another, that they should not be long before they met again; upon which, and
diverse other discourses of that nature, day beginning to break forth, they
thought fit to separate, which, after a thousand repeated assurances of
constancy on both sides, they did; he leading first Roxana to the Gate of her
Garden, then he getting over the Wall by his Rope-ladder.

The brightest ^ay is frequently followed with a ^^ormy Night, and the fairest
Night succeeded by a Cloudy Day. Our Lovers Joys, like all vehement Motions,
were too great to last long, and though the Cause of it was not in themselves,
but from abroad; yet so sudden, so great, and so passionate a Love, as was
between them, rendered them not long happy, as you shall hear from what follows.

Ibrahim was a Person, that in all respects was very desirable; no wonder then
if that Roxana was so impatient to see again a Person so like that which she
had framed in her imagination, that could only please her. She had employed her
Maid, and the Maid Moretto, so that she was certain that her Father would not
return the day following to Constantinople. Ibrahim was to be advertised of
that, and means contrived of getting to the Summer House, the only convenient
place for their private interview; Moretto was to be consulted upon this,
wherefore, when Roxana knew that he was at work, she took the opportunity to
speak to him, as she went to visit her Flowers toward the Evening, and told
him, That she did not know how Ibrahim could get into the Summer House that
night; as he had been the night before? Why, Madam, the same way, replied
Moretto. We have no longer any need of the Caldean's assistance, said Roxana,
and I would gladly converse with him, after his own coming to this place.
Moretto, finding that he had like to have committed an error, said, Madam,
though he was last night carried into the Summer House, while he was asleep, by
the Caldean's wonderful Power and Art, yet I suppose that he conveyed him there
through the Air over those Walls which encompass your Garden; and no question,
Madam, but that if I inform him, by your Order, of your desires, let me but
know the hour, and his Love will be sufficient to find him Wings to fly to
you, if all other means were failing, he will find or make a way over the Walls,
no question. Well, said Roxana, I leave that care to you, fail not to give him
timely notice of it; but, added she, where will you find him? we forgot that.
Trouble not your self, Madam, replied Moretto, the Caldean will soon satisfy
me in that. It Is true, replied Roxana, but after you have got that knowledge
hasten to him, and deliver him this Note: Then she gave him the Note, and went
to walk in her Garden as she used to do; but being come near the Summer House,
she had not the power to advance one step forward till she had gone into it;
where being seated, she began to reflect on all that had happened to her there
the last night: a while after, she pulled Ibrahim's Verses out of her bosom,
and having kissed them, she read them over, kissed them, and put them into her
bosom again; then fell a raving as before; and then by and by again, out would
she pull the Paper, kiss, read, and kiss it again; and this sport she repeated
over diverse times. All this while Ibrahim, through his peep-hole, had the
pleasure of seeing how much his beloved Mistress did make of his Verses; for he
had seen them so often that he could discern them at such a distance. This
sight did infinitely please him, and he was so attentive at it, that he
perceived not Moretto, who was coming to him, 'till he was close by, he
acquainted him with Roxana's desires, then gave him the Letter, which being
opened by Ibrahim, he read in it what follows.

You Will wonder it may be at my forwardness, in making these advances, which I
should, with the Decorum of my Sex, have expected first from you, but mighty
Love causing me to reflect on all that the Heavens have done for me of late, I
can no longer withstand his invincible Power, it is he that has guided my Pen,
to inform you that my Father not returning home this day, this night may be as
freely ours as was the last. Heaven knows what we shall do to continue our
enterview after Aladin's return; but I leave all to Love, to whom I have wholly
devoted my self. I will not doubt but that you will be as desirous to meet me
in the Summer House this night, at the same hour, as I shall be to see you
there. It is Roxana gives you this advice.


It was now Ibrahim's turn to kiss the Letter, which he did over and over, and
having bid Moretto to fetch him Ink and Paper, he passed his time till his
return, in contemplating his Dear Roxana, who by this time was fallen asleep,
holding the Verses in her hand, which were ready to drop. To enjoy the better
the benefit of the cool Air, she had cast aside her Vail more than usually, by
which he did discover whole mines of Beauties which were spread all over her
neck and Breasts. When Moretto was returned, he could not take off his Eyes,
from so Charming an Object, and when he did it, he enviously turned his back
toward the Hole, that Moretto should not rob him with his Eyes, of some part
of that which he thought was wholly due unto his Love.

In this place, as in many others of this Book, I might make diverse curious
Reflections; as here, for example, jealousy is the natural effect of Love,
etc. But my design being to give you only a bare account of the Court-Secret,
according to the faithfulness of my Memoires; besides that, the Subject of this
Novel is sufficient enough of it self to furnish me with matter, I shall
decline all such kind of superfluous digressions, and stick close to my
Subject. This is then what Ibrahim writ back to Roxana.

Our Love had a more noble birth, than to ascribe unto it any of those low
Formalities, which were invented by meaner Souls than my Roxana's, and that are
put in use by such persons as make Love more by form than by inclination. Let
it suffice, that your kind invitation is as acceptable to me, as if it was an
assurance that you gave your consent to answer one from me. I shall employ all
the time, till the happy hour be come, in such pleasant Reflections on what has
already passed, and in such Raptures on the Joys to come, that I shall, by
those means, make that time, which otherwise would seem an Age to me, be but a
moment of pleasure, till that happy hour. The Heavens, who has made me for my
Roxana, and she for her Ibrahim, preserve us both.


This Letter being finished, he dispatched Moretto away with more than usual
haste, only that he might lose no more of that sight which his sleeping Roxana
did afford him. He was still gazing on, wishing himself all turned into Eyes,
that he might devour her with looking on, when on a sudden a great noise was
heard, of a confusion of Voices, which still drawing nearer to his Garden, he
thought fit to retire into his House, for fear of a surprise. When he was got
thither, he more distinctly heard the Voices, and gathered by them, that it was
a Slave who had made his escape. Some of the Pursuers were for getting over the
Wall, and to search in the Garden; others again said that no body lived in that
house; the sooner for that, cried others, let us search there; at last the most
voices carried it, for the search in the Garden: Some presently got over by the
help of others, at which Ibrahim having made fast all his doors, he kept
within, and let them do what they pleased without, when, after they had looked
all over, and found no body, they left off, but it was not without some cunning
observations, made by one of those that came first over; he, before the rest
was come, had observed some footsteps new made upon the Grass which was high,
and those steps tending toward the House, he had followed them, and leaning
his Ear to the Keyhole of the door, he had heard some kind of treading in the
House, all this gave him some Jealousy, that the Fugitive was gotten into it;
he made no more noise of it at that time, but was resolved to watch thereabouts
that night, to seize on the Fugitive himself, when he should think of getting
off, and have the sole Honor and Reward of the business to himself; with these
thoughts he mixed himself with the rest of the Rabble, and got over the Wall as
he had got in, and the noise going by little and little, further and further,
at last all was quiet as before.

So soon as the Storm was over, Ibrahim could no longer refrain from going
again to have another view of his Mistress asleep; but when he came he found
her gone, it is likely being awakned by the noise.

Ibrahim guessing that he had lost his happiness by the noise which the
multitude had made, did wish that he had had some of them there to revenge
himself up n; but presently considering that (...) night he should have the
happine^s ^o ^ee her nearer at hand, and to discourse with her, he quieted
himself with that Expectation, and returned into the house to wait till the
good hour.

Mean time, Roxana on her part did not think the time less long, though she had
slept some part of it away. She had received Ibrahim's answer by Moretto, and
she was so ordering of things, and disposing of the Servants, that none but her
own Maid and Moretto, the two Confidents, should know of the business: All
things being put in order, and the hour drawing near, she thought it would be
some satisfaction to her, to spend the rest of the time at the Summer House,
which she did, taking her Maid along with her, and leaving Moretto at her
Garden door, to be in readiness to give them the Alarm, if any Enemy should
appear.

At last the twelve a Clock at night Prayers were proclaimed from the top of a
Tower, according to the custom of that Country, where they have no public
Clocks, nor Bells; and Ibrahim came to the Garden with his Rope-Ladder, he
presently fixed it, and got up, and was striding over the wall, when a piece
was discharged, which shot him quite through the Body, so that he fell
headlong into Roxana's Garden. He that had shot him, followed close his Game,
not knowing which way he had fallen, and believing that he had shot him, and
not finding him on that side of the wall, cried out, if there be any body in
the next Garden, stop that Fugitive which I have shot; and looking for some
convenient place to get over, he at last found the Rope-Ladder, on which having
got, he leapt into Roxana's Garden, and was still so attentive after his
pursuit, that he considered not the persons that were by, but glorying in his
Prowess, 'twas I killed him, said he: Moretto, who was come, and had seen what
had happened to his poor Master, was in such a rage at this Villains Insolence,
that with a Spade he had in his hand, he cleav'd the fellow's head in two, and
laid him sprawling on the ground.

You may imagine in what a condition Roxana was, who, so soon as she had heard
the Gun go off, and the person fall, imagining it could be none other than her
Ibrahim, she had run to him, and being stunned by his fall, she had concluded
him dead, considering the great effusion of Blood which came from him; she
presently sent her Maid to call the Servants of the house up, and to send them
for help; she tore her Hair, endeavored to stop his wounds with the Linen
which she rent off her self; she raised his head in her lap, called upon him to
speak to her, and finding no answer come from him, and that he was without
motion, she fell backwards with her head against the Wall, in a swoon. In this
condition were they both found by the Servants, the Assistance which had been
sent for, and by her own Mother, who had been told of the sad disaster, by some
over-diligent Servant, that had brought her thither.

The Surgeons, moving of his body to search his wounds, saw a great deal of
Blood on Roxana, which had run from him, and they not knowing of the business
any more than they saw, did judge her hurt also, and by the place where the
blood was, that she was mortally wounded. They stirring of Ibrahim's body, he
came to life again, opened his Eyes, turned his head about, and presently asked
where Roxana was, and whether she was safe? He was answered, that there she lay
by him dead, as they supposed; Then is all your assistance in vain, said he, I
cannot live, if she be not, open my wounds afresh, or I Will tear them open with
my own hands, continued he. Roxana's Mother by this was run to her Daughter,
and with rubbing of her, and giving her some Cordials, she was brought to her
self again. The first thing she did, as if they had conserted together, was to
turn her head about, and then to ask where Ibrahim was? Here, Madam, said, one.
Ay and dead, said she! then farewell life, I can no longer live, if he is dead.
With that she flung her self back, and was returning into a swooning fit, but
that diverse cried out aloud, Ibrahim is not dead, he lives. Yes, Madam, said
Ibrahim, long enough to tell you that I dye yours, as I designed ever to have
lived. Then do I breathe again, said Roxana. At last the wound being searched,
the Surgeons were asked what judgment they gave of it, whether Mortal or not?
They with down looks, and sorrowful countenances, answered, there was no hope
of life. At which words, Roxana crying out aloud, then farewell Ibrahim, I Will go
before: she fell into a greater swoon than before, in which she was carried by
Servants unto her Apartment, and laid in her bed. Ibrahim was also carried to
the house of one of his Friends, that he might have better Attendance, where
after he had languish'd two days, he dyed, crying continually on Roxana, his
dear Roxana; and Moretto was struck with so much sorrow at the loss of so good
a Master, that he stabbed himself, and dyed at his Master's beds feet.

As for Roxana, she continued so long in her fainting, that every body near her
thought her to be dead; and when she came to her self again, it was with such
extravagancies, such unjointed discourses, and such sudden flyings out, that it
was easy to perceive her grief was greater than she could bear. Her Maid was
had into examination, who having confessed all, was at last dismissed, and put
away from her Mistress's service; they would have confronted her with Moretto
and the Caldean, but the first being dead, by which means the last was not to
be found, the business termin'd there. The body of that Wretch who had
committed the Murder was found to be the Person who had watched for the
Fugitive; he was delivered to his Friends, who came to demand him: Another
person was placed near Roxana, on the account she might administer Comforts to
her as well as other Services during her distraction; she was Sister to a
Mufti, whose name was Repset, and hers was Zora: This Mufti did also frequently
visit Roxana during her sorrow, in order to reduce her to her self again. But
enough of that at present; we shall have occasion more than once to speak of
this Mufti and his Sister, till then I leave giving you a Character of them:
mean time, leaving Roxana to the care of those persons that were appointed by
her Father and Mother to attend her, we will now come to the continuance of the
Historical part of this Novel, till we have occasion to return to Roxana, and
bring her again in play.

Cha Abbas the Persian Emperor, perceiving that things did not go on as he
would have them, toward the entire destruction of the Mohammedan Religion, on
which depended his Conquest of the Ottoman Empire, at which he aimed, under the
pretense of pure Zeal to his Religion; and that notwithstanding all his
Efforts, the formidable number of Priests of his sort, which he had sent to be
like so many Spies in the very heart of that Empire, the great number of
Pensioners which he kept amongst Selim's Courtiers and Chief Ministers of
State, and the vast expenses he had been at to defray all those Charges, he
resolved to play quit or double. Selim's Pulse was once again to be felt, how
he stood affected; and perceiving that it still beat true to the Mohammedan
Religion, in a great Council which was held at Ispahan, in which the
Mahometists did rule the Roast, it was ordered and concluded that seeing no good
was to be done by Selim, he should certainly be laid aside; whether there was
any foul play showed to him after this, my Memoirs therein fall short, but it
is certain he lived not long after that resolution was taken; he dyed in a
manner suddenly, not without great suspicion, that there had been given him
some strong ingredient, which came from Persia, which had been mixed with his
Cossee, or with those Herbs which he delighted frequently to smell to.

His death surpised all the world, but those that were of the Cabal, and made
way for his undoubted Successor Amurat to mount on the Throne. After the
Ceremonies of his Coronation were over, and that he was firmly Established, he
openly declared himself of the Sect of Haly; but did promise that he would
preserve the Laws of the Empire, and the Ottoman Religion according as it was
Established, and as his late Brother Selim had left them.

Of Truth, Amurat of himself had very good inclinations, he was very Just,
Pious, Religious, Charitable, and desirous to oblige all persons, that came
near him, and had he been left to his own Will and Pleasure, he had doubtless
Governed the Empire with all Peaceableness, Tranquillity and Justice, to the
great joy and content of his people. But what will not a blind Zeal do, which
is continually fomented by such as breathe nothing but ruin and destruction!
It was now high time for Cha-Abbas and all his Creatures, to put the last hand
to the great work; to this purpose, all the Priests of Haly's Sect, which were
about the Emperor, were charged never to let him rest, till they had brought
him to a firm resolution, of changing the Religion of the Empire, by totally
rooting out and expelling from it, the Ottoman Religion, and establishing in
lieu of it, the Sect of Haly: This peal was daily rung in Amurat's Ears,
proclaiming that the Heavens having made choice of him, to be the great and
wonderful instrument of so good, so great, and so pious a work, by which he
should avoid all expurgatory punishments for his sins, and should be
immediately carried up by Angels, and laid at the feet of the great Ala, who
should seat him in a Throne of Glory near unto himself; that he would leave
behind him here on Earth a Name and Fame that should endure for ever, that his
Memory would ever be in good Odor to all good persons, and that he should be
here worshipped as a Saint, with many other such like assurances of honor and
Glory, did at last prevail with him.

This was the daily practice of the Mahometists, but they finding that though
through their incessant plying of Amurat, all the day long, they brought him to
their Bow, yet every morning, he would, after consulting with his Pillow, still
continue in the goodness of his natural disposition, so that he always
appeared cold in the morning in the promoting of their designs, how warm soever
they had left him the night before. They had recourse to another Stratagem, the
same promises of greatness and glory in this world, and the next, which they
had promised to him, they also assured to the Sultana, that she should enjoy in
ample manner, if she did but plye Amurat at night, when they were in bed
together, as they did all the day long, telling her on the other hand, that if
she was slack or remiss in it, she would not only lose all those Honors, that
Happiness and bliss which was prepared for her, but incur by her neglect
eternal Misery.

To what height will not a blind Zeal be screwed up, by such fair promises on
the one hand, and the terror of such dreadful punishments on the other! No
wonder then, if that the Sultana's good, mild, and affable disposition, which
she had always shown before she was Empress, did change into a morose temper,
and into a most violent aversion against all those that were not of Haly's
Sect: She assured Haly's Priests, that she should not lose all those glories,
which had been promised her, by any neglect in the performance of what was
required of her: Of truth, she so plied Amurat by night, and the Halists by
day, that the worst of his Subjects or Slaves, was happy in comparison to him;
at bed, at Table, at Council, at his Recreations, and Divertions, nay even at
his Devotion, and greatest Retirements, he was so perpetually haunted and bated
by those Wolves in Sheeps cloathings, that he diverse times wished himself in
the same Station that he had formerly been, provided he might but enjoy also
that tranquillity of Mind and Spirit which he then possessed. Who could resist,
to so many redoubled, nay rather to such a continued assault? For his own ease
and quiet, and that he might but enjoy that content and quiet, which the
meanest of his Servants possoss'd, he was forced to yield to the Halist's
perpetual solicitations, he promised to do all that they would, and to root out
of his Dominions the Mohammedan Religion, to establish in lieu of it, therein,
the Sect of Haly, to change and alter the Laws which had been from time to time
made against that Sect, and to make new Laws, or that he would dye in the
attempt.

From the moment that the Halist's had got that assurance from him, they gave
him liberty to breathe again. Presently was Cha-Abbas acquainted with the good
success of the Halists, and great joy was expressed at it through all Persia.
But th^^ was not all, there was still more to be done; they had got but one
point yet, the present establishment of Haly's Sect, but how that should be
secured for the future, was now the business in hand. New Orders were therefore
sent from Persia, that the Priests of Haly should immediately enter upon that
work, that a Successor of the same Sect should be procured, and secured, to
supply Amurat's place after his Death, for fear of a relaps of the whole
Empire, into the Religion of Mahomet again; and presently the whole Crew fell
to work: Diverse ways were proposed, too long here to be repeated, my Memoires
mention only two of the most eminent, which were most insisted upon. The first
was, that the Bodies of Amurat and of his Sultana, should be so prepared and
ordered by Medicines, as that the Sultana might bring forth a vigorous young
Prince, to live, to be brought up in the Sect of Haly, and to be Successor to
Amurat. All those means were used, but to no purpose; this stubborn refusal of
Nature, not to comply with the desires of such persons, as use to overcome all
obstacles, in lieu of teaching them that Ala was above all their designs, did
but enrage them the more, and make them the more earnestly bent upon their
wicked enterprises. A Successor was to be produced, that should be of the Sect
of Haly, and that should step in betwixt the Heir apparent to the Ottoman
Empire and it, because that the right Heir was of the Mohammedan Religion, and
consequently unfit for their purposes, wherefore no means were to be left
unsought after, no ways untried, and no designs unattempted, that could conduce
to the work in hand.

They therefore concluded to try what Prayers, Pilgrimages, and Offerings would
do. The thing was proposed to the Emperor and the Sultana, and in short agreed
upon, and the day prefixed for the setting forth of the Court, that all things
might be in a readiness against the appointed time, yet still delayed from time
to time by the Sultana and the Emperor's orders.

Amongst the Priests of Haly was reckoned in the first rank this Repset, which
I have before mentioned, to be employed in administering of Consolations to the
afflicted Roxana. Not that he was more Learned, or endowed with greater Gifts,
or of a more Pious, Religious, and Sober Life than others, but that through his
Crafty Insinuations, and Indefatigable Application and Attendance, he had got
first the Sultana's good opinion, and by her means and recommendations, had
rendered himself Master of his Master, the Emperor: He had his Ear as well as
his Heart, so that he did order and dispose of all places of Authority and
Trust: He was of all the Councils, even to the most secret and particular: In a
word, he was become the Dominus fac totum. This acquired him a great Repute,
Esteem, Respect, and even Fear; for those that had no occasion of his Services,
did fear his Frowns, on which depended their Ruin, as their Establishment on
his Smiles and Condescentions.

This Creature, of mean, obscure Extraction, of as mean a mercenary Soul, and
of vitiated Principles, in the Station he was got, was the Primum mobile, or
great Wheel, which set the whole Machine of the Halists to work in the Ottoman
Empire; he had access to the Emperor and to the Sultana at all times, at all
hours of the day and night, even when they were in their privatest retirements:
He had since his greatness at Court shaken off the Rags of Monasteries, and had
licked himself from a shapeless Cub, into a spruce Courtier. The Court was then
replenished with Ladies, whose Beauties might compare with those of all the
other Courts in the World. But the Sultana did tarnish them all, and forced
them tacitly to confess, that she alone eclipsed their Luster. The Sultana had
her Diversions amongst those Ladies which composed her Court; and their
Beauties did attract to them from all parts of the Empire diverse Adorers of the
other Sex. But still our Mufti notwithstanding his multiplicity of Business
elsewhere, would make one; he was always amongst the Ladies, and it was thought
that those hours which he was to have employed in Private and Public Prayers,
and in other Devotions, he spent in his conversation with the Female Sex; being
led thereunto by that most powerful Magnet, his natural inclination: He had not
been satisfied with those private Stealths which he made on particular Persons
Wives and Daughters, under the Authority and Power of his Function; but his
Ambition and Lust still increasing, as did his Fortune and Credit, he resolved
to look higher, and to attempt the highest piece of Villainy, and Impudence,
under the Cloak of his Religion, and the design of propagating of it, as could
be imagined.

The Sultana, according to diverse occurrences, had given our Mufti not only a
free access into her greatest retirements, but in diversion had been more free
with him in her Speeches and in Carriage than with others; her Beauty and this
Freedom, which he thought his good Mien and Deserts had acquired him, did so
puff up his mind, that he thought it no difficult thing to ingratiate himself
into the Sultana's Affections: this impudent conceit of his (I can term it no
better) did set all his Wits to work to accomplish his end; to which purpose,
he did watch but for an opportunity of privately delivering to the Sultana what
he had to say without interruption.

He was not long without one; the Sultana being one day somewhat indisposed,
was retired into her Closet, with order that she would not be disturbed by any
body. Our Mufti, who was always on the watch himself, besides the Spies he
employed, had soon an intelligence of it; he dressed himself with all the
advantage imaginable, set himself up in the Glass, perfumed himself, in fine,
he was fitted as a Bridegroom on his Wedding day; in this equipage he presents
himself to the Sultana's Closet door, and being denied entrance, he took it in
such scorn and contempt, that he stayed not a second repulse, but turning the
Lock, entered of his own accord, and boldly intrudes upon the Sultana, who was
looking over of some Papers; he comes up to her briskly, and making a profound
reverence, Madam, said he, your Servant would have denied me entrance to you.
The Sultana, who was amazed to see him so gay, so brisk, and so much more
confident than usually, though he never wanted any, looking upon him, as
somewhat surpised, told him, That the Servant had done nothing but what he had
in charge, for that she being indisposed, she had re^^r'd with a design nor to
be disturbed, but since that he was come, she bid him to tell her what he had
to say. Madam, said he, I am sorry I have thus intruded on your privacy; and
the business I come about requires a long discourse, with a great deal of
attention: I think it will be best for me to defer the opening of it to another
time, and at present to retire. If the business is not of such a nature as to
lend fuel to a certain Melancholy which has seized me at present; I should
rather choose this time than any other, to hear what you have to say, replied
the Sultana: It may afford me some diversion; and as things are ordered on
other accounts, you may not be disturbed in the relation: Place your self at
ease, and let me hear what you would say.

This good beginning did still inspire our Mufti more and more with Hope and
Joy, which was so great that it discovered it self upon his Face, in his Eyes,
and in all his Actions; having fitted himself for to deliver his Speech, he
thus began;

It cannot be unknown to you, Madam, how instrumental I have been, through the
assistance of Heaven, in bringing about the great work of extirpating of
Heresy out of this Empire, and of settling in it the Religion of our Great
Prophet Hali: Since that it has reached the great Mufti's Ears, who upon that
information, has Commissionated me to go on with that work so well begun, and
to finish it, according as I shall find occasions to act. You also know, Madam,
with how little success all Physical means have been used, both as to your
person and to the Emperor's; so that all helps are laid aside of having a young
Successor from his Loins. I am not of your Opinion, replied the Sultana, and I
believe that the defect lies more in me than in the Emperor, for though I seem
not to see, that I might not in the least check his pleasures, I know very
well, that of late he has had a Child by one of his Mistresses. Madam, replied
our Mufti, you know not the Wiles and Artifices of those kind of Creatures,
they value not who gets their Children, they adopt them to what Father they
think are most proper to own them, it is sufficient only that they have once
enjoyed the man; to persuade him, nay convince him, that he is the true and
right Father of the Child they go with; they go yet further, Madam, according
to the persons inclinations, to one Sex more than another, the Child shall be
right or wrong of that very Sex; or there shall be no child in the whole Empire
of that Sex, to make a change with. I cannot think however, but that I am more
in the fault than Amurat, replied the Sultana, I am apt to believe that a
certain decay which I feel in me, is the cause of my having no Children of
late, wherefore I am desirous to try, what the Heavens will do, being solicited
to that purpose, by those Holy Prayers, Pilgrimages, and Offerings, which you
your self have proposed, and that have been resolved upon both by the Emperor
and the whole Court, and it is no little wonder to me to find you so soon, in
so contrary a mind. Madam replied the Mufti, I must deal plainly with you, I
have not, I confess, all the faith that might be imagined in those things; of
truth, they are good and necessary, pious frauds, to amuse the Vulgar withal,
and to work diverse good and Religious ends; and it is to that purpose only,
that we have now designed them, to please and blind the people, and to exalt
our Religion, with which none can compare for contriving of Miracles, of which
that of your proving with Child presently upon the return from the Pilgrimage,
however otherways the Child were got, would be none of the least, but to the
purpose. Madam, give me leave to tell you, Therefore that what I now propose,
is not in the least to put off the Pilgrimage, on the contrary, it is to the
same end. I have read something of Physic, have seen some operations, and
dissections, and I am sufficiently versed in those Arts, to be bold enough to
lay a Wager, that the defect is not in the least in you, Madam. How can we be
sure of that, replied the Sultana? How, Madam? answered he again, if you made
use of any other person than the Emperor to try the Experiment, and that I had
laid a great sum on it, I should soon draw the Stakes. You speak of things
that cannot be, replied the Sultana. That cannot be, Madam, replied the Mufti,
say rather, Madam, that you will not admit to be? Is it not my Duty not to
admit of any such thing? said she hastily, raising her voice. Yes, Madam, said
the Mufti, according to the common Rules; but, Madam, when the welfare of
Empires, the extirpating of Heresies, the establishing of true Religion call
for our Assistances, all those little particular Rules cease, they are
overrul'd by an higher power, and in the very design and intention of
establishing of Religion, all these small ties upon our Duties, vanish into
Air; nothing can be too good, too great, nor too holy, not to be sacrificed to
so laudable and so pious a work. That great and general Duty, swallows up, and
dispences with all those little ones, which at other times are in force; all
must yield to that great work: and that which at any other time would appear
unjust or unlawful, becomes the most just, lawful, and necessary good that can
be done, when it is for the good of the Church. This Doctrine is so new to me,
answered the Sultana, that I am more surpised at, than edified by it. This,
Madam, I have foreseen, said the Mufti, and it is for that reason, that I did
choose this opportunity, in which, without disturbance, I might infuse those
weighty Reasons, which I have in order to persuade you, to condescend to so
just a request as I am going to make to you. You have surprised me, I say once
again, and the nature of the business requires some serious considerations. Not
that I in the least incline to what you propose, but that I may arm my self
with such Arguments, against those ^^w Doctrines which you set up, that I may
have some color for my refusal, besides, the natural abhorrence which I find
in me toward what you propose, and I wish that some other means might be found
out, in which I might be so happy as to serve the Church. None greater than
this, Madam, Replied the Mufti, who would not so easily be put by, and give me
leave to add, Madam, to what I have said already, that the Emperor is obliged
for the forwarding of so great a work, to give his consent to it, only all the
business in this case is, that it must be made a Mystery, a Court-Secret, to
avoid all Scandal; for in such Cases, Sin (if it may be called so, considering
to what a pious end it is acted) becomes none, and the Scandal only which might
arise from the Knowledge, and the divulging of so great a Secret, becomes sin.
In a word, Madam, do but choose a Person secret, discreet, and in all other
respects according to your liking, and the Blessing of Heavens go along with
the work. In saying these words, the Mufti pricked up himself, that the Sultana
should take more notice of his person, and perceiving that she made no answer,
Let me further tell you, Madam, continued he, that this is not the first time,
such things have been acted, still to a good end, though never none to so great
and pious an end as this. It was but in the last Age, that a Neighboring
Empire to this, had fallen into the hands of its Enemies, had not a Mufti been
employed to get an Heir unto it; of truth, Madam, there are no fitter persons
in the World than those of the Clergy, for such works, in diverse respects; and
especially, I would advise you, Madam, to employ in this, one whose fidelity,
trust, and foreknowledge and pre-ingagements in this our great work, is
thoroughly known to you, that you may easily gain to you, without making any
more persons privy to those Mysteries, and great Arcanas of States; for in
these Cases, it is most certain, that the fewer are employed, the more secure
the business is from discovery. Here the Mufti made a full stop, not daring to
discover his intention more plainly, (though he had said enough already) till
he heard how the Sultana did resent it; and perceiving, that instead of giving
him some answer, she busied her self in perusing of the papers that were before
her. This slight did so offend him, that, he could not forbear saying, I am
sorry Madam, that I, who have already done so much for your service, and that
of the Church, and who is ready to lay down his life for the service of so
great, and so charming a Princess as you are, should be so little regarded, and
his good advises so little valued. And with that he put himself in a posture of
going, at which the Sultana, not so much as looking once on him, said, I have
already told you, that I would take time to weigh your Reasons, and the nature
of the thing you propose to me, and then after that I would give you my answer,
till then forbear giving your self or me any further trouble about it, I have a
mind to sleep, so good night.

Though our Mufti had a months mind to have stayed longer, and to have ventured
a little further, in pointing at the most proper person for the work, which he
fancyed to be himself, this unexpected answer from the Sultana with her hasty
rising up, did force him to a decent retreat, which he did without answering
one word more, after he had made a profound Reverence.

The Mufti being gone, the Sultana reseated her self, and doubtless made many
and great reflections on things proposed to her, by a Mufti too, which were so
opposite to her Principles and Inclinations; after which, having called for
attendance, she charged very strictly all that were about her, and whose duties
were to keep the doors, not to permit the Mufti Repset, on any pretense
whatsoever, to enter, when they knew that she was retired, and alone; she was
resolved to give him no more the opportunities of uttering such discourses, so
unbeseeming his Function to speak, and her Modesty and Greatness to hear; and
she knew well enough how to avoid his impertinencies, should he attempt any
before Company; and of truth, she was so offended at his late discourse, that
had it not been that he was a necessary Instrument in forwarding the work
(already begun) of Reformation: She would have acquainted the Emperor with his
attempt, and have had him dismissed the Court. But notwithstanding the Sultana's
aversion to all such sorts of ill ways, she had another charge by our Mufti,
though not altogether of the same nature, who came accompanied with two or
three more, that were Ministers of State, and privy Counselors, which demanded
for admittance into a private Conference with the Sultana, on pressing affairs,
which obliged the Sultana to give them admittance. This second visit was on the
account, that notwithstanding a day had been prefixed for the entering on the
Pilgrimage, there was still something or other in the wind which broke it off;
wherefore they now came with threatenings, to terrify the Sultana into a
compliance with their designs.

The Mufti told the Sultana that since the last time that he had the honor of
entertaining her, he had been diverse times to learn her resolutions, but that
not being admitted her presence, and the business they were come about
pressing, he had associated to himself those other worthy Persons, to
communicate an Affair, though not quite of the same nature as the former, yet
tending to the same end, which was the good of the Church, and the glory of
Ala. The Sultana replied, That she was very desirous to be instrumental in so
Pious and Good a Work, provided it were not by any sinister ends. To wave
entering upon the late Discourse I had with you, Madam, said the Mufti, we are
come here to let you know, that for very high and weighty reasons you must
forthwith, and without any further delays, set forth in Pilgrimage to the Holy
Waters with the Emperor, and immediately after you have made your Offering and
Devotions, give out that you are with Child: and you must so order matters,
that every body may give credit to it, for those very reasons which have
already been given you. And I, said the Sultana, tell you for answer, as I have
already told you, that I will never consent to any such thing, nor impose upon
the World thus, to the exclusion of the right Heir, without the Emperor's
consent, and I am already certain before hand, that he will never give his
assent to so ill a practice. Madam, said one of the Counselors, we have reason
to believe it, for we have already been denied by the Emperor, though we have
used all the Arguments imaginable to persuade him to it, on the contrary, we
have found so much and so great an aversion in him, toward such a thing, that
we despair ever bringing him to it; wherefore we are come, Madam, to denounce
to you from his Sanctity, the Grand Mufti, that all you have done hitherto is
of no value, if you persist not in doing all the good you can for the
advancement of the Universal Faith; and that in lieu of gaining any advantage
by what you have already done, you are immediately to be pronounced degraded
from all the fair and assured hopes of Honor and Glory, which you were to have
received in this and the other world, in case you had persisted to the end, and
you are immediately to be delivered up to the Prince of Darkness, to do with
you at his Pleasure. Wonder not at this proceeding, Madam, said then our Mufti,
it is but justice, that punishments should be in some measure proportionable to
the Crime for which they are inflicted, and can there be a greater, than to
(wilfully and merely to gratify some few shallow scruples) be the immediate
cause of the destruction of so great a work, so happily begun, and so
prosperously gone on.

You have no more therefore to do, but to countenance the business, to shape
you a great belly, which you must increase as the time of your reckoning will
require; to which purpose you must confide in three or four women, which you
shall think fit to entrust with so great a secret, which may assist you all the
time of your feigned Breeding, and at the time of your delivery also. I find so
much difficulty in all this, replied the Sultana, that I know not what to say,
nor what to do, I would do much to avoid those horrid threatenings which are
preparing to be put in execution against me; but on the other hand, how is it
possible that I should in the first place deceive the Emperor, who being made
jealous of some trick acted against his will, will be the more curious in the
detection of it; and if he should at any time desire, for his satisfaction, to
feel the stirring of the Child in my body, How shall I prevent him from taking
that liberty of satisfying himself? Besides, grant this was feasible: How is it
possible to delude so many great Persons highly interessed in this great
business, who by the Law of the Empire are to be present, that are of Mahomet
's Religion, and who have at present so much fears upon them, and so much cause
to suspect foul play, that they will be more diligent than usually in respect
to the business? To this we answer, Madam, in the first place, that the very
solemnity of the Pilgrimage, will be of great moment; next, that as to the
Emperor, we foreseeing such a thing, have provided against that inconveniency,
by letting him know, as we have done already, that we have reciv'd an Holy
Ointment, with which your Belly being once rubbed, to prevent miscarriage, no
profane hands must for ever after offer to touch it till after delivery; and
to that purpose, Madam, when you have once given out to the Emperor, that you
are with Child by him, you must keep your self so close lapped up, that he may
not, by any surprisal when you are asleep, attempt the Trial. He is so exact an
observer of all things, which the Church imposes upon him, that after you have
once assured him of the thing, he will be one of the first that will rejoice at
your pregnancy, and that will spread it abroad. And as to the other doubt you
have raised, Madam, in the first place, long before hand, we shall get several
Women that reckon about the time we have prefixed, that amongst them we may have
a Male-Child to substitute for yours; and as to the ways of conveyance of it
into the Bed to you, there are a hundred ways besides warm Clothes,
warming-pans, trapp-doors, back-doors, and private windows at the Bedshead to
bring a Child in; pish those things are practiced every day, especially amongst
us of the Clergy, who are not permitted to marry; but because the grand Mufti
knows that we, and he himself, are made of the same Flesh and Blood as other
men, we are permitted the use of Women in private, and without giving Scandal,
by which conversation it frequently happens, that we are put to such and the
like Shifts; then let us alone for ordering things, so as that none but those
of our Sect shall be present, at the time of your pretended delivery, some
shall be sent one way, others dispersed in other places, so that all will have
the wished for success that we all desire and pray for.

The Sultana having attentively hearkened to what had been said, and being
beforehand terrified with those horrid threatenings which they had denounced,
considering within her self that all the evil that was in it, they took upon
themselves, and that she had no further end in it, but the good advancement of
her Religion, she consented, though yet not without some kind of Reluctance;
and told them, that since they assured her, that they would take upon
themselves all the evil that she might fancy to be in the Action, and that they
would stand by her always, encounter and oppose all the Jealousies which the
Emperor might have on this Affair; she yielded to their desires, and said she
would immediately go to the Emperor, and fix-on a certain day to set forth.

All things being thus agreed upon, they left the Sultana to perform her part,
and every one of them went about to act theirs, in order of bringing about this
grand work.

Here we shall leave once more the Court, to give a visit to poor Roxana, who
through the great care of those that were about her, had perfectly recovered
her Senses, but was so melanchollick and so dejected, that she avoided all
Society, having no delight but to walk in her Garden, and to visit the
Summerhouse, in which she had first seen her beloved Ibrahim; though not
without great disturbances; and some time, when it came into her mind, looking
on the place where she last saw him, what a dismal sight it was to her, to see
him weltering in his own Blood. Mufti Repset had continually from time to time,
given her Visits, and such of his Counsels and Advises as he thought fit, and
finding her to be perfectly recovered of her alienation of mind, and fancying
her more beautiful than ever, in that negligent dress she now did wear,
especially after the loss of all his Amorous hopes toward the Sultana, he
resolved to change his Note, and under pretense of diverting her from her deep
Melancholy, to entertain a commerce of Love, and gallantry with her. This was
easy for him to do, for what with the Liberty usually allowed to Persons of
his Profession, the small care, or rather little Love which her Father had for
Roxana after this miscarriage; and that part which Zora acted, who was the
Mufti's Sister, as I have told you already, in her Brother's interest; the
Mufti had opportunity enough, to declare his mind to Roxana, with all the
Liberty and privacy imaginable.

He made as much use of it as he possibly could, unto which his Sister Zora,
who had been with Roxana ever since her distraction, did not a little
contribute. She was a Lady of the Town, one that loved much more to sing a
Lampoon, than to turn over her Beads, she was for all Commerse; all Ages,
Complexions, Humors, Conditions, so they but brought Grits to the Mill, were
welcome. But above all, she had a particular inclination for a brisk young man,
of good Parentage, good Mien, Education, and Inclinations, but of little or no
Fortune, whose name was Cara, and who had as little hopes of getting any at
Court; for being no Halist, and having but a small stock of ready Cash,
wherewith to push on his Fortune. Zora affecting this young Man, as I have
said, she did all she could to gain his Affections, but he knowing what a
course of life she had always lead, he was not very forward on the business, no
further than to take his share in the Crowd, amongst the rest of those that
kept her Company. She was handsome, and of a pretty good Conversation, but
above all, she was Sister to the all-doing Repset, the Mufti. This last made
him to incline very much to humor Zora, when he considered what influence she
had over her Brother, who was all at Court; he knew that Zora was informed of
his Religion, and seeing, that notwithstanding, that she took all occasions of
expressing her kindness toward him, though she never would admit him to the
last Favor, as having other designs upon him particularly, he began to build
upon that bottom, and on that account, did visit her frequently. She on her
part, thinking that his repeated Civilities, were the pure effects of her
Beauty, she did all she could to add luster to that proportion which Nature had
bestowed on her with a Liberal hand: Thus did Cara and Zora live in good
intelligence together, which was not discontinu'd, when she came into Aladin's
family, though she was then obliged, to bid farewell to that great troop of
Followers, which she formerly entertained, and was obliged to divert her self
by stealth in that Nature, in private Corners. For though Aladin, like the
rest, was forced to hold a Candle to the Devil, more for fear than love or
worship, which had made him yield to the taking of Zora into his Family at the
first request, which Repset had made him. It was with a Resolution of not
permitting any ill thing to be acted in his House, abroad she might do what she
pleased, but what Devil soever she was then, she was to be a Saint in Aladin's
House, and in this her Brother the Mufti had not lost his aims, which were to
get her a good Name again, if it were possible, which he knew she might as soon
get in Aladin's Family, as in a Convent, which had made him take the
Opportunity of offering her service in the behalf of Roxana, which at that time
was accepted more freely, than it might have been at any other juncture.

One day Zora seeing Cara pass by Aladin's Gates, she sent a slave to let him
know that she would speak with him. He came to her, and she told him, that she
could not doubt of the knowledge which he must have gained by this time, of her
affections toward him, but to let him know that her intentions were real, and
that she had retired her self into Aladin's sober Family, but to give her self
more entirely up to him, she would now at that very time present him to her
Brother, who was then in the House, and engage him to take a particular care of
him, and to obtain from the Emperor some considerable preferment, but that this
should be on condition that he should make her a promise of marrying her. This
word Marriage did not a little surprise Cara, he was so disturbed at it, that
he stood mute, which gave time to Zora to continue thus. What are you so great
a Libertine, as to be affrighted at a bare proposal of Marriage? No, Madam, not
at the word, replied Cara, but at the thing it self, for having never yet spent
one thought that way, it now a little intangles my Wits to find out an answer,
suitable to my thoughts, and the honor you do me. Well, I Will allow you three
days, replied Zora, to consider of the Business; in the mean time, I will be
beforehand with you, and instantly present you to my Brother. He was returning
most humble thanks to her, when that a noise being heard, he is coming, said
she, I Will go and meet him; with that she stepped toward the Mufti, who was going
out, and told him, that there was a Gentleman which she would recommend to his
particular care, as a person, though no Halist, yet that in all other respects,
did deserve his friendship and favor. At these words, the Mufti, to whom good
words, and fair promises, never cost any thing, whatever the effects were, came
to meet Cara, who was coming to salute the Mufti, and told him, Sir, my Sister
has beforehand given me such a Character of you, if your name is Cara, that
will oblige me to serve you with the utmost of my power; you may firmly build
on that fond, and so soon as I can possible, I shall make you sensible of the
effects of my Promises; but you must have a little patience, my hands are full,
do but put me in mind of you sometimes, by appearing before me, or before my
Sister, and your business is done.

Cara was going to return him a great Complement of thanks, when he thus
interrupted him, Look you, Sir, said the Mufti, I know what you would, and what
you should say, time is precious, be assured that I Will be as good as my word,
my Sister shall engage for me, and so Sir, your Servant. With that he took his
Sister by the hand, and led her in another Room, which made Cara retire, to
reflect on Zora's news proposals.

The Mufti had so heated himself near Roxana, who being that day in a little
more pleasing humor than usually, with the assurances that her Father had
given her, to carry her into the Country again; that it had added much Lusture
to her natural Beauty, which of late had been clouded with the black fumes of
Melancholy, upon the hopes of being in a short time freed from this Priest's
impertinencies. She had been a little more free than ordinary in her
Conversation, which had made him to offer at more Liberty than usual; this had
so offended her, that she had risen from her Seat, and left the room. At which
our Mufti all on a fire, had taken pet, and was gone down, to make his
Complaint to his Sister, and to acquaint her with his Resolutions. Dear Sister,
said he to her, you can no more be ignorant of the Love which I have for
Roxana, than I am of that which you have for Cara. I have given you my word,
that I will prefer him to a considerable Employ, and that I will oblige him
first to marry you; and I here assure you anew, that I will perform all that I
have promised you to a title; but my Dear Zora, you must take pity on me also.
I must tell you that I can no longer live, except I enjoy Roxana. Oh! how the
thought of her disturbs my heart, added he? I have used all the fair means
imaginable, and she proves the more obdurate to all my supplications, to all my
submissions, and to all my Vows. What must I do in this condition? There
pausing, Zora made this answer. Sir, I pity your condition the more, because
that mine is of the very same nature. And seeing you have so generously offered
me your assistance, I can do no less than to assure you of mine, but speak what
you would have me do, and it is done. But remember this, both for my sake, as
well as your own, that no time must be lost, because Aladin has given orders to
his Servants to be in a readiness, to march to his Government three days hence;
wherefore you must be quick in the execution of your resolutions. For that
matter, replied the Mufti, let me alone, I, who govern the Emperor, will easily
deal with Aladin; and oblige him to retard his Journey at my pleasure, nay and
if there is occasion, as you will find there will be, when I have told you all;
I will have him so suddenly sent into the Country, that he shall not have time
to take above a Servant or two with him, therefore Dear Zora, set your heart at
Rest, that way. But to the point. I have been thinking that some little
forcible attempt might prevail more with Roxana's humor, than all other means
that I have tried yet. I know that some Women will be forced, that they may
have that to say for themselves, when afterward they readily comply with our
desires. I have a great mind to try what that will do, when Aladin is gone, but
without you I can do nothing in it; it is you that must distance the Mother
from Roxana's Apartment, and that must either send out of doors, or employ at
distance, all the Servants, that none may hear her Cries, in case she would be
so foolish, and let me alone for the rest. I will attempt her but once more by
fair means, and then I Will go to extremes. Well, Brother, said Zora, be you
assured of me, let it be your business to get Aladin removed far enough from
hence, against that time for his prying Eye, and distrustful disposition, would
spoil all, and be sure not to forget Cara. Trust to me, dear Sister, answered
Repset, and let me alone to manage things. With that he took leave of his
Sister, and went his way.

Aladin growing weary of the Mufti's too frequent visits to his Daughter, and
of Zora's Intreagues, how close soever she carried them, was resolved to put an
end to both, by retiring to his Government, seeing that he no longer had any
Business to do in Constantinople, and he had disposed of all things to be in a
readiness to transport himself and his whole Family thither, with a full
resolution never to let his Wife nor Daughter see that great City again, at
least so long as the last were under his Government, which he hoped would not
be long, for he was resolved to marry her out of hand, so soon as he were got
down, to any Gentleman that would have her, to free himself from the trouble of
observing her. To this purpose, he went to the Court to ask the Emperor's leave
to retire the next morning to his Government, but he was come too late. The
Mufti had already influenced the Emperor, that Aladin's presence was necessary
for some time longer here, at least till a particular Council were over, at
which he was to assist, which would not be till two or three days hence. This
had the Mufti done, that he might have the Opportunity of giving Roxana one
Visit more, in which he would use all the Rhetoric imaginable to gain her
Affections, and which should be the last, if he did not succeed. Aladin having
received the Emperor's absolute Orders not to stir, till that Consultation was
over, he returned home in order to obey it, but with a firm resolution that so
soon as it were over, to be gone without any further leave, but take hold of
the Emperor's words, who had told him he should not go till that time was over;
wherefore he still kept all things in readiness for his Journey, only
acquainting with it his Wife, and Roxana, who was daily courting of him to be
going, as much as the Mother had a desire to stay, for she thought her self
young enough yet to make a Figure at Court.

Cara all this while had leisure to reflect on what Zora had proposed to him,
and did not know what course to take. He had a fancy toward her, and would
gladly have established a commerce of Gallantry betwixt themselves, but when
the thoughts of marrying her came in his head, that would so pall his appetite,
that nothing could quicken it again, but the hopes that her Brother would get
him into some considerable employment; that would again make him resolve not to
break off wholly with Zora: in this his fluctuation of thoughts, he at last
designed to steer a middle course betwixt Sylla and Charibdis, to avoid the
dangerous Rock of Matrimony, and that of want and necessity also, by offering
Zora a verbal promise of Marriage, which he would engage to perform when he was
thoroughly settled in an Employ, though he never intended it: In this design he
resolves to go see Zora, he finds her at Aladin's, and lets her know that he
was come to tell her that the love he had for her was sufficient of it self to
oblige him to do any thing that she should require of him, but that he thought
it prudence to be fully possessed and fixed in some Office or Employ by the
Mufti's means before he married her, for fear that that being once done, the
Mufti's willingness to serve him should slacken, or that he should quite give
over all thoughts of assisting him. This so reasonable a request did stop
Zora's mouth, so that she had nothing to say, but that she knew so well her
Brother, that besides the interest and share that she had, or at least expected
to have in the business, he was a person that would be as good as his word, so
soon as it could be done without prejudice to the rest of his Concerns; that in
the mean time, she desired his frequent visits, declaring that she was never
well pleased but in his company; and that he did not know how much it would
oblige her and her Brother, if that he would give her a verbal assurance of
Marrying her, as he had already promised, when things were settled to his mind.
I am so far, Madam, replied Cara, from refusing you so just a request, and so
much conformable to my own desires, that I will propose further, with your
leave, to confirm this promise, and to make it a firm marriage betwixt you and
I. It Is the Mufti, that I fear, and not you; I will consummate the Marriage by
bedding you privately. You know, Madam, that Marriages are made in Heaven, that
we do but ratify them here on Earth, that that is performed by our mutual
consents, and that the outward and pompous Ceremonies thereof are but to
satisfy the World that such a Man and such a Woman are going to lie by consent
with one another; and why may not we do that without all that bustle, when our
hearts have before hand agreed upon the point? I know that what you say, is
true, replied Zora, but should you prove false to me after all, then should I
be wanting in the means to right my self, which a public Matrimony would
afford me. That is an error, Madam, give me leave to tell you, replied Cara;
for were I so ill inclined, that could not hinder me from leaving you, at
least, and what difference betwixt the one and the other? But you must not fear
any such thing from a Person that has so much Love and Respect for you as I
have. Well, I find, replied Zora, that you have a charming Tongue, which with
the concurrence of my Love toward you, makes me apt to give credit to what you
say. You way rely on me in this, Madam, replied Cara, as on an Oracle. I will
be true to you, nay, to my self, I should say; for my Love to you makes me to
espouse your Interest as my own: do but consent to afford me time and
Opportunity of turning the verbal Promise you required of me, into an absolute
marriage, by receiving me into your Bed, into your arms. Well, replied Zora,
Since that I have already, long since, received you into my heart, I shall the
less stand upon terms, on the assurance you give me, that you will publicly
own our private marriage, when you are once firmly fixed in some handsome
Employ, I yield to your desires, and I will take but a day or two's time to
contrive how to manage the business, that we may not be discovered; after which
I shall give you notice of the time and place. In the mean time fail not to see
me every day, and never abuse the trust which I put in you. Cara answered Zora
with kisses, after which having once again assured her of his constancy, he
went his ways.

The Mufti, whose Love to Roxana did render as impatient and restless as could
be imagined, had not patience to defer the last trial which he designed, of his
Addresses to Roxana; he did not fail to give her a visit the next day,
notwithstanding the repulse which he had so lately received from her; but so
soon as she had heard that the Mufti was returned, she had got into her
Mother's Company, and would not admit of his Visit, but in her Mother's
presence; he was forced to comply to that, for fear of giving any suspicion,
wherefore he went in, and fell to compliment both Mother and Daughter, but much
after another manner than he had done the day before. However, he seemed so
complaisant, that the mother was exceedingly pleased with his Conversation; he
stayed the longer in hopes that in time, business would call the Mother away,
or that she would go of her self; but he was very much mistaken in that, she
still had a Colts Tooth of her own, and the Mufti's very eajoling of her
Daughter, tickled her Fancy so, that she sometimes would apply the discourse to
her self, and would answer accordingly, not without tacitly promising her self,
to repeat such pleasing Conversation as often as she could, during her stay at
Constantinople. At last the Mother was whispered by a Servant, that some
Company was come to give her a Visit, she arose presently to receive them; and
so soon as Roxana saw her Mother's motion, she likewise did rise to follow her,
but for all that she could do, the Mufti did hold her so fast, that she was
forced to stay. I find, Madam, said he, that you have resolved to render me
desperate; how cruel are you, to see a man, such a one as I am, dye at your
feet without the least regret for having been the cause of it? If I am the
cause of any Evil to you, replied Roxana, I assure you that I am a very
innocent one. I should be sorry to cause the least disturbance to my Enemies,
much less would I be guilty of such a Crime as you lay to my Charge, against a
Person whose Function I Honor and Respect. Good, Madam, replied the Mufti,
less of Honor and Respect to the Profession, and more of Love and Complaisance
to the Person: You know, Madam, that I adore you, I have told you more than
once, that I cannot live without you, take pity of me. Sir, I have already told
you I do, and I again tell you so, the rather, because I am so unhappy as not
to be in a capacity of easing you of your trouble, what can I say or do more?
Repay my Affections and Love with yours, replied the Mufti, and Cross not for
ever the saying, that Love begets Love. Why, to tell you the truth, Sir, that
Proverb is no Friend of yours, for every time I think on it I am convinced, that
all you say to me is down right Gallantry and Amusement, because that I find no
other Inclination in me but of such like Diversion, but not one grain of Love,
I can assure you. The more miserable wretch am I, Madam, said he; it is like
that some other is more happy than me, though not more in Love, nor more
deserving in any other respect. Pardon me. Sir, replied Roxana, if I am not
prepared at present for Confession, another time I may give you that trouble,
till then, your Servant, with that she run out of the Chamber so suddenly, that
he could not overtake her.

This usage did quite put him beside the Cushion, he was at once in love, mad,
angry, and full of spite. He went off with a resolution to have a full revenge
of the Daughter on the Father. To that end, that very night he informed the
Emperor, that some Rumors which were spread abroad of some insurrection in or
near Aladin's Government, did require his immediate presence there, that in
case there were any occasion for it, he might quell the disturbance, or by his
presence prevent any such Designs, so that the Emperor would do well to give
him notice that very night to be gone early in the morning. The Emperor told
him, that but the day before, he had advised him to retain Aladin at
Constantinople a while longer, wherefore he wondered at the sudden Alteration
of his Council. The Mufti answered, that these news having been spread abroad,
not without some grounds, since he had given him that advice, he thought that
now it was necessary to alter it. Well, said the Emperor, send for him in my
Name, and I Will give him orders to depart to morrow. In the Morning, Sir, said
the Mufti, for we know not what his delay of some hours might produce. Well,
said the Emperor, be it so; little dreaming of the Mufti's aim in it, which
was, that Aladin might not have so much time, as to take his Wife and Daughter
with him, which he feared he might do, with two or three Servants, and leave
the rest to follow, should he have any longer time aloud him.

Aladin was sent for, and he received Command from the Emperor, to depart the
next morning early toward his Government. He was surprised at the order, and
considering the Mufti's assiduous visits to his Daughter, he mistrusted that he
had a hand in the business, and that it was with a design to retain Roxana in
town; he was the more troubled too, because his Wife began also to hearken to
the Mufti's Tales; this made him to desire of Amurat, but so much time as to
take his Wife and Daughter, with some few Servants, with him, assuring him that
he would be gone in twenty four hours. The Emperor, thinking that there was not
so great and pressing a necessity, for Aladin's departure, as the Mufti had
suggested, did grant him his request; for which favor Aladin having returned
his thanks, he went home, to use all diligence for his depart. He presently
gave order to his Wife and his Daughter to be in a readiness against next
Morning, very early; he did appoint all those of his Servants that should go
along with him, and those that should come after; and gave order for all other
things requisite for the Journey.

The Mufti was not present when that Amurat had granted a day longer to
Aladin's desires, wherefore he knew nothing of that stop; and Aladin had been
so cunning that he had not given any notice of it to Zora, and had forbid his
Wife and Daughter to speak of it, for fear she should have given her Brother
some information, who would have again broke his measures; so that the Mufti at
his usual time of visit failed not to come to Aladin's House, as he used to do:
he thought that now he was secure enough from being interrupted by Aladin; but
he still was in fear of the troublesome Mother's company, which was not
requisite, on the account of his visit to Roxana, but he thought that he would
find a way to employ her elsewhere. He stayed not to be ushered in, as usually,
but briskly getting up stairs, humming of a tune to himself, as he went; he
pushed open the door of Roxana's Chamber, and rushed in on the sudden, and was
so hasty to shut the door upon him, that he might not be disturbed by the
Mother, in his last address of Courtship to Roxana, that he had not perceived
Aladin and the Mother, who were both in the Room. You cannot but think that he
was strangely discomposed at Aladin's presence, who he thought far off on his
Journey? not in the least, I assure you; what with his accustomed confidence,
and that presence of mind (which he never had but in such amorous intreagues) I
come to tell you, Sir, said he to Aladin, that the Sultana hearing of Roxana's
safe and perfect recovery, desires to congratulate her and her Mother of it, as
she does you by me; and that to that end she will have them to attend her this
Evening at the Seragli^^ I have no more to say. You may wonder peradventure,
why I was employed to deliver this Message; but the reason was, that I was
desirous to be the Messenger of so good news to you. Prepare against the time,
and fit your selves for so honorable a visit. As to you, Sir, turning to
Aladin, you may continue your design of setting forth in the Morning; Amurat
expects you should, for which I wish you a safe conduct from our great Prophet.
Having delivered this formal S^ory, I must be going, continued he, earnest
business stays for me, wherefore I take my leave.

Though Aladin did believe all this to be a Sham, he also knew that the Mufti
had power and influence enough upon the Sultana to put in her head a desire to
see Roxana, for whom she had a particular kindness, not doubting but that the
Sultana would be glad to have an account of Roxana's late adventures from her
own mouth: this was the Mufti's opinion also; wherefore he immediately
addressed his steps toward the Seraglio, and all places being open to his
confidence, he soon found access unto the Sultana, in whom he easily inspired
the desires of sending for Roxana and her Mother; which care he took upon
himself, and having already done that part, he had no more to do, but to fix on
the day of the violent attempt on Roxana, with his Sister Zora's assistance.

They both being certain that now Aladin would be obliged to be gone the next
morning without his Daughter, who should not return home that night, by his
contrivance. They fixed the time for the great work on the next day, about the
time that Roxana came from walking in her Garden; she usually did retire into
her Closet for a time: Zora undertook to keep the Coast clear; and the Mufti
assured her that he would act his part like a Man of Mettle.

Aladin not knowing how to remedy all this, thought it his best way to leave
all to Fortune, for the present; and so soon as he were got to his Government,
to send for his Wife and Daughter; or to obtain leave to come and fetch them
himself: mean time, he knew that it was but folly to withstand the Mufti's
designs; and believing they inclined so much toward his Daughter, that by that
means his Wife might escape; and Roxana having already been censured by the
World, for her late misfortune, he took the whole business more patiently; and
receiving a message at night from the Seraglio, that the Sultana would not part
with his Wife and Daughter till the next day; he rested contented, at least
seemingly so, dispatched the rest of his business, and set forward on his
Journey early the next Morning, with two or three of his most necessary
Servants.

Roxana and her Mother were courteously received by the Sultana, who being
crowded with visits that day, through the Mufti's contrivance, had not the
convenience of satisfying her self of Roxana's adventure, as she desired; that,
with the Emperor's coming to partake of the relation, by the Mufti's
instigation also, made it so late before the Sultana was fully satisfied with
Roxana's company, that she obliged her, and her Mother, to stay there all that
night, and part of the next day, after which, the Sultana dismissed them, not
without Presents, as her Custom was to do.

Roxana was in hopes that her Father would have stayed for their return, to
have taken them along with him, but the Mother wished on the contrary, that he
might be gone, that she might enjoy more of those pleasant Conversations with
the Mufti, of which she had had but a small relish, which made her mouth water
for more. This that made Roxana's sorrow for Aladin's, departure, when she was
returned home, was a matter of rejoicing for the Mother; and both believing
that all was of the Mufti's contrivance, he was blessed and cursed for it,
according to the diverse interests of the Parties concerned.

Mean time, to make good the Proverb, That the more the Fox is cursed, the more
he thrives; the Mufti was hugging of himself at this good success, and at the
hopes he had of prospering as well in the great work of that day; so that it
was with great impatience, that he waited for the lasie Hours, that were to
usher in that happy moment. Zora was likewise giving all the necessary orders
beforehand, for to distance all the Servants from Roxana's Apartment, that no
interruption should be given that way, and had found out a means to divert the
Mother another way, so that all things were in a readiness, and seemed to
concur with the grand Design.

Cara, who since the late Engagement he had with Zora, was more assiduous in
his Visits than ever, seldom failed of seeing her once a day, he did usually
take the time that Roxana walked in her Garden, because that she, not caring
much for Zora's Company, would go without her, whereby Cara had the greater
liberty of entertaining her; according to his Custom he came, and finding
scarce any person in the body of the House, Zora her self being, just at that
instant, out of the way, Cara believing that she might be in her own Chamber,
went to see, but finding her not there, and passing by Roxana's Chamber, looked
in, but not seeing her there neither, and that the Key was in Roxana's Closet
door, he ventured in, and having knocked, and no answer made, he made bold to
open the Door and peep in. He was so surprised at the fight of so many delicate
things, which composed the Ornament of it, that gazing earnestly on, he entered
quite in, and forgot himself in the amazement he was.

Roxana being somewhat indisposed, did return from her Garden sooner than
ordinary, she came into her Chamber, and was immediately followed into it by
the Mufti, (who was in watch with Zora in a dark Corner in the passage,) so
close that she had not time to reach to the Closet. So soon as he was got in,
he shut the door upon him within side, and went after Roxana, who, little
thinking of him, was crying out, Oh! Ibrahim, Ibrahim. Madam, said he, coming
softly behind her, and taking her gently by the middle with both his hands,
disturb not the dead; at this Roxana started, for she thought it had been some
of her people that were giving their attendance, who had shut the door; A
living Dog is better than a dead Lion, continued he, and the Comparison is not
so disproportionable as you may imagine, betwixt your dead Ibrahim, and your
living, most humble, most passionate, and most miserable Lover, who not able to
subsist any longer without your consent, is come to dye imploring your pity and
compassion; saying of this, he flung himself at Roxana's feet, who had been
prevented by the Mufti, from discovering Cara in the Closet; you may imagine
with what apprehensions he remained there; Roxana, infinitely surpised to find
her self alone with the Mufti, and the door shut, would have got to her Closet;
but the Mufti taking hold of her Garment, said, Can you have so much cruelty in
you, Madam, as to let me perish here, and not so much as afford me one word of
Comfort? Speak, Madam, and let me know whether you doom me to life or death;
there pausing, Roxana, who could not get from him, was forced to make him this
answer. I wonder, Sir, that notwithstanding I have so frequently told you, that
I should eternally so much love the memory of Ibrahim, that I should never
afford to spare one grain of Love on any thing else, you will still persist in
a fruitless pursuit of an imaginary Bliss; which you can never obtain. If the
World, Madam, replied the Mufti, is not mistaken, Ibrahim, did gain from you,
what you so severely deny to me. To undeceive you, Sir, replied Roxana, If you
please to rise, for I must not see you any longer in so unbecoming a posture
before me, I will tell you, that though Ibrahim was my Husband, as much as all
the sacred Ties of faithful Promises and Oaths could bind us together, never to
marry any other, and to consummate that our private Contract and Marriage so
soon as we had brought my Parents to consent. Know, Sir, I say, that I never
admitted him to any further favor, than the most modest Virgin in the World
would a person that were an absolute stranger, setting aside one single private
enterview, unto which I was surprised, when I gave my heart wholly to him, in
lieu of his that he had given me.

But Madam, answered the Mufti; your promises were made to a living man, and
they did bind you no longer than till death had broke those bonds. Sir, replied
Roxana, interrupting him, with a little heat, if the Vows I made him were made
void by my death, which I wish had been so, he had not been freed from his part
toward my memory, had he remained alive; the same it is with me. I tell you I
am still an untouched Maid, and that in the resolution I am at present, which I
hope time will never alter, should a Lover with an Empire be offered me, I
should reject it, though it were in the just and lawful account of marriage;
wherefore, Sir, never think to gain any the least point over me in those
sinister ways that you attempt. Then, Madam, replied the Mufti, seeing that you
are so plain, I will be so too, and tell you that my Passion being grown to
that height and strength, that I can no longer be Master over it, I am now come
to know of you, whether I must obtain by consent or by force, that without
which I can no longer live, and be my self. This made Roxana to change Color,
look about her, and to tremble, not being able to stir from the place where she
was, which was far from the Door. After this, said she, it is neither safe nor
just, for me to remain here, wherefore let me go, or I shall call for aid. In
vain, Madam, replied the Mufti, I have provided before hand, against all
preventions, you are in my Power. There is not one of your Servants that can so
much as hear you, the door is fast, you cannot escape me; therefore, once more,
Madam, I humbly beg of you to have compassion on me, and to afford me freely,
what you see you cannot prevent me from taking by force, and with that he held
her faster than before. Roxana, perceiving in what a danger she was, and that
she was to expect nothing less than what the Mufti threatened, by the fierceness
of his looks, and the fire in his Eyes, called out aloud for aid; at which he,
with a forced smile, said, In vain all this, I am not a person to do my work by
halves, I once again tell you, that no body can hear you, and that I will not
lose this fair opportunity, and this advantage of giving a vent to those
Flames, which would burn me up to ashes, should they remain any longer blazing
in my breast. Roxana made her last effort, to get from him, toward the door,
which made the Mufti say, Nay then, Madam, I must carry you to that Couch, with
that taking her up in his Arms, notwithstanding all the resistance that she
could possibly make, he carried her toward the Couch, at which, having given a
great shriek, she sainted away in his Arms.

When Cara had heard the Mufti's resolution of forcing Roxana, he had designed
to rescue her, though he run himself into great danger by it; but to disguise
himself, he had put upon him a long Vest of Cloth of Silver, and flung a thick
Veil over his head, and face, which concealed him from any bodies knowledge; so
soon as he heard Roxana's last shriek, and perceived through the Keyhole, by
the Mufti's Violence, that it was time for him to come to her assistance; he
came softly out of the Closet, and violently forcing Roxana out of the Mufti's
arms, (not without flinging him forcibly on the Floor) he laid her gently down
on the Couch, went to the door and opened it, after which, he returned to
Roxana, all this without speaking one word; he did what he could to bring her
to life, at last she breathed again, opened her Eyes, and perceiving a strange
shape by her, appeared disturbed at it, and presently expressed it more by a
relapsing into a swoon again. Cara perceiving it, and guessing that it might be
his Dress that did afflight her, while she had still the apprehensions of her
danger upon her, he made toward the Closet, to lay by those things he had put
on, and so hastily steal out of the Chamber unseen; and being turned, he found
that the Mufti was got away. He was but just got into the Closet again, when
Zora came into the Chamber, who had doubtless been sent there by her Brother,
she presently run toward Roxana, pretending a great surprise, whom she found
coming to her self again, which made her run into the Closet, to get some
Cordials for her; Cara not knowing what to do, not to be discovered, clapped on
again the Vail, which he had already thrown off, and standing upright against
the Wall, without motion. So soon as Zora perceived him at the entering into the
Closet, she made a great shriek, and running out as fast as her legs would
carry her, she got out of the Chamber, not minding Roxana, who was by that time
quite out of her fainting fit. Cara, fearing that the longer he staid, the more
difficult it would be for him to get off without being known, made after her,
out of the Chamber, and being got in a blind passage, he let drop his disguise,
and as well as he could, got out of the House, being perceived by no body but
one Slave, who was at the outward gate. Roxana having at this second apparition
of the Vision, taken more notice of it, did fancy that she knew that Vest, and
perceiving no body in the Room, and the door wide open, after a little pause
she got off of the Couch, went into her Closet, and finding that the Vest she
had seen was wanting, having locked the door upon her, and taken in the Key,
she recovered her self little by little, and busi'd her thought in unravelling
the mystery of her great and wonderful deliverance, finding her self in the
same condition that she was in before the Attempt, setting aside the disorders
that her fears, and her struglings, had made in her Clothes and mind.

Roxana was not interrupted in the least by Zora, she had been so frighted, at
what her Brother had told her, just passing by her, and what she her self had
seen, that she had not the courage to return to Roxana's Chamber, not doubting
but that Roxana would pronounce her accessory in her own thoughts, if not the
chief Instrument of the Mufti's wicked enterprise, and the Mother being very
busy elsewhere, in putting up things which were in her particular Custody, to
be sent after Aladin, who could not take them along with him, through her
absence, when he left the City.

Roxana had full leisure to reflect on the Mufti's bold attempt, and on the
strangeness of her deliverance, she remembered how near she was being ravished,
when past hopes of all assistance, the door being locked on the inside by her
ravisher, but could not retrieve how it came to pass that she had remained
untouched, her ravisher gone, the door left open, and she delivered from all
her fears, and apprehensions, when there was no body by. Then again she could
not imagine who should be the Person, that should get into her Closet, how it
came open, and wherefore they should go out, without saying any thing to her,
with one of her Vests on, and one of her Veils over their face; all these
things appeared more like a Dream or a Vision to her than a Reality, she would
have inclined to believe it so, had not she mist her Vest, and her Vail; and
still remained sensible of the disturbances and disorders she was in. She had a
great desire to inform her self of all these things from Zora, but she wondered
that she came not near her, and conjecturing by that, that it was her guilt
which made her not to appear; she could not tell which way to begin to open the
business to her. She was sensible of the Mufti's boundless power, that he who
had had so much impudence, as to attempt so horrid a violence upon her
Chastity, in her own house too, would not be wanting to himself, by some means
or other, of shifting his neck out of the Collar; nay, she even apprehended
that if she should make a noise of it, he would not stick to turn all the ill
of the business upon her self, and that what with his tongue, his impudence,
and his ascendant over the Emperor, the Sultana, and the chiefest of the Court,
he would so manage things, that he should be counted innocent, and she guilty.
In this perplexity of thought she knew not what to resolve upon; she continued
pondering on the business, without coming to any Resolution, till her Mother
finding the Chamber door open, did step in to see for her Daughter, after whom
she had inquired; not seeing her in the Chamber, she called, to know whether
she was retired into her Closet; Roxana hearing her Mother's voice, opened the
Door, and her Mother briskly telling her, that she had been a great while very
busy in sending her Father's things after him; it put her quite off of giving
any account of what had happened, and from that Moment, she resolved to make no
noise about it, at least for some time, till she had got as much light into the
Business as she could possibly attain to.

The Mother asked her whether the Mufti, according to his Custom, had not seen
her that day? Truly, said she, not giving her Daughter time to answer, he is a
man of excellent Conversation, and considering, that no Scandal can happen from
the visits of a Person of his Profession, though never so frequently repeated,
I must confess, that I should take as much delight in that sort of Diversion,
as in any other that I know. What think you Daughter, are not you of my
Opinion? No, Madam, replied Roxana, being vexed at the subject of their
Discourse; I do not find in his Conversation that satisfaction that you
imagine, and most commonly when he busies himself in telling me all the fine
things that he can think of, my thoughts are so employed elsewhere, that I very
frequently, have given him such unsuttable answers to what he has said, that he
has let me know how sensible he was of my insensibility, as he was pleased to
term it. This is to have ones thoughts wholly taken up another way answered the
Mother; for shame leave off those melanchol^y Reflections, you daily employ
upon a person that cannot so much as be sensible of them, much less to requite
them, and think on some other Subject, more fitting your youth and condition. I
am fixed, Madam, replied Roxana, and believe time which cures all things, will
be defective in easing me of my trouble. We are always apt to indulge those
affections which please us most, replied the Mother, but none are so agreeable,
but that in success of time, they become out of date, and almost quite defaced
out of our memory; it will be so with you, Roxana, hereafter; your grief is but
young yet, it is still in its full strength and vigor, but it will grow old,
decay, and wither quite away, as all things else do. I cannot tell, Madam, what
I shall be, but I know what I feel now, I cannot answer for the future, but now
I can admit of no greater comfort, than of thinking of what I have lost. Well,
replied the Mother, since you are so wedded still to your grief, and that I
find you at this present, more than ordinarily involved in it, I will not go
about to assuage it any more for the present, for fear of raising it higher,
therefore I Will leave you. Saying of these words, her Mother went out of the
Closet, and left her musing, though not wholly on that subject which she
imagined.

Roxana was so vexed at the subject of her Mother's Discourse, which was very
unseasonable at that time to her, that she was scarce able to give her Mother
the respect she owed her: She resolved not to stir out of her Closet till she
would go to Bed, and see whether Zora would come to her of her own accord, by
which she might guess whether she had a hand in her Brother's late Attempt, as
she questioned not but she had; but whether she had or had nor, as she made a
resolution in her self never to give the Mufti the liberty of speaking more
with her, so she designed to leave Zora behind her, so soon as her Father
should send or come to fetch her into the Country, which he had promised her he
would in a Letter which he had left behind him.

The Mufti being got home, and retired privately into his Closet, to consider
how to come off clearly of so foul a business, had given order to his Servants
to say to any that should ask after him, he was not within. Of all the whole
business, that which he could by no means apprehend, was the manner of Roxana's
rescue from his embraces, when he was so near accomplishing his business; he
could not tell what to make of it: some times he thought that he had not shut
the door, then when he assured himself he had, he fancied that there was
certainly some secret door belonging to Roxana's Chamber, which he had never
heard of, nor Zora neither, or that she certainly would have secured it, or
given him notice of it; then again he fancied that in the great haste he had
made to get up and away, to the best of his remembrance, he had seen the Closet
door open, and why might it not be some body that was in that Closet that had
thus dashed all his hopes in pieces? That he thought the most probable of all
the conjectures which he could make: But then, how that Person should come to
be there, to what end, what business he had to do in Roxana's Closet, and why
in such a strange kind of disguise, for he made no question but that it was a
Man, by the roughness with which he had been handled by him. All these
questions which he made to himself were unanswerable; the most that he could
make of it was, that he believed that some Man was employed about some business
or other in the Closet, and that not willing to be known, he had come to
Roxana's rescue unexpected, and after that, returned about his business: This
gave him apprehensions that he might have a greater and more difficult game to
play, in the discovery of the Person, and stopping of his mouth, than in
appeasing of Roxana: this did perplex him infinitely, insomuch that he knew not
which way to go about to purge himself from all guilt. After he had taken
diverse turns in his Chamber, then returned into his Closer, it being necessary
that he should go about justifying himself without delay, he at last took up
the resolution of writting a Letter to Roxana, which he would enclose in
another to his Sister, and send it immediately by his Servant, to be delivered
into Zora's own hand: He thus writ to Zora,

What Devil, envious of my Happiness, was got into the Closet, or had placed
that Person there, who has not only been the great and only obstacle to my
Joys, but who, I fear, may prove more difficult to lay again, I know not; but
certain it is, that when I had passed over all other difficulties, and that I
was ready to lose my self in that Ocean of Pleasures, which I was just going to
enjoy, my Prey was snatched from me, I rudely thrown on the Floor, Roxana
rescued, and I glad to get off so, without any further knowledge of my Enemy; I
cannot think of any neglect in you, but wholly attribute all the misfortune to
my unlucky Stars. Fail not to deliver this enclosed into Roxana's own hand,
after you have read it and sealed it up; I hope it will in some measure appease
that fury she must needs be in at present against me; and though I have no
longer hopes of obtaining any thing from her by fair means, I am resolved not
to stop there, but to go on, and to leave no Plot, Stratagem, or Surprizal
unattempted, till I get my ends, seeing that it is impossible for me to live
much longer without enjoying of her.


This Letter being delivered into Zora's hands by a trusty Servant of his, she
read it, but durst not venture to deliver it to Roxana with her own hands: She
dreaded to encounter the Storm which Roxana would raise against her, had she
the least suspicion that she had an hand in the business; and it was very
probabable that she did mistrust it; she therefore gave it to the Messenger,
and bid him to take no notice of having seen her, but that he should enquire
for some of Roxana's Servants, to whom he should give it, and charge him
immediately to go and deliver it into Roxana's hands, while he should stay for
his return. It was in short, delivered to Roxana who not knowing the hand,
opened and read it; but how vexed was she, when she read from whom it came,
that she had not immediately sent it back again, without so much as looking
upon it! but now it was too late, and since she had begun to read, she had as
good go on to see the rest of it as not, she then read as follows.

I should think you to be the most insensible Person in all the World, Madam,
should you not vent your Passion against me, with all the rage and fury
imaginable, and nothing more could persuade me, that all you had done to save
your Honor, were but feigned, did you not think me the very worst of all men
Yes, Madam, you ought to resent in the highest nature, what I have attempted
against you, and I am bound in conscience to give you that good and wholesome
Advice. But after all, Madam, when you have given all that is due to your just
resentments, and your revenge, let me advise and entreat you to allow justice
its due also, and after you have treated me like a Criminal, so long as you had
no other reason but to believe me so, you ought to receive again some good
impressions of me, in your heart and mind, when you are well informed of my
Innocence, and of the Violence that I was forced to use upon my self, before I
could submit to become the Instrument by which you have received so much
trouble. For who durst persist long in the refusal of the express orders of the
Emperor, especially after I had so highly incensed him at my refusal to obey
him, in a thing of such a nature, which I knew would so highly offend you? Yes,
Madam, Amurat being overcome with your Beauty, had a desire to know whether you
had not been defiled by Ibrahim, so as to have been rendered unworthy of the
Honor of his Embraces; he chose that way of Trial, and he forced me to go
about it. I have not yet given him an account of what I have done, and I wait
to learn from you what I shall answer, according to the Inclination you may
have of becoming his Mistress or not. For my part, I know how to think of you,
and how to value so chaste and so virtuous a Woman, and if I durst give Counsel
against my Prince, I know what I would advise you to do. But, Madam, your own
Chaste thoughts are sufficient to inspire you with such an Answer, as is fitting
and suitable to so much goodness as you are Mistress of. Leave me not long
without an answer, that I may frame accordingly my report to the Emperor. I
doubt not, but after this Information, of the reasons of my rash proceedings
against you, you will take care to clear me from being censured by that Person
that insolently took the rest of the work out of my hands, just when I was
going to desist from any further prosecution of that in which you had so
entirely satisfied me, that you might have seen that my Commission ending
there, I had no more to do, than beg your pardon for what I had done, so much
against my own inclinations, and that profound respect which I have for so
Charming a person.


These Reasons how plausible they might appear to the Mufti and Zora, did so
ill consist with the method he had taken, the Violence he had used, the
passion, or rather rage, that he had expressed, during the attempt, and his
former lustful solicitations, besides those passionate Expressions in the
Letter, that Roxana did but admire at his Impudence, that employed Amurat's
Name and Commands, to justify his Beastliness; upon that she tore the Letter
in a thousand pieces, and confirmed her self in the Resolution of never more
giving him the least opportunity imaginable of speaking to her, and presently
taking Pen Ink, and Paper, she writ to Aladin, to most humbly and earnestly
entreat him to come, and deliver her from that Misery she lived in, through the
wicked Mufti's means, and immediately dispatched a Messenger with the Letter to
her Father.

Having thus settled her mind again, she called for some of her Attendants to
put her in Bed. Zora thought that a fit time to appear in, before Roxana,
because that she thought she would not take notice of any thing, before her
other Servants, and that so soon as she were in Bed, she would retire to her
Chamber; so that she might see and guess by her looks, at the agitation of her
Heart, and so proceed, as she should find occasion. The Servants being come,
Zora appeared also with the Vest and Vail which had been found in the dark
Corner. Look you, Madam, said she, what has been found in the dark Passage! Can
you tell who laid them there, replied Roxana? If you could do that you would
pleasure me for I am sure that I am infinitely obliged to that Person, who ever
he be, that took the pains to carry them so far, and I wish he had them for his
pains. They are worth acceptance, I assure you, Madam, said Zora. If you think
so, replied Roxana, do so much for me, as to make a strict enquiry all about
the House, to find out the Person, and if you can discover him, present them
from me to him, but if you cannot learn who it is, pray accept of them your
self. Rexana spoke this with something of Cheerfulness, which made Zora to
believe that Roxana had accepted of the Mufti's Reasons as sufficient. That
made her venture to ask her, whether she designed an answer to the Letter she
had lately received, for which there was a Servant waited below. No, replied
Roxana, I leave it to the Persons own discretion, that writ it, who is too well
supplied with that, to want my advice, and not to act in it for the better, as
he shall think fit. Saying this she went in Bed, and ordered that the Curtains
should be close shut, and no noise made, because she would go sleep, which
obliged all the Servants to retire, and Zora with them.

All that Zora could do, to satisfy her own Curiosity, and to serve her
Brother, in the discovery of Roxana's Deliverer, was to no effect. No body in
all the House could give her an account of him, only a slave told her, that
about such a time, he had seen a Man go out of the House hastily, whom he knew
not. She fancied it might be Cara, who after his usual manner, coming to give
her a Visit, and not finding her, was gone back again to his Lodgings. To be
certain of this, she presently dispatched a Servant to him, to let him know
that she would speak with him, and in case he was not at home, to leave word
that he should come to her, so soon as he was come in, or very early the next
morning.

Roxana's dubious answer, did work very much in Zora's mind, and she thought
that it would do so in her Brother's also, wherefore she sent word of it in
writing to the Mufti, and informed him besides, of all that she could; this
made the Mufti to come to Aladin's house that very night, to consult with his
Sister, what was to be done, and upon that to take new Measures, in the
pursuance of his first designs, to which he was two much wedded, to ever leave
them unaccomplished. Zora acquainted him with all that she knew, and he
repeated to her all that he had done, and the result was, that least Roxana
should by some means or other, break all their Measures, the Mufti should make
another attempt upon her, but with more Craft, and less of force. To this end
it was concluded, that the Mufti should provide a good proportion of some
choice preparation of Opium, by which it should be quickened in its operation,
and weakened in its taste, and that Zora should administer it to Roxana, in
that Dish of Coffee, which she used to take every night going to bed. The time
to do this was appointed to be the following Night, and the hour, when all the
rest of the Family were retired. After this the Mufti returned home, and Zora
went to her Bed.

Cara all this while had not wanted matter to busy his thoughts with, but
above all, he had been wondering at the Mufti's bold attempt, to which he
doubted not but Zora did assist, and at the fair escape which he had made out
of the Closet, without being discovered, after he had had the good Fortune to
prevent the Execution of so great a piece of Villainy, and the happiness of
serving Roxana in so high a measure. He did not doubt but that Zora had as
Vicious Inclinations as her Brother, but yet her Beauty prevailed over all, and
when he represented to himself, her amiable Person, nothing would serve his
turn, but the enjoyment of that, at what rate soever, upon which he was fully
bent, though not at so dear a rate, as to be tied to her in Matrimony. He went
to bed also in those thoughts, and in a design to obey her Summons the next
morning.

Cara in the Morning came to Aladin's house, where he was examined by Zora,
whether he had been the day before to visit her; for that she having been
busied that day more than ordinary, in assisting Roxana's Mother to put up
those things which Aladin had left behind him, and to send them away, he might
have been there, and not see her. Cara, to take from her all distrust of his
knowing any thing of the Mufti's late attempt, did tell her, that earnest
business having called him elsewhere, he had been defective in that duty, for
which he came to beg her pardon, and know what was her pleasure with him. She
told him that there was nothing more in it, than to know why he had been
defective in performing the promise which he had made her of daily visiting
her. I would add, continued Zora, that peradventure, I thought it long since I
had seen you, but that I fear you would take advantage of it. Yes, Madam,
replied Cara, I would, and do so; and I now most earnestly beg that you would
be so just to your self and me, as immediately to appoint the happy moment in
which I am to dye in your embraces; the time you had taken for it, is expired:
and if you would not have me to dye for love presently at your feet, my dear
Zora, speak that happy moment. You are in haste, it seems, replied Zora? Yes,
Madam, answered Cara; and I had already designed to wait on you, to demand the
performance of your word, before I received your Commands; because I know not
whether I shall be obliged to attend your Brother, the Mufti, in his journey
after the Court, which sets forth to morrow. Well, replied Zora, you shall
prevail; but remember your promise; at twelve this Night come into that Chamber
where Aladin used sometimes to lie, when here, by the door of the Gallery,
which shall be left open, and there I shall be ready to receive you; but be
sure, you let no body see you, and that you make no noise. I know the Chamber,
replied Cara, and I shall fly to your embraces as a miserable Slave would do to
his unhop'd for Freedom. This bargain made, they confirmed it with kisses, and
so parted till the appointed time.

Roxana having had a very restless night, being affrighted with horrid Dreams,
did resolve not to lie any longer in her own Chamber, at least for a while,
till her mind were more quiet: wherefore, so soon as she was up, she ordered
that all things should be removed from her Chamber, that she should want, into
that in which her Father used to sleep, as being more remote from noise, and
that the sight of those places in her own Room, in which she had been so highly
offended, might not affect her Imagination with such fancies as she had had the
last night. This removal being come to Zora's ears, she presently sent a
Messenger to the Mufti, to inform him of it; and another to Cara, with a
Letter, in which she let him know that it having been Roxana's pleasure to
change Chambers with her for a night or two, because she slept not well in her
own; that she sent him that timely notice of it, that in lieu of her own
Chamber, he should go further into Roxana's Chamber, still by the Gallery door,
where he should find his Zora. But the time seeming long to Cara till night, he
was gone out on visits, to divert himself, and make the time less tedeous; so
that the Letter was left to be given him with a Servant of his, who forgeting
to deliver it at his coming home: Cara was by that means left wholly ignorant
of the change.

The Messenger who had been sent to the Mufti had had better success, he had
delivered the Letter into the Mufti's own hands, had waited for an answer,
which he brought back to Zora, with the ingredient which she was to mix in
Roxana's Coffee. All things did thus tend little by little toward their
determination on the three Lovers accounts, who were all very impatient of the
arrival of the happy moment in which they were to consummate their Joys; but
above all did the Mufti grow impatient, when he received a Summons from the
Council, to give his attendance there forthwith, to deliberate of the measures
that should be taken to keep the discontented and murmuring People quiet,
during the absence of the Court: the Business being of very great concern,
required also a long and vigorous debate about the means that were best to be
used: the Council on this business was divided, and every one, according as his
own particular Interest guided him, gave his voice for this or that way, Our
Mufti did all he could possible to bring things to a conclusion, but could not
prevail; he had diverse times made offers to retire, (it growing toward the
hour of his assignation) but had been obliged as often to sit down again, by
Amurat's Command; at last, the Council having made an end of the business in
hand, broke up, and our Mufti was let loose to his own desires; he made all the
haste that he could possible to his own Lodgings, to accommodate himself a
little fit for the great Work he had in hand, but the hour appointed being
already come, he made all the haste imaginable toward Aladin's House.

Cara had not failed to come at the critical minute to enjoy his dear Zora, who
having before hand taken all her measures with the Mufti, so that he was not to
see her any more that night, but go directly to find Roxana in A^^din's
Chamber, she had retired her self in Roxana's Chamber, in expectation of her
dear Cara's coming. Cara having got into the House by the back door, which
answered to the Gallery, he had pulled it close after him, and it being a
spring-Lock, it had shut of it self; he addressed his steps toward Aladin's
Chamber, as he had been directed, and coming to the door, which he found upon
the Latch, he opened it, went in, shut it again, undressed himself, and went to
bed to his Mistress Zora, as he supposed. He began his Caresses, and whispered
fine things in her Ear; but finding no return, neither in word, nor in actions,
and perceiving that she was so fast asleep, that all he said or did could not
awake her, he concluded that Zora did observe that silence, either to prevent
him from making a noise, or that it was in point of modesty; wherefore he
troubled himself no further, but fell about the business that he was come for:
he was strangely surpised in several respects. He found not that compliance
and complaisance which he with reason did expect from Zora; on the contrary, he
met with a kind of repulse and opposition, which though not very vigorous and
strong, was continual, and which came from the person, as if it designed a more
vigorous resistance, had she not been overcome by a profound sleep, which was
accompanied with a louder voice than was requisite to be heard at such a time,
and which was so forced and inarticulate, as those persons that in their Dreams
offer to speak, but cannot; but that which surprised him above all, was to find
that which he least expected, namely, a Virgon: he left making reflections till
another time, and as he had done the business he was come about, and finding
the person, whoever it was, to awaken more and more, so that she began to cry
out, he hastened all he could to slip on his clothes, and to get away in all
diligence, for fear of any surprizal; but being very desirous to know with whom
he had had to do, he had flipp'd a Ring off the Person's Finger, which he took
along with him; he presently got to the door he had come in at, and getting
into a Courtyard, through which he was to pass before he came to the Street,
there he espied a Person muffled up, who turned aside, as having no desire to
be known, he passed by, and went his way home, contented with his present good
fortune, and wonderfully surprised at his good success.

The Person that Cara had seen in the Court was the Mufti, who having found the
door shut, had walked up and down there, in hopes it should be opened to him.
The desire he had of concealing himself, and the haste which Cara had made
away, had hindered the Mufti from perceiving who it was; he went in, and being
got into the Gallery, he found Zora very much disordered, who was running for
help, who told him that Roxana was wakened in a strange disorder, that through
some dream, or the effects of what had bin given her; she talked very loud of
strange things, and that certainly she would make some strange discovery, of
what had passed betwixt them, if he found not some present expedient to allay
the Fury she was in. What do thou mean, replied the Mufti, I rather think
that thou art mad, or thou would never have left me till now, dancing
attendance in the Court. Why, replied Zora, have you not been with her? No,
replied the Mufti, how could I, when the door (which you said should be open,)
was shut; but some body else, more happy than I, has gathered the Fruit, is
(...) of all my Labors. Yes, continued he, I had a glimps of him as he run by
me, and I very much fan^y it was Cara. Has he been with you this Night. No,
replied Zora, I can assure you. While they were thus examining one another,
they heard a noise, which obliged the Mufti to retreat the same way he had come
in. He was no sooner got out, but that Zora returning back upon her steps,
perceived Roxana coming toward her in the greatest disorder imaginable; she
had misplaced all her Garments about her, and they were so loose put on, that
they were ready to drop off, her Hair were about her head, her Eyes looked as a
person's that is in drink, she reeled and staggered much after the same manner,
and her words came from her, much with the same dissiculty, as persons in drink
bring them forth, and but with little or no more Sense; in her hand she had a
naked Scimiter, which at the sight of Zora, she lifted up, And have I found
thee, thou Robber of my Honor, said she, then there is for thee, with that she
discharged as great a blow with the Scimiter upon Zora, as her weakness would
permit her to give, which Zora prevented from lighting upon her head, by
receiving it upon her Arm, which was cut to the bone; Zora staid not for
another blow, but presently run away, and locked her self up in her own
Chamber, barricadoing the door within side, with all that she could find.

It being yet very Early, so that she found no body about the House, she went
rummaging on, still crying out, where is the Thief, where is the Ravisher,
where is that Devil who has deprived me of my Jewel? I must have it again, I
must find it, nay, I will have it, I Will to the Emperor, and make my moan to
him, sure he will redress me; all this she said, going up and down and striking
with the Scimiter as she went along; this noise awakened at last some of the
Women, who wondering what was the matter, hearing Roxana's Voice, stepped out to
see, but so soon as she espied the first, running at her as well as she could,
the Woman made her escape into Roxana's Mother's Chamber, where having shut her
self in, she told the Mother what she had seen.

Roxana, with the haste she had made, running after the Woman, had fallen down,
and could not get up again, which made some other Women with the Mother, who
had been awakened at the allarm, to venture upon her, and having taken by force
the Scimiter from her, they took her up, defending themselves as well as they
could from her Teeth and Nails, and conveyed her to her Mother's Bed, being the
nearest at hand, where she was forced to be held with mere strength of Arms.

After the Mother had a little recollected her self, she caused some body to go
call Zora to her; the Messengers were knocking at the door till they were
weary, without any answer, which made them look through the Keyhole, and by an
imperfect dim light, it being yet early, having perceived her fallen on the
ground, and a great deal of Blood about her, they hastily run back to the
Mother, and told her that Zora lay murdered on the Floor, in her own Chamber,
and that the Door being looked within side, there was no coming at her. The
Mother did presently give order that the Door should be broke open, that to
that purpose some men servants should be called up, as also to be sent for some
Physicians in all haste; all was done accordingly, and Zora was found coming to
her self again; for the loss of Blood, which had caused her fainting, in which
she had fall^n on the Floor, being thereby stopped for the present, she had come
to life again; those that were about her stopped the blood, and bound up the
Wound as well as they could, till further help came. She was asked who had done
her the mischief? and the question being made by those that were inferior to
her, she thought not fit to give them any account of it, but waved the
Discourse.

Roxana, in the mean time, having amongst the rest of her extravagant talk,
mentioned the Mufti's Name two or three times. The Mother having given strict
Charge she should be held in her Bed, did go to Zora's Chamber, to see her, and
to ask her some questions. She asked of her, in the first place, who had so
wounded her, to which Zora made answer, that having heard a great noise in the
Women's apartment, she had stepped out of her Chamber to see what was the
matter, and that as she was returning, she had met with Roxana, who calling her
Robber and Thief, had given her that blow with a Scimiter that she had in her
hand, at which she had run away, and locked her self in her Chamber, for fear
she should follow after her, to give her more. The Mother asked her, whether
the Mufti her Brother, had been there that day, to which Zora made answer, No.
Are you very sure of that, said the Mother, Yes, Madam, answered Zora, and I am
certain, that no body in all the House can say he has been seen by them this
day. He may have been here, and you not know it, replied the Mother. No, Madam,
answered Zora, I can, and will give you ample proof of what I say. And pray,
Madam, continued she, because my Wound will not permit me to write, call but
for some body that can, and I will send the Mufti word, that he should give us
an exact account of the places and Company he has been with all the Day, and
all the night. A person being brought, Zora bid him only write, justify your
self, and give good proofs where you have been of late. This was presently sent
by Zora's special order, to her Brother, who was found in his Bed. By this time
the Surgeons being come, they took Zora in hand, and dressed her Wound.

No sooner did the Mufti read that note, but he presently got up, though it was
so early, and he began his Certificate, which was, that having been at the
Council till past twelve of the Clock, he had from thence gone home, from
whence he had not since stirred out. This was signed by all his Servants. Of
truth there was but one, who knew of his going out, who was his Consident, the
others believing really that he had not been out that night. So soon as it was
convenient for him to stir forth, he went to diverse of the Counselors, and
obtained from them their hands to certify, that he had been with them in the
Council Chamber, till after twelve, telling them, to satisfy their Curiosity,
that a wager depended upon it; after that he went to all the other places where
he had been all that day, and obtained from those Persons in whose Company he
had been, to sign to his Certificate, which he sent back to Zora.

He thought this a very necessary thing for him to do out of hand, because the
Court was moving that day, toward the Holy Waters, that he might be so far
justified to the World, that he should not in his absence be accused of a deed,
which he verily believed was done, but knew not by whom, and had no hand in it,
with hopes, that at his return, he might renew his Friendship with Roxana, who
still stuck at his heart, though he believed her ravished. Thus he fitted
himself for the Journey, and went with the Court. The Physicians having
administered things to Roxana, in order to compose her Spirits, and to cause
her to rest. The Scimiter was examined, and no body could imagine how Roxana
came by it, nor any body remember that they had seen such a one in the House:
But when Zora had viewed it a little more nearly, she fancied that Cara did
wear just such a one, which confirmed her in the suspicion she had before, that
Cara had come, and taking one R^om for another, had met with Roxana, while she
her self had been disappointed.

The Mother not knowing what to think of all this, nor what to make of it,
began to wish her self in the Country with her Husband, or he with her at
Constantinople, to dive a little deeper than she could in all these Mysteries,
and to unravel the Riddles.

Cara, for his part, having got by his change, was well satisfied, fancying
that it was with Roxana that he had met in the dark, in lieu of Zora, of which
he hoped to be one day fully satisfied, by the Ring which he had taken from off
her Finger; nothing did trouble him in all this business, but the loss of his
Scimiter, which he knew not whether he had dropped by the way, or left behind
him, through his extreme haste to get away unseen, which he had almost
despaired to do, by the great noise which Roxana began to make.

By this time of the day, the Emperor and the Sultana were ready to go their
Journey, accompanied with the principal Officers of the Court, not forgetting
our Mufti amongst the rest. Not but that he would fain have lingered behind for
some few days, to have learned, of certain, who had been his Substitute, of
which he had but a bare distrust, and to have had some account of Roxana's
condition. But the Emperor calling particularly for him, he was forced to go,
and leave all to Zora's care, which was to send him word how things were; but
he resolved to take Cara along with him, to prevent him from any further
progress in his good fortune with Roxana, under the pretense of having then
more opportunity to present him to Amu^at, and to get him some employ.

Roxana, who was all this while in her Mother's bed, had at last fallen asleep,
and by the assistance of those Remedies which had been administered to her, all
that had passed, that had been done to her, or that she had acted, did appear
as a Vision; and had she not found in her self so great a change, which of
necessity did persuade her that there was but too much reality in the case, all
had passed with her for a Dream. She still insisting on the Mufti's violence to
her, Zora gave Roxana's Mother that Certificate which her Brother had sent, and
the Mother having read it, she gave it to Roxana, who having examined the
Witnesses names over and over, could not but be satisfied in that respect, not
doubting, but all those hands were true: the Mufti, as wicked as he was, not
daring to counterfeit so many Privy Counselors hands, which would of necessity
have risen up in judgment against him, and have declared him a person not fit
to live.

Thus was Roxana still in the dark, as to the knowledge of her Ravisher; but
though she found that the Mufti was not the immediate Person, she suspected
that it was his, and his Sister's contrivance and design, but that by some
strange accident some other person had made use of an opportunity which Fortune
had presented to them. She inquired what was become of the Scimiter, with which
she had wounded Zora, and desired to see it: it was brought to her, and she
neither knew how she had come by it, nor whose it might be; she only learned
that no body in all the Family could remember to have seen such a one in all
the House: and Zora did believe that she came out of Aladin's Chamber with it.
Roxana laid up the Scimiter safe, that when time should serve, she might make
what use she could of it, in order to some discovery. Presently after, calling
for water to wash her hands, she missed the Ring off of her Finger; she said
nothing of that, but would go her self into Aladin's Chamber, to seek after it;
being got thither, she caused all that had come with her to retire; she locked
her self in, and left no corner unsearch'd, both for the Ring, and the
Scimiter's Scabbard, but to no purpose; she then considered how all things lay
in that Chamber, the great disorder the bed-cloths were in; and prying a little
further, she perceived some signs of the violence which had been used against
her; whence she concluded, that whoever it was that had been there, he had
designdly taken her Ring away, but left the Scimiter by accident, with haste to
get away unseen. After this, she concluded that something had been given her,
to cast her in a Sleep or Trance, that she might not make that noise and
resistance which they might expect she would have done; and who could do all
this without Zora's privacy? Then remembering that she had complained to her of
an odd taste in the last Coffee she took at night, that confirmed her still
more in the belief that all had been acted by Zora, with a design to assist her
Brother in the pursuit of his first Design, of getting from her by force, what
he could not obtain by fair means, but that he being detained about some other
Concerns, some other Person more fortunately had met with what the Mufti had so
long sought for, and had made use of the fair opportunity that presented it
self to him, not troubling himself who was the Person; and that as a great
argument that she conjectured right, it was observable, that no body but her
Mother and Zora did know of her lying in Aladia's Chamber that night, where she
had never lain before.

Roxana having made those, and diverse other reflections, she returned to her
Mother's Chamber, where she declared all that had happened to her, and all the
surmisals that she had made upon the business; concluding, that seeing of
necessity, Zora must be the principal Instrument in all the business of her
ruin, she would never see her Face more, no more than her Brother, the wicked
Mufti; and she earnestly begged of her Mother to advise Zora to retire from
their House, because she had conceived a prejudice against her, which would
hinder her perfect recovery by the sight of her. The Mother did speak to Zora
about it, and Zora knowing her self guilty, and that Roxana was very like to
revenge her self on her, in the absence of her Brother, she stayed not to be
bid to go twice; and that very day, she retired to the House of a Relation of
hers, and Roxana lived with her Mother a more retired life than ever: all her
diversion being in walking sometimes in her Garden, sitting a while in the
Summer House, and the rest of her time she spent in Sighs and Tears, in her own
Chamber and Closet.

The Court had not been gone a Month, but that a Rumor run about every where,
that the Sultana was with Child; and there were diverse persons that did not
stick to affirm, and offer to lay wagers that it was of a young Prince. This
made all the Bassa's and other Grandees of the Port, and of the Empire, who
were not of the Sect of Hali to look about them; they had very well informed
themselves of the Emperor and the Sultana's Phisicians, that she could not
bring forth a living Child, which made them conclude that these Rumors were
spread abroad but to feel the pulse of the People, and to find how it would be
resented by those that were more particularly concerned in the business.

Presently a private Messenger was sent to Prince Soliman, of that wicked
practice against his right to the Succession of the Empire. He was of the blood
of the Ottomans, had married Zelinda, the Eldest of the two Daughters which
Amurat had had by a former Sultana, who was of the true ancient Religion of
Mahomet, and who had had her Children educated the same way. The youngest had
been married to another Prince, of the same Religion also. The Prince returned
them thanks for the timely advice which they had given him; and he further
desired them to continue their good will toward him, in giving him from time
to time, such intelligences and advices as might conduce to their own good as
well as his, assuring them that he would stand by them against all Attempts
which should be made against their Religion, Laws, and Liberties.

This answer was so agreeable to their Wishes, which they received from Prince
Solomon, that it did not only revive their drooping Spirits, but set them all
to work themselves, and, by Spies upon Amurat, and the Sultana's Person, to
find out all that they could of their designs against the Empire, and they at
last found that Cha-Abas the Persian Emperor had so poisoned the Sultana's mind
by diverse rich Presents, great assurances of his Aid and Succor in the great
Work of Reformation (as he called it,) and the continual Solicitations of his
Pensioners, and Emissaries in the Ottoman Empire, that they no longer doubted
of their designed ruin, and that they were sold with the Empire to Cha-Abas's
Ambition. They gained some of the Ladies of the Mohammedan Religion, whose
places obliged them to be constantly near the Sultana in the Seraglio, to
observe her exactly, and to give them from time to time, what reports they
could, concerning her feigned pregnancy.

The Emperor and the Sultana, having finished their Pilgrimage and Devotions,
the Court returned to Constantinople with great joy, the Emperor and Sultana
declaring publicly that she was with Child; for which, great joy was expressed
amongst all the Followers of the Sect of Haly, and our Mufti was none of the
backwardest in proclaiming the wonderful Miracle. But that did not hinder him
from minding his own concerns, and learning the reasons of Zora's coming away
from Aladin's Family. She told him all that she did know, and all that had
passed in his absence, but she did not know how the Certificate which he had
sent, was taken, because that she had gone from thence that very day. She after
that asked him news concerning Cara, he told her that he had for her sake, got
him the Command of a Galley, and that he was gone to enter upon it, that after
that he would return to Constantinople. With this story he pleased her for the
present. Of truth he had procured him that Command, but it had been with a
design to keep him at Sea, far from Constantinople; and from attempting to get
hereafter, by fair means, from Roxana, what he believed mere Fortune had thrown
into his Arms; for notwithstanding all these Frowns of Fortune on his amorours
designs, he doubted not but to succeed in time, and to obtain from Roxana now,
what she so positively refused him before, being of Opinion that she would not
think her self for the Future so obliged, as she was before her Rape, to
preserve that which was not of so much value, how highly soever he did still
value it himself.

The Mufti did make strict inquiries after Roxana's Health, and diverse offers
to visit her, but all to no purpose; he addressed himself to the Mother, who
received him very Civilly, and did express so much satisfaction in his
Conversation, that he continued his Visits to her, not without hopes to make
her in time an Instrument for his access to his beloved Roxana. He was not long
without soliciting the Mother on that account, but still she waved the
Discourse, and put it off, not without being offended in her self, at the
slight the Mufti made of her Company, in so earnestly pressing for her
Daughter, while she believed her self more suitable in Age for his grave
conversation, than Roxana was. But the Mufti at last growing quite weary of the
Mother's company, which made him to slacken his Visits, she was obliged to make
him a Promise, that she would speak to Roxana about him, to keep him still to
her. That made him to repeat his Visits more frequently again, but still more
to solicit and press the Mother to obtain leave of her Daughter, that he might
see her, than for any diversion which he could please himself with, in the
Mothers Company; however he appeared as complaisant toward her as he could
force himself to represent, and he did so press the Mother to the performance
of her promise, that she was at last forced to speak to Roxana about it.

Roxana did not only receive with all the coldness imaginable what she said,
but took upon her to reprimand her Mother for engaging her self in so fowl a
business, declaring once for all, that if she would not let her be quiet at
Constantinople, where she remained merely in complaisance to her, and without
any the least inclination of her own, she would immediately write to her
Father, to send for her into the Country. This answer made the Mother mute for
ever after in the Mufti's concerns, and rather than to be mewed up again as she
had formerly been, in the Country, (which she feared would happen but too
soon,) she resolved to lose one Courtier, in the person of the Mufti, to
preserve all the rest that addressed themselves to her. She therefore told the
Mufti; that she had used all her endeavors to persuade her Daughter, but all
to no purpose, she being so wedded to her deep Melancholy of late, that she
abhorred all manner of Conversation. This made our Mufti to withdraw himself in
a short time after from the Mother's Coversation also, though not to desist
from his amorous pursuit of Roxana.

Great rejoycings were at Court for the Sultana's pregnancy, Cha-Abas failed
not to send an Ambassador to Congratulate the Emperor and Sultana about it. And
at last the time came of the Sultana's quickening, those news redoubled the joys
of the Halists, insomuch, that they no longer doubted of a Successor to the
Empire, that should be of their Sect, and that consequently would preserve that
Religion in the Empire. Mean time the true Mahometists, who were all
disgraciated, and laid aside from all Offices of Trust, and public Employes,
were very diligent in their enquiry into things, and they had a very great
progress in the discovery of Cha-Abas's designs, but they thought it not time
yet to show the least sign of their knowledge; that did so persuade the
Halists, that they were possessed with a Spirit of stupidity, and that they were
wholly deprived of all Sense and foresight of their Misery at hand, that they
set the less guard on their Actions, and acted so visibly their wicked Designs,
that they became obvious to the very Vulgar Eyes. But amongst all those
rejoycings, care was taken to distance from Constantinople, all such Persons as
were to be concerned in prying more narrowly into the Birth of the Pretended
Child, than were consistent with the Halists Designs. Wherefore some were
confined to their Country Houses; some few, who had yet some Governments of
Provinces, were charged not to stir from thence without special orders from the
Emperor; others were sent in Embassy. Amurat's youngest Daughter was sent by
the forced Advice of her Physicians, to some Baths of warm Waters, at a great
distance from Constantinople, in order to recover that health, of which she
found no want. In fine, all but the Mufties of the true Mohammedan Religon, were
dispersed far enough from offering to prye into the grand Secrets of the Court.
But those Mufties were to be disposed of also: Our Mufti was employed
particularly in that work, he invented a Paper, which he caused Amurat to
proclaim, was his pleasure, should be read in all the Mosquees in his
Dominions, which was so much against the formal Laws of the Empire, and of such
dangerous Consequences to the true Mohammedan Religion, that the Mufties
unanimously declined the reading of them, in their respective Mosquees, only
some few that were Temporisers, did sacrifice to their Interest and Ambition,
the true Dictates of their own Consciences.

This was sufficient matter to bring those refusing Mufties into Examination,
they were examined before Amurat, and notwithstanding all that they did allege
of just and honest, in vindication of their Innocence from the aspersion of
Disobedience, and Rebellion, with which they were charged, they were all sent
Prisoners to the Tower of the Dardanelles.

As this Confinement of the Mufties did highly rejoice the Halists, which did
all conclude from thence, a sudden fall of the Mohammedan Religion, to the
Elevation of theirs, so it did raise such fears and apprehensions in the true
Mahometists, that they began to provide with more vigor than ever, though
underhand, against the Fatal stroke, which was ready to fall upon their
Religion, Rights, and Lives. They sent Messengers to Prince Solomon, to entreat
him to be in a readiness to defend his own Right, and the Laws of the Empire.
He hearkened to their advices, and made Preparations underhand to assist those
of his own Religion, and to free them from Persian slavery. Thus were all
Parties busy in supporting and promoting their own interest, by all means
imaginable. The one pufft up with great hopes, and the other as much abased
with fears and apprehensions.

Roxana was not without a very great increase of trouble on her part,
notwithstanding the general rejoicing of all those of her own Sect. She had
felt some motions in her Belly, which she was not accustomed to feel, which
with some sick fits, that had lately come upon her, had made her to give her
Mother an account of the whole; her Mother did presently Judge by what her
Daughter had told her, and by some other Circumstances and Signs, that Roxana
had not only been ravished, but that she had been got with Child also; She
confirmed her Daughter in those Suspicions that she had of it, and the
knowledge of that further mischief did wholly cast down Roxana, so that from
that time she confined her self entirely to her Chamber, and would not admit
but one from amongst all her Servants, in which she most confided, to approach
near her, or to see her.

Our Mufti was not satisfied with applauding himself, with his late invention,
wherewith he had entrapp'd his great Enemies, the Mufties of the true Mohammedan
Religion (as he deemed them) but he would be praised for it likewise by all his
Party, not sparing Amurat and the Sultana from acknowledging his Subtilty in
the managing of that branch of the great work. To this purpose he went to pay
his devoirs to the Sultana, who he had not seen since that great Exploit: She
failed not to magnify his ingenuity, and to praise his indefatigable Industry
in the propagation of the Faith: after which falling on particular discourses,
the Sultana asked him what was become of Roxana and her Mother? saying that she
had not seen them, nor heard of them since her return, and that she had
expected a congratulatory visit from them for her great belly. The Mufti glad
that the Sultana had fallen on that Theme of her self, made answer, that he had
heard by accident, that they were still both in Town, but that his multiplicity
of business had hindered him from making any further enquiry about them. The
Sultana said that she had a desire to see the Beauteous, and Ingenious Roxana
again; and with that ordered that a Messenger should be immediately sent from
her, to the Mother and Daughter, to command them to wait on her that very day.

The Messenger delivered the Message to Roxana's Mother, but did not come to
the speech of her; and all that her Mother could say or do, after the Messenger
was gone (to whom she had said, they both would obey the Sultana's obliging
Commands) she could not prevail with her to keep her Company. What will the
Sultana think, said the Mother? What shall I say? What excuse shall I make? All
that Roxana said, was, what you please, use your own discretion, and act
according to your own fancy. The Mother was forced to go to the Seraglio
without Roxana, very much dissatisfied, and very full of thoughts, what she
should tell the Sultana, and whether she had best to discover to her what
misfortunes had happened to Roxana, or not: She left all to the conduct of
Fortune, and resolved to discover, or keep secret according as the Sultana
would give her occasion to act. She was kindly received by the Sultana, who
presently asked after Roxana. Is she sick, said the Sultana? Yes, Madam,
replied the Mother; she is not well, nor very sick neither. What Riddle is
this, replied the Sultana? Pray unfold it. At this, the Mother, who had much to
do to retain her Tears, and in whose Face the Sultana had observed great marks
of Sorrow, could no longer contain her self: She gave her Eyes liberty to
dischage themselves upon her Cheeks, which so sensibly moved the Sultana, that
she once again bid her to let her know what was the cause of so great a Sorrow
as she expressed? assuring her, that nothing should be wanting to give her
comfort. My Griefs are of that nature, Madam, replied the Mother, that they
will not admit of any Redress. I must rest satisfied in letting you know them,
without any hopes of Comfort, neither from you, nor any body else in the World,
continued she. But, Madam, since it is your pleasure to hear my sorrowful Story,
be pleased, at least, to afford me your Pity. With that she told the Sultana
all that had happened to Roxana, since the Court's removal and return. This is
very ill for poor Roxana, said the Sultana, the rather, because that there is
no means left to know her Ravisher, who, though I do not believe to be
designedly so, yet deserved some punishment, for using so ill the opportunity
which he had of serving poor Roxana in a nobler way; at least, if he were a
person suitable to her rank, he should be compelled to marry her, or I should
lose my Interest with Amurat. But though I cannot redress your Griefs according
to my own desires, in some measure I will alleviate them, and render them
somewhat more easy for you both to bear. Does any body know of Roxana 's
misfortune, added the Sultana? No, Madam, not any one, I can assure you; for
she has not seen the Face of any person since; nor could I so much as prevail
with her to wait upon you, Madam: I cannot deny, but that Zora, Mufti Repset 's
Sister, may suspect something of the business, as having had a hand in it on
the Mufti 's account, so far as his design went. That Is nothing, replied the
Sultana: They are both of the Cabal, in which I now will join you and Roxana,
as being persons that may be of great use to me in carrying on the great
design. But you must be all secret, not a whisper, or a betraying look, or all
is lost. Madam, you may command our Lives, replied the Mother; we should go to
our deaths without murmuring, if it were to serve you. I believe you, and thank
you, replied the Sultana. Know now, that for the good of our Cause, and the
Glory of the Sect of our great Prophet Haly, it has been thought fit by our
Privy Council, that I should feign to be with Child; and it has been so given
out already, to be about that very time in which Roxana was made so in effect.
There are some Women that have proved pregnant about that time also, who have
Spies upon them, to observe whether they will have a Boy at the time of their
delivery, that I may be supplied with a Male Child, when my feigned time of
deliverance is accomplished: now if Roxana 's Child proves to be a Son, nothing
would be more conformable to my desires, than to have it to pass for a Prince.
Tell Roxana this from me, that she should continue in her solitary reservedness
still on this account, and that when the business is over, I shall take care to
provide for her according to her quality and merits; mean time, continued she,
give her this from me, with an assurance of my special favor: With that, she
gave her a rich Jewel, and so dismissed her.

The Mother being returned home, told all the whole Story to Roxana, who being
still more and more afflicted at the publishing of her misfortune, did not
rejoice, as her Mother expected, at the Sultana's confidence which she reposed
in them, nor at her kind assurances of favor and protection; on the contrary,
she plunged her self deeper still in Melancholy; so that from that time she
continued in darkness, admitting of no more light into her Chamber, than what a
small dim Taper did afford.

The Confinement of the Mufties in the Tower of the Dardanelles, had much
disturbed the whole Party of the true Mahometists; they had murmured aloud,
they had acted with more fire than usually, so that it was known that they did
expect some assistance from some place, but whence not yet certainly known; and
business not being ripe to come to a conclusion, on the Halists party, till the
pretended Heir were come into the World, to satisfy the multitude as well as
others, and keep them under, till their rising would be to no effect, a day was
appointed for bringing the imprisoned Mufties to a public Examination, to
satisfy the true Mahometists, but it was so deferred, that it should not be
till after the Sultana had been delivered of her fictitious great Belly.

The time of her delivery at last grew near, according to that reckning which
they had given out, but because it did not exactly agree with the true
reckoning which Roxana made, or that her Mother made for her, (for she her self
minded nothing) another Reckning was set up, and given out, and that being near
out also, the Sultana had ordered at what places she would Lie In, which were
sometime in one place, sometimes in another; that no body should have any
certain knowledge of it, but those who were of the Secret.

It was not long after, that Roxana's Mother sent a Letter to the Sultana, to
let her know that her Daughter was in her effectual Labor; Orders were
presently sent back in a Letter, that she should be brought into the Seraglio,
if it were possible to be done with Secrecy. But she was so far gone, that it
could not be; and she being delivered of a Son, the Child, according to the
orders that had been given, was secretly conveyed to the Seraglio, into that
Appartment which the Sultana had last made choice of, there kept by a good Fire
in the next Chamber to that appointed for the Sultana's Lying In, and notice
presently brought to the Sultana, that every thing was in a readiness. The
Sultana did presently get her self carried to that Apartment by some of her
Attendants, and put into her Bed, the Midwife and all the rest of the
Confederacy at hand. Amurat had notice given that the Sultana was in Labor,
and he sent to his late Brother's Sultana, and to diverse others of the Sect of
Hali, instantly to repair to that Appartment, to which the Sultana had been
newly transported, there presently was a considerable appearance at the
appointed place, of such as were of the Sect of Hali, except two or three at
the most of old true Mahometists, who being held in Discourse by Amurat at the
Beds feet, the Curtains being shut close round the Bed, so that nothing was to
be seen, and scarce heard, for the Sultana not being accustomed to those sorts
of Pageantry, she could not bring her self to cry out with that vigor and
strength that acute Pains cause Women to do; but however the Child being
conveyed into the Bed by a by door, which was at the inward side or Ruel of the
Bed, (to which they had given some small thing to cause it to sleep, for ^ar
that it should cry out and ^scover all) A little while after ^^e Midwife pulls
it out of the P^^^lapped up in warm Cloths, pu^ it into her lap, and conveyed
h^^ self and it into the next Room, ^rough the same by-door, not de^^aring what
it was that she had go^, but presently after it was told to Amurat, who spoke
it to the Company, rejoicing mightily at it. Thus was Roxana's Child used to
su^^titute an Heir to the Empire, that might be brought up in the Sect of Hali,
to the prejudice of Zelinda, who was the true and undoubted Heir apparent, only
because she was of the true Mohammedan Religion.

The News of a new born Prince being spread abroad, it afforded new Subject of
great Joy, to all those of the Sect of Hali; amongst the rest of their
demonstrations of joy, there was a Fire-work, which was so great, and so
curiously contrived, that it seemed as if those Fusees of which it was
composed, were flying up, with a design to consume the Region of Fire, to burst
in pieces the Thunderbolts, to fire Lightning, and to allarm the very Stars.
Presently were seen Ambassadors from all parts, amongst which, one from
Cha-Abas was not the last to compliment the Emperor and Sultana on the birth
of the young Prince.

But now that so much of the great work was done; that which remained yet
undone, was to be thought of. Roxana remained still unconsolable, insomuch that
she never made any enquiry after her Child, whether it was dead or alive;
neither did she take such care of her self as she ought to do; but that was her
Mother's part, of which she acquitted her self as she ought to do. The Cabinet
Council thought fit to have Roxana conveyed out of the way, lest that, having
been made privy to the Plot, at some time or other she should in one of her
melancholic fits discover the whole mystery: and the Mufti Repset was
appointed to perform that pious piece of work. He undertook the business, but
it was not till after he had attempted and tried all the ways and means
imaginable to reclaim Roxana out of her deep melancholy, and to bring her to
give an ear to his addresses; but finding all to be labor in vain, he on the
sudden converted all his former Love into Hatred; insomuch that he did not only
contrive her Confinement in some place in Persia, but he charged those who were
appointed to guard her, and convey her to the Galley that should transport her,
with Letters which contained, that that Person should be received, meaning
Roxana, into the Order to which she was directed; and that after she had been
brought by hardship to a severe penance, she should be sent into another World
by the means of some gentle Poison. And that the Mufti should not be wanting in
the least in his revenge, he directed her to be privately conveyed into that
Galley which was commanded by Cara; that he whom he believed to be Roxana's
innocent Ravisher, should have a hand in her death. Thus Roxana was sent away
incognito, to her own ruin, under the pretense of change of Air, for her
health sake.

All this while Aladin had been kept in ignorance of all that had passed at his
House in Constantinople, and as often as he had sent for leave of the Emperor to
come up to Constantinople, he still had been denied by our Mufti's
contrivances: but so soon as Roxana was sent away, he had liberty sent him to
come to Constantinople.

The Sultana having accidentally had some intelligence of our Mufti's cruelty
against poor Roxana, to whom she had promised her protection, gave private
notice to Roxana's Mother, that there was a Letter sent with her, which was to
be delivered to the Captain of the Galley, which he was not to open, but to
deliver it as it was to those persons to whom he was to deliver Roxana; which
Letter contained orders for Roxana's death. And she advised the Mother to send
immediately an express after Roxana, to give her private notice thereof in
writing. The Mother lost no time, and the Messenger came just as Roxana was
getting into the Galley. Cara having received his order, and, by the retinue,
believing his Charge to be some person of quality, who desired to remain
concealed, he showed her to the best Cabin, without any further inquiry who
this person should be; and of truth, there was no body there that could inform
him: for at Roxana's departure from Constantinople, all her own Servants had
been discharged, and new ones, which she had never seen before, were appointed
to wait on her that Journey.

Thus was poor, unfortunate Roxana doomed to death, and sent to it by him who
had been the chief cause of her greatest sorrow. But the Heavens, who permit
sometimes Wickedness to triumph over Innocence and Virtue for a while, will not
rest till they have brought the Wicked to Punishment, not permitting Goodness
to be always oppressed, as we shall see in the continuation of Roxana's Story.

The great rejoicing which the Halists made for their young Heir to the Empire,
did but the more incense those of the true Mohammedan Religion, who were highly
disturbed already at the imprisoning of their Mufties, and they murmured openly
at it, which caused that the Halists, who had now no further occasion for their
Confinement, at least for the present, did release them, after a kind of
Examination, which was more for Form, than any thing that could with Justice be
alleged against them. But more Severity than ever was used against all true
Mahometists; and the Halists were so full of the designs which they had of
suddenly destroying them, that they could not forbear their open threatenings.
Of truth, it was discovered that there was an agreement made betwixt Amurat's
Council and Cha-Abas to destroy all such as would not become Halists; and to
that purpose, Cha-Abas was to send a Persian Army into the Ottoman Empire,
which was to assist the Halists in their wicked designs, to totally root out
the True, Ancient Mohammedan Religion, to destroy all the maintainers thereof
with Fire and Sword, and to clear the whole Empire of that Religion

The Blow was ready to be given, when that all the Nobility of the Ancient and
True Religion of Mahomet, made an association amongst themselves, to stand and
fall one by another, for the maintenance of their Religion, and the
preservation of the fundamental Laws of the Empire. This they signed, and sent
over to Prince Soliman, by a particular Messenger, with Letters to humbly
entreat him to defer no longer his coming to redeem them from Slavery and
Idolatry; that now the Persian Sword was ready to fall upon their Heads, and
that if he stayed any longer from giving them assistance, that in their ruin
he would meet with an end to all his just pretensions to the Succession of the
Empire.

Soliman, who had had sure intelligences from all hands of Cha-Abas designs,
that knew that he would no sooner have done with the Ottoman Empire, but that
he would be for divesting of him also, of his Dominions, did presently march at
the head of a great Army, into the Ottoman Territories; where being come, and
not finding the Bassa's to join with him, as they had assured him they would
do, he was thinking of retiring again, knowing well, that how great soever his
Army was, it was very insufficient to oppose Amurat's Forces, so long as they
remained united; but he was not long in that suspense, for so soon as the
Nobles had conveniences, they all came over with their men to him, who being so
strongly reinforced, and Amurat's Army so weakened, or rather entirely ruined,
he marched streight-way toward Constantinople, without the least considerable
resistance, all places yielding to him as he marched.

This sudden and unexpected Change in the Halists Affairs, did so surprise
them, that every one of them began to shift for themselves, amongst which, the
Priests of every order of Hali's Sect, were not the last. Amurat himself,
seeing what a prodigious Change had happened in all his Dominions, thought it
necessary to send secretly away, the Sultana with the Child, into Cha-Abas's
Dominions, and he himself, did not long after, follow them, resolved to deprive
himself of the Empire for the good of his Subjects, seeing that the
constitution of the Government did not suit with his Religion.

It is now time we should return to poor unfortunate Roxana. At her reception
into the Galley, through her disorder in getting in, her Vail had fallen so
much aside, as to give Cara a sufficient view, to let him know what a Beautiful
Person he was entrusted withal. But Roxana was so altered from her former
condition, by her incessant grief that persons who had more and frequenter
opportunities of seeing her, than Cara, would not have known her again;
besides, he was far from immagining, that she, who had lived all along so
retiredly, should be for going into Persia. He had then as much sight of her,
as was sufficient to set his heart all on fire, and to create in him an
extraordinary desire of seeing more openly that Beauty, and of inquiring who
she was.

Roxana's thoughts were taken up another way, she sitting alone in her Cabin,
had time to run over all her Misfortunes, and to descant upon every particular
Circumstance of them. But that which troubled her most in that juncture, was
the advice which her Mother had sent her in Writing, concerning the Letter
which had been delivered with her into the Captain's hand, in which was written
the Sentence of her Death; but no Advice or Counsel had been added to her
Mother's Care, how she should avoid or get off that danger. Cara's Love would
not let him rest, he took all occasions, and made use of all the opportunities
that offered themselves, to show a more than usual Zeal and Diligence, to serve
her personally, thereby both to get another fair sight of her, and to
ingratiate himself into her good opinion; of truth, he was so diligent in
serving her, beyond that morose way which most of those, who use the Seas, are
inclined to, that Roxana could not but observe it; and those assiduous Services
being seconded with diverse Presents of Refreshments, and offers of further
Services, Roxana had no longer any place to doubt, but that all was the Effects
of her unfortunate beauty, as she used to style it.

Upon this Opinion, she began to build some hopes to attain to the knowledge of
the Particulars contained in the fatal Letter, whereby she hoped that she might
find out some means to prevent that mischief, which she was going to. To this
purpose, she thought that her Beauty, though so much altered of late, might
much contribute especially toward a person, who she perceived did endeavor by
all means imaginable, to see her face wholly unvailed, she therefore was not
long without giving him an opportunity of so doing, but so as if it were by
mere accident. She pretended that the want of a free Air in the Cabin, did make
her sick, and therefore desired Cara that he would give his Prisoner leave, (as
she termed her self) to take a little Air upon the Deck. That was a Request so
suitable to Cara's desires, that he made her this answer. My Prisoner, Madam,
said you? I know of no such thing; and if you were so really, you have those
Charms about you that will set you free, whenever you desire them to act; be
assured, Madam, continued he, that I am so far from thinking you a Prisoner,
much less of using you like one, that I here offer you all my Services, in any
thing that may tend to your satisfaction and content; with that he took her by
the hand, and led her upon the most convenient place on the Deck. Where she
sat un^ a large Umbrello, encompassed round with her own Slaves and Servants.

The Wind blowing a little fresh, her Vail was disordered by it, she took that
opportunity of showing her self, in pulling it quite off, as she was about
setting of it in order again, as if by accident; which causing her to blush,
she said to Cara, who stood as if struck with Thunder at the admiration of so
much beauty, The very Elements are set against me, they would not else have
discovered to you, Sir, that which may hereafter slacken your Civilities
toward a Person, that now you will have no longer any Opinion that she
deserves them. Cara stood still mute, gazing upon Roxana, though veiled again,
without the power to stir or speak one word. Roxana taking that for a good
sign, took the liberty to proceed thus. Cast your Eyes upon some other Object,
which may blot out of your imagination those Lines which my deficiency may have
traced there, that you may be no longer troubled at your so free offers of
Services, to a person so little deserving them; I Will release you of them, Sir.
Madam, replied Cara, who was a little come to himself again, I am so strangely
surprised, at what chance joined to my good Fortune has shown me, that I know
(...) whether I had better wish my self turned all into Eyes, to gaze on that
Treasure of Beauty I have seen, or into one whole heart to offer at your Feet,
as a Sacrifice, though most unworthy to so much per^^ction. Roxana, finding the
Air too cool, arose to retire, Cara accompanying her to her Cabin. She said, I
take, Sir, what you are pleased to say to me, as words of course, which your
mouth uses to utter, while your heart may have no share at all in them. If ever
I was guilty of any such thing, Madam, answered Cara, be assured that now what
I say, is the pure and sincere Dictates of an heart, that would be too happy to
expire in your Service, and that my mouth has no further to do with it, than in
obedience to my Heart's commands. Take heed, Sir, that you say, replied Roxana,
you know not to whom you make those fair offers, and what great inducements I
may have to take you at your word! You may wonder, and not without cause, at my
forwardness, in the acceptance of your Services, continued she, but know, Sir,
that those circumstances that I at present lie under, may be of such a nature
as may plead my excuse, for a way of proceeding so contrary to the Rules that
the most prudent and modest of our Sex do observe. In a word, Sir, I find that
I have not too much time left me, to employ after some means, to preserve my
life. Once more, Sir, I tell you that I am your Prisoner, and that you have
orders to lead me and to deliver me up to my Executioners. Who I, Madam,
replied Cara, strangely surprised, when did I receive such Orders? and from
whom? From Mufti Repset, replied Roxana. It is he who has pronounced my
Sentence, and that has trusted you with the care of seeing it executed.
Riddles, all Riddles to me, Madam, I can assure you, answered Cara, I have no
further orders, than to receive you, and your Servants, with your Goods, on
board my Vessel, to convey you all to Persia, there to deliver you into the
hands of certain Religious Persons, which for their austerity of Lives, and
discipline of Religion, are the most unfit Persons that could ever be pitched
upon, to perform so horrible an Act, as your bare mentioning of makes my very
heart to tremble within me. Well, Sir, replied Roxana, to convince you that I
know more of the reach of your Commission, than you know your self, give me
leave to tell you, that you have in your power, my Life and Death. Yes, Sir, I
know that you have a Letter, in which is contained the Decree of my Death, and
that in the delivery or retention of that Letter, consists either my happiness
or misery. I must confess, Madam, that I have a Letter, answered Cara, which I
have order to deliver with you into such persons hands as I have mentioned, but
what the Contents are, I am wholly ignorant of; only this intimation I have had
from the Mufti you mentioned, that it contained the Emperor's particular
orders, and that therefore I should be very observant in the delivery of it.
Well, Sir, replied Roxana, obey the Order, and deliver me up a Victim to the
Mufti's revenge, though you incur the Emperor's displeasure, Who, I am certain,
knows nothing of it. The Mufti will reward you one day, for the signal Service
you will render him, in the destruction of miserable Roxana. Saying this she
let fall a deluge of tears, at which Cara was so wonderfully moved, as well as
at the name of Roxana, that he had not the power to speak for a considerable
time; but at last recollecting himself, Roxana! repeated he diverse times,
divine Roxana! Oh Heavens! what turn of Fortune is this? I serve the Mufti in
so foul a deed, (for it must needs be true, since Roxana has said it) I serve
the Mufti? nay Amurat himself, against Roxana's Life? May all the Elements
contrive my immediate ruin first, and instantly bring it upon me. No, Divine
Roxana, continued he, casting himself at her feet, Rather than be accessory in
any thing that can cause the least trouble to you; nay, rather than not return
the Heavens thanks, for having thought me worthy of so great an Honor, as to
be instrumental in the preserving of that Charming Creature from all manner of
Evil, let my Vessel split, and I be swallowed up immediately into the deep,
never to be seen more, so Roxana be but safe.

These passionate Expressions, with her Name so frequently repeated, made
Roxana to believe that she was known to Cara, though she could not remember
that she had ever seen him; it made her put a stop to her Tears, and lifting up
her Eyes, to see whether she could call to mind any remembrance of him. You
speak, Sir, as if you knew me, at least my Name, said Roxana, and as if you
were concerned more than ordinarily at my misery. Nay, you seem to believe that
the Mufti is my Enemy? Your Enemy, Madam, replied Cara, the blackest of them,
and more, that he is the only prime cause of all your troubles, though
peradventure some person more happy, and at once more unhappy than he, by mere
hazard, may have been thrown upon the prosecution of his Hellish designs
against so excellent a person as Roxana is, where he himself had fallen short
of them. At these words, Cara changed Color, looked on the Floor, and seemed
so discomposed, that Roxana was seized with such strange Apprehensions at it,
as made her to desire to be in private, under pretense of being suddenly taken
ill. That was so conformable to the condition that Cara was in on his part,
that he went out of the Cabin, without speaking one word more, nor so much as
looking toward Roxana, who had turned likewise aside.

Roxana being thus alone, began to reflect on what Cara had said: she wondered
that a Person so wholly unknown to her, should have so much knowledge of her
most secret Concerns, as he seemed to have, she not doubting, but that he knew
all, by what he had already said; she believed that he was not ignorant of her
Rape, and fancied that peradventure he might know the Person that had done it.
This made her to desire to know more, but she had not the confidence to require
it: She wished that Cara would of his own accord fall accidentally on that
Subject again, yet she dreaded to hear any more. In fine, she was in such a
perplexity of thoughts, that they had almost driven from her all the
apprehensions which she should have had of her approaching danger.

Cara, on his part was not less surpised; he had under his care that beautiful
Person, which mere Fortune had thrown into his Arms, at the same time that the
Mufti had contrived things so as to make her his own. He believed that the
Mufti had mistrusted that he was the Person who had disappointed him, or taken
his place; and he was persuaded, that his procuring of him such an Employ as he
had, was but to distance him from Roxana, that he might not have the
opportunity of making his peace with her, when she should know that he had
enjoyed her, when he had no thoughts of her, but was wholly bent on another.
And finally, he believed, that in pure rage and revenge he had done her some
very ill office toward the Emperor, which had made him consent to her death.
These, and diverse other thoughts did agitate him most violently: there wanted
nothing more to confirm him in the belief of all those things but her
acknowledging of the Ring he had taken from that Person whom he had enjoyed,
but he had not the confidence to give or show it to her: at last, he resolved
to set down in writing what he would willingly have her to know, and to give it
with the Ring wrapped up in it, to one of Roxana's Servants, to deliver it to
Roxana: whereupon having taken Pen and Ink, he framed this following long
Letter, that it might fully supply all that he had to say, which he could never
utter before Roxana's presence.

It is with the greatest respect, and humblest submission imaginable, divine
Roxana, that venture upon this enterprise, of informing you of a secret, on
which, as you will resent the knowledge of it, depends either my eternal Misery
or Happiness. And though I know my self to be wholly free from all ill designs
or evil practices, in the whole business, yet I cannot but tremble when I think
you may be ready to condemn me before you have read my Letter quite out. You
may remember how long it is since you lost that Ring, which I send you here
enclosed, though I believe you do not know how. No, Madam, those things which
the wicked Mufti had persuaded his Sister Zora to give you, had too great a
power over your Senses to permit you to make use of so much discernment; and
could you have done that, you had been likewise capable of resisting those
gentle efforts which I made on your Person. Yes, Madam, I here conf^^s that I
am the Person, who the Heavens thought more fit than the abominable Mufti, to
gather those Fruits which he had designed and contrived for his own Tooth, with
contrivances that were hatched in Hell. But, Madam, I was innocent all this
while; witness the strange surprizal I was in, to find that I had gathered such
Fruit as none had ever touched before, at that time, that all my thoughts were
bent only on Zora, who that very night had made me an assignation in that
Chamber where I met with you, Madam, and from whom I was far from expecting
such Virgin Fruit, whose Life and Conversation I knew but too well. How she
came not to be in that Chamber, and how I came to light on you there, does
still remain a Riddle to me. I must confess, that at the resistance you would
have made, and which you endeavored to make, as much as the narcotick effects
of your Opium would permit, I found my mistake; but who could then abstain and
retire? No Flesh and Blood, Madam: I accepted of what Fortune had thus thrown
into my arms; and because I was absolutely ignorant of the Person I had met
with, I took from her Finger the Ring which I have sent you. If any thing in
all this adventure can be laid to my charge, which might render me guilty in
the least circumstance imaginable toward you, I will doom my self immediately
to death; nay, what is worse, I will deprive my self from the happiness of ever
seeing you more, and yet live. But, Madam, if nothing but mere hazard and
Fortune had the conduct of all that mystery, let me not for what is none of my
fault, suffer the greatest of evils, your Frowns and Anger. The Heavens, in
rescuing you from the embraces of so wicked a person as he, who had plotted the
ruin of your Honor, did resign you into mine; and they thought me once before
worthy of being your Deliverer. The same Heaven, Madam, did afterward take you
from the Mufti, to give you to me; and they have given me a Heart that is
capable-of all things that are Noble and Just, and which may be valued on the
very account of aspiring to the Honor of pleasing you. Though my Fortune is
not great, my Extraction is Noble: deign therefore, beautiful Roxana, to look
down a little upon a Person that the Fates designed you from the beginning,
that was produced for you, and that they have given you already: for who can
look upon our unexpected, unsought, and unthought of encounter, and not
conclude that it is the will of Heaven that we should be united? Is not this
last act of your blackest Enemy, the greatest argument imaginable, that when he
designed most your Ruin, I should be chosen for the most happy Instrument of
your deliverance, by the Heavens, as I had been once before of your deliverance
from his filthy embraces? How can you then doubt, but that I was certainly
designed for you, as you have been for me. Resist not then against what the
Heavens have decreed, but accept of an heart, which is so freely offered you.


Cara found that he could dwell for ever on this Theme, therefore he was forced
to break off his Letter, which he gave to one of Roxana's Servants, who went
immediately into the Cabin, and presented it to her. Roxana asked from whom it
was, and she was told from Cara, which set her all in a trembling, with the
apprehension of learning that which she so earnestly desired to know: She
opened it, and read it, and after that remained for a considerable time
agitated with abundance of contrary thoughts on the whole Mystery of her
deliverance, and afterward of her ravishment, by the same person; and having
seriously weighed all Circumstances, and convinced her self that Cara had not
been in the least to blame, except he had beforehand known who she was, which
he did not: She began to think, that of truth, the Heavens had designed Cara
for her, and she for him. Being further confirmed therein, by that Providence
which once appointed him to be her deliverer, and had delivered her into the
hands of a person, that so passionately loved her, when she was designed to
have been given by that very person to her Executioners. She therefore resolved
to comply to the Heavens Decrees, in receiving of Cara's Service in the
preservation of her Life, which should pass as an Atonement for what he had
done, and that she would place on the account of Merit, for the future. But
when all was done, she had not the courage to speak to Cara, she therefore writ
to him these following Lines.

I am convinced, that the Heavens have a great share, in the preservation of my
Life, in so ordering of things, as to make me light into the hands of the same
Person, that had accidentally preserved me from the most loathsome Embraces of
a Monster, and that had a second time done the same, though at the dearest rate
that I could purchase it. And I am but too well convinced, that I have met with
my Ravisher by the Ring I have received, and that he is the same Person that
was before my Preserver. But I am strangely disappointed as to the revenge,
which I had always assured my self to take on the Thief. I find the flowing
bitterness of my Gall, to turn into a more calm and pleasant Relish, and that I
shall be forced to acknowledge Heaven's Decree and Dispensation in all the
course of my misfortunes. I therefore must submit to its pleasure, and believe
that I am obliged in gratitude, as well as on other terms, to acknowledge you
my deliverer also. I know not how to tell you all this, and much more that I
have to say. If you would save the Blushes of a person who is not used to make
such Confessions, bring the Mufti's Letter along with you to me, and let me
take my Eyes from you, to employ them on reading what death was appointed for
me, while you shall busy your thoughts in contriving what course is best for my
deliverance.


Cara having received this answer, was so over-joyed at it, that he presently
run into Roxana's Cabin, with the Letter open in his hand, after he had read
it; and casting himself at Roxana's Feet, Here, Madam, said he, take this, take
me, take all, and dispose of me, of my Vessel, and all my Men as you shall
think sit; all is at your Command. Roxana was reading attentively the Letter
all this while, after she had done, raising him up, You see Cara, said she, by
this Letter, that the Heavens have decreed I should be yours; they would not
else thus render me obliged to you for my Life; and since they have so ordered,
that I must receive it as a Present from you, I think I ought in gratitude to
return it again into your hands, and at your disposal. Madam, replied Cara, my
Life is bound up in yours, so that I cannot live without you; receive mine
therefore, with all its habilities and functions, as absolutely depending on
yours; and accept of a Person who shall ever be your Slave and your Admirer. I
must do so, replied Roxana; it is decreed, and I must submit to the will of
Heaven, continued she, giving him the Ring, receive this Pledge again, which I
now freely give you, in confirmation that I give my self to you also; and
accept of this Weapon, which I present you, wherewith to defend me from all my
Enemies, with that she gave him that Scimiter which he had left in her Chamber
at Constantinople. He presently knew it again, received it, and said, I hope,
Madam, that henceforth I shall have no occasion of using such Arms in your
defense; I shall free you from your trouble by easier means. The wicked Mufti
's Party is now so ruined, that the Ottoman Empire has spu'd him out, with
diverse more of his wicked Sect. Wicked indeed, replied Roxana, so wicked, that
I hate the very thoughts of that Sect, and would gladly embrace the True,
Ancient, Mohammedan Religion. You wanted nothing but that, Madam, replied Cara,
to accomplish you as my heart could wish; and certainly it is the same kind
Heavens who have preserved your Life, that now takes care of your Soul also, in
inspiring you with so good thoughts; oppose them not, but yield immediately to
this Call from Heaven; retire from amongst a People that are pleased but with
Deceits and Cruelties, and come amongst such as delight to serve their God in
Spirit and Truth. I will immediately give order to steer back again to Turkey,
where you shall be instructed in the true Worship of our great Ala. Dispose of
me as you please, replied Roxana; I am now yours by Gift, and so soon as I can
get my Portion out of my Father's hands, I shall be yours also by Marriage.
Cara having kissed Roxana's hand, they consulted together of the ways they
should take to discover to Prince Soliman, the grand Cheat which the Clergy of
Haly's Sect had put upon him, and the whole Ottoman Empire. In short, they had
a better Wind in returning, than they had going, which quickly brought them
back to the Shore, from whence they came to Constantinople, where the Prince
was made sensible of the wrong which was intended to him by the Halists. The
whole Empire thought themselves obliged to Soliman, in so high a measure, that
in the great Assembly of the Divan, he was proclaimed Emperor, and Zelinda
Empress, that very day after she came to Constantinople. Roxana had her Portion
allotted to her, which was sufficient to make Cara and her live happily
together. She presently made open Profession of the True, Ancient, Mohammedan
Religion, and was married to Cara after that manner, and now live comfortably
together, with all the Content and Satisfaction imaginable.

FINIS.
THE Court Secret, A NOVEL.

PART II.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes in Russel street in
Covent Garden. 1689.

TO THE READER.
NO sooner had that Piece called, The Amors of Messalina, appeared in Public,
but some malicious Persons gave out, that I was the Author of it, they having
heard underhand, that I was about some such thing; and though presently after,
there came forth another Piece on the same Subject in my Name, Entitled, The
Court Secret, in which Crowned Heads are treated with that Reverence and
Respect which is due to them: They have still continued to misrepresent me to
the World, adding, That the severe Rebukes which I had received for my rude
Behavior toward Sovereigns in the first, had made me to compose the last in
another strain, by way of Submission. Did those Persons that thus asperse me
but consider with what Respect I speak of Persons that once have had Dominion
over me, they would not find one grain of that ill Nature in all my Writings,
with which the Amors of Messalina have been seasoned by its Author, as if
designedly writ as a Satyr against the late King and Queen, which has proved a
Scandal to all moderate and modest Persons.

There are Men in the World that resemble some Creatures, which the Naturalists
report to be of so venomous Natures, that suck Poison from those very Plants
that other Animals gather Odoriferous Balsams and Honey, and that corrupt the
very Air they take in; so that at the breathing of it forth again, it destroys
all that approaches near them. Their natural ill Dispositions and Inclinations
have such strong Tendences to Evil, that they convert all the Advantages which
they might have received from Education, Learning, and good Examples, into
scandalous Conceptions and Expressions, without respect to Dignities or Persons.

Certainly those Persons must needs be void of that Charity, which covers a
multitude of Defects, that thus delight to impose the worst of Crimes on those
that have been their Lords and Sovereigns, unto whom all Honor and Respect is
due, from those who once were their Subjects, if it were but for the bare
Relation they have to our present King and Queen, whom God long preserve.

It may be alleged (though disingeniously) That I my self am guilty of that
which is blamed in others, by speaking too largely of another King, under the
Name of Cha-abas the Emperor of Persia. But when all is done, that very Person
intended, was never my King, and God forbid he ever should be so; and what do I
say of him, nay, what can I say more of him, than what has already been
declared and proclaimed, not by a few of his own inconsiderable Heretic
Subjects (as he is pleased to call those that are Protestants) but also by the
Emperor of Germany, the Kings of England, Denmark, Sweden, the States of
Holland, and all the Confederate Princes, all which has been confirmed by his
most Holy Father the Pope? Is he not publicly declared the common Enemy of
Christendom? Has he not with Justice acquired the Mock-title of most Christian
Turk, in lieu of that of most Christian King? Has he not fomented the Disorders
in Hungary, and invited the Turks to invade the Empire, promising them to give
such a diversion to the Emperor's Arms another way, that they should find a
very easy Conquest of it? And has he not showed us greater Examples of
Cruelties, than the very Infidels have done against poor Christians on the bare
account of their Religion, in the barbarous Murders of his own Subjects?
Pillaging, burning, and destroying all places that the Justice of his Enemies
Arms force him to abandon, not so much as sparing those which are consecrated
to that God which he adores (if he owns any at all) and all this after the
Murder of Men and Children, and the Ravishing and Deflowering of the grave
Matrons and Virgins? Nay, it rather may be asked, What has he not done of most
cruel, barbarous, and inhumane? And when he was rather tired, than satiated,
not contented with all those Acts of Cruelty which he had committed both at
home and abroad, in the profoundest Security that a Peace could procure, while
he himself took breath; Has he not used his utmost Endeavors to delude a too
easy Prince who he had charmed with his Flatteries and deceitful Promises, and
by the influence of his all-doing dazzling Gold, to follow his sleps, till
trusting too much on his plausible Assurances, he has been deprived of the Love
of his own People, of the Friendship of his Allies, and at last of his three
Kingdoms also? And had we not by this time all of us been convinced of the sad
Effects of the French King's Advices and Counsels, by a most woeful and
lamentable Experience, had not the immediate Hand of God interposed.

If then that King has rendered himself so odious to all Christians in becoming
their professed and declared Enemy, through the Tyrannical Government of his
own People, and his perfidious Usurpations on his Neighbors, as to draw upon
himself such harsh, though rightly deserved Characters, I may very well be
excused, for what I have said of the same Person, in a Novel, where Hyperbolies
are allowed in their largest extent: I having had no other design in the whole
Business than to gratify the Reader with joining the Pleasant to the Useful,
without the least intention of railing, or so much as making any severe
Reflections, or bearing malice against any Person, even my professed Enemies, much
less against such as are absolute Strangers to me.

A Key to both Parts of the Court Secret.
Selim the First, King Charles I. Selim the Second, King Charles II. Amurat,
The Duke of York. Osmond, The Duke of Gloucester. Soliman, The Prince of Orange.
The Sultana, Queen Mary. Zelinda, The Princess of Orange. Cha-abas, The French
King. Clorinet, Tyrconnel. Chilase, The French King's Confessor. Repset, Peter's
the Jesuit. Zora, His Sister. Clorineta, The Lady Tyrconnel. Monitenna, Madam
of Maintenon. Emperor of Migrena, Emp. of Germany. Grand Visir Rinola, D. of
Loraine.
The Bassas of
Swibrunckia, D. of Brunswick. Abrania, Bavaria. Brugulnea, Lunenburg. Xonisea,
Saxony. Grubdenbran, Brandenburg. Sehes, Hesse. Stenrum, Munster. The Saraguere
Kelwad, Waldeck. The Ottoman Empire, Great Britain. The Persian Empire, France.
Albiona, England. Myrgena, Germany. Pesina, Spain. Haldon, Holland. Clonstad,
Scotland. Leridan, Ireland. Constantinople, London. Ispahan, Paris. Risauta,
Austria. Blunid, Dublin. Lynderodon, Londonderry. Mahometans, Protestants.
Mahometists, Jesuits. Halists, Papists. Grand Mufti, The Pope. Mufti, Bishops
or Priests. Heathens, Turks. The Grand Council of the Divan, or of the Empire.
The Parliament.
As for Aladin, Roxana, Cara, and Moretto, the Reader may apply them as he
thinks fit.

The Court Secret: A NOVEL.
PART II.
AMbition is a Passion so absolute and imperious, that when a Mind is once
possessed with it, there is rarely any admittance for any other at the same
time: It seizes the whole Man, and Love it self, that masters the Masters of
the World, can scarce get entrance in an heart prepossessed with that Tyrant,
that is continually fed with those Court-Flatteries wherewith Princes are
usually entertained.

Yet there is no Rule so general, that will not admit of some Exception, and in
the Person of Cha-abas, the now Emperor of Persia, may be seen that that
unsufferable Ambition, which caused him to aim at an Universal Monarchy, and
that has armed all the World against him, threatening no less than the utter
Subversion of his Empire, has at the same time received also into his Bosom
that little Deity, who blinds all those Victims which he designs for
Sacrifices; insomuch that the Vulgar, who seldom dive into the Secrets of
Princes, have attributed wholly to his boundless Ambition, that in which Love
had as great a share, if not the advantage. I shall leave it to the Reader's
Judgment in the reading of this Second Part of the Court Secret; in which that
Emperor's Private Amors are set forth according to the Memories fallen into
my hands.

When the Persian Emperor had been advised by his Politic Council, to make
choice of a Wife for Amurat, that might espouse the Persian Interest, be
capable of governing him when he should come to the Government, which right or
wrong was to happen, according to the measures which they had taken, in the
prospect they had that Amurat was a great Proselyte to that Sect. This present
Sultana was pitched upon as the most proper and fit person that could be had
for that purpose. She was therefore chosen from a great number that aspired at
that honor, to become, in success of time, the chiefest Instrument by which
all the Halists should work their Designs in that Empire. Of truth, her Wit,
Address, Presence of Mind, Courage, Boldness, and exquisite Beauty, which gave
luster to all her other excellencies, did highly contribute in rendering her
Mistress of Amurat's Affections, and fitted her above all other persons in the
World to carry on so great a Design.

The Sultana had formerly lived in the Persian Court, where Cha-abas had had
the opportunity of admiring her Charms; and doubtless he had been so absolutely
mastered by them, as never to have been brought to resign such a Treasure of
Beauties to another, when he had it at his disposal, had he not been diverted
from it, by the choicest Beauties of his Empire, which were daily offered to
him, and the Shame which was continually set before his eyes, of losing so fair
an opportunity of rendering himself Master of the Ottoman Empire, so much
coveted and aimed at by his Predecessors, the Glory of the Performance being by
his Fortunate Stars, reserved for his invincible Arms, which would illustrate
all his Conquests, establish for ever the Religion of Haly throughout the
Ottoman Empire, and Crown him with eternal Glory and Renown.

Those and such like Arguments, for that time, caused his Ambition to triumph
over his Love; he yielded to their Advices, and permitted himself to be led by
Interest, to the prejudice of Love, who enraged at the Assront, divested
Cha-abas Heart from its Natural Severity, and infused it into the Sultana's
Bosom, rendering it thereby so obdurate to all his Intercessions, that all his
Repentance and Submission should not be of force to make in it the least
impression.

The violent Counsels of the Mufty Repset, and other Halists, having been the
occasion of that prodigious and wonderful change in the Ottoman Empire, which
had caused Amurat and the Sultana to retire into Persia, from the Fury of an
enraged Multitude, against whose Torrent no Bank of Religion, Allegiance, or
Loyalty can hold, and that nothing but its own impetuousness can allay. They
were obliged to run the same Fortune also; the Mufti, like the rest of his
Order, not much troubling his Head at the wonderful Alterations which he, with
the assistance of others of his Fraternity, had wrought in Turkey. Of truth it
may be said of that Society, that they were ever true to that design they first
took in hand, to stick to the Interest of the House of Risauta. That made them,
when they found, notwithstanding all their efforts, that the Persian Emperor
still grew more and more formidable, to the great prejudice of the Pesinians,
they on the sudden feigned themselves weary of protecting the Pesinians, made
Overtures to wholly relinquish their Interest, and to come over to that of
Persia; which was greedily embraced by its Emperor, who not distrusting them,
did wholly rely on their Counsels; they in the mean time, by that means and
Stratagem, designing the total Ruin of the Persian Empire, and the raising of
the House of Risauta above whatever it had yet been. This made them to put
Cha-abas upon glutting his Ambition by all base and violent Usurpations,
Breaches of Treaties Treacheries upon the Territories of those Neighboring
Princes that were at Peace with him, which made the Grand Mufti himself to be
affronted by him, by which doings he has now drawn upon him the hatred of all
Princes, who have all joined against him that will not hear of any Terms of
Accommodation; who have obliged the Grand Mufti not to protect him, but to
abandon him to the just Revenge of all those Princes whom he has so highly
offended, and that even will not assist Amurat in the least in the recovery of
his lost Empire, because it has happened through his following the evil
Counsels of the Persian Emperor, though he is so great a Preselyte to the
Religion of Haly, of which most of those Confederate Princes against Cha-abas
are Professors. Thus have the Mahometists, under pretense of Friendship to
Persia, worked those Ends, and brought about those purposes for the advantage
of Pesina, which they could not compass by open force, and put the Pesinians by
their entering into the Confederacy, in a Capacity of not only recovering
suddenly all that Cha-abas has at several times basely stolen from them, but in
sharing also in that spoil which is intended of the whole Persian Empire. I
hope the Reader will pardon this Digression, on condition that I will not
trouble him with any more. And now I return to my Subject again.

Cha-abas having gone so far in his Design against the Ottoman Empire, as to
cause Amurat to desert it, though his Designs were first quite different from
what had happened, he designed farther to make use of Amurat's Desertion of his
Empire, to his particular advantage, which could not be done, without causing
Amurat to change the Resolution which his good Nature had promp'd him to, of
retiring from the World into some Religious Place, there to end his days in
Devotions. To this purpose Cha-abas gave Orders, That all persons, from the
highest to the lowest, in his Dominions, should give the same respect to Amurat
and to his Sultana, as they used to show to himself; He caused them to be
bravely and magnificently entertained in all places they passed through, made
his own Guards to attend them, and sent his own Chariots to bring them to a
magnificent Palace which he had caused to be richly furnished, and adorned with
all necessary things for their Reception, and went some part of the way himself
to receive them, with all the Demonstrations of Sorrow imaginable, and all the
Assurances of Friendship, Aid and Assistance that could be expected;
protesting, That notwithstanding all those formidable enemies which he had at
that time on his hands, he would re-seat Amurat on his Throne; and that he
would beg for Peace on his bare Knees of his enemies, rather than not pursue
the destruction of the Mohammedan Religion, which he was resolved to accomplish,
happen what would, and to make Amurat a more glorious and absolute Prince in
the Ottoman Empire than ever any of his Predecessors had been.

Thus did that Vain Man, that Monster of Pride, Cruelty, and Ambition, domineer
and huff, when he knew not which way to turn himself, before the Confederate
Princes, who were all resolved to pull down his Pride, and to take from him at
once all those places, and whole Provinces which by fraud and deceit he had at
diverse times encroached and stolen from them. He had first tried all means
imaginable, and had applied himself to the Grand Mufti, and to the Emperor of
Myrgena, with promises to restore all that he had gained from them; but they
told him, that they knew him too well to trust any longer to his Word, which he
had never kept. So that finding that that would not do, he had proposed to beg
those Princes Pardon which he had offended, and to make full restitution of all
that he had possessed himself of theirs, with an assurance, that he would submit
to all that they should please to impose upon him, provided, they would but
withdraw their Forces from falling upon him, till he had accomplished that
great Design he had so well begun, of totally rooting out the true Mohammedan
Religion: But those Confederate Princes knowing, that all that he said, was but
to divert them from taking revenge of all his perfidious dealings against them;
and that at the very time that he so earnestly begged for a Peace, he was
animating and fomenting the Heathens, to continuing a War against the
Mahometists; they therefore gave no ear to any thing he said, but went on still
with their preparations of War against him, with all the vigor imaginable.

This made Cha-abas to look out for a place of Retreat in time, in case he
should be driven out of his own Empire; but he did it with that same Pride and
Ostentation which usually accompanies all his Actions. He cast his eye on the
Island Leridan, pertaining to Amurat, and which still held out for him, all the
Natives of that Kingdom being Halists, and governed by Clorinet, who was a
great Halist also, and who had been placed in that station by Amurat.

After then that he had brought Amurat and his Sultana to that Palace which he
had appointed for them, and settled an Allowance for their Maintenance suitable
to their Greatness, he began to consider which way to begin, and in what proper
Terms to propose to Amurat, so that he might not find out his drift, the
re^^ction of Clonstad and of Albiona to him; but Amurat was not long without
giving him himself a fair opportunity of declaring his Mind; for he being still
dejected and unconsolable, for the loss of the Love of his Subjects, without
which he had no prospect of ever recovering his Right again, did still pursue
the Design which he had taken, of leaving the World, and of retiring into some
Religious House, where to end his days in peace and quietness, and mentioned
his Design to Cha-abas. There needed no more to set the Persian Emperor on,
this was matter sufficient for him to work upon: He represented to Amurat, that
that would tarnish the Glory of all his former Actions; it would give occasion
to the World to censure him, and to future Ages to entertain a^ very ill
Opinion of him* He added, That he himself was so highly concerned in the whole
Business, that it would greatly tarnish that Glory which the Justice of his
Cause, and the good success of his Arms had acquired him, if he did not
re-establish Amurat on his Throne, and totally root out of all his Dominions
the Mohammedan Religion, as he had already done out of his own Empire, and would
do out of the whole World, before he would be quiet: That a War which was
founded on Religion, and the extirpation of Heresies, as his was, was not to be
left undone, being of quite another Nature than those Wars which are made on
the account of securing ones Right, enlarging of ones Dominions, increasing of
ones Glory, and the like; That whosoever once set his his Hand to that Plough,
wherein Religion was concerned, was not to look back, but to go forwards, over
all the Hazards and Difficulties imaginable, being confident, that the more
perilous, the more glorious the Achievement of the thing would be; that he was
ready to assist him with Men, Arms, Ammunition and Money, with Vessels to
transport them over into Leridan, where he thought it the most convenient to
begin, by the total suppression of all his Mohammedan Subjects, through the aid
and assistance of those Forces which were all Halists, under the Conduct of his
Lieutenant Clorinet. In fine, he said so much to Amurat, and did so subtly
disguise his Designs to him, under the Veil of Religion, that though he did not
absolutely yield to his Reasons, yet he had nothing to say for himself, but
that he would consider of it, and give Cha-abas an Answer in a day or two.

Cha-abas finding that Amurat began to shake in the handle, thought of making
use of that other means which had succeeded so well before, which was, in
putting the Sultana on following close by Night those Lessons which he and the
Mufties of his Party did continually buz in Amurat's Ears all the Day long;
which made Amurat to believe himself in a worse condition than ever; and of
truth, merely to rid himself of that continual trouble that he saw himself
exposed unto, by those perpetual Tongue-Batteries, discharged against his
Constancy and Resolutions, he yielded to their Efforts, and began to capitulate
with Cha-abas about the Business. Cha-abas told him, that he had no other end
in it, than the re-establishing of him on his Throne again, and, all under one,
to extirpate Heresy: But that because Amurat had been so unsuccessful in his
former Designs, for want of good Counselors and Officers, to perform and
execute those Resolutions that the Councils had taken, he did think it not only
convenient, but very necessary to give him such a Counselor as they might both
trust in for Fidelity and Conduct; that to avoid all occasion of Murmurs
amongst his Subjects, who would all expect Relief from the Moneys which he
should transport with him, there should go along with him a Persian Treasurer,
that should have the whole and sole disposal of his Treasure; and that neither
of his Subjects, either Halists or Mahometans, that were Officers, should envy
one another, (for those last were to be a little while longer considered) he
would send also some Persian Officers to be put in all strong places to command
the Army, and to govern the Military Affairs, as occasions should serve: So
that Amurat should have nothing to do, but to countenance the whole proceeding,
as being made in his Name, and on his Account, till the Business was ended; and
that then he should take upon him again the whole management of Affairs, and
Rule as Emperor there, and recover, through Cha-abas continued assistance, the
rest of his lost Empire.

All these sugared Bates did Amurat swallow down, with the greatest security
that could be, not so much as once doubting in the least, but that all that
Chaabas said, was real and sincere: He therefore resolved once again to launch
himself into the World, and through Cha-abas kind assistance, go and recover
his lost Empire. Amurat having taken this Resolution, and having past his Word
to Cha-abas of being wholly and absolutely governed by him, to see whether that
would alter the ill success which he had had hitherto in all his Undertakings.
There was public Rejoycings at it; Amurat had Liberty to breathe again, and
was no longer tormented with the continual Alarms which he received Day and
Night from those whom Cha-abas had appointed to torment him. But there happened
another Obstacle, which was to be removed, as a great Impediment to Cha-abas
other Designs: So far he had consulted but his own Pride and Ambition; but Love
claimed a share in his Bosom also, and the Sultana's Charms had already made
so deep an impression in his heart, that it was impossible for him to yield to
those earnest Entreaties and Prayers which she made, that she might attend on
Amurat in that Expedition; He represented to her the Season of the Year, the
Inconstancy of the Elements that she would expose her self to, the Uncertainty
of the Success, the Inconveniences of lying long at Sea, of Landing amongst
Enemies, of going from a pure to an unwholesome corrupt Air, where diseased men
might make it still more dangerous. In fine, he himself, and those whom he set
on the Sultana, to dissuade her from going, acted so well their Parts, that not
only the Sultana, but Amurat himself, (who had already given his Consent for
the Sultana to accompany him,) did resolve, that she should rest behind, at
least, till it were convenient for her to come over: Mean time, all Dispatches
were made for the sudden putting in execution what had been designed and agreed
on betwixt the Two Emperors; insomuch, that in a short time Amurat was told,
that the Fleet, and all the things necessary for his Expedition, were in a
readiness, and ready to set Sail, only they wanted his Person, without which
nothing could be done. Thus was Amurat sent away from his Sultana, to
countenance Chaabas Designs on Leridan, and to give more Liberty to his amorous
Intrigues. For no sooner was Amurat gone, but that Chaabas laid close Siege
unto the Sultana's Virtues, and followed it so close, that he prevented the
Design which she had taken, and which doubtless she had executed, of confining
her self into some Society of Religious Women, during Amurat's Absence, had not
Cha-abas Love been very diligent in breaking her measures. He had not yet made
any Declaration of Love to her, and all those Services and Demonstrations of
Respect which he showed her, passed but for the effects of his Courtesy and
Civility, to a Princess in affliction: He had had some thoughts of declaring
his Passion, but he thought it was not to be done in a mean and ordinary
method, but in such a manner as should correspond with his Glory, the Greatness
of the Sultana, and the Excess of his Passion. He daily did afford her new
Divertisements, and finding that there still reigned over the Sultana's Brow, a
certain melancholic Air, which though it added no small Luster unto the
Sultana's Majestic Gravity, yet did not so well answer his amorous Designs
toward her; he resolved upon communicating of his Designs unto Clorineta, Wife
to Clorinet, who had accompanied the Sultana from Turkey into Persia, and all
along been Privy to all the Sultana's Contrivances, Plots and Intrigues, and in
whom the Sultana put all her Confidence and Trust.

We have had no occasion in the First Part of the Court Secret to mention this
Person, but having diverse opportunities to bring her upon the Stage in this
Second Part, it is fitting that I should give you a short Description of her:
She was very handsome yet, though some few years had of late left some Traces
behind them, which spoke the Relics of a very exquisite Beauty; and her gay
Humor, free Air, and Natural Amorous Disposition, did still persuade her, and
not without Cause, that she had Beauty enough left to captivate the Heart even
of the proudest Monarch of the World; and she had diverse times tacitly within
her self, wished that those Addresses at large which Cha-abas had made to the
Sultana, had been designed to her, who had certainly given them more favorable
Receptions and Returns, than he might ever expect from the more virtuously
strait-laced Sultana, not without hopes that she might thereby gratify those
Two Passions of Love and Gain, which had still so great an Ascendant over her,
and which made her design within her self to make a Prize of Cha-abas; in which
she was already confident she should not be opposed by the Sultana, who as she
found her inclined, especially at that time, would rather encourage and assist
her in her Design, than thwart it, in hopes that it would in part divert those
Addresses which Chaabas might disturb her quiet with, and which she could not
tell how handsomely to avoid, considering the Obligations which both she and
Amurat seem to have unto him.

Cha-abas then watching for an opportunity of entertaining Clorineta on that
Subject, did one day find her all alone, walking in a private covered Walk in
the Garden, where she had given an assignation unto the Mufti Repset, who was
one of her Favorites. Cha-abas came up to her, and saluting her; Madam, said
he, I may thank my good Fortune for giving me this fair opportunity of
declaring to you something of nearest concern to me, and on which depends my
Happiness or Misery. This Onset did so tickle Clorineta's Heart, expecting
nothing less than a declaration of Love from that Emperor, after so fair a
beginning, that she could not forbear assuring him, that whatever he should say
unto her, would be so great an Honor, as she would lose a Thousand Lives to
merit it, and that it would be all her study how she should answer so great a
Monarch's Desires, wih all the Humility and Respect imaginable; and at the same
time she wished with all her Heart, within her self, that her Mufti should
forget the Assignation, or mistake the Time or Place, that his coming might not
interrupt Cha-abas Discourses, nor create in him the least Jealousy and
Suspicion. Cha-abas, on his part, desiring not to be interrupted neither, and
for fear of being seen by the Sultana, who used to walk sometimes there, said,
Madam, if you will honor me so far as to accompany me to y^nder Pavillion,
where I may more freely and more at leisure disburthen my Mind into your
Bosom, you will infinitely oblige me. Any thing, Sir, replied Clorineta, that
you shall please to command me, I shall take as a great honor to perform. With
that Cha-abas taking of her by the Hand, lead her toward the Pavillion, which
was at the end of the Walk, making Signs to those that had followed him into
the Garden, and that in respect had stopped at some distance from Clorineta,
that he wanted not their Company.

After Cha-abas had seated Clorineta and himself, fetching a great Sigh from
the bottom of his Heart, he thus began, This forerunner of my Discourse, Madam,
does but too much inform you of the Nature of it, without any further clearing
of the business, and letting of you know, that it is Love, that All-powerful
Deity, who makes me sigh in his Chains: Yet, Madam, it were in vain for me to
deny or go about to conceal a Passi^n, which how close soever I should resolve
to carry it, would in despite of all my Circumspections manifest it self: I
love, Madam, and -- There Cha-abas making a pause, as if he was afraid to
discover any more of his Passion, it gave opportunity to Clorineta to say, You
can command, Sir, as well as love; and doubtless that your Power is as absolute
in that as it is in all other things that depend on your Will and Pleasure:
What is there in your Court, in your whole Empire, over which you have not that
Power and Authority to command? And who would not think themselves the most
happiest persons, in obeying, especially in things of this Nature? You say
right, Madam, replied Cha-abas, I can command in my Dominions my own Subjects;
but besides, that Love must always be free, and without force: Peradventure
that the Person who makes me sigh, is not my Subject, but one that I must serve
with the greatest Submission and Respect that I can possibly pay to her
Greatness and Illustrious Person.

Notwithstanding that these Two last Words had been sufficient to have
enlightened a less discerning person than was Clorineta, yet she was so puffed
up with her good Fortune, and so prepossessed with the Opinion, that all that
Cha-abas said, was meant to her, that she went confidently on, taking all to
her self, and framing Answers suitable to her imagination, which she returned
to Cha-abas with such amorous Glances, such pathetick Expressions, and such
passionate Zeal, that Cha-abas could not but take notice of it, and believing
it to be as it was, and finding her worthy some consideration, he let her
remain in her mistake, and resolved to take hold of an opportunity which
offered it self so fairly: therefore he thus continued, Yes, Madam, You have so
many Charms, and they so powerful, that should you be my Subject, they were
capable of rendering me your Slave. Clorineta was going to answer, when that she
perceived her Mufti coming with a round pace toward the Pavillion: The very
thoughts of his approach, and discovering any Intrigue betwixt them, did so
confound her, that she knew not what to say; and to avoid all Suspicions, she
removed her Seat something more behind the Door, to conceal her self from
Repset's View, pretending that the Air did blow something too cold upon her,
and she put the Door a little closer than it was before. But that did but serve
to discover the more visibly the set Assignation which had been betwixt them;
for Repset who had had an Eye of her at a distance, which caused him to
redouble his pace, made a stop at the foot of some steps that led up to the
Pavillion, saying aloud, I have seen you, Madam, and notwithstanding the Design
you had to put the Dye upon me Love, who would not let so great a Votary as I
am to him, lose such an Assignation, lent me his Eyes to see you at that
distance, and his Wings to fly to your -- Saying this as he was getting up,
pushing the Door wide open, and perceiving Cha-abas, he made a full stop both
to his Words and Motion. It were hard to declare which of these Three Lovers
was the most surpised. The Mufti retiring, begging pardon for his Mistake, and
bold Intrusion, went down Stairs again as fast as he had got up, and sneaking
through little by-Allies, he retired to his Lodgings, with all the haste and
confusion imaginable. This made Clorineta to pluck up her Spirits, and tell Cha
abas, That the M^fti meeting of Two Persons there which he little expected, had
certainly strangely confounded him, and that doubtless it would make him lose
the Assignation which he had mentioned, of all which he had so well informed
them, except the Name of the Person. Chaabas all the while looked earnestly on
Clorineta, as desirous to have been further informed by her Looks or Gestures,
which she perceiving, for fear of saying or doing any thing that should betray
her to her new Lover, she did rise, making some offer to go out, saying, that
peradventure they might have another view of the Mufti, which would inform them
further. Chaabas, who was as desirous as she, to know certainly who was the
Person whom the Mufti had not named, and which he had some Jealousies was her
self, by the great disorder that his coming had put her in; besides, the
suspicion he had entertained at her shifting of her Seat so soon as she had
perceived him, under pretense of getting more out of the Cold Air, consented to
her desires, and taking her by the Hand, led her out, begging of her a further
opportunity of discovering his Passion; which she, with all the modesty she was
Mistress of, endeavored to evade; and they meeting with Company, with which
that Walk used to be filled at that time of the day, they parted without any
further appointment or Rendezvous than what Fortune should present to them, as
it had done before. Cha-abas mixed himself with a Company of Ladies, amongst
which was one named Monitenna, who had rendered great pieces of Services to
Cha-abas, during his late Distemper, and to whom he had protested a World of
Acknowledgments and of Love: She looked on Clorineta with a World of Disdain,
Rage and Spite, as on a person that intended to deprive her of that Love which
her most assiduous Cares, and indefatigable Labors, had obtained from
Cha-abas: And though she could not lay claim to any Beauty, and that she was
but the Relics of a mean Person of Birth and Estate, though of a celebrated
Wit, of which she also had a great share, she thought that her Services might
stand her in place of all those other things, as being more material and
effectual: Wherefore from that moment, she declared her self, in her own Mind,
a mortal Enemy unto Clorineta, and did her afterward all the ill Offices that
she could possible, as we shall have occasion to declare.

As for Clorineta, she had a Message delivered to her from the Sultana, which
made her to retire. Though her Beauty had (while present) suspended Cha-abas
Passion toward the Sultana for that time, he had no sooner retired from her
Company, but that the Sultana presented her self, to his Imagination, with all
those Perfections, and that Majestic Grace which always accompany her. He soon
forgot, that he had told Clorineta, she was the Person he adored; and as if
nothing of that had ever been, the next time that he met with Clorineta, which
was in the Sultana's presence, he took no more notice of her than if he had
never seen her before, and wholly addressed himself to the Sultana, to whom he
said a^undance of very fine things, but at such a distance, that they might
have been shared amongst the rest of the Company; and this Visit which he had
made to the Sultana, with a design of giving her some more particular Marks of
his Passion than he had ever done yet, termin'd only in inviting her to a great
Ballet and Masking, which he had designed, for to give her some diversion;
though his design was to give her then, in as splendid a manner as he could
possible, a Declaration of Love in Writing. She a long time pleaded her
melancholy Humor, which rendered her more fit for the Conversation of
Religious Women, than to participate of the Pleasures of so splendid a Court,
especially in the absence of Amurat, who, for ought she knew, might be exposed
to eminent dangers, while she should be revelling here; but those her
suggestions having been overruled by diverse Discourses, backed with
assurances, that before all things could be fitted for so magnificent an
Entertainment as he intended, there would certain news come of Amurat's great
success in Leridan; she at last on those Conditions yielded to lend her
presence to so Noble an Assembly, where all the Chief Lords and Ladies of the
Persian Court were generally invited.

Every body from that time began to make Preparatives to appear as splendid as
they could at the Grand Ball, which was called The Ball of the Royal Love; and
to get such Disguises that would keep them from the knowledge of all Persons,
but those unto whom they would be known. As for Cha-abas, he spared neither
Cost nor Charges to render it the most magnificent and splendid that ever was.
Of truth, it was so like the Ambition of the Giver, that I cannot but find a
sheet or two of Paper more than ordinary, to set down the Description of it in
my Novel, not doubting but that the Reader will not grudge the time that he
shall employ in the reading of it: But first we will give time for the
preparation of all the necessary things for this great Mask, and in the mean
time give me leave to entertain you with some Transactions in the Ottoman
Empire, relating to the Historical part of my Novel.

Upon Amurat's deserting of his Subjects, and abandoning them to the Fury of
all their Enemies, which in the Opinion of many of his Subjects, acquitted them
of their Oaths of Allegiance to him; for as they said, There were mutual Oaths
passed betwixt Amurat and his People at his accession to the Crown; He on his
part did promise to govern them according to the Established Laws of the Land,
and to maintain the Mohammedan Religion, and all the Laws that had from time to
time been made for its preservation, against all the Assaults and Conspiracies
of its sworn Enemies the Halists, and to protect and defend his People from all
Foreign Usurpation and Invasion; and his People on their part had promised to
obey him, as their King and Governor, and to pay unto him the same Allegiance
and Obedience, which they had done to his Predecessors, on the assurance that
he would faithfully and inviolably keep and observe his Coronation Oath. I say,
that many of his Loyal Subjects did believe, and thought in their Consciences,
that the Emperor's Breach of his Oaths had dispensed them from those which
they had taken to him of their Allegiance. Yet there remained some amongst
them, who still were of Opinion, That though Amurat had broke his
Coronation Oath, that did not free them from those Oaths of Allegiance to him
which they had taken, saying, That his doing ill, or committing an Error, was
no warrant for them to do the same. But when it came to that pass, that the
Emperor deserted them and his Kingdoms, and thereby renounced to the
protecting and defending of them: Nay, That on the contrary, he joined with the
Halists against his own People, and applied himself to the greatest declared
Enemy of the Ottoman Empire, and of the Mohammedan Religion, which he had
declared over and over, he would root out of the World; then, I say, that
helped to take off all those Scruples which had been left on their tender
Consciences, and found, that what at first was but strife, who should have the
upper hand, of the Halists or Mahometans, in the Ottoman Empire, was now turned
into a War of Religion, in which the true ancient Mohammedan Religion, the Laws
of the Land, the Liberty of the Subject were concerned. In fine, where all lay
at stake, and in which he that had sworn to be their Protector and Defender,
was gone over to the greatest Enemy of all their Rights, and had solicited him
against his own People; then they thought themselves absolutely freed from all
Duties to him, and from all further Passive Obedience, which was so much
enjoined to them by the Doctrine of their Church, who commanded them to fly
from Persecution in their own Land by their own Prince, into another, after
that he had deserted and abandoned them to their Destruction, and joined
himself to the implacable Enemy of their Religion, Established by the Laws of
the Nation. Then they thought that their staying at home for the Defense of
their own Religion, and to oppose the threatened Usurpation and Invasion of the
Halists under Cha-abas conduct, was the same thing as their flying from
Persecution at home into another Country, now that their Head, their King,
their Protector had abandoned them to the Fury of their most barbarous and
bloody Enemies; was the same thing as flying from Persecution. had their
Emperor staid to protect them.

They therefore jointly Crowned Prince Soliman and the Princess Zelinda, as the
next Heirs to the Crown, which had been forfeited to them by Amurat's
abandoning of it; and they took those usual Oaths which are tendered to all the
Emperor's at their Coronation; and the People acknowledged them to be their
Lawful King and Queen, and on that account swore to them the Oaths of
Obedience, Allegiance and Submission, which were usual on such occasion; all
which was confirmed by the Grand Council of the Empire, received in all parts,
and proclaimed throughout the whole Empire, except by a small Party of Halists,
which had been kept together in Arms in Leridan by Clorinet, after he had
turned out from amongst them all those that professed the Mohammedan Religion.

News by this time are come to Ispahan of the Persians Fleet safe arrival at
Leridan, where they had discharged their Men and Ammunition, and where Amurat
at his first Landing, had obtained a considerable Advantage over his Enemies,
and had great hopes to subdue that Kingdom, to transport those Forces
afterward into the Kingdom of Clonstade, where there was a great Party ready
to receive him; from whence, after that was recovered, he would march with his
Conquering Army into Albona, and so make himself once more Master of his
Empire. These Letters were shown to the Sultana, who not finding the same
Contents in Amurat's Letters to her, nor in Clorinet's Letters to his Wife, so
clearly set down, did fear giving too much Credit to them; but what with the
construing which was put on the Sultana's and Clorineta's Letters, the Sultana
was persuaded to believe all that was told her, as most authentic, which made
her resolve to breathe a little, and to give some release unto her continual
Sorrow, in appearing according to her Grandeur and Rank at the great Mask, with
all the Mirth and Jolity that her present Condition could afford her to yield.

Cha-abas was so strongly bent on this great Design, that one would have
thought he had no other business in hand; He laid aside all other Concerns, and
did resolve, happen what would, to give all the Scope and Liberty imaginable to
his Amors, which made such a noise, that some of the more Sober sort of his
Court did not think convenient to appear at that great Festival, at a time when
the Blessing of Heaven was to have been implored upon their Arms against so
many formidable Enemies that did encompass them round: Of truth there was not
less than 157000 Men armed against Persia: There was of the Myrgenians 7000, of
the Abravians 10000. of the Wasbians 5000 under the Conduct of the most Valiant
Bassa of Abravia. The Bassa of Reinola had the Command of 20000. Myrgenians and
Cranfonians, 10000. Xoniseans, 8000. Swibrunckians and Brugulneans, and 8000
Seheseans: The Bassa of Grubdenbran commanded of Grubdenbranians 26000. and of
Stennumians 6000: The Aga Kalkwad led 50000. Halldonians, and there was 7000.
Pesinians, besides the formidable Navies which threatened him by Sea. All these,
I say, could not abate any thing of his Ambition, especially now that it was
boy'd up, and carried on the Wings of Love. At last, his particular Mufti, unto
whom only he imparted the Secrets of his Heart, was pitched upon to represent
to him the unseasonableness of the thing, and the great inconveniences that
would attend it. But he severely rebuked him for his unasked for advice, and
desired him not to trouble him with his Counsels, till he sent for him.

The Mufti, whose Name was Chilase, was but newly returned home, not much
concerned how he had succeeded in his Admonition to Cha-abas, when Repset came
to give him a Visit. They were both of the wicked Order of the Mahometists:
They had held perpetual Correspondence by Letters with one another; all the
time that the Destruction of the Mohammedan Religion in Albiona had been
hatching, they were very familiar together, and no Secret was hid from one
another but in their Amors; there they were Two, as unanimous soever they were
in all other Businesses. Repset's Design in that Visit was to learn, whether
Cha-abas had said any thing to Chilase concerning the mistake which he had
lately made in the Garden: He had made his Peace well enough with Clorineta,
but he would gladly have known how the Emperor had resented it, and what his
thoughts might be on that account. Chilase told him, That he had not spoken but
once since to Cha-abas, who was so attentive to his great Entertainment, that
then he had rebuked him for offering to give him some Advice about it, which he
had been desired to do by some of the principal Lords of the Court: But let him
go on, continued he, we shall have the satisfaction of being partakers of it.
Yes, said Repset, though not in so high a measure as he designs for himself: Of
truth it must be confessed, continued he, the New Object of his Love, which
puts him on all this, has such powerful charms, that no Flesh and Blood were
able to resist. You speak so feelingly of the Effects of those charms, replied
Chilase, that I cannot but fancy you are more than ordinary interested in it.
No Brother, replied Repset, the great number of cares that I had continually
upon me, and the Nature of them, did keep me off of any such Designs, though
certainly she is the finest Person in the World, the most courteous and affable
to the meanest of her Subjects; and it is a thousand pities that she has an
Husband who is not capable, through his infirmities, to perform toward her
those Matrimonial Devoirs which she ought in reason to expect, and which 100000
Persons would think themselves most happy to supply her with. What pity then is
it, said Chilase, that she should now be courted by another Prince as
insufficient to perform to any purpose those amorous Offices, which in reason
she might expect, were she in the least flexible to his applications? But, in
my Opinion, she has not the Air, carries not that Gayety of Humor, that
Briskness, which usually speaks a Person amorous. No more do many other Women,
answered Repset, who nevertheless are all Love: I tell you, that any person
that would manage that business discreetly, might obtain from her more than you
think, if they did but observe to nick her reserved Humor, and to make no
noise of it; and were I in your place, I know what I would do. Repset's Design
in engaging Chilase in an Amor with the Sultana, was to divert him from
looking in, and having any thoughts toward Clorineta who had spoken, he
thought, too much to Chilase's advantage, and had expressed to him a great
desire to be more particularly acquainted with him; besides, he had once found
Chilase in a very close Discourse with Clorineta; all which did not please him
very well: wherefore he endeavored to create in him some Desires toward the
Sultana, that might make a Diversion; so that he might not hereafter thwart him
in his Amors to Clorineta. Chilase swallowed the Bate, and though he seemed
not to take much notice of what Repset spoke concerning the Sultana, he
resolved within himself, from that moment, to push his Fortune, and try what he
could do in gaining the Sultana's good Will by some signal Pieces of Services,
though to the prejudice of his Master Cha-abas Designs.

From these Particular Discourses they fell to Generals, concerning the Grand
Mask, where they could not forbear mentioning the great Opportunities it gave
to Courtship, addressed indifferently to any person, under those Disguises, and
by consent to particular Men and Women, who beforehand had agreed on ways of
knowing one another: That there the meanest Person in the World, for a little
Money and Cost, might be admitted to hazard his Fortune with the best in the
Land, if he had but Wit, Confidence and Address; For Example, said Chilase, If
you or I should have a fancy to try what those Masking Meetings termine to, how
easy would it be for us to so disguise our selves, as to enjoy all the
pleasure and satisfaction of the whole Entertainment, and not be discovered?
You say true, answered Repset; but I am so far from any such thought, that I
design that day to take the Air out of Town, and lie all night at a Friends
House, to whom I have long owed a Visit. And I, said Chilase, design to take
Phy sick that day; for of late I have sound my self indisposed, and that Day
and Night I shall not need to fear the trouble of impertinent Visits. With
these and such like Discourses they ended the Day: Repset took his leave, and
went to visit his Clorineta; and Chilase fell musing on those Fancies which
Repset had put in his Head: The more he thought on it, the more it raised his
thoughts, the more bold it made him, and the more desirous to attempt the
thing: He thought that this Masking Bout was such a fair opportunity to try his
Fortune in, that he was not to let it slip, lest he should never meet with such
another. The Sultana represented her self to his Imagination, all Charming; and
the very thoughts of enjoying so great a Princess, so lovely a Person, did
almost ravish him beyond his Senses. I will push on my Fortune, said he to
himself, and try what I may hope or fear for the future, by the success of my
first Attempt, in which my Disguise will secure me from all Dangers: And what
if there were never so many Dangers, who would regard them? Who would not pass
over the greatest Difficulties imaginable, to attain to so much Happiness?
Well, I am resolved, and I will early in the Morning begin to prepare for so
glorious an Enterprise. With this Resolution he went to his Bed, though not to
sleep.

Amongst those Persons which the Sultana admitted to her Privacy, of the
Persian Ladies, was Monitenna, who was most passionately in Love with Cha-abas,
and whose Jealous Humor had occasioned her to seek for a particular Friendship
with the Sultana and with Clorineta, that she might the better pry into their
Actions, and break all their measures with Cha-abas, who she knew had a Love
for them both: She disguised the Love which she had for Cha-abas, under the
Notion of her Duty in the Care she had taken, and still took of him in his
Distemper, and of a Principle of Gratitude toward him for so money Favors and
great Advantages which she had received: And she did endeavor by all manner of
means, so to oblige them both, that they were forced to receive her into their
particular Favor, even in Gratitude. That sight which she had had of the
Emperor with Clorineta, stuck by her; and she apprehended more danger that
way, than from the Sultana, whom she perceived had not yet any inclinations for
Cha-abas, while the other did nothing else all day long, but extol him to the
very Skies, and expressed the great desires she had of carrying on that first
Interview which she had had with him, into a perfect Amorous Intrigue. Mean
time, Monitenna played so well the part of an un^oncern'd person, still
extolling his Liberality and Gallantry, that Clorineta, who was of a very free
and open Disposition, made her her Confident in her amorous Designs. Repset
still followed close his Game with Clorineta, and being desirous to partake of
the Mask and Ball, he proposed it to her, and they both agreed in what
Disguises they should be, not to be known but by them Two only; at least,
Repset was not to be known; but as to Clorineta, she was to be known by the
Sultana, who was to know her also, designing also to make her self known to the
Emperor by some private Mark. The Cause of her easy yielding to Repset's
Desires, was because she knew him to be violent; and that if she should offer
to oppose him in that which she believed was put on by some Jealousy which he
had entertained of Cha-abas ever since he had found them together, though she
had endeavored by all means imaginable to let him know there was nothing less
than Love in the Case, and that it was a mere accidental Rencounter, and that
all the Discourse they had was on the Sultana's Beauty, with which Cha-abas
seemed to be exceedingly captivated: She feared that it might carry him to do
some extravagant thing, which might redound to her prejudice; but withal, she
resolved to put the Change upon him, and to dress one of her Women in those
Disguises which she had designed for her self, and put on others, which should
not be known but by the Sultana and Monitenna.

Chilase in the mean time had by the Virtue of Gold (a thing with which the
Persians use to work Miracles), got the knowledge of the Sultana's Disguise; so
that he was in all Points ready for the Mask. Monitenna, who had from Cha-abas
himself, how he was to appear, and who had informed him in what Dress the
Sultana was to be, as also of the first Dress which Clorineta had pitched upon,
had no more to do, but to fit her self with all the means imaginable to do all
the Mischief she could possible, and to create a Confusion amongst these Lovers.

At last the Day came in whose following Night the Ball was to begin: There
never was a more splendid appearance; There was nothing to be seen but Tissu's,
Clothes of Gold and Silver, Embroideries with Pearls and precious Stones, and
whole Rocks of Diamonds, which, with the light of a Thousand White Wax Tapers,
placed in Silver and Crystal Candlesticks and Sconces, did produce a light
more piercing than that of the Sun in its full Meridian, contracted within the
limits of a most spacious Hall.

The Maskers being all entered, and after some Dances having taken their Seats
at the upper end of the Hall, there were heard in the Air most admirable
Consorts of Music, of Voices, of Flutes, and of other Instruments, answering
one another, and sometimes all together, singing all in the praise of Love.
During these Harmonies, which charmed not less the Ears than the Maskers did
the Eyes. There appeared toward the middle of the Hall, like a Flock of flying
Hearts, of all sorts and Sizes, fluttering in the Air, to which presently came
flying a little Cupid with his Bow and Arrows, shooting at the whole Flock
still as he flew, with little Silver Shafts. At last he shot the biggest of all
the Hearts that were in the whole Flock, which tumbling down on the Floor,
transpierced with the Shaft, and bleeding, the little Cupid made after it with
all the Wing he had, and lighting on the Ground, seized on the Heart, with
which he began to play Childish Tricks. At last he looks round on all the
Ladies, as if designing to bestow it on one of them; He walks round, and not
knowing to whom to deliver it, he falls a crying, lays himself down by the
Heart, pushes it from him, kicks it, still lying; and plays a Thousand little
Apish Tricks with it, pouting, and seeming very sullen. As he was toying thus,
comes, as from out of the Hangings, which represented whole Figures to the
Life, a Venus and the Three Graces. They come up to Cupid, who perceiving them,
takes the Heart, and huggs it in his Arms, as afraid they should take it from
him: Venus begs it of him, he kicks at her; she offers to take it, he defends
it; the Graces assist Venus in the getting of it from him; he scrambles with
them, kicks one, pinches another, scratches a Third, spits at the Fourth; and
finding that they were too many for him, he on the sudden having secured the
Heart betwixt his Thighs, catches up his Bow, and pulls out an Arrow to shoot;
at which they all run away and left him; he laughed at them, laid himself down
again, and began to fool as before; presently after comes out as from another
part of the Hanging, Old Time with his Wings and his Scythe, leading in one
Hand Fortune with a Vail over her Eyes, a Sail in her Hand, a Wheel on her
Head, and in the Name of it a Golden Ball, and in the other Hand Fame, with her
Two Trumpets, her Gown all over bestrew'd with Ears and Eyes. They come up to
Cupid, he seems pleased with them, but still secures the Heart; He plays with
the Feathers of Times Wings, gives Fortune a blow, then hides himself behind
Time and Fame; while she gropes after him, he gets one of Fame's Trumpets, and
blows in it: They let him play so with them, till he gets into a good Humor,
which Time perceiving, he leads him by the Hand toward the Ladies: Cupid seems
bashful at first; at last takes a round, and after diverse offers to several
Ladies, he lays it in the Sultana's lap, and presently flies away, Time,
Fortune and Fame being gone before.

This Heart was no sooner laid in the Sultana's lap, but that she was surpised
to see it open, fall in pieces, and discover it self to be within side a whole
Cluster of Diamonds and Pearls, in the midst of which was a Paper neatly
folded, which she had a great mind to open, and to see what it contained; but
she was unwilling to gratify her Desires at that time, because that all the
rest of the Maskers had their Eyes fixed upon her: However, her Curiosity was
so great, that she could not forbear turning up one Corner of it, in which
having read the Word Love, she secretly conveyed it into her Pocket, together
with the Heart, and took no further notice. By this time a large Table filled
with all manner of Delicacies, sprung up as out of the Floor, with Seats round
it; and out of the Hangings round, came out diverse Servants with Bottles of all
sorts of Liquors, and Glasses, which were supplied by others, which appeared
but half in and half out of the said Hangings, still shifting of Glasses after
they had once been used. The Maskers did all rise, went and seated themselves
round the Table, and took of what they liked best, with which some stored their
Pockets, others their Handkerchiefs, which they carried after on the Stools on
which they were seated before; after which the Table and Chairs disappeared
again. The Consorts ceased, and the Four and Twenty Violins struck up some
Tunes, to invite the Maskers to dance; after they had danced so long as it was
thought convenient, there appeared other Maskers, no body knowing how they came
in, who danced diverse Sarabrands, and other Antic Dances, very pleasant and
diverting. Which ended, and the Dancers retired, then did all the Maskers
promiscuously mix together, and every one applied himself as his Fancy led him.

It was then that Cha-abas took the opportunity of addressing himself to the
Sultana; and under his Disguises did take a greater liberty than he durst have
done at another time, of mentioning his Love to her; each moment seeming very
tedious unto Chilase, who was watching at a distance for the time that Cha-abas
would give the Sultana some respite, that he might tell her what he had to say.
Clorineta was not less impatient on the other hand, and thought it long before
the Sultana dismissed the Emperor, as she had promised her to do, that she
might have the opportunity of entertaining him in her turn. Mean time Repset
was plying his time tooth and nail in his Courtship to Clorineta's Woman,
thinking her to be the Mistress, with no other Design than to hinder a Commerce
betwixt Cha-abas and Clorineta. While all the Maskers were thus busy in
entertaining one another, and sometimes shifting from one another, either for
the sake of mere change, or to meet with some particular Person that they had a
mind to entertain, to find out some other that answered more home to their
Propositions, or to take breath when they had spoken all they had to say. The
jealous Monitenna was observing all the passages betwixt those Persons with
which she was concerned, she saw how that so soon as the Sultana had shifted
from Cha-abas, Clorineta had supplied her room, in passing opportunely by just
in the nick, which had made the Emperor to detain her, and try her Wit. It
troubled her not a little to see that her long detaining of Cha-abas, had made
him once or twice offer at a Change, which in Civility is always left to the
Woman's choice, and how still she had engaged him anew, and held him fast by
the hand, that he might not go from her, till she had emptied her mind; she
perceived how that the Mufti Chilase had done the same with the Sultana, and
how hot he was upon his Design. At last she had the satisfaction to see
Clorineta let go Cha-abas hand; but that satisfaction was dashed again, by a
private Whisper which she saw Cha-abas give her, and how that he then took the
opportunity of kissing her neck. Those were so many points of Daggers in poor
Monitenna's Heart, which hastened her the more to put in execution that Revenge
which she had designed.

Cha-abas being thus disengaged of Monitenna's long Conversation, sought after
none but the Sultana, to whom he thought he had given sufficient time to
recollect, and fit her self for a second Charge; but perceiving a Person very
earnest with her, he was so discreet, as to entertain himself with the next
Lady he met near her, till he should find the place empty, which our amorous
Mufti Chilase did still possess. Monitenna being ready to play her Game, stepped
aside to Repset, and whispered him in the Ear, that he was mistaken, and that
Cha-abas had been entertaining Clorineta all that while, who he had but just
now quitted, and that if he would follow her, she would bring him to her.
Repset, who had two or three times been surprised at the Discourses of the
Woman which he entertained, and at her unwillingness to speak, but when obliged
to give an Answer, though she would sometimes speak pretty pertinently, as
knowing her Lady's Intrigues with Repset, did believe the Intelligence which
had been given him to be real, and so followed Monitenna, who brought him to
Clorineta. Where he fell a fuming and fretting against her, for having put the
Change upon him, which she excused as well as she could, telling him moreover,
that that was not a time to clear doubts in, and that she would give him full
satisfaction after the Ball; mean time she was in a peck of troubles to get to
the Assignation which Cha-abas had given her presently after the Ball, she
thought that he would not let his Eye go off of her, and that if she should
offer to speak to Cha-abas to put off the Assignation to another time, for some
important Reasons, that would but exasperate Repset the more, so that she did
not know what to do, but was wishing for some sudden disorder, or accident
which might give her the opportunity of stealing away; when that Monitenna
having delivered a Note to the Emperor, which intimated, that his two late
Mistresses were both entertained at that very moment by two Mufti's, whose
Names she concealed, and at the same time having given the two Mufti's Notes,
which gave them notice, that they were discovered, and that a Friend of theirs
had provided them a Coach, to make their escape, to which they should be
guided. Both the Mufties still unknown to one another, broke off abruptly their
Courtship, and with all the haste they could possibly, made toward the door of
the Hall, they were met there with two Persons whom Monitenna had posted on
purpose, who told them, taking them aside into a little Room, that they had
Orders to let no body go by without they first deposited their Disguise, that
there being some Jewels lost in the Company, it was suspected that some Rogues
or other had taken this opportunity of pilfering something in so great an
Assembly. The two Mufties, half dead at these News, offered to be searched, and
would have given all the money they had about them, so they would but let them
go in their Disguises, protesting of their innocence; to which the two men
answered according to their Qew, that they believed them far from the Theft by
their free offering to be searched, but because that it was the Emperor's
particular Order, and that it would be as much as their lives were worth to
transgress it, they plainly told them, that they could not answer their
desires: Thus were the two Mufties forced to uncase, fearing a worse disaster,
should they stay any longer. But how great was their surprise, when they knew
one another, how they star'd, how their Countenances changed, and with what
confusion they were seized, there was no time to lose, they desired to be
conducted to the Coach, which was accordingly done. They both got into the
Hackney Coach in the dark, the Coachman asked where they would go; they made
Answer, toward their Lodgings, and told him where they were, they being not
far from one another. When they were got out of the crowd and confusion of
Coaches and Lights that were waiting about that part of the Court; The one said
to the other, Is this your Physic that you would take? And is this your
Country-journey? replied the other. Well, said Repset, I have some Reasons for
what I have done. And I also, replied Chilase; wherefore it will be best for us
to wave any further Discourse for the present; we are near our Lodgings,
continued he, let us go to rest, and to morrow, if you please, about twelve, we
will confer Notes, in my Chamber, and endeavor to find out how we have been
betrayed, and what Cha-abas thoughts are of us. With that they took leave of
one another, and retired each to their Appartment. Where we will leave them, to
return to our Maskers.

Cha-abas, upon the Information, going to give Orders for the private securing
of the two Mufties without noise, passed by Clorineta, who taking him by the
Hand, being overjoyed that Repset was gone, said, that the hour of the
Assignation drew near; I will but step to give some Orders, said he, and I am
yours. With that he went from her, she was presently supplied with some other,
as well as was the Sultana, who not knowing of the Discovery which had been
made, was wondering at her Gallant's sudden departure, after so many
protestations of Love, which he had made her, though he would never let her know
who he was, notwithstanding that she had pressed him much to it; she had made
him very fair returns to all his protestations, and had given him an
Assignation the next Evening in a certain Walk of the Garden, where he had
assured her he would not fail to be, though she designed to put the Change upon
him, in sending Clorineta in her room, and she did long till the hour came,
that she might learn the success of the Cheat. Cha-abas being returned, and the
Company growing weary, the Ball broke up, the sooner too, that he might meet
his Mistress at the Rendezvous. Clorineta presently slipped out of the way, for
fear the Sultana should take her home with her, and so disappoint the Emperor;
the earnest haste which Clorineta made, and the apprehensions which she
discovered at her going off, for fear the Sultana should see her, gave farther
suspicions to Monitenna, that it was an Assignation betwixt the Emperor and
Clorineta. She therefore followed her close, and bid one of those Persons,
which she had employed before about the Mufties, to dodge that Person, and to
bring her word in the Sultana's Coach where she was gone; she presently
returned to the Sultana, who knew her, that asked her what was become of
Cloreneta, she told her that she knew not. It Is no matter, now I have you to
keep me company home, replied the Sultana, it may be she will be at home before
us. How shall we get home unknown? I wish we had a Hackney Coach, continued the
Sultana. Your own will do as well, Madam, replied Monitenna; for no body will
imagine that you would make use of it your self. With the like Discourses, they
got to the Sultana's Coach, which they caused to drive a little out of the
Crowd; by this time the Person that Monitenna had sent, was returned, who
having told her that Clorineta was in such a certain place walking all alone,
the Sultana proposed going there to take her up, wondering what she should do in
such a retired place by her self. They had much to do to disingage themselves
from the confusion and concourse of people; they were so long about it, that
when they were come to the place of Clorineta's Rendez-vous with Cha-abas, they
found them both together. This was according to Monitenna's Heart's desire: She
made no question, but that that Object would create strange Jealousies in the
Sultana's Mind, if she had but one grain of Love; and of truth she could not
forbear giving some touches of her resentments both to Cha-abas, and to
Clorineta. She told him, that he had not deceived her in her expectations; That
she had set no greater value on his Protestations than she now did see them to
amount unto, and that she looked on all that he had said as Words spoken in the
Air.

She spoke to Cha-abas all the while, as if they knew not one another, and
served Clorineta in the same manner. But after all, she left Cha-abas and
Clorineta together, and retired with Monitenna to her Coach, which was in the
Street, not permitting either of them to stir one step after her, which was no
small Affliction to Monitenna, who by that saw her self frustrate of the Design
which she had of disappointing them. They staid not long after; They reflected
a little on the Discovery, and how they had been surpised: They framed some
specious pretenses, as that it was to desire Clorineta to solicit the Sultana
in Cha-abas behalf, and to inform him, how his Declaration of Love had been
received and resented; all which he had not had time to do, by reason of the
sudden breaking up of the Ball. Of truth it had lasted longer, but that the
Company perceiving the Emperor, who was very well known, to go out so hastily,
they thought that it was in order to retire, which gave the occasion of
breaking up some time sooner than otherwise might have been expected. After
this they parted, that by Clorineta's sudden return home after the Sultana, it
might take off all occasion of suspicion; and Cha-abas retired, to give a full
swing unto his Amorous Thoughts.

Monitenna was very well pleased at Clorineta's coming Home so soon after them,
and gathered from it, that no Action had past between the Emperor and her
Rival; and when that Clorineta assured the Sultana, whom she rallied on the
Assignation, that there was no other Design in it, but for Cha^abas to gain her
to be his Solicitor in his Amors toward the Sultana, and to be informed by
her how his Declaration of Love had been received by her, she found her self
quite at ease on that side. The Sultana said to Clorineta, That she had
perceived a Paper which was concealed in that Heart which had been given her by
the little Cupid, but that she had not had the Curiosity yet to see what it
contained; with that, taking out of her Pocket both the Heart and the folded
Paper, after they had admired the Richness and neat Contrivance of the Heart,
the Sultana gave the Paper to Clorineta to read. That Freeness did abundantly
speak the great Considence which the Sultana reposed in Clorineta, and in
Monitenna also; for in such Cases but few Women will admit of Communication;
but such was the Sultana's Love to Clorineta, and indifferency for all men but
Amurat, that she set no Value upon any thing else. This is what was writ in
that Paper:

IF my Abilities did answer but in some measure the Ambition of my Will and
Desires, Divine Princess, I should e're now have laid the whole World at your
Feet; Not that I could be so vain as to imagine it worth your consideration;
for many Worlds would not suffice to make a Present proportionable to your
Grandeur; but as that which could approach next to my Heart, the nearest to
your Merits, though still at a vast distance. Yet diverse Worlds are wrapped up in
the aspiring Desires of that Heart which I humbly present you, with all that it
has already performed, and what it shall be capable of atchieving hereafter, to
render it, most charming Princess, the more acceptable. Let this Emblem of it
represent its firmness and constancy in the Resolution of being eternally
yours, as well as its Riches and Purity in Love. Yes, Madam, it is so full of
that Divine Flame, which your charms have kindled, that being not of so
yielding a Nature as to melt, it has burst in sunder, permit that Balm which
perpetually flows from your lips, to prevent the same effect in the Original,
and give leave to that breath with which you perfume the Arabian Spices, and
give Life to all things, to refresh its Ardors, yield a favorable Reception,
adorable Sultana, to an Heart replenished with the most passionate Desires
imaginable of serving you, and entertain as yours, that which is all Love for
you, and that can never find rest nor satisfaction till it has even outrun
your very desires in its performance, which no Mortal can do with such a
zealous Love as your Slave,

Cha-abas.


So soon as Clorineta had read this, the Sultana said, This is so like the
Humor of him that writ it, that any person might easily have guessed at the
Author, tho his Name had not been to it; and really all that he has said to me,
was very much of the same Nature: How he has had information to find me out
from amongst so great a crowd I know not, tho I would gladly be satisfied in
it: It was ill done, and so much against my intentions, that I am troubled for
having confided in persons that have betrayed me. Monitenna made great
protestations of her Innocence, and Clorineta made answer, Who should betray
you but your self, Madam? Who, I betray my self, replied the Sultana? after I
had taken such cautions measures, after I had had other Apparels made in
private that very Day, when you your self knew nothing of my Designs but some
few hours before. You are making out what I was saying, Madam, That nothing but
your self could discover you to the Emperor: For how is it possible to conceal
that Greatness, that Majestic Air, and that agreeableness with which you adorn
all your Actions, and attract the Eyes as well as the Hearts of all companies.
It can no more be hid than the Sun's Beams in its full luster. You need to have
been seen but once to be known again, and distinguished from all the rest of
the World, Madam, tho you had shrouded you self under all the Disguises that
Art could produce. Away with those gross Flatteries, answered the Sultana, you
know I hate them; Monitenna, I dare say, is not of your Opinion, and does
rather believe that some of my Servants, or some of the Dressers has been won
by Gold to betray me. Madam, replied Monitenna, though I cannot deny but that
which Clorineta has said is true, to which I could add a great deal more, and
sufficient to have made a Discovery of your Person against your Will and
Intentions, yet I verily believe that you have been betrayed, and that I could
detect the Person through which the Discovery has been made. Pray oblige me so
much, replied the Sultana, that I may punish them accordingly; for I will never
endure such near my Person. To take all suspicions from off my self, Madam, I
am the more earnest to tell you, that Yesterday Morning I perceived one of
those Gentlemen which Cha-abas uses to employ in secret Messages and Intrigues,
very earnest in Discourse with one of the Tailor 's Servants, in the passage
that leads to the place appointed for their Workroom, where I did see him give
the Fellow Money for something which he had conveyed into his hand. The
Gentleman had certainly known me, but that the Passage being something dark,
and I turning my Face toward the Wall as I passed by, I took from him the
opportunity of so doing. If this be examined into, Madam, continued she, you
will find that, or something worse at the bottom; for those Persons are never
employed by Cha-abas but on some Amorous Intrigue, and every day in change of
Habits. I am satisfied, replied the Sultana, and believe it to be so; and since
it is none of my own Servants that has been prevailed with, I Will trouble my
self no further about it; all my Care shall be wholly to avoid all
opportunities of giving Cha-abas any convenience of disturbing the quiet of my
Mind, either in his own Person, or by the Mediation of any of his Mercuries;
For the I cannot be so rude as not to receive with a great deal of Respect, his
Addresses, yet I shall not afford them such Returns as he may expect; for
besides, that I never had any inclinations toward the carrying on of Amorous
Intrigues; the present condition of our Affairs will not permit me to yield all
the complaisance that I might otherwise have afforded in mere Diversion; and
since I find that Cha-abas looks two ways at once, and that at the same time he
makes his Addresses to you, Clorineta, I assure you, that you shall find me the
most obliging Rival that ever was, and that I will forward your good Fortune as
much as I can possible; only I will take the opportunity of his Addre^^^ (...)
both, to make some Dive^^ (...) and to create some little Mirth ^^ongst our
selves. By this time the Sultana being quite undressed, she went to her Bed,
and presently after Clorineta and Monitenna did the like.

Clorineta was no sooner retired, but that she gave a full Scope to all her
Thoughts; She reflected on all that Cha-abas had told her, on the Assignation
he had given her, and on that which he had made her promise to give him; all
which clearly showed, that he perfectly knew her, and on that great
Condescension which the Sultana had promised to her Amors; from all which she
promised to her self a World of Satisfaction and Content, which made her wish a
Thousand times, that she had not been entered so far into a Commerce of
Gallantry with the Mufti Repset, as there was already (...) bout it, and to
sift the business to the bottom, and find out the Mystery through Clorineta's
Maids assistance. As for his clearing himself toward his Companion Chilase,
having found him as deep in as he was himself, he troubled not much himself
about that, and he did rather tend to disclose his Amors and Intrigues to
Chilase, than to make a Secret of them, if he found him in a Communicative
humor.

Chilase was much more concerned, his thoughts were at once agitated with
diverse things, amongst which, Cha-abas knowledge of his having been at the
Masking, did not the least trouble him, especially if he had also been informed
of his Addresses to the Sultana, he wished a thousand times he had but some
knowledge of the Person that had discovered him, that he might take his
measures accordingly; as to the rest, he was so pleased with the courteous
Answers which he had received from the Sultana to all his Courtship, that he
was impatient to proceed, and to give her that further account of his Person,
which he had promised her to do, according to her own desires. As to Repset's
knowledge of his having been at the Mask, he was much of the same opinion with
his Fellow Mufti, with a resolution of informing himself better the next day,
and of clearing all doubts and suspicions, he endeavored to sleep; but his
Fancy was too much elevated with the thoughts of his success in his Addresses
to the Sultana, to let him take any rest.

While we leave all our Lovers contriving which way is best to bring about
their Designs, and of compassing of their ends, it will not be amiss to give
the Reader a further account of the proceedings of Affairs in the Ottoman
Empire. Amurat had had the good Fortune to miss the Ottoman Fleet, which lay
wait for him, and to land that Ammunition and Men he had both of Persians and
Ottomans, which had gone into Persia, and offered their Service to him, amongst
which but very few, or none at all of the Mohammedan Religion. Amurat found soon
after his Landing, that he was no longer Emperor over Leridan, for presently
the Persian Council began to give him Directions in whatsoever he was to do,
insomuch that he found he had not so much Power left him, as the meanest
Officer in the Army, though nothing was yet acted but under his Name and by his
supposed Orders. The first thing, was to turn out of the Council all those of
the Mohammedan Religion, which had till then sat in that Council, and had stuck
steadfast unto Amurat's Interest; the Persians declaring, That they could not
join in Council with any but the Halists. This was followed presently with
turning out of their Governments and Places of Trust all the Albanians and
Leridonians, of what persuasion soever, and to fill up their places with such
Persian Officers, as Cha-abas had sent over to that purpose; and though Amurat
did intercede in the behalf of some, who had rendered signal ^pieces of Service,
as their Fathers had done before, both to his Father, Brother, and to Himself,
all was overruled by Cha-abas absolute Command, and the necessity of Affairs
requiring it to be so: All this one would have thought had been sufficient to
have opened Amurat's Eyes; but he suffered befides all that a world of
indignities, and was so infatuated with the Persians flattering Tongues, that
he was not backward (as he had Orders to do) to represent on all occasions in
public the great Love and Care that Cha-abas had for him, and what he had
done, and what he would daily do to restore him to his Throne, and to establish
the Halist's Religion throughout all his Dominions; at which, while the
Persians laughed in their sleeves, Amurat's poor dejected Subjects could not but
wonder, and with their sighs, tears, and groans, pity their Emperor's
blindness, and bemoan their own miserable and desperate condition, I mean
amongst them that had not hearts or opportunities to take up Arms, in their own
defense, against so visible an Usurpation of the Persian Prince, who was
bringing them into the same slavery, as his own Subjects were. But others that
had Courage enough to expect a good success from their Arms, and the Justice of
their Cause, being clearly convinced, that the War they were going to make
through their opposition of the Persians, was directly against the designs of
Cha-abas, in which their late Emperor had no Concern at all. They took up
Arms, gathered together, made themselves Masters of some strong Holds, which
they fortified, got in Provisions against a Siege, and declared one and all,
that they would stand by one another, to the last drop of their blood.

The little or no resistance which Amurat had found at his Landing, and some
time after, did so raise the Hearts of all the Halists in all his Dominions,
that the Fortress of Blunid in the Kingdom of Clonstade, whose Governor had
required time to deliver it up, did utterly refuse to perform his promise; on
the contrary, being in hopes of some Relief, he fortified himself in it, and
bid defiance unto the Senate of that Kingdom, declaring, That he would never
part with it, but to Amurat, who had placed him in there, and for whom he would
preserve it to the last extremity; and diverse Halists did arm themselves
secretly, and did associate together in small Troops, in hopes of being
reinforced by Amurat from Leridan, so soon as he should have reduced that
Kingdom, which they expected he would do in a very short time. News were also
sent over into Albania, that Amurat, with some of his Friends Halist, and a
numerous Army of Persians was landed in Leridan, had subdued his Enemies,
recovered that Kingdom, banished from thence all Mahometans, and was going with
all expedition to do the like in the Kingdom of Clonstad, from whence he would
march to them with a Triumphant Army, and restore all his Friends the Halists
to their Estates and Employs, destroy wholly the Mohammedan Religion, banish all
its Abettors, and establish there the Religion of Hali: they went so far as to
prefix a time for Amurat's Return, and in all their Discourses, their Actions,
and in their very Looks, they expressed as much confidence and assurance as
could be imagined, that all this would infallibly come to pass.

Mean time the Grand Senate of the Empire was continually in Consultation how
to secure the Mohammedan Religion, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty of the
Subject, and the whole Empire from the Persians Usurpation, and all the
Conspiracies of the Halists; they ordered, amongst other things, that all
Halists should depart at ten miles distance from the Metropolis of the Empire,
but they were so puffed up with the expectations of their sudden deliverance,
that they minded it not, and but very few, and them of the most timid amongst
them, did observe those Orders. On the other hand, the Confederate Princes,
against Cha-abas unsufferable Pride and Ambition, did daily gain Victories
against his Forces, who were forced to retreat, and abandon all that they had
taken against their former Treaties and Engagements, but it was not without
using all the Violences and Cruelties imaginable, there was nothing to be seen
but Fires, Ruins, Desolations, Rapes, Thefts, and Murders in all places that
they quitted, not so much as sparing of Mosquees, nor the Palaces of Princes,
and other public Buildings, which amongst all Nations were ever preserved
between the most implacable and inveterate Enemies.

Moreover, Cha-abas called the Heathens to come and make diversions with their
Arms in the Territories of the Confederate Princes, assuring them, that they
might do what they pleased against them, whilst he would buy off their other
Enemies, and with his whole Power keep them in play toward his Frontiers. Thus
did that great Pretender of the Extirpation of Heresies, and of the setting up
of Hali's Religion, cause the sworn Enemies of the true Mohammedan Religion, to
destroy with Fire and Sword those who professed his own Religion, which plainly
showed, that Religion was only a Pretense he made use of, to usurp the Rights
of others, and to render himself absolute Monarch over all that part of the
World; a thing which he had long since designed, and diverse times attempted,
and for which now all those Confederate Princes of his own Religion, and others
of the Mohammedan Religion had unanimously agreed to call him to an account, not
doubting but that the Great Ala, who knew all his Treacheries, and perfidious
Dealings, and Usurpations would bless their Arms and Undertakings, in so just a
Cause, against that common Enemy.

Things were in this posture, when that Cha-abas having permitted Love for a
time to triumph over his insatiated Ambition, was laying close Siege unto the
Sultana's Chastity. He dressed himself with all the advantages that he could
possible, to please her Eye; he framed the most pathetick Speeches that he
could invent, to charm her Ears; he made her the richest Presents that he could
possible do, to please her Pride and Ambition, and he expressed as great
Passions and transports of Love, to gain some returns of the same Nature from
her. He sent one of those Mercuries, which I have mentioned, to know of the
Sultana, when he should have the Honor to wait on her, and receive her
Commands, and at the same time privately to convey into Clorineta's Hands a
little Note, in which he expressed the continuation, or rather increase of his
Passion, and put her in mind of the Assignation which she had promised to make
him. This Messenger was received by the Sultana with that courteous and affable
disposition with which she charmed all Persons that approached her Presence,
and bid him tell the Emperor, that no Laws were to be prescribed him in his
own Empire, where it was but too much honor for every one to obey especially,
by a poor dejected Princess, who had refug'd her self under the Wings of his
generous Protection, but that she should be better disposed and more fitted to
receive so great an honor, with that respect which she ought to show to so
great and glorious a Monarch, about the Evening, if he pleased to do her so
great an honor, and so dismissed the Messenger with Civility; who having
finished his business in public with the Sultana, made a Complement to
Clorineta, who had been present at the delivery of his Message to the Sultana,
and who had remained behind, when the Sultana had retired, to know whether
Cha-abas had retained any thoughts of her. The Mercury soon found an
opportunity of secretly conveying the amorous Note into Clorineta's hand, who
greedily receiving it, told him, that she would take the first opportunity that
she could possible to read privately the Contents, and that according as it
required, she would send an Answer by an express Messenger. With that the
Messenger went his ways, as having finished the business he was came about, and
returned to give Cha-abas an account of his Embassy.

Monitenna with a Rival's look, than whose Eyes none are more piercing, had
observed the delivery of the Note, the earnestness with which Clorineta had
seized it, and the care with which she had conveyed it into her Bosom, all this
increased her rage and whetted her revenge; she did not abandon her Rival one
moment all that Day, endeared her self as much as she could possible to her,
and seeing her in a pensive humor, asked her what she ailed, and whether she
could assist her in any thing, and do her service? Yes, answered Clorineta, and
my dear Monitenna, you may save my Life, or let me loose it, I am in such a
condition that I want the assistance of such a friend as you are to help me out
of it by your good Counsels and Directions. Let us get in some private place,
my Dear, added she, while the Sultana is retired, according to her daily custom
obout this time, and there I Will lay open my Heart to thee, in hopes that thou will be my faithful Friend and Counselor; with that taking Monitenna by the
hand, she led her into her own Appartment.

When they were got privately together, here said Clorineta, giving the Note to
Monitenna, read what the Emperor has writ to me, with that Monitenna opening
the Paper, read in it as follows,

I Hope that envious Demon of my happiness, which guided the Sultana to disturb
our Assignation, will not be so malicious as to give us new cause of Complaint.
I shall pay the Sultana a visit this Evening, if you can prefix a time for that
happy moment, and convey to me your designs in Writing, I shall be as obedient
und diligent in the performance of your Commands, as I am impatient of all
delays, defer no longer, giving me some new Assurances of your condescension
unto the most passionate desires of him who dies for love of you.


What do you think of this? said Clorineta, so soon as Monitenna had made an
end of reading, I think, Madam, that there are no Instructions to be given you
upon this, he has spoken so plain. It Is true, replied Clorineta, but yet there
is something that infinitely disturbs my mind. What can disturb the mind of a
Person who sees her self beloved passionately, beloved by the greatest Monarch
in the World, replied Monitena; those who he abandons, who he Sacrifices to
you, may have cause to complain, but for you, upon whom his love flows beyond
bounds or measures -- Then Clorineta interrupted her saying; From thence flows
my misery also, for on the one hand, I must wrong the best Princess in the
World, to whom he also makes his Court at the same time; if I keep the
knowledge of it from her, and if I let her know it, I shall incurr her hatred,
and his displeasure in betraying him to her But besides all this, I must
confess to you that I have gone so far in a commerce of Gallantry with the
Mufti Repset, that knowing how apthe is to be transported with Passion, should
he come to the knowledge of my entertaining of any new love, though that of a
Prince, he would be apt to break forth into some extravagancy or other, though
he should involve himself in my ruin. This is my case dear Monitenna,
continued she, and you see how much I stand in need of your Advice in such an
intricate business. I am not capable of giving you Counsel in this, I can
assure, replied Monitenna, and where I in your case my self, I should stand as
much in need of Advice as you do at present, which if I could not get, I would
then follow my own Inclinations, and obey my own desires. The love of an
Emperor is a great inducement to what I say. You speak very true, replied
Clorineta, and I do verily believe, that should I discover Cha-abas's love to
the Sultana, she would not be so much concerned at it, considering how little
she regards his to her self, farther than allowing him that respect due to
Crownned Heads. Well, my Will is good, I could venture on in giving the
Emperor an Assignation, if I could tell where conveniently, and that I could
conceal it from the Mufti's knowledge; Where do you think would be the most
convenient place, continued she? None like one of the Pavillions in the Garden,
answered Monitenna, after every body is retired; there you may have all the
freedom imaginable of entertaining one another. You say right, replied
Clarineta; but should Repset at that time come to my Chamber, all hours being
alike to him, and he not find me there, nor at the Sultana 's, what noise and
disturbance would he not make in his Jealousy? I know not, answered Monitenna,
except you should pretend you were gone ill to Bed, and had given out, that you
would not be disturbed by any Person whatsoever. I believe that might do,
replied Clorineta, if you would be so kind as to give him his Answer, I should
do a great deal more for you, replied Monitenna, than that comes to; Then will
I go write the Assignation for this Night, said Clorineta, and give it to
Cha-abas when he comes by and by to visit the Sultana, and then I will dispose
my self to go meet him at the place and time appointed, which, I believe, will
be most proper betwixt eleven and twelve, for the Sultana retires not till
eleven, besides the Mufti seldom comes to me after eleven: I shall rely upon
you, continued she, to manage the Mufti, in case he should drop in at such an
unseasonable time. Fear me not, replied Monitenna, as to my part with the
Mufti. With that Clorineta settled her self to writing the Note, and Monitenna
went out, leaving her very busy about it.

I Make no question but it will be thought ill of Monitenna 's playing double
with Clorineta, but those Censurers little know what liberty is taken of that
Nature, amongst Rivals in Love, if that we daily see, that in Ambition, which
is a passion less blind than that of Love, notwithstanding how Friends,
Relations, Brothers and Sisters, Fathers and Children, nay even Wives and
Mistresses, are sacrificed to the greediness of that devouring Passion; How
much more cruelty may be expected from a Rival in Love? Yet in all that
Monitenna acts, there is no mixture of cruelty, there is barely the
satisfaction of Revenge on an imperious Rival, who is so imprudent as to lay
her self open to a Person, of whom common Fame spoke some Intelligence with the
Emperor, which could not have escaped Clorineta 's Ears; besides, she did but
break her measures, as to the enjoying part, and made her self sport with
raising of Jealousy in the Mufti Repset 's bosom toward her Rival, of truth
it was too much Vanity in Clorineta to think her Beauty capable to exclude all
other Pretenders from their share in Cha-abas Affections. She might have
considered, that Monitenna 's assiduous Services and Cares to Cha-abas, during
his late Distemper, might claim as great a share in his Affections, as her own
Beauty could do; and she ought not to have believed all that a Rival may say
against her self in such a case, but rather have distrusted that there lay some
Train hid under that design to blow her up with, when opportunity should serve;
wherefore she was but justly punished for her imprudence, and want of
circumspection.

Now I come to the two Mufties, Repset had been at Chilase's Apartment, where
after diverse Discourses, they were so well agreed together, that they had made
a resolution to go hand in hand with their Amors, with assurances of assisting
one another; as to Repset, his Court was already made, he wanted but a Promise
from his Rival not to entrench upon his Prerogative at any time, now, or
hereafter, in case he should come short of his Designs with the Sultana, which
had been solemnly sworn to him, but with what resolution to be kept by him, I
know not; for it is a Maxim, That all Rivals are to be adjudg'd Heretics in
Love, and no body is bound to keep their Faith to Heretics, according to the
blessed Doctrine of the Order of the Mahometists. Repset was satisfied with his
Clorineta, and Chilase had writ a Letter to the Sultana, to entreat of her the
favor which she had promiss'd at the making of an Assignation, which Letter
Repset had engaged Clorineta should deliver to the Sultana, without knowing
from whence it came. Upon these assurances of Friendship one to another, they
had parted, but could never find out, nor so much as come near suspecting of
the true Person that had given them notice of their being discovered, and
hearing no more of it, they rested very well contented, not questioning but
that they should have heard more of it e're then, if there had been any further
design in it, than giving them a false Alarm. The Emperor, it is true, had made
some reflections on the Confidence of the two Mufties his Rivals, which at first
had put him upon a further search into the business, to have known their Names;
but not knowing to whom to address himself for further intelligence, and on the
other hand, being restless in his new Amors, this last had put out of his mind
all thoughts of the first.

Monitenna thought she had Intelligence sufficient from her Rival, to give her
the opportunity to serve her a Trick, and all under one to serve her own turn;
she writ a Letter in a strange Character to Repset, which she caused to be
conveyed to him by a strange Hand, in which she gave him notice, that if he
would prevent Clorineta from going to an Assignation that Night at eleven of
the Clock, which she had given to a Rival of his, he would do well to come to
her about ten of the Clock that Evening, and not to stir from her till the Hour
was over, that he should be convinced of the reality of the business by the
uneasiness and restlesness that he should find her in, and that if he let her
know that he had had some Intelligence of her Designs, it would disenable the
Informer from ever more doing him such another piece of Service. The Mufti did
receive the Note, and promised to himself to be with his Mistress early enough
to spoil her Sport for that time, and to observe her exactly.

At last the Hour was come, in which Cha-abas was to make his Visit to the
Sultana, he was dressed to the greatest advantage imaginable, and had prepared
himself to speak his mind thoroughly to her, and to learn from her mouth what he
might expect of return: He enters the Sultana's Chamber, she who was resolved
to give him a positive Answer, goes to meet him; Madam, says Cha-abas,
presuming upon that Goodness which I believe to be in you in as great a
Splendor, as all the rest of your Perfections, I come to lay my life at your
feet, expecting from your breath my Sentence to live or die. With that he put
one knee on the sloor. Sir, said she to him again, making an offer to raise
him, If your life or death were at my disposal, you might be sure to be
absolute Master of both, for I should instantly resign unto you that Power so
justly due to you alone under the Heavens. Live, Great Sir, continued she, live
to reflect on the unworthiness of that Person, in whose power you would
deposite so great a Treasure. Alas! what is life, Madam, answered Cha-abas, if
it is not blessed with your allowance; and who can see you, and not desire
above life, above all, to have a share in your Affections? No, Madam, it is far
better to die than to live, and not have some hopes of being one day blessed
with your Love: The Heavens that have made you so admirable, so charming, so
much to be beloved by all that see you with discernment, cannot have made you
so cruel, as to take no better advantage of all your Perfections, than to
strike Admiration and Love in people, and then to let them perish in their
Love, without the least grain of pity or commiseration, for those sufferings
which your Beauty does occasion. The same Heavens, Great Sir, answered the
Sultana, have designed me from the very beginning for Amurat, I have given him
all that he had Right to claim of me, and I have left nothing at my own
disposal, in the opinion that I had no body else to please or gratify but him.
You see, Sir, that by that gift I am no more my own, and that if you require
any thing from me beyond that Respect and Honor which I ought to have for the
greatest Prince of the World, it is to Amurat, and not to me, that you ought to
address your self: I now do but keep for him, and wear about me for his use,
whatever I once could call my own. Yet, Madam, answered the Emperor, some pity
may be allowed unto the miserable, and Amurat be no Loser by it; you may
command my Empire, I will immediately beg on my bare knees a Peace from my
Enemies, and bend instantly all my Forces against his Enemies, if you but
consent to it, nay I will head them my self, and lead them on through the
thickest of your Rebels, if my Services may be but received. I will not only
receive your Services, answered the Sultana, but your Commands also, if I can
be so happy as to oblige you in either, Sir, without too great a force on my
inclinations; and here I declare, Sir, that next to Amurat, you may claim the
greatest share in my Esteem and Respects. That is no more yet, replied the
Emperor, than what you would modestly allow to any person that would but in
the least measure deserve it, and beg it of you, but not one grain of Love,
Madam. Yes, Sir, replied the Sultana, I love, nay I adore your Virtues, and
amongst them that Noble Zeal, which has made you not to spare your own
Subjects, but sacrificed them to your just resentments, in their disobedience
of your Commands, to abandon their Heretical Religion to cleave to yours: But
as to Love, besides, Sir, that my natural inclinations and disposition lead me
quite another way, whether through infirmity of body, or prepossession of mind
by other more powerful motives, I find at this present, that it will very ill
answer the condition that both Amurat and I am in, and the sad circumstances
that we groan under, which are Causes that should produce care, sorrow, and
fretfulness, rather than Love and a gay Humor. In a word, Sir, your Person is
most acceptable, your Wit, Courage, Courtesy, Obligingness, and all other
Ornaments are without exception, and worthy to be admired by all the World.
They may, nay they do stir up an admiration and high esteem for you in all
persons, that are capable to judge of your Excellencies; but you must excuse
me, if they cannot incite Love in a Bosom that is not capable of any. The more
miserable Wretch I am, Madam, and peradventure it is that I am come too late,
continued he, after some more happy Rival; and -- he was going on, when the
Sultana thus interrupted him; Sir, whenever you see, or are by any circumstance
imaginable, convinced of my yielding to another what I believe no Monarch in
the World would better merit than your self, except the Ottoman Emperor; do
not then only tax me with all the Evils that could taint a virtuous Soul, but
loath and detest me as the worst of my Sex; but till then let me humbly beg of
you to harbor a better opinion of me, and to believe, that I have for you all
the respect, honor, and esteem that can be produced in a generous and grateful
Spirit, by all the Endearments, and all the rare Qualities and Virtues that can
be imagined. Well, Madam, I will not insist any longer, replied he, on a
business that is not pleasing to your Ears, at this present especially, but
will live in hopes, that by my most assiduous Services, my indefatigable
diligence and my matchless Love, I shall in time produce in you that Love which
you will not own to have, which I so passionately desire to find in your Bosom,
and without which I shall ever remain the most miserable Prince in the World.
He had much to do to get time to end these words, by reason of Company, which
he saw at distance coming to visit the Sultana, which prevented her also from
giving him any other Answer, than, Well, Sir, agreed, let us leave all to time.
With that the Sultana arose, and received the Company, which produced an
agreeable Diversion, in which Cha-abas had a part, though not long; for his
repulse by the Sultana did but whet him the more in his application to
Clorineta, to whom he gave the opportunity to convey her thoughts in writing to
him, and stayed not long after, that he might not give the least suspicion that
could be to the Sultana, and to gratify his amorous Curiosity and desires,
which rendered him very impatient to learn the success of his Amors with that
Mistress, he retired then, and read in that Note what follows.

IT is no small Trial, Great Sir, that you put upon my Spirits, to try how well
they could bear all the happiness they are capable of at once, and yet keep
within their bounds; yes certainly, Sir, the Honor you do me in your last
Commands, has so much exasperated my mind, that I wanted something to allay its
happiness, which I have found, in the very thoughts, of what misery I should be
plunged in, by such another disappointment unto the longing desires of one that
is so wholly yours, as is Clorineta; you will find that Person betwixt eleven
and twelve in the same Pavillion, in which she first had the Honor to learn,
that so great a Monarch was pleased to look down on somean a Person, who waits
for that happy moment with all the Love and impatience imaginable.


There needed no more to set Cha-abas heart all on fire, he thought the time
very long till the hour was come, and did all he could to divert himself till
then.

The Mufti Repset having received the Information, which Monitenna had given
him, though he knew not from whom, did think it of that concern, as was not to be
neglected; wherefore before the hour of ten he came to Clorineta's Lodgings,
where he found her and her Woman exceeding busy in setting of her forth with
all the advantage that Art could lend to kind Nature's gifts; but in what a
surprise was she when she perceived him come into her Chamber? She had given
Order, that he should be told she was not well, and retired to rest, with a
desire not to be disturbed; but a Person, like the Mufti, who had made bold to
intrude, formerly on the Sultana's retiredness, was not to be put by on his
Mistresses's account. He therefore giving no ear to what was told him, being
spurred on with some sparks of Jealousy, which the Information had stirred up
in him, he entered, and found Clorineta as busy as a Bride on her Wedding day,
who, you may imagine, was strangely disconsoled at the Apparition. Is this the
sick I^^dy, said the Mufti, looking earnestly on Clorineta; Yes, answered she,
and had you stayed but two minutes longer, you had found (...) Bed, from which
I have been diverted but some few moments to try these things which the Tailor
and Tire-woman have brought me, that they may mend the faults out of hand. I am
sorry, Madam, to learn that you are ill, though I hope not with much danger, and
I am much of your mind, that the Bed may contribute much to your recovery; to
which purpose I will retire for some time in the next room, to give you the
liberty of going to your Bed, where, Madam, I will come and read by you to
divert you, as I use to do. For you must know, that one of the pretenses for
the Mufti's coming at any hour into Clorineta's Chamber, which passed current
with all her Servants, but one particular Favorite, who was privy to their
amorous Intrigue, was his pretending to bring her the News and Intelligences
from Leridan, where her Husband was Bassa, to read them to her, and to consult
with her about those concerns, and sometimes also to read new Pieces that were
curious and witty. Clorineta hearing his Design, was almost distracted at his
resolution, and said, That truly her head did so ache, that reading would but
the more discompose her, and that she desired nothing but silence and darkness.
How, Madam, does your head ache so violently? then there is more danger than I
apprehended. Pray, Madam, let me feel your Pulse, you know that I have some
skill in Physic, and continued he, holding of her Arm, I find indeed so great
a disturbance, and such an agitation of Spirits, that my care of your Welfare
will not permit me to go from you, till you have had some two or three hours
sleep, after which I shall be able to judge, whether Nature will be so kind as
to overcome the distemper without the assistance of cooling Julips or Bleeding,
or whether we must fly to Remedies for aid. Go, Madam, continued he, hasten to
your rest, I find you want it much, and I will not detain you any longer from
it. Clorineta believing that he was now going his way, was overjoyed within her
self at the good success of her feigned illness, when her flash of Joy was
immediately extinct, by the addition which the Mufti made of his going into the
next room, where he would wait till she was in Bed, would once again feel her
Pulse, after that he would stay in the next room for her awaking, that he might
not disturb her with any noise, and then he would see what alteration her
repose had made in her, and whether for better or for worse. With that he
retired without speaking a word more, nor hearing her, and sat himself down in
the Antichamber.

He was no sooner gone out of one door, but that she caused it to be made fast
within side, and she sent to desire Monitenna to come to her by another door,
unto whom she told all her Grievances, and asked her what she should do; I know
not now, replied Monitenna, but you should have given order sooner of having no
body admitted to you, and you should have kept your self locked up in your own
Chamber; and he would have stayed, replied Clorineta, and waited all night, as
you see he will now, before he had retired without seeing me; Then there should
he have waited, said Monitenna, while you might have conveyed your self to the
Rendezvous another way. But what is to be done now? replied Clorineta, I am
ruined, undone for ever, I am the miserablest Wretch in Nature, I will dress my
self and be gone, and leave him waiting where he is, till he is weary.
Consider, Madam, the inconveniences that will attend that, you know his hasty
Temper, that he will see you in Bed, and then wait till you have slept, his
impatience will never let him rest an hour without coming to see whether you
repose, and feel your Pulse, of he is denied entrance, that will but raise his
Jealousy, which will make him ten thousand times more restless, and uneasy,
and what he may not do when his passions are up, you may imagine. Heavens, what
shall I do then? replied Clorineta, I shall die, I shall perish, I shall not
live till morning, assist me with your counsel, or I shall run distracted. All
that I can tell you, said Monitenna, is, that you must rest satisfied. What,
and leave the Emperor waiting in vain, replied Clorineta in a passion, that
must not be, I had rather hazard all, and endure all that the Mufti 's rage can
suggest him to do, than fail of meeting Cha-abas at the time and hour: You do
not consider, replied Monitenna, that there wants not above half an hour, and
that it is impossible you should be dressed by that time, and get thither, by
the Mufti 's amusing you so long. I Will run stark naked rather than fail him,
replied passionately Clorineta. Do what you please, said Monitenna, but -- but
what, good now, replied hastily Clorineta? I say, that if I was in your case,
replied Monitenna, I would resolve to send some person to him, with some great
excuse, which should express the sorrow that you are in for the disappointment:
Well, I think I must do so, and if you would take that trouble upon you, for I
have no body else that I durst confide in, you will infinitely oblige me, he
will not know you in the dark, tell him that -- tell him what you please; your
mind being less troubled than mine is at present, you may better frame an
excuse than I can my self. Pray lose no time, remember the Nature of the
Business, and act accordingly in it, I will go to Bed, which in the perplexity
and disturbance of mind I am in, is the fittest place for me, since I cannot go
where I would, you may safely say, it was a sudden Fit of Sickness surpised
me; and I believe that it will be so in earnest by morning. I will not detain
you any longer; I will retire. With that she prepared her self for Bed.

Monitenna was ravished to see her Plots succeed so well; she knowing before
hand to what she should bring that business, had dressed her self to all the
advantage she could possible, and wanted but some little addition to her Head,
to fit her to personate Clorineta, with the Emperor, as she had projected to
do. She made all the haste imaginable to fit her self to the purpose she was
going about, and set forth for the Adventure: She came into the Garden by the
help of the Sultana's Key, which Clorineta had secured before hand for her
purpose, and addressed her steps to the Pavillion, where she was not long
before Cha-abas came. He presently run to her, and flung himself about her Neck
with the greatest transport imaginable. And is Fortune so kind at last, said
he, as to bring me into the Arms of that Person that I so much prize above the
World? Monitenna, who all this while had not had time to speak, replied, You
mistake the Person, Sir, I believe, and forget who you were to meet. Not in the
least, dear Madam, replied Cha-abas, I know that the Sultana is at this time
retired to divert her self with her sullen Humor, and that I have now the
happiness to possess that toward which my Heart has the greatest tendency,
there being more of Gallantry and Respect in its application to the Sultana,
than Love, which I bring entirely to the most charming Clorineta. Still you may
mistake, Sir, said Monitenna, for I find you spoke not those things which you
intend to me; and I fear very much that your Heart and your Tongue go not
together. Think, Sir, better before you speak, and go not on so fast to ruin a
poor credulous creature that has but too much trusted in your fair Words: I am
not the first, it may be, that has been too credulous, and I believe would wish
themselves now in my place. But few, Madam, can pretend to that Happiness, I
assure you, replied he, and none to such a share in my Love as my dear
Clorineta. Yes, you will except Monitenna, doubtless, replied Monitenna.
Monitenna, replied the Emperor, in a scornful Tone! Alas, poor creature, she
has deserved much, I must confess, by her assiduous care in my late illness,
and I have, and will still more reward her for her diligence, which I must
confess was extraordinary; but -- But she loves you, I dare say, replied
Monitenna hastily; and it was that Love of hers which made her do for you what
you might not expect from any other Person that had not been moved by Love: And
doubtless you have given her some hopes of Return in the same Nature, or --
There Cha-abas interrupted her in his turn, saying, I might encourage her, it is
likely, with some such hopes, to continue her in the same Humor of assisting
me as she had done: But what is that to Love? Nay, what is that to you, to me,
to our present concerns, dear Madam? Let us lose no longer time in things that
so little concern our present business; let us enjoy our selves while we may --
Saying of this he began to be a little more busy with his Hands than he had
been; but finding that there was no Reply, nor so much as the least resistance
made, that the Lady was fallen forwards on him, her Arms extended downwards,
and without Motion, it made him desist from the Labor of his Hands, to look
after her: He lifted her up, which motion bringing poor Monitenna to her self
again from the Swoon that his Cruel Expressions had put her in: Oh! cruel
Prince, said she, giving a great sigh, and most unfortunate Monitenna! With
that she returned into a fainting Fit again, which gave time to Cha-abas to
consider more exactly who it was, by the aid of the Moon, which had risen since
their meeting, than he had done before in the dark. He saw plainly his mistake,
and was doubtless troubled at what he had done; but he was no less struck with
wonder at Monitenna's supplying of Clorineta's Room: He did all he could to
bring her to life again; He laid her down on the Seats that were in the place,
and run to the Fountain that was not far, and brought from thence Water in his
Hat, which he flung in her Face: At last he did so much, that the poor
afflicted Monitenna came to her self again, and fetching a deep sigh, and
looking steadfastly on the Emperor, Oh! do not, Sir, said she, take so much
pains on a Person that is so unworthy of it; Reserve those Labors for more
happy Persons: And since that the miserable Monitenna has no hopes left of
obtaining the Effects of those vain Promises in which she so unfortunately put
too much confidence: Be not so doubly cruel, as first to kill her, and then not
to let her die. My dear Monitenna, replied Cha-abas, believe that I have a
share of Love for you also, and let me entreat you to attibute my Failings to
that Liberty that we Men have given our selves of courting all New Faces:
Sometimes it may be, when we lose by the change, and are invited to it merely
by Novelty: You know, dear Monitenna, that we are Nature's Children, and that
we love to follow the steps of that dear Mother, who her self is delighted with
Variety: I love thee, I protest I do, and shall give thee further
Demonstrations of it whene're thou please. We are both mistaken, continued
he, it is true, I did not think to find thee here; I confess that I had
appointed to meet the Lady Clorineta, but how she has failed, and you come in
her Room, is a wonder to me. You are mistaken in her, Sir, answered Monitenna,
who was a little come to her self, she has other Assignations, other Amors to
manage besides yours; she loves Variety as well as you say you do, Sir,
continued she; and it was the entertaining of another Lover, which she prefers
to you, that made her desire me to supply her place, and to tell you, that some
sudden Distemper has been the cause of her disappointing you. And does she
prefer any man to me? replied the Emperor in an huffing tone, Is she so weak
as to forget who I am? and can she please her self in any others company better
than in mine? Then let her go, I will no longer think her worthy of my
thoughts, I will leave her to associate with Persons more suitable to the
lowness of her mind; she does not merit the Love of a Monarch, that can prefer
a meaner Person to his Favors. But as for that Person who she prefers to me, I
will banish him out of my Empire; none shall find protection in it, that shall
have dared to lift up his thoughts where there might be but the least suspicion
imaginable that I designed: Let me but know that insolent Varlet, and I shall
soon break his measures. Great Prince, replied Monitenna, know that the Person
is not worth your Anger, no more than she for prefering a mean pitiful Mufti
before the greatest Monarch in the World: Let them alone for the present, Sir,
and I engage to you, that in some few days I shall not only bring you to
surprise Clorineta and her Lover together, but also show you another Scene at
the same time and place, betwixt another Mufti and the Sultana, how reserved
soever she carries it toward you. How! another Mufti, replied Cha-abas, as
surprised, has the Devils set loose all the Mufties in the World to oppose and
thwart me in my Amors. Must so great and mighty a Prince as I am, be baffled
in his Enterprises by so mean a thing as a Mufti? I shall make such Examples of
them as shall for ever deter all such Black Coats from casting but an Eye on
any Object that I deign to favor with my liking: And as to you, my dear
Monitenna, here is my Hand, that for the future I shall have you in greater
Esteem than ever, and you shall be sensible henceforth both of my Bounty and
Love: Build upon it, as on a sure Foundation that shall never fail you.
Monitenna remaining still very much disordered by her late disturbance,
returned humble Thanks to Cha-abas, and assured him, That she would endeavor
by all means imaginable to deserve in part his Favors, though she could never
pretend to merit so much Honor: She told him moreover, That she feared her
late Disorders might bring some Fits upon her, which she would endeavor to
intercept, if she could come to some Remedies which she had in her Closet
against such Distempers. Upon this Cha-abas taking of her by the Hand, gave her
a Kiss, as a Pledge of what he had promised her, and saying, That seeing she
still continued ill, he would not detain her any longer from her Rest, and
would put off to another time giving of her more ample Proofs of his Love. With
that he led her to the Garden Door which answered to her Apartment, where, for
fear of being discovered, he parted with her.

Monitenna was not a little pleased with her self for having so much disgusted
the Emperor of his Two New Mistresses, and ingratiated her self into his
Favor again: She resolved to manage it, and to gain him wholly to her;
wherefore she pursued her Design, in rendering the Sultana and Clorineta as
suspected to the Emperor as could be, not making any scruple at all to
undermine those Persons who had insinuated themselves into Cha-abas's
Affections, to her prejudice, and who, as she thought, had encroached on her
Prerogatives, which she laid claim to by Precedence. She inquired at her return
after Clorineta's Health; it was told her, That she had continued in Bed ever
since, without Sleep; that the Mufti had frequently visited her, and was still
attending in the Withdrawing-Room; and that she had frequently asked after her,
and ordered, that she should be brought to her so soon as she returned; that
made Monitenna to hasten to Clorineta's Chamber, where going to her Bedside,
she gave her such an account of her Transaction with Cha-abas, as she thought
fit, to put her neither in extraordinary Hopes or Despair: She could not stay
long with her; for the Mufti, who had been a whole half hour without seeing
her, could hold out no longer, and was demanding admission; So that as
Monitenna was going out at one Door, for fear of creating more Jealousies in
his Head, the Mufti came in by the other. Well, Madam, said he to Clorineta,
how do you find your self now, taking her by the Arm? Truly the worse for you,
replied she; for you will not let me sleep, but are continually disturbing me
when I fall into slumbers, which strangely discomposes me. Well, Madam, I hope
that you will be so just, as to attribute it to my care of your health, and my
Zeal in your Service: And since I find, that there is no increase of Fever, now
that it is toward day, I will leave you wholly to your rest, which I shall
pray may be sweet and comfortable to you. I shall visit you again when I think
you have sufficiently reposed, with hopes to find you quite recovered: mean
time, I am your humble Servant. With that he took his leave of Clorineta, and
went his way, not doubting but that he had broke the Assignation for that time;
and he set himself on thinking how he should secure her wholly to himself for
the future.

Cha-abas, for his part, was strangely altered in his Mind, since the
Information which Monitenna had given him of Clorineta's Plurality of Lovers:
She did not concern him so much, peradventure, not thinking her any longer
worthy of his Esteem, after the prefering of a Mufti to him: But more
particularly was he troubled at the Insolency of that Mufti, that durst aspire
to the Sultana's Favor, who he could not beat out of his Head, but 'twas
Repset; and not well knowing who the other Mufti could be, he was still apt to
fall into the Opinion, that it was the same Person who made Love to both his
Mistresses, at the same time. This he imprinted so well in his Imagination,
that nothing could beat it out, no, not his reflecting on what Monitenna had
told him, of bringing him to surprise both his Rivals at once: He thought that
she meant, that he should see Repset courting of both his Mistresses presently
after one another; or that he had not well understood her: But still his Mind
was entirely bent on the belief, that Repset was the only opposition which he
found in his Amors, which made him take the Resolution to watch him close, to
examine all his Actions, every step that he made, and what Company he kept all
the day long, by such trusty Persons as should give him full Information of all
that he desired to know; and in that Resolution to set some Persons about it
that very day, he went to rest.

Mufti Chilase having by this time taken all his measures and precautions in
his further Addresses to the Sultana, had writ a Letter, in which he did give
her a further account of his Person: He got a trusty Messenger to convey it to
Repset's Hands, who had promised him to give it to Clorineta, who should
present it to the Sultana, not knowing from whom it came: So that Repset
carried it along with him when he returned that same day to give a Visit to
Clorineta, which was toward Evening. After he had entertained her a while, he
took his leave of her, to go about a Business of high Concern, entreating her
to deliver that Letter which he gave her into the Sultana's own Hand, without
any enquiry after the Author; which she having promised to do, he went his way,
and she not long after waited on the Sultana, unto whom having delivered that
Letter, without a Name, the Sultana had the Curiosity to read in it as follows:

THat vast disproportion that is betwixt your Greatness and my Unworthiness,
Great Princess, would leave me nothing to say for my self, had I not been
assured from your own mouth, at the Masking, That my most humble Addresses,
should not be wholly rejected: But not daring to approach too near the splendour
of your Sovereignty, without being shrouded under the favorable Veil of your
Permission, for fear of burning the Wings of my Ambition, and casting my self
into eternal misery, I have presumed, not without trembling, to address my self
to your affable Goodness, most Adorable Princess, by the mediation of these
Lines, to humbly represent to your commiseration, to what an height of Love and
Ambition my Heart is risen, through your singular Bounty and Permission; that
Heart and Mind, Madam, so disproportionable to the meanness of my Birth, when
compared to your Illustrious Self. Give me leave to believe, Madam, that such
an aspiring mind, must be other than of the common stamp; and it creates in me
some thoughts, that through some mistake in Nature, my mind was designed for
some body of a more Noble Blood than that which contains it now; or that my
mother, resolving to have a child answerable to her Ambition, might be endowed
with so much Beauty, and other Engagements, as to invite some Person of a Noble
Birth, to satisfy therein her Towering Desires. How durst I else, most
Illustrious Sultana, raise my thoughts to that height, in which the Heavens and
Nature have placed you above the rest of the World? Deign, most charming
Empress, to entertain some favorable thoughts, as I endeavor to insinuate
into your mind, of an Heart so much ravished with the consideration of your
matchless Perfections, and permit your Slave to appear in your Presence, with
all the Submission and Respect that he is capable to express; and be assured,
Madam, that there is no Attempt nor Enterprise so difficult, that I would not
undertake at your command, with confidence, that the merit of the cause of my
acting, and the vigor of all my Faculties in so glorious a cause, would be
sufficient to carry me through all difficulties in which I were led on by your
commands. When I consider, high and mighty Princess, the boldness of my
Attempt, that Heart that dares all to render himself worthy of your Esteem,
trembles, and dissolves in my Breast: Encourage it, Great Princess, to go and
throw it self at your Feet by your commands, which by the same Hand that has
presented you this, may be conveyed unto the meanest of your Adorers, but the
greatest Admirer of your Perfections, and the most Passionate of all your
Lovers.


The Sultana was no less surprised at the Presumption of the Person, whom she
was informed was of low Birth, as she was at the Odness of the Style and
Expressions: She guessed, that it could not come but from that Person who had
so earnestly solicited her at the Masking, for an Interview, which was quite
out of her Mind, as having never designed any further Conversation or
Correspondency with any one, beyond the Limits of that Night. She resolved to
see how far this Insolence would go; wherefore she desired Clorineta to assist
her in it, in writing Two Words to that Person, in which she should give him
notice of a Time and Place for an Interview, where she her self should
personate the Sultana, and under her Name meet him, and make sport with him:
Which Clorineta having undertaken to do, she retired to write, that it might be
ready against Mufti Repset's next Visit.

Here let us leave our Lovers once again, to return to the Historical part of
our Novel. Amurat was not long before he found, that those Forces which he had
brought over with him, nor those which he had found in Leridan, would answer
his Designs: It was signified to Cha-abas, who ordered some Recruits to be sent
over, with a Convoy, who had the good Fortune not to meet with the Ottoman
Fleet, but after they were got into an Harbor, and had discharged their
Lading. They were no sooner espied, but that they made toward them with all
the Sails they had, as well as the Wind would permit them, and some few of
their Vessels fell upon the Persians, the rest of their Fleet not being able to
come up, or at least pretending so; for it was shrewdly suspected, that some
Persian Gold had infected some of the Officers, and had so infatuated them, as
to make them forget to add Bullets to that Powder which they shot against the
Persian Fleet. However, those few of the Ottoman Fleet which engaged, did so
well behave themselves, that the Persians, though Six or Eight to One, had
nothing to boast of but Blows. They retired on their own Coasts, and into their
own Harbors: The Seas were extremely pestered with Persian Privateers, which
would do mischief to some private Merchant Men; and on both sides there were
daily some Vessels taken. But that was not to last; the Conjunction of the Two
Fleets of Haldon and of the Ottoman Empire, which was to be very suddenly,
would soon put an end to all those little Pickroons, strike Terror to all its
Enemies, and even make the Ocean to groan under their pressure.

That Re-enforcement being thus arrived at Leridan, Amurat having joined it to
the rest of his Forces, he attempted to reduce a strong place in that Kingdom,
called Lynderodon, in which a very considerable Number of the poor persecuted
Mohometans were refuged with store of Provision, and a firm Resolution to
defend themselves in it to the last Man.

That obliged Amurat to send from Blunid, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of
Leridan, some Forces to besiege Lynderodon. The Besieged made a brave
resistance, and in many Sallies got a great deal of Booty, so that they found
themselves provided with sufficiency of all things to endure a long Siege, not
doubting but that before they were forced to yield to their Enemies, they
should receive some considerable Succor from Albiona: In the mean time the
Persians, that had come over with Amurat to that Expedition, began to play
their Golden Engines, which had never failed them yet, and with which all their
Treacherous Conquests have been bought; for it was never known yet, that they
ever got a pitched Battle fairly fought, especially against the Turks. But their
Golden Battery having made so much noise, that it had come to the knowledge of
the Besieged, they seized on their Governor, and imprisoned him, in order to
Examination, and of making a woeful Example of Him for his Treachery, but he
made a shift to escape that punishment which he had deserved. They made Choice
of a new Governor, to whom by his desires they associated another, by which
that City was secured, and bravely defended from the Rage and Fury of all those
Persians, Halists, and those of the Country; who had sworn not to spare Women
nor Children, if they should take it by force; which had been the same case,
though it had yielded upon Composition; for all those other poor people that in
other places had yielded themselves up upon Composition and Promises confirmed
by Oaths, that they should not be molested, were all destroyed (...) and put to
the Sword in cold blood, by the instigations of (...) bloody Priests of the
Sect of H^ly; who would not permit any of their Religion to give Quarter to any
of the true Mahometans, declaring* That whoever did keep his Faith to any
Heretics, as they call the true Mahometans, were worse than Dogs, and should
be eternally damned without Redemption.

Thus went things in Leridan, while that diverse small Parties did rise in
Clonstad through the instigation of some Halists that still did hold for
Amurat, and who had received private Letters from him, that he would suddenly
come over to their aid and assistance, with a formidable Army of Persians and
Leridanians, so soon as he had subdued those Rebels, that had retired and
fortified themselves in Lynderodon. But those Parties were daily beaten and
dispersed, there was nothing but the Castle of the Metropolis of that Kingdom
which held out still for Amurat, which caused the Senate of that Kingdom to
declare the Bassa that held it, and all his Adherents Traitors; for as to the
Mountaneers, they had been routed, dispersed, and driven to take Sanctuary in
their own wild part of that Kingdom, whence they had first descended. Albiona
all this while being secure within it self, notwithstanding all the Intrigues
and Plots of the Halists, which still remained in Constantinople,
notwithstanding all the Orders that had issued out for them to retire at ten
miles distance from that great City, which was obeyed but by a very small
number of them, it did daily send Forces to the Frontiers of Clonstad, and to
other places to be ready to embark for Leridan, with the first opportunity, to
go and assist there their distressed Brethren, and join with those brave men
that so stoutly opposed and withstood all the Forces that Amurat and Cha-abas
had in that Kingdom.

The Mufti Repset, after his usual manner, came to render his Mistress a Visit,
as much to satisfy his Jealousy, as to enquire after her Health, she gave him
the Answer to Chilase's Letter, and did not enquire after the Person; after he
had been a while with her, he left her to carry that Answer to his Friend
Chilase, in which he doubted not but he should highly oblige him: He found him,
delivered him the Letter, and read in it what follows.

THE obligation which I have of keeping my word, with that respect you show in
your submissive Letter, has invited me to let you know, that to morrow in the
Evening about ten of the clock I shall be at the Grotto, at the further end of
the great Walk. Make the best use you can of this information.


I am the most happy man in the World, cried he aloud as soon as he had read
the Letter, I am made for ever, I shall run beyond my self for Joy; Oh, for
some allay to those Joys, that otherwise will transport me beyond Recovery.
See, my dear Friend, continued he, giving the Note to Repset to read, behold my
Happiness. With that he walked hastily up and down the Room, set himself down,
hastily rising up again, then he would jump, and make such loud Exclamations of
Joy, that it very much imitated a man that was transported with an unruly
Passion. Repset having read the Paper, What think you, said Chilase to him?
That I guess right, answered he again, and that you are half Seas over already
in this Intrigue, all the difficulty in it, that I can perceive, is to get to
the Rendezvous without being perceived; for you must be as tender of her Honor
as of your Life. Let me see this Note once again, continued he, looking on the
Paper, this is not the Sultana 's hand, which I know very well, and this
Writing I am acquainted with also, though I cannot call it to mind presently.
This made Chilase to hearken a little, and to stand still; which being
perceived by Repset, and that it answered his Expectation: I would advise you,
continued he, to be very circumspect in this business, and to weigh every
circumstance of it before you embark in it too far, consider before you leap,
and endeavor to avoid all surprises. What if this should be to bring you into
an Ambuscade, where in lieu of meeting with a Sultana, you should feel the
weight of some thing else on your shoulders, or a worse Entertain^ (...); great
Persons think they may (...) thing. This Advice did (...) allay Chilase's
Transport, he (...) ^ to think; Why, said he to ^pset, do you think that there
may be ^nger in it? I know not replied Repset, it is as things may happen,
Women have humors, and most commonly they are guided by that which
predominates, especially amongst such persons as are, or at least think
themselves not liable to give any account of their Actions in such cases; to
gratify their Passions, a man's life is no more than that of a Fly, they need
but say the word, and it is done. Why all this is true, replied Chilase, whose
Courage Repset had strangely allayed by these learned Cautions, he began to ask
him his Advice in that Case; I know not what to advise you, replied Repset,
this business is like all others, the greater the danger, the greater the
Honor: But however, if I was in your place, I would not go in a Clergie-dress,
I would try my Fortune like a Courtier, or like a Soldier, that in case any
disaster should happen, I might not be obliged to scandalize the Church.
Besides, at the first interview to appear in your own Habit, might breed
contempt, though after some time, and that you were both agreed upon the matter,
then you might plainly discover your self. All these Reasons are very weighty,
replied the other Mufti, and I incline very much to follow them, for which I
give you many thanks, and I will instantly go about to procure such a Dress, as
shall make me an absolute Cavaleer, Hat and Feathers, Sword and Wigg shall not
be wanting: I must think of some pretenses to borrow all these things, and fit
me from head to foot against the happy hour. I Will leave you, replied Repset, to
your business, and wish you good success in it. With that they parted.

Repset was agitated betwixt two troublesome Passions, Envy and Jealousy, which
made him take the resolution to spoil Chilase's Sport; sometimes he was raging
mad with Envy, to think that after all he had done toward the Sultana, to get
to that pass, which Chilase had so easily attained to, all to no effect, which
happy success in another he could not brook; another time, he fancying the
Writing to be Clorineta's, that stirred up Jealousy in him, believing that the
Sultana despising the Address, Clorineta had been glad to take the opportunity
of her refuse, to personate her, and to enjoy that which the other slighted;
eitherwise did put him upon mischief, which he was resolved to act with a
witness. To that purpose, when it drew near the hour of the Assignation, he
underhand enquired, whether the Sultana did design to stir out that Evening?
And he had Intelligence that she was indisposed, and had been all the day, and
designed to go to her Bed; that information, cured him of his Envy; but then it
increased his Jealousy, not doubting now but that Clorineta had a mind to know
whether all Mufties were alike, the rather too, because he had been informed,
that Clorineta had declared she would go forth that Evening. He made no more
noise about it, but went immediately to the Gardener, and for a little money,
got from him the Keys of those Cocks which made all the Waterworks play that
were in and about the Grotto, and prepared to get privately about the place of
the Appointment a little before the hour.

All things being thus got ready on all sides, Repset came first to the Grotto,
where he hid himself, as well as he could, under one of the Seats that was
nearest to the Cock. That Night proved very dark, which contributed much to his
concealment; this was about half an hour before the prefixed time. Some time
after Chilase came into the Garden by a Key, which he had got of the Gardener
for money; and he was not long there, till he was followed by Clorinetta, who
had got in by the same Key which Repset had made use of, and left the door open
after her, which was the Sultana's. Chilase was as an accomplished Spark in all
appearance, as could be: He had a white Beaver Hat on, a curious long, flaxen,
curled Wigg, Embroidered Clothes Point Linen, and all things else suitable. In
this Equipage he ma^ches toward the Grotto. though any Dress might very well
have served the turn in the dark. There was no body that frequented the Garden
that could lose their way to the Grotto, all the Walks in it leading to it,
which was in the middle of the furthest Square of the Garden; but he went on
very slowly, his Heart failing him, and prophesying some ill at hand, nay, the
never failing Prognostic amongst the Superstitious happening also, (bleeding
at the Nose) he was upon the very point of giving over his Design, and of
making an honorable Retreat. This last accident, though he had bled but some
few drops, did put a stop to his proceedings for some short time to clean
himself. Mean time, two Persons were come to the Grotto, and had seated
themselves presently after Repset had concealed himself. The one said to the
other, My heart aches for fear of some surprise, Oh! Love, to what hazards and
dangers do thou lead thy Votaries. Fear nothing, answered the other, we are
safe enough, but we must lose no time, for nothing but that can cause us any
mischief: Remember your Vows and Promises, said the first again; To a tittle,
replied the last. After this from wor^s they were going to action, when that
our envious, malicious Mufti (Jealousy it could not be) slipped out of his
lurking hole, turned the Cocks, and set all the whole Grotto on water. From
above, from below, from all sides, there were a thousand Springs, which put the
two poor Lovers in such a pickle, that it quite extinguished every spark of
their amorous Fire, at least for that time. They got out of the Grotto half
drowned, and blinded, every one shifting for themselves, as also did Chilase,
who was just entering the Grotto when the Squibs of Water began to play, so that
he had his share of the refreshment also. Clorinetta was about the middle of
the Walk, when she heard the noise of the Waterworks, and perceived as well as
she could in the dark, some Persons running, amongst which one came up to her;
Oh, are you there? said he, I am glad I have found you, we are surprised, let
us get into the Lodge as fast as we can by the same door we came out, if they
have not shut it, from whence we will get into the street, thence to my
Lodgings, where we will shift us. With that he pulled Clorineta hard by the
hand, with another that was wringing wet, and as cold as a Ghost. Clorinetta,
who had been frighted at this, did not know what to do, while she was thinking
whether she had best to cry out, keep silent, discover her self, or run from
this Person that pulled her along by force, but which was qualified sometimes
with a Come, Madam, there is no danger for us but in this place, and we are
safe, if but once out of it. She was forced to yield to the Person's strength,
and to follow; he led her to the Gardiner's Lodge, where finding the door open,
they got into the street, where presently after, a Footman coming by with a
Light, Clorinetta did perceive that he belonged to her; she bid him to stay,
calling him by his Name, then looking on the Person who held her by the hand,
and that left a Train of Droppings where-e're he went. Sir, said she, you may
by this time, I suppose, have found your mistake, I perceive you want clean
Linen, I Will leave you to go shift your self. With that she turned to her
Servant, and bid him to light her to her Apartment, which was not far. When she
was got to the door, she was strangely surprised to see a brave Spark, with a
young Lady in his hand, both in the same Condition with the other she had so
lately left. Madam, said the Gentleman, by a misfortune this Gentlewoman and I
have been put in this condition, and if You would be so obliging as to direct
us to the Sultana 's Apartment, You would infinitely oblige us. This was
Chilase, who having met with that Person, whom the other Gentleman, who had
taken Clorinetta, had lost, and taking her for the Sultana, he was leading of
her home, thinking to pass her for one belonging to the Sultana. This new
Spectacle did strangely surprise Clorineta, who could not forbear rallying of
them, (at which she was very expert) I cannot but wonder where I was, and under
what shelter, when so much Rain fell, and be so dry: Certainly, continued she,
it was a sudden Stor^, which has not so much as wet the Pavement hereabouts;
But if you belong both to the Sultana, continued she, your nearest way will be
through this place, this Fellow shall conduct you thither. With that she bid
her Servant to go with them so soon as the Lights were come that had been
called for. By this time the washed Gentlewoman finding that the distrust which
she had had all along, that she had not the right Person by the hand, was on
good grounds, was contriving how to get off, her Hoods, which the violence of
the Water had forced over her Face, where they did stick very fast, and kept
her concealed; said that it was a mistake of the Gentleman's, that she had no
acquaintance at the Sultana's, and she begged leave to retire, and did not
desire to be known. With that she disengaged her self from Chilase, and
desiring to be excused, having made a Curtsy, she went her way as fast and as
well as she could, not knowing her self where to go, nor how to dispose of her
self. Chilase being left alone, Clorinetta offered the same Civility to him;
but he, for fear of being discovered, would not accept of it, but she would
force it upon him, and the Lights being come, she commanded her Man not to
leave the Gentleman, till he was got to his Lodgings, and so she retired to
think on the strange Adventures of that Night. Chilase being alone with the
Footman, gave him a piece of Money, desiring him to lead him to the next Inn,
where he would take up for that night, he being very cold and wet, and his
Lodgings too far off; which the Fellow readily performed, and went and told
Clorinetta where he had left him, for she longed to know who that Person was;
wherefore she charged the Man to return to the Inn, and watch there all the
rest of the night till morning, when he should be relieved, and if that Person
did go out to dodge him to his Lodgings, she gave him something to drink while
he watched, and sent him immediately away.

The Wet Lady had not gone far, but that she fell into Repset's Hands, who did
avoid, as well as he could, all persons, for fear of being discovered, he being
in the Querpo Dress of his Order. He had lost his way, and had been forced to
get out through the Gardner's House; and perceiving a Petticoat, he offered her
his Service. She, who was for making all the haste she could possible to the
Gardners, whose Daughter she was, would hardly give him an answer, and she
pursuing her way, he took her by the hand and would follow her: He had done
better to have saved himself that labor, for they were both met by the person
who had brought first that Woman into the Grotto, she told him that she could
not be rid of that Person, who was very troublesome to her; at that, the Man,
who was already vexed at all the misfortune that had happened to his Mistress,
took the pains to lay a lusty Cudgel he had in his hand on Repset's shoulders,
who run away as fast as he could, crying out Murder with a full mouth: That
noise awaked some persons in the Gardiner's House, who all this while had lain
in a profound sleep, little thinking, no more than their Master and Mistress
did, what had happened during their sleep. The two Lovers hearing the bustle
that the Servants made in the House, thought it was time to retire, and that
made her yield to his importunities of going along with him, upon condition
that he would marry her the next morning. Upon which Terms they agreed, and
went their way, where he would lead her. The Gardiner's people having found
nothing amiss in the House, and having reported so to the Master, who had begun
to move, all was quiet again, and every body went to make an end of their Work
in their Beds. Thus ended the odd Adventures of that cross and ill conditioned
Night, which had never been cut out for Lovers: We will leave all our Lovers to
go to their Beds, not to sleep, I dare say, but to reflect on the strange
Renconters that that Night had produced, and return to Cha-abas, who all this
while had been waylaying of the Mufti Repset. He had been informed, that he was
frequently seen to go up the stairs which went to a passage in which was a
backdoor out of the Sultana's Chamber, so that these were the back-stairs to
her Lodgings for Servants to pass by. Of truth the Mufti did often go up and
down those stairs, because he had no other way to go to his Lodgings, which
were one pair of stairs higher, and backwards, whereas the Sultana's Chamber
was forwards. This Intelligence had so exasperated Cha-abas anger against this
wicked Mufti, which so disturbed an Emperor's quiet, that he resolved upon
watching himself, and surprise him going into the Sultana's Chamber, where he
would give him that Correction himself, which he deserved. To this purpose,
having disguised himself under a long black Cloak, in which he muffled himself
all over, he waited one night in a little byroom, at the foot of the stairs,
incognito, till his Spies should bring him word of the Mufti's getting up the
stairs; but the late drubbing which Repset had received, having caused him to
keep his Bed, at least his Chamber, for two or three days; for so long time was
Cha-abas disappointed also of his sweet Revenge. But that time being over, one
night as he was on the Watch, News were brought him that the Mufti was just
gone up stairs, as he really was, Cha-abas muffles himself up, and up stairs he
trudges after him, and as he was earnestly looking after him as he was getting
up, he perceived his own shadow against the Wall, caused by the Light that was
placed above the stairs head; he took not time to examine, but being prepossest
with having the Mufti in Chase, he takes it to be him, he fiercely runs after
it, still as he moves, that went on before him toward the Sultana's backdoor,
till by Cha-abas coming nearer, it seemed to go in, losing it self in the
darkness which was betwixt the inmost and the outward door; at the sight of
which the Emperor making his last Efforts to reach him, stretching out his
Arms to grasp him, he unfortunately struck his Foot against a little Threshold,
which made him come down with all his strength against the inward Wianscote
door, which with his force he made to fly open, and having at his stumble lost
his Hat and Peruque, and got hold with both his Hands of the Cloak in which he
was muffled; Have I got you, cried he aloud, not considering in what a posture
he was, nor where he was, You shall not escape me, now Priest, continued he.

The great noise which he had made with his Fall against the door and on the
floor, had surprised the Sultana, who being lain on her Bed, did rise, and
enquired what was the matter of those Women that waited in the Chamber, who
stood all gazing on, not stirring a foot, in as great an amazement as did the
Sultana, not knowing all this while who this Person should be, that so rudely
durst thus disturb the Sultana's rest. Mean time, Cha-abas having recollected
himself, and with all his fumbling under his Cloak, finding that he had lost
his prey, and in what a strange posture he was before the Sultana who stood
still looking on, and admiring what that Person should be; he laps himself up
in his long Cloak over Head and Ears, gets up, and without speaking one word,
got out of the Chamber down stairs, and retires to bemoan his misfortune.

All this while, the noise that Cha-abas had made with his hasty getting up
stairs after the Mufti, had caused Repset to stop when he was got to the second
pair of stairs, which were a little beyond the Sultana's Chamber Door, whence
he had been looking all that while on the Scene which was acting below, and
having overheard the word Priest, which in the Emperor's passion he had spoke
very loud; he seeing that Person gone, and that the Hat and Peruque, which had
been thrown from out of the Chamber into the passage, had been taken up by one
whose Office it was to wait there, he gave him a little Money to let him have
them, pretending he knew to whom they belonged; and he retired with them to his
Chamber to examine them more at leisure, and to endeavor to find out who was
the Owner of them.

Cha-abas being got in private, after he had spent some time in musing, he sent
for Monitenna to come and speak with him; He told her, That ever since she had
imform'd him of his being Rivaled by Mufties, he had had an Eye on Repset's
actions; That he had caused him to be observed, and that News being brought him
of his frequent going up and down those back-stairs, which led to the Sultana's
Chamber, and so went on, telling her the disaster that had befallen him,
concluding, that the Sultana had concealed him in her own Chamber, and saved
him from that punishment which he designed him. To which she answered, That she
was at that very time, and had been for above an hour before in the Sultana's
Chamber, where I assure you, Sir, that the Mufti Repset was not all that while,
continued she, and we were all so surprised with the noise and suddenness of
the business, that all our thoughts were bent in knowing what was the matter,
and who that Person should be, that had made that disturbance. Was I not known
then, said the Emperor? Not that I know, replied Monitenna, but some of us
going to the door, and exquiring of some Person that waited there, what had
been the matter? He made Answer, That he knew not, more than that the Mufti
Repset having gone up stairs to his Lodgings, as he used to do, some body
muffled up in a long black Cloak, had presently after come up stairs, whether
in pursuit of him they know not, but that this last Person, who he did not
know, having perceived his own shadow against the Wall, had fiercely run and
caught after it, still following it till it were lost in the dark betwixt the
two doors, that that Person had there fallen, and when he had got up again, and
gone his way, he had left his Hat and Peruque behind him, which having been
thrown out of the Chamber after him, the Person said he did take them up, but
that the Mufti Repset, who from the other pair of stairs, having seen all that
had passed, did give him some money for them, pretending that he knew the
Person to whom they did belong; that therefore he had let him have them: And
are my things in the Mufti 's hands then, replied Cha-abas, that troubles me
more than all the rest, seeing that I have not been known? My dear Monitenna,
continued he, assist me in this business, the Heavens, I see, have decreed that
I should be perpetually obliged to thee, and I will certainly acknowledge it,
if I get but once off of this business without being known; and that I have
revenged my self of these two Mufties, I think thou did name, as thou have
promised me I should. Be patient till then, Sir, answered she, and spoil not
all by too much precipitation; I have promised it you, be patient then, and
rely on my word, which I will make good with the first opportunity. But you
must be sure, said Cha-abas, to get my Hat and Peruque out of Repset 's hands,
with all the expedition you can possible; for I fear very much, that by his
showing them up and down, they might at last be known to be mine by some body
or other. She assured him that she would get them into her possession that very
night: After which they had other Discourses mixed with some amorous
Expressions, which lasted till Monitenna thought it was time for her to retire,
and see after the getting of those things from Repset.

She left the Emperor then, and retiring to her own Chamber, she sent thence
one of the Sultana's Servants in the Sultana's Name, to demand from Repset that
Hat and Peruque which he had in his Hands, to which the Mufti made answer, That
he had already sent them by the first Messenger that the Sultana had sent for
them. The Person returned to Monitenna with that Answer, which made her
immediately to run to the Sultana's Apartment, to learn more of the business.
There she found Clorinetta, who was giving an account of her last night
Adventure to the Sultana, and how she had found out that the Person, who was to
be at the Assignation, was Mufti Chilase, how he had been served by she knew
not who, but that the Gardener, who had lost his Daughter that Night, did
confess that he had lent the Key of the Waterworks to the Mufti Repset that
very Night, only to make Sport, as he pretended, but that he believed he had an
Hand in conveying his Daughter away, and that if she was not suddenly restored
to him, he would complain of him to the King. Never were persons, Madam, in
such a pickle, continued she, as was the Mufti Chilase, the Gardener's Daughter
and her Gallant; by good Fortune, the Mufti Repset had bestowed his Favors on
them before I came to the Rendezvous; I heard the noise of the Waterworks at a
distance, which made me listen, which prevented me of having my share. How
insolent these Mufties are grown? said the Sultana. You had no Discourse with
Chilase then? continued she, None at all, Madam. I assure you I lost the
Happiness of being courted by him, replied Clorinetta: Well, it is no matter,
the Sport we have lost of that we have had another way. But how come you to
know that this is the Emperor's Hat and Peruque? continued she. Madam, replied
Clorinetta, a certain Person who knew that the Emperor was gone up these
stairs in a Disguise, and seeing him come down some time after without them,
made some enquiry after them of the Person that waits in the passage, who
denying that he had them, the other told him that they belonged to the
Emperor, to terrify him, I suppose, and to get them from him; which made him
confess, that Mufti Repset had them. A Servant of mine passing by heard this,
and presently came to tell it me as a great Secret. The Mufti made no scruple
of delivering them to the Person; I sent to him, said the Sultana: it was
answered, No, by some of her Servnats.

Thus did Monitenna learn, that it was known it was the Emperor who had given
them that Larrum, and left those signs of it behind him, but not one of them
could guess at the right Cause, which had made him do that, till having
recollected what the Fellow that waited had seen, and what they themselves had
seen and heard: out of all they picked out, that it was some Jealousy that
Cha-abas had of the Mufti Repset's going to see the Sultana that back-way,
which had put the Emperor himself on the Design of surprising him in the Fact.
Monitenna had enough, she flipt from the Company without being suspected, and
sent word to the Emperor of all that had happened in a Letter, which put him
into such a rage against every body, that none could have a free access to him
but Monitenna, who was become his right Hand. He sent for her, she came to him,
and brought a long with her those things which he had left behind him; and upon
his asking her Advice, what he had best to do, she advised him to trouble
himself no further about it, that what was passed could not be mended, and that
the more he should stir in it, the more noise it would make, and oblige people
to pry the nearer into the business. What, said he to Monitenna, and must those
two wicked audacious Mufties rest unpunished, at least let me know the other
Name also. Great Sir, answered Monitenna, if you will but put so much
confidence in me, as to rely wholly on my care and conduct in the punishing
both of Repset and Chilase, those two insolent Mufties, you shall have the
satisfaction of seeing it with your own Eyes, to your full satisfaction. I will
not rely on thee for that only, my dear Monitenna, replied Cha-abas, but in any
thing else that thou should advise me, nay I will lay my life into thy hands.
Then, Sir, I promise you, replied Monitenna, that within the space of two days
I will give you full satisfaction, as to your Revenge. That Is all I desire at
present, replied he, I am pretty well weaned of those desires which I had
toward the Lady Clorinetta, and the lowness of her mind, in her thoughts
toward a Mufti, when she was courted by an Emperor, has made me to turn all
that good Will and Esteem which I had for her, into a perfect Love to thee, of
which I shall daily make you sensible. As to the Sultana, I must confess that
she has stirred up in my Heart a very great esteem for her; but if thou show
me that she prefers so mean a Person to me, I shall no longer have any other
regard for her, than what I owe and ought to pay to a Sultana under my
Protectiou. Diverse other Discourses passed betwixt Cha-abas and Monitenna,
which were mixed with amorous Expressions; after which Monitenna retired,
leaving the Emperor in a much more quiet temper of Mind than she had found him.

Chilase by this time had wiped off all sorrow; he had gone so far in the
Discovery of the late night Adventures, as to learn that the Gardener had his
Daughter stolen from him that night, that though he had received his share of
the refreshment which the Waterworks had afforded, he believed that it was not
intended for him, by reason that he was but just stepped into the Grotto, and
that he had seen and heard some Persons run out of it, and pass by him. He did
not know but that the Sultana might be going toward that place, and prevented
by the noise of the Waters and of those Persons that run away, and so have
retired to her Apartment again; a sign of it was, that when he thought that he
had met with the Sultana, he had led her out of the Garden by her own door,
which was found open, however he had lost the way afterward, in which he was
the more confirmed by meeting with the Lady Clorineta at that time, which he
believed the Sultana might take along with her so far as into the Garden, where
peradventure she was to have stayed till her return; thus did he run on in
construing all the accidents to his own advantage, and according as his Heart
desired they should be. As for Repset, he was left in the dark still, still
tormented betwixt Jealousy and Envy, in which he did all he could to clear and
inform himself further; to which purpose he daily visited Chilase, who had, as
far as he knew himself, told him what had happened that Night, at which Repset
would admire, but own nothing of that part which he had in it. Chilase was so
prepossest and so positive, that the Sultana had been in the Garden, that
Repset's Envy was the more kindled at it, which made him take the resolution to
have a finger in the Pie, though it were by surprise.

One day as he was going into Chilase's Lodgings, which were on the other side
of the Garden, opposite to the Sultana's Apartment, which made the way a great
Compass about, a Person came to him, and asked him, if he was the Mufti
Chilase; What would you have with him? replied Repset, only deliver this Note;
Sir, said he, giving him the Note, and my business is at an end: So the Person
presently returned the same way that he came. Repset took the Note, observed
the privacy with which the Messenger had delivered it, and upon this fancied
that it was some secret business, which giving him the Curiosity to pry into
it, he returned back to his own Lodgings without seeing Chilase, where having
shut himself in, he opened the Paper, and found in it these Lines.

You are in the right to believe, that a mark of your being something more than
you seem to be, may be gathered from the boldness of your Attempt, which has
highly confirmed me in the good Opinion I had already entertained of you, and
in which you had succeeded, had not those accidents, which happened that Night,
made me retire, when I had already gone some steps in the Garden, in order to
meet you. It is not the first time that an Heart worthy a Princess's Esteem,
has been found to reside in a meaner Breast, than that which should of Right
contain it. You cannot give me a greater confirmation of the good thoughts I
entertain in your behalf, and of the greatness of your Love, than in rendering
your self at my Apartment this night about twelve, where you shall be received
by a Person that shall conduct you to me. Your Person is perfectly known to me,
by what means, I shall inform you my self. Let it suffice you, that I intend
this Honor to Chilase, though not in my own hand.


In what a Surprise was Repset at what he had seen! What shall I do in this
case? said he to himself; this I find was intended by the Sultana unto Chilase;
however Fortune has been so kind as to let it fall into my hands, and with
Justice too: I have deserved more from that unkind Sultana than ever he could,
have rendered her more and greater Services than ever he is like to do, and my
Love and Courage is as great as his. Seeing then that it has once pleased
Fortune to be favorable to me, I will not disoblige her in refusing her
Kindness, I will personate that happy Mufti, and push on my Fortune as far as
it will go in this Intrigue, and what know I but that it may guide me into the
Sultana 's Arms. Oh, that I were there, continued he with a deep sigh, well I
will instantly to Chilase, and feel his Pulse, but not a word will I tell of
the Assignation. Thus he set forward again toward Chilase's Lodgings. No
sooner had R pset gone toward his Lodgings with the Note, but that the same
Person who had given it him, and who had watched his going, run presently to
Chilase's Lodgings again, enquired after him, and gave him another Note, and
presently went his way. Chilase retired, read in it the same words which were
in the other, which Repset had been invited to intercept, only with this
addition at the bottom:

If you let the Mufti Repset know or give him the least occasion imaginable of
suspecting any Commerce between us, particularly this nights Assignation, you
are lost for ever in my thoughts.


Chilase had much to do to keep himself within his own bounds at the reading of
this Note; he read it over and over, and kissed it as often: Go, said he, yes,
through all the dangers that all Mankind and all the Devils in Hell could lay
in my way, I would step over them thus and thus, most charming Princess, to
come to your Summons. Thus was he expressing his Courage and his Love when
Repset came into his Chamber without knocking, which had almost surprised
Chilase past reprieve. So soon as he saw Repset, he slided the Note into his
Pocket, and perceiving that he had seen some of his Actions, and heard some of
his Words; I was just repeating some words out of a Tragedy which affects me
much, said he. Well, what News, continued he, from beyond Sea? I have nothing
new, replied Repset, that is pleasing; the Sultana, I believe, has none neither
to her mind, she looks so sour and melancholic: I believe that a Nunnery
would be the best place for her to retire in with her sad and melancholic
thoughts, with which she disobliges all the World but you. But me, replied
Chilase, I had, it is true, a glimpse of some hopes by an Assignation; but what
did it come to? and what hopes have I had since? who have not heard one word
more from her since that time. Those great Persons will take their own time,
replied Repset, and please their own humors; what you have not had yet, no
doubt, you may expect; in short, next time her inclinations move her, you shall
hear from her. Not if she has occasion of sorrow, replied Chilase; That ebbs
and flows, as Women please, answered Repset, after they have given a moments
space to those troublesome thoughts, they soon banish them from their Hearts,
they empty themselves of all that can but in the least check their Desires, and
are all Love and Pleasure within, with whatsoever formality and sowreness they
disguise themselves without. Wait with patience and be happy in your great
Enterprise, while I must rest contented with my meaner Fortune. Your Fortune,
replied Chilase, is certain, and you certainly happy in the possession, while I
live only upon hopes and desires. The two Mufties were entered into those
serious Reflections, far from either of their thoughts and designs, when that
Word was brought in, that a Person of Quality was come, who demanded to speak
with Mufti Chilase, which made the Mufti Repset to retire.

Monitenna had engaged in this her Design against the Mufties, a Person who was
highly obliged to her, for having obtained for him a Favor from the Emperor;
he was to bring along with him a Friend or two more to assist him; she had
informed them in every Circumstance; she had engaged the two Mufties by the two
Notes which she had sent, not doubting but that Repset's Jealousy would oblige
him to watch Monitenna, or his Envy and Malice toward Chilase, mixed with Love
toward the Sultana, would make him endeavor to prevent his Rival's Happiness,
in interposing between, either of which would serve her turn, though she wished
he might take the last Course. In fine, she had fitted all things to her
purpose, and all this with the Sultana's approbation, and to Clorineta's
knowledge, so far only as it concerned Chilase, but not a word of Repset had
she mentioned; she had posted her Friends in a little Room, next to that in
which she designed to bring the two Mufties, as in the Sultana's Chamber, all
was to be transacted in the dark, as if by the Sultana's Orders she had
advertised Cha-abas of the time, that he should appear, and what he should say,
and she her self was to be their Conductor; she had no more to do but to wait
the hour, which was near at hand.

To give a better Color to the business, and take off all Suspicion on the
Muftie's sides, the Sultana had quitted her own Chamber to Monitenna's disposal
for that night, and was retired to her Closet with Clorinetta, to pass the time
at Cards till the Sport was ready; and Cha-abas had been disposed of in the
nearest Pavillion in the Garden to the Sultana's Chamber.

The hour being come, News were brought to Monitenna, that the Mufti Repset did
appear. There was no body stirring in the whole Apartment, and an obscurity
reigned all over it, but in such places as Monitenna had thought fit to
enlighten with some small Candles, with the help of one of them which stood at
a low Window, was the Mufti discerned. Monitenna, who was in a Dress which did
sufficiently disguise her for a Woman belonging to the Sultana, came, and
taking him by the Hand, I see you are punctual, said she, and rather a little
before your time; Follow me, continued she, and I Will lead you where you may be
undressing your self while I go to the Sultana, to learn when I shall bring you
to her. With that she led him into a little Room, where there was a Light, in
which she locked him up, and went to be ready to receive the other Mufti, whose
Love would not let him stay one moment beyond his time; she accosted him with
Words much of the same Nature, and led him into another convenient Room, where
she bid him undress himself, and prepare for to go along with her to the
Sultana, so soon as she should receive the Orders from her so to do, about
which she was now going; she shut him in also, and went to call that Woman who
had informed her of the Mufti's coming; she bid her to follow her, and to take
that Person by the Hand, which she would give her in the dark, and to lead him
very slowly into the Sultana's Chamber and to her Bedside, where she should
leave him and retire, locking the door after her; and that when she was come to
the Bedside, she should pull the Curtain a little open. Having thus placed
that Woman, she went into the Chamber, where she put out the Candle, telling
the Mufti, there would be no occasion for one, and taking him by the Hand, she
led him in his Morning-Gown to the passage where the Woman was in the dark, and
put him into her Hand, so run before through the Sultana's Chamber, took the
other Mufti by the Hand, and led him hastily to the other side of the Sultana's
Bed, where having heard the sign of the Curtain being drawn, she left him: With
what eagerness did those two Mufties pull off their Gowns to step into the
Embraces of a languishing Sultana! How were their Souls agitated with the very
thoughts of the Enjoyments they were going to surfeit with! How many different
violent Passions did at once seize on their Spirits! Love, Fear, Respect, and
Ambition were all struggling at once, which should have the Mastery over their
Spirit; and the Contention was so equally great, that it was the Cause, neither
of those Passions had the power to quite exasperate their Spirits, and
transport them beyond their natural bounds.

They stepped into the Bed at the same time, with all the gentleness and
reservedness imaginable, and with trembling Hands, and aching Hearts, stretched
forth their Arms to feel out for the prey, they met one another Hand, and at
the very first touch pulled them back, as if each had met with a Viper, not
without a strange surprisal, and both lay quiet a while after, which
endeavoring to inform themselves better with their Legs, they approached them
toward the middle of the Bed, with as little satisfaction as they had received
from their Hands, but with much more apprehensions: At last the boldest of the
two had so much Courage as to lay his Hand on the others Face and Head, which
having fully informed him, that it was a man he had felt, and that having
emboldned the other to do the same, as much by way of prevention or defense, as
to satisfy any further his Curiosity, they at last through fear of danger, did
seize one another so hard, that the smart caused them each to offend his Enemy
as much as he could, in order to secure themselves: these seizing at last came
to blows; and they were accompanied by words, and in the bustle and confusion
of the Combat, holding still one another very fast with one Hand, while they
laid on with the other, they at last both came down on the floor together. This
being heard by Monitenna, she presently run to Cha-abas, and brought him into
the Chamber, ushering him with two Flambaus in her Hands, at the sight of which
our obstinate Combatants would not yield. Cha-abas seeing them thus all bloody,
their shirts half torn off of their Backs, and the few Hairs they had strow'd
over them; How now, Gentlemen, said he to them, what do you do here in the
Sultana 's Chamber at this time of the night, and in this posture? They hearing
the Emperor's Voice, turned all their late animosity into shame and confusion,
each of them endeavoring to recover their Night-Gowns, and to hide themselves.
I Will send some body to you to cool your Courage, said Cha-abas, and when they
have done their business; I Will give you another Visit, mean time prepare your
selves for the Mortification which is intended you. With that he went out of
the Chamber, laughing heartily at them. Monitenna, who had left one of the
Lights in the Chamber, followed the Emperor, and locked the door upon them;
and when she had conveyed Chaabas, where he might see and hear the second
Scene, and not be seen, she went and brought the Sultana and Clorineta into the
Chamber, that they might have a share of the M^rth, which the Confusion of
those two Lechers did produce, they all the while hanging down their Heads, and
hiding their Fa^^s, as if they thought to conceal (...) knowledge of who they
were. The Sultana began first to speak; Why, how now, said she, my Gallant
split in two? or has he brought a Friend with him to let him see his Happiness,
or to partake of his Felicity? He must by all means take share with him in his
good Fortune. With that she fell a laughting at them, but was not seconded in
it by Clorineta, as she had been at their first coming in. She perceiving two,
though they had so well muffled themselves up in their Gowns, that their Faces
were not to be known, had some certain apprehensions, that she might be too far
concerned in the conclusion of the business to afford any share of her Mirth to
it, more than she had done already. I hope, continued the Sultana, that the
Emperor will reward his grave Confessor for so noble an Attempt on the Person
of a Princess that had sheltered her self under his generous and Royal
Protection; and will not let his Companion, whoever he is, lose his share of
the Recompense: May I not know who it is, continued she, raising her voice, I
must know to whom I am so much obliged for their Visit, Who can inform me? This
she said looking on Monitenna. None better than themselves, Madam, if they
please but to speak, answered Monitenna. Yes, Madam, I will speak, said then
Repset in a Tone that spoke nothing but Rage, Fury, and Despair, I am that
unfortunate Repset, said he, who had the Heartbreaking to receive a Note of
this Assignation, which was intended for that Person, and though I found that it
was not your Hand that had writ it, yet believing it to be a pursuance of that
Intrigue, of which Chilase had made me his Confident; out of Envy to his good
Fortune, and with a design to disappoint him, I came thither, under the
assurance of that Note, which had been delivered to me, which in the reading I
found to be directed to him; and now let him answer for himself.

You may imagine, or rather it cannot be imagined, into what a Consternation
this put poor Clorinetta, not many days before she had wished Repset far enough
from disturbing her new Amors with the Emperor; but so soon as she had lost
all hopes of any further Conversation through his silence after those unluckly
Disappointments which had happened to their Assignations, she had recalled her
Love to Repset, and was of opinion, that playing at a small Game, was much
better than being quite out of Play, though it were but for the sake of the
Company. She therefore could not conceal so well her resentments, but that
notice was taken of them both by the Sultana and Monitenna, which obliged the
Sultana to retire sooner than she intended, who was followed by Clorinetta and
Monitenna.

No sooner had the Sultana set a step toward her retiring, but that those
Persons who had been appointed by Monitenna to play their parts, came into the
Room, they had been waiting some time for the Sultana's retreat, they came up
to the two Mufties, and taking fast hold of them in a kind of rough way, told
them that by Order from the Emperor, they came to remove their station into
another place; they led them into another Room, where the door being shut upon
them, they had leisure to consider that there were two or three men more who
looked like Surgeons, with Incision-Knives, Razors, Scissers, Plasters,
Rowlers, and such like things on a Table before them; then casting their looks
toward the Chimney, they saw Searing-Irons in the fire. These things of
themselves spoke terror enough to the Criminals, and doubtless they were
apprehensive that they designed a punishment proportionable and suitable to
their Crimes, in which they were presently confirmed, when one of the Surgeons
asked those Persons that had brought them in, Whether those were the two
Persons that were to be made Eunuchs? Yes, replied the two other; Then assist
us to bind them, said the Surgeons, that we may obey the Emperor's Orders, who
has declared, that he would have us served so, if we obey not his Commands to a
tittle. With that, all those that were in the Room, came about the two poor
Mufties, as with a design to bind them. When they both set themselves to oppose
with all their violence the severity of that Decree, pleading both, That they
had been trepan'd; That it was a designed Plot to put a signal Affront upon the
whole Clergy in their particular Persons, and that they were to be put into
Ecclesiastical Hands to be punished, if guilty, but that they knew not any
fault that they were guilty of. Thus did the terror of the punishment
reconcile in a moment two Persons who but a minute before were declared
Enemies: They were answered, That their very being at such an unseasonable hour
in that Undress in the Sultana's Chamber, could not but speak them guilty; and
upon that, the Surgeons came up nearer to them, as with Cords in their Hands,
with a design to bind them. When Repset, who was the most valiant of the two,
and nearest the fire, stoopt on the sudden, and taking up two of the red-hot
Irons out of the fire, he gave one to Chilase, saying, Here, take this in your
defense, and let us die bravely, and sell our lives as dear as we can, rather
than endure tamely that horrid Torment that these cruel Hang-men would inflict
upon us. Let them not unman us, but let us die like men.

This sudden and desperate Resolution in Repset, which had been embraced also
by Chilase, who had been rendered courageous by Example, set the others on
retreating some steps, and enter into a Consultation, the result of which was,
That the two Delinquents should desire that one of them should be sent to the
Emperor, to humbly remonstrate to Him of the one hand, that they were both
alur'd into this Praemunire; to which they consented, saying, That the one had
but obeyed the Sultana 's Command, and the other but designed to break his
measures; That this force used against two Persons of such eminent Ranks
amongst the Clergy, was a too great intrenching on their Prerogatives; And on
the other, that rather than yield to so severe a punishment, they would die,
though they should be forced to kill themselves, if they could not overcome
their Enemies, unto whom they would sell their lives as dear as they could.
These Instructions being delivered to Persons that had no further Orders, than
to affright them to the last extremity, were sufficient to set them going to
the Emperor. Mean time there was a Cessation of Arms, and a further Parley
betwixt the two Parties, in which abundance of things were said on both sides;
yet all this while neither Party knew one another personally, nor so much as
the Names of any Persons, and the two Muf^ies were so altered in their
Countenances with the apprehensions of the eminent danger they were ^n, besides
their odd kind of Dresses, that persons who had been familiarly acquainted with
them, ^ad scarce known them.

The Messenger that was sent to Cha-abas, returned with an Olive Branch in his
mouth, and smiling, said, Well, Gentlemen, whoever you are? for we know you
not; wherefore you may be certain, that we have done nothing without Orders
from the Emperor. I am to declare to you the Emperor's last Will and
Resolution in this present Business: Know then, That through the Intercession
of some Ladies, which are to be nameless, something more than your Lives is
granted to their humble Requests, on Conditions, that from henceforth neither
of you ever attempt more to go to Balls and Masqueradings; That neither of you
presume to court or solicit any Ladies of what degree soever, nor be so vain
as to take their Sports with such inferior Persons for Realities and serious
Assignations; And that neither of you shall ever dare to lift up your eyes,
much less your thoughts in any place where the Emperor looks but with a
respectful Countenance. What say you, Gentlemen? Will you stand to this
Agreement, and solemnly promise to perform every tittle thereof upon your
words? Chilase did presently give his consent and assurance, that he would be a
true Observer of the Articles; but as to Repset, he made some demur in the
matter: He said, That he would promise to go no further than he was entered
already in any Commerce with the female Sex, and that he would never look
after, nor aspire at any more Correspondency with any Woman whatsoever, than
what he had done already; but that as to what was already past, he could not
recall it back again. With such Equivocations and mental Reservations he
resolved to cleave still to his Clorinetta; but what he said was taken for
satisfactory, the Surgeons, at least those Persons that were disguised, packed
up their Tools, and required of the two Mufties their fiery Weapons, which
having put up also, they went their ways. The Mufties Clothes were afterward
brought to them by the same Woman, whom Monitenna had employed before, they
dressed themselves, bundled up their Night-Gowns, and conveyed them under their
long Robes, and were after that conveyed into the street, where the door being
shut after them, they took each of them that course which they liked best.

Monitenna gave a full Relation to the Sultana of the whole Business before
Clorinetta, who was forced to join in their Mirth, with some few forced Smiles,
but longed extremely to see Repset, or at least to hear from him. As to the two
Mufties, the frights they had been put in, had brought them both into most
violent Fevers, in which the Mighty French Panaceas for all Diseases,
Clysters, Julips, and Bleedings were not wanting, and if that cure them not,
they are as surely doomed to Death, as any of our Rusticks are when no
amendments appears after the advantageous use of a Pepper-Posset. Chilase was
the first which was reckoned out of danger, yet he had a lingering Fever on him
for a long time. But Repset being of a more fiery disposition, the fuel of his
Fever lasted longer before it had spent it self, insomuch that he was almost
brought to the last gasp: Yet at last through a sight which he had got of
Clorinetta, who had solicited the Sultana to send her to him with an How do
you? He began to recover little by little, but remained so long weak, and so
oppressed with Melancholy, that he stirred not out of his Chamber in two months
time.

Cha-abas was infinitely pleased with Monitenna, for having given him so
Comical a diversion and revenge, in which there had been so much terror, and
so little hurt, and the Reputation of both the Mufties secured by the
concealment of their Names and Persons under Disguises. Monitenna, mean time,
did triumph within her self, for having at once so bravely revenged her self of
all her Enemies, and ingratiated her self so far into Cha-abas Favor again, as
not to be removed from thence in haste by any new Pretender.

Things were in that amorous and diverting posture in the Persian Court, when
News came from diverse parts of Cha-abas ill Success against those Confederate
Princes that were resolved to recover their Rights, which Cha-abas had basely
taken, and with the same injustice withheld from them. But if he was beaten,
and forced to surrender those places that he had formerly surprised, he would
be sure to level them first, to blow up all public Edifices, to set fire on
every place, not sparing the very Churches, and even to dig up the very
Foundations of the City-walls. This was done always in cold blood, after they
had satiated themselves with Ravishments and horrid Murders. All this under
pretense to leave the Country so desolate, as that their Enemies should not be
able to subsist in it; though it was well known, that it was but with a design
to animate and encourage his men, who being convinced of the unjustice of their
Master's Cause, would frequently take all opportunities of deserting so cruel
and bloody a Master, to adhere to such persons as with Justice prosecuted a
generous War against that general Enemy of Mankind. Of truth his Cruelties were
such, that those few of his Allies, who had at first stuck to him, abandoned
him, having not the Heart to assist a Person that had so wholly given himself
up to the ruin and destruction of Mankind.

Neither was he more successful in Leridan. His Army there, which though joined
with that of the Natives of that Kingdom, which though very cruel against the
Mahometans, was so outdone in those barbarous Acts by the Persians, that they
began to fear the falling under their Tyranny. They did not stick to declare
this, and to confess that they had rather continue to live under the Mohammedan
Yoke, than to be made Slaves to the Persians; and when they were told by the
Persian Officers, that those Mahometans, with whom they preferred to live rather
than under them, were Heretics, they boldly answered, that so was their
Emperor and themselves also, for having made War against the Grand Mufti, and
declaring him not infallible, which Tenet, said they, none but Heretics would
hold: Besides, they highly murmured at the ill Success which they had in all
their Undertakings, at the loss of so many brave men before so mean a place as
was Lynderodon; now that they could not effect any thing with their Golden
Batteries, as they had formerly done in other places. These Complaints of the
Leridians to the Persians, produced nothing but Grudges and Heart-burnings
betwixt them, which amongst the Officers on both sides, after having reproached
one another of want of Courage, came to quarrels, which ended in blows and
Duels, in which commonly the Persians came by the worse. While that the common
Soldiers did daily desert, retiring in their Fastnesses and Retreats, where
they bid defiance to the Persians.

The Mahometans mean time, kept themselves in strong Holds, and with
unspeakable Valor did oppose their Enemies, daily expecting a very
considerable Relief from Albiona and Clonstad. Especially those of Lynderodon,
behaved themselves with such extraordinary Valor, that they, in diverse
Sallies, did kill and take so many, both Officers and Soldiers of their
Enemies, that they were forced to raise the Siege, and to retire at such a
considerable distance from that place with their Army, that these brave
Mahometans remained Masters of the Field ten miles round them.

The Winds proving contrary, during a long time, for the transportation of
those Men and Ammunition which were ready to go, as it is usual at that season
of the year. The Fleet appointed to carry them, put diverse times to Sea, but as
often were driven back again by Westerly, Notherly, and Northwest Winds.

In the Kingdom of Clonstad, the principal Fortress was surrendered at
discretion, and all those that had taken up Arms for Amurat, were beaten and
dispersed, diverse Packets of Letters, Instructions and Commissions sent by
Amurat from Leridan, to those of his Party in Clonstad, were discovered, the
Persons seized and imprisoned, their Papers brought to the Grand Council of
that Nation, read and examined, whereby all the Halists Designs and private
Plots at that time in agitation in that Kingdom, were laid open and detected;
upon which diverse, of all ^he three States of that Kingdom, we^e apprehended,
and made close Prisoners, and all the Hopes of Amurat and of his Party thereby
quite dashed to pieces, beyond all hopes of recovery.

Now were the Ottoman and Haldonian Fleets joined at Sea, which made Cha-abas
Fleet to divide it self; part of it was sent by him to annoy and destroy some
of the Ottomans and Haldonians Plantations in the Indies, and the rest was kept
in their Harbors, not daring to stir forth, but watching for some opportunity
of conveying some Recruits of Men, Arms, and Ammunitions into Leridan, which
was almost impossible for them to do the direct way, because the Ottoman Fleet
lay in the Chanel. He likewise sent some Ships with Relief for Leridan, whose
Officers were to steer their Course quite another way, to such an appointed
distance, where they were to open their Commissions, and then they were ordered
to steer round, and to land in Leridan, where they could most conveniently, not
to be molested by the Ottoman Fleet.

But if that Cha-abas had such Designs on Leridan, which Kingdom of truth he
had bought very dear, and for which he had already, some years since, made
diverse considerable Payments, and which was yet to cost him much more Money and
men's Lives, before he could be absolute Master of it, if ever he did get it.
Solomon and his Grand Council of the Divan were not wanting on their parts to
supply the two Kingdoms of Clonstad and Leridan with all Necessaries, to
suppress all the Halists Plots and Machinations, to disarm them, seize them
from amongst them that were the most forward in broaching of false Reports, in
dispersing of libellous and treasonable Papers, and in sowing of Sedition and
Rebellion amongst the Mobile. Diverse of them were seized, sitting in their dark
Councils, some in dispersing of false and forged Proclamations and
Declarations, under Amurat's Name, and others in buying of Arms, and making
great Provisions, in order to a Rebellion. These Arms were discovered, seized
on, and secured, and the Gaols were filled with those seditious Halists. Thus
by the Emperor's Vigilance, and the Grand Council of the Ottoman Empires wise
Counsels, all their mischiefs were prevented, and all things tended to a
perfect Peace and Settlement of the whole Empire; insomuch that those who sat
at the Helm, thought fit to give Cha-abas some diversion, and to attack him by
Sea, while the rest of his Enemies were prosecuting of the War againk him by
Land.

To that purpose there were Designs laid of going with the greatest part of the
united Fleets before that Haven where Cha-abas Fleet lay at Anchor, and there,
as occasion should serve, and as they should think most convenient, either send
a considerable number of Fireships in amongst them all at once, and so burn
and destroy them in their Harbor, or else block them up in it, so as that they
might not be able to get out, by sinking diverse old Carcasses of Ships laden
with stones at the mouth of the Harbor.

It was also deliberated, That during that Diversion a considerable Army should
be landed thereabouts, to seize on the Forts, Castles, and other strong Holds
that were the Guards of that Haven. These things and diverse others of the same
Nature, were debated, and some concluded upon, which showed that all things
were in good posture in the Ottoman Empire, since that they began from being
wholly on the defensive to undertake their part of an offensive War with the
rest of their Allies against Cha-abas, that universal Enemy of Mankind, and of
the true, ancient, and Mohammedan Religion.

Thus far did my Memoirs reach, from whence I have taken that matter, of which
I have composed the first and second Part of the Court Secret. May the
downfall, ruin, and total destruction of the Ante-Titus Vespasianus of our
days, afford me matter sufficient to make a third Part of the Court Secret, or
to make a complete Piece of it self under the Title of, The prodigious Birth
and Life, Tyrannical Government, and miserable Fall of the Christian Turk,
Lewis the Fourteenth.

FINIS.

