Of Revelation and the Messiah.

A SERMON Preached at the Public Commencement AT CAMBRIDGE. July 5th. 1696.

By RICHARD BENTLEY, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary and Library Keeper to His
MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1696.

1 PET. III. 15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man, that asks
you a reason of the Hope that is in you.
BY the Hope that is in us, we do understand here, as in other places of
Scripture, not only the bare Hope strictly so called, but the Faith too of a
Christian. Whence it is, that in the Syriac version of the text, and in some
ancient Latin copies, the word Faith is added to the other; the hope and the
Faith that is in you. And indeed if we consider Hope as a natural passion; we
shall find it to be always attended and ussher'd in by Faith. For it is certain,
there is no Hope without some antecedent Belief, that the thing hoped for may
come to pass; and the strength and steadiness of our Hope is ever proportional
to the measure of our Faith. It appears therefore why the word Hope in the text
may with sufficient propriety of speech comprehend the whole Faith of a
Christian; and that, when the Apostle exhorts us, to be ready always to answer
every man that asks the reason of our Hope; it is the same, as if he injoined
us, to be never unprepared nor unwilling to reply to any doubts or questions
about the grounds of the Christian Faith.

At the date of this Epistle, the whole World (with relation to the text) might
be considered under one general division, Jews and Gentiles: First, the Jews,
Romans 3. 2.
To whom the Oracles of God were committed, and who from thence had the
information and expectation of the Messiah. These, when they asked a Christian
the reason of his Hope, were themselves already persuaded, that the Messiah
would come: and the only controversy between them was, Whether Jesus was He?
according to the message of John the Baptist, Luke 7. 19.
Was Jesus he that should come, or must they look for another? Secondly, the
Gentiles, who having no means of knowledge besides mere natural Reason, could
have no notions nor notices of this expected Messiah. These therefore, when
they demanded the reason of a Christian's Hope, were first to be acquainted
with the purpose and promise of God to send the Messiah, were to be instructed
about the reasons and designs of that great embassy; about his quality and
office, and all the circumstances of his Person: and then was the proper time
to show, That Jesus was He; that the description of the Messiah was truly
exhibited and represented in His character; and the ancient prophecies all
accomplished in His actions and events.

It Is not for nothing, that the Apostle so presses this advice in the text, Be
ready always to give a reason of the hope that is in you. As if he had
foretold, That there would be no age of the Christian world, wherein this
preparation would be superfluous. It has pleased the divine Wisdom, never yet
to leave Christianity wholly at leisure from opposers; but to give its
professors that perpetual exercise of their industry and zeal. And who can
tell, if without such adversaries to rouse and quicken them, they might not in
long tract of time have grown remiss in the duties, and ignorant in the
doctrines of Religion? Perhaps before this time even some of the Records of it
might have perished by men's negligence: as the Jews had like to have lost their
Law, if divine Providence had not preserved one copy of it in the Temple.
Matthew. 13. 25.
It is, while men sleep, while they live in peace and security, and have no
enemies to contest with, that the great Enemy comes and sowes tares among the
wheat. But of all the ages since the coming of Christ, I suppose this present
has least reason to complain for want of work and employment in defense of
Religion. Here are not only the two parties in the text, Jews and Gentiles,
still in the world to engage with; but even in the midst of Christianity are
the most dangerous designs formed against it: as if our Savior's prediction of
particular families were to be verified too of the whole Church, Matthew. 10. 36.
That its worst enemies should be they of its own Household.

There are a sort of persons baptized indeed into the Christian Faith, and
educated in the profession of it: but in secret, I wish I might say so, nay
even openly they oppose and blaspheme it; repudiating at once the whole
authority of Revelation, and debasing the sacred Volumes to the rank of
ordinary Books of History and Ethics. The being of God and a Providence they
profess to believe, to acknowledge a difference between Good and Evil, to be
verily persuaded of another Life to come; and to have their expectations of
that state, as their behavior is in this. Nay even the whole system of
Christian Morals they can willingly embrace: but not as a collection of divine
Statutes and Ordinances sent us by an express from Heaven, but only as useful
rules of life, discoverable by plain Reason, and agreeable to natural Religion.
So that they cannot see the mighty occasion, that should invite even the
eternal Son of God from the bosom of the Father, to act so mean and calamitous
a part upon the stage of this sorry world. What need of so great a master to
read mankind lectures of Morals, which they might easily learn without any
teacher? It Is true, they are often told of some sublime mysterious doctrines
delivered by him, which they own would never have been thought of by natural
Reason. But then, that is so far from recommending to them the importance of
his errand from Heaven; that for that very reason they deny the truth of his
message. For whatever comes imperiously in the name of divine Mystery, and
soars above the pitch of humane knowledge, whatsoever things they cannot fathom
and grasp through all the causes, designs, modes and relations of them, as the
notion of the Messiah, his incarnation, mediation, satisfaction; all these they
reject and explode, as incomprehensible to pure Reason, which they set up as
the only principle and measure of belief.

In all this, these persons act the part, and place themselves in the condition
of Gentiles, whom we may imagine in the text, to ask the reason of a Christians
hope: since the whole body of these men's Religion is no more than what even
Heathens attained to: the modern Deism being the very same with old
Philosophical Paganism, only aggravated and damned with the additional crime of
Apostasy from the Faith. But besides this, these very persons will on other
occasions personate the Jews too, those other enquirers supposed in the text;
and dispute with Jewish objections against the Christian Religion: though they
no more believe the matter of those objections, than the thing they object
against: like Celsus and Julian of old, that gathered arguments against the
Christians from all the different Sects and Hypotheses of Philosophy, though
inconsistent one argument with another; and brought objections too from the Old
Testament, which they did not believe, against the New one, which they were
engaged by all methods to oppose.

In our present Discourse therefore, we shall endeavor to refute these modern
adversaries under their double shape and character: first as they are mere
Deists or Pagans, renouncing all Revelation, and the very notion of the
Messiah: and secondly, as they fight under Jewish colors; so as admitting,
there be a promised Messiah the Savior of the world, yet men ought to reject
the person of Jesus, and still to wait for another.

it self is not shy nor unwilling to ascribe its own first credit and
fundamental authority to the test and testimony of Reason. Sound Reason is the
touchstone to distinguish that pure and genuine gold from baser metals;
Revelation truly divine from imposture and enthusiasm. So that the Christian
Religion is so far from declining or fearing the strictest trials of Reason;
that it everywhere appeals to it, is defended and supported by it, and indeed
cannot continue, in the Apostle's description, James 1. 27.
pure and undefiled without it. It Is the benefit of Reason alone, under the
providence and spirit of God, that we our selves are at this day a Reformed
Orthodox Church: that we departed from the errors of Popery, and that we knew
too where to stop; neither running into the extravagancies of Fanaticism, nor
sliding into the indifferency of Libertinism. Whatsoever therefore is
inconsistent with natural Reason, can never be justly imposed, as an Article of
Faith. That the same Body is in many places at once; that plain Bread is not
Bread; such things, though they be said with never so much pomp, and claim to
infallibility; we have still greater authority to reject them, as being
contrary to common sense and our natural faculties, as subverting the
foundations of all Faith, even the grounds of their own credit, and all the
principles of civil life.

So far are we from contending with our adversaries about the dignity and
authority of Reason: but then we differ with them about the exercise of it, and
the extent of its province. For the Deists there stop and set bounds to their
Faith; where Reason, their only guide, does not lead the way further and walk
along before them. We on the contrary, Deuteronomy. 34.
as Moses was shown by divine power a true sight of the promised Land, though
himself could not pass over to it: so we think, Reason may receive from
Revelation some further discoveries and new prospects of things, and be fully
convinced of the reality of them; though it self cannot pass on, nor travel
those regions, cannot penetrate the fund of those truths, nor advance to the
utmost bounds of them. For there is certainly a wide difference between what is
contrary to Reason, and what is superior to it, and out of its reach. To give
an instance in created Nature: how many things are there, whose being we cannot
doubt of, though unable to comprehend the manner of their being so? That the
human soul is vitally united to the Body by a reciprocal commerce of action and
passion; this we all consciously feel and know, and our adversaries will affirm
it. Let them tell us then, what is the chain, the cement, the magnetism, what
they will call it, the invisible tie of that union, whereby Matter and an
incorporeal Mind, things that have no similitude nor alliance to each other,
can so sympathize by a mutual league of motion and sensation? No, they will not
pretend to that; for they can frame no conceptions of it. They are sure, there
is such an union from the operations and effects: but the cause and the manner
of it are too subtle and secret to be discovered by the eye of Reason; it is
mystery, it is divine magic, it is natural miracle. If then in created beings,
they are content with us, to confess their ignorance of the modes of existence,
without doubting of things themselves: have not we much more reason to be
humble and modest in speculations about the essence of God, about the reasons
of His counsels, and the ways of His actions? yes certainly: under those
circumstances we may believe with Reason even things above and beyond Reason.

For example: If we have sure ground to believe that such a book is the
Revelation of God; and we find in it Propositions expressed in plain words, of
a determinate sense without ambiguity; so as they cannot be otherwise
interpreted, by any just metaphor or fair construction allowed in common
language: we say we have sufficient reason to assent to those propositions, as
divine doctrines and infallible truths, so far as they are declared there;
though perhaps we cannot our selves comprehend, nor demonstrate to others, the
reasons and the manner of them. Neither is this an easy credulity, or unworthy
of the most cautious and morose searcher of truth. For observe; we do not say,
Any thing incomprehensible to Reason is separate and alone a proper object of
belief: but as it is supported and established by some other known and
comprehensible truth. As, if Abraham had been told by some ordinary Man, That
in His and Sarah's decrepit age he should be blessed with a Son: this Promise
so alone, without its basis to stand on, could not have challenged his assent;
because the thing was impossible in the way of Nature. Matthew. 19. 26.
But since it was God Almighty, with whom all things are possible, that was the
author of that Promise; by the mediation of that certain truth, the veracity
and omnipotence of God, without hesitation he believed, and so obtained the
glory to be Father of the faithful. Romans 4. 11.
And upon the same grounds the Blessed Virgin gave credit to the salutation of
the Angel; though the message in it self seemed impossible to reason. So true
it is, that Reason it self warrants us to proceed and advance by Faith, even
beyond the sphere and regions of Reason. We agree then with our adversaries
about the authority of Reason: but we dissent about the exercise of it, and the
bounds of its jurisdiction. We believe even the abstrusest Mysteries of the
Christian Religion: of which mysteries perhaps we can assign no reasons; but
for our belief we assign a good one: Because they are plainly taught in the
word of God, who can neither err nor deceive. And this we affirm to be a
reasonable conclusion; though it carry us even to the confines of Heaven,
beyond the limits of Reason. But if the Deists think to oblige us to give a
natural account of those mysteries, without the authority of Scripture: for
that we must beg their excuse. We will argue from strict Reason, as much as
they can pretend to: but we must not submit that our adversaries shall confine
us to improper topics and impossible ways of proof.

It appears therefore, that though we should decline and despair to give any
account at all of the reasons and methods of God's counsel in the mission of
his Son; and only appeal to the sentence of Scripture: yet the Deists ought to
be satisfied with that proof; since the Doctrine is so expressly taught in the
oracles of God. But besides this, what if even natural Light shall discover to
us some faint, but yet certain views of that mysterious instance of divine
Wisdom and Goodness; and exhibit to us a rational account, Why the Son of God
should condescend to be our Mediator and Redeemer. But before we engage in this
attempt, let it be lawful to implore the candor of our Friends; if, while we
endeavor to win over our Enemies, we may seem to some, To do too little, or
perhaps to others, To venture too far, and to advance beyond our Lines. To
discern then some reasons of this wonderful Mystery; we must take our prospect
from the highest mountain of Nature, from the first Creation, and origin of
human Race.

GOD, who at the beginning viewed all the works of his hands, Genesis 1. 31.
and behold, all things were very good; made Man also upright and complete,
without any defect in his whole composition, without any original perverseness
of Soul, or false bias of Will or Judgment, without any natural obliquity or
enormity of Inclinations. He made him an intelligent Being, to know God and
Himself: to understand and feel present happiness, and to secure it by
consideration and contrivance for the future. He endowed him with liberty of
mind: that he might act, not of necessity, nor blind instinct like the Brutes;
but with consciousness and voluntary choice. He implanted in him diverse
Appetites and Affections, all useful instruments of his happiness, if fitly
employed: and none vicious and culpable radically and in their whole nature;
but then only, when they are applied to wrong objects, or in right ones are
raised or sunk beside their due temper and measure. I say it again, for the
justification of our Creator; that not one of the simple affections of the
Soul, no not Concupiscence, Hatred, Anger, Revenge, are in themselves criminal
and sinful. Some of the Affections, it is true, have very bad names: but those
are either mere excesses of simple Passions; or else mixed and compound ones,
which have no proper real essence, but are only notional terms; as Envy for
example, a very bad thing indeed; but it is an evil of our own product, and not
of God's creating. For the real constituent parts of it, are Hatred and Grief,
very useful and lawful affections: but the evil of it is our own; when we
entertain that Hatred and Grief at the good that befalls others: which is what
we express by the complex name of Envy.

God therefore having so created Man, in every capacity pure and perfect, might
justly require of him, that he should maintain and preserve this original
rectitude; that in all his desires, designs and actions, he should constantly
adhere to the dictates of Reason and Nature; so as the least deviation would
make him obnoxious to God's displeasure, and nothing less than complete
obedience recommend him to his favor: according to the terms proposed to Cain,
Genesis 4. 7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin
lies at the door. God, I say, might expect and require of man such a perfect
obedience to the Law of Nature: because it was both reasonable and possible for
Man to perform it. Reasonable it was, because every Statute of that Law
promotes the true interest and felicity of Mankind, even in the very
performance. It Is true, in the present posture of human affairs, a man's duty
is frequently inconsistent with his temporal interest. But from the beginning
it was not so: neither would it be now, if the whole world at once could be
just and innocent. For it is not my keeping the Law, but another transgressing
it, that involves me in any misery. The scope and tendency of the Law it self
is always mine and every man's advantage. For it is not a thing foreign and
aliene to our nature, imposed on us purely to try our obedience; but it all
results from our very frame and constitution. The general preservation of man's
Natural good is the sole root and fountain of the Moral: the universal Profit
and Pleasure, the public Happiness of human Life gives being and denomination
to every virtue and vice: and the true rules and directions to preserve and
secure that happiness make up the whole Volume, the Code and Pandect of the Law
of Nature. Without doubt then it was reasonable to obey, where nothing was
commanded us, but to pursue our own interest; nothing forbidden us, but not to
do our selves harm. And secondly, it was possible for man to perform that
entire obedience. For since, as we have proved before, all his natural
faculties are right and good, and the Law it self accommodated and proportioned
to those faculties; there appears no necessary intrinsic impediment, why he may
not adequately observe it. If every particular precept be possible to be done,
it is not absolutely impossible to fulfill the universal. And methinks they,
that on other accounts acknowledge that God requires such perfect obedience
upon the terms of the Law of Nature, should be very averse from believing, that
there is a natural and fundamental insufficiency in man to perform it. For
certainly the just God cannot be so importune and unreasonable a Master, as to
enjoin us what is physically impossible, to expect to reap where he has not
sown, to require Bricks without allowance of Straw.

But then, though there was no such original and natural disability in Man; yet
there arose a moral and circumstantial one, an accidental incapacity
supervening to his Nature, an impossibility from event, that ever any person
from the beginning of the world to the last period of it (always excepting the
Man Christ Jesus) should be wholly pure and free from the contagion of Sin. For
our first Parents having fallen from their native state of innocence; the
tincture of evil, like an hereditary disease, infected all their posterity: and
the leaven of sin having once corrupted the whole Mass of Mankind, all the
species ever after would be sowred and tainted with it; the vicious ferment
perpetually diffusing and propagating it self through all generations. For let
us but consider the state of human life; first a perpetual conversation among
evil Examples, and the strongest principle of our nature, Imitation; and then,
the ignorance and prejudices of Childhood, the fervor and temerity of Youth;
the force and the frequency of Temptations, and the narrow dubious conconfines
between Virtue and Vice: and we may pronounce it impossible, that any man
should so govern his steps through all the lubricous paths of Life, as never
once to slip and fall from his duty. Agreeably to the testimony of Scripture,
which has concluded all under sin, Gal. 3. 22. and again; If we say, 1 John 1.
8.
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: and again,
Romans 3. 9. 23.
both Jews and Gentiles are all under sin; all have sinned and come short of
the glory of God. Ib. v. 19.
Every mouth then be stopped; and all the world must plead guilty before the
tribunal of God: for by the deeds of the Law (the Law of nature as well as of
Moses) no flesh can be justified in his sight. It is evident then from the
principles of pure Reason, beside the authority of Scripture; that upon the
Deists Hypothesis, upon the terms of natural Religion, no Salvation can be
obtained; no Life and Immortality can be expected. For that being the free
offer and favor of God; he might justly set what price he pleased upon it;
even the greatest that we can possibly pay; nothing less than entire obedience,
than unspotted innocence, than consummate virtue.

Thus far then even Reason evinceth, and holds the Lamp to Revelation. Some
means of Reconciliation between God and Man, the Judge and the Offender, must
be contrived; some vicarious satisfaction to justice, and model of a new
Covenant; or else the whole bulk of Mankind are for ever unhappy. And surely to
prevent that, to retrieve a perishing world, was a weighty concern; even of
greater importance than the very creating it, and more worthy of the care and
consult of Heaven. I say, the care of Heaven; for alas here on Earth, what
expedient could Man find out? How could Dust and Ashes take upon him to speak
unto the Lord? Could any of the Sons of Adam presume to be advocate for the
rest? himself one of the criminals, himself in want of another advocate? and
what friend knew we at the court of Heaven; of that high power and favor with
God, as to offer his intercession? or so wonderfully kind to Us, as to pay our
satisfaction? We must freely own to the Deist; that here Reason was at a stand:
even Nature her self languish'd between hope and despair; Romans 8. 22.
and in the style of the Apostle, the whole Creation groaned and traveled in
pain together; when behold (what Revelation has informed and assured us of)
the eternal Son of the Almighty, Heb. 1. 3.
the brightness of the Paternal Glory and the express image of his Substance,
even He vouchsafed to be our Patron and Mediator, to take our Nature upon him
and to dwell among Men, to fulfill that Law of righteousness wherein we were
deficient, to bear our guilt and our burden upon himself, and to offer his
most precious blood, as an expiation for our offenses, as the seal of a new
Covenant better than the Law of Nature; a Covenant of more gracious terms,
terms of Repentance and Remission of sins: so that if we truly believe in Him,
and sincerely endeavor to observe his Commands; our imperfect Righteousness
through the merits of his Sufferings shall be imputed, accepted and rewarded;
as if it were an entire obedience to the strict Law of Works and of natural
Perfection.

And now I dare presume to ask even our adversaries themselves, what flaws or
fallacies they can show in all this. If it be true then, that Reason it self
discovers such absolute necessity of some way of Reconciliation between God and
Man; and if it was necessary for Man, as being the party concerned, to know the
particular way that God did approve and accept of; and if mere Reason could
never find that out, but Revelation alone must and ought to inform us; and
lastly, if such Revelation be actually made, attested, and promulgated to the
world: what pretense is there left, why we should not believe and acquiesce in
it? if upon examination it bear all the marks of true Revelation; if it contain
nothing unworthy of it self, and of the wisdom and goodness of its Author.

And is not the Economy of man's Salvation, as it is set forth in Holy
Scriptures, every way agreeable to that divine character? No, if we ask our
Adversaries; it is an improper and unequal method; it is inconsistent with the
justice and impartiality of God. Rex Jupiter omnibus idem. God, say they, if he
had designed such an universal benefit for Mankind, would have exhibited it
equally and indifferently, to every Age and Nation alike. But the conditions of
Salvation proposed in the Gospel are incompetent and much too narrow; being
restrained to those times and countries alone, that can hear of the fame of
Jesus, and believe in his Person. And what becomes then of all the former Ages
of men, before He was born? What of those remote Nations ever since, that could
have no intelligence of him, nor hear the least tidings of Judea and Jerusalem?
must all those Myriads of Souls perish for invincible ignorance, for want of
impossible Faith? Romans 10. 14.
For how could they believe on him, of whom they had not heard? and how could
they hear without a Preacher? And why should the God of the whole earth, the
God that is no respecter of persons, no nor of nations, be so unaccountably
kind, so unjustly fond and partial to any single country? much less to a little
obscure people, the Jews, scarce heard of in the rest of the world, till they
were captives and slaves in it? and withdraw his paternal love from so many
other Nations much more considerable, and more worthy of his providence? Is he
God of the Jews only? Romans 3. 29.
Is he not also of the Gentile?

This way of discourse we may expect from the Deists: And I hope, according to
the advice of the text, we are both able and ready to give a Reply. For first
as to that imagined Partiality of God, in preferring any one country before the
rest of the World, to be the Land of Christ's Nativity; what a poor and
contemptible cavil? For upon supposition, that the Messiah of God was to take
human nature upon him, and be born of a Woman: must he not of necessity be born
in some one particular Country, exclusively to all the rest? And is not that
then a ridiculous objection against any single Country; that may equally be
urged against all whatsoever?

Neither was it mere Fondness in the Deity, that he chose the obscure land of
Palestine for the birth place of his Son, rather than Greece, or Italy, or
Asia, the theaters of Art and Learning, and the seats of Empire? For not to
mention Abraham and the Patriarchs, whose singular faith and piety justly
obtained of God, that their Posterity should have the adoption and the glory,
Romans 9. 4.
and the covenants and the promises, and the consanguinity of Christ: it
appears also from event; that the circumstances of that nation were of all
others the most suitable to the design of the Messiah. For since it was fit and
necessary, that Prophecies should foretell of him long before his coming; that
his pedigree and extraction should be accurately deduced through a long series
of Ancestors; and other such marks be assigned of him, that men might know,
This was He: what more proper to those purposes, than the state of the Jews,
that peculiar people, secluded and distinguished one tribe from another, and
the whole from all the rest of Mankind, by the very frame of their polity? So
that the Genealogies were less confused, the Histories and Prophecies more
faithfully recorded, and the accomplishment of all more certain and
illustrious, than they could have been in any other Nation upon Earth; all of
which, within that long compass of time, were blended together by mutual
commerce and mutual conquest, and other omnifarious causes of mixture and
confusion.

And then as to that other surmise, that God would have proposed fair and equal
means of general salvation; and not upon such narrow and insufficient terms, as
an actual Faith in the person of Jesus; a condition impossible to the much
greater part of Mankind: we acknowledge it to be true, infallibly true; Faith
in Christ Jesus the only way to Salvation since the preaching of the Gospel: so
as whosoever rejects that, when it is duly declared to him, and refuses his
assent and obedience to it, can have no portion in the Kingdom of Heaven. But
for those, that never once heard of the Lord of Life; that is an undecided case,
which we do not determine. For who has authority to give sentence, where God
and Scripture are silent? Thus far we are assured there; that let the future
condition of those be as God pleases, at least he will not condemn them for
invincible ignorance. For there is no respect of persons with Him; Romans ^. 11*
12.
but as many as have sinned without Law, shall perish without Law. The meaning
whereof is, that the Gentile world shall not be judged and condemned for the
breach of the law of Moses, which never was given them; but for sins against
the law of Nature, and the common light of Conscience. We may infer then by
parity of argument, That as many as shall sin without the Gospel, shall perish
without the Gospel; that is, not because they believed not in Jesus, whom they
had not the least notice of: but they will be tried and sentenced for sins
against natural Reason, for things within their power and capacity; Romans 1. 18,
20, 21.
because when they knew God, they glorified him not, as God; because they held
the truth in unrighteousness, so that they are without excuse.

But if the Deist shall still insist; that though we have justified God from
the calumny, as if he would condemn the Gentiles for want of impossible Faith:
yet still he maintains it to be unjust and incredible, that while one small
part of Mankind enjoys the favor of the Gospel; all under the state of Nature
shall have the hard measure of Summum Ius; must be all damned by rigid
inflexible Justice, without equity or mercy, without any act of pardon, or the
least room for Repentance: if he will rather obstinately believe, or hope, or
wish; that the God of tender compassions, who loves all things that he has
made, who will not require much, where little has been given, cannot be so
extreme with the Gentile world as to mark all that is done amiss; and yet to
slight and overlook those shining examples of virtue not unfrequent among them.
If this be all he sticks at: God forbid, that on this single account, he should
exclude himself from the Communion of Faith. We can allow him this opinion; as
at worst a charitable error, as some indication of a large heart and a generous
love of Mankind. But then he must always remember, that even those virtuous
Heathens, whom he would so gladly place in some part of Heaven, can be saved on
no other account than by the merits and mediation of Jesus their Savior. For
without his satisfaction, there is no remission of sins nor acceptance of
repentance: and without remission of sins, Romans 3. 20.
by the deeds of the Law, and natural Righteousness, no flesh can be justified
in the sight of God. They are saved therefore, if they be saved at all, by the
sole benefit of Christ; though in this life they could not know nor thank their
Benefactor. For though they lived in the earliest ages of time, long before his
Incarnation, yet even then they might be purified by the blood of the Lamb, 1
Pet. 1. 20.
manifested indeed in latter times, but pre-ordained before the foundation of
the world: so that from the first origin of it, he might extend and impart, to
all that were worthy, the efficacy of his Merits, and the privileges of Faith
and Grace, and a share in the inheritance of Glory and Immortality.

II. And now we may expect, that our Adversaries

It must be granted on all hands, that the Messiah, whenever he is manifested
to the world, must appear in that very manner, as the Jewish Prophets describe
him. All the characters must hit and correspond one to another; the same
features, the same lineaments visible in both; the one the shadow and picture,
and the other the substance. Now, say they, it is evident from the Prophets;
That the Messiah is to be a temporal Prince, to sit on the throne of David his
royal ancestor, and to make Jerusalem the seat of an universal and perpetual
Empire. But the character of Jesus is as different from this description, as a
stable from a palace. It Is true, we Christians endeavor to show a similitude
between them by figurative interpretations of Scripture: which we call the
spiritual and mystical sense; but they call arbitrary and precarious, as having
no foundation in the native and naked Letter: which is not to be racked and
wrested from its obvious meaning; little credit being to be given to such
extorted confessions.

Thus far our Objectors. But I suppose, the Prophetic language and character
is better understood, than that this surmise should pass without a just answer.
Indeed if it were in this case alone, that the expressions of the Prophets need
a figurative interpretation, the exception might appear fair and plausible. But
it cannot be denied, that on many other occasions, besides the matter of the
Messiah, their discourse (after the genius of the Eastern nations) is thick set
with metaphor and allegory: the same bold comparisons and dithyrambick liberty
of style everywhere occurr. Which is an easy and natural account (besides the
more secret reasons that the Holy Spirit might have) why the kingdom of
Messiah, though really spiritual and not of this world, is so often dressed and
painted by them with the glories of secular Empire. For when the spirit of God
came upon them, and breathed a new warmth and vigor through all the powers of
Body and Soul; when by the influx of divine light the whole scene of Christ's
heavenly kingdom was represented to their view; so that their hearts were
ravished with joy, and their imaginations turgid and pregnant with the glorious
ideas: then surely, if ever, their style would be strong and lofty, full of
allusions to all that is great and magnificent in the kingdoms of this world.
But then in other passages of the same Prophets, as it were on purpose to hint
to us the true meaning of the former, the Messiah is described plainly without
poetical colors, to be a person of low condition, to have no form nor
comeliness in him, a man acquainted with sorrows, and numbered among
transgressors; and by other characters so clear and express: that some of the
Jewish Rabbis, to elude so strong a conviction, have maintained and propagated
an absurd opinion, as if two Messiah's were foretold by the Prophets, the one a
triumphant monarch, and the other an unfortunate and afflicted person. What
will not perverse and refractary minds take hold of, rather than submit to an
unwelcome truth?

It is evident then, that the kingdom of Christ so magnified in the Prophetic
style is a spiritual kingdom. And yet to be free and ingenuous, we must own
that the whole nation of the Jews mistook the meaning of those passages. Even
our Savior's own disciples were not exempted from the common error. And the
whole posterity of that people are pertinacious in it to this day: which to
many is a mighty prejudice against the credit of the Gospel. What? as if it
were such a matter of astonishment, that they obstinately adhere to the literal
sense, which promises them a temporal kingdom with worldly honors and
pleasures? an interpretation both specious in it self, and agreeable to their
proud hopes and carnal apprehensions, which are miserably defeated and
disappointed in Jesus? There seems to be nothing so very unnatural and
unaccountable in this. But then that very Disappointment, so far it is from
being an objection, that to a sagacious mind and incorrupt judgment, it self is
a convincing proof, that he was truly the Messiah. For let us reflect upon the
state of those times. It Is certain in fact, that the whole nation was possessed
with an inveterate persuasion, that the Messiah was then a coming. And it is as
certain, that Jesus the Son of Mary professed himself that Messiah. Let us argue
now upon human reasons and the common principles of action. If he was not the
true Messiah: we are then to consider him, as an ordinary Jew, of mean quality
and education. Now to give any tol^rable account, why such a one should pretend
himself to be the Messiah, there are but two ways possible. Either he was acted
by ambitious designs, which he hoped to compass by that impost^^e or by a
complexional and natural enthusiasm, verily imagining himself to be the
Messiah. I suppose, I scarce need to say, that both these suppositions are
fully confuted by every word and action of his life. But what I now observe, is
this; that upon either of those principles, whether Ambition or Enthusiasm, he
would certainly have acted the part of the Messiah, in such a character as men
then asscribed to him; according to the popular expectation, and the received
notion of those times. Now the whole Nation expected, that the Messiah was to
be a great General; to rescue them from the Roman power, and to restore the
kingdom to Israel. It Is certain then, that upon either of those motives, he
would have blown the trumpet to rebellion, and attempted their deliverance.
Ambition would have animated him to it; as the only way to his hopes and
wishes: or if Enthusiasm had inspired him, what would he not have promised and
assumed to himself? to fight the battles of the Lord; to execute vengeance upon
the Heathen; to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of
iron. Such were the designs of Barcocab and some other impostors of old:
setting up to be the Messiah; they put their followers in arms, and proclaimed
liberty to the people. Not so the blessed Jesus: but when the multitude would
have made him their King, he withdrew himself even by miracle to avoid it. He
did not summon to arms, but to repentance and newness of life. He had a kingdom
indeed: but not of this earthly Jerusalem, but of that which is above. He was
truly their deliverer: but not from the Roman yoke; but from the more slavish
yoke of the Law, from the more wretched bondage to sin and death. Was this the
air and language of Ambition? Was this the mien and spirit of Enthusiasm? Nay
rather does not Nature her self cry out and declare; that for one of his low
condition and vulgar education, to profess himself the Messiah in so surprising
a manner, in a character so unthought of, by an interpretation of Prophecies so
spiritual and divine, so infinitely better than the literal meaning, against
the universal prejudice of the nation, and the hopes and solicitations of his
very followers; was certainly a thing more than human, an invincible testimony,
that he was really the Christ, and his doctrine from God and not of men.

But our Adversaries have another objection still behind: and our answer
thereto will put an end both to it and to the present discourse. And this
objection is borrowed from the Law of Moses: which, say they, having a promise
of eternity annexed to it, to be an everlasting covenant, a perpetual statute,
a covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, ought of necessity to be continued and
confirmed by the true Messiah: whereas Jesus endeavored to abolish it, and
thereby wholly subverted the credit of his own pretensions. But we answer in
our Savior's declaration, Matthew. ^. 17.
that he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. We are to distinguish
then between the moral part of the Mosaic Law, and the political and
ceremonial. As to the Rites and Ceremonies; it is apparent, they had no
intrinsic nor moral holiness in them; no natural tendency to promote the
happiness of men; nay rather they were inconvenient and grievous, a yoke of
bondage and servile discipline, which none were able to bear. Even the rewards
and penalties, which enforced their observation, did not naturally flow and
result from them, as effects from proper causes; but they were miraculously
added to them by the sole virtue of the divine promise. It Is true, they were
fit and proper for the ends of their institution; to be types and shadows of
better things to come; to preserve the people from Idolatry, by allowing no
intercourse nor commerce with other nations. But it is evident for that very
reason, as well as many more, that those ceremonies were neither calculated for
eternity, nor modelled for mankind in common. So that when the reasons of their
sanction no longer continued, when the things they typically represented, were
come to pass; when the wall of partition was to be removed, and according to
the Prophecies, all nations to be called to Christ, and the ends of the earth
to be his possession: they must needs be antiquated and abolished, like
scaffolds that are removed when the buildings are finished: since under that
new state none of them had any further use, and several of them became
impossible to be observed. And so for the Political institutions of Moses: it is
plain they were accommodated to the circumstances of affairs, and the
necessities of time and place; not absolutely the very best, but the best that
those ages of the world and the genius of that people would bear. As for
instance, the toleration of Polygamy and causeless Divorces; these were
indulged them, not as most pleasing to their Lawgiver, Matthew. 19. 8.
but because of the hardness of their hearts, in the words of our Savior:
because they were too stiff-necked and headstrong to admit of a shorter bridle.
These civil ordinances therefore, when better precepts were once proposed and
accepted in their place, must of necessity drop and die of themselves, and
become obsolete without any repeal: just as the temporary edicts in war, and
the agreements of the cartel do expire of their own accord, when the peace is
concluded. But then the Moral part of the law of Moses, which is the sap and
marrow, the soul and substance of the whole, that indeed is of eternal and
universal obligation. But then, who can say, that this is abrogated and
cancelled by Jesus? so far from that, that every branch of it is ingrafted and
incorporated into his Gospel. In this best of senses therefore the Mosaic Law
is confirmed and fulfilled by our Savior. For Morality is a thing immutable;
and unless human nature it self should be new molded by our maker; vice and
virtue must be always what they have been. So foolish was the cavil of the
Deists against our Savior's descent from Heaven; P. 4.
because he gave no other Lectures of Morals, than what Nature and Reason had
taught before. Nay if he had taught us the reverse of those Morals, this had
been an objection indeed. But in that even the divinity of his doctrine most
eminently appears; that the finger of God upon the tables of our hearts, and
the pens of the inspired Writers in the volume of the Gospel have prescribed us
one and the same lesson. As for Us, whose employment it is to teach that lesson
to others; let us but express it also in our own lives and conversations; let
us but add that credit to our doctrine, that reputation to our profession: so
may we expect to bring over all our adversaries to the truth and power of
Religion; so may we expect, when we give the account of our talents, to be
received with that blessed approbation, Well done, thou good and faithful
servant; enter thou into the joy of thy Master.

FINIS.

