MEMOIRS OF Sir John Berkley, Containing an ACCOUNT Of his NEGOTIATION WITH
Lieutenant General CROMWELL, Commissary General IRETON, And other Officers of
the Army, For Restoring King CHARLES the First to the Exercise of the
Government of England.

LONDON: Printed by J. Darby in Bartholomew-Close, for A. Baldwin in
Warwicklane. MDCXCIX

MEMOIRS OF Sir JOHN BERKLEY.
IN the Year 1647 her Majesty and his Highness the Prince of Wales were pleased
to send me into Holland, to condole the Death of the Prince of Orange; and
having performed that Office, I returned with Mr. John and Mr. William
Ashburnham to France, by the way of Calais; where we met with the News of his
Majesty's being seized by one Cornet Joyce in Holmby House, from whence he was
carried with a Guard of 400 Horse toward the Army, the Cornet producing no
Authority whereby to warrant this proceeding. The next Post brought us
Advertisement to Calais, that his Majesty was well received by the Officers and
Soldiers of the Army, and that there were great hopes conceived that they would
both concur to establish his Majesty in his just Rights. From Calais we went to
Rouen, where we met a Confirmation of this Intelligence, and heard withal, that
one Sir Edward Ford (who was Brother-in-law to Commissary General Ireton) was
sent by her Majesty and his Highness the Prince of Wales into England, to
discover the Intentions of the Army, and to promote an Agreement between his
Majesty and them. From Rouen we went to St. Germains; where we were no sooner
arrived, but we heard that Mr. Denham (who during his Imprisonment had
contracted a great Familiarity with Mr. Peter's, a Preacher, and a powerful
person in the Army) was dispatched with a Commission to the like effect with
that of Sir Edward Ford. As I was going up to her Majesty, I met accidentally
with my Lord Culpepper, who scarce had saluted me, before he told me, that I
must prepare my self immediately for another Journey, her Majesty being
resolved to send me into England after Sir Edward Ford and Mr. Denham. I
answered, that I had no Pass, nor any Acquaintance with any one of the Army;
and that I doubted, if the King's Party should come too thick upon them at
first, those of the Army would be jealous they should have too many Sharers in
the Places and Preferments they might perhaps meditate to procure and preserve
to themselves. His Lordship replied, That if I were afraid to go into England,
her Majesty and his Highness would serve themselves of some other person,
because they conceived it necessary to employ some to the Army, that might be
supposed to have greater Trust both with the Queen in France, and with the King
in England, than either Sir Edward Ford or Mr. Denham had. I returned, That if
after a serious consideration it should be judged of use to dispatch me into
England, I would adventure, tho I had not the honor to be very well known to
his Majesty, and therefore could not expect any great Trust from him. To that
part his Lordship replied, That there was an Intention to send Mr. John
Ashburnham after me; but that he would not go without a Pass, and therefore
that I should have it added to my Instructions to procure him one. Within few
days after, I had my Dispatch, and went by the way of Dieppe, where I met with
Mr. William Leg of the Bedchamber to his Majesty. He embarked with me for
England; we arrived at Hastings, and from thence went the next day toward
London. Two miles on this side Tunbridg I met with Sir Allen Apsley, who had
been my Lieutenant Governor of Exeter, and afterward Governor of Barnstaple in
the County of Devon. He told me that he was going to me from Cromwell and some
other Officers of the Army, with Letters, and a Cipher and Instructions, which
were to this effect: That he should desire me to remember, that in some
Conferences with Colonel Lambert and other Officers of the Army upon the
rendering of Exeter, I had taken notice of the Army's bitter inveighing against
the King's person, as if he had been the worst of men, and their excessive
extolling the Parliament; both which being without any color of ground, I had
concluded that those Discourses were not out of any persuasion of mind, but
affected to prepare men to receive the Alteration of Government they intended
the Parliament should effect by the assistance of the Army; which I had said
was not only a most wicked, but a very difficult if not an impossible Design,
for a few men not of the greatest Quality to introduce a Popular Government
against the King and his Party, against the Presbyterians, against the Nobility
and Gentry, against the Laws established both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and
against the whole Genius of the Nation, that had been accustomed for so many
Ages to a Monarchical Government. Whereas on the other side, if they would but
consider, that those of their Party had no particular obligations to the Crown,
as many of the Presbyterians had, and therefore ought less to despair of his
Majesty's Grace and Favor; that the Presbyter began this War upon specious
pretenses of making the King a glorious King; that under that pretext they had
deceived many well-meaning men, and had brought great things to pass; but that
now the Mask was taken off, and they discovered to have sought their own
Advantages, and at the same time the Power almost wrested out of their hands to
do themselves much good or others hurt, and that by the Independent Party, who
could establish themselves no way under Heaven so justly and prudently, as by
making good what the Presbyterians had only pretended, that is, restoring King
and People to their just and ancient Rights; which would so ingratiate them
with both, that they would voluntarily invest them with as much Trust and Power
as Subjects are capable of. Whereas if they grasped more, it would be with the
general hatred, and their own destruction. To this Discourse of mine they only
gave a Hearing, but no Consent, as proceeding from an Interest much divided
from theirs: but since they have found by experience all or the most part to be
so reasonable that they were resolved to put it in practice, as I might
perceive by what had already passed; they desired for the present nothing of
me, but that I would present them humbly to the Queen and Prince, and be Suitor
to them in their Names, not to condemn them absolutely, but to suspend their
Opinions of them, and their Pretensions toward his Majesty, and judge them
rather by their future Behavior, of the innocence whereof they had already
given some Testimonies to the World, and would do more and more daily. When I
should have done this Office, they desired I would come over into England, and
become an Eyewitness of their Proceedings. I thought this Rencounter no ill
Omen to my future Proceedings. Sir Allen Apsley told me I should have to do
with subtle men, that governed themselves by other Maxims than the rest of the
World. I remember I answered, that the Caution was good, and that I would arm
my self the best I could; but that it was hard to secure our selves from
malicious men when we were absolutely in their power. I took the best
Information I could from Sir Allen Apsley, and resolved with him to go into
London before I went to the King or the Army, that I might be enlightened by
the most able men of our Party; which I did, and collected this following
Discourse from them.

[During the time his Majesty was at Newcastle, the Independent Party was so
prevalent in the House of Commons, that the Presbyterians were forced to
consent to have the King rendered by the Scots to the Parliament; and his
Majesty was accordingly delivered by them to the English Committee, and a Guard
of English set upon him of the Presbyterian party, and no passionate Enemies of
his Majesty. The Presbyterian party, that was very numerous in the House of
Commons, and over-voted the other in most Questions, had engaged themselves
privately (by some of their Chiefs) to the Scots in two points; first, that the
Army should be disbanded, and then the King brought to his Parliament with
Honor and Safety. The disbanding was gone about very seriously by the
Parliament; and a Committee (whereof the Earl of Warwick was the chief)
chosen, and accordingly sent to Newmarket or Saffron-walden, where the Army
then lay. Many of the Army professed really their Obedience to the Parliament
as to the disbanding; but none more solemnly than Cromwell, who made great
Execrations against himself in the House, if he did not desire it cordially. He
had always professed great Submission to the Parliament, who had very liberally
rewarded him for his Service, and was hopeful to have begotten so great a
confidence in them, that they would have been contented to entertain the Army
as their Pretorian Band, and therefore was very sorry to see the House bent to
license them, but durst not appear against it, because he had many Ill-willers
in the Army, and did believe they durst not, or would not, unanimously oppose
the Parliament in that particular, and therefore refused to go to the Army, tho
he was sent for often by the mutinous Party, who upon that score were not a
little offended with him; and at length, their Discontents increasing, seeing
themselves deserted by their Superior Officers, thought of some means to secure
themselves from their Ungrateful Parliament, which they began now perfectly to
hate, and thereupon chose to themselves Adjutators in every Regiment, and in
every Troop of Horse, by whom they engaged themselves to be absolutely
concluded. The first Resolution these new-elected Officers took, was, not to
disband, and the next, to seize the King's Person. Cromwell staid very long in
London, for one that had been the Author of that Design: however, he at last
stole out of Town, and joined with the Mutineers, but did not so readily concur
in the seizing the King's Person, or at least pretended not to do it: For he
sent his Kinsman VVhalley with Orders to use all means but Force, to cause his
Majesty to return to Holmby; but his Majesty absolutely refusing, VVhalley
marched with his Majesty toward the Army.]

This Account I had from the most discerning of my Acquaintance in London, from
whence I went to the Headquarters at Reading, with intention (after I had
delivered my Message) to desire leave to wait on his Majesty at Causum. I was
no sooner arrived at Reading, but I spoke with Sir Edward Ford and Mr. John
Denham. Both of them were much of the same Advice with those I had discoursed
at London concerning the present Power of the Adjutators, by whom the most
important Affairs of the Kingdom and Army were transacted. By them I learnt
that His Majesty came very unwillingly from Holmby; that his Majesty would not
go to the Army, tho he were earnestly invited by the Officers; that his
Majesty, against the Consent of the Army, concurred with the Vote of the
Parliament, to go to Richmond, where he would have been out of the Army's
power, and would not be persuaded out of his Resolution, till the Army forced
the Parliament to recall their Vote: Then his Majesty would needs go to Windsor,
much against the sense of the Army; but because they could not persuade his
Majesty, they forced him from thence by ill usage; and that the rather, because
he would not be entreated to pass by the Army in his way to Windsor: In sum,
they doubted that his Majesty hearkened to some secret Propositions of the
Presbyterians, and bent all his thoughts to make an absolute Breach between the
Army and the Parliament, which Ireton discerned, and told his Majesty plainly,
Sir, you have an intention to be the Arbitrator between the Parliament and us,
and we mean to be it between your Majesty and the Parliament.

Two or three hours after my arrival, Cromwell sent an Officer to excuse him to
me, that he could not wait on me till ten at night, by reason he was sitting
with the Committee of Parliament, and should not rise till then. He came then
accompanied with Rainsborough and Sir Hardress Waller. After general
discourse, I told him the sum of my Instructions from the Queen and Prince;
which were to assure them, that her Majesty and his Highness were not partial
to the Presbyterians, nor any way averse to them; that I should endeavor to
incline his Majesty to comply with them as far as would stand with his Honor
and Conscience, and to dispose them to press his Majesty no farther. His answer
was in these words: That whatever the World might judge of them, they would be
found no seekers of themselves farther than to have leave to live as Subjects
ought to do, and to preserve their Consciences; that they thought no men could
enjoy their Lives and Estates quietly, without the King had his Rights, which
they had declared in general terms already to the World, and would more
particularly very speedily, wherein they would comprise the several Interests
of the Royal, Presbyterian, and Independent Parties, as far as they were
consisting with each other; which I understood afterward, to be meant of the
Proposals of the Army. I went the next day to the General, by Cromwell's
direction, to ask his leave to see the King; which he was pleased to grant. I
delivered my Letters and Instructions to his Majesty. I found that his Majesty
discovered not only to me, but to every one he was pleased to converse with, a
total Diffidence of all the Army except Huntington, and grounded it chiefly
upon the Officers backwardness to treat of receiving any Favor or Advantage
from his Majesty. I was of his Majesty's sense, that men whose hands were yet
hot with the blood of his most faithful Subjects, ought not entirely to be
trusted, but thought they ought absolutely to be well dissembled with whilst
his Majesty was in their hands, at least that he might the better get out of
them, and to this end offered several Expedients; as, to suffer Peter's to
preach before his Majesty, of which he was very ambitious; and to converse with
him, and others of the Army, with freedom; and by all means to endeavor to
gain the good Opinion of the most active Adjutators, and the like. But his
Majesty concurred in none of them; which made me doubt his Majesty valued my
Reasons something the worse for the Author, and therefore I meditated nothing
so much as to procure a Pass for Mr. John Ashburnham, with whom I hoped I might
prevail, and he with his Majesty; which within few days after I did obtain, and
caused it to be delivered to his Servant.

About four days after my coming to the Army, there came two General Officers
from the Council of War to me, to let me know, that they had been informed that
I had some wrong done me upon the Rendition of Exeter, to a great value; and
that if I would put the Sum under my hand, they would see that I should have
satisfaction. I gave them most hearty thanks; but withal told them, that I came
not to them upon my own business, but that of his Majesty; which as soon as
they should dispatch, no man living would be more ready to receive and
acknowledge this or any other favor from them; till then, it would no way
become me to do it. This was a Generosity which those Selfdenyers thought might
do well in discourse and speculation: but could not understand it when brought
into practice, and therefore concluded that I was so great a Presbyterian, that
I would choose rather to lose twelve hundred pounds (which was my pretension)
than to offend my Lord Roberts, a great Presbyterian, who must have made me
Reparation; in which opinion they were confirmed by two Letters they had lately
perused, the one from Sir Marmaduke Langdale at Antwerp, and the other from Sir
William Fleetwood at London; both affirming, that to their knowledge I was an
engaged Presbyterian. I was altogether a stranger to them both, and therefore
did attribute this either to their Envy that I was admitted, or Grief that they
were excluded from the Employment between his Majesty and the Army. However it
was, upon those surmises Cromwell came to expostulate the matter plainly with
me, and I replied to him in these words, That I was as much Presbyterian as
Independent; that I, as well as others, was inclined to think the better of
them, because they pretended to mind the King's Restoration; but bid them be
assured, that as soon as I should discover they were not real, I, and I thought
all the King's Party, would join with any that would but dissemble better than
they; and concluded, that I thought nothing would separate the Crown and the
King's Party. Cromwell seemed not unsatisfied with this plain dealing, and so
left me. The next day Huntington, who was sent to me by the King, made me
acquainted with two General Officers, whom I durst not name because they are
obnoxious to the present Power. With these I had often and free Communication;
and inquiring what Opinion they had of the Army in general, as to a conjunction
with the King, they replied, that they did believe it was universally desired
both by the Officers and Adjutators; that if Cromwell was not real in it, he was
a great Dissembler, and so was Ireton; that for the present the whole Army was
so bent upon it, that they durst not be otherwise; that if they should ever
happen to change, they should easily discover it; and because they had been in
great part the Cause that Sir Allen Apsley was sent to me, they thought
themselves obliged to give me all the light they could of things and persons;
which to the last they performed, in my opinion, most sincerely. I let them
know at our first meeting, that I doubted there would be three great
Difficulties which would obstruct the Agreement. First, they would expect that
the King should not only give them Liberty of Conscience, but alter the
Established Ecclesiastical Government, which his Majesty was persuaded he could
not in conscience do. The second, that they would not be contented to separate
some few men from the Court, and from bearing great Offices, unless they and
their Posterity were ruined, and that by the King's Act, which his Majesty
could not in Honor permit. And thirdly, that they would not be contented with a
security of the Militia during his Majesty's life, and his Majesty could not
grant it farther, but infinitely to the prejudice of his Posterity. They
assured me that his Majesty would be pressed in none of these particulars, and
that there was a draught of Proposals which Ireton had drawn, and which would
certainly be voted by the whole Army, wherein there was nothing tending to any
such purpose; and if his Majesty would consent to them, there would be an end
of all difficulties; and they thought the sooner his Majesty did it, would be
the better, because there was no certainty in the temper of the Army, which
they had observed to have altered more than once already. I asked whether I
might not have a sight of these Proposals; they answered, when I pleased. I
went with them to Ireton for that purpose, and remained with him almost till
morning. He permitted me to alter two of the Articles, and that in most
material points; and I would have done a third, which was, the excluding seven
persons (that were not named) from Pardon, and the admitting of our Party to
sit in the next Parliament. To the first he answered, That being they had
prevailed in the War, if they should not in the sight of the World make some
distinction between themselves and those that were worsted (who always bear the
blame of public Quarrels) they had so many malicious Enemies both in the
Parliament and Army, that they should be censured of betraying their Party, and
to have sought their own ends by private and indirect means. To the second, He
confessed that he should himself be afraid of a Parliament, wherein the King's
Party should have the major Vote: but after the Agreement, if the King's party
and they could piece kindly and cordially together, there would be nothing
easier than to procure his Majesty satisfaction in those two particulars. He
concluded, by conjuring me as I tendered his Majesty's good and welfare, that I
would endeavor to prevail with him to grant the Proposals, that they might
with the more confidence propound them to the Parliament, and make an end of
all differences. Out of my Discourses and Inquiries I collected these
Observations: First, that the Army was governed partly by a Council of War, and
partly by a Council of the Army or Adjutators, wherein the General had but a
single voice; that Fairfax the General had little power in either; that Cromwell
and his Son Ireton with their Friends and Partisans, governed the Council of
War absolutely, but not that of the Army, which was the most powerful, tho they
had a strong party there also; but the major part of the Adjutators carried it.
Amongst these Adjutators there were many ill-wishers of Cromwell, looking on him
as one who would always make his advantages out of the Army. These observed
that Cromwell resolved to prosecute his ambitious Ends through all means
whatsoever, and did not only dissemble, but really change his way to those
Ends; and when he thought the Parliament would make his Fortune, resigned
himself totally to them, even to the disbanding of the Army before it was paid:
When the Presbyterians prevailed, he took the Covenant: When he quitted the
Parliament, his chief dependence was on the Army, which he endeavored by all
means to keep in Unity, and if he could not bring it to his sense, rather than
suffer any division, went over himself, and carried his Friends with him into
that way the Army did choose, and that faster than any in it. Upon this ground,
when the Army was for the Parliament, no man so violent as he in both: When the
Army became for the King against the Parliament, no man drove so furiously as
he; and when the Army changed a third time for the Parliament and against the
King, he was still the Leader: and if the Army shall change a fourth time to
become Levellers (tho he will oppose this at first, as he did all other
Changes) no man shall out-go him in Levelling. All that he seems to desire is,
that the Army would be constant in any way, that he might not be necessitated
to the playing of so many different parts, he being equally indifferent to all
that will afford him equal Advantages.

When I came to Reading, I found many of the Adjutators jealous that Cromwell
was not sincere for the King, and desired me, if I found him false to their
Engagement, that I would let them know it, and they did not doubt to set him
right either with or against his will. But in all my Conferences with him, I
found no man in appearance so zealous for a speedy Blow as he; sometimes
wishing that the King was more frank, and would not tie himself so strictly to
narrow Maxims; sometimes complaining of his Son Ireton's slowness in perfecting
the Proposals, and his not accommodating more to his Majesty's sense, always
doubting that the Army would not preserve their good inclinations for the King.
I met with him about three days after I came to Reading, as he was coming from
the King then at Causum: He told me that he had lately seen the tenderest sight
that ever his eyes beheld, which was the Interview between the King and his
Children, and wept plentifully at the remembrance of it, saying, That never man
was so abused as he in his sinister opinions of the King, who he thought was
the uprightest and most conscientious of his three Kingdoms; that they of the
Independent Party (as they were called) had infinite Obligations to him for not
consenting to the Scots Propositions at Newcastle, which would have totally
ruined them, and which his Majesty's Interest seemed to invite him to; and
concluded with me by wishing, that God would be pleased to look upon him
according to the sincerity of his heart toward his Majesty. I immediately
acquainted his Majesty with this Passage; who seemed not well edified with it,
an did believe that all proceeded out of the use Cromwell and the Army had of
his Majesty, without whom he thought they could do nothing; and this I conceive
was inculcated daily by Bampfield and Lo at first, and afterward by the Lord
Lauderdale, who had frequent Accesses to his Majesty from the Scots, the
Presbyterians, and the City of London, who knew there was nothing so fatal to
them as a Conjunction between the King and the Army. Out of all my Observations
I drew these Conclusions, which I prosecuted to the best of my power: That his
Majesty was concerned to come to a speedy issue with the Army; that he might
either agree with them, or discover that they intended not to agree with him;
and in that case that his Majesty should secure his Escape, and in the mean
time that his Majesty should not give them the least color of exception to his
Actions; that seeing the Officers were more easily fixed to his Majesty by a
visible prospect of their Interest in case of a Conjunction, I took the least
pains with them, and applied my self to Peter's and the Adjutators, who swayed
their Officers more than their Officers commanded them; and it was more hard to
satisfy them (being many) in point of Interest, than their Officers who were
few.

About ten days after my arrival at the Army, the Contentions grew high and hot
between them and the Presbyterian Party in the House, which was the major part
by much, and the City of London; the one contending to have the Parliament
purged of corrupt Members, and the other to have the Army removed farther from
the City. This caused the Army's March from Reading to Bedford, and
consequently his Majesty's Remove with his wonted Guard from Causum to Woborn,
a House of the Earl of Bedford, where I procured his Majesty a sight of the
Army's Proposals six or eight days before they were offered to him in public.
His Majesty was much displeased with them in general, saying, that if they had
a mind to close with him, they would never impose so hard terms upon him. I
replied, That I should suspect them more than I did (if they had demanded less)
that they did not intend really to serve his Majesty, but only to abuse him,
since it was not likely that men who had through so great Dangers and
Difficulties acquired so great Advantages, should ever sit down with less than
was contained in the Proposals; and on the other side, never was a Crown so
near lost, so cheaply recovered, as his Majesty's would be, if they agreed upon
such terms. His Majesty was of another advice, and returned, That they could
not subsist without him, and therefore he did not doubt but that he should see
them very shortly be glad to condescend farther; and then objected to three
particular points of the Proposals. The first was, The Exception of seven, not
named, from Pardon. The second, the excluding his Party from being eligible in
the next ensuing Parliament. And the third, That tho there was nothing against
the Church Government established, yet there was nothing done to assert it. To
these I replied, That after his Majesty and the Army were accorded, it would be
no impossible work to make them remit in the first point; and if he could not,
when his Majesty was reinstated in his Throne, he might easily supply seven
persons beyond the Seas in such sort as to make their Banishment supportable to
them. To the second; That the next Parliament would be necessitated to lay
great burdens upon the Kingdom, and it would be a happiness to the King's Party
to have no Voice in them. To the third, That the Law was Security enough for
the Church, and it was happy that men who had fought against the Church, should
be reduced (when they were Superiors) not to speak against it. His Majesty
broke from me with this expression, Well! I shall see them glad 'ere long to
accept more equal terms. I now began to long impatiently for Mr. Ashburnham, as
hoping he had some better Topics for his Majesty; and within few days after he
arrived to his Majesty's great contentment as well as mine. His Instructions
referred to mine, which we were to prosecute jointly. I gave him presently all
the light I had, which he seemed to embrace at first; but after he had
discoursed more amply with his Majesty, I found him so far from crossing him,
that he abounded in his Majesty's sense, and held afterward this discourse
with me: That for his part he was always bred in the best Company, and
therefore could not converse with such senseless Fellows as the Agitators were;
that if we could gain the Officers sure to the King, there was no doubt but
they would be able to command their own Army, and therefore he was resolved to
apply himself totally to them, and so did, and there grew immediately great
familiarities between him and Whalley Captain of the Guard that waited on the
King, and then with Cromwell and Ireton; and daily Messages between his Majesty
and the Headquarters, which Mr. Ashburnham carried, and sometimes me with him,
tho I seldom knew the Message, at least he would have me believe I did not; for
he chose to speak apart with Cromwell and Ireton when I was present, alleging,
that they would not speak freely to two at once. What with the pleasure of
having so concurring a Second as Mr. Ashburnham, and what with the encouraging
Messages his Majesty had by my Lord Lauderdale, and others from the
Presbyterian Party and the City of London, who pretended to despise the Army,
and to oppose them to death, his Majesty seemed very much erected; insomuch
that when the Proposals were solemnly sent to him, and his Concurrence most
humbly and earnestly desired, his Majesty (not only to the astonishment of
Ireton and the rest, but even to mine) entertained them with very tart and
bitter Discourses, saying sometimes, that he would have no man to suffer for
his sake, and that he repented of nothing so much as the Bill against the Lord
Strafford; which tho most true, was unpleasant for them to hear; That he would
have the Church established according to Law by the Proposals. They replied, It
was none of their work to do it; that it was enough for them to wave the point,
and they hoped enough for his Majesty since he had waved the Government it self
in Scotland. His Majesty said that he hoped God had forgiven him that Sin, and
repeated often, You cannot be without me; You will fall to ruin if I do not
sustain you. Many of the Army that were present, and wished well, at least as
they pretended, to the Agreement, looked wishtly and with wonder upon me and
Mr. Ashburnham, and I as much as I durst upon his Majesty, who would take no
notice of it, until I was forced to step to him and whisper in his ear, Sir,
your Majesty speaks as if you had some secret strength and power that I do not
know of; and since your Majesty has concealed from me, I wish you had
concealed it from these men too. His Majesty soon recollected himself, and
began to sweeten his former Discourse with great power of Language and
Behavior. But it was now of the latest. For Colonel Rainsborough, who of all
the Army seemed the least to wish the Accord, in the middle of the Conference
stole away and posted to the Army, which he inflamed against the King with all
the artificial malice he had. As soon as the Conference ended, I followed him
to Bedford, where the Army then lay. I met with some of the Adjutators, who
asked me what his Majesty meant, to entertain their Commissioners so harshly? I
told them, that Rainsborough had delivered it amiss to them, as indeed he had
by adding to the truth. I then desired a meeting with Ireton and the rest of
the superior Officers, and obtained it, and there asked them, If the King
should grant the Proposals, what would ensue? They replied, they would offer
them to the Parliament: But if they refused them, what would they do then? they
replied, they would not tell me. I then returned, that I would tell them, I
would lose no more time with them: For if there came of Proposals but the
propounding, I could then propound as well as they. They all replied, that it
was not for them to say directly what they would do against the Parliament; but
intimated that they did not doubt to be able to prevail with the Parliament.
When I appeared not fully satisfied with this Reply, Rainsborough spoke out in
these words, If they will not agree, we will make them; to which the whole
Company consented. But we had a harder work with his Majesty, who was so far
from granting, that he sent for Sir Thomas Gardener, Mr. Jeffry Palmer, and Sir
Orlando Bridgman, his learned Counsel, Men indeed of great Abilities and
Integrity; to these were added Mr. Philip Warwick, Mr. Ashburnham, Mr. Denham,
Sir Richard Ford, Dr. Gough (who came over with Mr. Ashburnham from France) Dr.
Sheldon, Dr. Hammond, and my self. We easily answered the Proposals both in
point of Law and Reason. But we had to do with what was stronger than both.

All this while there wanted not those that mediated a better understanding
between the Parliament and the Army; but that not taking effect, the Army
advanced nearer London, and lodged at Windsor, and his Majesty at Stoke. At
this time those that were supposed best inclined to his Majesty in the Army,
seemed much afflicted with his Majesty's backwardness to concur with the Army
in the Proposals; and the rather, because they conceived great hopes that
within few days they should be masters of London, which they doubted might
alter the temper of the Army toward the King. Cromwell, Ireton, and the rest of
the superior Officers of the Army, knew that London would certainly be theirs
two days before they communicated it to the Army; and therefore sent an Express
to Mr. Ashburnham and to me, that since his Majesty would not yield to the
Proposals, yet his Majesty should at least send a kind Letter to the Army,
before it were commonly known that London would submit. We caused a meeting of
the abovenamed persons at Windsor, where the Letter was immediately drawn: But
his Majesty would not sign it, till after three or four several Debates; which
lost one whole days time, if not more. Mr. Ashburnham and I went with it at
last, and upon the way met with Messages to hasten it. But before we came to
Syon, the Commissioners from London were arrived, and our Letter out of season;
for tho his Majesty was ignorant of the success when he signed the Letter, yet
coming after it was known, it lost both the Grace and Efficacy. All that the
Officers could do, they did; which was, whilst the Army was in the Act of
Thanksgiving to God for their success, to propose that they should not be
elevated with it, but keep still to their former Engagement to his Majesty, and
once more solemnly vote the Proposals; which was accordingly done. The next day
the Army marched into London, and some few of the Presbyterian Party, that had
been most active against the Army, disappeared. From London, the Headquarters
came to Putney, and his Majesty was lodged at Hampton Court. Mr. Ashburnham had
daily some Message or another from the King to Cromwell and Ireton, who had
enough to do both in the Parliament and Council of the Army, the one abounding
with Presbyterians, the other with Levellers, and both really jealous that
Cromwell and Ireton had made a private Compact and Bargain with the King;
Lilburn printing books weekly to that effect: and Sir Lewis Dives afterward
acknowledged to me, that being his Fellow-prisoner, he had daily endeavored to
possess him with that opinion, of which although he were not persuaded himself,
yet he judged it for the King's service to divide Cromwell and the Army. On the
other side, the Presbyterians were no less confident of their Surmises; and
amongst them, Cromwell told me, that my Lady Carlisle affirmed, that I had said
to her Ladyship, that he was to be Earl of Essex, and Captain of the King's
Guards. I had the honor to be well known to her Ladyship, but forbore,
contrary to my Duty and Inclination, to wait on her, for fear of giving any
Umbrage to the Army, she being of the contrary party; but having several
Messages from her Ladyship by my Lady Newport and others, I waited on her. I
was not long there, but Arpin came into her Chamber, who was an Adjutator, and
sent for, as I conceived, to be an Eyewitness that I was in my Lady Carlisle's
Chamber, tho nothing passed but general Discourses; and I should have ly'd if I
had said any thing to that purpose. But these and like Discourses made great
impression on the Army; to which Mr. Ashburnham's secret and long Conferences
contributed not a little; insomuch that the Adjutators, who were wont to
complain that Cromwell went too slow toward the King, began to suspect that he
had gone too fast, and left them behind him: From whence there were frequent
Complaints in the Council of the Army, of the intimacy Mr. Ashburnham and I had
in the Army; that Cromwell's and Ireton's door was open to us when it was shut
to them; that they knew not why Malignants should have so much Countenance in
the Army, and Liberty with the King. These Discourses, both in public and
private, Cromwell seemed highly to be offended with; and when he could carry any
thing to his Majesty's advantage amongst the Adjutators, could not rest until
he had made us privately partakers of it; but withal he told Mr. Ashburnham and
me, that if he were an honest man, he had said enough of the sincerity of his
intentions; if he were not, nothing was enough, and therefore conjured us, as
we tendered his Majesty's Service, not to come so frequently to his Quarters,
but send privately to him, the suspicions of him being grown to that height,
that he was afraid to lie in his own Quarters. But this had no operation upon
Mr. Ashburnham, who alleged, that we must show them the necessity of agreeing
with the King from their own Disorders.

About three weeks after the Army had entered London, the Scots had prevailed
with the Parliament for another solemn Address to his Majesty, which was
performed in the old Propositions of Newcastle, some Particulars in reference
to the Scots only excepted. The Army was very unwiliing the King should grant
these Propositions, of which the King advised with all the Persons above
mentioned, who were all of opinion, that it was unsafe for his Majesty to close
with the Enemies of the Army whilst he was in it; and therefore followed the
Advice of all the leading part of the Independent Party both in the Parliament
and Army, by refusing the Articles, and desiring a personal Treaty, whereof his
Majesty thought the Proposals a better ground than the Articles, tho there were
something in them to which his Majesty could not consent. We gave our Friends
in the Army a sight of this Answer the day before it was sent, with which they
seemed infinitely satisfied, and promised to use their utmost endeavors to
procure a personal Treaty, and to my understanding performed it: for both
Cromwell and Ireton, with Vane and all their Friends, seconded with great
resolution this desire of his Majesty. But contrary to their and all men's
expectation, they found a most general opposition, and that this Message of his
Majesty had confirmed the jealousy of their private Agreement with the King; so
that the more it was urged by Cromwell, etc. the more it was rejected by the
rest, who looked on them as their Betrayers. The Suspicions were so strong in
the House, that they lost almost all their Friends there; and the Army that lay
then about Putney were no less ill satisfied: for there came down shoals every
day from London of the Presbyterian and Levelling Parties that fomented these
Jealousies; insomuch that Cromwell thought himself, or pretended it, not secure
in his own Quarters. The Adjutators now begin to change their Discourse, and
complained openly in their Councils both of the King and the Malignants about
his Majesty. One of the first they voted from him was my self. They said, That
since his Majesty had not accepted of their Proposals, they were not obliged
any farther to them; that they were obliged to consult their own Safety, and
the good of the Kingdom, and to use such means toward both as they should find
rational: and because they met with strong opposition from Cromwell and Ireton,
and most of the Superior Officers, and some even of the Adjutators, they had
many private solemn meetings in London, where they humbled themselves before
the Lord, and sought his good pleasure, and desired that he would be pleased to
reveal it to his Saints, which they interpret those to be who are most violent
or Zealous (as they call it) in the work of the Lord. These found it apparent
that God had on the one side hardened the King's heart, and blinded his eyes, in
not passing the Proposals, whereby they were absolved from offering them any
more; and on the other side, the Lord had led Captivity captive, and put all
things under their feet, and therefore they were bound to finish the Work of
the Lord, which was to alter the Government, according to their first Design:
and to this end they resolved to seize the King's Person, and take him out of
Cromwell's hands. These Proceedings struck so great a Terror into Cromwell and
Ireton, with others of the Officers that we supposed best affected to us, that
they were of opinion the Army should be drawn to a Rendezvous, and their
endeavors used to engage them once more to adhere to the Proposals. As soon as
the tumultuous part of the Army had notice of it, they resolved before the day
of the Rendezvous to seize the King's Person. I had been now about three weeks
removed from the King, and about a fortnight after me Mr. Ashburnham. Mr. Leg
still remained with his Majesty, and waited in his Bedchamber.

About eight or ten days before the time appointed for the drawing together of
the Army, Mr. Ashburnham invited me from London, and Mr. Leg from Hampton
Court, to dine with him on a Sunday at Ditton, being the other side of the
Water. They were both there long before me, and I a good while before dinner.
But just as Dinner was ready to come in, they took me aside in the room, and
told me that his Majesty was really afraid of his Life by the tumultuous part
of the Army, and was resolved to make his escape; and that they had order from
his Majesty to command me in his name to wait on his Majesty in his intended
Escape. I replied, It was a great honor, and accompanied with not a little
danger; but withal it was new to me, and therefore nothing occurred to my
thoughts at present but two things: the first was, that I thought it absolutely
necessary that Mr. Ashburnham, who kept the King's money, should immediately
employ his Servant Dutton, who was well acquainted with the Coast, to provide
three or four Ships in several Ports, to be ready in all events; the second,
that I also might receive his Majesty's commands immediately from himself. To
the first they seemed to concur, but nothing was ever done in it, which to this
day amazes me. The other was effected, and I went the Tuesday night after to
Hampton Court privately, being introduced a back way by Mr. Leg. The King told
me he was afraid of his Life, and that he would have me assist in person in his
escape. I asked which way his Majesty would go? his Majesty replied, that both
Mr. Ashburnham, who was present, and I should know that by Will. Leg. The
Monday before, Mr. Ashburnham and I went to the Headquarters, to desire Passes
to return beyond the Seas; and by the way back he told me, that the Scots had
much tampering with the King, but could come to no Agreement; that they would
fain have his Majesty out of the Army, and to that end had much augmented his
just fears; and therefore asked me what I thought of his Majesty's coming
privately to London, and appearing in the House of Lords? I replied, Very ill;
because the Army were absolutely masters both of the City and Parliament, and
would undoubtedly seize his Majesty; and if there should be but two Swords
drawn in the scuffle, they would accuse his Majesty of beginning a new War, and
proceed with him accordingly. He then asked me what I thought of the Isle of
Wight? I replied, better than of London; tho I knew nothing of it, nor who was
Governor. He replied, that he had had some communication with the Governor of
late, and conceived good hopes of him, but had no assurance from him. I then
asked him, Why his Majesty would not make his Retreat secure by quitting the
Kingdom? He replied, not for two Reasons; the first was, the Rendevouz would be
a week after, and his Majesty was not willing to quit the Army before that were
passed; because if the Superior Officers prevailed, they would be able to make
good their public Engagement; if they were overtopped, they must apply
themselves to the King for their own security. The second was, that the Scots
were in Treaty with the King, and well nigh a Conclusion, which they would
never come to, but out of their desires to separate the King and the Army; that
if the King went before, they would hold him to impossible Conditions, and
therefore his Majesty was resolved to conclude with them first. In which advice
Mr. Ashburnham was most positive, and told me often, that the World would laugh
at us if we quitted the Army before we had agreed with the Scots; and let them,
replied I, so his Majesty be secure. On the Wednesday, as I take it, we had
Orders to send spare Horses to Sutton in Hampshire, a place where I never had
been; and the Thursday after, his Majesty, with Will. Leg, came out at the
closing of the evening, and immediately went toward Oatlands, and so through
the Forest, where his Majesty was our Guide; but lost our way, tho he were well
acquainted with it, the night being excessively dark and stormy. When his
Majesty fat first out, he discoursed long with Mr. Ashburnham, and at last
called me to him, and complained very much of the Scots Commissioners, who were
the first that presented his Dangers to him, and offered him Expedients for his
escape; but when he came to make use of those they had offered, they were
fullest of Objections; saying, that his coming into London was desperate, his
hiding in England chimerical, and his escape to Jersey prevented, because my
Ship was discovered; which particular my Lord Lanerick affirmed. The King
thereupon asked me, if I had ever a Ship ready? I answered, that I neither had
not could have any, having not one penny of money; that I had desired Mr.
Ashburnham earnestly to make provision, but knew not what he had done in it.
The King then asked me, what I thought might be the reason they should say I
had one, and that discovered, if I had none? I replied, It was hard for me to
affirm what was their meaning in that particular, or in general in their
proceeding with his Majesty: but I did conjecture, they were very desirous to
have his Majesty out of the Army, which made them present his Dangers to him so
frequently as they had done: and in the next place they desired that his
Majesty should put himself again into their hands, but wanted confidence, or
believed it would be ineffectual to move it directly to his Majesty, because
they had given so ill an account when he was last with them; and therefore they
objected against their own Expedients of coming into London, and obscuring
himself in England. And because they could find no other against his going to
Jersey, they pretended that I had a Ship discovered; believing perhaps that I
was totally separated from his Majesty, and so should not have had any occasion
to contradict it; and by this means his Majesty being excluded all other means
of escape, should have been necessitated to make use of Scotland. His Majesty
laid his hand upon my shoulder and said, I think thou art in the right, and
believed it afterward more confidently than I did. I then asked his Majesty
which way he would go. His Majesty replied, that he hoped to be at Sutton three
hours before day, and that while our Horses were making ready, we would
consider what course to take. But what by the length and illness of the way,
the darkness of the night, and going at least ten miles out of our way, it was
daybreak when we came to our Inn at Sutton, where our Servant came out to us,
and told us there was a Committee of the County sitting about the Parliaments
business. His Majesty thereupon sent for our Horses out, and we continued our
way toward Southampton; and his Majesty resolved that we four should walk down
the next hill with our Horses in our hands, and as we walked consult what we
were to do. Then I inquired if Mr. Ashburnham had gotten a Ship, and finding he
had not, I proposed going farther West, where I was sure I had some Friends
would favor our escape: and here again I found the two reasons prevail, of not
leaving the Army before the Rendevouz was passed, and the Treaty with the Scots
finished. His Majesty resolved (and that the first time for ought I could then
discover) to go for the Isle of VVight, whither he ordered Mr. Ashburnham and
me to go with these Instructions, by word of mouth, to the Governor Hammond,
and return to his Majesty, who went with Will. Leg to a house of my Lord
Southampton at Titchfield; that we should carry him a Copy of the Letter his
Majesty left behind him at Hampton Court, and of two Letters sent to him, one
from Cromwell, the other without a name. Cromwels and the other Letter contained
great apprehension and fears of the ill intentions of the Levelling party in
the Army and City against his Majesty; and that from Cromwell added, that in
prosecution thereof a new Guard was the next day to be put upon his Majesty of
that party. His Majesty's Letter contained his distrust of the disorderly part
of the Army, and his necessity thereupon of providing for his own safety, which
he would so do as not to desert the Interest of the Army: that in order
thereunto we should let the Governor know, that of all the Army his Majesty had
made choice of him to put himself upon, as a person of a good Extraction, and
one, that tho he had been enagaged against him in the War, yet it had been
prosecuted by him without any animosity to his Person, to which he had been
informed he had no aversion: only his Majesty, that he might not surprise him,
thought fit to send us before to advertise him, and to desire his (...) (...)
protect his Majesty and his Servants to the best of his power; and if it should
happen that he might not be able to do it, then the Governor should (...)
himself to leave us in as good a condition as he found us, that is, suffer us
to make our escape. With these Instructions we parted: but before I had gone
ten yards, I returned to his Majesty, and said, I had no knowledge of the
Governor, and therefore could not tell whether he might not detain us in the
Island; and therefore advised his Majesty, if we came not to him by the next
day, that his Majesty should think no more of us, but secure his own escape.
His Majesty thanked me for the Caution, and pursued his way, and Mr. Ashburnham
and I ours. The first thing we resolved was, that since his Majesty went
toward the East side of the Island, that we would go on the West, to a place
called Limington, where Mr. Ashburnham told me there was a short passage over.
By the way I asked Mr. Ashburnham if he had any acquaintance with Hammond the
Governor. He replied, not very much, yet he had lately had some discourse with
him upon the Highway near Kingston, and found him not very averse to his
Majesty; but that which made him conceive the best hopes of him was the
Character Mr. Denham, and the Commendations my Lady Isabella Thynn gave of him.
We came to Limington that night, but could not pass, by reason of a violent
Storm that blew. The next morning we got over, and had then eight miles to the
Castle of Carisbroke, where the Governor dwelt. We came thither after ten in
the morning, and found the Governor was newly gone out toward Newport. When we
overtook him, Mr. Ashburnham desired me to open the matter to him, which he
would afterward second himself. After I had saluted him, I took him aside, and
delivered our message to him word for word. But he grew so pale, and fell into
such a trembling, that I did really believe he would have fallen off his Horse:
which trembling continued with him at least an hour after, in which he broke
out into passionate and distracted Expressions, sometimes saying, O Gentlemen!
you have undone me by bringing the King into the Island, if at least you have
brought him; and if you have not, pray let him not come: for what between my
Duty to his Majesty, and my Gratitude for this fresh obligation of Confidence,
and my observing my Trust to the Army, I shall be confounded: otherwhile he
would talk to a quite contrary purpose. I remember, to settle him the better, I
said, That, God be thanked, there was no harm done; that his Majesty intended a
Favor to him and his Posterity, in giving him an occasion to lay a great
obligation upon him, and such as was very consisting with his relation to the
Army, who had so solemnly engaged themselves to his Majesty: but if he thought
otherwise, his Majesty would be far from imposing his Person upon him. To that
he replied, That then if his Majesty should come to any mischance, what would
the Army and Kingdom say to him, that had refused to receive him? To this I
replied, That he did not refuse him, who was not come to him. He returned, That
he must needs know where his Majesty was, because he knew where we were. I told
him he was never the nearer for my part. He then began a little to sweeten, and
to wish that his Majesty would have reposed himself absolutely upon him,
because it would have been much the better for both. I then went to Mr.
Ashburnham, and told him, that this Governor was not a man for our purpose, and
that for my part I would never give my consent that his Majesty should trust
him. Mr. Ashburnham acknowledged that he did not like him; yet on the other
side, he much feared what would become of his Majesty if he should be
discovered before he had made his point, and made appear what his intention
was; for then he would be accused of what his Enemies pleased to lay upon him.
I replied, That if we returned not that night, his Majesty would be gone to
Sea. I perceived Mr. Ashburnham liked not that so well, and therefore took the
Governor to task apart, and after some Conference they came both to me; and the
Governor said, that since we desired it, he would say, that because he believed
his Majesty had made choice of him as a person of Honor and Honesty, to lay
this great Trust upon, therefore he would not deceive his Majesty's
expectation. I replied, That Expression was too general, and did not come home
to our Instructions. He then made many Discourses not much to the purpose,
during which time he kept himself between Mr. Ashburnham and me; and when he
found me still unsatisfied, he added, that I was harder to content than Mr.
Ashburnham, and he did believe that his Majesty would be much easier pleased
than either, and thereupon concluded that I should go into the Castle, and that
Mr. Ashburnham should take his Horse and go to the King, and tell his Majesty
what he said. I embraced the motion most readily, and immediately went over the
Birdg into the Castle, tho I had the Image of the Gallows very perfectly before
me. Mr. Ashburnham went, I believe, with a better heart to horse; but before he
was gone half a flight shot, the Governor (being before the Castle gate) called
to him, and had a conference of at least a quarter of an hour with him, to what
purpose I never knew until I came into Holland, where a Gentleman of good Worth
and Quality told me, that the Governor affirmed afterward in London and in
many places, that he then offered to Mr. Ashburnham, that I should go and he
should stay, as believing his Majesty to be less willing to expose him than me,
but that Mr. Ashburnham absolutely refused. Whatever passed between them, I am
sure they came both back to me; and the Governor putting himself between us
said, that he would say that which he was sure ought to content any reasonable
man, which was, that he did believe his Majesty relied on him as on a person of
Honor and Honesty, and therefore he did engage himself to us to perform
whatever could be expected from a person of Honor and Honesty. Before I could
make any, Mr. Ashburnham made this reply, I will ask no more. The Governor then
added, let us then all go to the King, and acquaint him with it. Mr. Ashburnham
answered, with all my heart. I then broke from the Governor who held me in his
hand, and went to Mr. Ashburnham and said, What do you mean, to carry this man
to the King before you know whether he will approve of this Undertaking or no?
undoubtedly you will surprise him. Mr. Ashburnham said nothing but, I Will
warrant you: and so you shall, said I; for you know the King much better than I
do, and therefore when we shall come where the King is, I assure you I will not
see him before you have satisfied his Majesty concerning your proceeding. Well;
he would take that upon him. I then desired he would not let the Governor carry
any with him, that in all events we might the more easily secure him, which he
consented to. Nevertheless when we came to Cows Castle, where we were to take
boat, Hammond took Basket the Governor of the Castle along with him; and when I
complained of it to Mr. Ashburnham, he answered, It was no matter, we should be
able to do well enough with them two. When we came to Titchfield, my Lord of
Southamptons House, Mr. Ashburnham according to his promise went up to the
King, and left me below with Hammond and Basket. I afterward understood, that
when Mr. Ashburnham had given an Account of our message and the Governors
answer, and came to say that he was come along with us to make good what he had
promised, his Majesty struck himself upon the breast and said, What! have you
brought Hammond with you? O, you have undone me; for I am by this means made
fast from stirring. Mr. Ashburnham replied, That if he mistrusted Hammond, he
would undertake to secure him. His Majesty said, I understand you well enough,
but the World would not him; if he should follow that Counsel, it would be said
and believed that he ventured his Life for him, and that he had unworthily
taken it from him. No, it was too late now of thinking any thing, but going
through the way he had forced him upon, and leave the Issue to God. But when
his Majesty began anew to wonder that he could make so great an oversight, Mr.
Ashburnham having no more to reply, wept bitterly. In the mean time Hammond and
Basket were so impatient at this long stay below in the Court, that I was
forced to send a Gentleman of my Lord Southampton, to desire that his Majesty
and Mr. Ashburnham would remember that we were below. About half an hour after,
we were sent for up; but before Hammond and Basket kissed his hand, his Majesty
took me aside and said, Sir John Berkley, I hope you are not so passionate as
Jack Ashburnham: do you think you have followed my directions? I answered, no
indeed Sir, but it is none of my fault, as Mr. Ashburnham can tell you if he
please; I have exposed my life to prevent it; and then told his Majesty the sum
of what had passed, and particularly of my being a Prisoner in the Castle, and
of Mr. Ashburnham's coming away without me, which Mr. Ashburnham had omitted.
His Majesty judged that it was now too late to boggle, and therefore received
Hammond cheerfully, who promised more to his Majesty than he had done to us,
and we all went over that night to the Cows. In the morning his Majesty went
with the Governor to Carisbroke, and was met by the way with diverse Gentlemen
of the Island, by whom we learnt that we were more fortunate than we were aware
of; for the whole Island was unanimously for the King except the Governors of
the Castles and Hammond's Captains; that there were but twelve old Men in the
Castle, who had served under the Earl of Portland, and were all well affected;
that Hammond might be easily gained if not more easily forced, the Castle being
day and night full of Loyal Subjects and Servants of his Majesty; and his
Majesty having daily liberty to ride abroad, might choose his own time of
quitting the Island. Indeed not only his Majesty and all that were about him,
but those that were at a further distance, approved by their Letters this
resolution of his Majesty. Both his Majesty and Mr. Ashburnham attackt the
Governor, and I think very prosperously, for both he and his Captains seemed to
desire nothing of his Majesty, but that he would send a Civil Message to the
Houses, signifying his propension to Peace, which was done to their
Satisfaction. Three days after our coming to the Island, a Messenger was sent
by the Parliament for Mr. Ashburnham, Sir John Berkley and Mr. Leg, but the
Governor refused to let us go. The fifth day after our arrival we heard that in
the Rendevouz of the Army, the superior Officers had carried it, and that one
or two were shot, and eleven more of the mutinying Levellers made Prisoners.
This made us bless God for the resolution of coming into the Island: and now
Mr. Ashburnham and the Governor were frequent and fervent in private
conferences, and as I have heard came to particulars of accommodation for him,
in case of the King's recovery: Insomuch that now the Governor seemed
sollicitous of nothing so much, as that the Army should resume its wonted
discipline, and clear themselves of their importunate and impertinent
Adjutators, of whose Authority in the Army he never approved, and therefore
sent his Chaplain immediately to the Army to conjure them to make use of their
Success upon the Adjutators. Two or three days after, he moved earnestly, that
his Majesty would send one of us three to the Army with colorable Letters to
the General; but that he should write with confidence to Cromwell and Ireton, to
whom he would also write, and did, conjuring them by their Engagement, by their
Interest, by their Honor, and their Consciences, to come to a speedy close with
the King, and not to expose themselves still to the fantastic giddiness of the
Adjutators. My two Comrades were very well contented that I should go this
Voyage, which I did not without some apprehension of the event as to my own
particular. His Majesty charged me to require Will. Ashburnham to provide a
ship for him upon the Coast of Sussex: But Mr. Ashburnham thought not fit I
should be furnished with money for that, or for my journey. I desired that in
case the Army should not intend well, I might have Commission to the Scots, but
Mr. Ashburnham did not think it fit. I then took a Cousin German of mine with
me, one Mr. Henry Berkley Son to Sir Henry Berkley, and procured a Pass from
the Governor of the Cows for his return within four or five days, which had
been otherwise forgotten. Between Bagshot and Windsor (then the Headquarters)
I met Traughton the Governor's Chaplain, who told me he could carry no good
news back, the Army being as yet come to no resolution as to the King. As I was
half way between Bagshot and Windsor, Cornet Joyce a great Adjutator, and he
that had taken the King from Holmby, overtook me. He seemed much to wonder that
I durst adventure to come to the Army. Upon my discourses with him I found,
that it had been discoursed among the Adjutators, whether for their
justification the King ought not to be brought to a Trial, which he held in the
affirmative, not that he would have one hair of his Head suffer, but that they
might not bear the blame of the War. I was quickly weary of his discourse; but
I perceived he would not leave me until he saw me in Windsor, and knew where I
lodged. About an hour after, I went to the General's Quarters, and found a
General meeting of the Officers there. After an hours waiting I was admitted,
and after I had delivered my Compliment and Letters to the General, I was
desired to withdraw; and having attended half an hour, I was called in. The
General looked very severely upon me, and after his manner said, That they were
the Parliament's Army, and therefore could not say anything to his Majesty's
motion of peace, but must refer those matters to them, to whom they would send
his Majesty's Letters. I then looked about upon Cromwell and Ireton, and the
rest of my acquaintance, who saluted me very coldly, and had their Countenance
quite changed toward me, and showed me Hammonds Letter, which I had delivered
to them, and smiled with much disdain upon it. I saw that was no place for me,
and therefore went to my Lodging, where I staid from four until six, and none
of my acquaintance came at me, which appeared sad enough. At last I sent my
Servant out, and wished him to see if he could light upon any of my
acquaintance. At last he met with one that was a General Officer, who whispered
in his ear, and bad him tell me, that he would meet me at twelve at night in a
Close behind the Garter Inn. I came at the hour, and he not long after. I asked
him what News? and he replied, None good; and then continued this Discourse.
You know that I and my Friend engaged ourselves to you; that we were zealous
for an Agreement, and if the rest were not so, we were abused; that if there
was an intention to cozen us, it would not be long hid from us; that whatever
we should discover, should not be secret to you; that we, since the Tumults of
the Army, did mistrust Cromwell, and not long after Ireton, whereof I informed
you. I come now to tell you, that we mistrust neither, but know them and all of
us to be the archest Villains in the World; for we are resolved notwithstanding
our Engagements, to destroy the King and his Posterity; to which end Ireton
made two Propositions this Afternoon, one that you should be sent prisoner to
London; the other, that none should speak with you upon pain of death: and I do
hazard my Life now by doing of it. The way that is intended to ruin the King,
is to send eight hundred of the most disaffected of the Army to secure his
Person, as believing him not so now, and then bring him to a Trial, and I dare
think no farther. This will be done in ten days; and therefore if the King can
escape, let him do it as he loves his Life. I then inquired what was the reason
of this horrid change; what had the King done to deserve it: He said, nothing,
and that to our grief; for we would leap at any advantage against him; I have
pleaded hard against this Resolution this day, but have bin laughed at for my
pains. Well, but still, why is this horrid perfidiousness resolved on, since
there appears no occasion for it, the Officers being superiors at the
Rendevouz? He could not tell certainly, but he conceived this to be the ground
of it, That tho one of the Mutineers was shot at the late Rendevouz, and eleven
made Prisoners, and the rest in appearance overquell'd, yet they were so far
from being so indeed, that there has been with Cromwell and Ireton, one after
another, two third parts of the Army to tell them, that tho they were certainly
to perish in the Attempt, they would leave nothing unessay'd to bring the whole
Army to their sense; and if all failed, they would make a Division in the Army,
and join with any that would assist in the Destruction of their Opposers:
Cromwell and Ireton therefore argued thus; If the Army divide, the greatest part
will join with the Presbyterians, and will, in all likelihood, prevail to our
ruin, and we shall be forced to make Applications to the King, wherein we shall
rather crave than offer any Assistance; and when his Majesty shall give it us,
and afterward have the good fortune to prevail, if he shall then pardon us, it
is all we can pretend to, and more than we can promise our selves; and
thereupon concluded, That if we cannot bring the Army to our sense, we must go
to theirs, a Schism being evidently destructive: And therefore Cromwell bent all
his Thoughts to make his peace with the Party that was most opposite to the
King, in which Peter's was instrumental. He acknowledged (as he had formerly
done upon the like occasion) that the Glories of the World had so dazzled his
eyes, that he could not discern clearly the great Works the Lord was doing;
that he was resolved to humble himself, and desire the Prayers of the Saints,
that God would be pleased to forgive him his Self-seeking. These Arts, together
with comfortable Messages to the Prisoners, that they should be of good cheer,
for no harm should befall them since it had pleased God to open his eyes,
perfected his Reconciliation, and he was reinstated in the Fellowship of the
Faithful. I then asked this Gentleman whether I should not endeavor to deliver
my Letters from the King to Cromwell and Ireton: he replied, by all means, lest
they should mistrust I had discovered them.

As soon as I came to my Lodging I dispatched my Cousin Harry Berkley to the
Isle of Wight with two Letters; the one containing a general Relation and
doubtful Judgment of things in the Army, which I intended should be shown to
the Governor; the other was in Cipher, wherein I gave a particular account of
this Conference, naming the Person, and concluding with a most passionate
Supplication to his Majesty to meditate nothing but his immediate Escape. The
next morning I sent Colonel Cook to Cromwell, to let him know that I had Letters
and Instructions to him from the King. He sent me word by the same Messenger,
that he durst not see me, it being very dangerous to us both, and bid me be
assured, that he would serve his Majesty as long as he could do it without his
own ruin; but desired that I would not expect that he should perish for his
sake. As soon as I had this answer, I took horse for London, with this
resolution, not to acquaint any man with the intentions of the Army, nor of his
Majesty's intendded escape, which I presumed would be within few days, the Wind
serving, and the Queen having sent a ship to that purpose, and pressed it
earnestly by her letters. The next day after my arrival at London I had a
letter from my Lord Lanerick and Lord Lauderdale, desiring a meeting with me,
as presuming I had a Commission to treat with them from his Majesty. At our
meeting they wondered to find the contrary. In my discourse with them I happened
to say, The last words his Majesty said to me at parting were, that whatever I
should undertake to any person in his name, his Majesty would make it good in
the word of a King. My Lord Lanerick thereupon replied, that he would ask no
more Commission for me, believing it to be true, both because I affirmed it,
and because he had received the like from his Majesty upon the like occasion.
Our first conference was interrupted through my Lord Lauderdale's vehement
indignation against the Letter of Mr. Ashburnham to the Speaker, wherein he had
this passage, That he would not expose his Honor to the discretion of either
Scot or Adjutator. This Letter was written by Mr. Ashburnham before I left the
Island, upon the occasion of Whalleys complaint to the House of Commons, that
Mr. Ashburnham had broken his Engagement with him at his first coming to
Woburn, wherein he undertook that the King should not leave the Army without
his Knowledge and Consent. Dr. Sheldon, Dr. Hammond, Mr. Leg and I, objected
hard against this Expression; but Mr. Ashburnham liked it so well, that we
could not make him depart from it. On the Friday after, we had another meeting,
wherein we discoursed our selves well toward an Agreement, and resolved on
Monday following to conclude one way or other. The next day, being Saturday, I
had a Letter from Mr. Ashburnham, requiring me in his Majesty's name, to lay by
all other business whatsoever, and return instantly to his Majesty. I sent
therefore my Excuse to my Lords Lanerick and Lauderdale, and went that night
out of Town, which they took very ill, tho they had no reason for it; for I
would as willingly have excused my Journey as they, as believing it was only to
assist in his Majesty's Escape: for I had more than once observed, that tho Mr.
Ashburnham were willing enough to appropriate Employments of Honor and Profit,
yet he was contented to communicate those of Danger with his Friends. The next
morning I was with his Majesty, who received me more graciously than ordinary,
and told me that he had always a good opinion of my Honesty and Discretion, but
was never so much confirmed in it, as by my dispatch from Windsor, for which
his Majesty thanked me. After I had returned my Acknowledgments for his
Majesty's Favor, I asked, if his Majesty approved the Advice so well, why did
he not follow it? Why was he still in the Island? where he could not long
promise himself the Liberty he now had, since there were Forces designed, both
by Sea and Land, to secure his Person. His Majesty replied, that he would have
a care of that time enough, and that he was to conclude with the Scots before
he left the Kingdom, because from their desire to have him out of the Armies
hands, they would take reason; whereas if he went before, they would never
treat with him but upon their own terms: and in this opinion Mr. Ashburnham
fully concurred with his Majesty. Against this I argued the best I could, and
when I saw it was in vain, I desired his Majesty would dispatch this Treaty,
for his condition would admit no delays. His Majesty then ordered me to
withdraw with Mr. Ashburnham, Dr. Sheldon, Dr. Hammond, and Mr. Leg, to see how
far his Majesty had gone in a Treaty with the Scots. This Treaty had bin
managed in London by Dr. Gough, who in the Queens name conjured his Majesty to
make his speedy escape, in all his Letters, and in his own name beseech'd his
Majesty not to insist upon nice terms in this present exigence of his affairs.
But Mr. Ashburnham refined much upon several expressions of the Articles, that
concerned the Covenant, and Church of England, of which he was a great
Professor, and made many replies and alterations, and moved Messenger to be
sent after Messenger about it, and at last insisted, that the King would send
for the Scots Commissioners to come to him. The next day I fell sick, what with
my late journying, and what with my vexation at this slow way of proceeding.
The day following I went to his Majesty, and as soon as I could be admitted
spoke to him in these words: Sir, if you make no more have than you do, I doubt
you will not be able to secure your Escape; and therefore I humbly beseech your
Majesty to make two Papers or Draughts, the one containing the utmost extent of
what your Majesty will give the Scots, and sign it; and at the same time send
another containing the least you will receive of them, and let the Scots sign
and deliver that to Dr. Gough at the same time that he shall deliver your
Majesty's Concessions to them, and provide instantly for your Safety. About the
middle of this discourse with the King, Mr. Ashburnham came in, and when I had
ended, very graciously smiling said, That this Proposition was good if it were
practicable, which it was not; for tho the Scots should agree to the Substance
of all the Articles, yet they and all men else would have their several senses
concerning the expressions, which must be satisfied, or no Agreement made, and
therefore concluded that the Scots were to be sent for. To this I replied, that
Mr. Ashburnham had much reason ordinarily speaking for what he objected; but
his Majesty's danger made this a very extraordinary Case. His reasons carried
it clear, and Sir William Flemming or Mr. Mungo Murray (for they both went and
came by turns) was sent to invite the Scots Commissioners to come to his
Majesty. The next day after his departure in the evening, the King called me to
him and told me, I think you are a Prophet; for the Scots Commissioners at
London have sent an Express, desiring me to do the same thing in effect you had
moved, but that it was now too late, for they would be come away before another
Express could be gone out of the Island toward them. I replied, that our
concurrence was accidental, for I had not the least Intelligence with the Scots
Commissioners; but when I saw there was no remedy, I applied my self to what
was next the best I could. And God knows there was work enough for abler men
than any of us were: for at the same time the Scots were coming to the King,
there were also Commissioners sent by the Parliament to his Majesty with offers
of a Treaty, upon condition that his Majesty as a pledge of his future
sincerity, would grant four Preliminary Bills, which they had brought ready
drawn to his Majesty's hands. The first contained the Revocation of all
Proclamations and Declarations against the Parliament, wherein his Majesty made
himself expressly the Author of the War. The Second was against the Lords that
had bin lately made by his Majesty, that they should have no Seat or Vote in
Parliament, and that his Majesty nor his Successors should make none for the
future without consent of Parliament; which was to take away the most
unquestioned flower of his Crown, his being the sole fountain of Honor. The
third was a Bill of exceptions from pardon, that included almost all of his
Majesty's Subjects that had any considerable Estates. The fourth was an Act for
the Militia, which embraced ten times more power, than the Crown ever executed,
for the two Houses, raising men and money arbitrarily; which was no more nor
less than dethroning of the King, and enslaving the People by a Law, and in
effect to give the King only the leave to discourse whose the Glass Windows
should be. Nevertheless the Title and Frontispiece of this vast Design was so
modest, that many well-wishing persons were induced to believe, that by all
means his Majesty ought to pass those Bills for many reasons; but especially
because his Enemies would deliver his Majesty to the World as obstinate to his
own and the Kingdoms ruin if he should not accept this offer. To avoid both the
inconveniences of granting or refusing, I drew an Answer of the Treaty before
it began; that if they would needs think it expedient to require so great
Hostages from his Majesty, they would not be backward to give some token to his
Majesty of their reality, and then desired that at the same time his Majesty
should pass these four Bills, the Houses would pass four of his Majesty's
drawing, which were all most popular, and such as they durst not pass nor well
deny: at least if they did, they could with no color of justice accuse his
Majesty for not granting what was most unjust and most unpopular. The first was
a Bill for payment of the Army, which contained their disbanding as soon as
they were paid. The second, a period to the present Parliament. The third, for
restoring the King, Queen, and Royal Family to their Revenues. The fourth, the
settling of the Church Government without any coercive Power; and in the mean
time, till such a Government were agreed on, the old to stand, without coercive
Authority. I showed this Answer first to Mr. Leg, then to Dr. Hammond and Dr.
Sheldon, who seemed to approve of the Expedient, and desired Mr. Ashburnham
would acquaint the King with it. But I never heard any thing from his Majesty;
and I was resolved never to have it obtruded, lest I should appear fond of my
own Conceptions. By his Majesty's directions an Answer was drawn, that gave a
full Denial, which was, in my judgment, very well penned. But I thought good
penning did not signify much at that time, and therefore made this Objection:
It is very possible, that upon his Majesty's giving an absolute Negative, the
Commissioners may have Orders to enjoin the Governor to look more strictly to
his Person, and so his intended Escape would be prevented. His Majesty replied
immediately, That he had thought of a Remedy, which was, to deliver his Answer
sealed to the Commissioners; and so left us. I could not hold from letting Mr.
Ashburnham find my sense of this sorry Expedient, by saying, that the
Commissioners would either open the Answer, or conclude that in effect it was a
Denial, and proceed accordingly: but all was in vain. Some few days after, the
English Commissioners arrived and delivered their Message, and desired an
Answer within three or four days. The next day the Lords Lowdon, Lanerick,
Lauderdale, Chiesly, and others, Commissioners for the Kingdom of Scotland,
delivered a Protestation to the King, subscribed by them, against the Message,
as not according with their Covenant. From that time they began to treat
seriously with his Majesty, but would not permit that either Mr. Ashburnham or
I should assist at the Treaty, for which I forgive them with all my heart; for
it would have bin very insecure for us to have had any communication with them
at that time. At last they came to such a conclusion as they could get, not
such a one as they desired from the King, but much short of it, which gave an
advantage to the Lord Argyle and the Clergy-Party in Scotland to oppose it as
not satisfactory, and by that means retarded the proceeding of Duke Hamilton
and that Army four Months, which was consequently the ruin of Laughern in
Wales, and of the Forces in Kent and Essex, and of the Scots Army also, which
consisted of twenty four thousand men, all which Forces were the result of the
Treaty; which appears to me, if it had been sooner dispatched, to have bin one
of the most prudent Acts of his Majesty's Reign, however unprosperous. When the
time was come that the King was to deliver his Answer, his Majesty sent for the
English Commissioners, and before he delivered his Answer, asked my Lord
Denbigh (who was the chief Commissioner) whether they had power to alter any
substantial or circumstantial part of their Message; and when they replied they
had not, his Majesty delivered his answer to the Lord Denbigh sealed. After
they had withdrawn a while, my Lord Denbigh returned with the rest, and seemed
offended with his Majesty for delivering the Message settled, and expressed his
indignation in harsher terms than one Gentleman ought to use to another. After
long expostulations, his Majesty was persuaded to open his Answer, which was so
far from allaying the Storm, as it increased it both in the Commissioners and
the Governor, who altogether retired from the Castle of Carisbroke to Newport,
an English mile from the Castle. As soon as they were gone, I went to Mr.
Ashburnham, who told me he had newly dispatched away a Footman over the Water,
to order four or five Horses to be removed from the Place where they then
stood, lest they should be found and seized by the Soldiers that were coming
into the Island. I conjured him by no means to do it, lest the Winds or the
Parliament's Frigates might force us in our escape to put ashore, and we should
want Horses. He thereupon sent a Groom after him, and brought him back, but
within few hours after sent him again with the first Order, but upon what
ground I know not, unless that of good husbandry. That night or the next
morning his Majesty resolved to endeavor his Escape, but he met with two great
Obstacles: the Wind in the very instant became cross, and the Governor returned
from Newport full of fury, and locked up the Gates, and doubled his Guards, and
went not to bed that night. In the morning he commanded all his Majesty's
Servants from him. Before we took our leaves, we acquainted his Majesty, that
we had left the Captain of the Frigate, and two honest and trusty Gentlemen of
the Island, to assist his Escape, and that we would have all things in
readiness on the other side of the Water. His Majesty commanded us to draw a
Declaration in his name that night, and send it to his Majesty in the morning.
When we came to Newport, Will. Leg and I left Mr. Ashburnham and the rest in
the Inn, and went to an Acquaintance's house of ours in the Town, where, after
we had staid an hour, we heard a Drum beat confusedly, and not long after that,
one Captain Burley, with diverse others, were risen to rescue the King. Upon
this Mr. Leg and I went to the Inn, where we found Mr. Ashburnham making
Speeches to those poor well-affected People, advising them to desist from their
vain Enterprise. I must confess I thought any communication of ours with them
dangerous, and therefore I advised Mr. Ashburnham not to say any thing to them;
for when his words were out of his mouth, others would interpret them, and say
he said what they pleased: and it was well for him and us that we did so; for
the Prisoners were not only examined concerning us, but promised Liberty and
Pardon in case they would peach us; and the Governor of the ^ows had order from
Hammond to put us a Shipboard, and to carry us to London upon suspicion that
we were accessory to this Rising; which was a Design so impossible for those
that undertook it to effect, consisting of Women and Children without any Arms
saving one Musket, that no sober man could possibly have been engaged in it. I
was desired that night to draw the Declaration for his Majesty, which I did,
and it was approved of by all but Mr. Ashburnham, and at last published in his
Majesty's name. After we had staid on the other side of the Water about three
weeks, expecting the Kings coming over to us, and began at last to despair of
it, I moved to Mr. Ashburnham, Mr. Leg and Mr. Denham (who was then come to us
from London) that some one might be sent to the Queen from us all, which was
consented to, and I made choice of by the rest.

FINIS.

