A LECTURE Held Forth at the Calves-Head Feast Before a Society of Olivarians
and Roundheads, At the White L -- n in CORNHILL, On the Thirtieth of January,
1691/2. In Contempt of the Martyrdom of King Charles I.

By Dan. Bergice.

LONDON, Printed for C. G. 1692.

A LECTURE Held Forth at the Calves-Head Feast, etc.
In the Thirteenth Spoke of a Cart-wheel you shall find these words written,
Calves-Head and Bacon.
THIS is the day (my Beloved) on which we Annually Sunder our selves together,
to Triumph in the Conquest we this day made over him that exalted himself to
Dethrone us The Chosen of the World: And since nothing is esteemed more fit to
rub up your Treacherous Memories, than the Representation of the thing
signified. I have therefore thought fit (my Brethren) to insist upon these
words, and rattle in your Ears (even as a Company of Drums do at the Window of
a new married Couple) my most secret Cogitations concerning the Premises.

This Calves Head is a Hieroglifick, or secret Representation of a thing, and
here it represents that of its own likeness, viz. a Head. Now you are not
Ignorant, I am sure, that a thing without a Head looks Simply. I have sometimes
been told that my Discourse has had neither Head nor Tail; well what then, it
has had the more Guts and Heart, and a Swinging Fat Carcass. But here, contrary
to my former Custom, I have only chose the Head, as thinking it the most Noble
Part, being filled with Brains, my Beloved; yea these very Brains being made
pallatable with the Vinegar of Affliction, may whet the Stomachs of our
Conscience, and beget us an Appetite to, and longing after Holy things; this is
the True and Holy Appetite, and not as some of us do, to long for a Harlot, who
will long for Treats and Money, and at last bring you the Crinkums, whether you
long for them or no; you may long to be cured, but you may chance to go to your
long Home first.

2. There is a Vexatious Longing, when new married Women humbly Conceive in
Winter, they are very subject to long for Summer Fruit, altogether impossible
to come at, and therefore they long for it, on purpose to put their Husbands to
charge, and their Friends to trouble: But I say let them eat nothing but Calves
Head and Bacon.

3. As there are Longings, so there are Loathings, that is, when Satan has
clogged the Stomach of the Inward Man, with Fat Dabs and Greasy Bits of
Pleasure and Voluptuousness, that he can digest nothing that is good, but the
Lean Calves Head of Meekness, eaten with the Bacon of Understanding, will never
rise in the Stomach and cause Pukeings, which Teeming Girls are troubled with.

4. There is a very bad Loathing when Man and Wife Loath one another
Conversation; nothing follows but Care and Distraction, Sorrow and Woe, Trouble
and Torment, Anguish and Pain, perpetual Slavery, the Devil upon two Sticks,
the House goes out of the Windows, and the whole Family is Damned as Black as
Butter-milk: Now my Advice to such is, that they would agree Civilly, be quiet
for the future, and sit down lovingly like Neighbors Children, and make
themselves Merry with a Calves Head and Bacon.

5. There is a Loathing of all that is good, and that is none of the best.

6. There is a Loathing and Longing joined together, that is, when a Man loathes
to come to a Meeting, and longs to go to a Bawdyhouse; but my Friends, Satan
has a great Share in such a Man, therefore I leave him, by him to be Buffetted,
not thinking him worthy to come to our Feast of Calves Head and Bacon.

7. When a Man Loathes Monarchy, and Longs for a Commonwealth, that we may
Govern Higgledy Piggledy all over our own Heads: This is that which I recommend
to you.

Brethren, this Calves-Head Feast, as the World calls it, is held amongst us,
The Chosen of Israel, for a Memorandum, and to Congratulate each other for that
Blessed Action in Lopping off the Head of Charles I. after we had been long
Soused in the Powdering-Tub of Affliction, when our Hearts failed us, and our
Souls were filled with Emptiness: Let us rejoice in this, that our Actions are
Recorded, and are as a Living Monument to Eternize our Names for so Brave (though
counted an Impious) Action. I say, let us be glad in this (even as a Sea-man's
Wife is, when her Husband is gone a Two Years Voyage) let us not quench the
Spirit, but with loud and repeated Huzza's of inward Praises of the Renowned
Oliver, let us celebrate this day, let us Sing Old Rose and burn the Bellows,
Triumphing over our Dearly Beloved Calves Head and Bacon.

When I look upon the Lively Emblem of our Sorrows this Calves Head, it makes
me melt into Rapture (even as a Bride on the Marriage night) not for any
Remorse of Conscience which I feel dispersed from the lower Deck of my Soul,
but for thoughts of past Actions, I Bless that Divine Fabric Oliver, who
knocked down the Church like an Ox, cut the Throat of Monarchy like a Hog, and
took off the Head of his Prince like a Calf, and at last his Horns were exalted
above the rest of his Brethren. This I say causes my Soul to Rejoice, and is a
very great Support to my Inward Man; I suppose you are sensible that I know on
which side my Bread is Buttered, I can see as far into a Millstone as another
can put his Finger, for what can be ill that is guided by the Inward Man?
Something has some Savor, a Bit in the Morning is better than nothing all day,
and whoever says that Calves Head and Bacon is not good Prog, they Lie Beloved;
yea, they Lie Abominably. But what says the World of me: Why truly the Sons of
Belial have been very busy, and used my Name as a Cloak for, and Author of
Preposterous Holding Forth; but let that pass, I am what I am, a real Lover of
Calves Head and Bacon.

Now my Beloved, the Text being short, and not consisting of many words, I
shall endeavor to divide it by Letters, and explain it according to Art, Calves
Head and Bacon: C Cromwell, A always, L loved, V very much, E Extempory Prayer,
S such, H Heavenlymindedness, E evermore, A attended that, D diligent Hero. A
Accordingly he, N never, D durst, B behold, A any Loyal thing, C committed O on
his part, N nor no bodies else. Thus, my Beloved, I have divided the Text,
which put together make a Sentence, and the Sentence expounded right would fill
a Volum, so that for ought I can see the Text is very Proper, and to the
Unlearned Intricate, but to me as plain as a pike Staff.

From which words we may draw these Inferences: 1. That as that Holy Champion
loved Extempory Prayer, it infers that he abhorred a Form which should teach us
to be ware of a Form -- a Form! Did I say Out upon it, a Form! No, no, it is
that rotten Form that upholds a Form of Government contrary to our Principles.

2. That a Commonwealth is the only easy Method for us Sinful Men, and that we
should not so much as harbor a contrary thought, for it is that Government
which is most agreeable to Calves Head and Bacon. Government (my Friends)
should be like Ignis fatuus, or Will in a Whisp, that is, without a Head; but
then you will say, how should the Tail be guided? Oh no matter, as we would have
no Head, so we would have no Tail only a Body, and let every Man Rule; this was
the Method in Oliver's time: Tho this I say too, that a Head is necessary to
every thing else, I am Head of this Congregation of Calves Heads, every one of
you are the Heads of your Families, unless your Wives wear the Breeches; and it
is as necessary to have a Head to a Bed, as to have a handle to a Pipkin, which
cannot be managed without. 1. The Head is commonly answerable to the Body of a
thing, but what is one Head to the Body of a Nation. This, my Beloved, I know
not, no nor a Horse that has a bigger Head than I. My Beloved, a Calves Head is
an excellent thing; In the first place it serves for us to Triumph over. 2. The
Brains whet our Stomachs; and 3. The Meat fills them, and the Bones serve our
Dogs for a Dinner; so that in a Calves Head nothing is lost but what goes away
in Boiling, and that makes Broth too: The Ears show us that we ought to hear
the Word with all Diligence; the Eyes declare that we should discern between
this and that, and see what is what: The Nose may serve to show us, that we
ought to Smell where abouts we are, and follow that which is Good by the Scent,
even as a Cat does a Mouse, or a Blood-hound one that has Robbed a Henroost: The
Tongue may tell or show us, that we ought to Bleat or Roar abroad sound
Doctrine in the Ears of the Sleepy World, even as a Calf does just before
Milking-time: The Teeth show us, that we should Bite and Pinch our Adversaries
in the Bud, even as a Monky does a Louse, or a Rigid Lawyer a Profuse Client;
but since it is so that all Lawyers be K -- ves, the best Council that I can
give you, is to make your Pudding- bag widest at the top.

I have now done with the Calves Head and come to the Bacon, as a thing
inseparable from it: Bacon is as much as to say Hogsflesh in a Smoaky Sense;
now what piece is most proper to Boil with the Head of a Calf, has been much
disputed amongst the Learned, tho I am clearly for the Tail Chine, that the
Head and Tail may go together: Bacon is Fat, which shows us that we should
Thrive, and grow Fat in good Works, and hearing of the Word: The Lean may
inform us, that in all our Fat Pleasures we should here and there mix a Stripe
of Lean Afflictions; or as one of our Learned Brothers will have it, it teaches
us to eat Bread with Fat Bacon, and not like Cats and Dogs that always eat Meat
alone: The Rind of the Bacon may show us, that we should be Tough and Hardy in
all Persecutions and Troubles, and defend us from Violent Blows of Affliction
by the Bristles of our Faith; let us suffer our selves to be ring'd, viz.
Chained, and put into a Stye with Swine, that is, into a Prison with Vagabonds,
and there Fatted (i. e.) eat Bread and Water, Be brought out and have our
Throats Cut (i. e.) suffer even to Death; then shall we have the Honor to be
eaten with a Calves Head (i. e.) we shall be remembered after Death. This I
speak with reference to the Sire of the Steward of this Feast, that Vessel of
Clay, who sat as Judge, and was one of those Fleet Judges that Condemned his
Prince to the Fury of Wood (i. e.) to loose his Head on a Scaffold. This very
place where we Yearly meet, I have Sanctified to you, the Sign is an Emblem of
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, tho I never heard what color that Lion was,
yet it is very probable it was White, as this is. Think not, O Beloved, that I
speak this of my self, or by the Instigation of the Evil one, but from the
Dictates of the Inward Man, who has Revealed these things to me, in behalf of a
Weak and Unbelieving Sister here present; yet now I talk of a Sister, methinks
the Outward Man gets ground, and I feel him Swell and grow Stiff, much
resembling the Horn of Antichrist, methinks he thrusts forth his Gills and
shows his Nose above Water. Yet, my Beloved, say not Antichrist, for he has his
share in the Castoffs of the World, and not in us the Chosen People; I rather
think this Outward Insurrection to proceed from an Inward Cause, heated and
raised up by an Holy Flame of Fraternal Love, when my Bowels yearned toward
her my Sister; some advise to take a Glass of Tent, and a new-laid Egg: Now, my
Beloved, this I learned of the Children of Darkness, for they are grown more
Wise in their Generation than the Children of Light: But after all, there is
nothing like a Calves Head and Bacon: Let us beg for something above, to drop
down upon this little Willow (i. e.) our Church, that in time it may grow up to
be a Sturdy Oak, to be Sawed out into Deal Boards to Wainscot the Walls of the
New-Jerusalem. Yet let the World do as they will, I say still that the Head of
a Calf, and the Tail-Chine of a Hog is good Victuals.

Beloved, There are eight things which are an Abomination to mine Eyes, a
Surplice, a Common Prayer Book, a Gown and Cassock, a Young Handsome Girl
without a Husband, or Married to an Old Doting Fool; an Old Woman Married to a
Young Man; a Sister Married to one of the World, or a Feast without Calves Head
and Bacon. There is likewise five things past my finding out, The way of a
Brother and Sister in the midst of a Holy Flame; The way of a Constable Nabbing
a Bully; The way of a Harlot Cheating a Cully; The way of a Woman when her
Husband is out of Town; And the way of a Pick-pocket in a Fair; these things
are wonderful in mine Eyes. I have often compared the Wicked with us, and find
as much difference, as between an Apple and a Nut; they are just like blind
Bayard, that sees no better in the Light than in the Dark, Rambles about, and
at last tumbles Headlong into a deep Ditch, where he is utterly lost for ever
and ever: Let your Eyes be set toward your Resting place, those Sweet Elysium
Groves, where gentle Breeses of whispering Gales shall Lull you into Ecstasies
in the Brinks of Heavenly Springs, where Silver Streams run Murmuring along,
Tattleing in Charming Notes; this is the place prepared for us where we shall
have no more occasion for Calves Head and Bacon. Leave the World to the
Children of it, and steer your Course after me, with Weeping Eyes, even as a
Child that cries after the Nipple. I desire you to be mindful of the Main
Chance, observe the Dictates of the Inward Man, be satisfied with your Estates
and content with such things as you have, even as a Cat that lies Snug in a
warm Ash-heap, when all the Family is in Bed, thinking no body harm. Oh you
that hear me this day, be Mindful, Weep, Howl, and throw your Snot about, and
be Sorry for your Offenses: When I consider the Stubbornness of your Necks,
Hardness of your Hearts, and great Unbelief, it makes me almost resolve to
leave you to be Buffetted by the Evil One, and seek out some other Flock that
will obey my Hallow, and will know my Dog: Here is the Father against the Son,
and the Son against the Father; the Mother against the Daughter, and she
against the Maid; some for Peter, some for Paul, and the most for you don't
know who: You are Headstrong, Perverse and Unweily, Rugged, Ruffian-like, Base
and Degenerate, Ill-natured and Cruel, Hard-hearted, Dubious, nay Incredulous
and Unchristian, and for that reason I could find in my Heart to leave you, for
indeed what should I stay with you for? Yet now I think on it I will not, perhaps
you may grow better when you have filled your Bellies with Calves Head and
Bacon. Nevertheless endeavor to reform your selves, Watch and Pray, be Dutiful
to your Superiors, Affable to your Inferiors; Love your Neighbor's Wife as you
love him; and love him as you love your self; let all things be done in order,
in ample manner, in the form of a Cheese-cake; let your Words be seasoned with
Salt and a very little Pepper: I entreat this of you for my own sake, that it
may not be said of me when I am gone, I shear'd your Fleeces, yet left you
uncur'd of the Scab. I have been as Concise as I could in my Discourse, I shall
add no more till the next Year, only this, that I would have you mindful to get
Dinner on the Table, for now my Stomach serves for Calves Head and Bacon.

FINIS.

