A DISSERTATION UPON THE EPISTLES OF PHALARIS, THEMISTOCLES, SOCRATES,
EURIPIDES, and Others; And the FABLES of AESOP.

BY RICHARD BENTLEY, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary and Library Keeper to His
MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by I. Leake, for Peter Buck, at the Sign of the Temple, near
the Inner-Temple-Gate, in Fleet Street, MDCXCVII.

Sir William Temple's Essay upon Ancient and Modern Learning, page 58.
IT may perhaps be further affirmed, in favor of the Ancients; That the oldest
Books we have, are still in their kind the best. The two most Ancient that I
know of in Prose, among those we call Profane Authors, are Aesop's Fables, and
Phalaris's Epistles, both living near the same time, which was that of Cyrus
and Pythagoras. As the first has been agreed by all Ages since for the greatest
Master in his kind; and all others of that sort have been but Imitations of his
Original: so I think the Epistles of Phalaris to have more Race, more Spirit,
more Force of Wit and Genius, than any others I have ever seen either Ancient
or Modern. I know, several Learned Men (or that usually pass for such, under
the Name of Critics) have not esteemed them Genuine; and Politian, with some
others, have attributed them to Lucian: but I think he must have little Skill
in Painting, that cannot find out this to be an Original. Such Diversity of
Passions, upon such Variety of Actions and Passages of Life and Government;
such Freedom of Thought, such Boldness of Expression; such Bounty to his
Friends, such Scorn of his Enemies; such Honor of Learned Men, such Esteem of
Good; such Knowledge of Life, such Contempt of Death; with such Fierceness of
Nature, and Cruelty of Revenge, could never be represented but by him that
possessed them. And I esteem Lucian to have been no more capable of Writing,
than of Acting what Phalaris did. In all One writ, you find the Scholar or the
Sophist; and all, the Other, the Tyrant and the Commander.

A DISSERTATION UPON The EPISTLES of PHALARIS, and others; and the FABLES of
AESOP.
To Mr. Wotton.
SIR,
I Remember, that discoursing with you upon this Passage of Sir W. T. (which I
have here set down,) I happened to say, That with all Deference to so great an
Authority, and under a just Awe of so sharp a Censure, I believed it might be
even demonstrated, that the Epistles of Phalaris are Spurious, and that we have
nothing now extant of Aesop's own Composing. This casual Declaration of my
Opinion, by the power of that long Friendship that has been between us, you
improved into a Promise, That I would send you my Reasons in Writing, to be
added to the New Edition of your Book: believing it, as I suppose, a
considerable Point in the Controversy you are engaged in. For if it once be
made out, that those Writings your Adversary so extolls, are Supposititious,
and of no very long Standing; you have then His and his Parties own Confession,
That some of the Later Pens have outdone the Old ones in their kinds: And to
others, that have but a mean Esteem of the Wit and Style of those Books, it
will be a double Prejudice against him, in your favor, That he could neither
discover the true Time, nor the true Value of his Authors.

These, I imagine, were your Thoughts; when you engaged me to this, that I am
now doing. But I must take the freedom to profess, that I write without any
view or regard to your Controversy; which I do not make my own, nor presume to
interpose in it. It Is a Subject so nice and delicate, and of such a mixed and
difsused nature, that I am content to make the best Use I can of both Ancients
and Moderns, without venturing with you, upon the hazard of a wrong Comparison,
or the envy of a true one.

That some of the Oldest Books are the best in their kinds, the same Person
having the double Glory of Invention and Perfection; is a thing observed even
by some of the Ancients Dion. Chrysostom. Orat. 33. P. 397.
. But then the Authors they gave this Honor to, are Homer and Archilochus, one
the Father of Heroic Poem, and the other of Epode and Trochaic. But the choice
of Phalaris and Aesop, as they are now extant, for the two great inimitable
Originals, is a piece of Criticism of a peculiar Complexion, and must proceed
from a Singularity of Palate and Judgment.

To pass a Censure upon all kinds of Writings, to show their several
Excellencies and Defects, and especially to assign each of them to their proper
Authors, was the chief Province and the greatest Commendation of the Ancient
Critics. And it appears from those Remains of Antiquity that are left us, that
they never wanted Employment. For to forge and counterfeit Books, and father
them upon Great Names, has been a Practice almost as old as Letters. But it was
then most of all in fashion, when the Galen. in Hippoc. de Natura Hominis,
Comm. 2. p. 17. Ed. Basil.
Kings of Pergamus and Alexandria, rivalling one another in the Magnificence
and Copiousness of their Libraries, gave great rates for any Treatises that
carried the names of celebrated Authors. Which was an Invitation to the Scribes
and Copyers of those Times, to enhance the Price of their Wares by ascribing
them to Men of Fame and Reputation; and to suppress the true Names, that would
have yielded less Money. And now and then even an Author, that wrote for Bread,
and made a Traffic of his Labors, would purposely conceal himself, and
personate some old Writer of eminent Note; giving the Title and Credit of his
Works to the Dead, that himself might the better live by them. But what was
then done chiefly for Lucre, was afterward done out of Glory and Affectation,
as an Exercise of Style, and an Ostentation of Wit. In this the Tribe of the
Sophists are principally concerned; in whose Schools it was the ordinary task
to compose (...), to make Speeches and write Letters in the Name and Character
of some Hero, or great Commander or Philosopher; (...), What would Achilles,
Medea, or Alexander say in such or such Circumstances? Thus Ovid, we see, who
was bred up in that way, writ Love Letters in the Names of Penelope and the
rest. It Is true, they came abroad under his own Name; because they were written
in Latin and in Verse, and so had no color or pretense to be the Originals of
the Grecian Ladies. But some of the Greek Sophists had the Success and
Satisfaction to see their Essays in that kind pass with some Readers for the
genuine Works of those they endeavored to express. This, no doubt, was great
Content and Joy to them; being as full a Testimony of their Skill in Imitation;
as the Birds gave to the Painter, when they peck'd at his Grapes. One of them
(...) Praef. Epist. Bruti.
indeed, has dealt ingenuously, and confessed that he feigned the Answers to
Brutus, only as a Trial of Skill: but most of them took the other way, and
concealing their own Names, put off their Copies for Originals; preferring that
silent Pride and fraudulent Pleasure, though it was to die with them, before an
honest Commendation from Posterity for being good Imitators. And to speak
freely, the greatest part of Mankind are so easily imposed on in this way, that
there is too great Invitation to put the trick upon them. What clumsie Cheats,
those Sibylline Oracles now extant, and Aristeas's Story of the Septuagint,
passed without control even among very learned Men. And even some Modern
Attempts of this kind have met with Success not altogether discouraging. For
though Annius of Viterbo, after a Reputation of some Years, and Inghiramius
immediately, were shamed out of all Credit: yet Sigonius's Essay de
Consolatione, as coming from a skilful Hand, may perhaps pass for Cicero's with
some, as long as Cicero himself shall last. Which I cannot presage of that
bungling Supplement to Petronius (I mean not that from Traw, but the pretended
one from Buda) that Scandal to all Forgeries: though, I hear, it is at present
admired as a genuine Piece by some that think themselves no ordinary Judges.

OF PHALARIS'S EPISTLES.
THat Sophist, whoever he was, that wrote a small Book of Letters in the Name
and Character of Phalaris, (give me leave to say this now, which I shall prove
by and by) had not so bad a hand at Humouring and Personating, but that several
believed, it was the Tyrant himself that talked so big, and could not discover
the Ass under the Skin of that Lion. For we find Stobaeus Stob. Tit. vii.
, quoting the 38, and 67, and 72, of those Epistles, under the Title of
Phalaris. And Suidas, in the Account he gives of him, says he has wrote most
admirable Letters, (...), meaning those that we are speaking of. And Johannes
Tzetzes, a Man of much rambling Learning, has many and large Extracts out of
them, in his Chiliads; ascribing them all to the Tyrant whose Livery they wear.
These three, I think, are the only Men among the Ancients, that make any
mention of them: but since they give not the least hint of any Doubts
concerning their Author; we may conclude, that all the Scholars of those Ages
received them as true Originals; so that they have the general Warrant and
Certificate for this last Thousand Years before the Restoration of Learning. As
for the Moderns; besides the Approbation of those smaller Critics, that have
been concerned in the Editions of them, and cry them up of course; some very
Learned Men have espoused and maintained them, such as Thomas Fazellus Historia
Sicula, p. 118.
, and Iacobus Cappellus Historia Sacra and Exotica, p. 249.
. Even Mr. Seldom himself Marm. Arundel. p. 106.
draws an Argument in Chronology from them, without discovering any Suspicion
or Jealousy of a Cheat. To whom I may add their latest and greatest Advocate;
who has honored them with that most high Character, prefixed to this Treatise.

Others, indeed, have shown their Distrust of Phalaris's Title to them; but are
content to declare their Sentiment without assigning their Reasons. Phalaris,
or some body else, [says Caelius Rhod. lib. iii. c. 7.] The Epistles that go
under the Name of Phalaris, [Menagius ad Laert. p. 35.] Some name the very
Person, at whose door they lay the Forgery. Lucian, whom they commonly mistake
for Phalaris, [says Ang. Politianus, Epist. 1.] The Epistles of Phalaris, if
they are truly his, and not rather Lucians, [Lilius Greg. Gyraldus, Poet. Hist.
p. 88.] who, in another place, [ p. 332.] informs us, that Politian's Opinion
had generally obtained among the Learned of that Age: The Epistles, says he, of
Phalaris, which most People attribute to Lucian. How judiciously they ascribe
them to Lucian, we shall see better anon; after I have examined the Case of
Phalaris, who has the Plea and Right of Possession. And I shall not go to
dispossess him, as those have done before me, by an Arbitrary Sentence in his
own Tyrannical Way; but proceed with him upon lawful Evidence, and a fair,
impartial Trial. And I am very much mistaken in the Nature and Force of my
Proofs, if ever any Man hereafter, that reads them, persist in his old Opinion
of making Phalaris an Author.

The Censures that are made from Style and Language alone, are commonly nice
and uncertain, and depend upon slender Notices. Some very sagacious and learned
Men have been deceived in those Conjectures, even to ridicule. The great
Scaliger published a few Iambics, as a choice Fragment of an old Tragedian,
given him by Muretus; who soon after confessed the Jest, that they were made by
himself. Boxhornius writ a Commentary upon a small Poem De Lite, supposed by
him to be some ancient Author's; but it was soon discovered to be Michael
Hospitalius's, a late Chancellor of France. So that if I had no other Argument,
but the Style, to detect the Spuriousness of Phalaris's Epistles; I my self,
indeed, should be satisfied with that alone, but I durst not hope to convince
every body else. I shall begin therefore with another sort of Proofs, that will
affect the most slow Judgments, and assure the most timid or incredulous.

The Time of Phalaris's Tyranny cannot be precisely determined, so various and
defective are the Accounts of those that write of him. Eusebius sets the
Beginning of it Olymp. XXXI, 2. Phalaris apud Agrigentinos tyrannidem exercet;
and the End of it Olymp. XXXVII, 2. Phalaridis tyrannis destructa. By which
Reckoning he governed XXVIII Years. But St. Hierom, out of some unknown
Chronologer (for that Note is not extant in the Greek of Eusebius) gives a
different Time of his Reign, above LXXX Years later than the other; Olymp.
LIII, 3. or as other Copies read it, LII, 2. Phalaris tyrannidem exercuit annos
XVI. Which is agreeable to Suidas, who places him, (...), about the LII
Olympiad. If the former Account be admitted, the Cheat is manifest at first
sight: for those Letters of Phalaris to Stesichorus and Pythagoras must of
necessity be false. Because Stesichorus was but VI Years old at that supposed
time of Phalaris's Death; and Pythagoras was not taken notice of in Greece till
LXXX Years after it. But for the sake of Aristotle and Iamblichus, who make
these Three to be Contemporaries, and that I may prevent all possible Cavils
and Exceptions; I am willing to allow the latter Account, the more favorable
to the pretended Letters; his Government commencing Olymp. LIII, 3. and
expiring after XVI Years, Olymp. LVII, 3.

I. In the last Epistle, to those of Enna, a City of Sicily; Phalaris says, the
Hyblenses and Phintienses had promised to lend him Money at Interest; (...).
The Sophist was careful to mention such Cities as he knew were in Sicily. For
so Ptolemee places (...) there; and Antoninus, Phintis; and Pliny, Phintienses.
But it is ill luck for this Forger of Letters, that a Fragment of Diod. p. 867.
Diodorus, a Sicilian, and well acquainted with the History of his Country,
was preserved to be a Witness against him. That excellent Writer informs us,
that Phintias, Tyrant of Agrigentum, (the very Place where Phalaris was before
him) first built Phintia, calling it by his own Name; (...) and that this was
done, while the Romans were at War with King Pyrrhus, that is, Olymp. CXXV;
which is above CCLXX Years after Phalaris's Death, taking even the later
Account of St. Hierom. A pretty Slip this of our Sophist, who, like the rest of
his Profession, was more versed in the Books of Orators than Historians, to
introduce his Tyrant borrowing Money of a City, almost CCC Years before it was
named or built.

II. In the XCII Epistle, he threatens Stesichorus the Poet, for raising Money
and Soldiers against him at Aluntium and Alaesa, (...): and that perhaps he
might be snapt, before he got home again from Alaesa to Himera, (...). What a
pity it is again, that the Sophist had not read Diodorus: for he would have told
him, that this Alaesa was not in being in Phalaris's days. Diod. p. 246.
It was first built by Archonides, a Sicilian, Olymp. XCIV, 2. or, as others
say, by the Carthaginians, about Two Years before. So that here are above CXX
Years slipped, since the latest period of Phalaris. And we must add above a dozen
more to the reckoning, upon the Sophist's own score: For this Letter is
supposed to bear date before Stesichorus and Phalaris were made Friends; which
was a dozen Years, as he tells his Tale Epist. 103.
, before Stesichorus died; and Phalaris he makes to survive him. I am aware,
that the same Author says, Diod. ibid.
that there were other Cities in Sicily, called Alaesa: But it is evident from
the situation, that this Alaesa of Archonides is meant in the Epistles; for
this lies on the same Coast with Himera and Aluntium, (to which two the Sophist
here joins it,) and is at a small distance from them. And indeed there was no
other Town of that name in the days of the Sophist, the rest being ruined long
before.

III. The LXX Epistle gives an account of several rich Presents to Polyclitus
the Messenian Physician, for doing a great cure upon Phalaris. Among the rest,
he names (...), ten couple of Thericlean cups. But there is another thing,
besides a pretty Invention, very useful to a Liar; and that is, a good Memory.
For we will suppose our Author to have once known something of these Cups, the
time and the reason they were first called so; but that he had unhappily forgot
it, when he writ this Epistle. They were large Drinking-Cups, of a peculiar
shape, so called from the first Contriver of them, one Thericles a Corinthian
Potter. Pliny, by mistaking his Author Theophrastus, makes him a Turner, [lib.
XVI. cap. 40.] Celebratur and Thericles nomine, calices ex terebintho solitus
facere torno. The words of Theophrastus are these, [ Hist. Plant. I. V. cap.
4.] (...); That the Turners make Thericlean Cups of the Turpentine tree, which
cannot be distinguished from those made by the Potters. Here can nothing be
gathered hence, to make Thericles himself a Turner; for after he had first
invented them, they were called Thericlean, from their shape, whatsoever
Artificer made them, and whether of Earth, or of Wood, or of Metal. But as I
said, by the general consent of Writers, we must call him a Potter. Hesychius,
(...). Lucian [in Lexiphanes, page 960.] (...). Etymologicon M. (...). The
words of Eubulus, whom he cites, are extant in Athenaeus, [lib. XI. p. 471.]

(...)
And again;

(...)
Now the next thing to be enquired, is the Age of this Thericles; and we learn
that from Athenaeus; one Witness indeed, but as good as a multitude in a matter
of this nature, [ page 470.] (...); This Cup, says he, was invented by
Thericles the Corinthian Potter, who was contemporary with Aristophanes the
Comaedian. And in all probability, he had this indication from some Fable of
that Poet's, now lost; where that Corinthian was mentioned, as one then alive.
But all the Plays that we have left of his, are known to have been written and
acted between the LXXXIIX and XCVII Olympiads, which is an interval of XXXVI
years. Take now the very first year of that number; and Thericles, with the
Cups that had their appellation from him, come above CXX years after Phalaris's
death.

But I must remove one Objection that may be made against the force of this
Argument: for some ancient Grammarians give a quite different account, why such
Cups were called Thericlean. Some derive the word, (...), from the skins of
Beasts that were figured upon them: and Pamphilus the Alexandrian Athenaeus,
page 471.
would have them called so, (...), because Beasts were scared and frightened,
when, in Sacrifices, Wine was poured upon them out of those Cups. So I
interpret the words of Pamphilus; (...). For what is more ordinary in old
Authors, than the memory of that custom of pouring wine on the heads of the
Victims?

Ipsa tenens dextra pateram pulcherrima Dido Candentis vaccae media inter
cornua fudit. Nor are wild Beasts only called (...), but tame too, such as
Bulls and Cows; as the Epigrammatist calls the Minotaure, (...). I cannot
therefore comprehend why the most learned Is. Casaubon will read (...) in this
passage, and not (...). For I own, I see little or no sense in it, according to
his Lection. And as for the Authority of the ancient Epitomizer of Athenaeus,
who, he says, reads it (...); one may be certain, 'twas a fault only in that
Copy of him that Casaubon used. For Eustathius, who appears never to have seen
the true Athenaeus, but only that Epitome, read it in his Book (...), and took
it in the same sense that I now interpret it, [ p. 1209. Iliad.] H (...). And
now for those two derivations of the word (...); was ever any thing so forced,
so frigid, so unworthy of refutation? Does not common Analogy plainly show,
that as from (...) comes (...), from (...), and many such like; so (...) must
be from (...)? besides so many express Authorities for it, which I have cited
before. To which I may add that of Julius Pollux, [l. VI. c. 16.] (...): and
Plutarch in P. Aemilius, [pag. 273.] (...). And Clemens Alexand. [II. Paed. p.
69.] (...). For one may justly infer, that both Plutarch and Clemens believed
(...) to be from (...); because they join them with those other Cups, all which
had their names from Men that either invented or used them. And so says a
Manuscript note upon that passage of Clemens; (...). So that upon the whole,
let Pamphilus and those other Grammarians help him as they can, our Sophist
stands fully convicted, upon this Indictment, of forgery and imposture.

I must here beg leave of the late learned Editors of our Mock Phalaris, with
whom I must by and by have some further expostulation, to dissent from their
new version of this passage; whereby this argument from Thericles would vanish
into nothing. For instead of ten couple of Thericlean Cups, as the former
Interpreters honestly translate it, they present us, as an emendation, with the
like number of GLASSES, Poculorum Vitreorum, leaving us not the least footstep
of our Corinthian Potter. But methinks these Glasses come in but odly and
stingily among those other things named there of great value, (...), etc.
Vessels of Gold and Silver, beautiful Slaves, fifty thousand Drachmae, and a
liberal yearly Pension for Life. If Agathocles the Tyrant had made this Present
of a score of Glasses, it might have passed for a mark of favor: because he
was a Potter in his youth, and we might suppose them of his own making. And as
I remember, Diodorus tells such a story of him. But why Phalaris should make so
cheap and brittle a Complement, I cannot conjecture. It Is true, Suidas
translates it a Glass, (...) (...): and Etymolog. Mag. (...). But we know the
old Lexicons chiefly consist of Excerpta out of Scholiasts and Glossaries upon
particular Authors; one of which, in one single place, might expound it a
Glass. But that it must universally mean so, or particularly in this passage
before us, neither the use of the Language, nor good Sense will allow. For
besides Earth, which was the first Material; some were made of Wood, as
Theophrastus says in the place already cited; others of Silver or Gold, as
Plutarch in P. Aemilius; (...). And Athenaeus, [lib. v. p. 199.] (...). And I
conceive, it were more agreeable to the Generosity of Phalaris, which is the
subject of so many Letters, to suppose these Thericlean Cups to be Silver at
least, if not a more precious Metal.

IV. In the LXXXV Epistle, he boasts of a great Victory obtained over the
Zancleans; (...)* But the very preceding Letter, and the XXI, are directed to
the Messenians, (...), and the City is there called (...)* and in the First
Epist. he speaks of (...). Here we see we have mention made of Zancleans and
Messenians; as if Zancle and Messana were two different Towns. Certainly the
true Phalaris could not write thus; and it is a piece of ignorance inexcusable
in our Sophist, not to know that both those names belonged to one and the same
City, at different times. Strabo, [lib. VI. p. 268.] (...); Messana, which was
before called Zancle. See also Herodotus, [lib. VII.] and Diodorus, [lib. IV.]
and others. Perhaps it may be suspected, in behalf of these Epistles, that this
change of Name was made, during those XVI years of Phalaris's Tyranny; and then
supposing the LXXXV Letter to be written before the change, and the other Three
after it, this argument will be evaded. But Thucydides will not suffer this
suspicion to pass, who relates, Lib. vi. P. 414.
that at the time of Xerxes's expedition into Greece (which was Olymp. LXXIII.)
Anaxilaus King of Rhegium besieged Zancle, and took it, and called it Messana,
from the Peloponnesian City of that name, the place of his nativity. The same
says Lib. vi. cap. 23.
Herodotus: and agreeably to this narrative, Lib. xi. P. 37.
Diodorus sets down the death of this Anaxilaus Olymp. LXXVI, I. when he had
reigned XVIII years. Take now the latest accounts of Phalaris's death,
according to to St. Hierom; and above LX years intervene between that, and the
new naming of Zancle. So that unless we dare ascribe to that Tyrant a Spirit of
Vaticination, we cannot acquit the Author of the Letters of so manifest a cheat.

But I love to deal ingenuously, and will not conceal one testimony in his
favor, which is that of Messen. P. 134.
Pausanias, who tells the story very differently from Herodotus and Thucydides,
placing this same Anaxilaus of Rhegium about a CLXXX years higher than they do;
That he assisted the Refugees of Messana in Peloponnesus, after the second war
with the Spartans, to take Zancle in Sicily; which thereupon was called
Messana, Olymp. XXIX: (...). Now if this be true, we must needs put-in one word
for our Sophist; that Phalaris might name the Messenians, without pretending to
the gift of Prophecy. Sicil. Antiq. P. 85.
Cluverius indeed would spoil all again; for he makes it a fault in our Copies
of Pausanias, and for (...) the XXIX Olymp. reads (...) the LXIX; which is too
great a number, to do our Author any service. But we will not take an advantage
against him, from a mistake of Cluverius; for without question, the true
Lection is (...) the XXIX; because the time of the Messenian War agrees with
that computation, and not with the other: and the ancient Eusebius. Scalig. P. 39.
Catalogue of the Olympionicae puts Chionis's Victory at that very year. (...).
So that if Pausanias's Credit is able to bear him out, our Author, as to this
present point, may still come off with reputation. But alas! what can Pausanias
do for Him, or for himself, against Herodotus, and Thucydides, that lived so
near the time they speak of; against those other unknown Authors that Diodorus
transcribed; against the whole tenor of History, confirmed by so many
Synchronisms and Concurrences that even demonstrate Anaxilaus to have lived in
the days of Xerxes, and his Father; when Thereon, and not Phalaris, was Herodot.
lib. vii. P. 438
(...), Monarch of Agrigentum. Nay, though we should be so obliging, so partial
to our Sophist, as for his sake to credit Pausanias against so much greater
Authority; yet still the botch is incurable; it is running in debt with one man,
to pay off another. For, how then comes it to pass, that the Messenians in
another Letter, are in this called Zancleans? which, by that reckoning of
Pausanias, had been an obsolete forgotten word, an hundred years before the
date of this pretended Epistle.

V. That same XCII Letter, which has furnished us already with one detection of
the Imposture, will, if strictly examined, make a second confession, from these
words, (...); it is a threat of Phalaris to the Himeraeans, That he would
extirpate them like a Pinetree. Now here again am I concerned for our Sophist,
that he is thus taken tripping. For the Original of this Saying is thus related
by Lib. vi. cap. 37.
Herodotus: When the Lampsaceni in Asia had taken captive Miltiades the
Athenian, Craesus King of Lydia sent them a Message; That if they did not set
him free, he would come and extirpate them like a Pine; (...). The men of
Lampsacus understood not the meaning of that expression, like a Pine; till one
of the eldest of them hit upon it, and told them, That of all trees, the Pine,
when once it is cut down, never grows again, but utterly perishes. We see the
phrase was then so new and unheard of, that it puzzled a whole City. But now if
Craesus was upon that occasion the first Author of this Saying, what becomes of
this Epistle? For this, as I observed before, being pretended to be written
above a dozen years before Phalaris's death, carries date at least half a dozen
before Croesus began his reign.

Nay, there is good ground of suspicion, that Herodotus himself, who wrote an
Hundred Years after Phalaris was killed, was the first broacher of this
expression. For it is known, those first Historians make every body's Speeches
for them. So that the blunder of our Sophist is so much the more shameful. The
Third Chapter of the VIII Book of A. Gellius, which is now lost, carried this
Title; Quod Herodotus parum vere dixerit, unam solamque pinum arborum omnium
caesam nunquam denuo ex iisdem radicibus pullulare; That Herodotus is in the
wrong, in saying, that of all trees, a Pine only, if lopt, never grows again. I
suppose, Gellius, in that Chapter told us, Hist. Pl. lib. iv. c. 19. Cause. Pl.
l. v. c. 24. Plin. l. xvii. c. 24.
out of Theophrastus, of some other trees, beside the Pine, that perish by
lopping; the Pitchtree, the Firr, the Palm, the Cedar, and the Cypress. But I
would have it observed, that he attributes the Saying, and the Mistake about
it, not to Croesus, but to Herodotus: after whom, it became a Proverb, which
denotes an utter destruction, without any possibility of flourishing again. See
(...) in Zenobius, Diogenianus, and Suidas. And it is remarkable, that our
Letter-monger has Herodotus's very words, (...) and (...); when all those three
other Writers have (...) for (...), and (...) instead of (...): which shows he
had in his eye and memory this very place of Herodotus. A strange piece of
stupidity, or else contempt of his Readers, to pretend to assume the garb and
person of Phalaris, and yet knowingly to put words in his mouth, not heard of
till a whole Century after him.

But here again our late Editors, as if they had been bribed for the Sophist,
have lopt off and destroyed this branch of our Evidence, as far as lay in their
power: for they have made bold to execute this Proverb upon it self, and have
quite extirpated the Pine Tree out of their new Version: (...); that is, qui
eos in arundinis morem conteret, who will bruise them like a Reed, (say our
critical Interpreters.) It seems, the Translation in the former Editions, Qui
eos exscindam instar pinus, was too easy and vulgar. In H. Scripture, indeed,
there is mention, by a very elegant Metaphor, of bruised and broken Reeds. But
why Reeds must be transplanted hither, and the innocent Pine rooted up, I
confess to be above my small understanding in Gardening.

VI. In the LXXXV Epistle, we have already taken notice of our Mock-Tyrant's
triumph; (...), That he had utterly routed the Tauromenites and the Zancleans.
But there is an old and true Saying, (...), Many new and strange things happen
in War. For we have just now seen those same routed Zancleans rise up again,
after a Thousand Years, to give him a worse defeat. And now the others too are
taking their turn to revenge their old losses. For These, though they are
called Tauromenites, both here, and in the XV, XXXI, and XXXIII Epistles, make
protestation against the name; and declare they were called Naxians, in the
days of the true Phalaris. Taurominium, quae antea Naxos, says Pliny, [lib.
III. c. VIII.] Taurominium, quam prisci Naxon vocabant, says Solinus, [cap.
XI.] Whence it is, that Herodotus and Thucydides, because they writ before the
change of the name, never speak of Taurominium, but of Naxos, and the Naxians.
A full account of the time, and the reason, and the manner of the change, is
thus given by Lib. xiv p. 282, and 305.
Diodorus. Some Sicilians planted themselves Olymp. XCVI, 1. upon a Hill called
Taurus, near the ruins of Naxus, and built a new town there, which they called
Tauromenion, (...), from their settlement upon Taurus. About Forty Years after
this, Olymp. CV. 3. Lib. XV. p. 411.
one Andromachus a Tauromenite gathered all the remnant of the old Naxians that
were dispersed through Sicily, and persuaded them to fix there. This is such a
plain and punctual testimony, that neither the power and stratagems of the
Tyrant, nor the rhetoric of the Sophist, are able to evade it. Where are those
then, that cry up Phalaris for the florid Author of the Letters? who was burnt
in his own Bull, above CL Years before Taurominium was ever thought on.

But I shall not omit one thing in defense of the Epistles; which though it
will not do the work, let it go, however, as far as it can. We have allowed,
that Pythagoras was contemporary with Phalaris; and yet in the History of that
Philosopher, we are told of his conversation and exploits at Taurominium.
Porphyry says, Vita Pythag. p. 169.
He delivered Croton and Himera, (...), and Taurominium, from Tyrants: and, P.
192, and 193*
That in one and the same day he was at Metapontium in Italy, and Taurominium
in Sicily. The same story is told by Iambl. p. 128.
Iamblichus; who supplies us too with another, P. 109.
That a young man of Taurominium being got drunk, (...), Pythagoras played him
sober by a few tunes of grave Spondees. These several passages seem to concur
with, and confirm the credit of the Letters, that Taurominium had a Name and
Being in the time of Pythagoras and Phalaris. All this would be very plausible,
and our Sophist might come off with a whole skin, but for a cross figure in his
own Art, Rhetoric, called Prolepsis or Anticipation, viz. when Poets or
Historians call any place by a name, which was not yet known in the times they
write of. As when Virgil says of Aeneas, -- Lavinaque venit Littora: and of
Daedalus, Chalcidicaque levis tandem superadstitit arce: he is excused by
Prolepsis; though those places were not yet called so in the times of Daedalus
and Aeneas. So when Porphyry and Iamblichus name Taurominium in the story of
Pythagoras; meaning Naxos, which was afterward called so; the same figure
acquits Them. For it is no more, than when I say, Julius Caesar conquered
France, and made an expedition into England: though I know that Gaul and
Britain were the names in that age. But when Phalaris mentions Taurominium so
many generations before it was heard of, he cannot have the benefit of that
same Prolepsis. For this is not a Poetical, but a Prophetical Anticipation. And
he must either have had the Praescience and Divination of the Sibyls, or his
Epistles are as false and commentitious as our Sibylline Oracles.

VII. The XXXV Letter to Polygnotus presents us with a Sentence of Moral,
(...), That wise men take Words for the shadow of Things; that is, as the
Shadow is not alone without the presence of the Body, so Words are accompanied
with the Action. It Is a very notable Saying, and we are obliged to the Author
of it; and if Phalaris had not modestly hinted, that others had said it before
him, we might have taken it for his own. But then there was either a strange
jumping of good Wits, or Democritus was a sorry Plagiary; for He laid claim to
the first Invention of it, as Vita Democrit.
Diogenes Laertius says, (...): and De Educat. Puer.
Plutarch, (...). What shall we say to this matter? Democritus had the
character of a man of Probity and Wit; who had neither inclination, nor need,
to filch the Sayings of others. Besides, here are Plutarch and Diogenes, two
witnesses that would scorn to flatter, and to ascribe it to Democritus, had
they ever read it in others before him. This bears hard indeed upon the Author
of the Letters: but how can we help it? He should have minded his hits better,
when he was minded to act the Tyrant. For Democritus, the first Author of the
Sentence, was too young to know even Pythagoras, (...), says Vita Democ.
Diogenes; and yet Pythagoras survived Phalaris, nay, deposed him, if we will
believe his Scholars. We may allow Forty Years space for Democritus's writing;
from the LXXXIV Olymp. to the XCIV, in which he died. Now the earliest of this
is above an Hundred Years after the last period of Phalaris.

I am sensible that De Daem.
Michael Psellus refers this Saying to Simonides; and Epist* 252, and 259.
Isidorus Peleus. to the Lacedaemonians. But these two are of little authority,
in a case of this nature, against Plutarch and Diogenes. Neither would the
matter be mended, should we accept of their testimony. For Simonides was but
Seven Years old, or, as others say, yet unborn, when Phalaris was killed. And
were it a Lacedaemonian Apophthegm, though the date be undetermined, it might
fairly be presumed to be more recent than He.

VIII. In the LI Epistle to Eteonicus there is another Moral Sentence; (...);
Mortal Men ought not to entertain Immortal Anger. But I am afraid he will have
no better success with this, than the former. For Lib. ii. cap. 21.
Aristotle, in his Rhetoric, among some other sententious Verses, cites this
Iambic, as commonly known;

(...). This, though the Author of it be not named, was, probably, like most of
those Proverbial Gnomae, borrowed from the Stage; and consequently, must be
later than Phalaris, let it belong to what Poet you please, Tragic or Comic.

But because it may be suspected, that the Poet himself might take the Thought
from common usage, and only give it the turn and measure of a Verse; let us see
if we can discover some plainer footsteps of Imitation, and detect the lurking
Sophist under the mask of the

Tyrant. Tit. XX. (...).
Stobaeus gives us these Verses out of Euripides's Philoctetes;

(...)
Now to him that compares these with the words of the Epistle, 'twill be
evident, that the Author had this very passage before his Pen; there is (...)
and (...); not only a sameness of sense, but even of words, and those not
necessary to the Sentence: which could not fall out by accident. And where has
he now a Friend at a pinch, to support his sinking credit? for Euripides was
not born in Phalaris's time. Nay, to come nearer to our mark; from Argument.
Medeae Eurip.
Aristophanes the famous Grammarian, (who, after Aristotle, Callimachus, and
others, writ the (...), A Catalogue and Chronology of all the Plays of the
Poets; a Work, were it now extant, most useful to ancient History,) we know
that this very Fable, Philoctetes, was written Olymp. LXXXVII; which is CXX
Years after the Tyrant's Destruction.

IX. The XII Epistle exhibits Phalaris making this complement to his Friends;
(...); That while they continued in prosperity, his joy for that, though
himself should fall under misfortunes, would still make him happy. But methinks
those words, (...), the Other God, or Genius, that is, the Bad one, have a
quaintness in them something Poetical, and I am mistaken if they be not
borrowed from some Retainer to the Muses. And now I call it to mind, they are
Pyth. 3.
Pindar's,

(...)
or Callimachus's; for this Scazon of his is there cited by the Scholiast,

(...). Whether of these our Author made bold with, I cannot determine. Pindar
I should incline to guess, but that I find him familiar with Callimachus upon
another occasion; Epist. CXXII. speaking of Perillus's invention of the Brazen
Bull; (...). Where he has taken that expression, (...), from these Verses of
Schol* Pind. Pyth. 1.
Callimachus that concern the same business;

(...)
But be it either of them as you will, I suppose the Ages of both those Poets
are well enough known; so that without any computation of Years, one may
pronounce these fine Epistles not to belong to Phalaris himself, but to his
Secretary the Sophist.

X. The XXIII Epistle is directed to Pythagoras; and there he gives to his
Doctrine and Institution the name of Philosophy; (...). And so again in the
LVI. he gives him the title of Philosopher, (...). I could show now, from a
whole crowd of Authors, that Pythagoras was the first man that invented that
word; but I shall content my self with two, Diogenes Laertius, and Cicero. The
former says, P. 3. and. 26.
(...); Pythagoras first named Philosophy, and called himself Philosopher, in
conversation with Leon the Tyrant of Sicyon, or, as some say, of Phlius. The
latter tells us, Tu^cul. Quaest. l. V.
That when Pythagoras had discoursed before Leon, the Tyrant much taken with
his wit and eloquence, asked him what Art or Trade he professed. Art, says
Pythagoras, I profess none, but I am a PHILOSOPHER. Leon, in admiration at the
newness of the name, enquires what those Philosophers were, and wherein they
differed from other men; Quinam essent Philosophi, and quid inter eos and
reliquos interesset. What a difference is here between the two Tyrants? The one
knows not what Philosopher means; the other seems to account it as threadbare a
word, as the name of Wise Men of Greece; and that too, before ever he had
spoken with Pythagoras. We cannot tell, at this distance of time, which
Conversation was first, that with Phalaris, or that with Leon. But allowing
Leon's to be the first, yet it could not be long before the other. And it is
very hard to believe, that the fame of so small a business could so soon reach
Phalaris's ear in his Castle, through his Guard of Blue-coats, and the loud
bellowings of his Bull. Nay, could we suppose him to have heard of it; yet
surely when he had written to Pythagoras, he would have ushered the Word in
with some kind of introduction, That Science which you call Philosophy; and not
speak of it as familiarly, as if it had been the language of his Nurse.

XI. In the LXIII Epistle, he is in great wrath with one Aristolochus, a Tragic
Poet that no body ever heard of, for writing Tragedies against him, (...): and
in the XCVII. he threatens Lysinus, another Poet of the same stamp with the
former, for writing against him both Tragedies and Hexameters, (...). Now to
forgive him that silly expression, of writing Tragedies against Him, for he
could not be the Argument of Tragedy, while he was living; I must take the
boldness to tell him, who am out of his reach, that he lays a false crime to
their charge. For there was no such Thing nor Word as Tragedy, while he
tyrannized at Agrigentum. That we may slight that obscure story about Epigenes
the Sicyonian, Thespis, we know, was the first Inventor of it;

Ignotum Tragicae genus invenisse camaenae
Dicitur, and plaustris vexisse poemata Thespis.
Neither was the Name of Tragedy more ancient than the Thing; as sometimes it
happens, when an old Word is borrowed and applied to a new Notion; but both
were born together: the Name being taken from (...), the Goat that was the
Prize to the best Poet and Actor. But Alcestis, the first Tragedy of Thespis,
was acted about Marm. Arund. Suidas (...).
the LXI Olymp. which is more than twelve Years after Phalaris's death.

XII. Had all other ways failed us of detecting this Impostor, yet his very
Speech had betrayed him. For his Language is Attic, the beloved Dialect of the
Sophists, in which all their (...), or Exercises, were composed; in which they
affected to excel each other, even to Pedantry and Solecism. But he had forgot
that the Scene of these Epistles was not Athens, but Sicily, where the Doric
tongue was generally spoken and written; as besides the testimonies of others,
the very Thing speaks it self in the Remains of Sicilian Authors, Sophron,
Epicharmus, Stesichorus, Theocritus, Moschus, and others. How comes it to pass
then, that our Tyrant transacts every thing in Attic, not only foreign Affairs
of State, but domestic Matters with Sicilian Friends, but the very Accounts of
his Household? Pray, how came that Idiom to be the Court Language at Agrigentum?
It Is very strange, that a Tyrant, and such a Tyrant as He, should so dote on
the Dialect of a Democraty, which was so eminently (...), the Hater of Tyrants;
which, in his very days, had driven out Pisistratus, though a generous and
easy Governor. Especially, since in those early times, before Stage-Poetry
and Philosophy and History had made it famous over Greece, that Dialect was no
more valued than any of the rest.

I would not be here mistaken; as if I affirmed, that the Doric was absolutely
universal, or original in Sicily. I know, that the old Sicani, the Natives of
the Isle, had a peculiar Language of their own; and that the Greek Tongue
there, like the Punic, was only a foreigner, being introduced by those Colonies
that planted themselves there. Most of which coming from Corinth, Crete,
Rhodes, etc. where all spoke the Doric Dialect; thence it was that the same
Idiom so commonly obtained almost all over Sicily; as it appears to have done,
to omit other testimonies, from the ancient Medals of that Island, (...); all
which words, inscribed upon their Money, demonstrate the Doric Dialect to have
been then the language of those Cities. It Is true, there came some Colonies to
Sicily, from Euboea, and Samos, and other places; which, in those Parts where
they settled, might speak, for a while, the Ionic or the Attic; and afterward,
being mixed with the Dorians, might make a new sort of Dialect, a compound of
both: as Lib. vi. p. 414.
Thucydides observes of Himera, that the language of that City was at first a
medly of Doric and Chalcidi^. But that is no more than what happened even in
Greece it self, where there were many Ventus Auctor (...).
(...), local sub-Divisions of every Dialect, one Country having always some
singularity of Speech, not used by any other. But those little peculiarities do
not hinder us from saying in general, that the Sicilians spoke Doric. For the
other Dialects were swallowed up and extinguished by those two powerful Cities
of Dorian Original, Syracuse, and Agrigentum, that shared the whole Island
between them. Syracuse was a Corinthian Colony, and spoke Theocrit. Id. xv.
the Dialect of her Mother City. Agrigentum was first built by the Geloans of
Sicily, who had been themselves a Plantation of the Cretans and Rhodians, both
of which were Dorian Nations. So that upon the whole, though in some other
Towns, and for a time, there might be a few footsteps of the Ionic and Attic;
yet our Sophist is inexcusable, in making a Tyrant of Agrigentum, a City of
Doric Language and Original, write Epistles in such a Dialect, as if he had
gone to School at Athens.

But there is a Vid. Eurip. Edit. Cantab. p. 523.
learned Greek Professor (whose Pardon I must ask, that I forgot to name him
above, among the Patrons of Phalaris,) who, after he has asserted the credit of
Euripides's Letters, gratuitously undertakes to apologize for These too, about
this matter of the Dialect. First, says he, Is enim Astypala natus erat, una ex
Cycladibus ubi Atheniensium erat Colonia.
because Phalaris was born at Astypala, an Island of the Cyclades, where was an
Athenian Colony, that is one reason for his speaking Attic. It were easy to
overthrow this first argument at once; by refuting our spurious Epistles, and
by showing, from much better Authority, that Phalaris was a Sicilian born. But
I may speak, perhaps of that by and by; and I will have every Proof I bring
stand by it self, without the support of another. Let us allow then, that
Phalaris came from Astypalaea, (for so it is to be called;) not that Isle of
the Cyclades, according to v. (...).
Stephanus; but of the Sporades, mentioned by Lib. x. p. 488.
Strabo and Lib. iv. cap. 12.
Pliny: for this latter was nearest to Crete, whither Phalaris's Wife and Son
are supposed to have fled, Epist. LXIX. It Is true, our late industrious Editors
have discovered a new place of his birth, Vid. Vitam Phalar. and Indicem. Edic.
O^^n.
Astypalaea, a City of Crete, never mentioned before by any Geographer, situate
in the 370th. degrees. of Longit. bearing South and by North off of Utopia. And I
am wholly of their opinion, that he was born in that, or in none of them. But
because Tradition is rather for the Island, we will beg their good leave to
suppose it to be so: and There, as it seems, was formerly a Plantation of
Athenians; and Phalaris being one of their Posterity, must needs, for that
reason, have a twang of their Dialect. Now, what a pity it is, that Phalaris
himself, or his Secretary, did not know of this Plantation, when he writ the
CXX Letter to the Athenians, (...)! What a fine complement would he have made
upon that subject of their Kindred! If any one know an express testimony, that
there was an Athenian Colony at that Astypalaea, he can teach me more than I
now remember. This I know in general, from Lib. 1. p. 10. (...).
Thucydides and others, that the Athenians sent Colonies to most of the
Islands; and so That may come in among the rest. But what then? must the
Language for ever afterward be Attic, wherever the Athenians once had
footing? Thucydides says in the same passage, That they planted Ionia. They had
Colonies at Miletus, at Ephesus, and most of the Maritime Towns of Asia Minor.
Nay, the Ionians and the Attics were anciently one People, and the Language the
same: and when Homer says, Strab^, lib. viii. p. 333. and lib. ix. p. 392.
(...), by the latter he is known to mean the Athenians. And yet we see, that
in process of time, the Colonies had a different Dialect from that of the
Mother Nation. Why then must Astypalaea needs be Attic? and that so
tenaciously, that twenty Years living in Sicily could not at all alter it in
one of her Islanders? He was part of that time a Polyaenus Stratag.
Publican, or Collector of Taxes and Customs: Could not that perpetual negoce
and converse with Dorians bring his mouth, by degrees, to speak a little
broader? Would not He that Ibid.
aimed at Monarchy, and for that design studied to be popular, have quitted his
old Dialect for that of the place; and not by every word he spoke make the
invidious discovery of his being a Stranger? But what if, after all, even the
Astypalaeans themselves should be found to speak Doric? If we make a conjecture
from their neighborhood, and the company they are put in, we can scarce
question but they were Dorians. Lib. x. p. 488.
Strabo says, the Island lies between Cos, and Rhodes, and Crete, (...). And
that all these three used the Doric Dialect, is too well known, to need any
proof.

But let us hear the Second Apology for the Atticism of Phalaris. Sed nec ipse
Diodorus Siculus nec Empedocles Agrigentinus, nec Ocellus Lucanus Dorice sed
Attice fere scripserunt.
He defends him by the like practice of others; that being Dorians born,
repudiated their vernacular Idiom for that of the Athenians; as Diodorus of
Agyrium, Empedocles of Agrigentum, and Ocellus of Lucania. So that, though
Phalaris be supposed to be a Native of Sicily, yet here is an excuse for him,
for quitting the Language. But I conceive, with submission, that this Argument
is built partly upon a vulgar Mistake, and partly upon such Instances as are
quite different and aliene from the case of our Epistles.

Ocellus Lucanus, the Pythagorean Philosopher, writ a small Treatise Of the
Nature of the Universe; which has been several times printed, and is (...), in
the common and ordinary Greek. But, if I may expect thanks for the discovery, I
dare engage to make out; that the Author composed it, not in the dress that it
now wears, but in Doric, his own Country fashion. For I find, it was agreed and
covenanted among all the Scholars of that Italian Sect, Iamblichus Vit.
Pythagor* 202.
(...), to use their own Mother Tongue: this was the injunction of Pythagoras;
this was the tessera of the whole Party; and those that know any thing of their
story, will believe they would have lost their Lives, rather than have broken
it. It Is most certain, if one had published a Book against that Injunction, he
would have been banished the Society. Besides, when Iamblichus tells us of this
Compact of theirs, he makes not one Exception to it; which he could not have
missed, neither from ignorance nor forgetfulness, if so common a Tract as this
of Ocellus had been writ in the Attic. Nay, we are assured, that other Pieces
of this Author were made in the Doric; as one Of Law, (...), cited by Eclog.
Phys. c. 16.
Stobaeus: the fragment begins thus; (...). But, which is plain demonstration,
four citations are brought by the Ibid. c. 24.
same Writer out of this very Book, (...), About the Nature of the Universe;
all which are in Doric, and not, as they are now extant, in the ordinary
Dialect. The first of them begins thus, (...): which is thus extant in the
vulgar Edit. Cantab.
Ocellus, p. 16. (...). The second, thus beginning, (...), extant p. 17. The
third, (...), etc. thus extant, p. 21. (...). The fourth (...) (...); extant in
ordinary Greek, p. 31. (...). From which passages these two points are
manifestly evinced; That Ocellus composed his Writings in Doric, and so is
falsely brought in for an Excuse to our Phalaris: and, which is much more
considerable, That this Tract of his now extant, is to be acknowledged for a
genuine Work; which hitherto Learned Men have doubted of, from this very
business of the Dialect. For we now see by these Fragments, that every word of
the true Book is faithfully preserved; the Doric only being changed into the
ordinary Language, at the fancy of some Copyer since the days of Stobaeus.

As for Empedocles and Diodorus, a Poet and an Historian, their case is widely
remote from that of our Tyrant. The former, being to write an Epic Poem, showed
an excellent judgment in laying aside his Country Dialect for that of the
Ionians; which Homer and his followers had used before him, and had given it,
as it were, the dominion of all Heroic Poetry. For the Doric Idiom had not
Grace and Majesty enough for the Subject he was engaged in; being proper indeed
for Mimes, Comedies, and Pastorals, where Men of ordinary rank are represented;
or for Epigrams, a Poem of a low vein; or for Lyrics, and the Chorus of
Tragedy, upon the account of the Doric Music; but not to be used in Heroic,
without great disadvantage. And the Historian likewise, with the rest of that
and other Dorian Nations, Philistus, Timaeus, Ephorus, Herodotus, Dionysius
Halic. etc. had great reason to decline the use of their vernacular Tongue, as
improper for History; which, besides the affectation of Eloquence, aims at
Easiness and Perspicuity, and is designed for general use. But the Doric is
course and rustic, and always clouded with an obscurity; (...), says Vita
Pythag. p. 205.
Porphyry; who attributes the decay of the Pythagorean Sect to their writing in
that Dialect. And we have just now seen an instance of it; since some body
thought it worth his labor, to transcribe Ocellus into another Idiom. And now,
what affinity is there between Phalaris's case, and that of Historians, or
Heroic Poets? What mighty motives can be here for assuming a foreign Dialect?
The Letters are dated in the middle of Sicily, mostly directed to the next
Towns, or to some of his own Domestics, about private affairs, or even the
expenses of his family, and never designed for the public view. If any will
still excuse the Tyrant for Atticizing in those circumstances, it is hard to
deny them the glory of being the faithfullest of his Vassals.

XIII. But since Tyrants will not be confined by Laws; let us suppose, if you
will, that our Phalaris might make use of the Attic, for no reason at all, but
his own arbitrary humor and pleasure: yet we have still another Indictment
against the credit of the Epistles. For even the Attic of the true Phalaris's
age is not there represented; but a more recent Idiom and Style, that by the
whole thread and color of it betrays it self to be a thousand years younger
than He. Every living Language, like the perspiring Bodies of living Creatures,
is in perpetual motion and alteration; some words go off, and become obsolete;
others are taken in, and by degrees grow into common use; or the same word is
inverted to a new sense and notion; which in tract of time makes as observable
a change in the air and features of a Language, as Age makes in the lines and
mien of a Face. All are sensible of this in their own native Tongues, where
continual Use makes every man a Critic. For what Englishman does not think
himself able, from the very turn and fashion of the Style, to distinguish a
fresh English composition from another a hundred years old? Now there are as
real and sensible differences in the several ages of Greek; were there as many
that could discern them. But very few are so versed and practiced in that
Language, as ever to arrive at that subtilty of Taste. And yet as few will be
content to relish or dislike a thing, not by their own Sense, but by another
man's Palate. So that should I affirm, That I know the novity of these Epistles
from the whole body and form of the work; none, perhaps, would be convinced by
it, but those that without my indication could discover it by themselves. I
shall let that alone then, and point only at a few particular marks and moles
in the Letters, which every one that pleases may know them by. In the very
first Epistle; (...), which you accuse me of, is an innovation in language; for
which the Ancients used (...). In the XVII. (...), having given before, never
used by the Ancients in that sense, but always for having betrayed. In the LI.
(...), desirous to follow me, where he speaks of his Wife that would accompany
him in his exile: but (...) anciently signified, to pursue; when that which
fled, feared and shunned the Pursuer. In the CXLII, among other Presents to a
Bride, he sends (...); which would anciently have signified Daughters: but he
here means it of Virgins or Maidens; as Fille and Figlia signify in French and
Italian; which is a most manifest token of a later Greek. Even Chiliad. p. 196.
Tzetzes, when he tells the story out of this Epistle, interprets it Maids,
(...). In the LXXVII, (...), many that are fond of their children; for that is
his sense of the words; which, of old, would have been taken for a flagitious
love of Boys; as if he had said, (...). They that will make the search, may
find more of this sort; but I suppose these are sufficient to unmask the recent
Sophist under the person of the old Tyrant.

XIV. But should we connive at his using the Attic Dialect, and say not a word
of those flaws and innovations in his Style; yet there is one thing still,
that, I fear, will more difficultly be forgiven him; that is, a very slippery
way in telling of Money. This is a tender point, and will make every body shy
and cautious of entertaining him. In the LXXXV Epistle he talks of a Hundred
Talents, (...); of Fifteen more, in the CXVIII; Eight, in the CXXXVII; Seven,
in the CIV; Five, in the CXLIII; and Three, in the XCV. These affairs being
transacted in the middle of Sicily, and all the persons concerned being natives
and inhabitants there; who would not be ready to conclude, that he meant the
Talent of the Country? since he gives not the least hint of his meaning a
foreign Sum. If a bargain were made in England, to pay so many Pounds or
Marks; and the party should pretend at last, that he meant Scots Marks, or
French Livres: few, I suppose, would care to have Dealings with him. Now this
is the very case in so many of these Letters. In the LXX, indeed, he is more
punctual with Polyclitus his Physician; for he speaks expressly of Attic Money,
(...). But this is so far from excusing him, that it is a plain condemnation
out of his own mouth. For if it was necessary to tell Polyclitus, that he meant
the Attic Money, and not the Sicilian; why had he not the same caution and
ingenuity toward all the rest? We are to know, That in Sicily, as in most
other Countries, the Name and Value of their Coins, and the way of reckoning by
Sums, was peculiar. The Sum Talent, in the Sicilian Account, contained no
more in Specie than Three Attic Drachms, or Roman Denares; as plainly appears
from Pollux* lib. ix. c. 6.
Aristotle, in his now lost Treatise of the Sicilian Government. And the words
of Festus are most express; Talentorum non unum genus: Atticum est sex millium
denarium, Syracusanum trium denarium. What an immense difference! One Attic
Talent had the real value of Two Thousand Sicilian Talents. Now, in all these
Epistles the very Circumstances assure us, that by the word Talent simply
named, the Attic Talent is understood. But should not our wise Sophist have
known, that a Talent, in that Country where he had laid the Scene of his
Letters, was quite another thing? Without question, if the true Phalaris had
penned them, he would have reckoned these Sums by the Sicilian Talents,
increasing only the Number: Or should he have made use of the Attic Account, he
would always have given express notice of it; never saying (...) alone, without
the addition of (...).

XV. But to let pass all further arguments from Words and Language; to me the
very Matter and Business of the Letters sufficiently discovers them to be an
Imposture. What force of Wit and Spirit in the Style, what lively painting of
Humor, some fancy they discern there; I will not examine nor dispute. But
methinks little Sense and Judgment is shown in the Groundwork and Subject of
them. What an improbable and absurd story is that of the LIVE? Stesichorus was
born at Himera; but he chanced to die at Catana, a hundred miles distance from
home, quite across the Island. Suidas (...). and (...).
There he was buried, and a noble Monument made for him. Thus far the Sophist
had read in good Authors. Now upon this he introduces the Himerenses, so
enraged at the others for having Stesichorus's Ashes, that nothing less will
serve them, than denouncing of War, and sacking their City. And presently an
Embassy is sent to Phalaris, to desire his assistance: who, like a generous
Allye, promises them what Arms and Men and Money they would: but withal,
sprinkles a little dust among the Bees, advising them to milder counsels, and
proposing this expedient, That Catana should have Stesichorus's Tomb, and
Himera should build a Temple to him. Now, was ever any Declamator's Theme so
extravagantly put? What? to go to War upon so slight an occasion? and to call
in too the assistance of the Tyrant? Had they so soon forgot Stesichorus's own
counsel? Aristot. Rhet. l. ii.
who, when upon another occasion they would have asked succor of Phalaris,
dissuaded them by the Fable of the Horse and his Rider. Our Sophist had heard,
that Seven Cities contended about Homer; and so Two might go to Blows about
another Poet. But there is a difference between that Contention, and this
Fighting in Earnest. He is as extravagant too in the Honors he would raise to
his Poet's Memory; nothing less than a Temple and Deification. Cicero tells us,
that in his days, there was his Statue still extant at Himera (then called
Thermae,) which, one would think, was Honor enough. But a Sophist can build
Temples in the Air, as cheaply and easily as some others do Castles.

What an inconsistency is there between the LI and LXIX Epistles? In the former
he declares his immortal hatred to one Python, who, after Phalaris's flight
from Astypalaea, would have persuaded his Wife Erythia to a second marriage
with himself; but seeing her resolved to follow her Husband, he poisoned her.
Now this could be no long time after his banishment; for then she could not
have wanted Opportunities of following him. But in the LXIX Epist. we have her
alive again, long after that Phalaris had been Tyrant of Agrigentum; for he
mentions his growing old there. And we must not imagine, but that several years
had passed, before he could seize the Government of so populous a City, that
had Diod. Sicul. p. 205.
200,000 Souls in it, or, as others Diog. Laert. in Empedoc.
say, 800,000. For he came an indigent Stranger thither, according to the
Letters; and by degrees rising from one employment to another, at last had
opportunity and power to effect that design. Besides, in the LXIX Letter, she
is at Crete with her Son; and in the LI, she is poisoned (I suppose) at
Astypalaea: for there her Poisoner dwelt; and it is expressly said, she designed,
but could not follow her Husband. Which seems an intimation, that the Sophist
believed Astypalaea to be a City in Crete. It Is certain, our diligent Editors
by comparing these two passages together, made that discovery Vita Phalar. and
Index.
in Geography: for it could not be learnt any where else; and it is an admirable
token, both that the Epistles are old and genuine, and that the Commentators
are not inferior to, nor unworthy of their Author.

What a scene of putid and senseless formality are the LXXIIX, LXXIX, and CXLIV
Epistles? Nicocles a Syracusian, a Man of the highest rank and quality, sends
his own Brother an hundred miles with a request to Phalaris, That He would send
to Stesichorus another hundred miles, and beg the favor of a Copy of Verses
upon Clearista his Wife, who was lately dead. Phalaris accordingly sends to
Himera with mighty application and address, and soon after writes a second
Letter of Thanks for so singular a Kindness. Upon the fame of this, one Ep. lxv.
Pelopidas entreats him, That he would procure the like favor for a friend of
His; but meets with a repulse. Now, whether there was any Poem upon Clearista
among the Works of Stesichorus, whence our Sophist might take the Plot and
Groundwork of this story; or whether all is entirely his own invention and
manufacture; I will not pretend to guess. But let those believe that can, that
such stuff as this busied the head of the Tyrant: at least they must confess
then, though the Letters would represent him as a great admirer and judge too
of Poetry, that he was a mere Asinus ad Lyram. For, in the LXXIX Epist. he
calls this Poem upon Clearista (...) and (...), which must here (as it almost
ever does) signify a Lyric Ode, since it is spoken of Stesichorus a Melic or
Lyric Poet. But in the CXLIV he calls it an Elegy, (...); which is as different
from (...), as Theognis is from Pindar, or Tibullus from Horace. What? the same
Copy of Verses both an Ode and an Elegy? Could not some years acquaintance with
Stesichorus teach him the very Names? But to forgive Him, or rather the
Sophist, such an egregious piece of Dullness; why, forsooth, so much ado, why
such a vast way about, to obtain a few Verses? Could not they have writ
directly to Stesichorus, and at the price of some Present have met with easy
success? Do not we know, that all of that String, Bacchylides, Simonides,
Pindar, got their livelihood by the Muses? So that to use Phalaris's
intercession; besides the delay, and an unnecessary trouble to both, was to
defraud the Poet of his Fee.

Nay certainly, they might have employed any hand, rather than Phalaris's. For,
begging pardon of the Epistles, I suspect all to be a Cheat, about
Stesichorus's friendship with him. For the Poet, out of common gratitude, must
needs have celebrated it in some of his Works. But that he did not, the Letters
themselves are, in this point, a sufficient witness. For, in the LXXIX,
Phalaris is feigned to entreat him, not once to mention his Name in his Books.
This was a sly fetch of our Sophist, to prevent so shrewd an objection from
Stesichorus's silence as to any friendship at all with him. But that cunning
shall not serve his turn. For what if Phalaris had really wished him to decline
mentioning his Name? Stesichorus knew the World well enough, that those sort of
requests are but a modest simulation; and a disobedience would have been easily
pardoned. In the LXXIV Letter, he proclaims and glories to his enemy
Orsilochus, that Pythagoras had stayed five Months with him: why should he then
seek to conceal from Posterity the twelve Years familiarity with Stesichorus?
Pindar, exhorting Hiero the Tyrant of Syracuse to be kind to Poets and Men of
letters, tells him how Craesus had immortal praise for his friendship and
bounty to them, but the Pyth. 1. (...).
memory of that cruel and inhospitable Phalaris was hated and cursed every
where. How could Pindar have said this, had he heard of his extraordinary
dearness with Stesichorus? For their acquaintance, according to the Letters,
was as memorable and as glorious, as that of Craesus with Aesop and Solon. So
that Pindar, had he known it, for that sole kindness to his fellow Poet, would
have forborne so vile a character. Plato, in his Second Epistle, recounts to
Dionysius some celebrated friendships of learned Men with Tyrants and
Magistrates; Simonides's with Hiero and Pausanias, Thales's with Periander,
Anaxagoras's with Pericles, Solon's and others with Craesus. Now, how could he
have missed, had he ever heard of it, this of Stesichorus with Phalaris? being
transacted in Sicily, and so a most proper and domestic Example. If you say,
the infamy of Phalaris made him decline that odious instance: in that very word
you pronounce our Epistles to be spurious. For if They had been known to Plato,
even Phalaris would have appeared as moderate a Tyrant as Dionysius himself. In
Phalar. prior.
Lucian, that feigns an Embassy from Phalaris to Delphi for the dedication of
the Brazen Bull, makes an Oration in his Praise, as Isocrates does of Busiris;
where, without doubt, he has gathered all the stories he knew for Topics of his
commendation: but he has not one word of his friendship with Stesichorus. Nor,
indeed, has any body else. And do not you yet begin to suspect the credit of
the Letters?

It would be endless to prosecute this part, and show all the silliness and
impertinency in the Matter of the Epistles. For, take them in the whole bulk;
if a Great Person would give me leave, I should say, they are a fardle of
Common Places, without any life or spirit from Action and Circumstance. Do but
cast your eye upon Cicero's Letters, or any States-man's, as Phalaris was: what
lively characters of Men there! what descriptions of Place! what notifications
of Time! what particularity of Circumstances! what multiplicity of Designs and
Events! When you return to these again, you feel, by the emptiness and deadness
of them, that you converse with some dreaming Pedant with his elbow on his
desk; not with an active, ambitious Tyrant, with his Hand on his Sword,
commanding a Million of Subjects. All that takes or affects you, is, a
stiffness and stateliness and operoseness of Style: but as that is improper and
unbecoming in all Epistles, so especially it is quite aliene from the character
of Phalaris, a man of business and dispatch.

XVI. It must needs be a great wonder to those that think the Letters genuine;
how or where they were concealed, in what secret Cave, or unknown Corner of the
World; so that no body ever heard of them for a thousand years together. Some
trusty Servant of the Tyrant must have buried them under ground; and it was
well that he did so. For if the Agrigentines had met with them, they had
certainly gone to pot. They that burnt alive both Him, and his Relations, and
his Friends; would never have spared such monuments of him, to survive Them and
their City. And without doubt it was immortal Vellum, and stolen from the (...).
Parchments of Jove; that could last for ten Ages, though untouched and
unstirr'd; in spite of all damp and moisture, that moulders other mortal
skins. For had our Letters been used or transcribed during that thousand years;
some body would surely have spoken of them. Especially since so many of the
Ancients had occasion to do so: so that their silence is a direct argument that
they never had heard of them. I have just now cited some passages of Pindar,
Plato, and Lucian; which are a plain indication, that they were unknown to
those Three. Nay, the last of these, besides the proof abovenamed from his
silence and praetermission, does as good as declare expressly, that he never
saw our Epistles. For, not to mention other differences of less moment, he
makes both Phalar. 1. '(...). and ibid. (...).
Phalaris, and his Smith Perilaus, to be born at Agrigentum; but the Letters
bring one of them from Astypalaea, and the other from Athens. Lucian then knew
nothing of them; or at least knew them, as I do, to be spurious, and below his
notice. Much less could he be the Author of them, as Politian and his followers
believe; for he would neither have been guilty of such flat Contradictions; nor
have so forfeited all Learning and Wit, by those gross blunders in Chronology,
and that wretched pedantry in the Matter. And whosoever those Authors were,
that Lucian followed, in his Narrative of Phalaris; They too are so many
Witnesses against the Epistles. One can hardly believe, indeed, that the
Sophist should venture to fetch his Tyrant from Astypalaea, without the warrant
of some old Writer. But yet Lucian and his Authors compel us to think so. And
we find him as foolhardy on other occasions. De Polit. (...).
Heraclides of Pontus, that lived within two Centuries of Phalaris's Age, says,
the Agrigentines, when they recovered their Liberty, burnt Him and his Mother:
but our Sophist makes him an Orphan, Epist. xlix.
(...); which if any one shall contend to mean the loss of his Father only, yet
still He and Heraclides will not set horses together. For if Phalaris fled
alone from Astypalaea, neither Wife nor Child nor any Relation following him,
according to the Letters; how came the Old Woman to be roasted at Agrigentum?
Vita Pythag. p. 183.
Iamblichus brings in Abaris the Hyperborean in company with Pythagoras, to
Phalaris's Court: But our Sophist has writ a Epist. lvii.
Letter for him, wherein he refuses to come. So little regard had he, to fit
his stories to true History: and I have had too much regard to him, in giving
him the Honor and Patience of so long an Examination.

I MUST now beg the favor of one word with our late Editors of this Author.
They have told the world, in their Preface, That (among other Specimens of
their Diligence) they collated the King's MS. as far as the XL Epistle; and
would have done so throughout, but that the Library Keeper, Praef. Phalar.
Edit. Oxon. Manuscripto in Bibliotheca Regia, cujus mihi copiam ulteriorem
Bibliothecarius pro singulari sua humanitate negavit.
out of his singular Humanity, denied them the further use of it. This was
meant as a Lash for Me, who had the Honor then and since to serve His Majesty
in that Office. I must own, 'twas very very resolved of them, to make the
Preface and the Book all of a piece; for they have acted in this Calumny both
the injustice of the Tyrant, and the forgery of the Sophist. For my own part, I
should never have honored it with a Refutation in Print, but have given it the
Neglect that is due to Weak Detraction; had I not been engaged to my Friend, to
write this Censure upon Phalaris; where to omit to take notice of that Slander,
would be tacitly to own it. The true story is thus: A Bookseller came to me, in
the name of the Editors, to beg the use of the Manuscript. It was not then in
my custody: but as soon as I had the power of it, I went voluntarily and
offered it him; bidding him tell the Collator not to lose any time; for I was
shortly to go out of Town for two Months. 'Twas delivered, used, and returned.
Not a word said by the Bearer, nor the least suspicion in me, that they had not
finished the collation. For, I speak from experiment, they had more Days to
compare it in, than they needed to have Hours. It Is a very little Book, and the
Writing as legible as Print. Well, the Collation, it seems, was sent defective
to Oxen; and the blame, I suppose, laid upon Me. I returned again to the
Library, some months before the Edition was finished: No application was made
for further use of the Manuscript. Thence I went for a whole fortnight to Oxon,
where the Book was then printing; conversed in the very College where the
Editors resided. Not the least whisper there of the Manuscript. After a few
weeks, out comes the new Edition, with this Sting in the Mouth of it. 'Twas a
surprise, indeed, to read there, that our Manuscript was not perused. Could not
they have asked for it again, then, after my return? 'Twas neither singular,
nor common Humanity, not to enquire into the truth of the thing; before the
^^^tur'd to Print, which is a Sword in the Hand of a Child. But there is a
reason for every thing; and the mystery was soon revealed. As for the King's
Manuscript, they had no want nor desire of it; for, as I shall show by and by,
they had neither industry nor skill to use either That or their Own. And for my
part; I, it seems, had the hard hap, in some private conversation, to say the
Epistles were a spurious Piece, and unworthy of a new Edition. Hinc illae
lachrimae. This was a thing deeply resented; and to have spoken to me about the
Manuscript, had been to lose a plausible occasion of taking revenge.

Pro singulari sua humanitate! I could produce several Letters from learned
Professors abroad, whose Books our Editors may in time be fit to read; wherein
these very same words are said of me heartily and seriously. For I endeavor to
oblige even Foreigners by all Courtesy and Humanity; much more would I
encourage and assist any useful Designs at home. And I heartily wish, that I
could do any service to that young Gentleman of great Hopes, whose Name is set
to the Edition. I can do him no greater at present, than to remove some
blemishes from the Book that is ascribed to him: which I desire may be taken
aright; to be no disparagement to himself, but a reproof only to his Teachers.

It is counted an ill Omen to stumble at the Threshold. In the very First
Epistle to Alcibous, we have these words, (...): that is, For a disease of the
Soul, the only Physician is Death: do you therefore expect a most painful one
for those many and great injustices, not involuntary ones, such as you accuse
Me of, but voluntary ones that your self have committed. Let us see now, how
our new Editors have managed this passage. First, they interpret (...), nulli
gravem: meaning, I suppose, that Alcibous's death would be grievous to no body.
Which not only produces a flat and farfetcht sense, but is contrary to the
rules of good Language. For the Greek is in the Superlative degree: let them
put it then nulli gravissimam; and it will show them the errror of their
Version. It will be evident to such as know propriety of Speech, that (...),
since no Dative Case follows it, must be referred to Alcibous, and to no body
else. I do not expect from our Editors much sagacity in way of Critic: but
though they could not of themselves find out the true Reading; yet methinks
they might have embraced it, when they saw it in the Manuscript; which reads
it, (...), a most grievous and cruel death; meaning that in the Brazen Bull;
which he calls, in the CXXII Epist. (...), an epithet of the same root and
signification. (...) in this place, is an expletive particle, (...), as the
Grammarians call it; which being a rare and quaint usage, was the cause of
corrupting the Text.

The next words in the same passage, (...), our elegant Interpreters render
scelera, non invita. And this we are to receive for one of their many Praef. p.
3.
improvements after the former Translators. Those Old ones, good honest Men,
put us off with plain country Latin, Scelera, non praeter voluntatem patrata,
and other such Periphrases. For, as it was in their days believed, (...)
signified unwilling, and was always meant of the Agent: (...) was involuntary,
and generally meant of the Action. And this latter, when it signifies the
Action, cannot be expressed in Latin by one single word. For Involuntarius was
not in use: and Invitus is the same with (...), and is always spoken of the
Person, never of the Thing. So that if any body else had said scelera invita,
unwilling Crimes; some bold Readers would be apt to take it for Barbarism and
Nonsense: but coming from those great Genius's, with whom Learning, that is a
leaving the world, has taken her last residence, they receive this as a new
discovery in Language; like Sup. p. 44.
another of theirs in Geography.

In the very next words to these, (...); let us see if they make any better
work there. Invita, ad quae me hortaris; Involuntary Crimes, to which you
exhort me, says the version of our late Editors. Admirably well done again!
Pray, how can this Alcibous, a Messenian, be said to exhort him to those
Cruelties, who so much abhorred Him and Them, (as it is in this very Letter,)
that he had the Physician his Townsman tried for his own Life, for saving the
Tyrant's? It would puzzle a common Wit to reconcile this; but here is a Note
upon this passage, that will set every thing aright. Ann^t. ad Phalar. p. 145.
Ad quae me hortaris;] i. e. Moribus tuis nequissimis provocas. Commend me to
these Annotators for a help at a dead lift. To provoke a Man, we see, with the
basest tricks, is, in their language, to exhort him. So that when They, by a
vile aspersion, instead of thanks for a kindness received, have given me just
provocation to answer them as they deserve; it is only, in their manner, to
exhort me to do it. It is my singular Humanity, that I do not follow their
Exhortation. But I am apt to believe, that even the Sophist himself, as
illiterate as he was, would disdain to own such a version to be the Echo of his
meaning. Had he had in his thoughts so ridiculous a sense as they father upon
him; he would have said then, (...), or, (...). For that is the Syntax of
(...), when it signifies to exhort. Whereas (...) (the (...) in the Text is for
(...)) is, in that sense, as absurd and incongruous in Greek; as Quae mihi
hortaris, or, Quae mihi provocas would be in Latin. I think I have shown
already, that (...) is here (...), exprobrare, to accuse and reproach: Those
involuntary wrongs, that you lay to my charge. It Is true, the word is not used
in this acceptance by any ancient Authors. I have mentioned it therefore
above, as a token of a more recent Writer. But without doubt it was of known
use in the age of the Sophist; and the innovation was not at all improper. For
as the Ancients, both in Poetry and Prose, used (...) to denote this meaning;
(...). so by a like metaphor and analogy, we may use (...) to express the same
notion: just as the Latins say, vitio VERTERE. All this, I suppose, was known
to the Translator of Phalaris, who is commonly, but, I believe, falsely supposed
to be Cujacius; for he interprets it very well, Cujusmodi mihi objicis. But
that Edition, and another of Aldus, though the two principal of all, and both of
them in the public Library at Oxon, had yet the odd fortune to lie all the
while concealed Praef. p. 3.
, from our late Editors that lived there.

I was, but just now, in the mind to oblige them, by going through their whole
Book, and correcting for them all the Faults, that give offense to the best
Readers. But now, that I cast my eye backwards, it makes me look as blank, at
the prospect of all that is to come; as Hercules did, when, after he had made a
bargain unseen, he saw the Stables of Augeas. For if the very First Epistle, of
nine Lines only, has taken me up four Pages in scouring; what a sweet piece of
work should I have of it, to cleanse all the rest for them? I must beg their
Excuse therefore for the present; and shall only, to keep my Promise, give one
Touch of their industry and skill, in making use of the Manuscript.

They have confessed to us, they collated the Manuscript to the Praef. p. 4.
XL Epistle. But, it seems, they could make no use of its various Lections, but
in one single place, Epist. XXVI. It is writ to one Ariphrades, to caution his
Son to leave off plotting against Phalaris; (...); lest, when punishment
overtakes him for persisting in his present courses, he pretend he had not fair
warning. But what now do our new Editors make of this? (...), they translate,
suam expendens conditionem. This puts me in mind of the old Greek Proverb, That
Leucon carries one thing, and his Ass quite another. For here is no affinity at
all between the Text and the Version; which would every whit as well agree to
any other words in the Book. Even our Editors themselves seem sensible of this;
for they give us this Note upon it, (...) alium sensum hic vix admi^tit. in
eodem tamen usurpatum nullibi invenio. Melius itaque in MS. Regio (...), ob ea
quae jam agit. Annotat. page 146.
That (...) cannot admit here of any other meaning: and yet they find it no
where else used in this sense. I dare pass my word for the truth of this latter
part: to the former I shall say more anon. So that, say they, the better
Reading is in the King's Manuscript, (...), i. e. for those things which he now
does. In the King's Manuscript, which I have now by me, it was written at
first, (...): but another Hand has rased out the (...), as appears by the void
space, and made it (...). This Corrector, whoever he was, though we know him
from hence to be a sorry Critic; yet he was a degree above our new Editors. For
he made his (...) an Enclitic; but they theirs an Interrogative, as we see by
their Accent. Which in this place is directly against either common Grammar, or
common Sense; choose whether they please. But the genuine lection and meaning
is, as I rendered it above; (...), persisting and proceeding in his present
ways. So in the XXXIX Epist. (...), continuing in the present station. It Is
true, our Editors will not find (...) thus rendered in their Dictionaries: but
they may please to enlarge them then from this very place. For, is not (...)
exactly the same as the Latin PERTENDO? And is not Pertendo, to persist and
persevere?

Ter. Eunuch. 1, 1.
Verum si incipies, neque pertendes naviter. Even the Version ascribed to
Cujacius has here the true interpretation, Persistens in proposito: which I
would advise our Editors to consult, when they design to oblige the world by
another Edition.

This is all the use they have made of the King's Manuscript: let us see if
they have been more diligent in their own. In the XXXIV Epist. the Tyrant tells
one Pollux, who wondered he was grown so recluse, and difficult of access;
(...): Nay, says he, I avoid company less than I ought to do; for I have found
no faith either among strangers or friends. Our new Interpreters have given us
here a cast of their Critic; for Legendum forsan (...), quam enim
interpreta^ionem (...) hic admittat, non video.
instead of (...) they venture to read (...), ego jam sedulo omnes fugio: as
for the former Lection, they confess they know not what to make on it. Here are
your Workmen to mend an Author; as bungling Tinkers do old Kettles: there was
but one hole in the Text before they meddled with it, but they leave it with
two. For the fault is not in (...), but in (...); which is to be corrected
(...): (...), minus quam par est, minus quam oportet. This is so very easy an
Emendation, that a small dose of sagacity might have found it out, by
conjecture. But what will the Men of Letters think of our Editors? will they
commend their skill or their industry most* when I assure them, that all the
Three Manuscripts which they pretend to have collated, have it plainly and
fairly (...). Which fault will the Editors plead to? to make a public boast of
collating Three Manuscripts, and yet neglect every one of them? or, to have
observed in the Manuscripts so certain a Correction, without either knowledge
to make use on it themselves, or ingenuity to communicate it to the world? It Is
a bad business on either side; and yet it receives a great aggravation from
this other which follows. Epist. LXVIII. Phalaris, to encourage his Son's
Bounty; I do not think, says he, you spend me too much money, (...); but I
rather think I allow you too sparingly, for so generous a Son. Here is (...)
comes again. Now, every one of the Manuscripts have it here too (...): Two of
which, they pretend, in their Preface, to have thoroughly collated. And yet they
take not the least notice of this plain Emendation, (...), parcius aequo,
parcius quam oportet; but blunder on with the vulgar Reading, and translate it,
Ego m^ pauperiore^ invenio, quam (...) filii benignitati su^ficere p^^sim
But I find my self too poor to supply your Liberality. Which, besides that it
does not answer the words of the Greek, (which would then have been, (...))
makes mere nonsense of the Context. For in the very next sentence, he tells his
Son; You shall sooner want friends to give it to, than I want money to give.
Ingenious Translators! to make him complain of Poverty, and in the same breath
to declare that he has Riches without end.

Let this serve for a short Specimen of their Care and Skill in using of
Manuscripts. I have many more instances ready at hand; but their Humanity, I
hope, will pardon me, if I don't produce them now; nor now proceed, as I once
thought, to weed all their Book for them. My Time does not lie upon my hands;
and this Tract must be only a short Appendix to the Book of my Friend: but it is
likely hereafter, if, in their way of speaking, they mightily exhort me to it;
I may be at their service; if not in this, yet in another Language: to carry
the fame and glory of our Editors, whither such Editions as theirs seldom go,
to foreign Universities.

OF THEMISTOCLES'S EPISTLES.
SIR,
I Presume I have been as good as my word, in detecting the cheat of Phalaris's
Epistles: the other part of my Promise was a Censure of Aesop's Fables. But
before I meddle with those, I am willing, now that my Hand's in, to examine
some other Impostures of this sort, out of the same Schools of the Sophists. It
will be no unpleasant labor to me, nor, I hope, unprofitable to others, to
pull off the disguise from those little Pedants, that have stalked about so
long in the apparel of Hero's.

The Epistles of Themistocles were printed first at Rome, in MDCXXVI, out of a
Manuscript in the Vatican. The Editor, a Greek Bishop, believed them genuine;
but there were some that suspected a Forgery, as De Script. Socrat. p. 78.
Leo Allatius informs us: who himself leaves the matter in doubt; but withal
observes in their favor, that no body had ever said a word in print, to prove
them to be spurious. V. (...).
Suidas is an Evidence in their behalf; for, speaking of their reputed Author,
he says, he has writ Letters full of Spirit, (...). He, I think, is the only
old Writer that makes any mention of them. Which alone, as before in Phalaris's
case, is a shrewd prejudice against their Credit and Reputation. Lib. 1. p. 90.
Thucydides and Charon Lampsacenus say that Themistocles, when he fled into
Asia, made his address to Artaxerxes, who was newly come to the Throne; wherein
they are followed by Vita Themistoc.
Cornelius Nepos and Plutarch; against the common tradition of Ephorus,
Heraclides, and most others, that make Xerxes the Father to be then alive. Some
Plutarch, Diodor. Athenaeus, etc.
Writers relate, that he had five Cities given him by the Persian; others, but
three. Now, if the Letters had been known to any of those Authors, both these
Disputes had been soon at an end, or rather never had been raised. For he
himself expressly says, Ep. XX.
it was Xerxes he went to, and that he gave him but three Cities. Now, where
could these Epistles lie, unknown and invisible from Themistocles's time to
Suidas? We must needs say, that the Letters had a worse Exostracism than their
Author: since he was banished but for five Years, but they for a Thousand.

II. It Is observable, That every one of the Letters bear date after his
banishment; and contain a complete Narrative of all his Story afterward,
without the least gap or interruption. Now it is hard to say, whether is the
more strange of the two; That not one single Letter of his, before that time,
should be preserved; or not one, afterward, lost, though written from so
distant places, Argos, Corcyra, Epirus, Ephesus, Magnesia, from whence there
was no very sure conveyance to Athens. What a cross vicissitude of Fortune!
while the Author is in Prosperity, all his Letters are unlucky; and not one of
them is missing, after he himself miscarried. But the Sophist can easily
account for this, though Themistocles cannot: for here are no Letters before
his Exile; because the latter part of his Life was the whole Tour and Compass
that the Sophist designed to write of: and not a Letter afterward perished;
because being forged in a Sophist's Closet, they run no hazard at all of being
lost in the carriage.

III. Themistocles was an Eloquent Man; but here are some touches in his
Letters of such an elevated strain, that if he did not go to School to Gorgias
Leontinus the Sophist of that time, I can hardly believe he writ them. The
Historians tell us moderately, That after he was driven from home, he was made
much on at Argos: but He himself is all melting, when he talks on that Subject.
Ep. i.
He was met, he says, on the road by two Argivans of his acquaintance; who,
when he told them the news of his Banishment, railed bitterly at the Athenians:
but when they heard he was going to Delphi, rather than to Their town; in a
kind quarrel they tell him, That (...).
the Athenians had justly punished him; since he so much wronged the City of
Argos, to think of any Sanctuary but that. Well, he goes with them to Argos;
and there the whole City (...).
teazes him by mere force to take the Government upon him; taking it as the
greatest injury, that he offered to decline it. These, you will say, are choice
flowers both of Courtesy and of Rhetoric: but there is another clearly beyond
them; where he tells us, Ep. xiv.
That he is so resolved of going to the Persian Court, though it was a
desperate risque; that neither the Advice of his Friends, nor his Father
Neocles' s Ghost, nor his Uncle Themistocles' s, nor Augury, nor Omen, nor
Apollo' s Oracle it self, should be able to dissuade him. Here Is a bold
resolute Blade for you here is your Stoical (...)! It Is almost impossible for a
Sophist not to betray himself. Nothing will relish and go down with them, that
is ordinary and natural. Then they applaud themselves most, when they have said
a forced, extravagant thing. If one speaks of any Civility; the Complement must
be strained beyond all Decorum. If he makes a Resolution; he must needs swagger
and swear, and be as willful as a Mad man.

IV. The Subject of many of the Letters is Common place; mere Chat, and telling
a Tale, without any Business; an Errand not worth sending to the next Town,
much less to be brought from remote Countries some hundreds of Leagues. The XV
and XVIII Letters are written to Enemies; his Friends, I suppose, failing in
their Correspondence: and contain nothing but a little Scolding; which was
scarce worth the long carriage from Ephesus to Athens.

V. In the XX Epistle we have this Story: When Themistocles was at Corcyra, he
designed for Sicily, to Gelo the Syracusian Tyrant. But just as he was going a
Shipboard, the news came that Gelo was dead, and his Brother Hiero succeeded
him. Now, if we make it appear, that Hiero was come to the Crown some years
before Themistocles's Banishment, and this Voyage to Corcyra; what becomes of
the Credit of our Epistles? It Is true, the Chronology of this part of History
is not so (...). Plut. Them. p. 227.
settled and agreed, as to amount to a Demonstration against the Letters; but
however, when joined with the Arguments preceding, at least it will come up to
a high Probability. (...) apud Plut. Them. p. 225.
Theophrastus, in his Treatise of Monarchy, relates, That when Hiero had sent
Race-horses, and a most sumptuous Tent, to the Olympian Games; Themistocles
advised the Greeks to plunder the Tyrant's Tent, (...), and not to let his
Horses run. It Is evident then, if Theophrastus speak properly, that Hiero was
Monarch of Syracuse, when Themistocles was at Olympia; but it is most certain he
never came thither after his Exile.

But, to deal fairly, it must be confessed, that Aelian, in telling this story,
varies from Theophrastus; for he says, Var. Hist. ix, 5.
Hiero himself came to the Games. But that he would go thither in Person, after
he got the Government, is wholly improbable, So that, if Aelian be believed,
this business must have been done, before Hiero came to the Throne. For even in
Gelo's lifetime, who left him the Monarchy, he kept Horses for the Race; and
won at the Pythian Games, Pind, Schol* Pyth* 1, and 3.
Pythiad the XXVI, which answers to Olymp. LXXIV. 3. But besides that
Theophrastus is of much greater authority, the other refutes himself in the
very next words. For he says, Themistocles hindered Hiero upon this pretense;
That he that had not shared in the common Danger, ought not to share in the
common Festival: where it is certain, by the common Danger, he means Xerxes's
Expedition; when Herod. vii. c. 163. Diod. xi. p. 21.
Gelo either refused or delayed to give the Greeks his assistance. This affront
then was put upon Hiero, after that Expedition. But the very next Diod. xi. p.
29.
Olympiad after, Hiero was in the Monarchy. It cannot be true then, that his
first accession to the Throne, was, according to the Letters, while
Themistocles stayed at Corcyra.

Besides these Inferences and Deductions, we have the express Verdict and
Declaration of most of the Scholi. Pind. Pyth. 1. Diod. xi. p. 29, 41. Eusebius.
in Chron.
Chronologers, who place the beginning of Hiero's Reign Olymp. LXXV, 3. and
Themistocles's Banishment seven years after, Olymp. LXXVII, 2. The Arundelian
Marble, indeed, differs from all these, in the periods of Gelo and Hiero: which
would quite confound all this argumentation from notes of Time. But either that
Chronologer is quite out, or we can safely believe nothing in History. For he
makes Gelo first invade the Government, two years after Xerxes's Expedition.
But Lib. vii.
Herodotus spends half a dozen pages in the Account of an Embassy to Gelo from
Sparta and Athens, to desire his assistance against the Persian. And it is
agreed among all, Herodot. ibid. and Diod. l. xi.
That Gelo's Victory over the Carthaginians in Sicily was got the very same day
with the Battle at Salamis.

VI. The whole Volume of Themistocles's Letters consists of XXI only; and Three
of these are taken up in the story of Pausanias. The Second is writ to
Pausanias himself, before that Spartan's Conspiracy with the Persian was
discovered. There he exhorts him to moderation in his Prosperity; lest some
very great turn of Fortune should speedily befall him. Can you desire now a
surer indication of a Sophist? Without doubt, he that penned this Epistle, knew
beforehand what happened to Pausanias: who was soon after recalled home by the
Magistrates, and put to death for Treason. The XIX is to Pausanias again; but
after his Conspiracy was detected. Here he tells the Particulars of that Plot
as exactly, as if he had been one of the Ephori, that overheard it. Nay, he
foretells him, that the Lacedaemonians would take away his life. Now besides
that Themistocles would scorn to insult so, and rail to no purpose, as this
Letter does; he would surely have had more wit, than knowingly to write to the
Dead. For at the same time he heard those Particulars of Pausanias's Treason,
he must needs hear of his Execution; since those things were not known till
after his Death, and the rifling of his Papers. The VI Epistle is a long
Narrative of the whole business of Pausanias: for that was a Subject worthy of
Eloquence, and therefore was to receive ornament from the Pen of the Sophist.
But it was scarce worthy of Themistocles, to send such a long News-Letter to
Athens; where, in all likelihood, the Story was common, before he heard of it
himself.

But how shall we reconcile this Affair of Pausanias according to the Letters,
with what Diodorus has left us upon the same Subject? The Letters, we see, make
Themistocles to be banished, Ep. ii.
before Pausanias was suspected; and make the one reside at Argos, Ep. xix. vi.
while the other was convicted and put to death. But Diodorus, who has brought
all his History into the method of Annals, places the Death of Pausanias Lib.
xi. p. 36.
Olymp. LXXV, 4; and the Exile of Themistocles, Lib. xi. p. 41.
six years after, Olymp. LXXVII, 2. Now, I would fain know of our Sophist, how
he came to dispose and suit his matters so negligently; to bring Pausanias upon
the stage again, when he had been six years in his Grave? I imagine he will
referr me to Lib. i. p. 88.
Thucydides, who makes an immediate transition from one story to the other;
That the Spartans accused Themistocles, who was then banished from home, of
conspiring with Pausanias.' This, indeed, might draw the Sophist and some
others into a mistake. But it may be taken two ways: either that it was done
presently, upon the Death of Pausanias; or a few years after, when
Themistocles's Exile gave the Spartans, that hated and feared him, an
opportunity to ruin him. In Themist. p. 224.
Plutarch follows the first way; for he makes Themistocles, after his
Banishment, to have private dealings with Pausanias: in which opinion he
favors the Author of these Letters. But the second will rather appear to be
the sense of Thucydides: if we consider, that he places the matter of Pausanias
p. 63.
just after the flight of Xerxes; but when Themistocles went into Asia, he
makes p. 90.
Artaxerxes to be in the Throne: which was a considerable while after. Besides
that Diodorus, whose design was to referr all Occurrences to Years, and not to
follow the thread of Story beyond the annual Period, is of more credit in a
point of Chronology; than Plutarch or any other, that write Lives by the Lump.

OF SOCRATES's EPISTLES.
THE Epistles of Socrates, and his Scholars, Xenophon, Aristippus, etc. were
published out of the Vatican Library by the Learned Leo Allatius; and printed
at Paris, MDCXXXVII. He was so fully persuaded himself, and so concerned to
have others think, that they are the legitimate Offspring of those Authors
they are laid to; that he has guarded and protected them, in a Dialogue of LVII
Pages in quarto, against all the Objections that He or his Friends could raise.
And no body since, that ever I heard of, has brought the matter into
controversy. But I am inclined to believe, that by that time I have done with
them, it will be no more a Controversy, but that they are spurious. I shall
make use of nothing that Allatius has brought, except one Objection only; and
that I shall both manage in a new way, and defend it against all his Exceptions.

I. The First Letter is Socrates's to some King, it is supposed to Archelaus
King of Macedonia; in which he refuses to go to him, though invited in the most
kind and obliging manner. That he really denied his company to Archelaus and
others, we are assured from very good hands: which was the ground for our
Falsary to forge this Epistle. But I believe, none of those that mention it,
make so tall a Complement to Socrates, as he does here to himself. For he says,
(...).
The King offered him part of his Kingdom; and, that he should not come thither
to be commanded, but to command both his Subjects and Himself* Can you desire a
better token of a Sophist, than this? It Is a fine offer, indeed, to a poor old
Man, that had nothing but his Staff and one Coat to his back. But a Sophist
abhorrs mediocrity; he must always say the greatest thing; and make a Tide and
a Flood, though it be but in a Basin of Water.

II. Well; our Philosopher goes on, and give a reasons of his refusal; That his
Demon forbid him to go: and then he falls into the long story of what happened
to him in the Battle at Delium; which was a tale of twenty years standing at
the date of this Letter. But the Sophist had read it in Plato; and he would not
miss the opportunity of an eloquent Narration. I will not here insist upon the
testimony of Lib. v. p. 21^.
Athenaeus; That the whole business is a mere fiction of Plato's: let that be
left in the middle. But we may safely infer thus much from it; That even
Athenaeus himself, whose curiosity nothing escaped, never met with these
Epistles. Which alone creates a just suspicion, that they were forged since his
days; especially when the universal silence of all Antiquity gives a general
consent to it.

There Is a passage, indeed, in Analogia Socrat.
Libanius, which, in Allatius's judgment, seems plainly to declare, that he had
seen this very Epistle. For after he had mentioned Socrates's refusal to go to
Scopas, and Eurylochus, and Archelaus; he adds; (...). Now should we concede,
what Allatius would have; this is all that can be inferred from thence in their
favor; That they are older than Libanius; which I am willing to believe: and,
That He believed them true; which I matter not at all. For so we have seen
Stobaeus, Suidas and others, cry up Phalaris for a genuine Book; and yet I
fancy none of my Readers are now of their opinion. But with Allatius's good
leave, I would draw the words of Libanius to a quite contrary purpose. After he
had said, that many Princes had solicited Socrates, by Letter, to come and
live in their Courts; and he answered them all with a denial: But (says he) I
want the Letters themselves; in which you might perfectly see the Spirit of the
Man. This, to me, is an indication, that the Letters he means were not extant.
For if he had them in his hand, according to Allatius, how could he want them?
And it is plain, he speaks here of several Letters, being Replies to several
Messages; but in this Collection here is but a single one. I wish (says he) the
Letters were to be had; in those you might read his Character. If this be the
sense of those words, as probably it is; Libanius is so far from being Patron
to our Epistles, that he is a positive Witness against them.

III. The VII Letter is writ by Socrates to one of those that had fled to
Thebes from the violence of the XXX Tyrants: in which he gives him an account
of the state of Athens since their departure; That himself was now hated by the
Tyrants, because he would have no hand in the condemnation of Leon the
Salaminian: and then he tells the story at large. Now, here is a manifest
discovery that the Letters are supposititious. For the business of Leon was
quite over, before those Fugitives left the Town. For Leon was murdered Xenoph.
Hist. lib. ii. p. 467, 470. Diod. l. xix*
before Theramenes was: and Theramenes was murdered, before Thrasybulus and his
Party fled to Thebes. And that Socrates means them in this Letter, it is evident
from hence; That he speaks here of their Conspiracy, to resort privately
toward Athens and set upon the Tyrants: which afterward came to pass.

IV. The VIII, IX, XII, and XIII, are Letters of Jest and Railery between
Antisthenes and Aristippus and Simon the Shoo-maker. It Is an affront to the
memory of those Men, to believe they would fool and trifle in that manner;
especially send such impertinent stuff as far as from Sicily to Athens, which
could not decently be spoken even in merriment at a Table.

V. In the XIII Epistle, among the acquaintance of Simon he names Phaedrus, the
same that gives the Title to the Dialogue of Plato: and the XXV is writ by
Phaedrus himself to Plato: and both these are dated after Socrates's death. I
will appeal now to Athenaeus, if these two Letters can be genuine. He, among
other Errors in Chronology for which he chastises Plato, brings this in for
one; Lib. xi. page 505* (...).
That he introduces Phaedrus discoursing with Socrates; who must certainly be
dead before the days of the Philosopher. How comes he then to survive him, in
these Epistles; and discourse so passionately of his Death? It Is true; for want
of ancient History, we cannot back this Authority with any other Testimony. But
I am sure, all those that have a just esteem for Athenaeus, can have no slight
one of this Argument against the credit of the Letters.

VI. The XIV Epistle gives Xenophon a long Narrative of Socrates's Trial and
Death; being writ presently after by one of his Scholars that was present at
both. Among other particulars, he tells him, (...).
That the Oration or Charge against Socrates was drawn up by Polycrates the
Sophist. But I doubt this will turn to a Charge against another Sophist, for
counterfeiting Letters. For, I think, I can plainly prove, That at the date of
this Letter there was no such report ever mentioned, that Polycrates had any
hand in it; and, that this false Tradition, which afterward obtained in the
World, and gave occasion to our Writer to say it in his Letter, did not begin
till some years after Socrates's condemnation.

Diogenes Laertius brings Hermippus's testimony, That Polycrates made the Vita
Socrat.
Charge. (...). But, in opposition to this, he presently subjoins; That
Favorinus, in the First Book of his Commentaries, says, That Polycrates's
Oration against Socrates is not true and real: because he mentions in it the
Walls, built by Conon six years after Socrates's death. To which Laertius
subscribes his own assent, (...), And so it is. I may freely say, that this
passage of Favorinus has not been yet rightly understood. It is generally
interpreted, as if he denied the Oration that is attributed to Polycrates to be
really his. But this is very far from being his opinion. For then he would be
flatly confuted by Isocrates, a Witness unanswerable; who, in a Discourse which
he addresses to this very Polycrates, tells him; (...) Isoc. Busir.
I perceive you value your self most upon two Orations, The Apology of Busiris,
and Accusation of Socrates. But Favorinus's meaning was; That Polycrates did
not make that Oration for a true Charge to be spoke at the Trial of Socrates;
but writ it several years after, for no other Trial than that of his own Wit.
The words in the Greek can admit of no other sense; (...), etc. Observe, that
he says (...), Polycrates mentions: if he had denied him to be the Author, he
would have said in the Passive, There is mentioned. Besides he expressly calls
it (...), only denies it to be (...). But if he had denied it to be His, he
would have said, (...): as Laertius speaks in other places; In Xenoph.
(...). In Aeschine.
(...). This, I think, is sufficiently clear. Now we are to know, it was the
custom of the old Sophists to make an ostentation of their Art, upon some
difficult Subjects and Paradoxes, such as other people could speak nothing to:
as the commendation of a Fever or the Gout. Polycrates therefore, to show his
Rhetoric in this way, writ an Apology of Busiris, that killed and eat his
Guests; Quintil. lib. ii. cap. 18.
and of Clytemnestra, that murdered her Husband: and to give a proof of his
skill, as well in accusing Virtue, as in excusing Vice, he writ an Indictment
against Socrates; not (...), the true one, as Favorinus truly says, but only a
Scholastic Exercise; such as Plato, Xenophon, Libanius and others writ in his
Defense. So that we are no more forced to believe, that His Oration was the
true Charge that was spoken at Socrates's Trial; than, that he really pleaded
for Clytemnestra, when Orestes was going to kill her. Nay, it appears to me,
from Isocrates himself, that it was but a Scholastic Exercise, and after
Socrates's death. For he blames Polycrates, for reckoning Alcibiades among
Socrates's Disciples: since, besides that no body else ever counted him his
Scholar; had he really been so, he had been a commendation to his Master; and
not a disparagement, which was the aim of the Sophist. (...) Isoc. Busir.
So that (says he) if the dead could have knowledge of your Writings, Socrates
would thank you. Is not this a clear indication, that Socrates was dead, before
the Oration was made? and that this was not the true Charge? For then he would
have heard it at his Trial: and there had been no occasion to say, if the dead
could have knowledge of it. In the close of all, he advises him to leave off
showing his parts upon such villainous Themes, (...); lest he do public
mischief by putting false colors upon things. Here again we are plainly told,
that his Action against Socrates, like those for Busiris and Clytemnestra, was
but a Declamation, a Theme and Exercise in the School, and not a real
Indictment in the Areopagus at Athens. To all which let me add, That neither
Plato nor Xenophon nor any body contemporary with Socrates, ever once mention
Polycrates for the Author of the Charge: which, had the thing been true, they
would certainly have thrown in his teeth, considering the perpetual quarrel
between Sophists and Philosophers. And it is well known; that the Athenians, in
a penitential mood, either banished or put to death all those that had any hand
in Socrates's accusation. If Polycrates then were so eminently guilty, as to
draw up the Impeachment; how could he escape untoucht, when all the rest
suffered?

But when the Accusation of Socrates, though only a Sophistical Exercise, came
abroad in the world; it was natural enough, in some process of time, that those
that heard of it only, or but perfunctorily read it, should believe it to be
the real Charge. We have seen already, that Hermippus was in that mistake, who
lived an hundred years after; and with him Quintilian, Themistius, and others
innumerable. Favorinus, it seems, alone had the sagacity, by a notice from
Chronology, to find it of a more recent date than Socrates's Trial. And even
that very passage of Favorinus has lain hitherto in the dark: so that my Reader
may forgive me this prolixity and niceness; since he learns by it a piece of
News. As for Hermippus, lest the Authority of so celebrated an Author should
deterr one from so plain a truth; I will show another slip of his, and a worse
than this, in the story of Socrates. When Gryllus the Son of Xenophon was slain
in the same battle that Epaminondas was; most of the Wits of that Age writ
Elegies and Encomium's on him, in complement and consolation to his Father.
Among the rest, Laert. in Xenoph.
Hermippus says, Socrates was one. Which is a blunder of no less than XXXVII
years, the interval between Socrates's death and the battle of Mantinea.

Socrates was put to death Olymp. XCV, 1. when Laches was Magistrate. This is
universally See Diodorus, Favorinus, Diog. Laertius, Aristides, Marmor. Arund.
Eusebius. Argumentum Isoc^. Busir. etc.
acknowledged; and to go about to prove it, were to add Light to the Sun. And
six years after this, Olymp. XCVI, 3. Diodor. xiv. p. 303. Favorin. Diog. Laert.
in Eubulides's Magistracy, Conon repaired the Walls. Which gave the hint to
Favorinus, and after him to Diogenes, to discover the common mistake about
Polycrates's Oration. But Leo Allatius, to avoid the force of their Argument,
undertakes an impossible thing; to prolong Socrates's life above twenty years
beyond Laches: so that He might see Conon's Walls, and Polycrates's Declamation
be the true Charge at his Trial. Which he would make out by comparing together
some Scraps of different Authors, and some Synchronisms of other Men's Lives
with Socrates's. As if those things which are only mistakes and unwary slips of
the Writers, could have any force or credit against so many express
Authorities. By the same way that he proceeds, I will show the quite contrary;
that Socrates died twenty years before Laches's Government. For we have it from
good Hands, Diog. Laert. in Socrat* Argum. Isoc. Busir.
That Euripides, in a Play of his called Palamedes, using these words, (...),
etc. designed to lash the Athenians for Socrates's murder: and the whole
Theater perceiving it, burst into tears. Socrates therefore died before
Euripides. But it is well known, that the latter died six years before Laches
was Archon. Nay, Socrates must needs be dead, before Palamedes was acted. But
that was acted Olymp. XCI, I. Aelian. Var. Hist. ii, 1. Schol. Aristoph. (...).
p. 401.
, which is sixteen years before Laches. Have I not proved now exactly the quite
contrary to Allatius? But still, I hope, I have more judgment, than to credit
such an oblique Argument against so many direct Testimonies. If Allatius had
looked round about him, he would not have committed so great a blunder; while
he defends his Epistles at one Post, to expose them to worse Assaults. If
Socrates died in Laches's Magistracy, one Epistle must be spurious, that
mentions Polycrates. This Breach Allatius would secure; and therefore he will
needs make him live several years longer. But then, say I, if we concede this
to Allatius; not one Epistle only, but the whole bundle of them are spurious.
For most of them plainly suppose, that Socrates died under Laches. Even this
very Epistle complains Ep. xiv.
that Xenophon was abroad when Socrates suffered; and that the Expedition of
Cyrus hindered him from being present then at Athens: and a second Letter, xviii.
to name no more, dated after Socrates's death, makes Xenophon to have newly
escaped the dangers of his long March through Enemies Countries. Now, all the
world knows, Ma^m* Arund. Laert. Dicdor. etc.
that Cyrus's Expedition and Xenophon's March was in Laches's time, and the
year before him. So that upon the whole; there is no escape, no evasion from
this Argument; but our Epistles must be convicted of a manifest Cheat.

VII. In the XVII Letter, one of Socrates's Scholars, supposed to be present at
Athens when the things he speaks of were acted, says, the Athenians (...)
put to death both Anytus and Melitus, the Prosecutors of Socrates: which being
contrary to known matter of fact, proves the Epistle to be a forgery. Melitus,
indeed, was killed; but Anytus was only banished; and Laert. in Socrat. and in
Antisth. Themist. Orat. ii. Augustine. de Civ. Dei, viii, 3.
several Writers speak of him afterward at Heraclea in Pontus.

VIII. The XVIII is a Letter of Xenophon's, inviting some Friends to come to
see him, at his Plantation near Olympia. He says, Aristippus and Phaedo had
made him a Visit: and that he recited to them his (...).
Memoirs of Socrates; which both of them (...).
approved of. This alone is sufficient to blast the reputation of our famous
Epistles. For, how is it likely, that Aristippus would go so far to see
Xenophon, who (...). Laert. in Aristippo.
was always his Enemy? Much less would he have given his approbation to a Book,
that was a Satyr against himself. For the Book is yet in being; and in it he
introduces Socrates, in a long Lecture, reprehending Aristippus Xenoph.
Memorab. lib. ii. in princip.
for his Intemperance and Lust. Even Laertius takes notice, That he brought in
Aristippus's name upon that scandalous occasion, out of the enmity he bare him.

IX. We have already seen Xenophon writing Socrates's Memoirs at Scillus, near
Olympia. But in the XXII, to Cebes and Simmias, he is writing them at Megara;
for there the Letter is dated. And in the XXI, to Xanthippe, he invites her to
come to him to Megara. One would think, there was more Sophists than one had a
finger in this Volume of Letters: or if he was but one Author, Nature gave him
a short Memory without the blessing of a great Wit. It Is true, upon Socrates's
Execution, his Scholars left Athens for fear, Laert. in Euclid.
and retired to Megara, to the house of Euclides: which occasioned our Sophist
to bring Xenophon thither too. But he should have remembered, that while They
were scared out of Athens for fear of their own Lives, He was safe at a great
distance in the retinue of Agesilaus; from whose company he went to Scillus,
without ever residing at Megara. Nay, the Sophist is so indiscreet, as to bring
in Xenophon in forma pauperis, to beg and receive relief from Cebes and
Simmias: whereas every body knows, that he got great riches in the War, Laert.
in Xenoph. Xenoph. Exp. Cyrt, l. v. p. 35^*
and lived in very great splendour and hospitality at Scillus.

X. In the XXIV Epistle, Plato says, he is quite weary of a City Life; and had
therefore retired into the Country, (...), which Allatius translates, non long
ab Ephestiadibus. He ought to have said, ab Hephaestiadis. For the true word in
the Greek, is (...). Plato had some Estate there, which he disposed of in his
Will: (...), as it is in Vita Platon.
Laertius. Hesychius; (...). Stephanus Byz. (...), etc. In the Roman Manuscript
of Laertius, it is writ (...): which manner of spelling is found also in
Hesychius, (...). If the Reader does believe, that our Letter-monger, like
Hesychius, spelt the word wrong; he will be satisfied of the forgery: For
surely, Plato himself knew the true name of his own Estate. But if he incline
to absolve the Author, and lay the blame upon the Copyers; he may please to
accept of this, only as an Emendation.

XI. The XXVII Epistle is Aristippus's to his Daughter Arete: which, perhaps,
is the very same that is mentioned by Laertius; who, among the Writings of this
Philosopher, names (...). Allatius, indeed, is ready to vouch it: but I am not
so easy of belief. For here are IX. and XI.
two other Letters of his in this Parcel, and both of them writ in the Doric
Dialect, though directed to Athens: because, forsooth, he was a Cyrenaean, and
the Doric his native Tongue. Pray, what was the matter then, that in this he
uses the Attic; though he writ from Sicily a Dorian Country, to his own
Daughter at Cyrene? One would suspect, as I observed before, that a couple of
Sophists clubb'd to this Collection. It Is true, we know, from Laertius; that of
XXV Dialogues published by Aristippus, some were in the Doric Idiom, and some in
the Attic. But that, I suppose, was done because of the variety of his Persons.
In some Dialogues the Speakers were Sicilians, and those were writ in the
Doric; and where the Athenians were introduced, the Attic was proper. But now,
in this Letter to his Daughter, both Parties are Dorians; and so this Epistle
should rather be Doric, than either of the other two.

XII. In the same Letter he mentions her Estate in Bernice, (...). There is no
question but he means (...); perhaps that City not far from Cyrene. But there
was nothing then in all Afric called by that name: for (...) is the Macedonian
idiom for (...), the Victorious. In that Country, ph was generally changed
into b: as Etym. Magn. etc.
instead of (...) they said (...); for (...); for (...); and so in others. So
that (...) was unknown in Afric, till the Macedonians came thither: and indeed,
they had their names from the Wives of the Ptolemees, whole century of years
after the date of this Letter.

XIII. He goes on, and tells his Daughter, That if he should die, he would have
her go to Athens, and live with Myrto and Xanthippe the two Wives of Socrates.
It was a common Tradition among the Writers of Philosophic History, that
Socrates had these two Wives at once; and from thence our Sophist made them the
complement of a place in this Epistle. Laert. in Socrat. Plutarch. Aristid.
Athen. xiii. p. 556.
There are cited as Authors of this story, Callisthenes, Demetrius Phalereus,
Satyrus, and Aristoxenus, who all took it from Aristotle in his Book Of
Nobility, (...). But Polygamy being against the Law of that Commonwealth, and
the story therefore improbable; Hieronymus Rhodius produces a temporary Statute
made in Socrates's days, That by reason of the scarcity of People, a Man might
marry two Wives at a time. But notwithstanding such a flush of Authorities,
Athenaeus, Plutarch. ib.
Panaetius the Stoic, a very great Man, writ expressly against all those named
above; and, in the opinion of Plutarch, (...).
sufficiently confuted the Tradition of the Two Wives. For my own part, I dare
pin my belief upon two such excellent Judgments, as Plutarch's and Panaetius's;
and upon their credit alone, pronounce this Letter to be an Imposture. What
grounds they proceeded on I cannot now tell; but I think there is apparent
reason for rejecting the story, even laying aside their testimony. For none of
Socrates's acquaintance, not Plato, not Xenophon, say one word of this Myrto.
Aristotle, we see, was the first that mentioned her: but Ibid.
Plutarch suspects that Book to be spurious. So that all this Tradition rose at
first from a Falsary, that counterfeited Aristotle's name. Besides, they do not
agree in telling their tale; one says, that he had both Wives together:
another, that Myrto was his first Wife, and the second came after her death:
another, that Xanthippe was the first. Let either of them come first, and our
Epistles are false; for here we have Both surviving him, and living together.
Ibid.
One says, this Myrto was Aristides's Daughter; another his Granddaughter; and
another, his Grandson's Daughter. Whatsoever she was; if she outlived her
Husband, according to the Letters, pray where was her Ladyship at the time of
his suffering? Plato Apolog.
Xanthippe, like a loving Wife, attended him in the Prison; but the other never
came near him. It Is a mistake, sure, that has past upon the world, that
Xanthippe was the Scold: it should seem, that Myrto had the better title to
that honorable name. But what shall we say to Hieronymus, who brings you the
very Statute, that gave allowance of two Wives at once? Panaetius, you see,
believed it not: and why may not a Statute be forged, as easily as these
Epistles? If there was such an Act, there appears no great wisdom in it. It is
certain, there is near an equality in the births of Males and Females. So that
if some Men had two Wives for their share, others must go without: and what
remedy would that be against the scarcity of People? Besides that by such a Law
the Rich only would be accommodated, who were able to maintain a couple: the
poorer sort, who are always the most fruitful, would be in worse circumstances
than before. And without doubt, a very strong interest would have been made
against the passing of such a Bill; A. Gellius, li. 1. c. 23.
as we know what the Roman Matrons did, when Papirius Praetextatus made a like
story to his Mother. It Is very odd too, that no body but Hieronymus should ever
hear of this Statute; and He too a suspected Witness, because he brings it to
serve a turn, and to help at a hard pinch. But certainly such a Political
Occurrence, had it been true, could never have lain hid from the whole tribe of
Historians. It had very well deserved not only a mention, but a remark. But how
could it possibly escape the fancy and spleen of all the Comaedians of that
Age? how could they miss so pleasant an argument of jest and ridicule? Those
that are acquainted with the condition of those times, will look upon this as
next to a Demonstration. But let us grant, if you will, half a dozen Wives to
Socrates; yet nevertheless our Epistles will be still in the mire. For here our
Sophist makes the two Women live amicably together: which is pretty hard to
believe: for (as Aristoxenus apud Theodoret, Sermon. xii. ad Graecos.
those that make them Two, tell the story of them) while their Husband was
alive, they were perpetually fighting. But, which is worse yet, there are other
Letters in the bundle, that plainly suppose Socrates to have had but one Wife.
Ep. iv.
He himself, writing to some body, tells him this domestic news, That Xanthippe
and the Children are well: but says not a word of my Lady Myrto. Ep. xxi.
Xenophon sends a Letter top full of kindness and commendation to Xanthippe and
the Little ones; but it was very uncivil in him, to take no notice of the
other; since, according to the story, she brought her Husband the more
Children. Nay, if we allow this Letter of Xenophon's to be genuine, he played a
false and dirty trick, much against his character. For at the date of this
Epistle, if we believe the very next Ep. xxii.
to it, he was writing Socrates's Memoirs. So that while he here in his Letter
wheedles the poor Woman, and makes her little Presents, and commends her for
her love to her Husband, and for many good qualities; in his Book Xenoph.
Conviv. p. 876.
he traduces her to that present Age, and to all Posterity, for the most cursed
and devilish Shrew, that ever was or ever would be. Nay, which makes it the
baser, he was the only Man that said this of her; for neither Plato nor any of
the old Socratics writ a word about her Scolding. Which made Lib. v. p. 219.
Athenaeus suspect it was a Calumny: especially since Aristophanes and his
Brethren of the Stage, in all their Raillery and Satyr upon Socrates, never
once twitted him about his Wife. Well, let that be as it will: but what shall
we say to Xenophon's double dealing? For my part, rather than I Will harbor such
a thought of that great Man, I Will quit a whole Cart-load of such Letters as
these.

XIV. Xenophon, in the XV Letter, tells this story of Plato, to whom he bore a
grudge; That he should say, None of his Writings were to be ascribed to
himself, but to Socrates young and handsome; (...) (...). Now, this sentence is
taken out of Plato's Second Epistle to Dionysius the Younger: (...). Here Is a
blunder with a witness, from the Sophist's ignorance in Chronology. For his
forged Letter of Xenophon bears date immediately after Socrates's death: but
the true one of Plato, which Xenophon here alludes to, is recenter by a vast
while. For Dionysius came but to the Crown Olymp. CIII, I. which is XXXII years
after the Trial of Socrates.

I must observe one thing more, that by no means should be omitted. There were
formerly more Epistles of Xenophon extant, than appear in this Collection. A
large fragment is cited in Sermon. 81.
Stobaeus, out of his Letter to Crito; Sermon. 120, 123.
two fragments out of a Letter to Sotira; Sermon. 5.
and two more out of one to Lamprocles: none of which are found here in
Allatius's Parcel. Theodoret produces a passage out of a Letter of his to
Aeschines; wherein he jerks Plato (...).
for his Ambition and Voluptuousness; to gratify which, he went to Sicily, to
Dionysius' s Court. Praep. Evang. xiv. 12.
Eusebius has this passage and more out of the same Epistle: and the whole is
extant in Sermon. 78.
Stobaeus. What shall we say? that the true Letters of Xenophon were extant in
those days? or that those too were a Cheat, and belonged to the same Volume
whence these of Allatius were taken? And so, as I observed before, they will be
older than Libanius's time. I am afraid it will be thought ill manners to
question the judgment of Eusebius and Theodoret. But we know, See Dissert. upon
Io. Malal.
they have made other mistakes of a like nature: and the very Letter which they
cite, betrays it self to be a counterfeit. Xenophon, we see, reproaches Plato,
in a Letter to Aeschines. If this were true, it was a most rude affront to the
Person he writ to, whose friendship he courts so much in the rest of his
Letter. For Aeschines himself was guilty of the very same fault, and is wounded
through Plato's side. It Is well known, that He too, as well as Plato and
Aristippus and others, made a Voyage to Sicily, and struck in with Dionysius;
Laert. and Suidas in Aesch. Plut. de Adulat.
and that purely for Money and the Table. In Parasito.
Lucian says, He was Parasite to the Tyrant; and Polycritus apud Laert.
another tells us, he liked his Entertainment so well, that he did not stir
from him, till he was deposed. I would ask any Man now, if he can still believe
it a genuine Letter; let him have what veneration he can for the Learning of
Eusebius.

In the beginning of this Discourse, I have said, That I heard of none, that,
since the first publication of these Letters, called them into question. But I
was shown to day (after mine was in the Press) in Bishop Pearson's Vindiciae
Epp. Sancti Ignatii, a Par. II. p. 12, 13.
Digression made on purpose against Socrates's Epistles. I must confess, with
some shame, I had either never read that Chapter, or utterly forgot it. But I
am glad now to find that imcomparable Man both to think it worth going out of
his way to discover this Imposture, and to confirm me in my judgment by the
accession of his great Authority. There is nothing there disagreeing with what
I had said; but that his Lordship allows the Epistle to Aeschines, cited by
Eusebius, to be genuine: which I had endeavored to convict of a forgery. I
referr it to those that please to read both; whether they think I have just
reason to change my opinion: especially when I shall tell them, That not
Aeschines only, but even Xenophon himself made a Visit to Dionysius. I have
Lib. x. p. 427.
Athenaeus for my Authority, a Witness beyond all exception. (...), etc.
Xenophon (says he) the Son of Gryllus, when at Dionysius the Sicilian' s Table
the Cup Bearer forced the company to drink; Pray, says he, Dionysius (speaking
aloud to the Tyrant,) if your Butler forces Wine upon us against our wills, why
may not your Cook as well compel us to eat? So that if we suppose the Letter
genuine, the absurdity will double it self; both Parties being guilty of the
very same thing, that is charged upon Plato.

OF EURIPIDES' s EPISTLES.
IT IS a bold and dangerous venture, to attack Euripides's Letters; since a very
Learned Greek Professor has so passionately espoused them; that he declares it
to be Persrictae frontis and judicii imminuti. Eurip. Edit. Cantab. par. ii. p.
523.
great Impudence and want of all Judgment to question the Truth of them. I do
not care to meddle with Controversy upon such high Wagers as those: but if I
may have leave to give my opinion, without staking such valuable things as
Modesty and good Sense upon it, I am very ready to speak my mind heartily and
freely.

I. There are only five Epistles now extant, ascribed to Euripides: but without
doubt there were formerly more of them; as we have seen just before, that we
have not now the whole Set of Xenophon's Letters. Neither can we suppose a
Sophist of so barren an Invention, as to have his Fancy quite crampt and jaded
with poor Five. We have here a peculiar happiness, which we wanted in the rest;
to know whom we are obliged to for the great blessing of these Epistles.
Apollonides, that writ a Treatise (...), About falsified History, says, one
(...).
Sabirius Pollo forged them, the same Man that counterfeited the Letters of
Aratus. This we are told by the Writer of Aratus's Life, no unlearned Author:
who does not contradict him about these of Euripides; but for Aratus's, he
says, that, bating this Apollonides, every body else believed them to be
genuine. I cannot pass any judgment of what I never saw; for Aratus's Letters
are not now to be had: but if they were no better than these of our Tragedian,
I should, in spite of the common vogue, be of Apollonides's mind; and I wish
that Book of his were now extant. One may know, by the manner of the Name, that
this Sabirius Pollo was a Roman: but I do not find such a Family as the
Sabirii, nor such a Surname as Pollo. What if we read Sabinius, or Sabidius
Pollio?

Non amo te, Sabidi; nec possum dicere quare. If that Sabidius in Martial was
the forger of our Epistles; though the Poet could give none, yet I can give a
very good reason, why I do not love him.

But the Learned Advocate for the Letters makes several Exceptions against the
Testimony of Apollonides. As first, That we may fairly infer from it, that a
great many others believed them to be true. Alas! How many more, both Ancients
and Moderns, believed Phalaris's to be true? If that argument would have done
the work, I might have spared this Dissertation. But prove, that these Letters
now extant are the same that were forged by Sabirius. Commend to me an
Argument, that, like a Flail, there is no fence against it. Why, had we been
told too, that he made Phalaris's Epistles: yet how could we prove, unless some
passages were cited out of them, that they were the same that we have now? But
though I cannot demonstrate that these are Sabirius's; yet I Will demonstrate
them by and by to be an Imposture; and I hope then it will be no injustice to
lay them at his door. But it is an evidence, that the true Epistles of Euripides
were once extant; because some body thought it not improper to father false
ones upon him. Now, I should think the very contrary; that the Cuckoo does not
lay her Egg, where the Nest is already full. At least, I am resolved I Will never
go a book-hunting after the genuine Epistles of Phalaris; though some body has
cheated the World with a parcel of false ones.

II. It might easily have happened, though we suppose the Letters spurious, that
in so small a number as Five, there could be nothing found to convict them by.
But so well has the Writer managed his Business; that every one of them has
matter enough to their own Detection. The last and principal of them is dated
from Macedonia, in answer to some reproaches, that were cast upon him at Athens
for his going to Archelaus. As for what you write from Athens; says he, pray
know, that I value no more, (...), what Agatho or Mesatus now say; than I
formerly did, what Aristophanes babbled. Here we have the Poet Agatho, (for
without doubt he means the Poet, since he has joined him with Aristophanes)
residing at Athens, and blaming Euripides for living with Archelaus. Now, could
any thing be more unfortunate for our Sabirius Pollo, than the naming of this
Man? For even this Agatho himself was then with Archelaus in Aelian* II, 21.
and XIII, 4. Plut. in Apoph. Sch^i. Aristoph. (...).
Euripides's company: besides that they were always good friends and
acquaintance, not there only, but before at Athens.

But perhaps some may suspect, it was another Agatho a Vita Eurip. p. 29. Ed.
Cant.
Comic Poet, that was meant in the Letter, and not the famous Agatho the
Tragedian. This I find to be the Opinion of the Learned Person abovenamed. But
I will make bold to expunge this Comic Agatho out of the Catalogue of Mankind.
For he sprung but up, like a Mushroom, out of a rotten passage in Suidas; who,
after he has spoken of Agatho the Tragic Poet, has these words; (...): which
his Interpreters (Wolfius and Portus) thus translate, Fuit and alius Agatho
Comoediarum Scriptor. But there is nothing like Fuit and alius in the Original;
but the same Agatho is here meant, that was mentioned before. This they might
have known from the following words, (...), he was libelled for his
Effeminateness. For whom can that belong to, but to Agatho the Tragoedian; whom
(...). Rhet. Praec.
Lucian ranks with Cinyras and Sardanapalus? Do but read Aristophanes's
Thesmophoriazusae; and you will see him ridiculed upon that score for some pages
together. The Scholiast upon (...) of the same Poet; (...) (says he) (...).
Here you see, it is expressly said, P. 133.
Agatho the Tragoedian was traduced as Effeminate. It follows presently in the
same Scholiast; (...); where we have the very words of Suidas applied to the
Tragoedian: (...), this same Agatho was a Comaedian, Socrates being his Master:
not another, as the Translators of Suidas interpolate the Text. But is it true
then, that our spruce Agatho writ Comedies too? Nothing like it; though the
learned Dialogde Poet.
Gregorius Gyraldus affirms it from this very passage. It Is a mere oscitation
of our Scholiast, and of Suidas that gaped after him: the occasion and ground
of the story being nothing but this. Plato's Convivium was in the House of this
Agatho: in the P. 336. (...).
conclusion of which, Socrates is introduced proving to Agatho and
Aristophanes; That it belonged to the same Man, and required the same Parts, to
write both Comedy and Tragedy; and that he that was a skilful Tragoedian, was
also a Comoedian. Hence have our wise Grammarians dressed up a fine story, That
Agatho was a Comaedian, and of Socrates's teaching. And now, I hope, I have
evidently proved the thing that I proposed; to the utter disgrace of our
admired Epistles.

III. Euripides, we have seen, did not value one farthing, what either Agatho
or (...).
Mesatus said of him. I would gladly be better acquainted with this same
Mesatus; for I never once met with him but here in this Letter. He must be a
Brother of the Stage too, by the company he is placed in: But what was the
matter? Was he so hissed and exploded, that he durst never show his head since?
I have a fancy, he was of the same family with Epist. lxiii, and xcvii.
Phalaris's two Fairy Tragoedians, Aristolochus and Lysinus: and that these
Letters too are a kin to those of the Tyrant. But, perhaps, you will say, this
Mesatus is but a fault in the Copies. It may be so: and I could help you to
another Tragoedian of those times, not altogether unlike him; one Melitus, the
same that afterward accused Socrates; who was likely enough to hate Euripides,
that was the Philosopher's friend. Or I could invent some other medicine for
the place: but let those look to that, that believe the Epistles true, or think
them worth the curing.

The very Learned Defender of the Epistles, one of a singular Industry and a
most diffuse Reading, has proposed some Objections against the Letters,
communicated to him by a private Hand. That private Person, at the request of
the Editor, imparted his opinion to him in a very short Letter: to which he had
no Answer returned; till he found it, with some surprise, brought upon the
stage in Eurip. Edit. Cant. p. 27, and 523.
print; and his Reasons routed and triumphed. But let us see if we can rally
them again: perhaps they may keep their ground in a second Engagement.

IV. Our friend Sabirius Pollo, to make the whole Work throughout worthy of
himself, has directed this same Letter to Cephisophon, who was Euripides's
Actor for his Plays. For he had often heard of Cephisophon; and so he would not
let him pass without a share in his Epistles. But he should have minded Time
and History a little better, if he hoped to put himself upon Us for the Author
he mimic's. It Is true, Cephisophon and our Poet were once mighty dear
acquaintance: but there fell out a foul accident, that broke off the
friendship. For Euripides caught him Acting for him, not upon the Stage, but in
private with his Wife. Which business taking wind abroad, and making a
perpetual Jest, was one of the main reasons why he left Athens and went to
Macedonia. And is it likely, after all this, that our Poet should write a
Letter to him, as soon as he got thither? that he should use him as his most
intimate Friend, nearer to him than his own Children? I know, there are some so
fond of our Epistles, that they value all this as nothing. Cephisophon is so
much in their Books; that whatsoever is said against him, must be calumny and
detraction. Give me an Advocate, that will stick close and hang upon a Cause.
By being their Editor, he is retained for the Letters; and therefore he must
not desert his Client. But why shall no Testimony be allowed, that touches
Cephisophon? Are not P. 167, 184.
Aristophanes and his Commentator, and Suidas and In Vita Eurip.
Thomas Magister all lawful and good Evidence? And is there one single Witness
against them in his behalf? Not a Writer is now extant, that mentions his name,
but what tells the story of him: and if we must not believe them; we shall want
new Evidence to prove, there ever was such a Man.

V. In a Disquisition of this nature, an inconsistency in Time and Place is an
argument that reaches every body. All will cry out, that Phalaris, etc. are
spurious, when they see such breaches upon Chronology. But I must profess, I
should as fully have believed them so; though the Writers had escaped all
mistakes of that kind. For as they were commonly men of small endowments, that
affected to make these Forgeries; a great Man disdaining so base and ignoble a
work: so they did their business accordingly; and expressed rather themselves,
than those they acted. For they knew not how to observe Decorum, in a Quality
so different from their own: like the silly Player, that would represent
Hercules; tall indeed, but slender, without bulk and substance. Let us see the
conduct of this Author: In the first Letter, Archelaus sends Euripides some
Money; and our Poet, as if his Profession were like a Monastic Vow of Poverty,
utterly refuses it. And why, forsooth, does he refuse it? Why, it was too great
a Sum for his condition. Yes, to be sure; when a Sophist makes a Present, the
greatest Sum costs no more than the least. But it was difficult to be kept,
and the fingers of Thieves would itch at it. Alas for him; with the expense of
one Bag, out of many, he might have provided a Strong Box, and new Doors and
Locks to his House. But why could he not accept a Little of it? Even Laertius,
in Socrat and Xenoc.
Socrates himself and Xenocrates took a modicum out of Presents, and returned
the rest again. And is a Poet more selfdenying, than the most mortified of the
Philosophers? But the best of all, is, That Clito the King's chief Minister
threatened to be angry with him, if he refused it. What, could Clito expect
beforehand, that the Present would be refused? The most sagacious Statesman,
sure, that ever Monarch was blessed with. Alexander could not foresee such a
thing; but was mightily surprised, when Xenocrates would not receive some Money
that he sent him: Plut. Apoph.
What, says he, has Xenocrates no Friends to give it to, if he need it not
himself? As for our Poet, he had Friends, I assure you; but all of his own
kidney, men of Contentment, that would not finger a penny of it, (...). What
would one give to purchase a Set of such acquaintance? And yet, I know not
how, in the Fifth Letter, their appetites were come to 'em; For in that,
Euripides himself, from Archelaus's Court, shared some Presents among them; and
we hear not one word, but that all was well taken.

VI. The rest of this Letter is employed in begging pardon (...).
for the two Sons of a Pellaean old fellow, who had done something to deserve
Imprisonment. And the Third and Fourth are Common Places of Thanks for granting
this request. Now, besides that the whole Business has the Air and Visage of
Sophistry; for this same is a mighty Topic too in Phalaris's Epistles: it is a
plain violation of good Sense, to petition for a Man without telling his Name:
as if Pella the royal City had no Old Man in it but one. How can such an
Address be real? But to this they give a double Answer; That a Sophist, if this
was one, could not be at a loss for a Name: he might easily have put one here;
as hereafter he names Amphias* Lapretes and others. But the point is not, what
he might have done, but what he has done. He might have named some other Poet
at Athens, and not Agatho that was then in Macedonia. All those mistakes and
blunders of Phalaris and the rest might easily have been avoided, had the
Writers had more History and Discretion. (...).
But he had writ a Letter before this about the same business; and there we
must suppose he had mentioned his name. This indeed would be something, if it
would carry water. But though the Sophist has told you so; do not rashly
believe him. For it is plain, that pretended Letter must have been sent to
Archelaus, before this vast Present came from him. Why then did not the same
Messenger that brought the Money, bring the Grant too of his Petition? Would
the King, that did him this mighty Honor and Kindness, deny him at the same
time that small and just Request? For the crime of those Prisoners was surely
no heinous business. Had it been a design to assassinate the King, he would
never have interceded for them. The Charge against them was a venial fault: or
were it the blackest accusation, their Innocence at least would clear them: for
our Poet himself tells us, (...).
They had done no body any wrong.

VII. The Second Epistle is to Sophocles, whom he makes to be shipwrack'd at
the Island Chios; the Vessel and Goods being lost, but all the Men saved. That
Sophocles was at Chios, we are informed by Athen. XIII, 603.
Ion Chius the Tragoedian; who relates a long conversation of his there. If our
Author here means the same Voyage, as probably he does; he is convicted of a
cheat. For ( u) Ibid. and Thucyd. I, 75.
( t) then Sophocles was Commander of a Fleet with Pericles in the Samian War;
and went to Chios, and thence to Lesbos, for auxiliary Forces. But our
Mock-Euripides never thinks of his public Employment; but advises him to
return home at his leisure; as if it had been a Voyage for Diversion. Yes, says
his Advocate; but why might he not be at Chios another time, though no body
speak of it, about private Affairs? Yes; why not, indeed? For Sophocles was so
Ion Chius, ib. Aristoph. Ranis.
courteous and good-natured a Man, that, to do our Letter-monger a kindness, he
would have gone to every Island in the Archipelago. But it is hard though, that
a good Ship must be lost, and our Poet swim for it, to oblige the little
Sophist. For I fear the Vessel was cast away, purely to bring in (...).
the great loss of Sophocles' s Plays. Alas! alas! Could he not go over the
water, but he must needs take his Plays with him? And must Euripides, of all
men, lament the loss of them; whose own Plays must, probably, have truckled to
them at the next Feast of Bacchus? Must Euripides, his Rival, his Antagonist,
tell him, (...).
That his Orders about family affairs were executed: as if He had been employed
by him, as Steward of his Household?

VIII. The Fifth Letter is a long Apology for his going to Macedonia. Can they
think, says he, that I came hither for love of Money? I should have come then,
when I was younger; and not now, to lay (...).
my bones in a barbarous Country, and make Archelaus richer by my Death. I
observed it, as no small mark of a Sophist, That our Author foretells, he was
to die in Macedonia; where, we know, he was worried to death by a pack of Dogs.
But what wonder, say they, if an Old Man of Seventy predict his own death? I do
not question, but our Poet might presage himself to be Mortal. But 'twas an odd
guess to hit upon the time and place, when and where he was to die. For, what
ground was there to be so positive? The Letter, we see, carries date just after
his arrival at Court? He had, as yet, had very short trial, whether all things
would continue to his liking. And we have no reason to suppose, that he came
thither for good and all; never to see Athens again. Might he not, by some
accident, or supplanted by some rival, lose the King's favor? Or, was he sure
His life would last as long as his own? 'Twas a violent death, and not mere Age
and Craziness, that took our Poet away at last: and he knew Sophocles to be
then alive and hearty and making of Plays still; that was Fourteen years older
than himself. In these circumstances to be so positive about his dying there,
was a Prophecy as bold as any of the Pythian Oracle. But, say they, he gives a
hint too, that Archelaus might be deposed: which a Sophist would not say,
because it never came to pass. That was true and came to pass every day, that
he might be deposed: and he does not suggest, that it actually would be so; for
he expressly says, (...).
God would always stand by the King, and support him. But indeed, as they
interpret a passage there; it looks as if he had foreboded real Mischief;
(...). Which last words they translate, ubi jam destitutus fueris and
abdicatus, when you are deserted and deposed. But with all due submission, I
will assume the freedom of changing the version. For (...) and (...) belong to
the word (...), and not to Archelaus: and the distinction is to be put thus;
(...); Tempus ad exercendam benignitatem concessum; You will not grieve, that
the time is gone past recalling, which was granted you by God to do good to
Mankind in. This, I suppose, is now clear enough; and Archelaus is in no danger
of being deposed by this sentence. But let us examine our Author's next words;
(...).
To make Archelaus richer by my death. A very good Thought indeed, and worthy
of Euripides. But pray what could the King get by his death? Would the Poet be
compelled to make him his Heir; as some were forced by the Roman Emperors? Or,
would the King seize upon his Estate, and defraud the true Inheritor? If the
Poet had such suspicions as these, he would never have gone to him. But though
he had left all to him at his death; what would the King have been richer for
him? For surely Euripides, having settled affairs at home, carried no great
Stock with him to Macedonia; unless he thought Archelaus would make him pay for
his Board. He might well expect to be maintained by the King's Liberality; ( c)
as he found it in the ( d) Ep. v.
Event. The King therefore, were he his sole Heir, would only have received
again, what himself had given before. Nay, even a great part of that had been
lost beyond recovery. For our Poet, by the very first Messenger, had packt more
away to Athens, that Archelaus had given him, than all that he carried with him
could amount to; perhaps, than all he was worth before.

IX. But he has more still to say to those, that blamed him for leaving Athens.
If Riches (says he) could draw me to Macedonia; why did I refuse (...).
these very same Riches; when I was (...).
young, or middle-aged; and while my Mother was alive; for whose sake alone, if
at all, I should have desired to be rich? He alludes here to the First Letter,
(and perhaps to others now lost,) where he refuses an ample Sum of Money sent
him by Archelaus. Alas, poor Sophist! 'twas ill luck he took none of the Money,
to Fee his Advocates lustily: for this is like to be a hard brush. For how
could the Poet, while young, or middleaged, refuse Presents from Archelaus?
since, according Diod. Sicul. and alii apud Athen. l. v. p. 217.
to most Chronologers, he was about Seventy; and, by the most favorable
account, above Sixty; when Archelaus came to the Crown.

X. But what a dutiful Child had Mother Clito the Herb-woman? For her sake
alone, her Son Euripides could wish to be Rich; to buy her Oil to her Sallads.
But what had the Old Gentleman the Father done, that he wishes nothing for His
sake? And how had his Suidas* Tho. Magister, etc.
three Sons offended him, that They have no share in his good wishes? It Is a
fine piece of conduct, that our Sophist has shown. He had read something of our
Poet's Mother; for she was famous in old Comedy for her Lettuce and Cabbage:
but having heard nothing of his Sons; he represents him through all his
Letters, as if he had no Children. As here, the only motive to desire Wealth,
is his care of the Old Woman: and when she is supposed to be dead, all his
concern is only for his Friends. In the First Letter, (...).
He and his Friends are such contented men, that they refuse the royal Gift.
Not a word of the three young Sparks; who, it is hard to think, were so
self-denying. In the Fifth, he keeps none of the King's Presents by him, but
sends all away to Athens, to be shared among his (...).
Friends and Companions. How, again, would the young Gentlemen look, to be
forgot thus by their own Father? If it be suspected, in favor of the Letters,
that the Sons might be all dead before; I can soon put a stop to that, from a
good Evidence, Aristophanes; who, in a Play made (...), p. 184. Edit. Basil.
the very Year of our Poet's death, mentions the Sons as then alive.

XI. The Romans may brag as much as they please of Mecoenas and others: but of
all Patrons of Learning, Archelaus of Macedonia shall have My commendations.
Within two or three days after Euripides's arrival, he makes him a Present of
Ep. v.
Forty Talents. Which was a greater Sum of Money than our Poet could ever have
raised before; though all that he had should have been sold four times over.
The Great Themistocles Plut. Themist.
was not worth Three Talents, before he meddled with Public Affairs: and
Terent. Heaut.
Two Talents was thought a good Portion for a substantial Man's Daughter.
Alexander the Great, when he was Lord of the World, sent Xenocrates the
Philosopher a Present of Thirty Talents, or, as others say, Fifty; which
Cicero, Tusc. v. Pecunia temporibus illis, Athenis praefertim, maxima.
Cicero calls a vast Sum, especially for those times. But Alexander's natural
Munificence was stimulated and exalted to that extraordinary Act of Bounty, out
of a peak Laert. in A^ist.
he had to Aristotle. How generous then, nay, how profuse was Archelaus; that
out of his little and scanty Revenue could give as much, as his great Successor
in the midst of the Persian Treasures? But all this is spoiled again; when we
consider, it is a Sophist's Present: who is liberal, indeed, of his Paper Notes,
but never makes solid Payment.

And now, I suppose, it will be thought no great matter, whether Sabirius
Pollo, as Apollonides affirms, or any other unknown Sophist, have the Honor of
the Epistles. I will take my leave of Him and Them; after I have done the same
kindness to Apollonides, that I did to Sabirius. For as I read the name of the
one, (...), instead of (...): so, for (...), I dare make bold to substitute
(...). The former was never heard of but here. This latter is mentioned by
Laertius, Harpocration and others. He writ several Books, and dedicated one of
them Laert. in Timone.
to Tiberius. The time therefore agrees exactly with this emendation; for
living in that Emperor's days, he might well cite a Roman Author Sabidius
Pollio. But to take away all manner of scruple; this very Book About Falsified
History is ascribed to Apollonides Nicenus by v. (...). De Differ. Vocab.
Ammonius; (...), says he, (...); just as the Writer of Aratus's Life says;
(...).

OF AESOP' S FABLES.
I Could easily go on, and discover to you many more Impostures of this kind,
The Epistles of Anacharsis, Heraclitus, Democritus, Hippocrates, Diogenes,
Crates, and others. But perhaps I may be exhorted hereafter to put this
Dissertation into Latin, with large Additions: till which time I will adjourn
the further Discourse upon those several Authors; and proceed now to the last
thing proposed, The Fables of Aesop.

And here I am glad to find a good part of the Work done ready to my hand. For
Monsieur Bachet S. de Meziriac, has writ The Life of Aesop, in French: which
Book, though I could never meet with it, I can guess from the great Learning of
the Author, known to me by his other Works, to have in a manner exhausted the
Subject. Vavasor too, De Ludicra Dictione, ascribes the present Fables to
Maximus Planudes, and not to Aesop himself. See also a great deal upon this
Head in the late Historical Dictionary of Mr. Bail. All which make me look
upon Sir W. T.'s mighty Commendation of the Aesopean Fables now extant, which
is the occasion of this Treatise, to be an unhappy Paradox; neither worthy of
the great Author, nor agreeable to the rest of his excellent Book. For if I do
not much deceive my self, I shall soon make it appear, That of all the
Compositions of the Aesopic Fables, these that we have now left us, are both
the Last and the Worst. Though I do not intend a set Discourse; but only a few
loose things, that I fancy may have escaped the Observation of Others.

I. It Is very uncertain, if Aesop himself left any Fables behind him in
writing: the Old Man in In Vespis, p. 357.
Aristophanes learned his Fables in Conversation, and not out of a Book:

(...) --
There Is another In Avibus, p. 387.
passage in the same Poet, (...); which (...).
Suidas, and from him Erasmus, Scaliger, etc. affirm to be used proverbially;
You have not read so much as Aesop, (spoken of Idiots and Illiterates.) From
whence one might conclude, that Aesop wrote his own Fables, which were in every
bodies hands. But it plainly appears from the Poet himself, that it is not a
Proverbial Saying: For when One had said, He never heard before, that Birds
were older than the Earth: the Other tells him, He is unlearned, and
unacquainted with Aesop; who said, That the Lark was the first of Things; and
she, when her Father died (after he had laid five days unburied, because the
Earth was not yet in being) at last buried him in her own Head. Now, what is
there here like a Proverb? But pray take notice, that this Fable is not extant
in our present Collection; a good testimony, that Ours are not of the
Phrygian's own Composing.

I will mention another place of our Poet; that I may, on this occasion,
correct a gross Error of the Scholiast. It Is extant in Vespis, p. 330.

(...). Where he interprets (...); of one Aesop a ridiculous Actor of Tragedy.
But our Scholiast himself is more ridiculous: if it was He that writ this; and
not some trifler, that foisted it in among the other's Annotations. For there
was no Aesop a Greek Actor in the days of Aristophanes: he mistakes him for the
famous Aesop in Cicero's time, an Actor of Tragedy on the Roman Stage; and far
from being ridiculous:

Quae gravis Aesopus, quae doctus Roscius egit. But the Aesop meant by our Poet
is the Phrygian himself, whose Fables were called Jests, (...): so in the other
passage, already cited, (...). Hesychius, (...). Orat. lxxii. p. 631.
Dion Chrysostom, speaking of our Aesop, (...), says he, (...). Avienus, in his
Preface; Aesopus, responso Delphici Apollinis monitus, RIDICULA orsus est.

II. The first, that we know of, who essayed to put the Aesopic Fables into
Verse, was Plato in Phaedone. Plutarch. de And. Poet. Laert. in Socrat.
Socrates the Philosopher. Laertius seems to hint, that he did but one Fable;
and that with no great success; the beginning of it was this:

(...)
It Is observable again, that Socrates does not say, he made use of a Book of
Fables: but, I wrote, says he, (...), those that I knew, and that I could first
call to mind. And this Fable too does not appear in our present Collection; if
we may gather so much, from his naming the Corinthians.

III. After Socrates's time, Laert. in Demet.
Demetrius Phalereus made (...), Collections of Aesopean Fables: which,
perhaps, were the first in their kind, committed to writing; I mean, in form of
a Book. These seem to have been in Prose: and some, perhaps, may imagine, that
they are the same that are now extant. I wish they were; for then they would
have been well writ, with some Genius and Spirit. But I shall demonstrate Ours
to be of a Modern Date; and the Composition it self speaks too loud, that it is
not Demetrius's.

IV. After him, there was some body, whose name is now lost, that made a new
Edition of the Fables in Elegiac Verse; I find no mention of them, but in
Suidas; who cites them often under the name of (...), or (...). I will set down
a few Fragments of them; both to show that they belong to the Aesopic Fables,
which has not yet been observed, that I know of; and to enable you to judge,
whether, if we could change our modern Collection for these, we should not get
by the bargain.

Suidas in (...).
(...).

This belongs to the Fable about the Two Bags that every Man carries; one
before, where he puts other men's faults; another behind him, where he puts his
own. This is mentioned by Catullus, Horace, Phaedrus, Galen, Themistius,
Stobaeus, etc. and it is a Blot upon our Modern Set, that there it is wanting.

Id. in (...).
(...)
(...) vulgo (...).
(...).
And,

(...). And,

Id. in (...).
(...)
(...) --
And,

Id. (...).
(...). Some of them, it seems, were all Hexameters:

-- Id. (...). and Schol. Aristoph. p. 220.
(...)
(...).
It Is an easy matter to find what Fables these pieces relate to; and I think
they are all extant in the present Collection.

V. This, you see by this Specimen, was no contemptible Author: and after him
came one Babrius, that Suidas in (...).
gave a new Turn of the Fables into Choliambics. No body, that I know of,
mention him; but Suidas, Avienus, and Io. Tzetzes. There Is one Gabrias, indeed,
yet extant, that has comprised each Fable in four sorry Iambics. But our
Babrius is a Writer of another Size and Quality; and were his Book now extant,
it might justly be opposed, if not preferred, to the Latin of Phaedrus. There Is
a whole Fable of his yet preserved at the end of Gabrias, of the Swallow and
the Nightingale. Suidas brings many Citations out of him; all which show him an
excellent Poet: as this of the Sick Lion,

-- Suidas in (...).
(...)
And that of the Bore,

(...) Suidas. in (...).
(...): And a great many others.

VI. I need not mention the Latin Writers of the Aesopean Fables; Phaedrus,
Ausonius, Ep. xvi.
Julius Titianus, and Avienus; the two first in Iambic, the last in Elegiac:
but I shall proceed to examine those Greek ones now extant, that assume the
name of Aesop himself. There are two parcels of the present Fables; the one,
which are the more ancient, CXXXVI in number, were first published out of the
Heidelberg Library, by Neveletus, A. D. MDCX. The Editor himself well observed;
That they were falsely ascribed to Aesop, because they (...), Fab. 152.
mention holy Monks. To which I will add another remark; That there is a
sentence out of Job, See Fab. 288. Job i. 21.
(...); Naked we all came, and naked shall we return. But because these two
passages are in the Epimythion, and belong not to the Fable it self; they may
justly be supposed to be Additions only, and Interpolations of the true Book. I
shall therefore give some better Reasons, to prove they are a re^^^ Work. That
they cannot be Aesop's ow^ the CLXXXI Fable is a demonstrative proof. For that
is a story of Demades the Rhetor, who lived above CC years after our Phrygian's
time. The CXCIII is, about Momus's Carping at the Works of the Gods. There he
finds this fault in the Bull; That his Eyes were not placed in his Horns, so as
he might see where he pusht. But In Nigrino.
Lucian (speaking of the same Fable) has it thus; That his Horns were not
placed right before his Eyes. And De Part. Anim. l. iii. p. 54.
Aristotle has it a third way; That his Horns were not placed about his
Shoulders, where he might make the strongest push; but in the tenderest part,
his Head. Again, Momus blames this in the Man; That his (...) did not hang on
the outside of him, so as his Thoughts might be seen: but in In Hermotimo.
Lucian, the fault is; That he had not a Window in his Breast. I think it
probable from hence, that Aesop did not write a Book of his Fables: for then
there would not have been such a difference in the telling. Or, at least, if
these that are now extant were Aesop's; I should guess from this specimen, that
Lucian had the better on it, and beat him at his own play.

VII. But that they are recenter than even Babrius, who is himself one of the
latest Age of good Writers, I discovered by this means. I observed in 'em
several passages, that were not of a piece with the rest; but had a turn and
composition plainly Poetical: as in the CCLXIII Fable, which begins thus;
(...). This, I saw, was a Choliambic Verse; and I presently suspected, that the
Writer had taken it out of Babrius. And I was soon confirmed in my judgment by
this Suidas in (...).
fragment of his, that belongs to the same Fable:

(...)
For in the Fable in Prose there are these words; (...). Whence it evidently
appears, that the Author of that Parcel, which was published by Neveletus, did
nothing else but epitomize Babrius, and put him into Prose. But I will give you
some further proofs of it. The CCLXI begins thus; (...). Which, at the first
reading, one perceives to be part of a Scazon: and thus it is in a Suidas in
(...).
fragment of Babrius:

(...). In the CLVI, about the Fox with the Firebrand; (...) (...). Who does
not discover here a Scazon of Babrius?

(...). The CCXLIII is a manifest turning out of Choliambics into Prose; for
the whole is made up either of Pieces or entire Verses:

-- (...). And,

(...). And,

(...) -- And,

-- (...),
In the CCXCIII, there are these remnants of Babrius:

(...). And,

(...). And,

-- (...). The CLXV begins thus; (...): which I suppose to have been in Babrius
thus:

(...)
Or, (...):

In all these passages here are most visible footsteps by which we may trace
our Imitator: but generally he has so disguised the Fables, that no body can
find they ever belonged to Babrius. In the CCXLV, about the Priests of Cybele,
there is nothing but a short dry Story, and no relics of a Verse. But there is
a noble fragment of Babrius belonging to the same Fable, which I will here set
down, both to correct it, (for he that has given it us, Natal. Com. l. ix. c. 5.
has printed it false,) and to show you how much we have lost:

(...)
VIII. Thus I have proved one Half of the Fables now extant, that carry the
name of Aesop, to be above a Thousand Years more recent than He. And the other
Half, that were public before Neveletus, will be found to be yet more modern,
and the latest of all. That they are not from Aesop's own Hand, we may know
from the LXX, Of the Serpent and the Crab-fish: which is taken from a Scolion
or Catch, much older than Aesop, that is extant in Lib. xv. c. 15.
Athenaeus, and must be corrected thus:

(...)
And there is great reason to believe, that they were drawn up by Planudes, one
of the Later Greeks, that translated into his native Tongue Ovid's
Metamorphoses, Cato's Distich's, Caesar's Commentaries, and Macrobius. For
there is no Manuscript any where, above CCC years old, that has the Fables
according to that Copy. Besides that there are several passages, that betray a
modern Writer; as in the LXXVII, (...), a Bird; and XXXIX, (...), a Beast; both
unknown to all ancient Authors: and in the CXXIX, (...), Crying in his heart, a
manifest Hebraism, in imitation of Eccles. xi. I. (...). The LXXV, about the
Ethiopian, is taken almost word for word out of the VI of Apthonius the
Rhetorician; who made an Essay upon some Aesopic Fables, that is yet extant.
The IV, as appears from the last sentence of it, is a Paraphrase on the
CCLXXXIV of Neveletus's Parcel; which Parcel, as I have proved above, are a
Traduction of Babrius: and particularly in this very Fable there are footsteps
of his Verses;

-- (...). And,

-- (...). This Collection therefore is more recent than that Other; and coming
first abroad with Aesop's Life, writ by Planudes, it is justly believed to be
owing to the same Writer.

IX. That Idiot of a Monk has given us a Book, which he calls The Life of
Aesop, that, perhaps, cannot be matched in any Language, for Ignorance and
Nonsense. He had picked up two or three true stories, That Aesop was Slave to
one Xanthus, Eustath. in X Odyss. p. 785.
carried a Burden of Bread, conversed with Craesus, and was put to death at
Delphi: but the Circumstances of these, and all his other Tales, are pure
Invention. He makes Xanthus, an ordinary Lydian or Samian, to be a ( t)
Philosopher: which (o) (...).
word was not heard of in those days, but invented afterward by Pythagoras. He
makes him attended too, like Plato and Aristotle, by a Company of Scholars,
whom he calls (...): though the word was not yet used in that sense, even in
Aristotle's time. 'Twas the Plutarch. in Conviv.
King of Aethiopia's Problem to Amasis King of Egypt, To drink up the Sea: but
Planudes makes it a Wager of Xanthus with one of his Scholars. To say nothing
of his Chronological Errors, Mistakes of a Hundred or Two Hundred years: Who
can read, with any patience, that silly Discourse between Xanthus and his Man
Aesop; not a bit better than our Penny-Merriments, printed at London Bridge?

X. But of all his injuries to Aesop, that which can least be forgiven him, is,
the making such a Monster of him for Ugliness: an Abuse, that has found credit
so universally; that all the modern Painters, since the time of Planudes, have
drawn him in the worst Shapes and Features, that Fancy could invent. 'Twas an
Suidas in (...). and (...). Schol. Aristoph. p. 357, and 387.
old Tradition among the Greeks, That Aesop revived again, and lived a second
life. Should he revive once more, and see the Picture before the Book that
carries his Name; could he think it drawn for Himself? or for the Monkey, or
some strange Beast introduced in the Fables? But what Revelation had this Monk
about Aesop's Deformity? For he must learn it by Dream and Vision, and not by
ordinary methods of Knowledge. He lived A. D. MCCCLXX*
about Two Thousand Years after him: and in all that tract of time, there is not
one single Author that has given the least hint, that Aesop was ugly. What
credit then can be given to an ignorant Monk, that broaches a new Story after
so many Ages? In Plutarch's Convivium our Aesop is one of the Guests with Solon
and the other Sages of Greece: there is abundance of Jest and Raillery there
among them: and particularly upon Aesop: but no body drolls upon his ugly Face;
which could hardly have escaped, had he had such a bad one. Perhaps you will say,
it had been rude and indecent, to touch upon a natural Imperfection. Not at
all, if it had been done softly and jocosely. In Plato's Feast, they are very
merry upon Socrates's Face, that resembled old Silenus: and in this, they twit
Aesop for having been a Slave: which was no more his Fault, than Deformity
would have been. Philostratus has given us, in Two Books, a Description of a
Gallery of Pictures; P. 735.
one of which is Aesop with a Chorus of Animals about him. There he is
represented smiling and looking toward the ground, in a posture of Thought;
but not a word of his Deformity; which, were it true, must needs have been
touched on, in an account of a Picture. The Athenians set up a noble Statue to
his Honor and Memory:

Phaedrus, l. xi. ult.
Aesopo ingentem Statuam posuere Attici,
Servumque collocarunt aeterna in basi;
Patere honoris scirent ut cuncti viam,
Nec generi tribui, sed virtuti gloriam.
But had he been such a Monster, as Planudes has made of him; a Statue had been
no better than a Monument of his Ugliness: it had been kinder to his Memory, to
have let that alone. But the famous Lysippus was the Statuary that made it. And
must so great a Hand be employed to dress up a Lump of Deformity? Agathias the
Poet has left us an Anthol. lib. iv. (...).
Epigram upon that Statue:

(...), etc.
How could He too have omitted to speak of it, had his Ugliness been so
notorious? The Greeks have several Proverbs about Persons deformed; (...),
(...), etc. Our Aesop, if so very ugly, had been in the first rank of them;
especially when his Statue had stood there, to put every body in mind of it. He
was a great Favorite of Craesus King of Lydia; who employed him, as his
Ambassador to Corinth and Delphi. But would such a Monster, as Planudes has set
out, be a fit Companion for a Prince? or a proper Ambassador; to be hooted at
by all the Boys, wherever he came? Plutarch represents him as a polite and
elegant Courtier; rebuking Solon for his gruff and clownish behavior with
Craesus; telling him, he must converse with Princes, Pln^ in Solone.
(...), either agreeably, or not at all. Now, could either such a Station, or
such a Discourse befit Aesop; if he was truly that Scarecrow, as he is now
commonly painted? But I wish I could do that justice to the Memory of our
Phrygian; to oblige the Painters to change their Pencil. For it is certain, he
was no Deformed Person; and it is probable, he was very Handsome. For whether he
was a Phrygian, or, as others say, a Thracian; he must have been sold into
Samos by a Trader in Slaves. And it is well known, that that sort of People
commonly bought up the most Beautiful they could light on; because they would
yield the most Profit. And there is mention of two Slaves, Fellow Servants
together, Aesop and Rhodopis a Woman; and if we may guess him by his Companion
and ( b) Contubernalis, we must needs believe him a Comely Person. For Pliny
xxxvi, 12.
that Rhodopis (d) Herodotus. Suidas* Strabo.
was the greatest Beauty of all her Age: and even a Proverb arose in Memory of
it;

(...). FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 48. l. 17. r. (...); p. 66. l. 14. r. very well resolved; p. 80. l. ult.
r. Ten years; p. 90. l. 22. r. gives a reason; p. 93. l. 29. r. of that
Philosopher; p. 124. marg. r. (...); p. 127. marg. r. (...).


