THE Folly and Unreasonableness OF ATHEISM Demonstrated from The Advantage and
Pleasure of a Religious Life, The Faculties of Humane Souls, The Structure of
Animate Bodies, and The Origin and Frame of the World:

In EIGHT SERMONS Preached at the Lecture Founded by The Honorable ROBERT
BOIL, Esquire;

In the First Year, MDCXCII.

By RICHARD BENTLEY, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary, and Library Keeper to His
MAJESTY.

The Fourth Edition Corrected.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1699.

To my most Honored Patrons, TRUSTEES appointed by the Will of the Honorable
ROBERT BOIL, Esquire The Right Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, Sir Henry Ashurst, Knight and Baronet, Sir John Rotheram, Sergeant at Law,
John Evelyn, senior, Esquire.
Most Honored,
GOD having disposed the Heart of that incomparable Person, the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire, lately deceased, the Glory of our Nation and Age, whose
Charity and Goodness were as universal as his Learning and Fame; To settle an
Annual Salary for some Divine or Preaching Minister, who shall be enjoined to
perform the Offices following: 1. To preach Eight Sermons in the Year, for
proving the Christian Religion against notorious Infidels, viz. Atheists,
Deists, Pagans, Jews and Mahometans; not descending to any Controversies that
are among Christians themselves: These Lectures to be on the First Monday of
the respective Months of January, February, March, April, May, September,
October, November; in such Church as the Trustees shall from time to time
appoint: 2. To be assisting to all Companies, and encouraging them in any
Undertaking for propagating the Christian Religion: 3. To be ready to satisfy
such Real Scruples as any may have concerning those Matters; and to answer such
New Objections or Difficulties as may be started, to which good Answers have
not yet been made: You have been pleased to believe me able in some measure to
perform these Offices, and to command this First Essay to be made public. I am
very sensible of the great Honor, as well as the great Extent and Difficulty
of the Task; and shall endeavor to the utmost of my poor ability to answer the
religious and generous Design of that Excellent Person, and the good Opinion
you have entertained of,

My most Honored Patrons, Your very obliged and humble Servant, R. Bentley.
March 17. 1691/2.
THE Folly of Atheism, And (what is now called) DEISM: Even with Respect to The
PRESENT LIFE.
The First SERMON preached March 7. 1691/2.
Psalm XIV. v. 1. The Fool has said in his Heart, There is no God; they are
corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that does good.
I Shall not now make any enquiry about the time and occasion and other
circumstances of composing this Psalm: nor how it comes to pass, that with very
little variation we have it twice over, both here the 14th. and again number
the 53d. Not that these and suchlike are not important considerations in
themselves; but that I think them improper now, when we are to argue and
expostulate with such persons, as allow no Divine Authority to our Text; and
profess no greater, or, it may be they will say, less Veneration for these
Sacred Hymns, than for the profane Songs of Anacreon or Horace. So that
although I my self do really believe, that all such as say in their Hearts,
There is no God, are foolish and corrupt, both in Understanding and Will;
because I see infinite Wisdom it self has pronounced them to be so:
nevertheless this Argument would at present have no force upon these men, till
in due time and method we have evinced the sufficient Authority of Holy
Scripture. But however there are other Books extant, which they must needs
allow of as proper Evidence; even the mighty Volumes of visible Nature, and the
everlasting Tables of Right Reason; wherein, if they do not wilfully shut their
Eyes, they may read their own Folly written by the Finger of God, in a much
plainer and more terrible Sentence, than Belshazzar's was by the Hand Dan. 5. 5.
upon the Wall.

And as the impious Principles of these persons do preclude any argumentation
from the Revealed Word of God: so they prevent us also from speaking at present
to the second part of the Text. The whole Verse has apparently two
Propositions; the one denoting the Folly of Atheism, The Fool has said in his
Heart, There is no God: the second declaring the Corruption and Flagitiousness
of Life which naturally attend it; They are corrupt, they have done abominable
works, there is none that does good. Now this latter part to a genuine Atheist
is mere Iargon, as he loves to call it; an empty sound of words without any
signification. He allows no Natural Morality, nor any other distinction of Good
and Evil, Just and Unjust; than as Human Institution and the Modes and Fashions
of various Countries denominate them. The most Heroical Actions or detestable
Villainies are in the nature of things indifferent to his approbation; if by
secrecy they are alike concealed from Rewards or Punishments, from Ignominy or
Applause. So that till we have proved in its proper place the eternal and
essential Difference between Virtue and Vice; we must forbear to urge Atheists
with the Corruption and Abominableness of their Principles. But I presume, the
first part of the Text, the Folly and sottishness of Atheism (which shall be
the subject of this Discourse) will be allowed to come home to their Case:
since they make such a noisy pretense to Wit and Sagacity; and I believe
several of them first engage in that Labyrinth of Nonsense and Folly, out of an
absurd and preposterous affectation of seeming Wiser than their Neighbors.

But before I proceed any farther, it will be necessary to clear and vindicate
this expression of the Psalmist, The Fool has said in his Heart, There is no
God. For I know not any Interpreters, that will allow it to be spoken of such,
as flatly deny the Being of God; but of them, that believing his Existence, do
yet seclude him from directing the Affairs of the World, from observing and
judging the Actions of Men. I suppose they might be induced to this, from the
commonly received notion of an Innate Idea of God, imprinted upon every Soul of
Man at their Creation, in Characters that can never be defaced. Whence it will
follow, that Speculative Atheism does only subsist in Our speculation; whereas
really Humane Nature cannot be guilty of the crime: that indeed a few sensual
and voluptuous Persons may for a season eclipse this native Light of the Soul;
but can never so wholly smother and extinguish it, but that at some lucid
intervals it will recover it self again, and shine forth to the conviction of
their Conscience. And therefore they believed, that the words would not admit
of a strict and rigorous Interpretation; but ought to be so tempered and
accommodated to the nature of things, as that they may describe those profane
persons; who, though they do not, nor can really doubt in their Hearts of the
Being of God, yet they openly deny his Providence in the course of their lives.
Now if this be all that is meant by the Text, I do not see how we can defend,
not only the fitness and propriety, but the very truth of the expression. As to
that natural and indeleble signature of God, which Human Souls in their first
Origin are supposed to be stamped with, I shall show at a fitter opportunity,
that it is a mistake, and that we have no need of it in our Disputes against
Atheism. So that being free from that prejudice, I interpret the words of the
Text in the literal acceptance, which will likewise take in the Expositions of
others. For I believe that the Royal Psalmist in this comprehensive brevity of
speech, There is no God, has concluded all the various Forms of Impiety;
whether of such as excludes the Deity from governing the World by his
Providence, or judging it by his Righteousness, or creating it by his Wisdom
and Power. Because the consequence and result of all these Opinions is
terminated in downright Atheism. For the Divine Inspection into the Affairs of
the World does necessarily follow from the Nature and Being of God. And he that
denies this, does implicitly deny his Existence: he may acknowledge what he will
with his mouth, but in his heart he has said, There is no God. A God,
therefore a Providence; was a general argument of virtuous men, and not
peculiar to the Stoics alone. And again, No Providence, therefore no God; was
the most plausible reason, and the most frequent in the mouths of Atheistical
Men. So that it seems to be agreed on all hands, that the Existence of God and
his Government of the World do mutually suppose and imply one another.

There are some Infidels among us, that not only disbelieve the Christian
Religion; but oppose the assertions of Providence, of the Immortality of the
Soul, of an Universal Judgment to come, and of any Incorporeal Essence: and yet
to avoid the odious name of Atheists, would shelter and skreen themselves under
a new one of Deists, which is not quite so obnoxious. But I think the Text has
cut them short, and precluded this subterfuge; in as much as it has declared,
that all such wicked Principles are coincident and all one in the issue with
the rankest Atheism: The Fool, that does exempt the affairs of the World from
the ordination and disposal of God, has said in his Heart, There is no God at
all. It was the Opinion of many of the Ancients, that Epicurus Posidon apud
Ciceron. Plutarch. etc.
introduced a Deity into his Philosophy, not because he was persuaded of his
Existence, (for when he had brought him upon the Stage of Nature, he made him
only Muta persona, and interdicted him from bearing any Part in it,) but purely
that he might not incurr the offense of the Magistrate. He was generally
therefore suspected Verbis reliquisse Deum, re sustulisse; to have framed on
purpose such a contemptible paultry Hypothesis about him, as indeed left the
Name and Title of God in the World; but nothing of his Nature and Power. Just
as a Philosopher of our own Age gave a ludicrous Mr. De: Carts.
and fictitious notion about the Rest of the Earth, to evade the hard censure
and usage, which Galileo had lately met with. For my own part, as I do not
exclude this reason from being a grand occasion of Epicurus's owning a God; so
I believe that He and Democritus too were compelled to it likewise by the
necessity of their own Systems. For seeing they explained the Phenomenon of
Vision, Imagination, and Thought it self, by certain thin fleeces of Atoms,
that flow incessantly from the surfaces of Bodies, and by their subtilty and
fineness penetrate any obstacle, and yet retain the exact figures and
lineaments of the several bodies from which they proceed; and in this manner
insinuating themselves through the pores of Humane Bodies into the Contexture
of the Soul, do there excite Sensation and Perception of themselves: in
consequence of this Hypothesis they were obliged to maintain, that we could
have no Fancy, or Idea, or Conception of any thing, but what did really subsist
either entire or in its several parts. Whence it followed, that mankind could
have no imaginations of Jupiter or Mars, of Minerva or Isis; if there were not
actually such Beings in nature to emit those Effluvia, which gliding into the
Soul must beget such imaginations. And thence it was, that those Philosophers
adapted their description of the Deity to the vulgar apprehensions of those
times; Gods and Goddesses innumerable, and all of Humane figure: because
otherwise the conceptions of mankind about them could not possibly be accounted
for by their Physiology. So that if Epicurus and Democritus were in earnest
about their Philosophy, they did necessarily and really believe the Existence
of the Gods. But then as to the nature and authority of them; they bereaved
that Jupiter of his Thunder and Majesty: forbidding him to look or peep abroad,
so much as to enquire what News in the Infinite Space about him; but to content
himself and be happy with an eternal laziness and dozing, unless some rambling
Troops of Atoms upon the dissolution of a neighboring World might chance to
awake him. Now because no Israelite in the days of the Psalmist is likely to
have been so curious about natural Knowledge, as to believe the Being of God
for such a quaint and airy reason as this, when he had once boldly denied his
Dominion over the World; and since there is not now one Infidel living, so
ridiculous as to pretend to solve the Phenomenon of Sight, Fancy or Cogitation
by those fleeting superficial films of Bodies: I must beg leave to think, both
that the Fool in the Text was a thorough confirmed Atheist; and that the modern
disguised Deists do only call themselves so for the former reason of Epicurus,
to decline the public odium, and resentment of the Magistrate; and that they
cover the most arrant Atheism under the mask and shadow of a Deity: by which
they understand no more, than some eternal inanimate Matter, some universal
Nature, and Soul of the World, void of all sense and cogitation, so far from
being endowed with Infinite Wisdom and Goodness. And therefore in this present
Discourse they may deservedly come under that Character which the Text has
given of them, of Fools that have said in their Hearts, There is no God.

And now having thus far cleared our way; in the next place we shall offer some
notorious Proofs of the gross Folly and stupidity of Atheists.

If a Person that had a fair Estate in reversion, which in all probability he
would speedily be possessed of, and of which he might reasonably promise to
himself a long and happy Enjoyment, should be assured by some skillful
Physician; That in a very short time he would inevitably fall into a Disease,
which would so totally deprive him of his Understanding and Memory, that he
should lose the knowledge of all things without him, nay all consciousness and
sense of his own Person and Being: If, I say, upon a certain belief of this
indication, the man should appear overjoyed at the News, and be mightily
transported with the discovery and expectation; would not all that saw him be
astonished at such behavior? Would they not be forward to conclude, that the
Distemper had seized him already, and even then the miserable Creature was
become a mere Fool and an Idiot? Now the Carriage of our Atheists or Deists is
infinitely more amazing than this; no dotage so infatuate, no frenzy so
extravagant as theirs. They have been educated in a Religion, that instructed
them in the knowledge of a Supreme Being; a Spirit most excellently Glorious,
superlatively Powerful and Wise and Good, Creator of all things out of
nothing; That has endued the Sons of Men, his peculiar Favorites, with a
Rational Spirit, and has placed them as Spectators in this noble Theater of
the World, to view and applaud these glorious Scenes of Earth and Heaven, the
workmanship of his hands; That has furnished them in general with a sufficient
store of all things, either necessary or convenient for life; and particularly
to such as fear and obey him, has promised a supply of all wants, a
deliverance and protection from all dangers: That they that seek him, shall
want no manner of thing that is Psalm. 34. 9.
good. Who besides his munificence to them in this life; has so loved the
World, That he sent his Onelybegotten Joh. 3. 16.
Son, the express Image of his Substance, and Partaker of his eternal Nature
and Glory, to bring Life and Immortality to light, and to tender them 2 Timothy 1.
10.
to Mankind upon fair and gracious Terms; That if they submit to his easy
yoke, and light burden, Matt. 11. 30.
and observe his Commandments which are not grievous, he then gives them the
promise of eternal 1 John 5. 3.
Salvation; he has reserved for them in Heaven an Inheritance Heb. 5. 9. 1
Pet. 1. 4.
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away; he has prepared for
them an unspeakable, unconceivable Perfection of Joy and Bliss, things 1 Cor.
2. 9.
that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man. What a delightful and ravishing Hypothesis of Religion is this? And in
this Religion they have had their Education. Now let us suppose some great
Professor in Atheism to suggest to some of these men, That all this is mere
dream and imposture; that there is no such excellent Being, as they suppose,
that created and preserves them; that all about them is dark senseless Matter,
driven on by the blind impulses of Fatality and Fortune; that Men first sprung
up, like Mushroms, out of the mud and slime of the Earth; and that all their
Thoughts, and the whole of what they call Soul, are only various Action and
Repercussion of small particles of Matter, kept a while a moving by some
Mechanism and Clock-work, which finally must cease and perish by death. If it
be true then (as we daily find it is) that men listen with complacency to these
horrid Suggestions; if they let go their hope of Everlasting Life with
willingness and joy; if they entertain the thoughts of final Perdition with
exultation and triumph; ought they not to be esteemed most notorious Fools,
even destitute of (...), Max. Tyr. Diss. 1.
common sense, and abandoned to a callousness and numness of Soul?

What then, is Heaven it self, with its pleasures for evermore, to be parted
with so unconcernedly? Is 2 Timothy 4. 8. Jam. 1. 12.
a Crown of Righteousness, a Crown of Life, to be surrendered with laughter? is
an exceeding and eternal 2 Cor. 4. 17.
weight of Glory too light in the balance against the hopeless death of the
Atheist, and utter extinction? 'Twas a noble saying of the Emperor Marcus, That
he would not endure to live one day in the World, if he did not believe it to
be under the government of Providence. Let us but imagine that excellent Person
confuted and satisfied by some Epicurean of his time; that All was but Atoms,
and Vacuum, and Necessity, and Chance. Would He have been so pleased and
delighted with the conviction? would he have so triumphed in being overcome? or
rather, as he has told us, would he not have gone down with sorrow and despair
to the Grave? Did I but once see an Atheist lament and bewail himself; That
upon a strict and impartial examination he had found to his cost, that all was
a mistake; that the Prerogative of Humane Nature was vanished and gone; those
glorious hopes of Immortality and Bliss, nothing but cheating Joys and pleasant
Delusions; that he had undone himself by losing the comfortable Error, and
would give all the World to have better arguments for Religion: there would be
great hopes of prevailing upon such an Atheist as this. But, alas! there are
none of them of this temper of mind; there are none that understand and seek
after God; they have no v 2. (...) Psalm.
knowledge, nor any desire of it; they thrust the (...) 13. 46.
Word of God from them, and judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life; they
willingly prefer Darkness before Light; and obstinately choose to perish for
ever in the Grave, rather than be ^^irs of Salvation in the Resurrection of the
Just. These certainly are the Fools in the Text, indocil intractable Fools,
whose stolidity can baffle all Arguments, and be proof against Demonstration it
self; whose end (as the words of St. Paul do truly describe Phil. 3. 19.
them) whose end and very Hope is destruction, an eternal Deprivation of Being;
whose God is their belly, the gratification of sensual Lusts; whose Glory is in
their shame, in the debasing of Mankind to the condition of Beasts; who mind
earthly things, who if (like that great Apostle) they were caught up to the 2
Cor. 12. 2.
third Heaven, would (as the Spies did of Canaan) Number. 13. 32.
bring down an evil report of those Regions of Bliss. And I fear, unless it
please God by extraordinary methods to help their unbelief, and enlighten the
eyes of Mar. 9. 24. Ephesians. 1. 19.
their understanding; they will carry their Atheism with them to the Pit; and
the flames of Hell only must convince them of their Error.

This supine and inconsiderate behavior of the Atheists is so extremely
absurd, that it would be deemed incredible, if it did not occurr to our daily
Observation; it proclaims aloud, that they are not led astray by their
Reasoning, but led captive by their Lusts to the denial of God. When the very
pleasures of Paradise are contemned and trampled on, like Pearls cast before
Swine; there is small hope of reclaiming them by arguments of Reason. But
however, as Solomon advises, we will answer these Fools not according to their
Folly, lest we also be Prove. 26. 4.
like unto them. It is expedient that we put to silence the ignorance of these
foolish men, that Believers may be the more confirmed and more resolute in the
Faith.

Did Religion bestow Heaven without any terms or conditions indifferently upon
all; if the Crown of Life was hereditary, and free to Good and Bad; and not
settled by Covenant upon the Elect of God only, such as live soberly and
righteously and Tit. 2. 12.
godly in this present world: I believe there would be no such thing as an
Infidel among us. And without controversy it is the Way and Means of attaining
to Heaven, that makes profane Scorners so willingly let go the Expectation of
it. It Is not the Articles of the Creed, but the Duty to God and their
Neighbor, that is such an inconsistent incredible Legend. They will not
practice the Rules of Religion, and therefore they cannot believe the Promises
and Rewards of it.

But however, let us suppose them to have acted like rational and serious Men:
and perhaps upon a diligent inquisition they have found, that the Hope of
Immortality deserves to be joyfully quitted, and that either out of Interest,
or Necessity.

I. And first, One may conceive indeed, how there might possibly be a necessity
of quitting it. It might be tied to such Terms, as would render it impossible
ever to be obtained. For example, if it should be required of all the
Candidates of Glory and Immortality, to give a full and knowing Assent to such
things as are repugnant to Common Sense, as contradict the (...), the universal
Notions and indubitable Maxims of Reason; if they were to believe, that One and
the same Thing may be and not be at the same time and in the same respect; If
allowing the received Idea's and denominations of Numbers and Figures and Body,
they must seriously affirm, that Two and two do make a Dozen, or that the
Diameter of a Circle is as long as the Circumference, or that the same Body may
be all of it in distant places at once. I must confess that the offers of
Happiness upon such Articles of Belief as these, would be mere tantalizing of
Rational Creatures; and the Kingdom of Heaven would become the Inheritance of
only Idiots and Fools. For whilst a man of Common Capacity does think and
reflect upon such Propositions; he cannot possibly bribe his Understanding to
give a Verdict for their Truth. So that he would be quite frustrated of the
Hope of Reward, upon such unpracticable Conditions as these: neither could he
have any evidence of the Reality of the Promise, superior to what he is
conscious to of the Falsity of the Means. Now if any Atheist can show me in the
System of Christian Religion any such absurdities and repugnancies to our
natural Faculties; I will either evince them to be Interpolations and
Corruptions of the Faith, or yield my self a Captive and a Proselyte to his
Infidelity.

II. Or, 2dly, they may think it is the Interest of Mankind, that there should
be no Heaven at all; because the Labor to acquire it is more worth than the
Purchase: God Almighty (if there be one) having much overvalued the Blessings
of his Presence. So that upon a fair estimation, it is a greater advantage to
take one's swing in Sensuality, and have a glut of Voluptuousness in this Life,
freely resigning all pretenses to future Happiness; which, when a man is once
extinguished by Death, he cannot be supposed either to want or desire: than to
be tied up by Commandments and Rules so contrary to Flesh and Blood; to take up
one's Cross, to Mark. 8. 34.
deny himself, and refuse the Satisfaction of Natural Desires. This indeed is
the true Language of Atheism, and the Cause of it too. Were not this at the
Bottom, no man in his wits could contemn and ridicule the expectation of
Immortality. Now what power or influence can Religion have upon the minds of
these men; while not only their Affections and Lusts, but their supposed
Interest shall plead against it? But if we can once silence this powerful
Advocate, we shall without much difficulty carry the Cause at the Bar of
impartial Reason.

Now here is a notorious instance of the Folly of Atheists, that while they
repudiate all Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, merely for the present Pleasure
of Body, and their boasted Tranquillity of Mind; besides the extreme madness in
running such a desperate Hazard after Death, (which I will not now treat of)
they deprive themselves here of that very Pleasure and Tranquillity they seek
for. For I shall now endeavor to show, That Religion it self gives us the
greatest Delights and Advantages even in this life also, though there should
prove in the event to be no Resurrection to another. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Prove. 3. 17.


But before I begin that, I must occurr to one specious Objection both against
this Proposition and the past part of my Discourse; Namely, that Religion does
perpetually haunt and disquiet us with dismal apprehensions of everlasting
Burnings in Hell; and that there is no shelter or refuge from those Fears, but
behind the Principles of Atheism.

(1.) First therefore I will freely acknowledge to the Atheists; that some part
of what has been said is not directly conclusive against them; if they say,
that before they revolted from the Faith, they had sinned away all expectation
of ever arriving at Heaven: and consequently had good reason so joyfully to
receive the news of Annihilation by Death, as an advantageous change for the
everlasting torments of the Damned. But because I cannot expect, that they will
make such a shameless and senseless Confession, and supply us with that
invincible argument against themselves: I must say again, that to prefer final
Extinction before a happy Immortality does declare the most deplorable
stupidity of mind. Nay although they should confess, that they believed
themselves to be Reprobates, before they disbelieved Religion; and took Atheism
as a sanctuary and Refuge from the Terrors of Hell: yet still the imputation of
Folly will stick upon them: in as much as they chose Atheism as an Opiate to
still those frightning Apprehensions, by inducing a dullness and lethargy of
mind; rather than they would make use of that active and salutary medicine, a
hearty Repentance; that they did not know the Riches of the goodness and
forbearance and long-suffering Romans 2. 4.
of God, and that a sincere Amendment of Life was never too late nor in vain;
Jesus Christ being the 1 Timothy 4. 10. 1 John 5. 14. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Romans 5. 6, 10.
Savior of all men, and a propitiation for the sins of the whole world; who
came into the world to save sinners, even the chief of them all; and died for
the ungodly, and his bitterest enemies.

(2.) And secondly, As to the Fears of Damnation; those terrors are not to be
charged upon Religion it self, which proceed either from the Want of Religion,
or Superstitious mistakes about it. For as an honest and innocent Man does know
the punishments, which the Laws of his Country denounce against Felons and
Murderers and Traitors, without being terrified or concerned at them: So a
Christian in truth as well as in name, though he believe the consuming
Vengeance prepared for the disobedient and unbelievers, is not at all dismayed
at the apprehensions of it. Indeed it adds spurs, and gives wings to his
diligence, it excites him to work out his Salvation with fear and Phil. 2. 12.
trembling; a religious and ingenuous fear, that is tempered with hope and with
love and unspeakable joy. But he knows, that if he fears him who is able to
destroy both soul and body in Hell, he needs not fear Matt. 10. 28.
that his own soul or body shall ever go thither.

I allow that some debauched and profligate Wretches, or some designing
perfidious Hypocrites, that are religious in outward profession, but corrupt
and abominable in their works, are most justly as well as usually liable to
these horrors of mind. It Is not my business to defend or excuse such as these;
I must leave them, as long as they keep their hardness and impenitent Hearts,
to those gnawing and excruciating Fears, those whips of the Divine Nemesis,
that frequently scourge even Atheists themselves. For the Atheists also can
never wholly extinguish those horrible forebodings of Conscience. They
endeavor indeed to compose and charm their Fears, but a thousand occasions
daily awaken the sleeping Tormenters. Any flight Consideration either of
themselves, or of any thing without; whatsoever they think on, or whatsoever
they look on; all administer some reasons for suspicion and diffidence, lest
possibly they may be in the wrong; and then it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands Heb. 10. 31.
of the living God: There are they in great fear, as it is in the 5th verse of
this Psalm, under terrible presages of judgment and fiery indignation. Neither
Heb. 10* 27.
can they say, That these Terrors, like Tales about Specter, may disturb some
small Pretenders and puny Novices, but dare not approach the vere Adepti, the
Masters and Rabbis of Atheism. For it is well known both from ancient and
modern Cic. Plutarch, etc.
Experience, that the very boldest of them, out of their Debauches and Company,
when they chance to be surprised with Solitude or Sickness, are the most
suspicious and timorous and despondent Wretches in the World: and that the
boasted Happy Atheist in the Indolence of body, and an undisturbed Calm and
Serenity of mind, is altogether as rare a Creature, as the Vir Sapiens was
among the Stoics; whom they often met with in Idea and Description, in
Harangues and in Books, but freely owned that he never had or was like to exist
actually in Nature.

And now as to the present advantages which we owe to Religion, they are very
conspicuous; whether we consider Mankind, (1.) Separately, or (2.) under
Society and Government.

1. And first, in a Single Capacity. How is a good Christian animated and
cheered by a steadfast belief of the Promises of the Gospel; of an everlasting
enjoyment of perfect Felicity, such as after millions of millions of Ages is
still youthful and flourishing and inviting as at the first? no wrinkles in
the face, no gray hairs on the head of Eternity; no end, no diminution, no
satiety of those delights. What a warm and vigorous influence does a Religious
Heart feel from a firm expectation of these Glories? Certainly this Hope alone
is of inestimable value; it is a kind of anticipation and pledge of those Joys;
and at least gives him one Heaven upon Earth, though the other should prove a
Delusion. Now what are the mighty Promises of Atheism in competition with
these? let us know the glorious Recompenses it proposes: Utter Extinction and
Cessation of Being; to be reduced to the same condition, as if we never had
been born. O dismal reward of Infidelity! at which Nature does shrink and
shiver with horror. What some of the Vide Pocockii Notas ad Portam Mosis, p.
158, etc.
Learnedest Doctors among the Jews have esteemed the most dreadful of all
Punishment, and have assigned for the portion of the blackest Criminals of the
Damned; so interpreting Tophet, Abaddon, the Vale of Slaughter and the like,
for final Excision and Deprivation of Being: this Atheism exhibits to us, as an
Equivalent to Heaven. It Is well known, what has been disputed among Schoolmen
to this effect. And it is an observation of Plutarch, that Plutarch. (...), etc.
p. 1104, 1105. Ed. Ruald.
the Generality of Mankind, (...), as well Women as Men, chose rather to endure
all the Punishments of Hell, as described by the Poets; than part with the Hope
of Immortality, though immortal only in misery. I easily grant, that this would
be a very hard Bargain; and that Not to be at all, is more eligible, than to be
miserable always: our Savior himself having determined the question; Woe to
Mar. 14. 2*
that man, by whom the Son of Man is betrayed; good were it for that man, if he
had never been born. But however thus much it evidently shows, That this desire
of Immortality is a natural Affection of the Soul; it is Self-preservation in
the highest and truest meaning; it is interwoven in the very Frame and
Constitution of Man. How then can the Atheist reflect on his own Hypothesis
without extreme sorrow and dejection of Spirit? Will he say, that when once he
is dead, this Desire will be nothing; and that He that is not, cannot lament
his Annihilation? So indeed it would be hereafter, according to his Principles.
But nevertheless, for the present, while he continues in Life (which we now
speak of) that dusky Scene of Horror, that melancholy Prospect of final
Perdition will frequently occur to his Fancy; the sweetest Enjoyments of Life
will often become flat and insipid, will be damped and extinguished, be
bitter'd and poisoned by the malignant and venomous quality of this Opinion.

Is it not more comfortable to a man, to think well of himself, to have a high
Value and Conceit of the Dignity of his Nature, to believe a noble Origination
of his Race, the Offspring and Image of the great King of Glory: rather than
that men first proceeded, as Vermin are thought to do, by the sole influence of
the Sun out of Dirt and Putrefaction?

Is it not a firmer foundation for Contentment and Tranquillity, to believe
that All things were at first created, and are since continually ordered and
disposed for the best, and that principally for the Benefit and Pleasure of
Man: than that the whole Universe is mere bungling and blundring; no Art or
Contrivance to be seen in it; nothing effected for any purpose and design; but
all ill-favouredly cobled and jumbled together by the unguided agitation and
rude shuffles of Matter?

Can any man wish a better Support under affliction, than the Friendship and
Favor of Omnipotence, of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness; that is both able, and
willing and knows how to relieve him? Such a man can do all things through
Christ that Phil. 4. 13.
strengthens him, he can patiently suffer all things with cheerful
submission and resignation to the Divine Will. He has a secret Spring of
spiritual Joy, and the continual Feast of a good Conscience within, that forbid
him to be miserable. But what a forlorn destitute Creature is the Atheist in
Distress? He has no friend in Extremity, but Poison or a Dagger or a Halter or
a Precipice. A violent Death is the last refuge of the Epicureans, as well as
the Stoics. This, says Lucretius, is the distinguishing Lib. 3.
Character of a genuine Son of our Sect, that he will not endure to live in
Exile and Want and Disgrace out of a vain fear of Death; but dispatch himself
resolutely into the State of eternal Sleep and Insensibility. And yet for all
this swaggering, not one of a hundred of them has boldness enough to follow
the Direction. The base and degenerous Saying of one of them is very well
known; Mecaenas apud Senec. Ep. 101. Debilem facito* Manu; debilem pede, coxa:
etc
That Life is always sweet, and he should still desire to prolong it; though,
after he had been maimed and distorted by the Rack, he should lastly be
condemned to hang on a Gibbet.

And then, as to the Practical Rules and Duties of Religion: as the Miracles of
our Lord are peculiarly eminent above the Lying Wonders of Demons, in that
they were not made out of vain Ostentation of Power, and to raise unprofitable
Amazement; but for the real Benefit and Advantage of men, by feeding the
Hungry, healing all sorts of Diseases, ejecting of Devils, and reviving the
Dead: so likewise the Commands which he has imposed on his Followers are not
like the absurd Ceremonies of Pagan Idolatry, the frivolous Rites of their
Initiations and Worship, that might look like Incantation and Magic, but had
no tendency in their Nature to make Mankind the happier. Our Savior has
enjoined us a Reasonable service; accommodated to the rational Romans 12. 1.
part of our nature. All his Laws are in themselves, abstracted from any
Consideration of Recompense, conducing to the Temporal Interest of them that
observe them. For what can be more availing to a man's Health, or his Credit, or
Estate, or Security in this World, than Charity and Meekness, than Sobriety and
Temperance, than Honesty and Diligence in his Calling? Do not Pride and
Arrogance infallibly meet with Contempt? Do not Contentiousness and Cruelty and
Study of Revenge seldom fail of Retaliation? Are not envious and covetous,
discontented and anxious minds tormenters to themselves? Do not we see, that
slothful and intemperate and incontinent persons destroy their Bodies with
diseases, their Reputations with disgrace, and their Families with want? Are
Adultery and Fornication forbidden only by Moses and Christ? or do not Heathen
Lawgivers punish such Enormities with Fines, or Imprisonment, with Exile or
Death? 'Twas an Objection of Julian the Julianus apud Cyrillum, p. 134.
Apostate; that there were no new Precepts of Morality in our Religion: Thou
shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife.
Why all the World, says he, is agreed about these Commandments: and in every
Country under Heaven, there are Laws and Penalties made to enforce all the Ten,
excepting only the Sabbath and the Worship of strange Gods. We can answer Him
another way; but he may make our Infidels ashamed to complain of those
Ordinances as hard Impositions, which the sense of all Nations has thought to
be reasonable: which not only the Philosophers of Greece and Italy and the
ancient World; but the Banians of Mogul, the Talapoins of Siam, the Mandarins
of China, the Moralists of Peru and Mexico, all the Wisdom of Mankind have
declared to be necessary Duties. Nay if the Atheists would but live up to the
Ethics of Epicurus himself, they would make few or no Proselytes from the
Christian Religion. For none revolt from the Faith for such things as are
thought peculiar to Christianity; Not because they must love and pray for their
enemies, but because they must not poison or stab Matt. 5. 44.
them: not because they must not look upon a Woman to lust after her, but
because they are much more restrained ver. 28.
from committing the Act. If wanton glances and lascivious thoughts had been
permitted by the Gospel, and only the gross Act forbidden; they would have
apostatized nevertheless. This we may conjecture from what Plato and others
have Plato de Legib. lib. 10. p. 886. Ed. Steph.
told us, that it was commonly (...), immoderate Affections and Lusts, that in
the very times of Paganism induced men to be Atheists. It seems their impure
and brutal Sensuality was too much confined by the Religion of those Countries,
where even Venus and Bacchus had their Temples. Let not therefore voluptuous
Atheists lay all the fault of their Sins upon the Infirmity of Humane Nature;
nor plead that Flesh and Blood cannot resist those Temptations, which have all
their force and prevalence from long Custom and inveterated Habit. What
enticement, what pleasure is there in common profane Swearing? yet neither the
fear of God nor of the Law will persuade men to leave it. It Is prevailing
Example that has now made it fashionable, but it has not always been so, nor
will be hereafter. So other Epidemical Vices, they are rife and predominant
only for a season, and must not be ascribed to Humane Nature in the Lump. In
some Countries Intemperance is a necessary part of Conversation; in others
Sobriety is a Virtue universal, without any respect to the Duties of Religion.
Nor can they say, that this is only the difference of Climate, that inclines
one Nation to Concupiscence and Sensual Pleasures; another to Blood-thirstiness
and Desire of Revenge. It would discover great ignorance in History, not to
know that in all Climates a whole People has been overrun with some recently
invented or newly imported kind of Vice, which their Grandfathers never knew.
In the latest Accounts of the Country of Guiana, we are told that the eating of
Humane Flesh is the beloved pleasure of those Savages: two Nations of them by
mutual devouring are reduced to two handfulls of men. When the Gospel of our
Savior was preached to them, they received it with gladness of heart; they
could be brought to forgo Plurality of Wives; though that be the main
impediment to the conversion of the East Indies. But the great Stumblingblock
with these Americans, and the only Rock of Offense was the forbidding them to
eat their Enemies: That irresistible Temptation made them quickly to revolt and
relapse into their Infidelity. What must we impute this to? to the temperature
of the Air, to the nature of the Soil, to the influence of the Stars? Are these
Barbarians of man-eating Constitutions, that they so hanker after this inhumane
Diet, which We cannot imagine without horror? Is not the same thing practiced in
other parts of that Continent? Was it not so in Europe of old, and is it not
now so in Africa? If an Eleventh Commandment had been given, Thou shall not eat
Humane Flesh; would not these Canibals have esteemed it more difficult than all
the Ten? And would not they have really had as much reason as our Atheists, to
plead the power of the Temptation, and the propensity of Flesh and Blood? How
impudent then are the Atheists, that traduce the easy and gracious Conditions
of the Gospel, as Unreasonable and Tyrannical Impositions? Are not God's ways
equal, O ye Children of Destruction, and are not your ways unequal?

II. Secondly and lastly, For the good Influence of Religion upon Communities
and Governments, habemus confitentes reos; it is so apparent and unquestionable,
that it is one of the Objections of the Atheist, That it was first contrived and
introduced by Politicians, to bring the wild and straggling Herds of Mankind
under Subjection and Laws. Out of thy own mouth shall thou be judged, thou
wicked Luke 19. 22.
servant. Thou say that the wise Institutors of Government, Souls elevated
above the ordinary pitch of men, thought Religion necessary to Civil Obedience.
Why then do thou endeavor to undermine this Foundation, to undo this Cement
of Society, and to reduce all once again to thy imaginary State of Nature, and
Original Confusion? No Community ever was or can be begun or maintained, but
upon the Basis of Religion. What Government can be imagined without Judicial
Proceedings? and what methods of Judicature without a Religious Oath? which
implies and supposes an Omniscient Being, as conscious to its falsehood or
truth, and a revenger of Perjury. So that the very nature of an Oath (and
therefore of Society also) is subverted by the Atheist; who professes to
acknowledge nothing superior to himself, no omnipresent observer of the
actions of men. For an Hobbes de Cive, Leviathan.
Atheist to compose a System of Politics is as absurd and ridiculous, as
Epicurus's Sermons were about (...), Laert. De sanctitate and de pietate
adversus Deos. Cic.
Sanctity and Religious Worship. But there was hope, that the Doctrine of
absolute uncontrollable Power and the formidable name of Leviathan might
flatter and bribe the Government into a toleration of Infidelity. We need have
no recourse to notion and supposition; we have sad experience and convincing
example before us, what a rare Constitution of Government may be had in a whole
Nation of Atheists. The Natives of Newfoundland De Laert. p. 34, 47, 50. Voyage
du Sieur de Champlain. p. 28. and 93.
and New France in America, as they are said to live without any sense of
Religion, so they are known to be destitute of its advantages and blessings;
without any Law or form of Community; without any Literature or Sciences or
Arts; no Towns, no fixed Habitations, no Agriculture, no Navigation. And it is
entirely owing to the power of Religion, that the whole World is not at this
time as barbarous as they. And yet I ought not to have called these miserable
Wretches a Nation of Atheists. They cannot be said to be of the Atheist's
opinion; because they have no opinion at all in the matter: They do not say in
their hearts, There is no God; for they never once deliberated, if there was
one or no. They no more deny the Existence of a Deity; than they deny the
Antipodes, the Copernican System, or the Satellites Iovis: about which they
have had no notion or conception at all. It Is the Ignorance of those poor
Creatures, and not their Impiety: their Ignorance as much to be pitied, as the
Impiety of the Atheists to be detested and punished. It Is of mighty importance
to the Government to put some timely stop to the spreading Contagion of this
Pestilence that walks by day, that dares to disperse its cursed seeds and
principles in the face of the Sun. The Fool in the Text had only said in his
heart, There is no God: he had not spoken it aloud, nor openly blasphemed, in
places of public resort. There Is too much reason to fear, that some of all
orders of men, even Magistracy it self, have taken the Infection: a thing of
dreadful consequence and most imminent danger. Epicurus was somewhat wiser
Plutarch. (...). Lucret. etc.
than ordinary, when he so earnestly advised his Disciples against meddling in
public affairs: He knew the nature and tendency of his own Philosophy; that it
would soon become suspected and odious to a Government, if ever Atheists were
employed in places of Trust. But because he had made one great Rule superior to
all, That every man's only Good was pleasure of Body and contentment of Mind:
hence it was that men of ambitious and turbulent Spirits, that were
dissatisfied and uneasy with Privacy and Retirement, were allowed by his own
Principle to engage in matters of State. And there they generally met with that
fortune, which their Master foresaw. Several Cities of Greece that had
Plutarch. (...). Cicero, Athenaeus, Ae^ian, etc.
made experiment of them in Public Concerns, drove them out, as Incendiaries
and Pests of Commonweals, by severe Edicts and Proclamations. Atheism is by no
means tolerable in the most private condition: but if it aspire to authority
and power; if it acquire the Command of an Army or a Navy; if it get upon the
Bench or into the Senate, or on a Throne: What then can be expected, but the
basest Cowardice and Treachery, but the foulest prevarication in Justice, but
betraying and selling the Rights and Liberties of a People, but arbitrary
Government and tyrannical Oppression? Nay if Atheism were once, as I may say,
the National Religion: it would make its own Followers the most miserable of
men; it would be the Kingdom of Satan divided against it self; and the Land
would be soon brought to desolation. Josephus, that knew Josephus de Bello
Iudaico, l. 2. ^. 12.
them, has informed us, that the Sadduces, those Epicureans among the Jews,
were not only rough and cruel to men of a different Sect from their own; but
perfidious and inhumane one toward another. This is the genuine spirit and the
natural product of Atheism. No man, that adheres to that narrow and selfish
Principle, can ever be Just or Generous or Grateful; Si sibi ipse consentiat,
and non interdum naturae bonitate vincatur. Cic. de Offic. 1. 2.
unless he be sometime overcome by Goodnature and a happy Constitution. No
Atheist, as such, can be a true Friend, an affectionate Relation, or a loyal
Subject. The appearance and show of mutual Amity among them, is wholly owing to
the smallness of their number, and to the obligations of a Faction. It Is like
the Friendship of Pickpockets and Highwaymen, that are said to observe strict
Justice among themselves, and never to defraud a Comrade of his share of the
Booty. But if we could imagine a whole Nation to be Cut-purses and Robbers;
would there then be kept that square-dealing and equity in such a monstrous den
of Thieves? And if Atheism should be supposed to become universal in this
Nation (which seems to be designed and endeavored, though we know the gates of
Hell shall not be able to prevail) farewell all Ties of Friendship and
Principles of Honor; all Love for our Country and Loyalty to our Prince; nay,
farewell all Government and Society it self, all Professions and Arts, and
Conveniences of Life, all that is laudable or valuable in the World.

May the Father of Mercies and God of Infinite Wisdom reduce the Foolish from
their Errors, and make them wise unto Salvation; Confirm the Skeptical and
wavering Minds, and so prevent Us, that stand fast, in all our doings, and
further us with his continual help, that we may not be of them that draw back
unto Perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul.
Amen.
Matter and Motion cannot think: OR, A CONFUTATION OF ATHEISM From the
Faculties of the Soul.
The Second SERMON preached April 4. 1692.
Acts XVII. 27. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel
after him, and find him; though he be not far from every one of us: for* in him
we Live, and Move, and have our Being.
THese words are a part of that Discourse which St. Paul had at Athens. He had
not been long in that inquisitive and pragmatical City, but we find him
encountered by the Epicureans Acts 17. 18.
and Stoics, two sorts of people that were very ill qualified for the
Christian Faith: the one by reason of their Carnal Affections, either believing
no God at all, or that he was like unto themselves, dissolved in (...).
Laziness and Ease; the other out of Spiritual Pride presuming to assert, that
Arriani Epictet. l. 1. C. 12. (...). Seneca Ep. 53. Est aliquid qu^ sapiens
antecedat Deum: ille naturae beneficio, non suo sapiens est.
a Wise Man of their Sect was equal, and in some cases superior to the Majesty
of God himself. These men corrupted through Philosophy and vain deceit, took
our Apostle, and carried him unto Areopagus, v. 19.
(a place in the City, whither was the greatest resort of Travelers and
Strangers, of the gravest Citizens and Magistrates, of their Orators and
Philosophers;) to give an account of himself and the new Doctrine that he spoke
of. For, say they, thou v. 20.
bring strange things to our ears; we would know therefore what these things
mean. The Apostle, who was to speak to such a promiscuous Assembly, has with
most admirable Prudence and Art, so accommodated his Discourse, that every
branch and member of it is directly opposed to a known Error and Prejudice of
some Party of his Hearers. I will beg leave to be the more prolix in explaining
the whole; because it will be a ground and introduction not only to this
present, but some other subsequent Discourses.

From the Inscription of an Altar to the Unknown God, which is mentioned by
Heathen Authors, Lucian, Philostratus, and others, he takes occasion Lucianus
in Philopat. Philostrat. de vita Apol. l. 6. c. 2. Pausan. in Eliacis.
(V. 24.) to declare unto them, that God that made the World and all things
therein. This first Doctrine, though admitted by many of his Auditors, is
directly both against Epicureans, that ascribed the Origin and Frame of the
World not to the Power of God, but the fortuitous concourse of Atoms; and
Peripatetics, that supposed all things to have been eternally, as they now are,
and never to have been made at all, either by the Deity or without him. Which
God, says he, seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and V. 25.
Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with
men's hands as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all Life and
Breath and all things. This is opposed to the Civil and Vulgar Religion of
Athens, which furnished and served the Deity with Temples and Sacrifices, as if
he had really needed Habitation and Sustenance. And that the common Heathens
had such mean apprehensions about the Indigency of their Gods, it appears
plainly, to name no more, from Aristophanes's Plutus, and the Dialogues of
Lucian. But the Philosophers were not concerned in this point; all Parties and
Sects, even the Lucret. 2. Ipsa suis pollens opibus* nihil i^^^ga no^^^^.
Epicureans themselves, did maintain ((...)) the self-sufficiency of the
Godhead: and seldom or never sacrificed at all, unless in compliance and
condescension to the custom of their Country. There Is a very remarkable Tertul.
Apolog. cap. 46. Quis enim Philosophum sacrificare compellit? Quinimmo and deos
vestros palam destruunt, and superstitiones vestras commentariis quoque
accusant.
passage in Tertullian's Apology, Who forces a Philosopher to sacrifice, etc.?
It appears from thence, that the Philosophers, no less than the Christians,
neglected the Pagan Worship and Sacrifices; though what was connived at in the
one, was made highly penal and capital in the other. And has made of one V. 26.
blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the Earth; and has
determined the times before appointed, and the bound of their habitation. This
Doctrine about the beginning of Humane Race, though agreeable enough to the
Platonists and Stoics, is apparently levelled against the Epicureans and
Aristotelians: one of whom produced their Primitive Men from mere Accident or
Mechanism; the other denied that Man had any beginning at all, but had
eternally continued thus by Succession and Propagation. Neither were the
Commonalty of Athens unconcerned in this point. For although, as we learn from
Isocrates. in Paneg. Demosth. in Epitaph. Cic Or. pro Flacco. Euripides. etc.
Isocrates, Demosthenes and others of their Countrymen, they professed
themselves to be (...) Aborigines, not transplanted by Colonies or otherwise
from any Foreign Nation, but born out of their own Soil in Attica, and had the
same Earth for their Parent, their Nurse and their Country; and though some
perhaps might believe, that all the Diog. Laert. in Praef.
rest of Mankind were derived from Them, and so might apply and interpret the
Words of the Apostle to this foolish Tradition: yet that conceit of deriving
the whole Race of Men from the Aborigines of Attica was entertained but by a
few; for they generally allowed that the Egyptians and Sicilians, and Thucyd.
lib. 6. Herodot. etc.
some others were Aborigines also, as well as themselves. Then follow the words
of the Text, That v. 27, 28.
they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find him;
though he be not far from every one of us. For in him we Live, and Move, and
have our Being. And this he confirms by the Authority of a Writer that lived
above 300 years before; As certain also of your own Poets have said, For we are
also his Offspring. This indeed was no Argument to the Epicurean Auditors; who
undervalued all Argument Plutarch. de And. Poet. and contra Colot.
from Authority, and especially from the Poets. Their Master Epicurus had
boasted, that in all his Writings he had not cited one single Authority out
Laert. in vita Epicuri.
of any Book whatsoever. And the Poets they particularly hated; because on all
occasions they introduced the Ministry of the Gods, and taught the separate
Existence of humane Souls. But it was of great weight and moment to the Common
People; who held the Poets in mighty esteem and veneration, and used them as
their Masters of Morality and Religion. And the other Sects too of Philosophers
did frequently adorn and confirm their Discourses by Citations out of Poets.
For as much then as we v. 29.
are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto
Gold or Silver, or Stone graven by art or man's device. This is directly
levelled against the gross Idolatry of the Vulgar, (for the Philosophers are
not concerned in it) that believed the very Statues of Gold and Silver and
other Materials, to be God, and terminated their Prayers in those Images; as I
might show from many passages of Scripture, from the Apologies of the Primitive
Christians, and the Heathen Writers themselves. And v. 30, 31.
the times of this ignorance God winked at, (the meaning of which is, as upon a
like occasion the same Apostle has expressed it, that in times past he
suffered Act. 14. 16.
all Nations to walk in their own ways) but now commands every one to repent;
Because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. Hitherto the
Apostle had never contradicted all his Audience at once: though at every part
of his Discourse some of them might be uneasy, yet others were of his side,
and all along a moderate silence and attention was observed, because every
Point was agreeable to the notions of the greater Party. But when they heard of
the Resurrection of the Dead, the interruption and clamor became universal: so
that here the Apostle was obliged to break off, and depart from among them.
What could v. 33.
be the reason of this general dissent from the notion of the Resurrection,
since almost all of them believed the Immortality of the Soul? St. Chrysostom
has a conceit, that the Athenians took (...) (the original word for
Resurrection) to be preached to them as a Goddess, and in this fancy he is
followed by some of the Moderns. The ground of the conjecture is the 18th verse
of this Chapter, where some said, What will this Babbler say? other some, He
seems to be a setter forth of strange Gods ((...), strange Deities, which
comprehends both Sexes) because he preached unto them, (...), Jesus and the
Resurrection. Now, say they, it could not be said Deities in the plural number,
unless it be supposed that (...) is a Goddess, as well as Jesus a God. But we
know, such a permutation of Number is frequent in all Languages. We have
another example of it in the very Text, As certain v. 28. Arati Phoen. v. 5.
(...)
also of your own Poets have said, For we are also his Offspring. And yet the
Apostle meant only one, Aratus the Cilician, his Countryman, in whose
Astronomical Poem this passage is now extant. So that although he preached to
the Athenians Jesus alone, yet by a common mode of speech he might be called, a
setter forth of strange Gods. It Is my opinion, that the general distaste and
clamor proceeded from a mistake about the nature of the Christian
Resurrection. The word Resurrection ((...) and (...)) was well enough known
amongst the Athenians, as appears at this time from Hom. Il. w. 551. (...),
etc. Aesch. Eumen. 655. (...) Soph. Electra, 136. (...).
Homer, Aeschylus and Sophocles; they could hardly then possibly imagine it to
signify a Goddess. But then it always denoted a returning from the State of
the Dead to this present World, to eat and drink and converse upon Earth, and
so after another period of Life to die again as before. And Festus a Roman
seems to have had the same apprehensions about it. For when he declares the
case of St. Paul his Prisoner to King Agrippa, he tells him, That the
Accusation was only about certain questions of the Jewish Superstition; and of
one Jesus which was Acts 25. 19.
dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. So that when the Athenians heard him
mention the Resurrection of the Dead, which according to their acceptance of
the word was a contradiction to common Sense, and to the Experience of all
Places and Ages; they had no patience to give any longer attention. His words
seemed to them as idle tales, as the first news of Luke 24. 11.
our Savior's Resurrection did to the Apostles themselves. All interrupted and
mocked him, except a few, that seem to have understood him aright, which said
they would hear him again of this matter. Just as when our Savior said in an
Allegorical and Mystical sense, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, John
6. 53.
and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you; the Hearers understood him
literally and grossly. The Jews v. 60.
therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us his Flesh
to eat? this is a hard saying, who can hear it? And from that time many of his
Disciples v. 66.
went back, and walked no more with him.

I have now gone through this excellent Discourse of the Apostle, in which many
most important Truths are clearly and succinctly delivered; such as the
Existence, the Spirituality, and All*sufficiency of God, the Creation of the
World, the Origination of Mankind from one common stock according to the
History of Moses, the Divine Providence in overruling all Nations and People,
the new Doctrine of Repentance by the preaching of the Gospel, the Resurrection
of the Dead, and the appointed Day of an universal Judgment. To all which
particulars by God's Permission and Assistance I shall say something in due
time. But at present I have confined my self to that near and internal and
convincing Argument of the Being of God, which we have from Humane Nature it
self; and which appears to be principally here recommended by St. Paul in the
words of the Text, That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel
after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us. For in him
(that is, by his power) we live, and move, and have our being.

The Proposition, which I shall speak to, from this Text is this: That the very
Life and Vital Motion and the Formal Essence and Nature of Man is wholly owing
to the power of God: and that the consideration of our Selves, of our own Souls
and Bodies, does directly and nearly conduct us to the acknowledgment of his
Existence. And,

1. I shall prove, That there is an immaterial Substance in us, which we call
Soul and Spirit, essentially distinct from our Bodies: and that this Spirit
does necessarily evince the Existence of a Supreme and Spiritual Being. And,

2. That the Organical Structure of Humane Bodies, whereby they are fitted to
live and move and be vitally informed by the Soul, is unquestionably the
workmanship of a most wise and powerful and beneficent Maker. But I will
reserve this latter part for the next opportunity; and my present undertaking
shall be this, To evince the Being of God from the consideration of Humane
Souls.

(1.) And first, I say, there is an immaterial Substance in us, which we call
Soul, essentially distinct from our Bodies. I shall lay it down as selfevident,
That there is something in our Composition, that thinks and apprehends, and
reflects and deliberates; that determines and doubts, consents and denies; that
wills, and demurrs, and resolves, and chooses, and rejects; that receives
various sensations and impressions from external objects, and produces
voluntary motions of several parts of our Bodies. This every man is conscious
of; neither can any one be so Skeptical as to doubt of or deny it: that very
doubting or denying being part of what I would suppose, and including several
of the rest in their Idea's and Notions. And in the next place it is as
self-evident, that these Faculties and Operations of Thinking, and Willing, and
Perceiving, must proceed from something or other as their efficient Cause: mere
Nothing being never able to produce any thing at all. So that if these powers
of Cogitation, and Volition, and Sensation, are neither inherent in Matter as
such, nor producible in Matter by any motion and modification of it; it
necessarily follows, that they proceed from some cogitative Substance, some
incorporeal Inhabitant within us, which we call Spirit and Soul.

(1.) But first, these Faculties of Sensation and Perception are not inherent
in Matter as such. For if it were so; what monstrous absurdities would follow?
Every Stock and Stone would be a percipient and rational Creature. We should
have as much feeling upon clipping a Hair of the Head, as upon pricking a
Nerve. Or rather, as Men, that is, as a complex Being compounded of many vital
parts, we should have no feeling nor perception at all. For every single Atom
of our Bodies would be a distinct Animal, endued with self-consciousness and
personal Sensation of its own. And a great number of such living and thinking
Particles could not possibly by their mutual contract and pressing and striking
compose one greater individual Animal, with one Mind and Understanding, and a
vital Consension of the whole Body: any more than a swarm of Bees, or a crowd
of Men and Women can be conceived to make up one particular Living Creature
compounded and constituted of the aggregate of them all.

(2.) It remains therefore, secondly, that seeing Matter in general, as Matter,
has not any Sensation or Thought; if it have them at all, they must be the
result of some Modification of it: it must acquire them by some Organical
Disposition; by such and such determinate Motions, by the action and passion of
one Particle upon another. And this is the Opinion of every Atheist and
counterfeit Deist of these times, that believes there is no Substance but
Matter, and excludes all incorporeal Nature out of the number of Beings.

Now to give a clear and full confutation of this Atheistical Assertion, I will
proceed in this method.

1. First I will give a true Notion and Idea of Matter; whereby it will again
appear that it has no inherent Faculty of Sense and Perception. 2. I will
prove, that no particular sort of Matter, as the Brain and Animal Spirits, has
any power of Sense and Perception. 3. I will show, that Motion in general
superadded to Matter cannot produce any Sense and Perception. 4. I will
demonstrate, that no particular sort of Motion, as of the Animal Spirits
through Muscles and Nerves, can beget Sense and Perception. 5. I will evince,
that no Action and Passion of the Animal Spirits, one Particle upon another,
can create any Sense and Perception. 6. I will answer the Atheist's Argument of
matter of Fact and Experience in brute Beasts; which, say they, are allowed to
be mere Matter, and yet have some degree of Sense and Perception.
And first I will give a true Notion and Idea of Matter; whereby it will appear
that it has no inherent Faculty of Sense and Perception. And I will offer no
other, but what all competent Judges, and even Atheists themselves do allow of;
and which being part of the Epicurean and Democritean Philosophy is
providentially one of the best Antidotes against their other impious Opinions:
as the Oil of Scorpions is said to be against the poison of their Stings. When
we frame in our minds any notion of Matter, we conceive nothing else but
Extension and Bulk; which is impenetrable and divisible and passive; by which
three properties is understood, that any particular quantity of Matter does
hinder all other from intruding into its place, till it self be removed out of
it; that it may be divided and broken into numerous parts of different sizes
and figures, which by various ranging and disposing may produce an immense
diversity of Surfaces and Textures; that if it once be bereaved of Motion, it
cannot of it self acquire it again, but it either must be impelled by some
other Body from without, or, (say we, though not the Atheist) be intrinsecally
moved by an immaterial self-active Substance, that can penetrate and pervade
it. Wherefore in the whole Nature and Idea of Matter, we have nothing but
Substance with Magnitude, and Figure, and Situation, and a capacity of being
moved and divided. So that no parts of Matter considered by themselves, are
either hot or cold, either white or black, either bitter or sweet, or betwixt
those extremes. All the various Mixtures and Conjugations of Atoms do beget
nothing but new inward Texture, and alteration of Surface. No sensible
Qualities, as Light, and Color, and Heat, and Sound, can be subsistent in the
Bodies themselves absolutely considered, without a relation to our Eyes, and
Ears, and other Organs of Sense. These Qualities are only the effects of our
Sensation, which arise from the different motions upon our Nerves from objects
without, according to their various modification and position. For example,
when pellucid colorless Glass, or Water, by being beaten into powder or froth,
do acquire a very intense whiteness; what can we imagine to be produced in the
Glass or Water, but a new disposition of parts? Nay an object under the
self-same disposition and modification, when it is viewed by us under differing
proportions, does represent very differing colors, without any change at all
in it self. For that same opake and white Powder of Glass, when it is seen through
a good Microscope, does exhibit all its little fragments pellucid and
colorless; as the whole appeared to the naked eye, before it was pounded. So
that Whiteness, and Redness, and Coldness, and the like, are only Idea's and
Vital Passions in Us that see and feel: but can no more be conceived to be real
and distinct Qualities in the Bodies themselves; than Roses or Honey can be
thought to smell or taste their own Sweetness, or an Organ be conscious of its
Music, or Gunpowder of its Flashing and Noise.

Thus far then we have proved, and it is agreed on all hands, that in our
conception of any quantity of Body, there is nothing but Figure and Site, and a
Capacity of Motion. Which Motion, if it be actually excited in it, does only
cause a new Order and Contexture of parts: so that all the Idea's of sensible
Qualities are not inherent in the inanimate Bodies; but are the effects of
their Motion upon our Nerves: and sympathetical and vital Passions produced
within our selves.

2. Our second enquiry must be; what it is in the constitution and composition
of a Man that has the Faculty of receiving such Idea's and Passions. Let us
carry in our minds this true notion of Body in general, and apply it to our own
Substance; and observe what prerogatives this Rational Machin (as the Atheists
would make us to be) can challenge above other parcels of Matter. We observe
then in this understanding piece of Clockwork; that his Body, as well as other
senseless Matter, has color, and warmth, and softness, and the like. But we
have proved it before, and it is acknowledged; that these Qualities are not
subsistent in those Bodies, but are Idea's and Sensations begotten in something
else. So that it is not Blood and Bones, that can be conscious of their own
hardness or redness: and we are still to seek for something else in our Frame
and Make, that must receive these impressions. Will they say that these Idea's
are performed by the Brain? But the difficulty returns upon them again: for we
perceive that the like qualities of softness, whiteness and warmth, do belong
to the Brain it self; and since the Brain is but Body, those Qualities (as we
have shown) cannot be inherent in It, but are the Sensations of some other
Substance without it. It cannot be the Brain then, which imagins those
qualities to be in it self.

But they may say, it is not the Gross Substance of the Brain that causes
Perception; but the Animal Spirits, that have their residence there; which are
void of sensible qualities, because they never fall under our Senses by reason
of their minuteness. But we conceive, by our Reason, though we cannot see them
with our Eyes, that every one of these also has a determinate figure: they are
Spheres, or Cubes, or Pyramids, or Cones, or of some shape or other that is
irregular and nameless; and all these are but Modes and Affections of
Magnitude; and the Idea's of such Modes can no more be subsistent in the Atoms
so modified, than the Idea of Redness was just now found to be inherent in the
Blood, or that of Whiteness in the Brain. And what relation or affinity is
there between a minute Body and Cogitation, any more than the greatest? Is a
small drop of Rain any wiser than the Ocean? or do we grind inanimate Corn into
living and rational Meal? my very Nails, or my Hair, or the Horns and Hoofs of
a Beast may bid as fair for Understanding and Sense, as the finest Animal
Spirits of the Brain.

3. But Thirdly, they will say, it is not the Bulk and Substance of the Animal
Spirits, but their Motion and Agility, that produces Cogitation and Sense. If
then Motion in general or any degree of its velocity can beget Cogitation;
surely a Ship under sail must be a most intelligent Creature; though while she
lies at Anchor, those Faculties be asleep: some cold Water or Ice may be
phlegmatic and senseless; but when it boils in a Kettle, it has wonderful
Heats of Thinking and Ebullitions of Fancy. Nay the whole corporeal Mass, all
the brute and stupid Matter of the Universe must upon these terms be allowed to
have Life and Understanding: since there is nothing that we know of, in a state
of absolute Rest. Those things that seem to be at rest upon the surface of the
Earth, are daily wheeled about its Axis, and yearly about the Sun with a
prodigious swiftness.

4. But Fourthly, they will say, it is not Motion in general, that can do these
feats of Sensation and Perception; but a particular sort of it in an Organized
Body through the determinate Roads and Channels of Muscles and Nerves. But, I
pray, among all the kinds of Motion, whether straight or circular, or
parabolical, or in what curve they please; what pretense can one make to
Thinking and Liberty of Will, more than another? Why do not these persons make
a Diagram of these cogitative Lines and Angles; and demonstrate their
Properties of Perception and Appetite, as plainly as we know the other
properties of Triangles and Circles? But how little can any Motion, either
circular or other, contribute to the production of Thought? No such circular
Motion of an Atom can be all of it existent at once; it must needs be made
gradually and successively both as to place and time: for Body cannot at the
same instant be in more places than one. So that at any instant of time the
moving Atom is but in one single point of the Line. Therefore all its Motion
but in that one point is either future or past; and no other parts are
coexistent or contemporary with it. Now what is not present, is nothing at all,
and can be the efficient of nothing. If Motion then be the cause of Thought;
Thought must be produced by one single Point of Motion, a Point with relation
to time as well as to place. And such a Point to our Conceptions is almost
equivalent to Permanency and Rest, or at least to any other Point of any Motion
whatsoever. What then is become of the privilege of that organical Motion of
the Animal Spirits above any other? Again, we have shown, that this circular
and other Motion is but the successive Flux of an Atom, and is never existent
together; and indeed is a pure Ens Rationis, an operation of the Soul, which
considering past motion and future, and recollecting the whole by the Memory
and Fancy, calls this by one denomination and that by another. How then can
that Motion be the efficient of Thought, which is evidently the Effect and the
Product of it?

5. But Fifthly, they will say farther, (which is their last refuge) that it is
not Motion alone, or under this or that Denomination, that produces
Cogitation; but when it falls out that numerous Particles of Matter, aptly
disposed and directed, do interfere in their Motions, and strike and knock one
another; this is it which begets our Sensation. All the active power and vigor
of the Mind, our Faculties of Reason, Imagination and Will are the wonderful
result of this mutual Occurse, this Pulsion and Repercussion of Atoms. Just as
we experience it in the Flint and the Steel; you may move them apart as long as
you please, to very little purpose: but it is the Hitting and Collision of them
that must make them strike Fire. You may remember I have proved before, that
Light and Heat, and the rest of those Qualities, are not such Idea's in the
Bodies, as we perceive in our Selves. So that this smiting of the Steel with
the Flint does only make a Comminution, and a very rapid Whirling and Melting
of some Particles: but that Idea of Flame is wholly in Us. But what a strange
and miraculous thing should we count it, if the Flint and the Steel, instead of
a few Sparks, should chance to strike out Definitions and Syllogisms? And yet
it is altogether as reasonable, as this sottish opinion of the Atheists; That
dead senseless Atoms can ever justle and knock one another into Life and
Understanding. All that can be effected by such encounters of Atoms, is either
the imparting or receiving of Motion, or a new determination and direction of
its Course. Matter, when it acts upon Matter, can communicate nothing but
Motion; and that we have showed before to be utterly unable to produce those
Sensations. And again, how can that Concussion of Atoms be capable of begetting
those internal and vital Affections, that Self-consciousness and other Powers
and Energies that we feel in our Minds: seeing they only strike upon the
outward Surfaces; they cannot inwardly pervade one another; they cannot have
any penetration of Dimensions and Conjunction of Substance. But, it may be,
these Atoms of theirs may have Sense and Perception in them, but they are
refractary and sullen; and therefore, like Men of the same Tempers, must be
banged and buffeted into Reason. And indeed that way of Argumentation would be
most proper and effectual upon these Atheistical Atomists themselves. It Is a
vigorous Execution of good Laws, and not rational Discourses only, either
neglected or not understood, that must reclaim the profaneness of those
perverse and unreasonable Men. For what can be said more to such persons, that
are either so disingenuous or so stupid, as to profess to believe, That all the
natural Powers and acquired Habits of the Mind, that penetrating Understanding
and accurate Judgment, that strength of Memory and readiness of Wit, that
Liberality and Justice and Prudence and Magnanimity, that Charity and
Beneficence to Mankind, that ingenuous fear and awful Love of God, that
comprehensive Knowledge of the Histories and Languages of so many Nations, that
experienced Insight into the works and wonders of Nature, that rich Vein of
Poetry and inexhausted Fountain of Eloquence, those lofty flights of Thought
and almost intuitive Perception of abstruse Notions, those exalted Discoveries
of Mathematical Theorems and Divine Contemplations; all these admirable
Endowments and Capacities of humane Nature, which we sometimes see actually
existent in one and the same Person, can proceed from the blind shuffling and
casual clashing of Atoms. I could as easily take up with that senseless
assertion of the Stoics, That Virtues Seneca Ep. 113. Plutarch de Contrad
Stoic.
and Vices and Sciences and Arts, and Fancies and Passions and Appetites are
all of them real Bodies and distinct Animals; as with this of the Atheist, That
they can all be derived from the Power of mere Bodies. It Is utterly incredible
and impossible; and we cannot without indignation go about to refute such an
absurd imagination, such a gross contradiction to unprejudiced Reason. And yet
if the Atheists had not been driven from all their posts and their subterfuges;
if we had not pursued their Atoms through all their turnings and windings,
their cells and recesses, their interferings and justlings; they would boast,
that they could not be answered; and make a mighty flutter and triumph.

Nay though they are so miserably confounded and baffled, and can offer no
further explication of the Cause and the Manner; yet they will, Sixthly, urge
matter of Fact and Experience, that mere Body may produce Cogitation and Sense.
For, say they, do but observe the actions of some Brutes, how nearly they
approach to humane Reason, and visibly discover some glimpses of Understanding:
and if that be performed by the pure Mechanism of their Bodies (as many do
allow, who yet believe the Being of God, and an immaterial Spirit in Man) then
it is but raising our Conceptions, and supposing Mankind to be Engines of a
finer Make and Contexture, and the business is done. I must confess, that the
Cartesians and some others, men that have given no occasion to be suspected of
Irreligion, have asserted that Brutes are mere Machins and Automata. I cannot
now engage in the Controversy, neither is there any necessity to do so; for
Religion is not endangered by either opinion. If Brutes be said to have Sense
and Immaterial Souls; what need we be concerned, whether those Souls shall be
immortal, or annihilated at the time of Death. This objection supposes the
Being of God; and He will do all things for the wisest and best ends. Or if
Brutes be supposed to be bare Engines and Machins; I admire and adore the divine
Artifice and Skill in such a wonderful contrivance. But I shall deny then that
they have any Reason or Sense, if they be nothing but Matter. Omnipotence it
self cannot create cogitative Body. And it is not any imperfection in the power
of God, but an incapacity in the Subject; The Idea's of Matter and Thought are
absolutely incompatible. And this the Cartesians themselves do allow. Do but
convince Them, that Brutes have the least participation of Thought, or Will, or
Appetite, or Sensation, or Fancy; and they will readily retract their Opinion.
For none but besotted Atheists, do join the two Notions together, and believe
Brutes to be rational or sensitive Machins. They are either the one or the
other; either endued with Sense and some glimmering Rays of Reason from a
higher Principle than Matter; or (as the Cartesians say) they are purely Body,
void of all Sensation and Life: and like the Idols of the Gentiles, they have
eyes and see not; ears, and hear not; noses, and smell not: they eat without
hunger, and drink without thirst, and howl without pain. They perform the
outward material actions; but they have no inward Self-consciousness, nor any
more Perception of what they do or suffer, than a Looking Glass has of the
Objects it reflects, or the Index of a Watch of the Hour it points to. And as
one of those Watches, when it was first presented to the Emperor of China, was
taken there for an Animal: so on the contrary, our Cartesians take brute
Animals for a sort of Watches. For considering the infinite distance betwixt
the poor mortal Artist, and the Almighty Opificer; the few Wheels and Motions
of a Watch, and the innumerable Springs and Organs in the Bodies of Brutes;
they may affirm (as they think, without either absurdity or impiety) that they
are nothing but moving Automata, as the fabulous Vide Zenobium and Suidam in
(...) and Scholiastem Eurip. Hecubae V. 838.
Statues of Daedalus, bereaved of all true life, and vital Sensation; which
never act spontaneously and freely, but as Watches must be wound up to set them
a going; so their Motions also are excited and inhibited, are moderated and
managed by the Objects without them.

(2.) And now that I have gone through the six parts that I proposed, and
sufficiently shown that Sense and Perception can never be the product of any
kind of Matter and Motion; it remains therefore, that it must necessarily
proceed from some Incorporeal Substance within us. And though we cannot
conceive the manner of the Soul's Action and Passion; nor what hold it can lay
on the Body, when it voluntarily moves it: yet we are as certain, that it does
so, as of any Mathematical Truth whatsoever; or at least of such as are proved
from the Impossibility or Absurdity of the Contrary, a way of Proof that is
allowed for infallible Demonstration. Why one motion of the Body begets an Idea
of Pleasure in the Mind, another an Idea of Pain; why such a disposition of the
Body induces Sleep, another disturbs all the operations of the Soul, and
occasions a Lethargy or Frenzy; this Knowledge exceeds our narrow Faculties,
and is out of the reach of our discovery. I discern some excellent Final causes
of such a vital Conjunction of Body and Soul; but the instrumental I know not,
nor what invisible Bands and Fetters unite them together. I resolve all that
into the sole Pleasure and Fiat of our Omnipotent Creator: whose Existence
(which is my last Point) is so plainly and nearly deducible from the
established proof of an Immaterial Soul; that no wonder the resolved Atheists
do so labor and bestir themselves to fetch Sense and Perception out of the
Power of Matter. I will dispatch it in three words. For since we have shown,
that there is an Incorporeal Substance within us: whence did that proceed, and
how came it into Being? It did not exist from all Eternity, that is too absurd
to be supposed; nor could it come out of nothing into Being without an
Efficient Cause. Something therefore must have created our Souls out of
Nothing; and that Something (since nothing can give more than it has) must it
self have all the Perfections, that it has given to them. There is therefore
an immaterial and intelligent Being, that created our Souls: which Being was
either eternal it self, or created immediately or ultimately by some other
Eternal, that has all those Perfections. There is therefore Originally an
Eternal, Immaterial, Intelligent Creator; all which together are the Attributes
of God alone.

And now that I have finished all the parts, which I proposed to discourse of;
I will conclude all with a short application to the Atheists. And I would
advise them as a Friend, to leave off this dabbling and smattering in
Philosophy, this shuffling and cutting with Atoms. It never succeeded well with
them, and they always come off with the loss. Their old Master Epicurus seems
to have had his Brains so muddled and confounded with them, that he scarce ever
kept in the right way; though the main Maxim of his Philosophy was to trust to
his Senses, and follow his Nose. I will not take notice Epicurus apud Laert.
Lucret. l. 5. Cicero de Fin. l. 1. Acad. l. 2.
of his doting conceit, that the Sun and Moon are no bigger, than they appear
to the Eye, a foot or half a yard over; and that the Stars are no larger than
so many Glowworms. But let us see how he manages his Atoms, those Almighty
Tools that do every thing of themselves without the help of a Workman. When the
Atoms (says he) descend Lucret l. 2. Cic de Fato and l. 1. de Not. Deorum
Plutarch, etc.
in infinite space (very ingeniously spoken, to make High and Low in Infinity)
they do not fall plumb down, but decline a little from the Perpendicular,
either obliquely or in a Curve: and this Declination (says he) from the direct
Line is the cause of our Liberty of Will. But, I say, this Declination of Atoms
in their Descent, was it self either necessary or voluntary. If it was
necessary, how then could that Necessity ever beget Liberty? if it was
voluntary, then Atoms had that power of Volition before: and what becomes then
of the Epicurean Doctrine of the fortuitous Production of Worlds? The whole
business is Contradiction and ridiculous Nonsense. It Is as if one should say,
that a Bowl equally poized, and thrown upon a plain and smooth Bowling-Green,
will run necessarily and fatally in a direct Motion: but if it be made with a
Byas, that may decline it a little from a straight Line, it may acquire by that
Motion a Liberty of Will, and so run spontaneously to the Jack. It would
behoove the Atheists to give over such trifling as this, and resume the old
solid way of confuting Religion. They should deny the Being of the Soul,
because they cannot see it. This would be an invincible Argument against us:
for we can never exhibit it to their Touch, nor expose it to their View; nor
show them the Color and Complexion of a Soul. They should dispute, as a bold
Brother of theirs did; That he was sure there was no God, because (says he) if
there was one, he would have struck me to Hell with Thunder and Lightning, that
have so reviled and blasphemed him. This would be an Objection indeed. Alas,
all that we could answer, is in the next words to the Text, That God has
appointed a day in which he will judge all the world in Righteousness, and that
the Goodness and Forbearance, and Long-suffering of God, which are some of his
Attributes, and Essential Perfections of his Being, ought not to be abused and
perverted into arguments against his Being. But if this will not do, we must
yield our selves overcome: for we neither can, nor desire to command fire to
come down from Heaven and consume them; and give them such experimental
Conviction of the Existence of God. So that they ought to take these Methods,
if they would successfully attack Religion. But if they will still be meddling
with Atoms, be hammering and squeezing Understanding out of them; I would
advise them to make use of their own Understandings for the Instance. Nothing,
in my opinion could run us down, more effectually than that. For we readily
allow, that if any Understanding can possibly be produced by such clashing of
senseless Atoms; it is that of an Atheist, that has the fairest Pretensions and
the best Title to it. We know, it is the Fool, that has said in his heart,
there is no God. And it is no less a Truth than a Paradox, That there are no
greater Fools than Atheistical Wits; and none so credulous as Infidels. No
Article of Religion, though as demonstrable as the Nature of the thing can
admit, has credibility enough for them. And yet these same cautious and quick
sighted Gentlemen can wink and swallow down this sottish Opinion about
Percipient Atoms, which exceeds in Incredibility all the Fictions of Aesop's
Fables. For is it not every whit as likely or more, that Cocks and Bulls might
discourse, and Hinds and Panthers hold Conferences about Religion, as that
Atoms can do so? that Atoms can invent Arts and Sciences, can institute Society
and Government, can make Leagues and Confederacies, can devise Methods of Peace
and Stratagems of War? And moreover, the Modesty of Mythology deserves to be
commended, the Scenes there are laid at a distance; It Is once upon a time, in
the Days of Yore, and in the Land of Utopia, there was a Dialogue between an
Oak and a Cedar: whereas the Atheist is so impudently silly, as to bring the
Farce of his Atoms upon the Theater of the present Age; to make dull senseless
Matter transact all public and private Affairs, by Sea and by Land, in Houses
of Parliament, and Closets of Princes. Can any Credulity be comparable to this?
If a Man should affirm, that an Ape casually meeting with Pen, Ink, and Paper,
and falling to scribble, did happen to write exactly the Leviathan of Thomas
Hobbs: Would an Atheist believe such a story? and yet he can easily digest as
incredible as that; that the innumerable Members of a Humane Body, which in the
style of the Scripture are all written in the Book of God, and may admit of
almost Psalm. 139. 16.
infinite Variations and Transpositions above the xxiv Letters of the Alphabet,
were at first fortuitously scribled, and by mere accident compacted into this
beautiful, and noble and most wonderfully useful Frame, which we now see it
carry. But this will be the Argument*of my next Discourse, which is the second
Proposition drawn from the Text, That the Admirable Structure of Humane Bodies,
whereby they are fitted to live and move, and be vitally informed by the Soul,
is unquestionably the Workmanship of a most wise and powerful and beneficent
Maker: To which Almighty Creator, together with the Son and the Holy Ghost, be
all Honor and Glory and Majesty and Power both now and from henceforth
evermore.

Amen.
A CONFUTATION OF ATHEISM FROM THE Structure and Origin of Humane Bodies.
PART I.
The Third SERMON preached May 2. 1692.
Acts XVII. 27. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after
him, and find him; though he be not far from every one of us: for in him we
Live, and Move, and have our Being.
I Have said enough in my last, to show the fitness and pertinency of the
Apostle's Discourse to the persons he addressed to: whereby it sufficiently
appears that he was no Babbler, as some of the Athenian Rabble reproached him;
not a (...), a busy prating Fellow; as in another language they say Sermones
serere, and Rumores serere Plautus. Virgil. Livius
in a like mode of Expression; that he did not talk at random, but was
thoroughly acquainted with the several humors and opinions of his Auditors. And
as Moses was learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, so it is manifest
from this Chapter alone, if nothing else had been now extant, that St. Paul was
a great Master in all the Learning of the Greeks. One thing further I shall
observe from the words of the Text, before I enter upon the Subject which I
proposed; that it requires some Industry and Consideration to find out the
Being of God; we must seek the Lord, and feel after him, before we can find him
by the Light of Nature. The search indeed is not very tedious nor difficult; He
is not far from every one of us; for in him we live, and move, and have our
Being. The Consideration of our Mind and Understanding, which is an incorporeal
Substance independent from Matter; and the contemplation of our own Bodies,
which have all the stamps and characters of excellent Contrivance; these alone,
though we look upon nothing abroad, do very easily and proximately guide us to
the wise Author of all things. But however, as we see in our Text, some
Thoughts and Meditation are necessary to it; and a man may possibly be so
stupid, or wilfully ignorant or perverse, as not to have God in all his
thoughts, or to say in his heart, There is none. And this being observed, we
have an effectual answer to that Cavil of the Atheists; who make it an
objection against the Being of God, that they do not discover him without any
Application, in spite of their corrupt Wills and debauched Understandings. If,
say they, such a God as we are told of, had created and formed us, surely he
would have left upon our Minds, a native and indeleble Inscription of Himself,
whereby we must needs have felt him, even without seeking, and believed in him
whether we would or no. So that these Atheists being conscious to themselves,
that they are void of such Belief, which (they say) if God was, would actually
and necessarily be in them, do bring their own wicked Doubting and Denying of
God, as Evidence against his Existence; and make their very Infidelity an
argument for it self. To which we reply, That God has endu'd Mankind with
Powers and Abilities, which we call natural Light, and Reason, and common
Sense; by the due use of which we cannot miss of the Discovery of his Being;
and this is sufficient. But as to that original Notion and Proposition, GOD IS,
which the Atheist pretends should have been actually imprinted on us,
antecedently to all use of our Faculties; we may affirm, that the absence of
such a Notion does not give the least presumption against the truth of
Religion: because though God be supposed to be, yet that Notion distinct from
our Faculties would not be requisite; nor is it asserted by Religion. First, it
would not be requisite; because, without any such primitive Impression, we can
easily attain to the knowledge of the Deity by the sole use of our Natural
Reason. And again, such an Impression would have rendered the Belief of a God
irresistible and necessary, and thereby have bereaved it of all that is good
and acceptable in it. For as the taking away the Freedom of Humane Will, and
making us mere Machins under fatal Ties and Impulses, would destroy the very
nature of Moral Virtue; so likewise as to Faith, there would be nothing worthy
of praise and recompense in it, if there were left no possibility of Doubting
or Denying. And secondly, such a radical Truth, GOD IS, springing up together
with the Essence of the Soul, and previous to all other Thoughts, is not
asserted by Religion. No such thing, that I know of, is affirmed or suggested
by the Scriptures. There are several Topics there used against the Atheism and
Idolatry of the Heathens; such as the visible marks of Divine Wisdom and
Goodness in the Works of the Creation, the vital Union of Souls with Matter,
and the admirable Structure of animate Bodies, and the like. But if our Apostle
had asserted such an anticipating Principle engraven upon our Souls before all
Exercise of Reason; what did he talk of seeking the Lord, if happily they might
feel after him and find him? since if the knowledge of him was in that manner
innate and perpetual, there would be no occasion of seeking, nor any hap or
hazard in the finding. Such an Inscription would be self evident without
Reasoning or Study, and could not fail constantly to exert its Energy in their
Minds. What did he talk of the Unknown God, and ignorantly worshipping? when if
such an Original Signature were always inherent in their hearts; God could not
be unknown to, or ignorantly worshipped by any. That primary Proposition would
have been clear, and distinct, and efficacious, and universal in the minds of
Men. S. Paul therefore, it appears, had no apprehension of such a First Notion;
nor made use of it for an argument; which (since whosoever has it, must needs
know that he has it) if it be not believed before by the Adversary, is false;
and if it be believed, is superfluous; and is of so frail and brittle a
texture, that whereas other arguments are not answered by bare denying without
contrary Proof, the mere doubting and disbelieving of this must be granted to
be ipso facto the breaking and confuting of it. Thus much therefore we have
proved against the Atheist; that such an original irresistible Notion is
neither requisite upon supposition of a Deity, nor is pretended to by Religion;
so that neither the Absence of it is any argument against the Being of God, nor
a supposed false Assertion of it an objection against the Scripture. It Is
enough that all are furnished with such Natural Powers and Capacities; that if
they seriously reflect, if they seek the Lord with meditation and study, they
cannot fail of finding and discovering him: whereby God is not left without
witness, but the Atheist without excuse. And now I haste to the second
Proposition deduced from the Text, and the argument of my present Discourse,
That the organical Structure of humane Bodies whereby they are fitted to live,
and move, and be vitally informed by the Soul is unquestionably the workmanship
of a most wise, and powerful and beneficent Maker.

First, It Is allowed and acknowledged by all parties, that the Bodies of Men
and other Animals are excellently well fitted for Life, and Motion, and
Sensation; and the several parts of them well adapted and accommodated to their
particular Functions. The Eye is very proper and meet for seeing, the Tongue
for tasting and speaking, the Hand for holding and lifting, and ten thousand
Operations beside: and so for the inward Parts; the Lungs are suitable for
Respiration, the Stomach for Concoction, the Lacteous Vessels for the Reception
of the Chyle, the Heart for the Distribution of the Blood to all the parts of
the Body. This is matter of Fact, and beyond all dispute; and in effect is no
more than to say, that Animals are Animals; for if they were deprived of these
Qualifications, they could not be so. This therefore is not the matter in
Question between us and the Atheists: But the Controversy is here. We, when we
consider so many constituent parts in the Bodies of Men, all admirably
compacted into so noble an Engine; in each of the very Fingers, for example,
there are Bones, and Gristles, and Ligaments, and Membranes, and Muscles, and
Tendons, and Nerves, and Arteries, and Veins, and Skin, and Cuticle, and Nail;
together with Marrow, and Fat, and Blood, and other Nutricious Juices; and all
those solid Parts of a determinate Size, and Figure, and Texture, and
Situation; and each of them made up of Myriads of little Fibers and Filaments,
not discoverable by the naked Eye; I say, when we consider how innumerable
parts must constitute so small a member, as the Finger, we cannot look upon It
or the whole Body, wherein appears so much Fitness and Use, and Subserviency to
infinite Functions, any otherwise than as the effect of Contrivance and Skill,
and consequently the Workmanship of a most Intelligent and Beneficent Being.
And though now the Propagation of Mankind be in a settled method of Nature,
which is the instrument of God: yet we affirm that the first Production of
Mankind was by the immediate Power of the Almighty Author of Nature: and that
all succeeding Generations of Men are the Progeny of one primitive Couple. This
is a Religious Man's account of the Frame and Origination of himself. Now the
Atheists agree with us, as to the Fitness of Man's Body and its several Parts
to their various Operations and Functions (for that is visible and past all
contradiction) but they vehemently oppose, and horribly dread the Thought, That
this Usefulness of the Parts and the Whole should first arise from Wisdom and
Design. So that here will be the point in debate, and the subject of our
present Undertaking; Whether this acknowledged Fitness of Humane Bodies must be
attributed, as we say, to a wise and good God; or, as the Atheist averr, to
dead senseless Matter. They have contrived several tricks and methods of (...).
Ephesians. 4. 14.
Deceit, one repugnant to another, to evade (if possible) this most cogent
Proof of a Deity; All which I will propose and refute: and I hope to make it
appear, that here, as indeed every where, but here certainly, in the great
Dramatick Poem of Nature, is, dignus Deo vindice Nodus, a necessity of
introducing a God.

And first, I will answer what Exceptions they can have against Our account:
and secondly, I will confute all the Reasons and Explications they can give of
their Own.

1. First, I will answer what Exceptions they can have against Our account of
the Production of Mankind. And they may object, That the Body it self, though
pretty good in its kind and upon their Hypothesis, nevertheless does not look
like the Workmanship of so great a Master, as is pretended by Us; that infinite
Wisdom and Goodness and Power would have bestowed upon us more Senses than
five, or at least these five in a much higher Perfection; that we could never
have come out of the Hands of the Almighty, so subject to numerous Diseases, so
obnoxious to violent Deaths; and at best, of such a short and transitory Life.
They can no more ascribe so sorry an Effect to an Omniscient Cause, than some
ordinary piece of Clockwork with a very few motions and uses, and those
continually out of order, and quickly at an end, to the best Artist of the Age.
But to this we reply: First, as to the five Senses, it would be rash indeed to
affirm, That God, if he had pleased, could not have endued us with more. But
thus much we may averr, That though the Power of God be infinite and perfect,
yet the Capacities of Matter are within limits and bounds. Why then does the
Atheist suspect that there may possibly be any more ways of Sensation than what
we have already? Has he an Idea, or Notion, or Discovery of any more? So far
from that, that he cannot make any addition or progress in those very Senses he
has, further than they themselves have informed him. He cannot imagine one new
Color, or Taste, or Smell, beside those that have actually fallen under his
Senses. Much less can he that is destitute of an entire Sense, have any Idea or
Representation of it; as one that is born Deaf has no Notion of Sounds; or
Blind, of Colors and Light. If then the Atheist can have no Imagination of
more Senses than five, why does he suppose that a Body is capable of more? If
we had double or triple as many, there might still be the same suspicion for a
greater number without end; and the Objection therefore in both cases is
equally unreasonable and groundless. Secondly, we affirm, that our Senses have
that degree of Perfection which is most fit and suitable to our Estate and
Condition. For though the Eye were so piercing, as to descry even opake and
little Objects some hundreds of Leagues off, even that improvement of our sight
would do us little service; it would be terminated by neighboring Hills and
Woods, or in the largest and* evenest plain by the very convexity of the Earth,
unless we could always inhabit the tops of Mountains and Cliffs, or had Wings
too to fly aloft, when we had a mind to take a Prospect. And if Mankind had had
Wings (as perhaps some extravagant Atheist may think us deficient in that) all
the World must have consented to clip them; or else Humane Race had been
extinct before this time, nothing upon that supposition being safe from Murder
and Rapine. Or if the Eye were so acute, as to rival the finest Microscopes,
and to discern the smallest Hair upon the leg of a Gnat, it would be a curse
and not a blessing to us; it would make all things appear rugged and deformed;
the most finely polished Crystal would be uneven and rough: The sight of our
own selves would affright us: The smoothest Skin would be beset all over with
ragged Scales, and bristly Hairs. And beside, we could not see at one view
above what is now the space of an Inch, and it would take a considerable time
to survey the then mountainous bulk of our own Bodies. Such a Faculty of sight
so disproportioned to our other Senses and to the Objects about us would be
very little better than Blindness it self. And again, God has furnished us
with Invention and Industry, so that by optical Glasses we can more than supply
that imaginary defect of our own Eyes, and discover more remote and minute
Bodies with that assistance, than perhaps the most whimsical Atheist would
desire to do without it. So likewise if our Sense of Hearing were exalted
proportionably to the former, what a miserable condition would Mankind be in?
What whisper could be low enough, but many would over-hear it? What Affairs,
that most require it, could be transacted with secrecy? and whither could we
retire from perpetual humming and buzzing? every breath of Wind would incommode
and disturb us: we should have no quiet or sleep in the silentest nights and
most solitary places; and we must inevitably be struck Deaf or Dead with the
noise of a clap of Thunder. And the like inconveniences would follow, if the
Sense of Feeling was advanced to such a degree as the Atheist requires. How
could we sustain the pressure of our very Clothes in such a condition; much
less carry burdens and provide for conveniences of Life? We could not bear the
assault of an Insect, or a Feather, or a puff of Air without pain. There are
examples now of wounded persons, that have roared for anguish and torment at
the discharge of Ordnance, though at a very great distance; what insupportable
torture then should we be under upon a like concussion in the Air, when all the
whole Body would have the tenderness of a Wound? In a word, all the Changes and
Emendations that the Atheists would make in our Senses, are so far from being
Improvements, that they would prove the utter Ruin and Extirpation of Mankind.

But perhaps they may have better success in their complaints about the
Distempers of the Body and the Shortness of Life. We do not wonder indeed, that
the Atheist should lay a mighty stress upon this Objection. For to a man that
places all his Happiness in the Indolency and Pleasure of Body, what can be
more terrible than Pain or a Fit of Sickness? nothing but Death alone, the most
dreadful thing in the world. When an Atheist reflects upon Death, his very
Hope is Despair; and it is the crown and top of his Wishes, that it may prove
his utter Dissolution and Destruction. No question if an Atheist had had the
making of himself, he would have framed a Constitution that could have kept
pace with his insatiable Lust, been invincible by Gluttony and Intemperance,
and have held out vigorous a thousand years in a perpetual Debauch. But we
answer; First, in the words of St. Paul: Nay, but, O Man, who art thou, that
reply against Romans 9. 20.
God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me
thus? We adore and magnify his most holy Name for his undeserved Mercy toward
us, that he made us the Chief of the visible Creation; and freely acquit his
Goodness from any imputation of Unkindness, that he has placed us no higher.
Secondly, Religion gives us a very good account of the present Infirmity of our
Bodies. Man at his first Origin was a Vessel of Honor, when he came first out
of the Hands of the Potter; endued with all imaginable Perfections of the
Animal Nature; till by Disobedience and Sin, Diseases and Death came first into
the World. Thirdly, The Distempers of the Body are not so formidable to a
Religious Man, as they are to an Atheist: He has a quite different judgment
and apprehension about them: he is willing to believe, that our present
condition is better for us in the Issue, than that uninterrupted Health and
Security, that the Atheist desires; which would strongly tempt us to forget God
and the concerns of a better Life. Whereas now he receives a Fit of Sickness,
as the (...), the kind Chastisement and Discipline of his Heavenly Father, to
wean his Affections from the World, where he is but as on a Journey; and to fix
his thoughts and desires on things above, where his Country and his Dwelling
is: that where he has placed his Treasure and Concerns, there his heart may be
also. Fourthly, Most of the Distempers that are incident to us are of our own
making, the effects of abused Plenty, and Luxury, and must not be charged upon
our Maker; who notwithstanding out of the Riches of his Compassion has
provided for us store of excellent Medicines, to alleviate in a great measure
those very Evils which we bring upon our selves. And now we are come to the
last Objection of the Atheist, That Life is too short. Alas for him, what pity
it is that he cannot wallow immortally in his sensual Pleasures! But if his Life
were many whole Ages longer than it is, he would still make the same Complaint,
Brevis est hic fructus Lucret. l 3.
homullis. For Eternity, and that is the thing he trembles at, is every whit as
long, after a thousand years as after fifty. But Religion gives Us a better
prospect and makes us look beyond the gloomy Regions of Death with Comfort and
Delight: When this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal put
on immortality. We are so far from repining at God, that he has not extended
the period of our Lives to the Longaevity of the Antediluvians; that we give
him thanks for contracting the Days of our Trial, and receiving us more
maturely into those Everlasting Habitations above, that he has prepared for us.

And now that I have answered all the Atheist's Exceptions against Our account
of the Production of Mankind, I come in the next place to examine all the
Reasons and Explications they can give of their own.

The Atheists upon this occasion are divided into Sects, and (which is the mark
and character of Error) are at variance and repugnancy with each other and with
themselves. Some of them will have Mankind to have been thus from all Eternity.
But the rest do not approve of infinite Successions, but are positive for a
Beginning; and they also are subdivided into three Parties: the first ascribe
the Origin of Men to the Influence of the Stars upon some extraordinary
Conjunction or Aspect: Others again reject all Astrology; and some of these
mechanically produce Mankind, at the very first Experiment, by the action of
the Sun upon duly prepared Matter: but others are of opinion, that after
infinite blundering and miscarrying, our Bodies at last came into this Figure
by mere Chance and Accident. There Is no Atheist in the World, that reasons
about his Infidelity (which God knows most of them never do) but he takes one
of these four Methods. I will refute them every one in the same order that I
have named them: the two former in the present Discourse, reserving the others
for another occasion.

I. And First, the Opinion of those Atheists that will have Mankind and other
Animals to have subsisted eternally in infinite Generations already past, will
be found to be flat Nonsense and Contradiction to it self, and repugnant also
to matter of Fact. First, it is contradiction to it self. Infinite Generations
of Men (they say) are already past and gone: but whatsoever is now past, was
once actually present; so that each of those Infinite Generations was once in
its turn actually present: therefore all except One Generation were once future
and not in being, which destroys the very supposition: For either that One
Generation must it self have been Infinite, which is Nonsense; or it was the
Finite Beginning of Infinite Generations between it self and us, that is
Infinity terminated at both ends, which is Nonsense as before. Again, Infinite
past Generations of Men have been once actually present: there may be some one
Man suppose then, that was at infinite distance from Us now: therefore that
man's Son likewise, forty years younger suppose than his Father, was either at
infinite distance from Us or at finite: if that Son too was at infinite
distance from Us, then one Infinite is longer by forty years than another;
which is absurd: if at finite, then forty years added to finite makes it
infinite, which is as absurd as the other. And again, The number of Men that
are already dead and gone is infinite, as they say: but the number of the Eyes
of those Men must necessarily be twice as much as that of the Men themselves,
and that of the Fingers ten times as much, and that of the Hairs of their Heads
thousands of times. So that we have here one Infinite number twice, ten times,
and thousands of times as great as another, which is contradiction again. Thus
we see it is impossible in it self, that any successive duration should be
actually and positively infinite, or have infinite successions already gone and
past. Neither can these Difficulties be applied to the Eternal Duration of God
Almighty. For though we cannot comprehend Eternity and Infinity; yet we
understand what they are Not. And something, we are sure, must have Existed
from all Eternity; because all things could not emerge and start out of
Nothing. So that if this prae-existent Eternity is not compatible with a
successive Duration, as we clearly and distinctly perceive that it is not; then
it remains, that some Being, though infinitely above our finite comprehensions,
must have an identical, invariable Continuance from all Eternity; which Being
is no other than God. For as his Nature is perfect and immutable without the
least shadow of change; so his Eternal Duration is permanent and indivisible,
not measurable by Time and Motion, nor to be computed by number of successive
Moments. One day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day.

And Secondly, this Opinion of infinite Generations is repugnant likewise to
matter of Fact. It Is a Truth beyond opposition, that the universal Species of
Mankind has had a gradual increase, notwithstanding what War, and Famine, and
Pestilence, and Floods, and Conflagrations, and the Religious Profession of
Celibacy, and other Causes, may at certain periods of time have interrupted and
retarded it. This is manifest from the History of the Jewish Nation, from the
account of the Roman Vide Observations upon the Bills of Mortality.
Census, and Registers of our own Country, where the proportion of Births to
Burials is found upon observation to be yearly as Fifty to Forty. Now if
Mankind do increase though never so slowly, but one Couple suppose in an Age;
it is enough to evince the falsehood of Infinite Generations already expired. For
though an Atheist should contend, that there were ten thousand million couple
of Mankind now in being, (that we may allow him multitude enough) it is but
going back so many Ages, and we descend to a single Original Pair. And it is all
one in respect of Eternal Duration yet behind, whether we begin the world so
many millions of Ages ago, or date it from the late Era of about Six Thousand
years. And moreover this recent beginning of the World is further established
from the known Original of Empires and Kingdoms, and the Invention of Arts and
Sciences: whereas if infinite Ages of Mankind had already preceded, there could
nothing have been left to be invented or improved by the successful industry
and curiosity of our own. The Circulation of the Blood, and the Weight and
Spring of the Air (which is as it were the Vital Pulse and the great
Circulation of Nature, and of more importance in all Physiology, than any one
Invention since the beginning of Science) had never lain hid so many myriads of
Generations, and been reserved for a late happy Discovery by two great
Luminaries of this Island. I know the Atheist may endeavor to evade this by
supposing, That though Mankind have been from everlasting, and have perpetually
increased by generation; yet at certain great periods there may be universal
Deluges, which may not wholly extinguish Mankind (for, they will say, there is
not Water enough in Nature for that) but may cover the Earth to such a Height,
that none but a few Mountainers may escape, enough to continue Humane Race; and
yet being illiterate. Rusticks (as Mountainers always are) they can preserve no
Memoirs of former times, nor propagate any Sciences or Arts; and so the world
must needs be thought by Posterity to have begun at such periods. But to this I
answer, First, That upon this supposition there must have been infinite Deluges
already past: for if ever this Atheist admits of a first Deluge, he is in the
same noose that he was. For then he must assert, That there were infinite
generations and an infinite increase of Mankind before that first Deluge; and
then the Earth could not receive them, but the infinite Bodies of Men must
occupy an infinite Space, and then all the Matter of the Universe must be
humane Body; and many other absurdities will follow, absurdities as infinite,
as the Generations he talks of. But if he says, That there have been infinite
Deluges heretofore, this is impossibility again; for all that I said before
against the Notion of infinite past Generations, is alike applicable to this.
Secondly, Such Universal Deluges (since the Deity is now excluded) must be
produced in a natural way: and therefore gradually, and not in an instant: and
therefore (because the tops of Mountains, they say, are never overflown) the
civilized People may escape thither out of Villages and Cities; and
consequently, against the Atheist, Arts, and Sciences, and Histories, may be
preserved, and derived to the succeeding World. Thirdly, Let us imagine the
whole Terraqueous Globe with its Atmosphere about it; What is there here, that
can naturally effect an Universal Deluge? If you would drown one Country or
Continent with Rains and Inundations, you must borrow your Vapor and Water
from some other part of the Globe. You can never overflow all at a time. If the
Atmosphere it self was reduced into Water, (as some think it possible) it would
not make an Orb above 32 foot deep, which would soon be swallowed up by the
cavity of the Sea, and the depressed parts of the Earth, and be a very feeble
attempt toward an Universal Deluge. But then what immense Weight is there
above, that must overcome the expansive force of the Air, and compress it into
near the thousandth part of the room that it now takes up? We, that acknowledge
a God Almighty, can give an account of one Deluge, by saying it was miraculous;
but it would be strange to see an Atheist have recourse to a Miracle; and that
not once only, but upon infinite occasions. But perhaps they may endeavor to
prove the possibility of such a natural Deluge, by borrowing an ingenious
Notion, and pretending, That the face of Nature may be now quite changed from
what it was; and that formerly the whole Collection of Waters might be an
orbicular Abyss, arched over with an exterior Crust or Shell of Earth, and that
the breaking and fall of this Crust might naturally make a Deluge. I Will allow
the Atheist all the fair play in the world. Let us suppose the Fall of this
imaginary Crust. First, It seems to be impossible, but that all the Inhabitants
of this Crust must be dashed to pieces in its Ruins. So that this very Notion
brings us to the necessity of a new production of Men; to evade which it is
introduced by the Atheist. Again, If such a Crust naturally fell, then it had
in its own constitution a tendency toward a Fall; that is, it was more likely
and inclinable to fall this thousand years, than the last. But if the Crust was
always gradually nearer and nearer to falling; that plainly evinces, that it
had not endured eternally before its Fall. For let them assign any imaginable
period for its falling, how could it have held out till then (according to the
supposition) the unmeasurable duration of infinite Ages before? And again, such
a Crust could fall but once; for what Architect can an Atheist suppose, to
rebuild a new Arch out of the ruins of the other? But I have shown before that
this Atheist has need of infinite Deluges to effect his design; and therefore
I Will leave him to contrive how to make infinite Crusts one upon the back of
another; and now proceed to examine in the second place, The Astrological
Explication of the Origin of Men.

II. If you ask one of this Party, what Evidence he is able to produce for the
truth of his Art, he may perhaps offer some Physical Reasons for a general
influence of the Stars upon terrestrial bodies: but as Astrology is considered
to be a System of Rules and Propositions, he will not pretend to give any
reason of it a priori; but resolves all that into Tradition from the Chaldeans
and Egyptians, who first learnt it by long observation, and transmitted it
down to Posterity; and that now it is daily confirmed by Events; which are
experienced to answer the Predictions. This is all that can be said for
Astrology as an Art. So that the whole Credibility of this Planetary production
of Mankind must depend upon Observation. But are they able to show among all
the Remains of the Chaldaick Observations for Four hundred and seventy thousand
years (as they pretended) any Tradition of such a Production? So far from that,
that the Chaldeans believed the world and mankind to have been from
everlasting, which opinion I have refuted before. Neither can the Egyptian
Wizards with their long Catalogue of Dynasties, and Observations for
innumerable Years, supply the Atheists with one instance of such a Creation.
Where are the fragments of Petosiris and Necepso, that may countenance this
Assertion? I believe if they had had any example of men born out of the Soil,
they would rather have ascribed it to the fruitful Mud of the Nile (as So
Diodorus Siculus, lib. 1. c 3. (...), etc.
they did the breeding of Frogs, and Mice, and Monsters) than to the efficacy
of Stars. But with the leave of these Fortune Tellers, did the Stars do this
feat once only, which gave beginning to Humane Race? or have they frequently
done so, and may do it again? If frequently, why is not this Rule delivered in
Ptolemee and Albumazar? If once only at the beginning, then how came it to be
discovered? Who were there then in the world, to observe the Births of those
First Men, and calculate their Nativities, as they sprawl'd out of Ditches?
Those Sons of Earth were very wise Children, if they themselves knew, that the
Stars were their Fathers. Unless we are to imagine, that they understood the
Planets and the Zodiac by instinct, and fell to drawing Schemes of their own
Horoscopes, in the same Dust they sprung out of? For my part I can have no
great Vitruvius, lib. 9. c. 4. Lucret. lib. 5. Ut Babylonica Chaldaeam
doctrina, etc. Apuleius de Deo Socratis: Seu illa (Luua) proprio and perpeti
fulgore, ut Chaldaei arbitrantur, part luminis compos, part altera cas^a
fulgeris.
veneration for Chaldaick Antiquity; when I see they could not discover in so
many thousand years, that the Moon was an opake Body, and received her Light
from the Sun. But suppose their Observations had been never so accurate, it
could add no Authority to modern Astrology, which is borrowed from the Greeks.
It Is well known that Berosus, or his Scholars new modelled and adapted the
Babylonian Doctrines to the Grecian Mythology. The supposed Influences of
Aries and Taurus for example, have a manifest relation to the Grecian Stories
of the Ram that carried Phrixus, and the Bull that carried Europa. Now which of
these is the Copy, and which the Original? Were the Fables taken from the
Influences, or the Influences from the Fables? the Poetical Fables more ancient
than all Records of History; or the Astrological Influences, that were not
known to the Greeks till after Alexander the Great? But without question those
Fabulous Tales had been many a time told and sung to lull Children asleep,
before ever Berosus set up his Intelligence Office at Cos. And the same may be
said of all the other Constellations. First, Poetry had filled the Skies with
Asterisms and Histories belonging to them; and then Astrology devises the
feigned Virtues and Influences of each, from some property of the Image, or
Allusion to the Story. And the same trifling futility appears in their XII
Signs of the Zodiac, and their mutual Relations and Aspects. Why no more
Aspects than diametrically opposite, and such as make aequilateral figures? Why
are the Masculine and Feminine, the Fiery and Airy, and Watery and Earthly Signs
all placed at such regular distances? Were the Virtues of the Stars disposed in
that order and rank, on purpose only to make a pretty Diagram upon Paper? But
the Atheistical Astrologer is doubly pressed with this absurdity. For if there
was no Counsel at the making of the world, how came the Asterisms of the same
nature and energies to be so harmoniously placed at regular intervals? And how
could all the Stars of one Asterism agree and conspire together to constitute
an Universal? Why does not every single Star shed a separate influence; and
have Aspects with other Stars of their own Constellation? But what need there
many words? As if the late Discoveries of the Celestial Bodies had not plainly
detected the imposture of Astrology? The Planet Saturn is found to have a great
Ring that encircles him, and five lesser Planets that move about him, as the
Moon does about the Earth: and Jupiter has four Satellites, which by their
Interposition between him and us make some hundreds of Eclipses every year. Now
the whole Tribe of Astrologers, that never dreamed of these Planets, have
always declared, that when Jupiter and Saturn come about again to any given
Point, they exert (considered singly by themselves) the same Influence as
before. But it is now manifest, that when either of them return to the same
point; the Planets about them, that must make up an united Influence with them,
have a different situation in respect of us and each other, from what they had
the time before: and consequently the joint Influence must be perpetually
varied, and never be reducible to any Rules and Observations. Or if the
Influences be conveyed hither distinct, yet sometimes some of the Little
Planets will eclipse the Great one at any given point; and by that means
intercept and obstruct the Influence. I cannot now insist on many other
Arguments deducible from the late Improvements of Astronomy, and the truth of
the Copernican System; For if the Earth be not the Center of the Planetary
Motions, what must become then of the present Astrology, which is wholly
adapted to that vulgar Hypothesis? And yet nevertheless, when they lay under
such wretched mistakes for many Myriads of Years, if we are willing to believe
them; they would all along, as now, appeal to Experience and Event for the
confirmation of their Doctrines. That Is the invincible Demonstration of the
Verity of the Science: And indeed as to their Predictions, I think our
Astrologers may assume to themselves that infallible Oracle of Tiresias,

O Laertiade, quicquid dico, aut erit, aut non. There Is but a true and a false
in any telling of Fortune; and a man that never hits on the right side, cannot
be called a bad Guesser, but must miss out of design, and be notably skillful
at lighting on the wrong. And were there not formerly as great pretentions to
it from the superstitious Observation of the Entrails of Cows, of the flying of
Vulturs, and the pecking of Chickings? Nay, the old Augurs and Soothsayers had
better reason to profess the Art of Divining, than the modern Astrological
Atheist: for they supposed there were some Demons, that directed the
Indications. So likewise the Chaldean and Egyptian Astrologers were much more
excusable than He. It was the Religion of their Countries to worship the Stars,
as we know from unquestionable Authority. They believed them Maimonides More
Nevochim De Zabiis and Chaldais. Plato in Cratylo. Diodorus, lib. 1 c. 2.
Eusebius Demonst. Evangel. lib. 1. c. 6. (...)
Intelligent Beings, and no other than very Gods; and therefore had some Reason
to suspect, that they might govern Humane Affairs. The Influence of the Stars
was in their apprehensions no less than Divine Power. But an Atheist, that
believes the Planets to be dark, solid and senseless Bodies, like the brute
Earth he treads on; and the Fixed Stars and the Sun to be inanimate Balls of
Fire; what Reasons can He advance for the Credit of such Influences? He
acknowledges nothing besides Matter and Motion; so that all that he can
conceive to be transmitted hither from the Stars, must needs be performed
either by Mechanism or Accident; either of which is wholly unaccountable, and
the latter irreconcilable to any Art or System of Science. But if both were
allowed the Atheist; yet as to any production of Mankind, they will be again
refuted in my following Discourse. I can preserve a due esteem for some great
Men of the last Age, before the Mechanical Philosophy was revived, though they
were too much addicted to this nugatory Art. When Occult Quality, and Sympathy
and Antipathy were admitted for satisfactory Explications of things, even wise
and virtuous Men might swallow down any Opinion that was countenanced by
Antiquity. But at this time of day, when all the general powers and capacities
of Matter are so clearly understood; he must be very ridiculous himself, that
does not deride and explode the antiquated Folly. But we may see the miserable
Shifts that some men are put to; when that which was first founded upon, and
afterward supported by Idolatry, is now become the tottering Sanctuary of
Atheism. If the Stars be no Deities, Astrology is groundless: and if the Stars
be Deities, why is the Astrologer an Atheist? He may easily be no Christian;
and it is difficult indeed to be both at once: because, as I have said before,
Idolatry is at the bottom; and by submitting Humane Actions and Inclinations to
the Influence of the Stars, they destroy the very Essence of Moral Virtue and
the Efficacy of Divine Grace: and therefore Astrology was justly condemned by
the Ancient Fathers Council. Laod. Can. 36 Conc. 6. in Trullo. Can 61. Cod Just.
lib. 9. tit. 18. Cod. Theodos. l. 9. tit. 16. (...) lib. 60. tit. 39.
and Christian Emperors. An Astrologer, I say, may very easily be no
Christian; he may be an Idolater or a Pagan: but I could hardly think Astrology
to be compatible with rank Atheism; if I could suppose any great gifts of
Nature to be in that person, who is either an Atheist or an Astrologer. But let
him be what he will, he is not able to do much hurt by his Reasons and Example.
For Religion it self, according to his Principles, is derived from the Stars.
And he owns, it is not any just Exceptions he has taken against Christianity,
but it is his Destiny and Fate; it is Saturn in the Ninth House, and not Judgment
and Deliberation, that made him an Atheist.

A CONFUTATION OF ATHEISM FROM THE Structure and Origin of Humane Bodies.
PART II.
The Fourth SERMON preached June 6. 1692.
Acts XVII. 27. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after
him, and find him; though he be not far from every one of us: for in him we
Live, and Move, and have our Being.
IN the former part of this Enquiry I have examined and refuted two Atheistical
Notions opposed to the great Doctrine of the Text, That we owe our Living and
Being to the power of God: The one of the Aristotelian Atheists, who, to avoid
the difficulties of the first production of Mankind, without the intervention
of Almighty Wisdom and Power, will have the Race to have thus continued without
beginning, by an eternal succession of infinite past Generations; which
Assertion has been detected to be mere nonsense, and contradictory to it self:
The other of the Astrological undertakers, that would raise Men like Vegetables
out of some fat and slimy soil well digested by the kindly heat of the Sun, and
impregnated with the influence of the Stars upon some remarkable and periodical
conjunctions: Which opinion has been vamp'd up of late by Cardan and
Cesalpinus, and other News-mongers from the Skies; a Pretense as groundless and
silly, as the dreaming Oneirocriticks of Artemidorus and Astrampsychus, or the
modern Chiromancy and Divinations of Gypsies.

I proceed now to the two remaining Paradoxes of such Sects of Atheists, as
laying aside Astrology and the unintelligible Influence of Heavenly Bodies,
except that which proceeds from their Gravity and Heat, and Light, do either
produce Mankind mechanically and necessarily from certain connexions of Natural
Causes; or more dully and supinely, though altogether as reasonably, resolve
the whole Business into the unaccountable shuffles and tumults of Matter, which
they call Chance and Accident. But at present I shall only take an account of
the supposed Production of Humane Bodies by Mechanism and Necessity.

The Mechanical or Corpuscular Philosophy, though peradventure the oldest, as
well as the best in the world, had lain buried for many Ages in contempt and
oblivion; till it was happily restored and cultivated anew by some excellent
Wits of the present Age. But it principally owes its re-establishment and
luster, to Mr. Boil that Honorable Person of ever Blessed Memory, who has
not only shown its usefulness in Physiology above the vulgar Doctrines of Real
Qualities and Substantial Forms; but likewise its great serviceableness to
Religion it self. And I think it has been competently proved in a former
Discourse, how friendly it is to the Immateriality of Humane Souls, and
consequently to the Existence of a Supreme Spiritual Being. And I may have
occasion hereafter to show further, that all the Powers of Mechanism are
entirely dependent on the Deity, and do afford a solid Argument for the Reality
of his Nature. So far am I from the apprehension of any great feats, that this
Mechanical Atheist can do against Religion. For if we consider the Phenomenon
of the Material World with a due and serious attention, we shall plainly
perceive, that its present frame and constitution and the established Laws of
Nature are constituted and preserved by Gravitation alone. That is the
powerful cement, which holds together this magnificent structure of the world;
Which stretches the Job 26. 7.
North over the empty space, and hangs the Earth upon Nothing; if we may
transfer the words of Job from the first and real Cause to the secondary Agent.
Without Gravity, the whole Universe, if we suppose an undetermined power of
Motion infused into Matter, would have been a confused-Chaos, without beauty or
order, and never stable and permanent in any condition. Now it may be proved in
its due place, that this Gravity, the great Basis of all Mechanism, is not it
self Mechanical; but the immediate Fiat and Finger of God, and the Execution of
the Divine Law; and that Bodies have not the power of tending toward a Center,
either from other Bodies or from themselves: which at once, if it be proved,
will undermine and ruin all the Towers and Batteries that the Atheists have
raised against Heaven. For if no Compound Body in the visible world can subsist
and continue without Gravity, and if Gravity do immediately flow from a Divine
Power and Energy; it will avail them nothing, though they should be able to
explain all the particular Effects, even the Origination of Animals, by
mechanical principles. But however at present I will forbear to urge this
against the Atheist. For, though I should allow him, that this Catholic
Principle of Gravitation is essential to Matter without introducing a God; yet
I will defy him to show, how a Humane Body could be at first produced
naturally, according to the present System of things, and the mechanical
affections of Matter.

And because this Atheist professes to believe as much as we; that the first
production of Mankind was in a quite different manner from the present and
ordinary method of Nature, and yet affirms nevertheless, that That was Natural
too; which seems at the first sight to be little less than a contradiction: It
should lie upon him to make out, how matter by undirected Motion could at first
necessarily fall, without ever Erring or Miscarrying, into such a curious
formation of Humane Bodies; a thing that by his own confession it was never
able to do since, or at least has not done for some thousands of years: he
should declare to us what shape and contexture Matter then had, which it cannot
have now: how it came to be altered by long course of time, so that living Men
can no longer be produced out of putrefaction in the primary way; and yet the
species of Mankind, that now consists of and is nourished by Matter so altered,
should continue to be the same as it was from the beginning. He should
undertake to explain to us the first steps and the whole progress of such a
formation; at least by way of Hypothesis, how it naturally might have been,
though he affirm not that it was actually so. Whether he has a new Notion
peculiar to himself about that Production, or takes up with some old one, that
is ready at hand: whether that most witty Conceit of Anaximander, That the
first Men and all Animals Plutarch. de Plac. Phi. lib. 5. c. 19. and Sympos. l.
8. c 8. Censorinus de die Natali cap. 4.
were bred in some warm moisture, enclosed in crustaceous skins, as if they
were various kinds of Crabfish and Lobsters; and so continued till they arrived
at perfect age; when their shelly Prisons growing dry and breaking made way for
their liberty: or the no less ingenious opinion of the great Empedocles; That
Mother Earth first brought forth Plutarch. de Plac. Phil. 5. 19. Censorin.
ibidem.
vast numbers of Legs, and Arms, and Heads, and the other members of the Body,
scattered and distinct, and all at their full growth; which coming together and
cementing (as the pieces of Snakes and Lizards are said to do, if one cuts them
asunder) and so configuring themselves into Humane shape, made lusty proper Men
of thirty years age in an instant: or rather the divine Doctrine of Epicurus
and the Egyptians; That there first grew up a sort Censorinus. ibid. Lucret.
lib. 5. Diodorus Siculus, lib. 1. c. 2.
of Wombs, that had their Roots in the Earth, and attracted thence a kind of
Milk for the nourishment of the enclosed Foetus; which at the time of maturity
broke through those Membranes, and shifted for themselves. I say, he ought to
acquaint us which of these he is for, or bring a new explication of his own;
and not require Us to prove the Negative, That a Spontaneous production of
Mankind, neither warranted by example, nor defended by reason, nevertheless may
not possibly have been true. This is a very unreasonable demand, and we might
justly put him off with such an answer as this; That there are several things,
which all men in their wits do disbelieve, and yet none but madmen will go
about to disprove. But to show him how much we endeavor to satisfy and oblige
him, I will venture once for his sake to incurr the censure of some persons for
being elaborately trifling. For with respect to the most of Mankind, such
wretched absurdities are more wisely contemned than confuted; and to give them
a serious answer, may only make them look more considerable.

First then, I take it for granted by him, That there were the same Laws of
Motion, and the like general Fabric of the Earth, Sea and Atmosphere, at the
beginning of Mankind, as there are at this day. For if any Laws at first were
once settled and constituted; like those of the Medes and Persians, they are
never to be reversed. To violate and infringe them, is the same as what we call
Miracle; and does not sound very Philosophically out of the mouth of an
Atheist. He must allow therefore, that Bodies were endowed with the same
affections and tendencies then as ever since, and that if an Axhead be supposed
to float upon water, which is specifically 2 K. 5. 6.
much lighter than it; it had been supernatural at that time, as well as in the
days of Elisha. And this is all that I desire him to acknowledge at present. So
that he may admit of those Arguments as valid and conclusive against his
Hypothesis, that are fairly drawn from the present powers of Matter, and the
visible constitution of the World.

Now that we may come to the point; All Matter is either Fluid or Solid, in a
large acceptance of the words, that they may comprehend even all the middle
degrees between extreme Fixedness and Coherency, and the most rapid intestine
motion of the Particles of Bodies. Now the most cavilling Atheist must allow,
that a solid inanimate Body, while it remains in that state, where there is
none, or a very small and inconsiderable change of Texture, is wholly incapable
of a vital production. So that the first Humane Body, without Parents and
without Creator, if such an one ever was, must have naturally been produced in
and constituted by a Fluid. And because this Atheist goes mechanically to work;
the universal Laws of Fluids must have been rigidly observed during the whole
process of the Formation. Now this is a Catholic Rule of Staticks; Archimedes
de Insiden^ibus humido, lib. 1.
That if any Body be bulk for bulk heavier than a Fluid, it will sink to the
bottom of that Fluid; and if lighter, it will float upon it; having Stevin des
Elements Hydrostatiques.
part of it self extant, and part immersed to such a determinate depth, as that
so much of the Fluid as is equal in Bulk to the immersed part, be equal in
Gravity to the whole. And consequently if several portions of one and the same
Fluid have a different specific gravity, the heavier will always (in a free
vessel) be gradually the lower; unless violently shaken and blended together by
external concussion. But that cannot be in our present case. For I am unwilling
to affront this Atheist so much, as to suppose him to believe, that the first
organical Body might possibly be effected in some Fluid portion of Matter,
while its Heterogeneous parts were jumbled and confounded together by a Storm,
or Hurricane, or Earthquake. To be sure he will rather have the primitive Man
to be produced by a long process in a kind of digesting Balneum, where all the
heavier Lees may have time to subside, and a due Aequilibrium be maintained,
not disturbed by any such rude and violent shocks, that would ruffle and break
all the little Stamina of the Embryon, if it were a making before. Now because
all the parts of an undisturbed Fluid are either of equal Gravity, or gradually
placed and storied according to the differences of it; any concretion that can
be supposed to be naturally and mechanically made in such a Fluid, must have a
like structure of its several parts; that is, either be all over of a similar
Gravity, or have the more ponderous parts nearer to its Basis. But there need
no more concessions than this, to extinguish these supposed Firstborn of
Nature in their very formation. For suppose a Humane Body to be a forming in
such a Fluid in any imaginable posture, it will never be reconcilable to this
Hydrostatical Law. There will be always something lighter beneath, and
something heavier above; because Bone, or what is then the Stuff and Rudiments
of Bone, the heaviest in specie, will be ever in the midst. Now what can make
the heavier particles of Bone ascend above the lighter ones of Flesh, or
depress these below those, against the tendency of their own Nature? This would
be wholly as miraculous, as the swimming of Iron in Water at the command of
Elisha, and as impossible to be, as that the Lead of an Edifice should
naturally and spontaneously mount up to the Roof, while lighter materials
employ themselves beneath it: or that a Statue, like that in Nebuchadnezzar's
Vision, whose Head was of fine and most ponderous Gold, and his Feet of lighter
materials, Iron and Clay, should mechanically erect it self upon them for its
Basis.

Secondly, Because this Atheist goes mechanically to work, he will not offer to
affirm, That all the parts of the Embryon could according to his explication be
formed at a time. This would be a supernatural thing, and an effectual
refutation of his own Principles. For the Corpuscles of Matter having no
consciousness of one another acting (at least before or during the Formation;
as will be allowed by that very Atheist, that attributes Reason and Perception
to them, when the Formation is finished) they could not consent and make a
compact together, to carry on the work in several places at once; and one party
of them be forming the Brain, while another is modelling the Heart, and a third
delineating the Veins. No, there must be, according to Mechanism, a successive
and gradual operation: Some few Particles must first be united together, and so
by apposition and mutual connection still more and more by degrees, till the
whole System be completed: and a Fermentation must be excited in some
assignable place, which may expand it self by its Elastical power; and break
through, where it meets with the weakest resistance; and so by that so simple
and mechanical action, may excavate all the various Ducts and Ventricles of the
Body. This is the only general account, as mean as it appears to be, that this
Machin of an Atheist can give of that fearful and wonderful Production. Now
to confute these Pretenses, First, There is that visible Harmony and Symmetry
in a Humane Body, such a mutual communication of every vessel and member of it,
as gives an internal evidence; that it was not formed successively, and patched
up by piecemeal. So uniform and orderly a system with innumerable Motions and
Functions, all so placed and constituted, as never to interfere and clash one
with another, and disturb the Economy of the whole, must needs be ascribed to
an Intelligent Artist; and to such an Artist, as did not begin the matter
unprepared and at a venture; and, when he was put to a stand, paused and
hesitated, which way he should proceed; but he had first in his comprehensive
Intellect a complete Idea and Model of the whole Organical Body, before he
entered upon the Work. But Secondly, if they affirm, That mere Matter by its
mechanical Affections, without any design or direction, could form the Body by
steps and degrees; what member then do they pitch upon for the foundation and
cause of all the rest? Let them show us the beginning of this Circle; and the
first Wheel of this Perpetual Motion. Did the Blood first exist, antecedent to
the formation of the Heart? But that is to set the Effect before the Cause:
because all the Blood that we know of, is made in and by the Heart, having the
quite different form and qualities of Chyle, before it comes thither. Must the
Heart then have been formed and constituted, before the Blood was in being? But
here again, the Substance of the Heart it self is most certainly made and
nourished by the Blood, which is conveyed to it by the Coronary Arteries. And
thus it is through the whole system of the Body; every member does mutually
sustain and supply one another; Cartesius de Formatione Faetus.
and all are coaetaneous, because none of them can subsist alone. But they will
say, That a little Ferment first making a Cavity, which became the left
Ventricle of the Heart, did thence further expand it self, and thereby
delineate all the Arteries of the Body. Now if such a slight and sorry business
as that, could produce an Organical Body; one might reasonably expect, that now
and then a dead lump of Dough might be leavened into an Animal: for there a
like Ferment makes notable Tumors and Ventricles; besides sundry long and
small Channels, which may pass tolerably well for Arteries and Veins. But I
pray, in this supposed Mechanical Formation, when the Ferment was expanded to
the extremities of the Arteries, if it still had any elastical force remaining,
why did it not go on and break through the Receptacle, as other Ferment must be
allowed to have done at the Mouth and the Nostrils? There was as yet no
membranous Skin formed, that might stop and repel it. Or if the force of it
was spent, and did not wheel about and return; what mechanical cause then shall
we assign for the Veins? for this Ferment is there supposed to have proceeded
from the small capillary extremities of them to the Great Vein and the Heart;
otherwise it made Valves, which would have stopped its own passage. And why did
that Ferment, that at first dispersed it self from the Great Artery into
infinite little ramifications, take a quite contrary method in the making of
the Veins, where innumerable little Rivulets have their confluence into the
Great Vein, the common chanel of the Blood? Are such opposite motions both
equally mechanical, when in both cases the Matter was under the same
modification? And again, When the first Ferment is excited, and forms the left
Ventricle of the Heart; if the Fluid Matter be uniform and of a similar
texture, and therefore on all sides equally resist the Expansion; then the
Cavity must continue One, dilated more and more, 'till the expansive force and
the uniform resistance be reduced to an equality, and so nothing at all can be
formed by this Ferment, but a single round Bubble. And moreover this Bubble (if
that could make a Heart) by reason of its comparative Levity to the Fluid that
incloses it, would necessarily ascend to the top; and consequently we should
never find the Heart in the midst of the Breast. But if the Fluid be supposed
to consist of Heterogeneous Particles, then we cannot conceive how those
dissimilar parts should have a like situation in two several Fluids, when the
Ferment begins. So that upon this supposition there could be no Species of
Animals, nor any Similitude between them: One would have its Lungs, where
another has its Liver, and all the other Members preposterously placed; there
could not be a like Configuration of Parts in any two Individuals. And again,
What is that which determines the Growth of all living Creatures? What
principles of Mechanism are sufficient to explain it? Why do not all Animals
continually increase in bigness during the whole space of their Lives, as it is
reported of the Crocodile? What sets a bound to their stature and dimensions?
Or if we suppose a Bound and Ne plus ultra to be mechanically fixed: but then
why so great a variety in the Bulk of the several Kinds? why also such
Constancy observed in that manifold Variety? For as some of the largest Trees
have Seeds no bigger or even less than some diminutive Plants, and yet every
Seed is a perfect Plant with Trunk and Branches and Leaves enclosed in a Shell:
So the first Embryon of an Ant is supposed by inquisitive Swammerdam Histor.
Insect. p. 3.
Naturalists to be as big, as that of an Elephant, and to promise as fair at
its primitive Formation for as spacious a Body: which nevertheless by an
immutable Decree can never arrive to the millionth part of the others Bulk. And
what modification of the first liquid Matter can vary so much, as to make one
Embryon capable of so prodigiously vast augmentation, while another is confined
to the minuteness of an Insect? Is not this manifestly a Divine Sanction, that
has fixed and determined the Shape, the Stature, the Appetites, and the
Duration of all Creatures in the World? Hither must we have recourse in that
great and mysterious Affair of an Organical Formation: And I profess that I
cannot discern one step in the whole, that is agreeable to the natural Laws of
Motion. If we consider the Heart, which is supposed to be the first principle
of Motion and Life, and divide it by our Imagination into its constituent
Parts, its Arteries and Veins and Nerves and Tendons and Membranes, and
innumerable little Fibers, that these Secondary Parts do consist of; we shall
find nothing here Singular, but what is in any other Muscle of the Body. It Is
only the Site and Posture of these several Parts and the Configuration of the
whole, that give it the Form and Functions of a Heart. Now why should the first
single Fibers in the Formation of the Heart be peculiarly drawn in Spiral
Lines; when the Fibers of all other Muscles are made by a transverse
rectilinear Motion? What could determine the Fluid Matter into that odd and
singular Figure, when as yet no other Member is supposed to be formed, that
might direct the Course of that Fluid Matter? Let Mechanism here make an
Experiment of its Power, and produce a spiral and turbinated motion of the
whole moved Body without an external Director. When all the Organs are once
framed by a supernatural and divine Principle, we do willingly admit of
Mechanism in many Functions of the Body: but that the Organs themselves should
be mechanically formed, we conceive it to be impossible and utterly
inexplicable. And if any Atheist will give a clear and philosophical account of
the things that are here touched upon; he may then hear of many more and
perhaps more difficult than these, which their unfitness for a popular
Auditory, and the remaining parts of my Subject, that press forward to be
treated of, oblige me now to omit.

But as the Atheist, when he is put to it to explain, How any Motion of dead
Matter can beget Thought and Perception, will endeavor to defend his baffled
Impiety with the instance of Brutes, which he calls Thinking Machines: so will
he now also appeal from the Arbitration of Reason in the Case of Animal
Productions, to Example and Matter of Fact. He will declaim to us about the
admirable Structure of the Bodies of Insects; that they have all the Vital
Parts, which the largest of Quadrupeds and even Man himself can boast of; and
yet they are the easy and obvious Products of unintelligent Nature, that
spontaneously and mechanically form them out of putrefied Carcasses and the
warm moisture of the Soil: and (which is mightily to his purpose) these
Insects, so begotten without Parents, have nevertheless fit Organs of
Generation and Difference of Sex, and can propagate their own kinds, as if
themselves had been begotten so too: and that if Mother Earth in this her
barrenness and decrepitness of Age can procreate such swarms of curious Engines,
which not only themselves enjoy their portion of Life, but by a most wonderful
Instinct impart it to many more, and continue their Species: might she not in
the flower of her Youth, while she was succulent and fertile, have produced
Horses and Elephants and even Mankind it self, the largest and perfectest
Animals, as easily as in this parched and steril condition she can make a Frog
or an Insect? Thus he thinks, he has made out from Example and Analogy, that
at the Beginning of things every Species of Animals might spring mechanically
out of the Soil without an Intelligent Creator. And indeed there is no one
thing in the World, which has given so much Countenance and Shadow of
Possibility to the Notion of Atheism, as this unfortunate mistake about the
aequivocal generation of Insects: And as the oldest Remains of Atheistical
Writings are full of this Comparison; so it is the main refuge of those, that
in this and the last Age have had the Folly and Impudence to appear in so
wretched a Cause.

Now to this last Subterfuge of the Mechanical Atheists we can occurr several
ways. And at present we affirm, First, ex abundanti, That though we should
allow them the spontaneous production of some minute Animals, yet a like
primitive Origination of Mankind could not thence be concluded. Because they
first tacitly suppose, that there is an universal decay of Moisture and
Fertility in the Earth. And they cannot avoid the necessity of so doing: For if
the Soil be as fruitful now, as it was in the beginning; why would it not
produce Men, and the nobler kinds of Beasts in our days too, if ever it did so?
So that if that supposition be evinced to be erroneous and groundless, all the
Arguments that they build upon it, will be subverted at once. Now what more
easily refuted, than that old vulgar Assertion of an universal Drought and
Exsiccation of the Earth? As if the Sun could evaporate the least drop of its
Moisture, so that it should never descend again, but be attracted and elevated
quite out of the Atmosphere? It Is now a matter agreed and allowed by all
competent Judges, that every Particle of Matter is endowed with a Principle of
Gravity, whereby it would descend to the Center, if it were not repelled
upwards by heavier bodies. So that the smallest Corpuscle of Vapor, if we
suppose it to be exhaled to the top of the Atmosphere, thence it must come down
again, or at least must there remain incumbent upon others: for there is either
Nothing or nothing heavier above it to protrude it any higher, neither can it
spontaneously mount any more against the tendency of its nature. And lest some
ignorant Atheist should suspect, that peradventure there may be no such Top of
the Atmosphere; but that it may be continued on to the Sun or to indefinite
Space: he must vouchsafe to be instructed, That the whole weight of any Column
of the Atmosphere, and likewise the Specific gravity of its Basis are
certainly known by many Experiments; and that by this computation (even making
allowance for its gradually larger Expansion, the higher we go,) the very top
of any Pillar of Air is not One hundred Miles distant from the Surface of the
Earth. So that hence it is manifest, that the whole Terraqueous Globe with its
Atmosphere cannot naturally have lost the least particle of Moisture, since the
foundation of the World. But still they may insist, That although the whole
Globe cannot be deprived of any of its Moisture, yet the habitable Earth may
have been perpetually the drier, seeing it is assiduously drained and exhausted
by the Seas. But to this we reply, That the very contrary is demonstrable; That
the longer the World shall continue, the moister the whole Aggregate of the
Land will be. For (to take no notice of the supply of its moisture by Rains and
Snow and Dews and Condensation of Vapors, and perhaps by subterraneous
passages) the tops of Mountains and Hills will be continually washed down by
the Rains, and the Channels of Rivers corroded by the Streams; and the Mud that
is thereby conveyed into the Sea will raise its bottom the higher; and
consequently the Declivity of Rivers will be so much the less; and therefore
the Continents will be the less drained, and will gradually increase in
Humidity from the first period of their Duration to the final Consummation of
all things: if the successive production of Plants and Animals, which are all
made up of and nourished by Water, and perhaps never wholly return to Water
again, do not keep things at a poise; or if the Divine Power do not interpose
and change the settled course and order of Nature.

But let us allow their supposition, That the Total of the dry Land may have
been robbed of some of its Moisture which it had at its first Constitution: yet
still there are some parts of the Earth sufficiently soaked and watered, to
produce, Men and Animals now, if ever they did at all. For do not the Nile, and
the Niger, and the Ganges, and the Menam, make yearly Inundations in our days,
as they have formerly done? And are not the Countries so overflown still
situate between the Tropicks under the direct and most vigorous Rays of the
Sun, the very place where these Mechanical Atheists lay the Scene of that great
Transaction? So that if Mankind had ever sprung naturally out of the Soil, the
Experiment would succeed now every year in Aethiopia and Siam; where are all
the requisite qualifications that ever have been, for such a production. And
again, if there has been such a gradual diminution of the Generative Faculty
of the Earth, that it has dwindled from nobler Animals to puny Mice and
Insects; why was there not the like decay in the production of Vegetables? We
should have lost by this time the whole Species of Oaks and Cedars and the
other tall and lofty Sons of the Forest, and have found nothing but dwarfish
Shrubs and creeping Moss and despicable Mushroms. Or if they deny the present
spontaneous production of larger Plants, and confine the Earth to as Pigmie
Births in the Vegetable Kingdom, as they do in the other: yet surely in such a
supposed universal decay of Nature, even Mankind it self that is now nourished
(though not produced) by the Earth, must have degenerated in Stature and
Strength in every Generation. And yet we have certain demonstration from the
Egyptian Mummies, and Roman Urns and Rings and Measures and Aedifices and many
other Antiquities, that Humane Stature is not diminished at all for the last
Two Thousand years. Now if the Decay has not been constant and gradual, there
has been no Decay at all; or at least no natural one, nor what may be accounted
for by this Mechanical Atheist. I conclude therefore, That although we should
allow the spontaneous production of Insects; yet no Argument can be deduced
from thence for a like Origination of Mankind.

But, Secondly, we affirm, That no Insect or Animal did ever proceed
aequivocally from Putrefaction, unless in miraculous Cases, as in Egypt by the
Divine Judgments; but all are generated from Parents of their own kind, Male
and Female; a Discovery of that great Importance, that perhaps few Inventions
of this Age can pretend to equal Usefulness and Merit; and which alone is
sufficient (if the Vices of Men did not captivate their Reason) to explode and
exterminate rank Atheism out of the World. For if all Animals be propagated by
Generation from Parents of their own Species, and there be no instance in
Nature of even a Gnat or a Mite either now or in former Ages spontaneously
produced: how came there to be such Animals in Being, and whence could they
proceed? There is no need of much study and deliberation about it: for either
they have existed eternally by infinite Successions already gone and past,
which is in its very See the Former Sermon.
Notion absurd and impossible; or their Origin must be ascribed to a
supernatural and Divine Power, that formed and created them. Now to prove our
assertion about the Seminal production of all living Creatures; that we may not
repeat the Reasons which we have offered before against the first Mechanical
Formation of Humane Bodies, which are equally valid against the spontaneous
Origin of the minutest Insects; we appeal to Observation and Experiment, which
carry the strongest conviction with them, and make the most sensible and
lasting impressions. For whereas it has been the general Tradition and Belief,
that Maggots and Flies breed in putrefied Carcasses, and particularly Bees come
(...). Nicander.
from Oxen, and Hornets from Horses, and Scorpions from Crabfish, etc. all is
now found to be Fable and Mistake. That sagacious and learned Naturalist
Francisco Redi made innumerable trials with Redi De generatione insectorum
the putrid Flesh of all sorts of Beasts and Fowls and Fishes and Serpents,
with corrupted Cheese and Herbs and Fruits and even Insects themselves: and he
constantly found, that all those Kinds of Putrefaction did only afford a Nest
and Aliment for the Eggs and Young of those Insects that he admitted to come
there; but produced no Animal of themselves by a spontaneous Formation. For
when he suffered those things to putrefie in Hermetically sealed Glasses, and
Vessels close covered with Paper; and not only so, lest the Exclusion of the
Air might be supposed to hinder the Experiment; but in Vessels covered with
fine Lawn, so as to admit the Air and keep out the Insects: no living thing was
ever produced there, though he exposed them to the action of the Sun, in the
warm Climate of Florence, and in the kindest season of the year. Even flies
crushed and corrupted, when enclosed in such Vessels, did never procreate a new
Fly: though there, if in any case, one would have expected that success. And
when the Vessels were open, and the Insects had free access to the Aliment
within them, he diligently observed, that no other Species were produced, but
of such as he saw go in and feed and deposit their Eggs there: which they would
readily do in all Putrefaction; even in a mucilage of bruised Spiders, where
Worms were soon hatched out of such Eggs, and quickly changed into Flies of the
same kind with their Parents. And was not that a surprising Transformation
indeed, if according to the vulgar opinion those dead and corrupted Spiders
spontaneously changed into Flies? And thus far we are obliged to the diligence
of Redi: from whence we may conclude, That no dead Flesh nor Herbs nor other
putrefied Bodies, nor any thing that has not then actually either a vegetable
or animal Life can produce any Insect. And if we should allow, as he did, that
every Animal and Plant does naturally breed and nourish by its substance some
peculiar Insect: yet the Atheist could make no advantage of this Concession as
to a like Origination of Mankind. For surely it is beyond even an Atheist's
Credulity and Impudence, to affirm that the first Men might proceed out of the
Galls and Tumors of Leaves of Trees, as some Maggots and Flies are supposed to
do now; or might grow upon Trees, as the story goes about Barnacles; or perhaps
might be the Lice of some vast prodigious Animals, whose Species is now
extinct. But though we suppose him guilty of such an extravagant folly, he will
only shift the difficulty, and not wholly remove it; for we shall still expect
an account of the spontaneous Formation of those mountainous kind of Animals
and Men-bearing Trees. And as to the Worms that are bred in the Intestines and
other inward parts of Living Creatures, their production is not material to our
present enquiry, till some Atheist do affirm, that his own Ancestors had such
an Original. I say, if we should allow this concession of Redi, it would do no
service to our Adversaries: but even here also they are defeated by the happy
curiosity of Malpighi and others, who observed and Malpighius de Gallis,
Swammerdam de genesis Insect. Lewenhoeck Epistol.
discovered, That each of those Tumors and Excrescences of Plants, out of
which generally issues a Fly or a Worm, are at first made by such Insects,
which wound the tender buds with a long hollow Trunk, and deposit an Egg in the
hole with a sharp corroding liquor, which causes a swelling in the leaf, and
so closes the orifice: and within this Tumor the Worm is hatched and receives
its aliment, till it has eat its way through. Neither need we recurr to an
aequivocal production of Vermin in the Phthiriasis and in Herod's Disease, who
was (...), eaten of worms, or maggots. Those Act 12 23.
horrible distempers are always accompanied with putrefying ulcers; and it has
been observed by the most accurate Lewenhoeck, that Lice and Flies, Continuat.
Epistol. p. 101.
which have a most wonderful instinct and acuteness of sense to find out
convenient places for the hatching and nourishment of their young, do mightily
endeavor to lay their Eggs upon Sores; and that One will lay above a hundred
Eggs, and may naturally increase to some hundreds of thousands in a quarter of
a year: which gives a full and satisfactory account of the Phoenomena of those
Diseases. And whereas it is said, Exodus 16. v. 20. That some of the Israelites
left of the Manna until the morning, and it bred worms and stank; which an
Atheist may make an objection, as either against Us, or against the truth of
the Scriptures: I understand it no otherwise, than that the Manna was
fly-blown. It was then the Month of October, which in that Southern Climate,
after the preceding Autumnal Rains, does afford a favorable season and copious
nutriment for infinite swarms of Insects. Neither do I ascribe it to a
miraculous power, that some of the Manna should breed worms, but that all the
rest should be preserved sound and untainted. And if any one shall rigidly urge
from that passage the literal expression of breeding; he must allow Moses to
speak in the language of the Vulgar in common affairs of life. We do now
generally believe the Copernican System; yet I suppose upon ordinary occasions
we shall still use the popular terms of Sun rise and Sunset, and not introduce
a new pedantick description of them from the motion of the Earth. And then as
to the vulgar opinion, That Frogs are made in the Clouds and brought down by
the Rains, it may be thus easily refuted: for at that very instant, when they
are supposed to descend, you may find by dissection not only their Stomachs
full of meat, but their Intestines full of excrement: so that they had lurked
before in the daytime in holes and bushes and grass, and were then invited
abroad by the freshness of a Shower. And by this time we may understand, what
credit and authority those old Stories ought to have about monstrous
productions in Egypt after the inundation of the Nile, of Mice and Frogs and
Serpents, half flesh and half mud; nay of the Legs, and Arms, and other Limbs
of Men, and quicquid Graecia mendax; altogether as true, as what is seriously
related by Helmont, That Helmont Imago Ferment. etc. p. 92. Edit 1652.
foul Linen, stopped in a vessel that has Wheat in it, will in 21 days time turn
the Wheat into Mice: which one may guess to have been the philosophy and
information of some Housewife, who had not so carefully covered her Wheat, but
that the Mice could come at it, and were there taken napping, just when they
had made an end of their cheer. Corn is so innocent from this calumny of
breeding of Mice; that it does not produce the very Weevils that live in it and
consume it: the whole course of whose generation and periodical changes has
been curiously observed and described by the ingenious Lewenhoek. And moreover,
that we may deprive the Atheist of all hopes and pretensions of Argument from
this baffled opinion of aequivocal Insects, we will acquaint him from the most
accurate observations of Swammerdam, That even the supposed change of Worms
into Flies is no real transmutation; but that most of those Members, which at
last become visible to the Eye, are existent at the beginning, artificially
complicated together, and covered with Membranes and Tunicles, which are
afterward stripped off and laid aside: and all the rest of that process is no
more surprising, than the eruption of Horns in some Brutes, or of Teeth and
Beard in Men at certain periods of age. And as we have established our
assertion of the seminal production of all kinds of Animals; so likewise we
affirm, That the meanest Plant cannot be raised without seed by any formative
power residing in the Soil. To which assertion we are encouraged, First, from
the known Seeds of all Vegetables, one or two only excepted, that are left to
future discovery: which Seeds by the help of Microscopes are all found to be
real and perfect Plants, with Leaves and Trunk curiously folded up and enclosed
in the Cortex: nay one single grain of Wheat or Barley or Rye, shall contain
four or five distinct Plants under one common Tunicle: a very convincing
argument of the Providence and Goodness of God; that those Vegetables that were
appointed to be the chief sustenance of Mankind, should have that multiplied
foecundity above any others: and secondly, by that famous experiment of
Malpighi, who a long time enclosed a quantity of Earth in a vessel, secured by
a fine cloth from the small imperceptible seeds of Plants that are blown about
with the winds; and had this success of his Curiosity, to be the first happy
discoverer of this noble and important Truth, That no species of Plants can be
produced out of Earth without a praeexistent seed; and consequently they were
all created and raised at the beginning of things by the Almighty Gardener, God
blessed for ever. And Lastly, as to those various and elegant Shells, that are
dug up in Continents and embodied in Stones and Rocks at a vast distance from
any Sea; which this Atheist may possibly allege for an instance of a Plastic
faculty of Nature; it is now generally agreed by the most diligent Inquirers
about them, That they are no sportfull productions of the Soil, as was formerly
believed, but that all did once belong to real and living Fishes; since each of
them exactly resembles some Shell of the Seas, both in its outward lineaments,
and inward texture, and specific gravity, and all other properties: which
therefore are so far from being subservient to Atheists in their audacious
attempts against God and Religion, that they rather afford an experimental
confirmation of the Universal Deluge.

And thus we have competently shown, that every Species of Living Creatures,
every small Insect, and even the Herbs of the Field give a casting vote against
Atheism, and declare the necessity of a supernatural Formation. If the Earth in
its first constitution had been left to it self, what horrid deformity and
desolation had for ever overspread its face? not one living Inhabitant would be
found on all its spacious surface; not so much as a Worm in the Bowels of it,
nor one single Fish in the vast Bosom of the Sea; not a Mantle of Grass or
Moss, to cover and conceal the nakedness of Nature. An eternal Sterility must
have possessed the World, where all things had been fixed and fastened
everlastingly with the Adamantin chains of Specific Gravity; if the Almighty
had not spoken and said, Let the Earth bring forth Grass, the Herb yielding
Seed, and the Fruit tree yielding Fruit after its kind; and it was so. 'Twas
God, that then created the first seminal forms of all Animals and Vegetables,
that commanded the Waters to bring forth abundantly, and the Earth to produce
Living Creatures after their kind; that made Man in his own Image after his own
likeness: that by the efficacy of his first Blessing made him be fruitful and
multiply and replenish the Earth; by whose alone power and conservation we all
live and move and have our Being.

May the same most Glorious God of his infinite mercy grant, that as we have
sought the Lord, and felt after him, and found him in these works of his
Creation: so now that we have known God, we may glorify him as God both now,
and for evermore.
Amen.
A CONFUTATION OF ATHEISM FROM THE Structure and Origin of Humane Bodies.
The Third and Last PART
The Fifth SERMON preached September. 5. 1692.
Acts XVII. 27. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after
him, and find him; though he be not far from every one of us: for in him we
Live, and Move, and have our Being.
IN my former Discourses I have endeavored to prove, that Humane Race was
neither (1) from Everlasting without beginning; nor (2) owes its beginning to
the Influence of Heavenly Bodies; nor (3) to what they call Nature, that is,
the necessary and mechanical motions of dead senseless Matter. I proceed now to
examine the fourth and last Plea of the Enemies to Religion and their own Souls,
That Mankind came accidentally into the World, and has its Life and Motion and
Being by mere Chance and Fortune.

We need not much wonder, that this last Opinion should obtain almost
universally among the Atheists of these times. For whereas the Other require
some small stock of Philosophy to understand or maintain them: This Account is
so easy and compendious, that it needs none at all; and consequently is the
more proper and agreeable to the great Industry and Capacity of the most
numerous Party of them. For what more easy to say, than that all the Bodies of
the first Animals and Plants were shuffled into their several Forms and
Structures fortuitously, that is, these Atheists know not how, nor will trouble
themselves to endeavor to know? For that is the meaning of Chance; and yet
this is all, that they say, or can say to the great Matter in question. And
indeed this little is enough in all reason; and could they impose on the rest
of Mankind, as easily as delude themselves, with a notion, That Chance can
effect a thing; it would be the most expedite and effectual means to make their
Cause victorious over Virtue and Religion. For if you once allow them such an
acceptance of Chance, you have precluded your self (they think) from any more
reasoning and objecting against them. The Mechanical Atheist, though you grant
him his Laws of Mechanism, is nevertheless inextricably puzzled and baffled
with the first Formation of Animals: for he must undertake to determine all the
various Motions and Figures and Positions and Combinations of his Atoms; and to
demonstrate, that such a quantity of Motion impressed upon Particles so shaped
and situated, will necessarily range and dispose them into the Form and Frame
of an Organical Body: an attempt as difficult and unpromising of success, as if
he himself should make the Essay to produce some new Kinds of Animals out of
such senseless Materials, or to rebuild the moving and living Fabric out of
its dust in the grave. But the Atheist, that we are now to deal with, if you do
but concede to him, that Fortune may be an Agent; presumes himself safe and
invulnerable, secure above the reach of any further disputes. For if you
proceed to ask questions, and bid him assign the proper Causes and determinate
Manner of that fortuitous Formation, you thereby deny him what you granted
before, and take away the very Hypothesis and the Nature of Chance; which
supposes that no certain Cause or Manner of it can possibly be assigned. And
as the stupidity of some Libertines, that demand a sight of a Spirit or Humane
Soul to convince them of its existence, has been frequently and deservedly
exposed; because whatsoever may be the object of our Sight, must not be a Soul
or Spirit, but an opake Body: so this Atheist would tax us of the like Nonsense
and Contradiction; if after he has named to us Fortune or Chance, we should
expect from him any particular and distinct account of the Origin of Mankind.
Because it is the very essence and notion of his Chance, to be wholly
unaccountable: and if an account could be given of it; it would then no longer
be Chance but Mechanism, or a necessary production of certain Effects from
certain Causes according to the Universal Laws of Motion. Thus we are to know,
that if once we admit of Fortune in the Formation of Mankind; there is no
further enquiry to be made, no more Difficulties to be solved, and no Account
to be demanded. And who then can admire, if the inviting easiness and
compendiousness of this Assertion should so dazzle the Eyes of our Atheist, that
he overlooks those gross Absurdities, that are so conspicuous in it?

(1) For first, if this Atheist would have his Chance or Fortune to be a real
and substantial Agent; as the Vulgar seem to have commonly apprehended, some
making it a Divinity, others they do not conceive what: he is doubly more
stupid and more supinely ignorant than those Vulgar; in that he assumes such a
notion of Fortune, as besides its being erroneous, is inconsistent with his
Atheism. For since according to the Atheists, the whole Universe is Corpus and
mane, Body and nothing else: this Chance, if it do really and physically effect
any thing, must it self be Body also. And what a numerous train of Absurdities
do attend such an assertion? too visible and obvious to deserve to be here
insisted on. For indeed it is no less than flat contradiction to it self. For
if this Chance be supposed to be a Body; it must then be a part of the common
Mass of Matter: and consequently be subject to the universal and necessary Laws
of Motion: and therefore it cannot be Chance, but true Mechanism and Nature.

(2) But secondly, if he forbear to call Chance a real Agent, and is content to
have it only a Result or Event; since all Matter or some portion of it may be
naturally exempt from these supposed Mechanical Laws, and be endowed with a
power of spontaneous or fortuitous Motion; which power, when it is exerted,
must produce an Effect properly Casual, and therefore might constitute the
first Animate Bodies accidentally, against the supposed natural tendency of the
Particles of those Bodies: even this second Assertion is contrary to common
Sense, as well as common Observation. For how can he conceive, that any parcel
of dead Matter can spontaneonsly divert and decline it self from the line of
its motion without a new impulse from external Bodies? If it can intrinsically
stir it self, and either commence its Motion or alter its course; it must have
a principle of self-activity, which is Life and Sense. But Sense I have proved
formerly to Sermon* 2.
be incompatible with mere Bodies, even those of the most compound and
elaborate textures; much more with single Atoms or solid Particles of Matter,
that having no intestine motion of Parts are destitute of the first foundation
and capacity of Life. And moreover, though these Particles should be supposed
to have this internal principle of Sense, it would still be repugnant to the
notion of Chance: because their Motions would not then be Casual, but
Voluntary; not by Chance, but Choice and Design. And Again, we appeal to
Observation, whether any Bodies have such a power of Fortuitous Motion: we
should surely have experiment of it in the effects of Nature and Art: No Body
would retain the same constant and uniform Weight according to its Bulk and
Substance; but would vary perpetually, as that spontaneous power of Motion
should determine its present tendency. All the various Machins and Utensils
would now and then play odd Pranks and Capricio's quite contrary to their
proper Structures and Designs of the Artificers. Whereas on the contrary all
Bodies are observed to have always a certain and determinate Motion according
to the degrees of their External Impulse, and their inward Principle of
Gravitation, and the Resistance of the Bodies they occurr with: which therefore
is without Error exactly foreseen and computed by sagacious Artists. And if
ever Dead Matter should deviate from this Motion; it could not proceed from it
self, but a supernatural Agent; and ought not to be called a Chance, but a
Miracle.

For Chance is but a mere name, and really Nothing in it self: a Conception of
our own Minds, and only a Compendious way of speaking, whereby we would
express, That such Effects, as are commonly attributed to Chance, were verily
produced by their true and proper Causes, but without their designing to
produce them. And in any Event called Casual, if you take away the real and
physical Causes, there remains nothing, but a simple Negation of the Agents
intending such an Event: which Negation being no real Entity, but a Conception
only of Man's Intellect wholly extrinsecal to the Action, can have no title to
a share in the production. As in that famous Example (which Plutarch says, is
the only one, where Fortune Plutarch. (...).
is related to have done a thing artificially) when a Painter having finished
the Picture of a Horse, excepting the loose Froth about his Mouth and his
Bridle; and after many unsuccessfull essays despairing to do that to his
satisfaction, in a great rage threw his Sponge at it, all besmeared, as it was,
with the Colors; which fortunately hitting upon the right place, by one bold
stroke of Chance most exactly supplied the want of Skill in the Artist: even
here it is manifest, that considering the Quantity and Determination of the
Motion, that was impressed by the Painter's hand upon the Sponge, com* pounded
with the specific Gravity of the Sponge, and resistance of the Air; the Sponge
did mechanically and unavoidably move in that particular line of Motion, and so
necessarily hit upon that part of the Picture; and all the paint, that it left
there, was as certainly placed by true natural Causes, as any one stroke of the
Pencil in the whole Piece. So that this strange effect of the Sponge was
fortuitous only with respect to the Painter, because he did not design nor
forsee such an effect; but in it self and as to its real Causes it was
necessary and natural. In a word, the true notion of Fortune ((...)) denotes
no more, than the Ignorance of such an event in some Knowing Agent concerned
about it. So that it owes its very Being to Humane Understanding, and without
relation to that is really Nothing. How absurd then and ridiculous is the
Atheist, that would make this Fortune the cause of the Formation of Mankind;
whereas manifestly there could be no such Thing or Notion in the World as
Fortune, till Humane Nature was actually formed? It was Man that first made
Fortune, and not Fortune that produced Man. For since Fortune in its proper
acceptance supposes the Ignorance of something, in a subject capable of
Knowledge; if you take away Mankind, such a Notion has no Existence, neither
with relation to Inanimate Bodies that can be conscious of nothing, nor to an
Omniscient God, that can be ignorant of nothing. And so likewise the adequate
Meaning of Chance ((...)) (as it is distinguished from Fortune; in that the
latter is understood to befall only Rational Agents, but Chance to be among
Inanimate Bodies) is a bare Negation, that signifies no more than this, That
any Effect among such Bodies ascribed to Chance, is really produced by Physical
Agents, according to the established Laws of Motion, but without their
Consciousness of concurring to the Production, and without their Intention of
such an Effect. So that Chance in its true sense is all one with Nature; and
both words are used promiscuously by Plato X. de Legibus. (...).
some ancient Writers to express the same thing. And we must be wary, lest we
ascribe any real Subsistence or Personality to this Nature or Chance: for it is
merely a notional and imaginary thing; an abstract Universal, which is properly
Nothing; a Conception of our own making, occasioned by our reflecting upon the
settled Course of things; denoting only thus much, That all those Bodies move
and act according to their essential properties and qualities without any
consciousness or intention of so doing. So that in this genuine acceptance of
Chance, here is nothing supposed, that can supersede the known Laws of Natural
Motion: and thus to attribute the Formation of Mankind to Chance, is all one
with the former Atheistical Assertion, that ascribes it to Nature or Mechanism:
and consequently it has received a prolix and sufficient Refutation in my
preceding Discourse.

(3) But thirdly, it is likely that our Atheist may willingly renounce the
Doctrine of Chance as a thing differing from Nature, and may allow it to be the
same thing, and that too no real and substantial Agent, but only an abstract
intellectual Notion: but still he has another Expedient in reserve, which is a
middle and safe way between the former rigorous Mechanism and the
extravagancies of Fortuitous Motion: viz. That at the Beginning all things
('it is true) proceeded necessarily and fatally according to the Mechanical powers
and affections of Matter: but nevertheless the several Kinds of Animals were
not formed at the first trial and effort without one error or miscarriage; (as
strict Mechanism would suppose;) but there was an immense Variety of Ferments
and Tumors and Excrescences of the Soil, pregnant and big with Foetus's of all
imaginable shapes and structures of Body: (...) Emped.
Millions of which were utterly incapable of Life and Motion, being the Molae,
as it were, and the Abortions of Mother Earth: and many of those that had Life
and Powers to preserve their own Individuals, yet wanted the due means of
Propagation, and therefore could not transmit their Species to the following
Ages: and that those few only, that we now find in Being, did happen (for he
cannot express it but by the Characters of a Chance) to have all the parts
necessary not only for their own Lives, but for the Continuation of their
Kinds. This is the favorite Opinion, among the Atheists, and the most
plausible of all; by which they think they may elude that most formidable
Argument for the Being of God, from the admirable contrivance of Organical
Bodies and the exquisite fitness of their several Parts for those Ends and Uses
they are put to, and seem to have been designed for. For, say they, since those
innumerable Instances of Blunder and Deformity were quickly removed out of
Knowledge and Being; it is plain that no Animals ought now to be found, but
such as have due Organs necessary for their own nourishment and increase of
their Kinds: so that this Boasted Usefulness of Parts, which makes Men
attribute their Origination to an intelligent and wise Agent, is really no
argument at all: because it follows also from the Atheists Assertion. For since
some Animals are actually preserved in Being till now, they must needs all of
them have those parts that are of Use and Necessity: but That at first was only
a Lucky Hit without Skill or Design, and ever since is a necessary condition of
their Continuation. And so for instance, when they are urged with the admirable
Frame and Structure of the Eye; which consists of so great a Variety of Parts,
all excellently adapted to the Uses of Vision; that (to omit Mathematical
Considerations with relation to Optics) has its many Coats and Humors
transparent and colorless, lest it should tinge and sophisticate the Light
that it lets in, by a natural Jaundice; that has its Pupil so constituted, as
to admit of Contraction and Dilatation according to the differing degrees of
Light, and the Exigencies of seeing; that has Eye lids so commodiously placed,
to cleanse the Ball from Dust, to shed necessary moisture upon it through
numerous Glandules, and to be drawn over it like a Curtain for the convenience
of sleep; that has a thousand more Beauties in its figure and texture never
studied nor admired enough: they will briskly reply, that they willingly
concede all that can be said in the commendation of so noble a member; yet
notwithstanding they cannot admit for good reasoning, He that formed the Eye,
shall not Psalm. 94. 9.
he see? For it was blind Nature alone or Matter mechanically moved without
consciousness or direction, that made this curious Organ of Vision. For the
short of the matter is this: This elegant structure of the Eye is no more than
is necessary to Seeing; and this noble faculty of Seeing is no more than is
necessary to Life; and consequently is included in the very suppositions of any
Animals living and continuing till now; though those be but the very few that
at the beginning had the good fortune to have Eyes, among many millions of
Monsters that were destitute of them, sine vultu caeca reperta, Lucret. Lib. 5.
and therefore did fatally perish soon after their Birth. And thus when we
insist on other like arguments of Divine Wisdom in the frame of Animate Bodies;
as the artificial Position of many Myriads of Valves, all so situate as to give
a free passage to the Blood and other Humors in their due Channels and Courses,
but not permit them to regurgitate and disturb the great Circulation and
Economy of Life; as the Spiral, and not Annulary, Fibers of the Intestines for
the better Exercise of their Functions; as the provident furnishing of
Temporary parts for the Foetus during the time of gestation, which are
afterward laid aside; as the strange sagacity of little Insects in choosing
fit Places for the Exclusion of their Eggs, and for the provision of proper
food, when the young ones are hatched and need it; as the ardent (...) or
natural Affection in those Animals, whose offspring cannot at first procure
their own sustenance, but must infallibly perish, if not fed by the Parents; as
the untaught Instincts and Impresses upon every species, directing them without
imitation or deliberation to the ready knowledge of proper food, to one and the
best way of their preservation and defense, and to the neverfailing propagation
of their own kind: whatever Considerations of this nature you propose to this
Atheist, as indeed such Instances are innumerable, all evidently setting forth
the Almighty's Wisdom and Goodness to such as are able to judge, and will judge
impartially; he has this one subterfuge from them all, That these things are
mistaken for tokens of Skill and Contrivance, though they be but necessary
Consequences of the present Existence of those Creatures. For he that supposes
any Animals to subsist, does by that very supposition allow them every Member
and Faculty that are necessary to subsistence; such as are those we have just
now enumerated. And therefore, unless we can prove a priori and independent of
this Usefulness, now that Things are once supposed to have existed and
propagated; That among almost infinite Trials and Essays at the beginning of
things, among millions of monstrous Shapes and imperfect Formations, a few such
Animals, as now exist, could not possibly be produced; these
After-Considerations are of very little moment: because if such Animals could
in that way possibly be formed, as might live and move and propagate their
Beings; all this admired and applauded Usefulness of their several Fabrics is
but a necessary condition and consequence of their Existence and Propagation.

This is the last pretense and sophistry of the Atheists against the
Proposition in my Text, That we received our Life and Being from a Divine
Wisdom and Power. And as they cannot justly accuse me of any ways concealing or
balking their grand Objection: so I believe these following Considerations will
give them no reason to boast, That it cannot receive a just and satisfactory
Answer.

(1) First therefore, we affirm that we can prove and have done it already by
arguments a priori (which is the challenge of the Atheists) that these Animals,
that now exist, could not possibly have been formed at first by millions of
trials. For since they allow by their very Hypothesis (and without standing to
that Courtesy we have proved it before) that there can be no casual or
spontaneous Motion of the Particles of Matter: it will follow that every single
Monster among so many supposed Myriads must have been mechanically and
necessarily Multaque tum tellus etiam Portenta creare, etc. Lucret. 5.
formed according to the known Laws of Motion, and the temperament and quality
of the Matter that it was made of. Which is sufficient to evince, that no such
Monsters were or could have been formed. For to denominate them even Monsters;
they must have had some rude kind of Organical Bodies; some Stamina of Life,
though never so clumsy; some System of Parts compounded of Solids and Liquids,
that executed, though but bunglingly, their peculiar Motions and Functions. But
we have lately shown it impossible for Nature unassisted to constitute such
Bodies, whose structure is against the Law of Specific Gravity. So that she
could not make the least endeavor toward the producing of a Monster; or of
any thing that has more Vital and Organical Parts, than we find in a Rock of
Marble or a Fountain of Water. And again, though we should not contend with
them about their Monsters and Abortions; yet since they suppose even the
perfect Animals, that are still in being, to have been formed mechanically
among the rest; and only add some millions of Monsters to the reckoning; they
are liable to all the Difficulties in the former Explication, and are expressly
refuted through the whole preceding Sermon: where it is abundantly shown, that
a Spontaneous Production is against the Catholic Laws of Motion, and against
Matter of Fact; a thing without Example, not only in Man and the nobler
Animals, but in the Smallest of Insects and the Vilest of Weeds: though the
Fertility of the Earth cannot be said to have been impaired since the beginning
of the World.

(2) Secondly, we may observe that this Evasion of the Atheist is fitted only
to elude such Arguments of Divine Wisdom, as are taken from things Necessary to
the conservation of the Animal, as the Faculties of Sight and Motion and
Nutrition, and the like; because such Usefulness is indeed included in a
general Supposition of the Existence of that Animal: but it miserably fails him
against other Reasons from such Members and Powers of the Body, as are not
necessary absolutely to Living and Propagating, but only much conduce to our
better Subsistence and happier Condition. So the most obvious Contemplation of
the frame of our Bodies; as that we all have double Sensories, two Eyes, two
Ears, two Nostrils, is an effectual Confutation of this Atheistical Sophism.
For a double Organ of these Senses is not at all comprehended in the Notion of
bare Existence: one of them being sufficient to have preserved Life, and kept
up the Species; as common Experience is a witness. Nay even the very Nails of
our Fingers are an infallible Token of Design and Contrivance: for they are
useful and convenient to give strength and firmness to those Parts in the
various Functions they are put to; and to defend the numerous Nerves and
Tendons that are under them, which have a most exquisite sense of Pain, and
without that native Armor would continually be exposed to it: and yet who will
say, that Nails are absolutely necessary to Humane Life, and are concluded in
the Supposition of Simple Existence? It is manifest therefore, that there was a
Contrivance and Foresight of the Usefulness of Nails antecedent to their
Formation. For the old stale pretense of the Atheists, That things were first
Lucret. lib. 4. Nil ideo quoniam natum est in corpore, ut uti Possemus: sed
quod natum est, id procreat usum.
made fortuitously, and afterward their Usefulness was observed or discovered,
can have no place here; unless Nails were either absolutely requisite to the
Existence of Mankind, or were found only in some Individuals or some Nations of
men; and so might be ascribed to necessity upon one account, or to Fortune upon
the other. But from the Atheist's supposition, That among the infinite
Diversity of the first terrestrial Productions, there were Animals of all
imaginable shapes and structures of Body, all of which survived and multiplied,
that by reason of their Make and Fabric could possibly do so; it necessarily
follows, that we should now have some Nations without Nails upon their Fingers;
others with one Eye only, as the Poets describe the Cyclopes in Sicily, and the
Arimasp^ in Scythia; others with one Ear, or one Nostril, or indeed without any
Organ of Smelling, because that Sense is not necessary to Man's subsistence;
others destitute of the use of Language, since Mutes also may live: one People
would have the Feet of Goats, as the feigned Satyrs and Panisci; another would
resemble the Head of Jupiter Ammon, or the horned Statues of Bacchus: the
Sciapodes, and Enotocoetae and Plinius and Strabo.
other monstrous Nations would no longer be Fables, but real instances in
Nature: and, in a word, all the ridiculous and extravagant shapes that can be
imagined, all the fancies and whimsies of Poets and Painters and Egyptian
Idolaters, if so be they are consistent with Life and Propagation, would be now
actually in Being, if our Atheist's Notion were true: which therefore may
deservedly pass for a mere Dream and an Error: till they please to make new
Discoveries in Terra Incognita, and bring along with them some Savages of all
these fabulous and monstrous Configurations.

(3) But thirdly, that we may proceed yet further with the Atheist, and
convince him, that not only his Principle is absurd, but his Consequences also
as absurdly deduced from it: we will allow him an uncertain extravagant Chance
against the natural Laws of Motion: though not forgetting that that notion has
been refuted before, and therefore this Concession is wholly ex abundanti. I
say then, that though there were really such a thing as this Chance or Fortune;
yet nevertheless it would be extremely absurd to ascribe the Formation of
Humane Bodies to a Cast of this Chance. For let us consider the very Bodies
themselves. Here are confessedly all the marks and characters of Design in
their structure, that can be required, though one suppose a Divine Author had
made them: here is nothing in the Work it self, unworthy of so great a Master:
here are no internal arguments from the Subject against the truth of that
Supposition. Have we then any capacity to judge and distinguish, what is the
effect of Chance, and what is made by Art and Wisdom? When a Medal is dug out
of the ground, with some Roman Emperor's Image upon it, and an Inscription that
agrees to his Titles and History, and an Impress upon the Reverse relating to
some memorable occurrence in his Life; can we be sure, that this Medal was
really coined by an Artificer, or is but a Product of the Soil from whence it
was taken, that might casually or naturally receive that texture and figure: as
many kinds of Fossils are very odly and elegantly shaped according to the
modification of their constituent Salts, or the cavities they were formed in?
Is it a matter of doubt and controversy, whether the Pillar of Trajan or
Antoninus, the Ruins of Persepolis, or the late Temple of Minerva were the
Designs and Works of Architecture; or perhaps might originally exist so, or be
raised up in an Earthquake by subterraneous Vapor? Do not we all think our
selves infallibly certain, that this or that very commodious House must needs
have been built by Humane Art; though perhaps a natural Cave in a Rock may have
something not much unlike to Parlors or Chambers? And yet he must be a mere
Idiot, that cannot discern more Strokes and Characters of Workmanship in the
Structure of an Animal (in an Humane Body especially) than in the most elegant
Medal or Aedifice in the World. They will believe the first Parents of Mankind
to have been fortuitously formed without Wisdom or Art: and that for this sorry
reason, Because it is not simply impossible, but that they may have been formed
so. And who can demonstrate (if Chance be once admitted of) but that possibly
all the Inscriptions and other remains of Antiquity may be mere Lusus Naturae,
and not Works of Humane Artifice? If this be good reasoning, let us no longer
make any pretenses to Judgment or a faculty of discerning between things
Probable and Improbable: for, except flat contradictions, we may upon equal
reasons believe all things or nothing at all. And do the Atheists thus argue in
common matters of Life? Would they have Mankind lie idle, and lay aside all
care of Provisions by Agriculture or Commerce; because possibly the Dissolution
of Lucret. 5. Dictis dabit ipsa fidem res Forsitan, and graviter terrarum
motibus orbis Omnia conquassari in parvo tempore cernes.
the World may happen the next moment? Had Dinocrates really carved Mount
Athos, into a Statute of Alexander the Great, and had the memory of the fact
been obliterated by some accident; who could afterward have proved it
impossible, but that it might casually have been formed so? For every Mountain
must have some determinate figure, and why then not a Humane one, as possibly
as another? And yet I suppose none could have seriously believed so, upon this
bare account of Possibility. It Is an opinion, that generally obtains among
Philosophers, That there is but one Common Matter, which is diversified by
Accidents, and the same numerical quantity of it by variations of Texture may
constitute successively all kinds of Bodies in the World* So that it is not
absolutely impossible; but that, if you take any other Matter of equal weight
and substance with the Body of a Man, you may blend it so long, till it be
shuffled into Humane shape and an Organical structure. But who is he so
abandoned to sottish credulity, as to think, upon that Principle, That a clod
of Earth in a Sack may ever by eternal shaking receive the Fabric of Man's
Body? And yet this is very near a*kin, nay it is exactly parallel to the
reasoning of Atheists about fortuitous Production. If mere Possibility be a
good foundation for Belief; even Lucian's True History Palaeph. (...) De
Incredibilibus.
may be true upon that account, and Palaephatus's Tales may be credible in
spite of the Title.

It has been excellently well urged in this case both by Ancients and Moderns,
that to attribute such admirable Structures to blind Fortune or Chance, is no
less absurd than to suppose, That if innumerable figures of the XXIV Letters be
cast abroad at random, they might constitute in due order the whole Aeneis of
Virgil or the Annals of Cicero de Natura Deorum, 2. 37.
Ennius. Now the Atheists may pretend to elude this Comparison; as if the Case
was not fairly stated. For herein we first make an Idea of a particular Poem;
and then demand, if Chance can possibly describe That: and so we conceive Man's
Body thus actually formed, and then affirm that it exceeds the power of Chance
to constitute a Being like That: which, they may say, is to expect Imitation
from Chance, and not simple Production. But at the first Beginning of things
there was no Copy to be followed, nor any prae-existent Form of Humane Bodies
to be imitated. So that to put the case fairly, we should strip our minds and
fancies from any particular Notion and Idea of a Living Body or a Poem: and
then we shall understand, that what Shape and Structure soever should be at
first casually formed, so that it could live and propagate, might be Man: and
whatsoever should result from the strowing of those loose Letters, that made
any Sense and Measures, might be the Poem we seek for.

To which we reply, That if we should allow them, that there was no
prae-existent Idea of Humane Nature, till it was actually formed, (for the Idea
of Man in the Divine Intellect must not now be considered) yet because they
declare, that great Multitudes of each Species of Animals did fortuitously
emerge out of the Soil Lucret. 5. Hinc ubi quaeque loci regio opportuna dabatur
Crescebant uteri, etc. and ibidem. Inde loci mortalia saecla creavit, Multa
modis multis varia ratione coorta.
in distant Countries and Climates; what could that be less than Imitation in
blind Chance, to make many Individuals of one Species so exactly alike? Nay
though they should now, to cross us and evade the force of the Argument, desert
their ancient Doctrine, and derive all sorts of Animals from single Originals
of each kind, which should be the common Parents of all the Race: yet surely
even in this account they must necessarily allow Two at least, Male and Female,
in every Species: which Chance could neither make so very nearly alike, without
Copying and Imitation; nor so usefully differing, without Contrivance and
Wisdom. So that let them take whether they will: If they deduce all Animals
from single pairs of a sort; even to make the Second of a Pair, is to write
after a Copy; it is, in the former comparison, by the casting of loose Letters
to compose the prae-existent particular Poem of Ennius: But if they make
numerous Sons and Daughters of Earth among every Species of Creatures, as all
their Authors have supposed; this is not only, as was said before, to believe a
Monky may once scribble the Leviathan of Hobbes, but may do the same frequently
by an Habitual kind of Chance.

Let us consider, how next to Impossible it is that Chance (if there were such
a thing) should in such an immense Variety of Parts in an Animal twice hit upon
the same Structure, so as to make a Male and Female. Let us resume the former
instance of the XXIV Letters thrown at random upon the ground. It Is a
Mathematical Demonstration, That these XXIV do admit of so many Changes in
their order, may make such a long roll (...) Arithmet. cap. de Progressione.
of differently ranged Alphabets, not two of which are alike; that they could
not all be exhausted, though a Million millions of writers should each write
above a thousand Alphabets a day for the space of a Million millions of years.
What strength of Imagination can extend it self to embrace and comprehend such
a prodigious Diversity? And it is as infallibly certain, that suppose any
particular order of the Alphabet be assigned, and the XXIV Letters be cast at a
venture, so as to fall in a Line; it is so many Million of millions odds to one
against any single throw, that the assigned Order will not be cast. Let us now
suppose, there be only a thousand constituent Members in the Body of a Man,
(that we may take few enough) it is plain that the different Position and
Situation of these thousand Parts, would make so many differing Compounds and
distinct Species of Animals. And if only XXIV parts, as before, may be so
multifariously placed and ordered, as to make many Millions of Millions of
differing Rows: in the supposition of a thousand parts, how immense must that
capacity of variation be? even beyond all thought and denomination, to be
expressed only in mute figures, whose multiplied Powers are beyond the
narrowness of Language, and drown the Imagination in astonishment and
confusion. Especially if we observe, that the Variety of the Alphabet
considered above, was in mere Longitude only: but the Thousand parts of our
Bodies may be Diversified by Situation in all the Dimensions of Solid Bodies:
which multiplies all over and over again, and overwhelms the fancy in a new
Abyss of unfathomable Number. Now it is demonstratively certain, that it is all
this odds to one, against any particular trial, That no one man could by casual
production be framed like another; (as the Atheists suppose thousands to be in
several regions of the Earth;) and I think it is rather more odds than less,
that no one Female could be added to a Male; in as much as that most necessary
Difference of Sex is a higher token of Divine Wisdom and Skill, above all the
power of Fortuitous Hits, than the very Similitude of both Sexes in the other
parts of the Body. And again we must consider, that the vast imparity of this
Odds against the accidental likeness of two Casual Formations is never lessened
and diminished by Trying and Casting. It Is above a Hundred to one against any
particular throw, That you do not cast any given Set of Faces with four Cubical
Dice: because there are so many several Combinations of the six Faces of four
Dice. Now after you have cast all the Hundred trials but one: it is still as
much odds at the last remaining time, as it was at the first. For blind
insensible Chance cannot grow cunning by many experiments; neither have the
preceding Casts any influence upon those that come after. So that if this
Chance of the Atheists should have essayed in vain to make a Species for a
Million millions of Ages, it is still as many Millions odds against that
Formation, as it was at the first moment in the beginning of Things. How
incredible is it therefore; that it should hit upon two Productions alike,
within so short duration Lucret. 5. Verum, ut opinor, habet novitatem Summa,
recensque Natura est mundi, neque pridem exordia cepit.
of the world, according to the Doctrine of our Atheists? how much more, that
it should do so within the compass of a hundred years, and of a small tract of
Ground; so that this Male and Female might come together? If any Atheist can be
induced to stake his Soul for a wager, against such an inexhaustible
disproportion; let him never hereafter accuse others of Easiness and Credulity.

(4) But fourthly, we will still make more ample Concessions, and suppose with
the Atheist, that his Chance has actually formed all Animals in their
terrestrial Wombs. Let us see now, how he will preserve them to Maturity of
Birth. What Climate will he cherish them in, that they be not inevitably
destroyed by Moisture or Cold? Where is that aequability of Nine Months warmth
to be found? that uniform warmth, which is so necessary even in the incubation
of Birds, much more in the time of gestation of Viviparous Animals. I know, his
Party have placed this great Scene in Egypt, Cesalpin. Berigard.
or some where between the two Tropicks. Now not to mention the Cool of the
Nights, which alone would destroy the Conceptions; it is known that all those
Countries have either incessant Rains every year for whole months together, or
are quite laid under water by Floods from the higher Grounds; which would
certainly corrupt and putrefy all the teeming Wombs of the Earth, and
extinguish the whole brood of Embryons by untimely Abortions.

(5) But fifthly, we will still be more obliging to this Atheist, and grant him
his petition, That Nature may bring forth the young Infants vitally into the
World. Let us see now what Sustenance, what Nurses he has provided for them.
If we consider the present Constitution of Nature; we must affirm, that most
Species must have been lost for want of fostering and feeding. It Is a great
mistake, that Man only comes weak and helpless into the world: whereas it is
apparent, that excepting Fish and Insects (and not all of them neither) there
are very few or no Creatures, that can provide for themselves at first without
the assistance of Parents. So that unless they suppose Mother Earth to be a
great Animal, and to have nurtured up her young Offspring with a conscious
Tenderness and providential Care; there is no possible help for it, but they
must have been doubly starved both with hunger and cold.

(6) But sixthly, we will be yet more civil to this Atheist, and forgive him
this Difficulty also. Let us suppose the first Animals maintained themselves
with food, though we cannot tell how. But then what security has he made for
the Preservation of Humane Race from the Jaws of ravenous Beasts? The Divine
Writers have acquainted us, that God at the beginning gave Mankind. Dominion
(an impressed awe and authority) over every living thing that moves upon the
Earth. But in the Atheists Genesis 1. 28.
Hypothesis there are no imaginable means of Defense. For it is manifest, that
so many Beasts of Prey, Lions, Tigres, Wolves, and the like, being of the same
age with Man, and arriving at the top of their strength in one year or two,
must needs have worried and devoured those forlorn Brats of our Atheists, even
before they were weaned from the Foramina Terrae, or at least in a short time
after: Lucret. 5.
since all the Carnivorous Animals would have mulplied exceedingly by several
Generations, before those Children that escaped at first, could come to the Age
of Puberty. So that Men would always lessen, and their Enemies always increase.

But some of them will here pretend, that Epicurus was out in this matter; and
that they were not born mere Infants out of those Wombs of the Earth; but Men
at their full growth, and in the prime of their strength. But I pray what
should hinder those grown lusty Infants, from breaking sooner those Membranes
that involved them; as the Shell of the Egg is broken by the Bird, and the
Amnion by the Foetus? Were the Membranes so thick and tough, that the Foetus
must stay there, till he had teeth to eat through them, as young Maggots do
through a Gall? But let us answer these Fools according to their Folly. Let us
grant, that they were born with Beards, and in the full time of Manhood. They
are not yet in a better condition: here are still many Enemies against few,
many Species against One; and those Enemies speedily multiplying in the second
and third and much lower generations; whereas the Sons of the First Men must
have a tedious time of Childhood and Adolescence, before they can either
themselves assist their Parents, or encourage them with new hopes of Posterity.
And we must consider withal, that (in the notion of Atheism) those Savages
were not then, what civilized Mankind is now; but Mutum and turpe pecus,
without Language, without mutual Society, without Arms of Offense, without
Houses or Fortifications; an obvious and exposed Prey to the ravage of
devouring Beasts; a most sorry and miserable Plantation toward the Peopling of
a World.

And now that I have followed the Atheists through so many dark mazes of Error
and Extravagance: having to my knowledge omitted nothing on their side, that
looks like a Difficulty; nor proposed any thing in Reply, but what I my self
really believe to be a just and solid Answer: I shall here close up the
Apostle's Argument of the Existence of God from the consideration of Humane
Nature. And I appeal to all sober and impartial Judges of what has been
delivered; Whether those Noble Faculties of our Souls may be only a mere Sound
and Echo from the clashing of senseless Atoms, or rather indubitably must
proceed from a Spiritual Substance of a Heavenly and Divine Extraction: whether
these admirable Fabrics of our Bodies shall be ascribed to the fatal Motions
or fortuitous Shufflings of blind Matter, or rather beyond controversy to the
Wisdom and Contrivance of the Almighty Author of all things, Who is wonderful
in Counsel, and Excellent in Working. To Isai. 28. 29.
whom, etc.

A CONFUTATION OF ATHEISM FROM THE Origin and Frame of the World.
PART I.
The Sixth SERMON preached October 3. 1692.
Acts XIV. 15, etc. That ye should turn from these vanities unto the living
God, who made Heaven and Earth and the Sea, and all things that are therein:
Who in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless,
he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us Rain from
Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling our hearts with Food and Gladness.
ALL the Arguments, that can be brought, or can be demanded, for the Existence
of God, may, perhaps not absurdly, be reduced to three General Heads: The First
of which will include all the Proofs from the Vital and Intelligent portions of
the Universe, the Organical Bodies of the various Animals, and the Immaterial
Souls of Men. Which Living and Understanding Substances, as they make
incomparably the most considerable and noble Part of the naturally known and
visible Creation; so they do the most clearly and cogently demonstrate to
Philosophical Enquirers the necessary Self-existence, and omnipotent Power, and
unsearchable Wisdom, and boundless Beneficence of their Maker. This first
Topic therefore was very fitly and divinely made use of by our Apostle in his
Conference with Philosophers and that inquisitive People of Athens: the latter
spending their Chap. 17. V. 2.
time in nothing else, but either to tell or hear some New thing; and the
other, in nothing, but to call in question the most evident Truths, that were
delivered and received of Old. And these Arguments we have hitherto pursued in
their utmost latitude and extent. So that now we shall proceed to the Second
Head, or the Proofs of a Deity from the Inanimate part of the World; since even
Natural Reason, as well as Holy Scripture, assures us, That the Heavens declare
Psalm. 19. 1.
the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his Handiwork; That he made the
Earth by his power, He Jer. 51. 15.
has established the World by his wisdom, and has stretched out the Heaven by
his understanding; That He commanded Psalm. 148. 5
and they were created; he has also established them for ever and ever; He
covers the Heavens with 147. 8.
Clouds, He prepares Rain for the Earth, He crowns 65. 2.
the Year with his Goodness.

These Reasons for God's Existence, from the Frame and System of the World, as
they are equally true with the Former, so they have always been more popular
and plausible to the illiterate part of Mankind; insomuch as the Epicureans,
and some others, have observed, that Lucret. 5. Praeterea coeli rations ordine
certo, Et varia annorum cernebant tempora verti: and lib. 6. Nam been qui
didicere Deos securum agere aevum, Si tamen interea mirantur, etc. Cic. de Not.
Deor. lib. 2. Quis hunc hominem dixerit, qui cum tam cert^s coeli motus, tam
ratos astrorum ordines, etc. Plutarch. de plac. phil. 1. 6. (...).
men's contemplating the most ample Arch of the Firmament, the innumerable
multitude of the Stars, the regular Rising and Setting of the Sun, the
periodical and constant Vicissitudes of Day and Night and Seasons of the Year,
and the other Affections of Meteors and Heavenly Bodies, was the principal and
almost only ground and occasion, that the Notion of a God came first into the
World: making no mention of the former Proof from the Frame of Humane Nature,
That in God we Live and Move and have our Being. Which Argument being so
natural and internal to Mankind, does nevertheless (I know not how) seem more
remote and obscure to the Generality of Men; who are readier to fetch a Reason
from the immense distance of the starry Heavens and the outmost Walls of the
World, than seek one at home, within themselves, in their own Faculties and
Constitutions. So that hence we may perceive, how prudently that was waved, and
the Second here insisted on by St. Paul to the rude and simple Semi-barbarians
of Lycaonia: He left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave
us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling our Hearts with Food and
Gladness. Which words we shall now interpret in a large and free Acceptance;
so that this Second Theme may comprehend all the Brute Inanimate Matter of the
Universe, as the Former comprised all visible Creatures in the World, that have
Understanding or Sense or Vegetable Life. These two Arguments are the Voices of
Nature, the unanimous Suffrages of all real Beings and Substances created, that
are naturally knowable without Revelation. And if, Lastly, in the Third place,
we can evince the Divine Existence from the Adjuncts and Circumstances of
Humane Life; if we find in all Ages, in all civilized Nations, an Universal
Belief and Worship of a Divinity; if we find many unquestionable Records of
Supernatural and Miraculous Effects; if we find many faithful Relations of
Prophecies punctually accomplished; of Prophecies so well attested, above the
suspicion of Falsehood; so remote and particular and unlikely to come to pass,
beyond the possibility of good Guessing or the mere Foresight of Humane Wisdom;
if we find a most warrantable tradition, that at sundry times and in diverse
manners God spoke unto Mankind by his Prophets and by his Son and his Apostles,
who have delivered to us in Sacred Writings a clearer Revelation of his Divine
Nature and Will: if, I say, this Third Topic from Humane Testimony be found
agreeable to the standing Vote and Attestation of Nature, What further proofs
can be demanded or desired? what fuller evidence can our Adversaries require,
since all the Classes of known Beings are summoned to appear? Would they have
us bring more Witnesses, than the All of the World? and will they not stand to
the grand Verdict and Determination of the Universe? They are incurable
Infidels, that persist to deny a Deity; when all Creatures in the World, as
well spiritual as corporeal, all from Humane Race to the lowest of Insects,
from the Cedar of Libanus to the Moss upon the Wall, from the vast Globes of
the Sun and Planets, to the smallest Particles of Dust, do declare their
absolute dependence upon the first Author and Fountain of all Being and Motion
and Life, the only Eternal and Self-existent God; with whom inhabit all Majesty
and Wisdom and Goodness for ever and ever.

But before I enter upon this Argument from the Origin and Frame of the World;
it will not be amiss to premise some Particulars that may serve for an
illustration of the Text, and be a proper Introduction to the following
Discourses.

As the Apostles, Barnabas and Paul, were preaching the Gospel at Lystra a City
of Lycaonia in Asia Ver. 8.
the Less, among the rest of their Auditors there was a lame Cripple from his
Birth, whom Paul commanded with a loud voice, To stand upright on his feet; and
immediately by a miraculous Energy he leaped and walked. Let us compare the
present Circumstances with those of my former Text, and observe the remarkable
difference in the Apostle's procedings. No question but there were several
Cripples at Athens, so very large and populous a City; and if that could be
dubious, I might add, that the very Climate disposed the Inhabitants to
impotency in the Feet. Atthide tentantur gressus, oculique in Achaeis Lucret.
Lib. 6.
Finibus -- are the words of Lucretius; which it is probable he transcribed from
Epicurus a Gargettian and Native of Athens, and therefore an unquestionable
Evidence in a matter of this nature. Neither is it likely, that all the
Athenian Cripples should escape the sight of St. Paul; since he disputed there
Ver. 17.
in the Market daily with them that met him. How comes it to pass then, that we
do not hear of a like Miracle in that City; which one would think might have
greatly conduced to the Apostle's design, and have converted, or at least
confuted and put to silence, the Epicureans and Stoics? But it is not difficult
to give an account of this seeming Disparity; if we attend to the
Qualifications of the Lame person at Lystra: whom Paul steadfastly beholding,
and perceiving that he had FAITH to be healed, said with a Ver 9.
loud voice, Stand upright on thy Feet. This is the necessary Condition, that
was always required by our Savior and his Apostles. And Jesus said unto the
Luke 18 42.
the blind man, Receive thy sight, thy FAITH has saved thee; and to the Woman
that had the Issue of Blood, Daughter, be of good comfor, thy FAITH has 8. 48
made thee whole, go in peace. 'Twas want of FAITH in our Savior's Countrymen,
which hindered him from shedding among them the salutary Emanations of his
Divine Virtue: And he did not many mighty Matt. 13. 58.
works there, because of their Unbelief. There were many diseased persons in
his own Country, but very few that were rightly disposed for a supernatural
Cure. St. Mark has a very observable Expression upon the same occasion: And he
COULD do no mighty Mark 6. 5.
work there, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them.
(...). We read in St. Luke 5. 17. And the POWER ((...)) of the Lord was present
to heal them. And, chap. 6. v. 19. And the whole multitude sought to touch him:
for there went Virtue ((...)) out of him, and healed them all. Now since (...)
and (...) are words of the same Root and Signification; shall we so interpret
the Evangelist, as if our Savior had not Power to work Miracles among his
unbelieving Countrymen? This is the passage, which that impious and impure
Atheist Lucilio Vanino Vanini Dial. p. 439.
singled out for his Text, in his pretended and mock Apology for the Christian
Religion; wickedly insinuating, as if the Prodigies of Christ were mere
Impostures and acted by Confederacy: and therefore where the Spectators were
incredulous, and consequently watchful and suspicious, and not easily imposed
on, he COULD do no mighty Work there; there his Arm was shortened, and his
Power and Virtue too feeble for such supernatural Effects. But the gross
Absurdity of this suggestion is no less conspicuous, than the villainous
Blasphemy of it. For can it be credible to any rational person, that St. Mark
could have that meaning? that he should tax his Lord and Savior, whom he knew
to be God Almighty, with Deficiency of power? He could do no mighty Works; that
is, he would do none, because of their Unbelief. There Is a frequent change of
those words in all Languages of the World. And we may appeal with St.
Chrysostom to the common Chrysostom. ad locum, (...). So (...) is volo, Acts 4. 20.
John 7. 7. and (...) is possum. Vid. Budaei Comm. L Gr.
custom of Speech, whatever Country we live in. This therefore is the genuine
Sense of that expression; Christ would not heal their infirmities, because of
the hardness and slowness of their Hearts, in that they believed him not. And I
think there is not one instance in all the History of the New Testament of a
Miracle done for any ones sake, that did not believe Jesus to be a good person,
and sent from God; and had not a disposition of Heart fit to receive his
Doctrine. For to believe he was the Sea John chapter 9. and Matt. 16. 14.
Messiah and Son of God, was not then absolutely necessary, nor rigidly
exacted; the most Signal of the Prophecies being not yet fulfilled by him, till
his Passion and Resurrection. But, as I said, to obtain a Miracle from him, it
was necessary to believe him a good person and sent from God. Herod therefore
hoped in vain to have seen some Miracle done by Luke 23. 8
him: And when the Pharisees sought of him a sign from Mark 8 12.
Heaven, tempting him; they received this disappointing Answer, Verily I say
unto you, There shall no Sign be given to this generation. And we may observe
in the Gospels, That where the Persons themselves were incapable of actual
Faith; yet the Friends Matt. 17. 15. 15. 22. Luke 8. 4.
and Relations of those Dead that were raised again to life, of those Lunaticks
and Demoniacks that were restored to their right minds, were such as sought
after him and believed on him. And as to the healing of Malchus's Ear, it was a
peculiar and extraordinary Luke 22. 51.
Case: For though the person was wholly unworthy of so gracious a Cure; yet in
the account of the meek Lamb of God it was a kind of Injury done to him by the
fervidness of St. Peter, who knew not yet what Spirit he was of, and that his
Master's Kingdom was not of this World. But besides this obvious meaning of the
Words of the Evangelist, there may perhaps be a sublimer Sense couched under
the Expression. For in the Divine Nature Will and Can are frequently the
self-same thing; and Freedom and Necessity, that are opposites here below, do
in Heaven above most amicably agree and join hands together. And this is not a
Restraint, or Impotency; but the Royal Prerogative of the most absolute King of
Kings; that he wills to do nothing but what he can; and that he can do nothing
which is repugnant to his divine Wisdom and essential Goodness. God cannot do
what is unjust, nor say what is untrue, nor promise with a mind to deceive. Our
Savior therefore could do no mighty Work in a Country of Unbelievers; because
it was not fit and reasonable. And so we may say of our Apostle, who was acted
by the Spirit of God; that he could do no Miracle at Athens, and that because
of their Unbelief. There is a very sad and melancholy Account of the success of
his stay there. Howbeit CERTAIN Men clave unto him and (...), c. 17. v. 34.
believed; A more diminutive expression, than if they had been called a few.
And we do not find, that he ever visited this City again, as he did several
others, where there were a competent number of Disciples. And indeed if we
consider the Genius and Condition of the Athenians at that time, How vicious
and corrupt they were; how conceited of their own Wit and Science and
Politeness, as if They had invented Corn and Oil and distributed Cicero pro
Flacco. Adsunt Athenienses, unde humanitas, doctrina, religio, fruges, jura,
leges ortae atque in omnes terras distributae putantur. Isoc. Paneg. Diod. Sic.
13.
them to the World; and had first taught Civility, and Learning, and Religion,
and Laws to the rest of Mankind; how they were puffed up with the fulsome
Flatteries of their Philosophers and Sophists and Poets of the Stage: we cannot
much wonder, that they should so little regard an unknown Stranger, that
preached unto them an unknown God.

I am aware of an Objection, that for ought we can now affirm, St. Paul might
have done several Miracles at Athens, though they be not related by St. Luke. I
confess I am far from asserting, That all the Miracles of our Savior are
recorded in the Sea John 21. 25. and 2 Cor. 12. 12.
Gospels, or of his Apostles in the Acts. But nevertheless, in the present
Circumstances, I think we may conjecture, That if any Prodigy and Wonder had
been performed by our Apostle among those curious and pragmatical Athenians; it
would have had such a consequence, as might have deserved some place in Sacred
History, as well as this before us at Lystra: where when the people saw what
Were. 11.
Paul had done, they lift up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia,
The Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men: and the Priests came with
Oxen and Garlands, and would have sacrificed to them, as to Jupiter and
Mercurius. That this was a common Opinion among the Gentiles, that the Gods
sometimes assumed Humane shape, and conversed upon Earth as Strangers and
Travelers, must needs be well known to any one, that ever looks into the
ancient Poets. Even the Vagabond Life of Apollonius Tyanensis shall be called
by a bigoted Sophist, (...), a Peregrination of a God among Eunapius, cap. 2.
Men. And when the Lystrians say, (...), Gods in the Shape of Men, they mean
not, that the Gods had other Figure than Humane even in Heaven it self (for
that was the received Doctrine of most of the Vulgar Heathen, and of some Sects
of Philosophers too,) but that They, who in their own Nature were of a more
august Stature and glorious Visage, had now contracted and debased themselves
into the narrower Dimensions and meaner Aspects of mortal Men. Now when the
Apostles heard of this intended Sacrifice, they rent their Ver. 14.
clothes and ran in among the people, crying out, etc. St. Chrysostom upon this
place has a very odd Exposition. He enquires why Paul and Barnabas do now at
last reprove the People, when the Priest and Victims were even at the Gates;
and not presently, when they lift up their Voice, and called them Gods: for
which he assigns this reason, (...). Chrysostom. ad loc.
That because they spoke (...), in the Lycaonian Tongue, the Apostles did not
then understand them: but now they perceived their meaning by the Oxen and the
Garlands. Indeed it is very probable, that the Lycaonian Language was very
different from the Greek; as we may gather from Ephorus Ephorus apud Strab.
lib. 14.
and Strabo that cites him, who make almost all the Inland Nations of Asia
Minor to be Barbarians; and from Stephanus Byzantius, who acquaints us, Steph
voce (...).
that (...), a Juniper-tree, was called (...) in the Speech of the Lycaonians,
(...). But notwithstanding we can by no means allow, that the great Apostle of
the Gentiles should be ignorant of that Language: He that so solemnly affirms
of himself, I thank my God, I speak with Tongues 1 Cor. 14. 18.
more than you all. And at the first Effusion of his heavenly Gift, the
dwellers in Cappadocia, in Pontus and Acts 2.
Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia (some of them near Neighbors to the Lycaonians)
heard the Apostles speak in their several Tongues the wonderful Works of God.
And how could these two Apostles have preached the Gospel to the Lystrians, if
they did not Ver. 7.
use the common Language of the Country? And to what purpose did they cry out
and speak to them, Ver. 15.
if the Hearers could not apprehend? or how could they by those Sayings
restrain the People from sacrificing; Ver. 15.
if what they said was not intelligible? But it will be asked, why then were
the Apostles so slow and backward in reclaiming them? and what can be answered
to the Query of St. Chrysostom? When I consider the circumstances and nature of
this affair, I am persuaded they did not hear that discourse of the people. For
I can hardly conceive, that Men under such apprehensions as the Lystrians then
were, in the dread Presence and under the very Nod of the almighty Jupiter, not
an Idol of Wood or Stone, but the real and very God (as the Athenians made
(...). Athenaeus, 6. 15. (...).
their Complement to Demetrius Poliorcetes) should exclaim in his sight and
hearing: this, I say, seems not probable nor natural; nor is it affirmed in the
Text: but they might buzz and whisper it one to another, and silently
withdrawing from the presence of the Apostles, they then lift up their voices
and noised it about the City. So that Paul and Barnabas were but just then
informed of their idolatrous design, when they rent their Clothes, and ran in
among them, and expostulated with them; Sirs, why Ver. 15.
do ye these things? we also are men of like passions with you; (...), Mortales
sumus similes vobis homines. So (...), If I die, a common Expression in Gr.
Writers.
Mortal men like your selves, as it is judiciously rendered in the ancient
Latin Version, otherwise the Antithesis is not so plain: For the Heathen
Theology made even the Gods themselves subject to humane passions and
appetites, to Anger, Sorrow, Lust, Hunger, Wounds, Lameness, etc. and exempted
them from nothing but Death and Old Age: and we preach unto you, that ye should
turn (...). Hom.
from these vanities (i. e. Idols) unto the Living God, which made Heaven and
Earth and the Sea, and all things that are therein: who in times past suffered
all Nations to walk in their own ways: (...), not all Nations, but all the
Heathen (the word HEATHEN comes from (...)) all the Gentiles, distinguished
from See Acts 4. 27. 14. 5. 26. 17. Gal. 2. 14.
the Jews, as the same words are translated Romans 15. 11. and 2 Timothy 4. 17. and
ought to have been so, Romans 1. 5. and 16. 26. but much more in our Text, which
according to the present Version seems to carry a very obscure, if not
erroneous meaning; but by a true interpretation is very easy and intelligible;
That hitherto God had suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own ways; and
excepting the Jews only, whom he chose for his own people, and prescribed them
a Law, he permitted the rest of Man* kind to walk by the mere light of Nature
without the assistance of Revelation: but that now in the fullness of time, he
had even to the Gentiles also sent salvation, and opened the door of faith, and
granted repentance unto life. So that these words of our Apostle are exactly
co-incident with that remarkable passage in his discourse to the Athenians: And
the Acts 17. 30.
(past) times of this ignorance (of the Gentile World) God winked at (or (...).
overlooked:) but now commands all men every where to repent. And
nevertheless, says our Text, even in that gloomy state of Heathenism, he left
not himself without witness, in that he did good, (...), always doing good from
Heaven, (which seems to be the genuine punctuation, and is authorized by the
Syriack Interpreters) and gave us (...) So that they read (...). Horat. Nec
siquid miri faciat natura, Deos id Tristes ex alto coeli demittere tecto.
Rain and fruitful Seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. Even
the very Gentiles might feel after him and find him; since the admirable frame
of Heaven and Earth and Sea, and the munificent provision of food and
sustenance for his Creatures, did competently set forth his Eternal Power and
Godhead; so that stupid Idolaters and profane Atheists were then and always
without excuse.

Our Adversaries have used the same methods to elude the present Argument from
the Frame of the World, as they have done to evade the former from the Origin
of Mankind. Some have maintained, That this World has thus existed from all
Eternity in its present form and condition: but Others say, That the Forms of
particular Worlds are generable and corruptible; so that our present System
cannot have sustained an infinite Duration already gone and expired: but
however, say they, Body in general, the common Basis and Matter of all Worlds
and Beings, is self-existent and eternal; which being naturally divided into
innumerable little particles or atoms, eternally endued with an ingenit and
inseparable power of Motion, by their omnifarious concursions and combinations
and coalitions, produce successively (or at once, if Matter be infinite) an
infinite number of Worlds; and amongst the rest there arose this visible
complex System of Heaven and Earth. And thus far they do agree, but then they
differ about the cause and mode of the production of Worlds, some ascribing it
to Fortune, and others to Mechanism or Nature. It Is true, the Astrological
Atheists, will give us no trouble in the present dispute; because they cannot
form a peculiar Hypothesis here, as they have done before about the Origination
of Animals. For though some of them are so vain and senseless, as to pretend to
a Thema Mundi, a calculated Scheme of the Nativity of our World: yet it exceeds
even Their absurdity, to suppose the Zodiac and Planets to be efficient of,
and antecedent to themselves; or to exert any influences, before they were in
Being. So that to refute all possible Explications that the Atheists have or
can propose, I shall proceed in this following method.

I. First, I will prove it impossible that the primary Parts of our World, the
Sun and the Planets with their regular Motions and Revolutions, should have
subsisted eternally in the present or a like Frame and Condition. II. Secondly,
I will show, That Matter abstractly and absolutely considered, cannot have
subsisted eternally; or, if it has, yet Motion cannot have coexisted eternally
with it, as an inherent Property and essential Attribute of the Atheist's God,
Matter. III. Thirdly, Though Universal Matter should have endured from
everlasting, divided into infinite Particles in the Epicurean way, and though
Motion should have been coaeval and coeternal with it: yet those Particles or
Atoms could never of themselves by omnifarious kinds of Motion, whether
Fortuitous or Mechanical, have fallen or been disposed into this or a like
visible System. IV. And Fourthly, a posteriori, That the Order and Beauty of
the Inanimate Parts of the World, the discernible Ends and Final Causes of
them, the (...), or a Meliority above what was necessary to be, do evince by a
reflex Argument, That it is the Product and Workmanship, not of blind Mechanism
or blinder Chance; but of an intelligent and benign Agent, who by his excellent
Wisdom made the Heavens and Earth: and gives Rains and fruitful Seasons for
the service of Man.
I shall speak to the two first Propositions in my present Discourse; reserving
the latter for other Opportunities.

I. First, therefore: That the present or a like Frame of the World has not
subsisted from Everlasting. We will readily concede, that a thing may be truly
Eternal, though its duration be terminated at one End. For so we affirm Humane
Souls to be Immortal and Eternal, though (...), there was a time when they were
Nothing; and therefore their Infinite Duration will always be bounded at one
Extreme by that first beginning of Existence. So that, for ought appears as
yet; the Revolutions of the Earth and other Planets about the Sun, though they
be limited at one end by the present Revolution, may nevertheless have been
Infinite and Eternal without any beginning. But then we must consider, that
this Duration of Humane Souls is only potentially Infinite. For their Eternity
consists only in an endless capacity of Continuance without ever ceasing to be,
in a boundless Futurity that can never be exhausted, or all of it be past and
present. But their Duration can never be positively and actually Eternal;
because it is most manifest, that no Moment can ever be assigned, wherein it
shall be true, that such a Soul has then actually sustained an Infinite
Duration. For that supposed Infinite Duration will by the very Supposition be
limited at two extremes, though never so remote asunder; and consequently must
needs be Finite. Wherefore the true Nature and Notion of a Soul's Eternity is
this: That the future moments of its Duration can never be all past and
present; but still there will be a Futurity and Potentiality of more for ever
and ever. So that we evidently perceive, from this instance, That whatever
successive Duration, shall be bounded at one end, and be all past and present,
for that reason must be Finite. Which necessarily evinceth, That the present or
a like World can never have been Eternal; or that there cannot have been
Infinite past Revolutions of a Planet about a Sun. For this supposed Infinity
is terminated at one extreme by the present Revolution, and all the other
Revolutions are confessedly past; so that the whole Duration is bounded at one
end, and all past and present; and therefore cannot have been Infinite, by what
was proved before. And this will show us the vast difference between the false
successive Eternity backwards, and the real one to come. For, consider the
present Revolution of the Earth, as the Bound and Confine of them both. God
Almighty, if he so pleases, may continue this Motion to perpetuity in Infinite
Revolutions to come: because Futurity is inexhaustible, and can never be all
spent and run out by past and present moments. But then, if we look backwards
from this present Revolution, we may apprehend the impossibility of infinite
Revolutions on that side: because all are already past, and so were once
actually present, and consequently are finite, by the argument before. For
surely we cannot conceive a Praeteriteness (if I may say so) still backwards in
infinitum, that never was present: as we can an endless futurity, that never
will be present. So that though one is potentially infinite; yet nevertheless
the other is actually finite. And this Reasoning does necessarily conclude
against the past infinite duration of all successive Motion and mutable Beings:
but it does not at all affect the eternal Existence of God, in whose invariable
nature there is no Past nor Future; who is omnipresent not only as to Space,
but as to Duration; and with respect to such Omnipresence, it is certain and
manifest, that Succession and Motion are mere impossibilities, and repugnant in
the very terms.

And Secondly, though what has been now said, has given us so clear a view of
the nature of successive Duration, as to make more Arguments needless: yet I
shall here briefly show, how our Adversaries Hypothesis without any outward
opposition destroys and confutes it self. For let us suppose infinite
Revolutions of the Earth about the Sun to be already gone and expired: I take
it to be self-evident; that, if None of those past Revolutions has been
infinite ages ago, all the Revolutions put together cannot make up the duration
of infinite ages. It follows therefore from this supposition, that there may be
some one assignable Revolution among them, that was at an infinite distance
from the present. But it is self-evident likewise, that no one past Revolution
could be infinitely distant from the present: for then an infinite or unbounded
Duration may be bounded at two extremes by two Annual Revolutions; which is
absurd and a contradiction. And again, upon the same supposition of an eternal
past Duration of the World, and of infinite Annual Revolutions of the Earth
about the Sun; I would ask concerning the Monthly Revolutions of the Moon about
the Earth, or the diurnal ones of the Earth upon its one Axis, both which by
the very Hypothesis are coaeval with the former; whether these also have been
finite or infinite? Not finite to be sure; because then a finite number would
be greater than an infinite, as 12 or 365 are more than an Unit. Nor infinite
neither; for then two or three Infinites would exceed one another: as a Year
exceeds a Month, or both exceed a Day. So that both ways the Supposition is
repugnant and impossible.

And Thirdly, the Arguments already used, from Sermon. III.
the gradual Increase of Mankind, from the known Plantations of most Countries,
from the recent Invention of Letters and Arts, etc. do conclude as forcibly
against the Eternity of the World, as against infinite Generations of Humane
Race. For if the present Frame of the Earth be supposed eternal; by the same
notion they make Mankind to have been coeternal with it. For otherwise this
eternal Earth, after she had been eternally barren and desolate, must at last
have spontaneously produced Mankind, without new cause from without, or any
alteration in her own texture: which is so gross an absurdity, that even no
Atheist has yet affirmed it. So that it evidently follows, since Mankind had a
beginning; that the present Form of the Earth, and therefore the whole System
of the World had a beginning also.

Which being proved and established; we are now enabled to give answers to some
bold Queries and Objections of Atheists; That since God is described as a Being
infinitely powerful and perfectly good; and that these Attributes were
essential to him from all Eternity; why did he not by his Power, for the more
ample communication of his Goodness, create the World from eternity, if he
created it at all? or at least, many Millions of Ages ago before this short
span of duration of five or six thousand Years? To the first we reply, That
since we have discovered an internal and natural impossibility, that a
successive Duration should be actually eternal; it is to Us a flat
contradiction, that the World should have been created from everlasting. And
therefore it is no affront to the Divine Omnipotence, if by reason of the
formal incapacity and repugnancy of the thing, we conceive that the World could
not possibly have been made from all Eternity, even by God himself. Which gives
an answer to the second Question, Why created so lately? For if it could not be
created from Eternity, there can no instant be assigned for its Creation in
Time, though never so many Myriads and Millions of years since, but the same
Query may be put, Why but now, and Why so late? For even before that remoter
period, God was eternally existent, and might have made the World as many
Myriads of Ages still backwards before That: and consequently this Objection is
absurd and unreasonable. For else if it was good and allowable, it would
eternally hinder God from exerting his Creative Power: because he could never
make a World so early, at any given Moment; but it may truly be said he could
have created it sooner. Or if they think, there may be a Soonest Instant of
possible Creation: yet since all Instants have an equal pretense to it in
humane apprehension, why may not this recent production of the World, according
to Sacred Authority, be supposed to be that Soonest? At least it may make that
Claim to it, that cannot be baffled by their Arguments, which equally conclude
against all Claims, against any conceivable Beginning of the World.

And so when they profanely ask, Why did not this supposed Deity, if he really
made the Heavens, make them boundless and immense, a fit and honorable Mansion
for an infinite and incomprehensible Being? or at least vastly more ample and
magnificent, than this narrow Cottage of a World? we may make them this answer;
First, it seems impossible and a contradiction, that a created World should be
infinite; because it is the nature of Quantity and Motion; that they can never
be actually and positively infinite: They have a Power indeed and a capacity of
being increased without end; so as no Quantity can be assigned so vast, but
still a larger may be imagined; no Motion so swift or languid, but a greater
Velocity or Slowness may still be conceived; no positive Duration of it so
long, than which a longer may not be supposed; but even that very Power hinders
them from being actually infinite. From whence secondly it follows; that,
though the World was a million of times more spacious and ample, than even
Astronomy supposes it; or yet another million bigger than that, and so on in
infinite progression; yet still they might make the same Exception world
without end. For since God Almighty can do all that is possible; and Quantity
has always a possibility of being enlarged more and more: he could never
create so ample a World, but still it would be true, that he could have made a
bigger; the foecundity of his Creative Power never growing barren, nor ever to
be exhausted. Now what may always be an exception against all possible Worlds,
can never be a just one against any whatsoever.

And when they scoffingly demand, Why would this imaginary Omnipotence make
such mean pieces of Workmanship? what an indigent and impotent thing is his
principal Creature Man? would not boundless Beneficence have communicated his
divine Perfections in the most eminent degrees? They may receive this reply,
That we are far from such arrogance, as to pretend to the highest dignity, and
be the chief of the whole Creation; we believe an invisible World and a Scale
of Spiritual Beings all nobler than our selves: nor yet are we so low and base
as their Atheism would depress us; not walking Statues of Clay, not the Sons of
brute Earth, whose final Inheritance is Death and Corruption; we carry the
image of God in us, a rational and immortal Soul; and though we be now indigent
and feeble, yet we aspire after eternal happiness, and firmly expect a great
exaltation of all our natural powers. But whatsoever was or can be made,
whether Angels or Archangels, Cherubims, or Seraphims, whether Thrones or
Dominions or Principalities or Powers, all the glorious Host of Heaven, must
needs be finite and imperfect and dependent Creatures: and God out of the
exceeding greatness of his power is still able, without end, to create higher
Classes of Beings. For where can we put a stop to the Efficacy of the Almighty?
or what can we assign for the Highest of all possible finite Perfections? There
can be no such thing as an almost Infinite: there can be nothing Next or Second
to an omnipotent God: Nec viget quicquam simile aut secundum; Horat. Car. 1. 12.
as the Heathen Poet said excellently well of the supposed Father of Gods and
Men. The infinite Distance between the Creator and the noblest of all Creatures
can never be measured nor exhausted by endless addition of finite degrees. So
that no actual Creature can ever be the most perfect of all possible Creation.
Which shows the folly of this Query, that might always be demanded, let things
be as they will; that would impiously and absurdly attempt to tie the Arm of
Omnipotence from doing any thing at all, because it can never do its Utmost.

II. I proceed now to the Second Proposition, That neither Matter universally
and abstractly considered, nor Motion as its Attribute and Property, can have
existed from all Eternity. And to this I shall speak the more briefly; not only
because it is an abstruse and metaphysical Speculation; but because it is of
far less moment and consequence than the rest: since without this we can evince
the Existence of God from the Origin and Frame of the Universe. For if the
present or a like System of the World cannot possibly have been eternal; and if
By the first Proposition.
without God it could neither naturally nor fortuitously emerge out of a Chaos;
we must necessarily By the third Proposition.
have recourse to a Deity, as the Contriver and Maker of Heaven and Earth;
whether we suppose he created them out of Nothing, or had the Materials ready
eternally to his hand. But nevertheless, because we are verily persuaded of the
truth of this Article, we shall briefly assign some reasons of our Belief in
these following Particulars.

First, It is a thing possible, that Matter may have been produced out of
Nothing. It is urged as an Universal Maxim; that Nothing can proceed from
Nothing. Now this we readily allow; and yet it will prove nothing against the
Possibility of Creation. For when they say, Nothing from Nothing; they must so
understand it, as excluding all Causes, both material and efficient. In which
sense it is most evidently and infallibly true: being equivalent to this
proposition; that Nothing can make it self, or, Nothing cannot bring its no
self out of nonentity into Something. Which only expresses thus much, That
Matter did not produce it self, or, that all Substances did not emerge out of
an Universal Nothing. Now who-ever talked at that rate? We do not say, the
World was created from Nothing and by Nothing; we assert an eternal God to have
been the Efficient Cause of it. So that a Creation of the World out of Nothing
by Something; and by that Something, that includes in its Nature a necessary
Existence and perfection of Power; is certainly no Contradiction; nor opposes
that common Maxim. Whence it manifestly follows, That since God may do any
thing that implies not a Contradiction; if there be such an Essence as God, he
may have created Matter out of nothing, that is, have given an existence to
Matter, which had no Being before.

And Secondly, It is very probable, that Matter has been actually created out
of Nothing. In a former Discourse Sermon II.
we have proved sufficiently, that Humane Souls are not mere modification of
Matter, but real and spiritual Substances, that have as true an Existence, as
our very Bodies themselves. Now no man, as I conceive, can seriously think,
that his own Soul has existed from all Eternity. He cannot believe the Stuff
or Materials of his Soul to have been eternal, and the Soul to have been made
up of them at the time of his conception. For a Humane Soul is no compound
Being; it is not made of Particles, as our Bodies are; but it is one simple
homogeneous Essence: Neither can he think, that the Personality of his Soul
with its Faculties inherent in it has existed eternally; this is against common
Sense; and it needs no Refutation. Nay, though a Man could be so extravagant,
as to hold this Assertion; That his Soul, his personal self, has been from
everlasting; yet even this in the issue would be destructive to Atheism; since
it supposes an eternal Being, endued with Understanding and Wisdom. We will
take it then as a thing confessed, That the Immaterial Souls of Men have been
produced out of Nothing. But if God has actually created those intelligent
Substances, that have such Nobility and Excellency of Being above brute
senseless Matter; it is pervicaciousness to deny, that he created Matter also:
unless they will say, necessary Existence is included in the very Essence and
Idea of Matter.

But Matter does not include in its Nature a necessity of Existence. For Humane
Souls, as is proved before, have been actually created, and consequently have
not necessary Existence included in their Essence. Now can any man believe,
that his spiritual Soul, that understands, and judges, and invents; endowed
with those Divine Faculties of Sense, Memory and Reason; has a dependent and
precarious Being created and preserved by another; while the Particles of this
dead Ink and Paper have been necessarily eternal and uncreated? It Is against
natural reason; and no one while he contemplates an individual Body, can
discern that necessity of its Existence. But men have been taught to believe,
that Extension or Space, and Body are both the self-same thing. So that because
they cannot imagine, how Space can either begin or cease to exist; they
presently conclude, that extended infinite Matter must needs be eternal. But I
shall fully prove Sermon. VII.
hereafter, that Body and Space or Distance are quite different things, and
that a Vacuity is interspersed among the Particles of Matter, and such a one as
has a vastly larger Extension, than all the Matter of the Universe. Which now
being supposed; they ought to abstract their Imagination from that false
infinite Extension, and conceive one Particle of Matter, surrounded on all
sides with vacuity, and contiguous to no other Body. And whereas formerly they
fansied an immense boundless Space, as an homogeneous One; which great
Individual they believed might deserve the Attribute of necessary Existence:
Let them now please to imagine one solitary Atom, that has no dependence on
the rest of the World; and is no more sustained in Being by other Matter, than
it could be created by it; and then I would ask the question, whether this poor
Atom, sluggish and unactive as it is, does involve Necessity of Existence, the
first and highest of all perfections, in its particular nature and notion? I
dare presume for the Negative in the judgments of all serious men. And I
observe the Epicureans Lucret. Lib. 1.
take much pains to convince us, that in natural corruptions and dissolutions,
Atoms are not reduced to Nothing; which surely would be needless, if the very
Idea of Atoms imported Self existence. And yet if one Atom do not include so
much in its Notion and Essence; all Atoms put together, that is, all the Matter
of the Universe can not include it. So that upon the whole matter, since
Creation is no contradiction; since God has certainly created nobler
Substances than Matter; and since Matter is not necessarily eternal; it is most
reasonable to believe, that the eternal and Self-existent God created the
material World, and produced it out of Nothing.

And then as to the last Proposition, that Motion as an Attribute or Property
of Matter cannot have been from Eternity. That we may wave some Metaphysical
Arguments, which demonstrate that Local Motion cannot be positively eternal; we
shall only observe in two Words; That if Matter be not essentially eternal, as
we have showed before; much less can Motion be, that is but the adjunct and
accident of it. Nay though we should concede an Eternity to Matter; yet why
must Motion be coaeval with it? which is not only not inherent and essential to
Matter; but may be produced and destroyed at the pleasure of free Agents: both
which are flatly repugnant to an eternal and necessary Duration. I am aware,
how some have asserted that the same quantity of Motion is always kept up in
the World; which may seem to favor the Opinion of its infinite Duration: but
that Assertion does solely depend upon an absolute Plenum; which being refuted
in my next Discourse, it will then appear how absurd and false that conceit is,
about the same quantity of Motion; how easily disproved from that Power in
Humane Souls to excite Motion when they please, and from the gradual increase
of Men and other Animals, and many Arguments besides. Therefore let this also
be concluded, That Motion has not been eternal in an infinite past Duration:
Which was the last thing to be proved.

A CONFUTATION OF ATHEISM FROM THE Origin and Frame of the World.
PART II.
The Seventh SERMON preached November. 7. 1692.
Acts XIV. 15, etc. That ye should turn from these vanities unto the living
God, who made Heaven and Earth and the Sea, and all things that are therein:
Who in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless,
he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us Rain from
Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling our hearts with Food and Gladness.
WHen we first entered upon this Topic, the demonstration of God's Existence
from the Origin and Frame of the World, we offered to prove four Propositions.

1. That this present System of Heaven and Earth cannot possibly have subsisted
from all Eternity.

2. That Matter considered generally, and abstractly from any particular Form
and Concretion, cannot possibly have been eternal: Or, if Matter could be so;
yet Motion cannot have coexisted with it eternally, as an inherent property and
essential attribute of Matter. These two we have already established in the
preceding Discourse; we shall now show in the third place,

3. That, though we should allow the Atheists, that Matter and Motion may have
been from everlasting; yet if (as they now suppose) there were once no Sun, nor
Stars, nor Earth, nor Planets; but the Particles, that now constitute them,
were diffused in the mundane Space in manner of a Chaos without any concretion
or coalition; those dispersed Particles could never of themselves by any kind
of Natural motion, whether called Fortuitous or Mechanical, have convened into
this present or any other like Frame of Heaven and Earth.

I. And first as to that ordinary Cant of illiterate and puny Atheists, the
fortuitous or casual Concurse of Atoms, that compendious and easy Dispatch of
the most important and difficult affair, the Formation of a World; (besides
that in our next undertaking it will be refuted all along) I shall now briefly
dispatch it, from what has been formerly said concerning Sermon. V. p. 6, 7.
the true notions of Fortune and Chance. Whereby it is evident, that in the
Atheistical Hypothesis of the World's production, Fortuitous and Mechanical
must be the self-same thing. Because Fortune is no real entity nor physical
essence, but a mere relative signification, denoting only this; That such a
thing said to fall out by Fortune, was really effected by material and
necessary Causes; but the Person, with regard to whom it is called Fortuitous,
was ignorant of those Causes or their tendencies, and did not design or foresee
such an effect. This is the only allowable and genuine notion of the word
Fortune. But thus to affirm, that the World was made fortuitously, is as much
as to say, That before the World was made, there was some Intelligent Agent or
Spectator; who designing to do something else, or expecting that something else
would be done with the Materials of the World, there were some occult and
unknown motions and tendencies in Matter, which mechanically formed the World
beside his design or expectation. Now the Atheists, we may presume, will be
loath to assert a fortuitous Formation in this proper sense and meaning; whereby
they will make Understanding to be older than Heaven and Earth. Or if they
should so assert it; yet, unless they will affirm that the Intelligent Agent
did dispose and direct the inanimate Matter, (which is what we would bring them
to) they must still leave their Atoms to their mechanical Affections; not able
to make one step toward the production of a World beyond the necessary Laws of
Motion. It is plain then, that Fortune, as to the matter before us, is but a
synonymous word with Nature and Necessity. It remains that we examine the
adequate meaning of Chance; which Sermon. V. p. 12, 13.
properly signifies, That all events called Casual, among inanimate Bodies, are
mechanically and naturally produced according to the determinate figures and
textures and motions of those Bodies; with this negation only, That those
inanimate Bodies are not conscious of their own operations, nor contrive and
cast about how to bring such events to pass. So that thus to say, that the
World was made casually by the concourse of Atoms, is no more than to affirm,
that the Atoms composed the World mechanically and fatally; only they were not
sensible of it, nor studied and considered about so noble an undertaking. For
if Atoms formed the World according to the essential properties of Bulk, Figure
and Motion, they formed it mechanically; and if they formed it mechanically
without perception and design, they formed it casually. So that this negation
of Consciousness being all that the notion of Chance can add to that of
Mechanism; We, that do not dispute this matter with the Atheists, nor believe
that Atoms ever acted by Counsel and Thought, may have leave to consider the
several names of Fortune and Chance and Nature and Mechanism, as one and the
same Hypothesis. Wherefore once for all to overthrow all possible Explications
which Atheists have or may assign for the formation of the World, we will
undertake to evince this following Proposition.

II. That the Atoms or Particles which now constitute Heaven and Earth, being
once separate and diffused in the Mundane Space, like the supposed Chaos, could
never without a God by their Mechanical affections have convened into this
present Frame of Things or any other like it.

Which that we may perform with the greater clearness and conviction; it will
be necessary, in a discourse about the Formation of the World, to give you a
brief account of some of the most principal and systematical Phenomenon, that
occur in the World now that it is formed.

(1.) The most considerable Phenomenon belonging to Terrestrial Bodies is the
general action of Gravitation, whereby All known Bodies in the vicinity of the
Earth do tend and press toward its Center; not only such as are sensibly and
evidently Heavy, but even those that are comparatively the Lightest, and even
in their proper place, and natural Elements, (as they usually speak) as Air
gravitates even in Air, and Water in Water. This has been demonstrated and
experimentally proved beyond contradiction, by several ingenious Persons of Mr.
Boyle's Physicom. Exp. of Air Hydrostat. Paradoxes.
the present Age, but by none so perspicuously and copiously and accurately, as
by the Honorable Founder of this Lecture in his incomparable Treatises of the
Air and Hydrostaticks.

(2.) Now this is the constant Property of Gravitation; That the weight of all
Bodies around the Earth is ever proportional to the Quantity of their Matter:
As for instance, a Pound weight (examined Hydrostatically) of all kinds of
Bodies, though of the most different forms and textures, does always contain an
equal quantity of solid Mass or corporeal Substance. This is the ancient
Doctrine of the Epicurean Physiology, then and since very probably Lucret. lib.
1.
indeed, but yet precariously asserted: But it is lately demonstrated and put
beyond controversy by that very excellent and divine Theorist Mr. Isaac
Newton, Newton Philos Nature. Princ. Math. lib. 3. prop. 6.
to whose most admirable sagacity and industry we shall frequently be obliged
in this and the following Discourse.

I will not entertain this Auditory with an account of the Demonstration; but
referring the Curious to the Book it self for full satisfaction, I shall now
proceed and build upon it as a Truth solidly established, That all Bodies weigh
according to their Matter; provided only that the compared Bodies be at equal
distances from the Center toward which they weigh. Because the further they are
removed from the Center, the lighter they are: decreasing gradually and
uniformly in weight, in a duplicate proportion to the Increase of the Distance.

(3.) Now since Gravity is found proportional to the Quantity of Matter, there
is a manifest Necessity of admitting a Vacuum, another principal Doctrine of
the Atomical Philosophy. Because if there were every where an absolute
plenitude and density without any empty pores and interstices between the
Particles of Bodies, then all Bodies of equal dimensions would contain an equal
Quantity of Matter; and consequently, as we have showed before, would be
equally ponderous: so that Gold, Copper, Stone, Wood, etc. would have all the
same specific weight; which Experience assures us they have not: neither would
any of them descend in the Air, as we all see they do; because, if all Space
was Full, even the Air would be as dense and specifically as heavy as they. If
it be said, that, though the difference of specific Gravity may proceed from
variety of Texture, the lighter Bodies being of a more loose and porous
composition, and the heavier more dense and compact; yet an ethereal subtle
Matter, which is in a perpetual motion, may penetrate and pervade the minutest
and inmost Cavities of the closest Bodies, and adapting it self to the figure
of every Pore, may adequately fill them; and so prevent all vacuity, without
increasing the weight: To this we answer; That that subtle Matter it self must
be of the same Substance and Nature with all other Matter, and therefore It
also must weigh proportionally to its Bulk; and as much of it as at any time is
comprehended within the Pores of a particular Body must gravitate jointly with
that Body; so that if the Presence of this ethereal Matter made an absolute
Fullness, all Bodies of equal dimensions would be equally heavy: which being
refuted by experience, it necessarily follows, that there is a Vacuity; and
that (notwithstanding some little objections full of cavil and sophistry) mere
and simple Extension or Space has a quite different nature and notion from
real Body and impenetrable Substance.

(4.) This therefore being established; in the next place it is of great
consequence to our present enquiry, if we can make a computation, How great is
the whole Sum of the Void spaces in our system, and what proportion it bears
to the corporeal substance. By many and accurate Trials it manifestly Mr. Boil
of Air and Porosity of Bodies.
appears, that Refined Gold, the most ponderous of known Bodies, (though even
that must be allowed to be porous too, because it is dissoluble in Mercury and
Aqua Regis and other Chemical Liquors; and because it is naturally a thing
impossible, that the Figures and Sizes of its constituent Particles should be
so justly adapted, as to touch one another in every Point,) I say, Gold is in
specific weight to common Water as 19 to 1; and Water to common Air as 850 to
1: so that Gold is to Air as 16150 to 1. Whence it clearly appears, seeing
Matter and Gravity are always commensurate, that (though we should allow the
texture of Gold to be entirely close without any vacuity) the ordinary Air in
which we live and respire is of so thin a composition, that 16149 parts of its
dimensions are mere emptiness and Nothing; and the remaining One only material
and real substance. But if Gold it self be admitted, as it must be, for a
porous Concrete, the proportion of Void to Body in the texture of common Air
will be so much the greater. And thus it is in the lowest and densest region of
the Air near the surface of the Earth, where the whole Mass of Air is in a
state of violent compression, the inferior being pressed and constipated by the
weight of all the incumbent. But, since the Air is now certainly known to
consist of elastick or springy Particles, Mr. Boil ibid.
that have a continual tendency and endeavor to expand and display themselves;
and the dimensions, to which they expand themselves, to be reciprocally as the
Compression; it follows, that the higher you ascend in it, where it is less and
less compressed by the superior Air, the more and more it is rarefied. So that
at the height of a few miles from the surface of the Earth, it is computed to
have some million parts of empty space in its texture for one of solid Matter.
And at the height of one Terrestrial Semid. (not above 4000 miles) the Ether
Newton Philos. Not. Principia. Math. p. 503.
is of that wonderful tenuity, that by an exact calculation, if a small Sphere
of common Air of one Inch Diameter (already 16149 parts Nothing) should be
further expanded to the thinness of that Ether, it would more than take up the
vast Orb of Saturn, which is many million million times bigger than the whole
Globe of the Earth. And yet the higher you ascend above that region, the
Rarefaction still gradually increases without stop or limit: so that, in a
word, the whole Concave of the Firmament, except the Sun and Planets and their
Atmospheres, may be considered as a mere Void. Let us allow then, that all the
Matter of the System of our Sun may be 50000 times as much as the whole Mass of
the Earth; and we appeal to Astronomy, if we are not liberal enough and even
prodigal in this concession. And let us suppose further, that the whole Globe
of the Earth is entirely solid and compact without any void interstices;
notwithstanding what has been showed before, as to the texture of Gold it
self. Now though we have made such ample allowances; we shall find,
notwithstanding, that the void Space of our System is immensly bigger than all
its corporeal Mass. For, to proceed upon our supposition, that all the Matter
within the Firmament is 50000 times bigger than the solid Globe of the Earth;
if we assume the Diameter of the Orbis Magnus (wherein the Earth moves about
the Sun) to be only 7000 times as big as the Diameter of the Earth (though the
latest and most accurate Observations make it thrice 7000) and the Diameter of
the Firmament to be only 100000 times as long as the Diameter of the Orbis
Magnus (though it cannot possibly be less than that, but may be vastly and
unspeakably bigger) we must pronounce, after such large concessions on that
side, and such great abatements on ours, That the Sum of empty Spaces within
the Concave of the Firmament is 6860 million million million times bigger than
All the Matter contained in it.

Now from hence we are enabled to form a right conception and imagination of
the supposed Chaos; and then we may proceed to determine the controversy with
more certainty and satisfaction; whether a World like the Present could
possibly without a Divine Influence be formed in it or no?

(1.) And first, because every Fixed Star is supposed by Astronomers to be of
the same Nature with our Sun; and each may very possibly have Planets about
them, though by reason of their vast distance they be invisible to Us: we will
assume this reasonable supposition, That the same proportion of Void Space to
Matter, which is found in our Sun's Region within the Sphere of the Fixed Stars,
may competently well hold in the whole Mundane Space. I am aware, that in this
computation we must not assign the whole Capacity of that Sphere for the Region
of our Sun; but allow half of its Diameter for the Radii of the several Regions
of the next Fixed Stars. So that diminishing our former number, as this last
consideration requires; we may safely affirm from certain and demonstrated
Principles, That the empty Space of our Solar Region (comprehending half of the
Diameter of the Firmament) is 8575 hundred thousand million million times more
ample than all the corporeal substance in it. And we may fairly suppose, that
the same proportion may hold through the whole Extent of the Universe.

(2.) And secondly as to the state or condition of Matter before the World was
a-making, which is compendiously expressed by the word Chaos; they must either
suppose, that the Matter of our Solar System was evenly or well-nigh evenly
diffused through the Region of the Sun, which would represent a particular
Chaos: or that all Matter universally was so spread through the whole Mundane
Space; which would truly exhibit a General Chaos; no part of the Universe being
rarer or denser than another. And this is agreeable to the ancient Description
of Chaos, That Diod. Sicul. lib. 1. (...). Apoll. Rhodius lib. 1. (...).
the Heavens and Earth had (...), one form, one texture and constitution: which
could not be, unless all the Mundane Matter were uniformly and evenly diffused.
It Is indifferent to our Dispute, whether they suppose it to have continued a
long time or very little in the state of Diffusion. For if there was but one
single Moment in all past Eternity, when Matter was so diffused: we shall
plainly and fully prove, that it could never have convened afterward into the
present Frame and Order of Things.

(3.) It is evident from what we have newly proved, that in the supposition of
such a Chaos or such an even diffusion either of the whole Mundane Matter or
that of our System (for it matters not which they assume) every single Particle
would have a Sphere of Void Space around it 8575 hundred thousand million
million times bigger than the dimensions of that Particle. Nay further, though
the proportion already appear so immense; yet every single Particle would
really be surrounded with a Void sphere Eight times as capacious as that newly
mentioned; its Diameter being compounded of the Diameter of the Proper sphere,
and the Semi-diameters of the contiguous Spheres of the neighboring Particles.
From whence it appears, that every Particle (supposing them globular or not
very oblong) would be above Nine million times their own length from any other
Particle. And moreover in the whole Surface of this Void sphere there can only
Twelve Particles be evenly placed, as the Hypothesis requires; that is, at
equal Distances from the Central one and from each other. So that if the Matter
of our System or of the Universe was equally dispersed, like the supposed
Chaos; the result and issue would be, not only that every Atom would be many
million times its own length distant from any other: but if any One should be
moved mechanically (without direction or attraction) to the limit of that
distance; it is above a hundred million millions Odds to an Unit, that it would
not strike upon any other Atom, but glide through an empty interval without any
contact.

(4.) It Is true, that while I calculate these Measures, I suppose all the
Particles of Matter to be at absolute rest among themselves, and situated in an
exact and mathematical evenness; neither of which is likely to be allowed by
our Adversaries, who not admitting the former, but asserting the eternity of
Motion, will consequently deny the latter also: because in the very moment that
Motion is admitted in the Chaos, such an exact evenness cannot possibly be
preserved. But this I do, not to draw any argument against them from the
Universal Rest or accurately equal diffusion of Matter; but only that I may
better demonstrate the great Rarity and Tenuity of their imaginary Chaos, and
reduce it to computation. Which computation will hold with exactness enough,
though we allow the Particles of the Chaos to be variously moved, and to differ
something in size and figure and situation. For if some Particles should
approach nearer each other than in the former Proportion; with respect to some
other Particles they would be as much remoter. So that notwithstanding a small
diversity of their Positions and Distances, the whole Aggregate of Matter, as
long as it retained the name and nature of Chaos, would retain well-nigh an
uniform tenuity of Texture, and may be considered as an homogeneous Fluid. As
several Portions of the same sort of Water are reckoned to be of the same
specific gravity; though it be naturally impossible that every Particle and Pore
of it, considered Geometrically, should have equal sizes and dimensions.

We have now represented the true scheme and condition of the Chaos; how all
the Particles would be disunited; and what vast intervals of empty Space would
lie between each. To form a System therefore, it is necessary that these
squandered Atoms should convene and unite into great and compact Masses, like
the Bodies of the Earth and Planets. Without such a coalition the diffused
Chaos must have continued and reigned to all eternity. But how could Particles
so widely dispersed combine into that closeness of Texture? Our Adversaries can
have only these two ways of accounting for it.

First, By the Common Motion of Matter, proceeding from external Impulse and
Conflict (without attraction) by which every Body moves uniformly in a direct
line according to the determination of the impelling force. For, they may say,
the Atoms of the Chaos being variously moved according to this Catholic Law,
must needs knock and interfere; by which means some that have convenient
figures for mutual coherence might chance to stick together, and others might
join to those, and so by degrees such huge Masses might be formed, as
afterward became Suns and Planets: or there might arise some vertiginous
Motions or Whirlpools in the Matter of the Chaos; whereby the Atoms might be
thrust and crowded to the middle of those Whirlpools, and there constipate one
another into great solid Globes, such as now appear in the World.

Or secondly by mutual Gravitation or Attraction. For they may assert, that
Matter has inherently and essentially such an internal energy, whereby it
incessantly tends to unite it self to all other Matter: so that several
Particles, placed in a Void space, at any distance whatsoever would without any
external impulse spontaneously convene and unite together. And thus the Atoms
of the Chaos, though never so widely diffused, might by this innate property of
Attraction soon assemble themselves into great sphaerical Masses, and
constitute Systems like the present Heaven and Earth.

This is all that can be proposed by Atheists, as an efficient cause of the
World. For as to the Epicurean Theory, of Atoms descending down an infinite
space by an inherent principle of Gravitation, which tends not toward other
Matter, but toward a Vacuum or Nothing; and verging from the Perpendicular
Lucret. Nec regione loci certa, nec tempore certo.
no body knows why, nor when, nor where; it is such miserable absurd stuff,
sorepugnant to it self, and so contrary to the known Phenomenon of Nature,
though it contented supine unthinking Atheists for a thousand years together;
that we will not now honor it with a special refutation. But what it has
common with the other Explications, we will fully confute together with Them in
these three Propositions.

(1.) That by Common Motion (without attraction) the dissever'd Particles of
the Chaos could never make the World; could never convene into such great
compact Masses, as the Planets now are; nor either acquire or continue such
Motions, as the Planets now have. (2.) That such a mutual Gravitation or
spontaneous Attraction can neither be inherent and essential to Matter; nor
ever supervene to it, unless impressed and infused into it by a Divine Power.
(3.) That though we should allow such Attraction to be natural and essential to
all Matter; yet the Atoms of a Chaos could never so convene by it, as to form
the present System: or if they could form it, it could neither acquire such
Motions, nor continue permanent in this state, without the Power and Providence
of a Divine Being.
I. And first, that by Common Motion the Matter of Chaos could never convene
into such Masses, as the Planets now are. Any man, that considers the spacious
void intervals of the Chaos, how immense they are in proportion to the bulk of
the Atoms, will hardly induce himself to believe, that Particles so widely
disseminated could ever throng and crowd one another into a close and compact
texture. He will rather conclude, that those few that should happen to clash,
might rebound after the collision; or if they cohered, yet by the next conflict
with other Atoms might be separated again, and so on in an eternal vicissitude
of Fast and Loose, without ever consociating into the huge condense Bodies of
Planets; some of whose Particles upon this supposition must have traveled many
millions of Leagues through the gloomy regions of Chaos, to place themselves
where they now areBut then how rarely would there be any clashing at all; how
very rarely in comparison to the number of Atoms? The whole multitude of them
generally speaking, might freely move and rove for ever with very little
occurring or interfering. Let us conceive two of the nearest Particles
according to our former Calculation; or rather let us try the same proportions
in another Example, that will come easier to the Imagination. Let us suppose
two Ships, fitted with durable Timber and Rigging, but without Pilot or
Mariners, to be placed in the vast Atlantic or the Pacifique Ocean, as far
asunder as may be. How many thousand years might expire, before those solitary
Vessels should happen to strike one against the other? But let us imagine the
Space yet more ample, even the whole face of the Earth to be covered with Sea,
and the two Ships to be placed in the opposite Poles: might not they now move
long enough without any danger of clashing? And yet I find, that the two
nearest Atoms in our ev^^ly diffused Chaos have ten thousand times less
p^^portion to the two Void circular Planes around them, than our two Ships
would have to the whole Surface of the Deluge. Let us assume then another
Deluge ten thousand times larger than Noah's. Is it not now utterly incredible,
that our two Vessels, placed there Antipodes to each other, should ever happen
to concur? And yet let me add, that the Ships would move in one and the same
Surface; and consequently must needs encounter, when they either advance
toward one another in direct lines, or meet in the intersection of cross ones;
but the Atoms may not only fly side-ways, but over likewise and under each
other: which makes it many million times more improbable, that they should
interfere than the Ships, even in the last and unlikeliest instance. But they
may say, Though the Odds indeed be unspeakable that the Atoms do not convene in
any set number of Trials, yet in an infinite Succession of them may not such a
Combination possibly happen? But let them consider, that the improbability of
Casual Hits is never diminished by repetition of Trials; they are as unlikely
to fall out at the Thousandth as at the First. So that in a matter of mere
Chance, when there is so many Millions odds against any assignable Sermon. V. p.
32.
Experiment; it is in vain to expect it should ever succeed, even in endless
Duration.

But though we should concede it to be simply possible, that the Matter of
Chaos might convene into great Masses, like Planets: yet it is absolutely
impossible, that those Masses should acquire such revolutions about the Sun.
Let us suppose any one of those Masses to be the Present Earth. Now the annual
Revolution of the Earth must proceed (in this Hypothesis) either from the Sum
and Result of the several motions of all the Particles that formed the Earth,
or from a new Impulse from some external Matter, after it was formed. The
former is apparently absurd, because the Particles that formed the round Earth
must needs convene from all points and quarters toward the middle, and would
generally tend toward its Center; which would make the whole Compound to rest
in a Poise: or at least that overplus of Motion, which the Particles of one
Hemisphere could have above the other, would be very small and inconsiderable;
too feeble and languid to propell so vast and ponderous a Body with that
prodigious velocity. And secondly, it is impossible, that any external Matter
should impell that compound Mass, after it was formed. It Is manifest, that
nothing else could impell it, unless the Ethereal Matter be supposed to be
carried about the Sun like a Vortex or Whirlpool, as a Vehicle to convey it and
the rest of the Planets. But this is refuted from what we have shown above,
that those Spaces of the Ether may be reckoned a mere Void, the whole Quantity
of their Matter scarce amounting to the weight of a Grain. It Is refuted also
from Matter of Fact in the Motion of Comets; which, as often as they are
visible to Us, are in the Newton ibidem p. 480.
Region of our Planets; and there are observed to move, some in quite contrary
courses to Theirs, and some in cross and oblique ones, in Planes inclined to
the Plane of the Ecliptic in all kinds of Angles: which firmly evinces, that
the Regions of the Ether are empty and free, and neither resist nor assist the
Revolutions of Planets. But moreover there could not possibly arise in the
Chaos any Vortices or Whirlpools at all; either to form the Globes of the
Planets, or to revolve them when formed. It Is acknowledged by all, that
inanimate unactive Matter moves always in a straight Line, nor ever reflects in
an Angle, nor bends in a Circle (which is a continual reflection) unless either
by some external Impulse, that may divert it from the direct motion, or by an
intrinseck Principle of Gravity or Attraction that may make it describe a curve
line about the attracting Body. But this latter Cause is not now supposed: and
the former could never beget Whirlpools in a Chaos of so great a Laxity and
Thinness. For it is matter of certain experience and universally allowed, that
all Bodies moved circularly have a perpetual endeavor to recede from the
Center, and every moment would fly out in right Lines, if they were not
violently restrained and kept in by contiguous Matter. But there is no such
restraint in the supposed Chaos, no want of empty room there; no possibility of
effecting one single Revolution in way of a Vortex, which necessarily requires
(if Attraction be not supposed) either an absolute Fullness of Matter, or a
pretty close Constipation and mutual Contact of its Particles.

And for the same reason it is evident, that the Planets could not continue
their Revolutions about the Sun; though they could possibly acquire them. For
to drive and carry the Planets in such Orbs as they now describe, that
Ethereal Matter must be compact and dense, as dense as the very Planets
themselves: otherwise they would certainly fly out in Spiral Lines to the very
circumference of the Vortex. But we have often inculcated, that the wide Tracts
of the Ether may be reputed as a mere extended Void. So that there is nothing
(in this Hypothesis) that can retain and bind the Planets in their Orbs for one
single moment; but they would immediately desert them and the neighborhood of
the Sun, and vanish away in Tangents to their several Circles into the Abyss of
Mundane Space.

II. Secondly we affirn, that mutual Gravitation or spontaneous Attraction
cannot possibly be innate and essential to Matter. By Attraction we do not here
understand what is improperly, though vulgarly, called so, in the operations of
drawing, sucking, pumping, etc. which is really Pulsion and Trusion; and
belongs to that Common Motion, which we have already shown to be insufficient
for the formation of a World. But we now mean (as we have explained it before)
such a power and quality, whereby all parcels of Matter would mutually attract
or mutually tend and press to all others; so that, for instance, two distant
Atoms in vacuo would spontaneously convene together without the impulse of
external Bodies.

Now fiirst we say, if our Atheists suppose this power to be inherent and
essential to Matter; they overthrow their own Hypothesis: there could never be
a Chaos at all upon these terms, but the present form of our System must have
continued from all Eternity; against their own Supposition, and what Vide Sermon.
VI. and Ser. VIII.
we have proved in our Last. For if they affirm, that there might be a Chaos
notwithstanding innate Gravity; then let them assign any Period though never so
remote, when the diffused Matter might convene. They must confess, that before
that assigned Period Matter had existed eternally, inseparably endued with this
principle of Attraction; and yet had never attracted nor convened before, in
that infinite duration: which is so monstrous an absurdity, as even They will
blush to be charged with. But some perhaps may imagine, that a former System
might be dissolved and reduced to a Chaos, from which the present System might
have its Original, as that Former had from another, and so on; new Systems
having grown out of old ones in infinite Vicissitudes from all past eternity.
But we say, that in the Supposition of innate Gravity no System at all could be
dissolved. For how is it possible, that the Matter of solid Masses like Earth
and Planets and Stars should fly up from their Centers against its inherent
principle of mutual Attraction, and diffuse it self in a Chaos? This is
absurder than the other: That only supposed innate Gravity not to be exerted;
This makes it to be defeated, and to act contrary to its own Nature. So that
upon all accounts this essential power of Gravitation or Attraction is
irreconcilable wirh the Atheist's own Doctrine of a Chaos.

And secondly it is repugnant to Common Sense and Reason. It Is utterly
unconceivable, that inanimate brute Matter, without the mediation of some
Immaterial Being, should operate upon and affect other Matter without mutual
Contact; that distant Bodies should act upon each other through a Vacuum
without the intervention of something else by and through which the action may
be conveyed from one to the other. We will not obscure and perplex with
multitude of words, what is so clear and evident by its own light, and must
needs be allowed by all, that have competent use of Thinking, and are initiated
into, I do not say the Mysteries, but the plainest Principles of Philosophy.
Now mutual Gravitation or Attraction, in our present acception of the Words, is
the same thing with This; it is an operation or virtue or influence of distant
Bodies upon each other through an empty Interval, without any Effluvia or
Exhalations or other corporeal Medium to convey and transmit it. This Power
therefore cannot be innate and essential to Matter. And if it be not essential;
it is consequently most manifest, since it does not depend upon Motion or Rest
or Figure or Position of Parts, which are all the ways that Matter can
diversify it self, that it could never supervene to it, unless impressed and
infused into it by an immaterial and divine Power.

We have proved, that a Power of mutual Gravitation, without contact or
impulse, can in no-wise be attributed to mere Matter: or if it could; we shall
presently show, that it would be wholly unable to form the World out of Chaos.
What then if it be made appear, that there is really such a Power of Gravity,
which cannot be ascribed to mere Matter, perpetually acting in the constitution
of the present System? This would be a new and invincible Argument for the
Being of God: being a direct and positive proof, that an immaterial living Mind
does inform and actuate the dead Matter, and support the Frame of the World. I
will lay before you some certain Phenomenon of Nature; and leave it to your
consideration from what Principle they can proceed. It Is demonstrated, That the
Sun, Moon and all the Planets do reciprocally gravitate one toward another:
that the Gravitating power of each of them is exactly proportional to their
Matter, and arises from the several Gravitations or Attractions of all the
individual Particles that compose the whole Mass: that all Matter near the
Surface of the Earth, (and so in all the Planets) does not only gravitate
downwards, but upwards also and side-ways and toward all imaginable Points;
though the Tendency downward be praedominant and alone discernible, because of
the Greatness and Nearness of the attracting Body, the Earth: that every
Particle of the whole System does attract and is attracted by all the rest, All
operating upon All: that this Universal Attraction or Gravitation is an
incessant, regular and uniform Action by certain and established Laws according
to Quantity of Matter and Longitude of Distance: that it cannot be destroyed nor
impaired nor augmented by any thing, neither by Motion or Rest, nor Situation
nor Posture, nor alteration of Form, nor diversity of Medium: that it is not a
Magnetical Power, nor the effect of a Vortical Motion; those common attempts
toward the Explication of Gravity: These things, I say, are Newton Philosophiae
Naturalis Princ. Math. lib. III.
fully demonstrated, as matters of Fact, by that very ingenious Author, whom we
cited before. Now how is it possible that these things should be effected by
any Material and Mechanical Agent? We have evinced, that mere Matter cannot
operate upon Matter without mutual Contact. It remains then, that these
Phenomenon are produced either by the intervention of Air or Ether or other
such medium, that communicates the Impulse from one Body to another; or by
Effluvia and Spirits that are emitted from the one, and pervene to the other.
We can conceive no other way of performing them Mechanically. But what impulse
or agitation can be propagated through the Ether from one Particle entombed
and wedged in the very Center of the Earth to another in the Center of Saturn?
Yet even those two Particles do reciprocally affect each other with the same
force and vigor, as they would do at the same distance in any other Situation
imaginable. And because the Impulse from this Particle is not directed to That
only; but to all the rest in the Universe, to all quarters and regions, at once
invariably and incessantly: to do this mechanically, the same physical Point of
Matter must move all manner of ways equally and constantly in the same instant
and moment; which is flatly impossible. But if this Particle cannot propagate
such Motion; much less can it send out Effluvia to all points without
intermission or variation; such multitudes of Effluvia as to lay hold on every
Atom in the Universe without missing of one. Nay every single Particle of the
very Effluvia (since they also attract and gravitate) must in this Supposition
emit other secondary Effluvia all the World over; and those others still emit
more, and so in infinitum. Now if these things be repugnant to Humane Reason;
we have great reason to affirm, That Universal Gravitation, a thing certainly
existent in Nature, is above all Mechanism and material Causes, and proceeds
from a higher principle, a Divine energy and impression.

III. Thirdly we affirm; That, though we shouldallow, that reciprocal
Attraction is essential to Matter; yet the Atoms of a Chaos could never so
convene by it, as to form the present System; or if they could form it, yet it
could neither acquire these Revolutions, nor subsist in the present condition,
without the Conservation and Providence of a Divine Being.

(1.) For first, if the Matter of the Universe, and consequently the Space
through which it is diffused, be supposed to be Finite (and I think it might be
demonstrated to be so; but that we have already exceeded the just measures of a
Sermon) then, since every single Particle has an innate Gravitation toward all
others, proportionated by Matter and Distance: it evidently appears, that the
outward Atoms of the Chaos would necessarily tend inwards and descend from all
quarters toward the Middle of the whole Space; for in respect to every Atom
there would lie through the Middle the greatest quantity of Matter and the most
vigorous Attraction: and those Atoms would there form and constitute one huge
sphaerical Mass; which would be the only Body in the Universe. It is plain
therefore, that upon this Supposition the Matter of the Chaos could never
compose such divided and different Masses, as the Stars and Planets of the
present World.

But allowing our Adversaries, that the Planets might be composed: yet however
they could not possibly acquire such Revolutions in Circular Orbs, or (which is
all one to our present purpose) in Ellipses very little Eccentric. For let them
assign any place where the Planets were formed. Was it nearer to the Sun, than
the present distances are? But that is notoriously absurd: for then they must
have ascended from the place of their Formation, against the essential property
of mutual Attraction. Or were each formed in the same Orbs, in which they now
move? But then they must have moved from the Point of Rest, in an horizontal
Line without any inclination or descent. Now there is no natural Cause, neither
Innate Gravity nor Impulse of external Matter, that could beget such a Motion.
For Gravity alone must have carried them downwards to the Vicinity of the Sun.
And that the ambient Ether is too liquid and empty, to impell them
horizontally with that prodigious celerity, we have sufficiently proved before.
Or were they made in some higher regions of the Heavens; and from thence
descended by their essential Gravity, till they all arrived at their respective
Orbs; each with its present degree of Velocity, acquired by the fall? But then
why did they not continue their descent, till they were contiguous to the Sun;
whither both Mutual Attraction and Impetus carried them? What natural Agent
could turn them aside, could impell them so strongly with a transverse
Side-blow against that tremendous Weight and Rapidity, when whole Planets were
a falling? But if we should suppose, that by some cross attraction or other
they might acquire an obliquity of descent, so as to miss the body of the Sun,
and to fall on one side of it: then indeed the force of their Fall would carry
them quite beyond it; and so they might fetch a compass about it, and then
return and ascend by the same steps and degrees of Motion and Velocity, with
which they descended before. Such an eccentric Motion as this, much after the
manner that Comets revolve about the Sun, they might possibly acquire by their
innate principle of Gravity: but circular Revolutions in concentric Orbs about
the Sun or other central Body could in no-wise be attained without the power of
the Divine Arm. For the Case of the Planetary Motions is this. Let us conceive
all the Planets to be formed or constituted with their Centers in their several
Orbs; and at once to be impressed on them this Gravitating Energy toward all
other Matter, and a transverse Impulse of a just quantity in each, projecting
them directly in Tangents to those Orbs. The Compound Motion, which arises from
this Gravitation and Projection together, describes the present Revolutions of
the Primary Planets about the Sun, and of the Secondary about Those: the
Gravity prohibiting, that they cannot recede from the Centers of their Motions;
and the transverse Impulse withholding, that they cannot approach to them. Now
although Gravity could be innate (which we have proved that it cannot be) yet
certainly this projected, this transverse and violent Motion can only be
ascribed to the Right hand of the most high God, Creator of Heaven and Earth.

But finally, if we should grant them, that these Circular Revolutions could be
naturally attained* or, if they will, that this very individual World in its
present posture and motion was actually formed out of Chaos by Mechanical
Causes: yet it requires a Divine Power and Providence to have preserved it so
long in the present state and condition. For what are the Causes, that preserve
the System of our Sun and his Planets; so that the Planets continue to move in
the same Orbs, neither receding from the Sun, nor approaching nearer to him? We
have shown, that a Transverse Impulse, impressed upon the Planets, retains them
in their several Orbs, that they are not drawn down toward the Sun. And again,
their Gravitating Powers so incline them toward the Sun, that they are not
carried upwards beyond their due distance from him. These two great Agents, a
Transverse Impulse, and Gravity, are the Secondary Causes, under God, that
maintain the System of Sun and Planets. Gravity we understand to be a constant
Energy or Faculty, perpetually acting by certain Measures and naturally
inviolable Laws; we say, a Faculty and Power: for we cannot conceive that the
Act of Gravitation of this present Moment can propagate it self or produce that
of the next. But the Transverse Impulse we conceive to have been one single
Act. For by reason of the Inactivity of Matter and its inability to change its
present State either of Moving or Resting, that Transverse Motion would from
one single Impulse continue for ever equal and uniform, unless changed by the
resistance of occurring Bodies or by a Gravitating Power. So that the Planets,
since they move Horizontally (whereby Gravity does not alter their swiftness)
and through the liquid and unresisting Spaces of the Heavens (where either no
Bodies at all or inconsiderable ones do occur) may preserve the same Velocity,
which the first Impulse impressed upon them, not only for five or six thousand
years, but many Millions of Millions. It appears then, that if there was but
One Vast Sun in the Universe, and all the rest were Planets, revolving around
him in Concentric Orbs, at convenient Distances: such a System, as that, would
very long endure; could it but naturally have a Principle of Mutual Attraction,
and be once actually put into Circular Motions. But the Frame of the present
World has a quite different structure: here is an innumerable multitude of Fixed
Stars or Suns; all which being made up of the same common Matter, must be
supposed to be equally endued with a Power of Gravitation. For if All have not
such a power, what is it that could make that difference between Bodies of the
same sort? Nothing surely but a Deity, could have so arbitrarily endued our Sun
and Planets with a Power of Gravity not essential to Matter; while all the Fixed
Stars, that are so many Suns, have nothing of that Power. If the Fixed Stars
then are supposed to have no Power of Gravitation, it is a plain proof of a
Divine Being. And it is as plain a proof of a Divine Being; if they have the
Power of Gravitation. For since they are neither revolved about a common
Center, nor have any Transverse Impulse, what is there else to restrain them
from approaching toward each other, as their Gravitating Power incites them?
What Natural Cause can overcome Nature it self? What is it that holds and keeps
them in fixed Stations and Intervals against an incessant and inherent Tendency
to desert them? Nothing could hinder, but that the Outward Stars with their
Systems of Planets must necessarily have descended toward the middlemost System
of the Universe, whither all would be the most strongly attracted from all
parts of a Finite Space. It is evident therefore that the present Frame of Sun
and Fixed Stars could not possibly subsist without the Providence of that
Almighty Deity, who spoke the word Psalm. 148.
and they were made, who commanded and they were created; who has made them
fast for ever and ever, and has given them a Law, which shall not be broken.

(2.) And secondly in the Supposition of an infinite Chaos, it is hard indeed to
determine, what would follow in this imaginary Case from an innate Principle of
Gravity. But to hasten to a conclusion, we will grant for the present, that the
diffused Matter might convene into an infinite Number of great Masses at great
distances from one another, like the Stars and Planets of this visible part of
the World. But then it is impossible, that the Planets should naturally attain
these circular Revolutions, either by Principle of Gravitation, or by impulse
of ambient Bodies. It is plain, here is no difference as to this; whether the
World be Infinite or Finite: so that the same Arguments that we have used
before, may be equally urged in this Supposition. And though we should concede,
that these Revolutions might be acquired, and that all were settled and
constituted in the present State and Posture of Things; yet, we say, the
continuance of this Frame and Order, for so long a duration as the known Ages
of the World, must necessarily infer the Existence of God. For though the
Universe was infinite, the now Fixed Stars could not be fixed, but would
naturally convene together, and confound System with System: because, all
mutually attracting, every one would move whither it was most powerfully drawn.
This, they may say, is indubitable in the case of a Finite World, where some
Systems must needs be Outmost, and therefore be drawn toward the Middle: but
when Infinite Systems succeed one another through an Infinite Space, and none
is either inward or outward; may not all the Systems be situated in an accurate
Poise; and, because equally attracted on all sides, remain fixed and unmoved?
But to this we reply; That unless the very mathematical Center of Gravity of
every System be placed and fixed in the very mathematical Center of the
Attractive Power of all the rest; they cannot be evenly attracted on all sides,
but must preponderate some way or other. Now he that considers, what a
mathematical Center is, and that Quantity is infinitely divisible; will never
be persuaded, that such an Universal Equilibrium arising from the coincidence
of Infinite Centers can naturally be acquired or maintained. If they say; that
upon the Supposition of Infinite Matter, every System would be infinitely, and
therefore equally attracted on all sides; and consequently would rest in an
exact Equilibrium, be the Center of its Gravity in what Position soever: this
will overthrow their very Hypothesis. For at this rate in an infinite Chaos
nothing at all could be formed; no Particles could convene by mutual
Attraction; because every one there must have Infinite Matter around it, and
therefore must rest for ever being evenly balanced between Infinite
Attractions. Even the Planets upon this principle must gravitate no more toward
the Sun, than any other way: so that they would not revolve in curve Lines, but
fly away in direct Tangents, till they struck against other Planets or Stars in
some remote regions of the Infinite Space. An equal Attraction on all sides of
all Matter is just equal to no Attraction at all: and by this means all the
Motion in the Universe must proceed from external Impulse alone; which we have
proved before to be an incompetent Cause for the Formation of a World.

And now, O thou almighty and eternal Creator, having considered the Heavens
the work of thy Psalm. 8.
fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained, with all the company
of Heaven we laud and magnify thy glorious Name, evermore praising thee and
saying; Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy
Glory: Glory be to thee, O Lord most High.

A CONFUTATION OF ATHEISM FROM THE Origin and Frame of the World.
The Third and Last PART.
The Eighth SERMON preached December 5. 1692.
Acts XIV. 15, etc. That ye should turn from these vanities unto the living
God, who made Heaven and Earth and the Sea, and all things that are therein:
Who in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless,
he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us Rain from
Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling our hearts with Food and Gladness.
HAving abundantly proved in our Last Exercise, That the Frame of the present
World could neither be made nor preserved without the Power of God; we shall
now consider the structure and motions of our own System, if any characters of
Divine Wisdom and Goodness may be discoverable by us. And even at the first and
general View it very evidently appears to us (which is our FOURTH and Last
Proposition,) That the Order and Beauty of the Systematical Parts of the World,
the Discernible Ends and Final Causes of them, the (...) or Meliority above
what was necessary to be, do evince by a reflex Argument, that it could not be
produced by Mechanism or Chance, but by an Intelligent and Benign Agent, that
by his excellent Wisdom made the Heavens.

But before we engage in this Disquisition, we must offer one necessary
Caution; that we need not nor do not confine and determine the purposes of God
in creating all Mundane Bodies, merely to Humane Ends and Uses. Not that we
believe it laborious and painful to Omnipotence to create a World out of
Nothing; or more laborious to create a great World, than a small one: so as we
might think it disagreeable to the Majesty and Tranquillity of the Divine
Nature to take so much pains for our sakes. Nor do we count it any absurdity,
that such a vast and immense Universe should be made for the sole use of such
mean and unworthy Creatures as the Children of Men. For if we consider the
Dignity of an Intelligent Being, and put that in the scales against brute
inanimate Matter; we may affirm, without over-valuing Humane Nature, that the
Soul of one virtuous and religious Man is of greater worth and excellency than
the Sun and his Planets and all the Stars in the World. If therefore it could
appear, that all the Mundane Bodies are some way conducible to the service of
Man; if all were as beneficial to us, as the Polar Stars were formerly for
Navigation: as the Moon is for the flowing and ebbing of Tides, by which an
inestimable advantage accrues to the World; for her officious Courtesy in long
Winter Nights, especiaally to the more Northern Nations, who in a continual
Night it may be of a whole month are so pretty well accommodated by the Light
of the Moon reflected from frozen Snow, that they do not much envy their
Antipodes a month's presence of the Sun: if all the Heavenly Bodies were thus
serviceable to us, we should not be backward to assign their usefulness to
Mankind, as the sole end of their Creation. But we dare not undertake to show,
what advantage is brought to Us by those innumerable Stars in the Galaxy and
other parts of the Firmament, not discernible by naked eyes, and yet each many
thousand times bigger than the whole body of the Earth: If you say, they beget
in us a great Idea and Veneration of the mighty Author and Governor of such
stupendous Bodies, and excite and elevate our minds to his adoration and
praise; you say very truly and well. But would it not raise in us a higher
apprehension of the infinite Majesty and boundless Beneficence of God, to
suppose that those remote and vast Bodies were formed, not merely upon Our
account to be peept at through an Optic Glass, but for different ends and
nobler purposes? And yet who will deny, but that there are great multitudes of
lucid Stars even beyond the reach of the best Telescopes; and that every
visible Star may have opake Planets revolve about them, which we cannot
discover? Now if they were not created for Our sakes; it is certain and
evident, that they were not made for their own. For Matter has no life nor
perception, is not conscious of its own existence, nor capable of happiness,
nor gives the Sacrifice of Praise and Worship to the Author of its Being. It
remains therefore, that all Bodies were formed for the sake of Intelligent
Minds: and as the Earth was principally designed for the Being and Service and
Contemplation of Men; why may not all other Planets be created for the like
Uses, each for their own Inhabitants which have Life and Understanding? If any
man will indulge himself in this Speculation, he need not quarrel with revealed
Religion upon such an account. The Holy Scriptures do not forbid him to suppose
as great a Multitude of Systems and as much inhabited, as he pleases. It Is
true; there is no mention in Moses's Narrative of the Creation, of any People
in other Planets. But it plainly appears, that the Sacred Historian does only
treat of the Origins of Terrestrial Animals: he has given us no account of
God's creating the Angels; and yet the same Author, in the ensuing parts of the
Pentateuch, makes not unfrequent mention of the Angels of God. Neither need we
be sollicitous about the condition of those Planetary People, nor raise
frivolous Disputes, how far they may participate in the Miseries of Adam's
Fall, or in the benefits of Christ's Incarnation. As if, because they are
supposed to be Rational, they must needs be concluded to be Men? For what is
Man? not a Reasonable Animal merely, for that is not an adequate and
distinguishing Definition; but a Rational Mind of such particular Faculties,
united to an Organical Body of such a certain Structure and Form, in such
peculiar Laws of Connection between the Operations and Affections of the Mind
and the Motions of the Body. Now God Almighty by the inexhausted fecundity of
his creative Power may have made innumerable Orders and Classes of Rational
Minds; some in their natural perfections higher than Humane Souls, others
inferior. But a Mind of superior or meaner capacities than Humane would
constitute a different Species, though united to a Humane Body in the same Laws
of Connection: and a Mind of Humane Capacities would make another Species, if
united to a different Body in different Laws of Connection. For this
Sympathetical Union of a Rational Soul with Matter, so as to produce a Vital
communication between them, is an arbitrary institution of the Divine Wisdom:
there is no reason nor foundation in the separate natures of either substance,
why any Motion in the Body should produce any Sensation at all in the Soul; or
why This motion should produce That particular Sensation, rather than any
other. God therefore may have joined Immaterial Souls, even of the same Class
and Capacities in their separate State, to other kinds of Bodies and in other
Laws of Union; and from those different Laws of Union there will arise quite
different affections and natures and species of the compound Beings. So that we
ought not upon any account to conclude, that if there be Rational Inhabitants
in the Moon or Mars or any unknown Planets of other Systems, they must
therefore have Humane Nature, or be involved in the Circumstances of Our World.
And thus much was necessary to be here inculcated (which will obviate and
preclude the most considerable objections of our Adversaries) that we do not
determine the Final Causes and Usefulness of the Systematical parts of the
World, merely as they have respect to the Exigencies or Conveniences of Humane
Life.

Let us now turn our thoughts and imaginations to the Frame of our System, if
there we may trace any visible footsteps of Divine Wisdom and Beneficence. But
we are all liable to many mistakes by the prejudices of Childhood and Youth,
which few of us ever correct by a serious scrutiny in our riper years, and a
Contemplation of the Phenomenon of Nature in their Causes and Beginnings. What
we have always seen to be done in one constant and uniform manner; we are apt
to imagine there was but that one way of doing it, and it could not be
otherwise. This is a great error and impediment in a disquisition of this
nature: to remedy which, we ought to consider every thing as not yet in Being;
and then diligently examine, if it must needs have been at all, or what other
ways it might have been as possibly as the present; and if we find a greater
Good and Utility in the present constitution, than would have accrued either
from the total Privation of it, or from other frames and structures that might
as possibly have been as It: we may then reasonably conclude, that the present
constitution proceeded, neither from the necessity of material Causes, nor the
blind shuffles of an imaginary Chance, but from an intelligent and Good Being,
that formed it that particular way out of choice and design. And especially if
this Usefulness be conspicuous not in one or a few instances only, but in a
long train and series of Things, this will give us a firm and infallible
assurance, that we have not passed a wrong Judgment.

I. Let us proceed therefore by this excellent Rule in the contemplation of Our
System. It Is evident that all the Planets receive Heat and Light from the body
of the Sun. Our own Earth in particular would be barren and desolate, a dead
dark lump of Clay, without the benign influence of the Solar Rays; which
without question is true of all the other Planets. It is good therefore, that
there should be a Sun, to warm and cherish the Seeds of Plants, and excite them
to Vegetation; to impart an uninterrupted Light to all parts of his System for
the Subsistence of Animals. But how came the Sun to be Luminous? not from the
necessity of natural Causes, or the constitution of the Heavens. All the
Planets might have moved about him in the same Orbs and the same degrees of
Velocity as now; and yet the Sun might have been an opake and cold Body like
Them. For as the six Primary Planets revolve about Him, so the Secondary ones
are moved about Them, the Moon about the Earth, the Satellites about Jupiter,
and others about Saturn; the one as regularly as the other, in the same
Sesquialteral proportion of the times of their Periodical Revolutions to the
Semidiameters of their Orbs. So that, though we suppose the present Existence
and Conservation of the System, yet the Sun might have been a Body without
Light or Heat, of the same kind with the Earth and Jupiter and Saturn. But then
what horrid darkness and desolation must have reigned in the World? It had been
unfit for the Divine purposes in creating vegetable and sensitive and rational
Creatures. It was therefore the contrivance and choice of a Wise and Good
Being; that the Central Sun should be a Lucid Body, to communicate warmth and
light and life to the Planets around him.

II. We have showed in our Last, that the concentric Revolutions of the Planets
about the Sun proceed from a compound Motion; a Gravitation toward the Sun,
which is a constant Energy infused into Matter by the Author of all things, and
a projected transverse Impulfe in Tangents to their several Orbs, that was
impressed at first by the Divine Arm, and will carry them around till the end
of the World. But now admitting that Gravity may be essential to Matter; and
that a transverse Impulse might be acquired too by Natural Causes, yet to make
all the Planets move about the Sun in circular Orbs; there must be given to
each a determinate Impulse, these present particular degrees of Velocity which
they now have, in proportion to their Distances from the Sun and to the
quantity of the Solar Matter. For had the Velocities of the several Planets
been greater or less than they are now, at the same distances from the Sun; or
had their Distances from the Sun, or the quantity of the Sun's Newton Phil.
Nature. Princip. Math.
Matter and consequently his Attractive Power been greater or less than they
are now, with the same Velocities: they would not have revolved in concentric
Circles as they do, but have moved in Hyperbola's or Parabola's or in Ellipses
very Eccentric. The same may be said of the Velocities of the Secondary Planets
with respect to their Distances from the Centers of Their Orbs, and to the
Quantities of the Matter of those Central Bodies. Now that all these Distances
and Motions and Quantities of Matter should be so accurately and harmoniously
adjusted in this great Variety of our System, is above the fortuitous Hits of
blind material Causes, and must certainly flow from that eternal Fountain of
Wisdom, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, who always acts Geometrically, by just
and adequate (...) Plat.
numbers and weights and measures. And let us examine it further by our Critical
Rule: Are the present Revolutions in circular Orbs more beneficial, than the
other would be? If the Planets had moved in those Lines above named; sometimes
they would have approached to the Sun as near as the Orb of Mercury, and
sometimes have exorbitated beyond the distance of Saturn: and some have quite
left the Sun without ever returning. Now the very constitution of a Planet
would be corrupted and destroyed by such a change of the Interval between it
and the Sun: no living thing could have endured such unspeakable excesses of
Heat and Cold: all the Animals of our Earth must inevitably have perished, or
rather never have been. So Genesis 1.
that as sure as it is good, very good, that Humane Nature should exist; so
certain it is that the circular Revolutions of the Earth (and Planets) rather
than those other Motions which might as possibly have been, do declare not only
the Power of God, but his Wisdom and Goodness.

III. It is manifest by our last Discourse, that the Ethereal Spaces are
perfectly fluid; they neither assist nor retard, neither guide nor divert the
Revolutions of the Planets; which roll through those Regions as free and
unresisted, as if they moved in a vacuum. So that any of them might as possibly
have moved in opposite Courses to the present, and in Planes crossing the Plane
of the Ecliptic in any kind of Angles. Now if the System had been fortuitously
formed by the convening Matter of a Chaos; how is it conceivable, that all the
Planets both Primary and Secondary, should revolve the same Way from the West
to the East, and that in the same Plane too without any considerable variation?
No natural and necessary Cause could so determine their motions; and it is
millions of millions odds to an unit in such a Cast of a Chance. Such an apt
and regular Harmony, such an admirable Order and Beauty must deservedly be
ascribed to Divine Art and Conduct. Especially if we consider, that the
smallest Planets are situated nearest the Sun and each other; whereas Jupiter
and Saturn, that are vastly greater than the rest and have many Satellites
about them, are wisely removed to the extreme Regions of the System, and placed
at an immense Distance one from the other. For even now at this wide interval
they are observed in their Conjunctions to disturb one another motions a
little by their gravitating Powers: but if such vast Masses of Matter had been
situated much nearer to the Sun or to each other (as they might as easily have
been, for any mechanical or fortuitous Agent) they must necessarily have caused
a considerable disturbance and disorder in the whole System.

IV. But let us consider the particular Situation of our Earth and its distance
from the Sun. It is now placed so conveniently, that Plants thrive and flourish
in it, and Animals live: this is matter of fact, and beyond all dispute. But
how came it to pass at the beginning, that the Earth moved in its present Orb?
We have shown before, that if Gravity and a Projected Motion be fitly
proportioned, any Planet would freely revolve at any assignable distance within
the Space of the whole System. Was it mere Chance then, or Divine Counsel and
Choice, that constituted the Earth in its present Situation? To know this; we
will enquire, if this particular Distance from the Sun be better for our Earth
and its Creatures, than a greater or less would have been. We may be
mathematically certain, That the Heat of the Sun is according to the density of
the Sun beams, and is reciprocally proportional to the square of the distance
from the Body of the Sun. Now by this Calculation, suppose the Newton ibidem,
p. 415.
Earth should be removed and placed nearer to the Sun, and revolve for instance
in the Orbit of Mercury; there the whole Ocean would even boil with extremity
of Heat, and be all exhaled into Vapors; all Plants and Animals would be
scorched and consumed in that fiery Furnace. But suppose the Earth should be
carried to the great Distance of Saturn; there the whole Globe would be one
Frigid Zone, the deepest Seas under the very Equator would be frozen to the
bottom; there would be no Life, no Germination; nor any thing that comes now
under our knowledge or senses. It was much better therefore, that the Earth
should move where it does, than in a much greater or less Interval from the
Body of the Sun. And if you place it at any other Distance, either less or more
than Saturn or Mercury; you will still alter it for the worse proportionally to
the Change. It was situated therefore where it is, by the Wisdom of some
voluntary Agent; and not by the blind motions of Fortune or Fate. If any one
shall think with himself, How then can any Animal at all live in Mercury and
Saturn in such intense degrees of Heat and Cold? Let him only consider, that
the Matter of each Planet may have a different density and texture and form,
which will dispose and qualify it to be acted on by greater or less degrees of
Heat according to their several Situations; and that the Laws of Vegetation and
Life and Sustenance and Propagation are the arbitrary pleasure of God, and may
vary in all Planets according to the Divine Appointment and the Exigencies of
Things, in manners incomprehensible to our Imaginations. It Is enough for our
purpose to discern the tokens of Wisdom in the placing of our Earth; if its
present constitution would be spoiled and destroyed, if we could not wear Flesh
and Blood, if we could not have Humane Nature at those different Distances.

V. We have all learnt from the Doctrine of the Sphere, that the Earth revolves
with a double motion. For while it is carried around the Sun in the Orbis
Magnus once a year, it perpetually wheels about its own Axis once in a day and
a night: so that in 24 hours space it has turned all the parts of the
Equinoctial to the rays of the Sun. Now the Uses of this vertiginous motion
are very conspicuous; for this is it that gives Day and Night successively over
the face of the whole Earth, and makes it habitable all around: without this
Diurnal Rotation one* Hemisphere would lie dead and torpid in perpetual
Darkness and Frost, and the best part of the other would be burnt up and
depopulated by so permanent a Heat. It is better therefore, that the Earth
should often move about its own Center, and make these useful Vicissitudes of
Night and Day, than expose always the same side to the action of the Sun. But
how came it to be so moved? not from any necessity of the Laws of Motion or the
System of the Heavens. It might annually have compassed the Sun, and yet have
always turned the same Hemisphere toward it. This is matter of Fact and
Experiment in the motion of the Moon; which is carried about the Earth, in the
very same manner as the Earth about the Sun, and yet always shows the same face
to Us. She indeed, notwithstanding this, turns all her Globe to the Sun by
moving in her menstrual Orb, and enjoys Night and Day alternately, one Day of
Hers being equal to about 14 Days and Nights of Ours. But should the Earth move
in the same manner about the Sun, as the Mood does about the Earth; one half of
it could never see the Day, but must eternally be condemned to Solitude and
Darkness. That the Earth therefore frequently revolves about its own Center, is
another eminent token of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness.

VI. But let us compare the mutual proportion of these Diurnal and Annual
Revolutions; for they are distinct from one another, and have a different
degree of Velocity. The Earth rowls once about its Axis in a natural Day: in
which time all the parts of the Equator move something more than 3 of the
Earths Diameters; which makes about 1100 in the space of a year. But within the
same space of a year the Center of the Earth is carried above 50 times as far
once round the Orbis Magnus, whose wideness we now assume to be 20000
Terrestrial Diameters. So that the annual motion is more than 50 times swifter
than the Diurnal Rotation, though we measure the latter from the Equator, where
the Celerity is the greatest. But it must Tacquet de Circulorum volutionibus.
needs be acknowledged, since the Earth revolves not upon a material and
rugged, but a geometrical Plane, that the proportions of the Diurnal and Annual
Motions may be varied in innumerable degrees; any of which might have happened
as probably as the present. What was it then that prescribed this particular
Celerity to each Motion, this proportion and temperament between them both? Let
us examine it by our former Rule: if there be any Meliority in the present
constitution; if any considerable Change would be for the worse. We will
suppose then, that the Annual Motion is accelerated doubly; so that a
periodical Revolution would be performed in 6 Months. Such a Change would be
pernicious; not only because the Earth could not move in a Circular Orb, which
we have considered before; but because the Seasons being then twice as short as
they are now, the cold Winter would overtake us, before our Corn and Fruits
could possibly be ripe. But shall this Motion be as much retarded, and the
Seasons lengthened in the same proportion? This too would be as fatal as the
other: for in most Countries the Earth would be so parched and effete by the
drought of the Summer, that it would afford still but one Harvest, as it does
at the present: which then would not be a sufficient store for the consumption
of a Year, that would be twice as long, as now. But let us suppose, that the
Diurnal Rotation is either considerably swifter or slower. And first let it be
retarded; so as to make (for example) but 12 Circuits in a year: then every day
and night would be as long as Thirty are now, not so fitly proportioned neither
to the common affairs of Life, nor to the exigencies of Sleep and Sustenance in
a constitution of Flesh and Blood. But let it then be accelerated; and wheel a
thousand times about its Center, while the Center describes one circle about
the Sun: then an Equinoctial day would consist but of four Hours, which would
be an inconvenient Change to the inhabitants of the Earth; such hasty Nights as
those would give very unwelcome interruptions to our Labors and Journeys and
other Transactions of the World. It is better therefore, that the Diurnal and
Annual Motions should be so proportioned as they are. Let it therefore be
ascribed to the transcendent Wisdom and Benignity of that God, who has made
all things very good, and loves all things that he has made.

VII. But let us consider, not the Quantity and Proportion only, but the Mode
also of this Diurnal Motion. You must conceive an imaginary Plane, which
passing through the Centers of the Sun and the Earth extends it self on all
sides as far as the Firmament: this Plane is called the Ecliptic; and in this
the Center of the Earth is perpetually carried without any deviation. But then
the Axis of the Earth, about which its Diurnal Rotation is made, is not erect
to this Plane of the Ecliptic, but inclines toward it from the Perpendiculum
in an Angle of 23 degrees and a half. Now why is the Axis of the Earth in this
particular posture, rather than any other? did it happen by Chance, or proceed
from Design? To determine this question, let us see, as we have done before, if
This be more beneficial to us, than any other Constitution. We all know from
the very Elements of Astronomy, that this inclined Position of the Axis, which
keeps always the same Direction and a constant Parallelism to it self, is the
sole cause of these grateful and needful Vicissitudes of the four Seasons of
the Year, and the Variation in length of Days. If we take away the Inclination;
it would absolutely undo these Northern Nations; the Sun would never come
nearer us, than he does now on the tenth of March or the twelfth of September.
But would we rather part with the Parallelism? Let us suppose then that the
Axis of the Earth keeps always the same Inclination toward the body of the Sun:
this indeed would cause a variety of Days and Nights and Seasons on the Earth;
but then every particular Country would have always the same diversity of Day
and Night, and the same constitution of Season, without any alteration: some
would always have long Nights and short Days, others again perpetually long
Days and short Nights: one Climate would be scorched and swelter'd with
everlasting Dog Days; while an eternal December blasted another. This surely is
not quite so good as the present Order of Seasons. But shall the Axis rather
observe no constant inclination to any thing, but vary and waver at uncertain
times and places? This would be a happy Constitution indeed. There could be no
health, no life nor subsistence in such an irregular System; by those
surprising Nods of the Pole we might be tossed backward or forward in a moment
from January to June, nay possibly from the January of Greenland to the June of
Abessinia. It is better therefore upon all accounts that the Axis should be
continued in its present posture and direction: so that this also is a signal
Character of Divine Wisdom and Goodness.

But because several have imagined, that this skue posture of the Axis is a
most unfortunate and pernicious thing; that if the Poles had been erect to the
Plane of the Ecliptic, all mankind would have enjoyed a very Paradise upon
Earth; a perpetual Spring, an eternal Calm and Serenity, and the Longaevity of
Methuselah without pains or diseases; we are obliged to consider it a little
further. And first as to the Universal and Perpetual Spring, it is a mere
Poetical Fancy, and (bating the equality of Days and Nights which is a thing of
small value) as to the other properties of a Spring, it is naturally
impossible, being repugnant to the very form of the Globe. For to those People
that dwell under or near the Equator, this Spring would be a most pestilent
and insupportable Summer; and as for those Countries that are nearer the Poles,
in which number are our own and the most considerable Nations of the World, a
Perpetual Spring will not do their business; they must have longer Days, a
nearer approach of the Sun, and a less Obliquity of his Rays; they must have a
Summer and a Harvesttime too to ripen their Grain and Fruits and Vines, or else
they must bid an eternal adieu to the very best of their sustenance. It is
plain, that the Center of the Earth must move all along in the Orbis Magnus;
whether we suppose a Perpetual Aequinox, or an oblique Position of the Axis. So
that the whole Globe would continue in the same Distance from the Sun, and
receive the same quantity of Heat from him in a Year or any assignable time, in
either Hypothesis. Though the Axis then had been perpendicular; yet take the
whole Year about, and the Earth would have had the same measure of Heat, that
it has now. So that here lies the question; Whether is more beneficial, that
the Inhabitants of the Earth should have the Yearly quantity of Heat
distributed equally every day, or so disposed as it is, a greater share of it
in Summer and in Winter a less? It must needs be allowed, that the Temperate
Zones have no Heat to spare in Summer; it is very well if it be sufficient for
the maturation of Fruits. Now this being granted; it is as certain and manifest,
that an even distribution of the Yearly Heat would never have brought those
Fruits to maturity, as this is a known and familiar experiment, That such a
quantity of Fuel all kindled at once will cause Water to boil, which being
lighted gradually and successively will never be able to do it. It is clear
therefore, that in the constitution of a Perpetual Aequinox the best part of
the Globe would be desolate and useless: and as to that little that could be
inhabited, there is no reason to expect, that it would constantly enjoy that
admired Calm and Serenity. If the assertion were true; yet some perhaps may
think, that such a Felicity, as would make Navigation impossible, is not much
to be envied. But it is altogether precarious, and has no necessary foundation
neither upon Reason nor Experience. For the Winds and Rains and other
affections of the Atmosphere do not solely depend (as that assertion supposes)
upon the course of the Sun; but partly and perhaps most frequently upon Steams
and Exhalations from subterraneous Heat, upon the Positions of the Moon, the
Situations of Seas or Mountains or Lakes or Woods, and many other unknown or
uncertain Causes. So that, though the Course of the Sun should be invariable,
and never swerve from the Equator; yet the temperament of the Air would be
mutable nevertheless, according to the absence or presence or various mixture
of the other Causes. The ancient Philosophers for many ages together
unanimously taught, that the Torrid Zone was not habitable. The reasons that
they went upon were very specious and probable; till the experience of these
latter ages evinced them to be erroneous. They argued from celestial Causes
only, the constant Vicinity of the Sun and the directness of his Rays; never
suspecting, that the Body of the Earth had so great an efficiency in the
changes of the Air; and that then could be the coldest and rainiest season, the
Winter of the Year, when the Sun was the nearest of all, and steered directly
over men's heads. Which is warning sufficient to deterr any man from expecting
such eternal Serenity and Halcyon-days from so incompetent and partial a Cause,
as the constant Course of the Sun in the Aequinoctial Circle. What general
condition and temperament of Air would follow upon that Supposition we cannot
possibly define; for it is not caused by certain and regular Motions, nor
subject to Mathematical Calculations. But if we may make a conjecture from the
present Constitution; we shall hardly wish for a Perpetual* Aequinox to save
the charges of Weather glasses: for it is very well known, that the Months of
March and September, the two Aequinoxes of Our year, are the most windy and
tempestuous, the most unsettled and unequable of Seasons in most Countries of
the World. Now if this notion of an uniform Calm and Serenity be false or
precarious; then even the last supposed advantage, the constant Health and
Longaevity of Men must be given up also, as a groundless conceit: for this
(according to the Assertors themselves) does solely, as an effect of Nature,
depend upon the other. Nay further, though we should allow them their Perpetual
Calm and Aequability of Heat; they will never be able to prove, that therefore
Men would be so vivacious as they would have us believe. Nay perhaps the
contrary may be inferred, if we may argue from present experience: For the
Inhabitants of the Torrid Zone, who suffer the least and shortest recesses of
the Sun, and are within one step and degree of a Perpetual Aequinox, are not
only shorter lived (generally speaking) than other Nations nearer the Poles;
but inferior to them in Strength and Stature and Courage, and in all the
capacities of the Mind. It appears therefore, that the gradual Vicissitudes of
Heat and Cold are so far from shortning the thread of man's Life, or impairing
his intellectual Faculties; that very probably they both prolong the one in
some measure, and exalt and advance the other. So that still we do profess to
adore the Divine Wisdom and Goodness for this variety of Seasons, for Seed-time
and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer Genesis 8.
and winter.

VIII. Come we now to consider the Atmosphere, and the exterior Frame and Face
of the Globe; if we may find any tracks and footsteps of Wisdom in the
Constitution of Them. I need not now inform you, that the Air is a thin fluid
Body, endued with Elasticity or Springiness, and capable of Condensation and
Rarefaction; and should it be See Mr. Boil of the Air.
much more expanded or condensed, than it naturally is, no Animals could live
and breath: it is probable also, that the Vapors could not be duly raised and
supported in it; which at once would deprive the Earth of all its ornament and
glory, of all its living Inhabitants and Vegetables too. But it is certainly
known and demonstrated, that the Condensation and Expansion of any portion of
the Air, is always proportional to the weight and pressure incumbent upon it:
so that if the Atmosphere had been either much greater or less than it is, as
it might easily have been, it would have had in its lowest region on the
Surface of the Earth a much greater density or tenuity of texture; and
consequently have been unserviceable for Vegetation and Life. It must needs
therefore be an Intelligent Being that could so justly adapt it to those
excellent purposes. It Is concluded by Astronomers, that the Atmosphere of the
Moon has no Clouds nor Rains, but a perpetual and uniform serenity: because
nothing discoverable in the Lunar Surface is ever covered and absconded from us
by the interposition of any clouds or mists, but such as rise from our own
Globe. Now if the Atmosphere of Our Earth had been of such a Constitution;
there could nothing, that now grows or breaths in it, have been formed or
preserved; Humane Nature must have been quite obliterated out of the Works of
Creation. If our Air had not been a springy elastical Body, no Animal could
have exercised the very function of Respiration: and yet the ends and uses of
Respiration are not served by that Springiness, but by some other unknown and
singular Quality. For the Air, that in Mr. Boyle's Second Continuation of
Physicomechanical Exp. about the Air.
exhausted Receivers of Air-pumps is exhaled from Minerals and Flesh and Fruits
and Liquors, is as true and genuine as to Elasticity and Density or
Rarefaction, as that we respire in: and yet this factitious Air is so far from
being fit to be breathed in, that it kills Animals in a moment, even sooner
than the very absence of all Air, than a Vacuum it self. All which do infer
the most admirable Providence of the Author of Nature; who foreknew the
necessity of Rains and Dews to the present structure of Plants, and the uses of
Respiration to Animals; and therefore created those correspondent properties in
the Atmosphere of the Earth.

IX. In the next place let us consider the ample provision of Waters, those
inexhausted Treasures of Lucret. Et mare, quod late terrarum distinet oras.
the Ocean: and though some have grudged the great share that it takes of the
Surface of the Earth, yet we shall propose this too, as a conspicuous mark and
character of the Wisdom of God. For that we may not now say, that the vast
Atlantic Ocean is really greater Riches and of more worth to the World, than
if it was changed into a fifth Continent; and that the Dry Land is as yet much
too big for its Inhabitants; and that before they shall want Room by increasing
and multiplying, there may be new Heavens and a new Earth: We dare venture to
affirm, that these copious Stores of Waters are no more than necessary for the
present constitution of our Globe. For is not the whole Substance of all
Vegetables mere modified Water? and consequently of all Animals too; all which
either feed upon Vegetables or prey upon one another? Is not an immense
quantity of it continually exhaled by the Sun, to fill the Atmosphere with
Vapors and Clouds, and feed the Plants of the Earth with the balm of Dews and
the fatness of Showrs? It seems incredible at first hearing, that all the Blood
in our Bodies should circulate in a trice, in a very few minutes: but I believe
it would be more surprising, if we knew the short and swift periods of the
great Circulation of Water, that vital Blood of the Earth, which composeth and
nourishes all things. If we could but compute that prodigious Mass of it, that
is daily thrown into the channel of the Sea from all the Rivers of the World:
we should then know and admire how much is perpetually evaporated and cast
again upon the Continents to supply those innumerable Streams. And indeed hence
we may discover, not only the Use and Necessity, but the Cause too of the
vastness of the Ocean. I never yet heard of any Nation, that complained they
had too broad or too deep or too many Rivers, or wished they were either
smaller or fewer: they understand better than so, how to value and esteem those
inestimable gifts of Nature. Now supposing that the multitude and largeness of
Rivers ought to continue as great as now; we can easily prove, that the extent
of the Ocean could be no less than it is. For it is evident and necessary, (if
we follow the most fair and probable Hypothesis, that the Origin of Fountains
is from Vapors and Rain) that the Receptacle of Waters, into which the mouths
of all those Rivers must empty themselves, ought to have so spacious a Surface,
that as much Water may be continually brushed off by the Winds and exhaled by
the Sun, as (besides what falls again in Showers upon its own Surface) is
brought into it by all the Rivers. Now the Surface of the Ocean is just so wide
and no wider: for if more was evaporated than returns into it again, the Sea
would become less; if less was evaporated, it would grow bigger. So that,
because since the memory of all ages it has continued at a stand without
considerable variation, and if it has gained ground upon one Country, has
lost as much in another; it must consequently be exactly proportioned to the
present constitution of Rivers. How rash therefore and vain are those busy
Projectors in Speculation, that imagine they could recover to the World many new
and noble Countries, in the most happy and temporate Climates, without any
damage to the old ones, could this same Mass of the Ocean be lodged and
circumscribed in a much deeper Channel and and within narrower Shores! For by
how much they would diminish the present extent of the Sea, so much they would
impair the Fertility and Fountains and Rivers of the Earth: because the
quantity of Vapors, that must be exhaled to supply all these, would be lessened
proportionally to the bounds of the Ocean; for the Vapors are not to be
measured from the bulk of the Water, but from the space of the Surface. So that
this also does infer the superlative Wisdom and Goodness of God, that he has
treasured up the Waters in so deep and spacious a Storehouse, the place that he
has founded and appointed Psalm. 104.
for them.

X. But some men are out Nequaquam nobis divinitus esse creatam Naturam rerum,
tanta stat praedita culpa. Principio quantum coeli regit impetus ingens, Inde
avidam partem montes Sylvaeque ferarum Possedere, tenent rupes vastaeque
paludes, Et mare, quod late terrarum distinit oras. Lucret. lib. 5.
of Love with the features and mean of our Earth; they do not like this rugged
and irregular Surface, these Precipices and Valleys and the gaping Channel of
the Ocean. This with them is Deformity, and rather carries the face of a Ruin
or a rude and indigested Lump of Atoms that casually convened so, than a Work
of Divine Artifice. They would have the vast Body of a Planet to be as elegant
and round as a factitious Globe represents it; to be every where smooth and
equable, and as plain as the Elysian Fields. Let us examine, what weighty
reasons they have to disparage the present constitution of Nature in so
injurious a manner. Why, if we suppose the Ocean to be dry, and that we look
down upon the empty Channel from some higher Region of the Air, how horrid and
ghastly and unnatural would it look? Now admitting this Supposition; Let us
suppose too that the Soil of this dry Channel were covered with Grass and Trees
in manner of the Continent, and then see what would follow. If a man could be
carried asleep and placed in the very middle of this dry Ocean; it must be
allowed, that he could not distinguish it from the inhabited Earth. For if the
bottom should be unequal with Shelves and Rocks and Precipices and Gulfs; these
being now apparel'd with a vesture of Plants, would only resemble the Mountains
and Valleys that he was accustomed to before. But very probably he would wake
in a large and smooth Plain: for though the bottom of the Sea were gradually
inclined and sloping from the Shore to the middle: yet the additional
Acclivity, above what a Level would seem to have, would be imperceptible in so
short a prospect as he could take of it. So that to make this Man sensible what
a deep Cavity he was placed in; he must be carried so high in the Air, till he
could see at one view the whole Breadth of the Channel, and so compare the
depression of the Middle with the elevation of the Banks. But then a very small
skill in Mathematics is enough to instruct us, that before he could arrive to
that distance from the Earth, all the inequality of Surface would be lost to
his View: the wide Ocean would appear to him like an even and uniform Plane
(uniform as to its Level, though not as to Light and Shade) though every Rock
of the Sea was as high as the Pico of Teneriff. But though we should grant,
that the dry Gulf of the Ocean would appear vastly hollow and horrible from the
top of a high Cloud: yet what a way of reasoning is this from the freaks of
Imagination, and impossible Suppositions? Is the Sea ever likely to be
evaporated by the Sun, or to be emptied with Buckets? Why then must we fancy
this impossible dryness; and then upon that fictitious account calumniate
Nature, as deformed and ruinous and unworthy of a Divine Author? Is there then
any physical deformity in the Fabric of a Humane Body; because our Imagination
can strip it of its Muscles and Skin, and show us the scragged and knotty
Backbone, the gaping and ghastly Jaws, and all the Sceleton underneath? We have
showed before, that the Sea could not be much narrower than it is, without a
great loss to the World: and must we now have an Ocean of mere Flats and
Shallows, to the utter ruin of Navigation; for fear our heads should turn giddy
at the imagination of gaping Abysses and unfathomable Gulfs? But however, they
may say, the Sea-shores at least might have been even and uniform, not crooked
and broken as they are into innumerable Angles and Creeks and Inlets and Bays,
without Beauty or Order, which carry the Marks more of Chance and Confusion,
than of the production of a wise Creator. And would not this be a fine bargain
indeed? to part with all our Commodious Ports and Harbors, which the greater
the Inlet is, are so much the better, for the imaginary pleasure of an open
and straight Shore without any retreat or shelter from the Winds; which would
make the Sea of no use at all as to Navigation and Commerce. But what apology
can we make for the horrid deformity of Rocks and Crags, of naked and broken
Cliffs, of long Ridges of barren Mountains, in the convenientest Latitudes for
Habitation and Fertility, could but those rude heaps of Rubbish and Ruins be
removed out of the way? We have one general and sufficient answer for all
seeming defects or disorders in the constitution of Land or Sea; that we do not
contend to have the Earth pass for a Paradise, or to make a very Heaven of our
Globe, we reckon it only as the Land of our peregrination, and aspire after a
better, and a celestial Country. It Is enough, Heb. 11.
if it be so framed and constituted, that by a careful Contemplation of it we
have great reason to acknowledge and adore the Divine Wisdom and Benignity of
its Author. But to wave this general Reply; let the Objectors consider, that
these supposed irregularities must necessarily come to pass from the
established Laws of Mechanism and the ordinary course of Nature. For supposing
the Existence of Sea and Mountains; if the Banks of that Sea must never be
jagged and torn by the impetuous assaults or the silent underminings of Waves;
if violent Rains and Tempests must not wash down the Earth and Gravel from the
tops of some of those Mountains, and expose their naked Ribbs to the face of
the Sun; if the Seeds of subterraneous Minerals must not ferment, and sometimes
cause Earthquakes and furious eruptions of Volcano's, and tumble down broken
Rocks, and lay them in confusion: then either all things must have been
overruled* ruled miraculously by the immediate interposition of God without any
mechanical Affections or settled Laws of Nature, or else the body of the Earth
must have been as fixed as Gold, or as hard as Adamant, and wholly unfit for
Humane Habitation. So that if it was good in the sight of God, that the Genesis 1.
present Plants and Animals, and Humane Souls united to Flesh and Blood should
be upon this Earth under a settled constitution of Nature: these supposed
Inconveniences, as they were foreseen and permitted by the Author of that
Nature, as necessary consequences of such a constitution; so they cannot infer
the least imperfection in his Wisdom and Goodness. And to murmr at them is as
unreasonable, as to complain that he has made us Men and not Angels, that he
has placed us upon this Planet, and not upon some other, in this or another
System, which may be thought better than Ours. Let them also consider, that
this objected Deformity is in our Imaginations only, and not really in Things
themselves. There is no Universal Reason (I mean such as is not confined to
Humane Fancy, but will reach through the whole Intellectual Universe) that a
Figure by us called Regular, which has equal Sides and Angles, is absolutely
more beautiful than any irregular one. All Pulchritude is relative; and all
Bodies are truly and physically beautiful under all possible Shapes and
Proportions; that are good in their Kind, that are fit for their proper uses
and ends of their Natures. We ought not then to believe, that the Banks of the
Ocean are really deformed, because they have not the form of a regular Bulwark;
nor that the Mountains are out of shape, because they are not exact Pyramids or
Cones; nor that the Stars are unskilfully placed, because they are not all
situated at uniform distances. These are not Natural Irregularities, but with
respect to our Fancies only; nor are they incommodious to the true Uses of Life
and the Designs of Man's Being on the Earth. And let them further consider,
that these Ranges of barren Mountains, by condensing the Vapors, and producing
Rains and Fountains and Rivers, give the very Plains and Valleys themselves
that Fertility they boast of: that those Hills and Mountains supply Us and the
Stock of Nature with a great variety of excellent Plants. If there were no
inequalities in the Surface of the Earth, nor in the Seasons of the Year; we
should lose a considerable share of the Vegetable Kingdom: for all Plants will
not grow in an uniform Level and the same temper of Soil, nor with the same
degree of Heat. Nay let them lastly consider, that to those Hills and Mountains
we are obliged for all our Metals, and with them for all the conveniences and
comforts of Life. To deprive us of Metals is to make us mere Savages; to change
our Corn or Rice for the old Arcadian Diet, our Houses and Cities for Dens and
Caves, and our Clothing for Skins of Beasts: it is to bereave us of all Arts
and Sciences, of History and Letters, nay of Revealed Religion too that
inestimable favor of Heaven: for without the benefit of Letters, the whole
Gospel would be a mere Tradition and old Cabbala, without certainty, without
authority. Who would part with these Solid and Substantial Blessings for the
little fantastical pleasantness of a smooth uniform Convexity and Rotundity of
a Globe? And yet the misfortune of it is, that the pleasant View of their
imaginary Globe, as well as the deformed Spectacle of our true one, is founded
upon impossible Suppositions. For that equal Convexity could never be seen and
enjoyed by any man living. The Inhabitants of such an Earth could have only the
short prospect of a little Circular Plane about three Miles around them; though
neither Woods nor Hedges nor artificial Banks should intercept it: which little
too would appear to have an Acclivity on all sides from the Spectators; so that
every man would have the displeasure of fancying himself the lowest, and that
he always dwelt and moved in a Bottom. Nay, considering that in such a
constitution of the Earth they could have no means nor instruments of
Mathematical Knowledge; there is great reason to believe, that the period of
the final Dissolution might overtake them, ere they would have known or had any
Suspicion that they walked upon a round Ball. Must we therefore, to make this
Convexity of the Earth discernible to the Eye, suppose a man to be lifted up a
great height in the Air, that he may have a very spacious Horizon under one
View? But then again, because of the distance, the convexity and gibbousness
would vanish away; he would only see below him a great circular Flat, as level
to his thinking as the face of the Moon. Are there then such ravishing Charms
in a dull unvaried Flat, to make a sufficient compensation for the chief things
Deuteronomy. 33. 15.
of the ancient Mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting Hills?
Nay we appeal to the sentence of Mankind; If a Land of Hills and Valleys has
not more Pleasure too and Beauty than an uniform Flat? which Flat if ever it
may be said to be very delightful, is then only, when it is viewed from the top
of a Hill. What were the Tempe of Thessaly, Vide Aelian. var. Hist. lib. III.
so celebrated in ancient story for their unparallelled pleasantness, but a
Vale divided with a River and terminated with Hills? Are not all the
descriptions of Poets embellished with such Ideas, when they would represent
any places of Superlative Delight, any blissfull Seats of the Muses or the
Nymphs, any sacred habitations of Gods or Goddesses? They will never admit that
a wide Flat can be pleasant, no not in the very Elysian Fields Virg Aen 6. At
pater Anchises penitus convalle virenti. and ibid. Hoc superate jugum. and ib.
Et tumulum coepit.
; but those too must be diversified with depressed Valleys and swelling
Ascents. They cannot imagine Flours worthy of Paradise, which not nice Art In
Beds and curious Knots, but Nature boon Poured forth profuse on Hill and Dale
and Plain. Paradise Lost, lib. 4.
even Paradise to be a place of Pleasure, nor Heaven it self to be For Earth
has this variety from Heaven Of Pleasure situate in Hill and Dale. Ibid. lib.
6.
Heaven without them. Let this therefore be another Argument of the Divine
Wisdom and Goodness, that the Surface of the Earth is not uniformly Unequal (as
many think it would naturally have been, if mechanically formed by a Chaos) but
distinguished with Mountains and Valleys, and furrowed from Pole to Pole with
the Deep Channel of the Sea; and that because of the (...), it is better that
it should be so.

Give me leave to make one short Inference from what has been said, which shall
finish this present Discourse, and with it our Task for the Year. We have
clearly discovered many Final Causes and Characters of Wisdom and Contrivance
in the Frame of the inanimate World; as well as in the Organical Fabric of the
Bodies of Animals. Now from hence arises a new and invincible Argument, that
the present Frame of the World has not existed from all Eternity. For such an
usefulness of things or a fitness of means to Ends, as neither proceeds from
the necessity of their Beings, nor can happen to them by Chance, does
necessarily infer that there was an Intelligent Being, which was the Author
and Contriver of that Usefulness. We Sermon. V.
have formerly demonstrated, that the Body of a Man, which consists of an
incomprehensible variety of Parts, all admirably fitted for their peculiar
Functions and the Conservation of the Whole, could no more be formed
fortuitously; than the Aeneis of Virgil, or any other long Poem with good Sense
and just Measures, could be composed by the Casual Combinations of Letters. Now
to pursue this Comparison; as it is utterly impossible to be believed, that
such a Poem may have been eternal, transcribed from Copy to Copy without any
first Author and Original: so it is equally incredible and impossible, that the
Fabric of Humane Bodies, which has such excellent and Divine Artifice, and,
if I may so say, such good Sense and true Syntax and harmonious Measures in its
Constitution, should be propagated and transcribed from Father to Son without a
first Parent and Creator of it. An eternal usefulness of Things, an eternal
Good Sense, cannot possibly be conceived without an eternal Wisdom and
Understanding. But that can be no other than that eternal and omnipotent God;
that by Wisdom has founded the Earth, and by Understanding Prove. 3.
has established the Heavens: To whom be all Honor and Glory and Praise and
Adoration from henceforth and for evermore.

AMEN.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. THE Folly of Atheism, and (what is now called) Deism; even with
Respect to the Present Life. Psalm XIV. v. 1. The Fool has said in his Heart,
There is no God; they are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is
none that does good. Page 1 SERMON II. Matter and Motion cannot think: Or, a
Confutation of Atheism from the Faculties of he Soul. Acts XVII. 27. That they
should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find him; though
he be not far from every one of us: for in him we Live, and Move, and have our
Being. p. 36 SERMONS III, IV, V. A Confutation of Atheism from the Structure
and Origin of Humane Bodies. Acts XVII. 27. That they should seek the Lord, if
happily they might feel after him, and find him; though he be not far from every
one of us: for in him we Live, and Move, and have our Being. p. 68, 99, 132
SERMONS VI, VII, VIII. A Confutation of Atheism from the Origin and Frame of
the World. Acts XIV. 15, etc. That ye should turn from these vanities unto the
living God, who made Heaven and Earth and the Sea, and all things that are
therein: Who in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways.
Nevertheless, he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and
gave us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling our hearts with Food
and Gladness. p. 165, 199, 238
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere are now in the Press, Five Dissertations about Phalaris's Epistles,
Aesop's Fables, etc. With an Answer to the Objections of the Honorable Charles
Boil, Esquire.


