A True Trial of the Ministers and Ministry of England; As also a true
Discovery of their Root and Foundation, and of the called English Church, with
its Honors, Possessions, Tithes and Maintenance. Together with the fruits of
the said Ministers and Ministry.
Published for the sake of the simple Ones, that they may no longer be
deceived; but may come to witness the Altar, whereof they have no right to eat
who serve the Tabernacle, Hebr. 13. 10.
Written forth by Gervase Benson.
The Heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net which they hid
is their own foot taken, Psalm. 9. 15. His mischief shall return upon his own
head; and his violent dealing shall come upon his own pate, Psalm. 7. 16.
FRiends and People: Now in your days is the Lord, who is the Living and
Faithful God, fulfilling his Promises; and has fulfilled what he said by
Isaias the Prophet, Isa. 2. 9. The people that walked in darkness have seen a
great light; and they that dwelt in the Land of the shadow of death, upon them
has the light shined. By which their feet are guided into the way of peace:
and in which light they see their salvation, through the tender mercy of God,
and the remission of their sins, through the knowledge of Him, who is the Light
of the world, and has enlightened every one that comes into the world: which
light is the Saints Teacher; and the Worlds Condemnation that hate it.
Therefore that all of you might come to know the true God, whom ye ignorantly
worship, (both Priests and People) who contrary to the light do walk, and act;
To the light which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal, take heed, and it
love, and obey, in whatsoever it shall show unto you: (That is the light which
shows you darkness, sin, and evil, and all things that ever you have done
brings to remembrance:) and all your Deeds, to the Light bring, that with it
they may be proved, whether, or nay, they be wrought in God: for all things
that are reproved are made manifest by the light, Ephesians. 5. 13. And that with
the light ye may come to see Him, who is the way to the Father of Lights, with
whom is no variableness, nor shadow of change; who is the Truth: And there is
no coming to the Father, but by Him, who is the Life, who is the beloved Son of
God, in whom alone he is well pleased: who the true Prophet is, which God
promised he would raise up, whom all the people should hear, Acts 3. 22, 23.
and every Soul that will not hear this Prophet (whom God has raised up for a
light to the Gentiles, that he might be his salvation unto the ends of the
earth, Isa. 49. 6.) shall be destroyed from among the people, and salvation they
shall never witness; for there is no other Name under Heaven given among men
whereby they must be saved; neither is there salvation in any other, Acts 4.
12. but by this Jesus, who continues a Priest for ever, over the household of
God, who to himself took not this honor, but he that said unto him, Thou art
my Son, this day begat I thee, he also says, Thou art a Priest for ever, after
the order of Melchizedeck, who endures for ever, has an everlasting
Priesthood, who perfectly saves them that come to God by him: who is holy
harmless, undesiled, and separate from sinners, who is consecrated for
evermore, ever lives to make intercession for the Saints: who is become their
High Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle,
not made with hands: That is to say, not of this building; who by his own blood
entered in once, into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for
them whose consciences he has, and does purge from dead works, to serve the
living God: not in the oldnesse of the letter, but in the newness of the
Spirit, Romans 7. 6. Whose hearts are sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
their bodies washed with pure water.

And of this Savior Jesus, and this High Priest, whom God has exalted, and is
exalting with his Right Hand, to be a Prince, and a Savior: are they witnesses
who have believed in the Light, who are the Children of the Light, who by the
Children of Darkness (which hate the light, whose words and deeds be evil)
are in derision called Quakers: who witness Him in them, who is greater then
he that is in the world: who is entered into the Holiest of all, daily making
intercession for them. And the true Tabernacle made without hands, they are
witnesses of: and the New Covenant, and the anointing, that teaches them of
all things, so that they need not, that any man teach them: but as the same
anointing teaches them, of all things and is true, and is no lie. And by the
holy Ghost, which he has given them, can they truly say: That Jesus is the
Lord, and that in him, they are complete, which is the head of all Principality
and Power, in whom also they are Circumcised, with the Circumcision made
without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
circumcision of Christ, buried with him in Baptism: wherein also they are
risen with him, through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him
from the dead, who is the first and the last: Even he that lives and was dead,
and behold he lives for evermore. And with the light which from the Lord Jesus
Christ does come they do see and know, That other Lords and Priests, besides
him have had Dominion over them, but he that has wrought, and does work all
their works in them: the living powerful God of Life and Light, has made and
is making, their memory to perish: who have brought nothing to perfection, who
hold up those places wherein the Nations served their Gods, which the Lord
commanded should utterly be destroyed, Deuteronomy. 12. 2. And do allow, and practice
those things which Christ Jesus have disanulled, blotted out, and nailed to the
Cross, the handwriting of Ordinances, imposed until the time of reformation:
Of which time and reformation, the People of God called Quakers are witnesses
in life, and power: and so also is the Holy Ghost. And the time is
accomplished, wherein the Lord is drawn near to judgment, and is become a swift
witness, against the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against the
Oppressors, and against the Hirelings: And against the Shepherds, that feed
themselves with the fat, and cloth themselves with the wool; but feed not the
flock: And against the Scoffers, and against all who after their own ungodly
lusts walk; who are talkers of a reformation; but say that the time is not yet
come. Men of corrupt minds they are, being destitute of the Truth, supposing
that gain is godliness: who go about to uphold a worldly Sanctuary, and make
Priests of the lowest of the people, which are not the Sons of Levi: who set up
a worship, devised of their own heart; for which they have neither precept nor
example, in the Scriptures: and take Tithes of the People, and demand them as
theirs by a humane Law, made in the will of Man; which the Ministers of Christ
Jesus never did act any such thing, nor sue any man at the law: but he that
preached the Gospel, lived of the Gospel; for so has the Lord ordained.
Neither did Levi, nor his Sons under the first Priesthood act any such thing;
for that Priesthood was made by a law, Exodus 4. 13, 14. and Exodus 28. 1. And
had a commandment to take Tithes of the people according to the Law, Hebr. 7.
5. And no man took this honor to himself, but he that was called of God, as
Aaron was, Hebrews 5. 4. And those that did not bring their Tithes to the
Storehouse robbed God, Malach. 3. 8. 10. and not the Priests, neither were the
Priests to go to the Magistrate to compel them by a law, to pay them Tithes,
and Treble damages (as the Priests now in England do) but according to all that
the Lord commanded, so did they: as you may read, Levit. 8. 36. But these men
now in England, who are called Ministers of the Gospel and of Christ, are
neither called of God (who never heard his voice) as Aaron was, and those under
the first Priesthood: who received their Law from God, and had a commandment
from Him to take Tithes of the People; Nor as the Ministers of the Gospel were
called, who witnessed their call from God, not of men, neither by man; but by
Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the dead, Gal. 1. 1. And
the Gospel which was preached by them was not after man, neither received they
it of man: neither was taught it but by Revelation of Jesus Christ. And Christ
Jesus is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: and the Gospel is the same,
for says the Apostle, Gal. 1. If any preach another Gospel, then that which
we have preached, let him be accursed. And the Ministers of Christ are the
same, and are one, who hold one Head, who are led and guided by one spirit,
even the Spirit of Truth, which the world cannot receive, because it sees him
not, neither knows him, Joh. 14. 17. And as many as are led by the Spirit of
Christ, they are the Ministers of Christ, who abide in his Doctrine, and do
whatsoever he commands them; But they that have not the Spirit of Christ
(even the same spirit which was in the Apostles of Christ) they are none of his
Ministers, Romans 8. 9. And they that deny Revelation, and affirm and say, That
al Revelation is ceased, are no Ministers of Christ, who know not the Father,
nor the Son, For no man knows the Father but by the Son, and he to whomsoever
the Son will reveal him, Matthew. 11. 27. And they who were the Ministers of
Christ Jesus witnessed Revelations, and delivered and preached to others, no
other doctrine, but what they received of the Lord. Even that which from the
beginning was, which they had heard, which they had seen with their Eyes: which
they had looked upon, and their hands had handled of the Word of Life, 1 John
1. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 3. which Word of Life, those called Ministers in England, who
deny Revelation, who sue men at the law for Tithes and maintenance, never
heard; who are yet in their sins, who live in pride, covetousness, and
oppression; who hold, and teach that none can be free from sin, nor overcome
sin, whilst they live here, contrary to plain Scriptures, Romans 6. 18. 22. and
1 John 2. 13. 14 And so they being servants of sin, are free from
righteousness: for it is they that are free from sin, that are the Ministers
of Christ, Romans 6. 18. For he that commits sin is the servant of sin: and no
man can serve two Masters: none can be the servant of Christ, whilst he is the
servant of sin, John 8. 34, For Christ and sin, are two contrary Masters: and
betwixt light and darkness there is no fellowship, 2 Cor. 6. 14. For whosoever
sins has not seen Christ neither known him, 1 John 3. 6. And how can they
be Christ's Ministers, who neither knew him nor ever saw him? For who are
Christ's Ministers, he is their Lord and Master, and they do whatsoever he
commands them, John 13. 13. And where Christ Jesus is made manifest, the
works of the Devil are destroyed, 1 John 3. 8. Now sin is of the Devil, 1
John 3. 7, 8. And the Devil is no Minister of Christ, nor none that are of
him: and he that commits sin is of the devil, who was a liar from the
beginning and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him, John 8.
44. neither is there truth in them: who teach for doctrines the Tradition of
men, Matthew. 15. 9. Who hold up a worship and maintenance, and the high places
devised by man: which they received by Tradition from the Pope, and his
Prelates, after the customs of the Nations, and not after Christ, who make the
Commandments of God of none effect by their traditions: these are such as the
Apostle spoke of, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. who give heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences
seared with a hot Iron: who run but God never sent them; and say, Thus says
the Lord, when he never spoke to them: and therefore it is, they have not
profited the people at all; because they stood not in the counsel of the most
High God, who are not built upon the foundation of Prophets and Apostles, and
Ministers of Christ Jesus, the Rock of ages: but from the foundation of the
Prophets, Apostles, and Disciples of Christ Jesus, they are razed and excluded,
who are unholy; for if their Root had been holy, the branches would have been
holy also, Romans 11. 16. but their fruits have made them manifest, to have
sprung up from the bitter root: who have troubled and defiled many, Heb. 12.
15. themselves being unclean, manifesting their root. And therefore all people,
every where, consider what ye are doing, that hold up a Generation of men, whom
you call Ministers of Christ, and of the Gospel, who be unholy, and unclean,
who do the Temple of God defile: who in the way of Cain do go; and after Error
of Balaam for rewards run greedily: These are they that be spots in your feasts
of Charity, when they feast with you, they feed themselves without fear; clouds
they are without water, carried about of winds; Trees, whose fruit withers,
without fruit; who are Murmurers and Complainers, who can never have enough,
who say, What shall we eat? What shall we drink? Wherewithal shall we be
clothed? Matthew. 6. 25, etc. Heathens they are, and no Ministers of Christ; who
after their own ungodly lusts do walk, whose mouths speak great swelling words,
having men persons in admiration for advantage, sensual they are, who have not
the same spirit, which was in the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, as sundry
of them have confessed and published in print: whose Foundation and Root is now
discovered and made manifest; whom ye call your Ministers, Parsons, Vicars, and
Curats: and the foundation of your Churches, as you call them, and your
Parishes, and your Fonts, and your Basins, and your Sacraments, for which there
is no Scripture; and your Infants Baptism, and your Tithes Prediall, and
Parsonall; and your Oblations, Obventions, and Easter Reckonings, and
Mortuaries; and your Crysoms, and your Churching of Women, and your
first fruits, and your Patrons, and your Presentations, and your Orders, and
your Approbations, and Augmentations; and all your worship, as you call it,
which is not in Spirit, and in truth, to be of man, and from man, and was
invented by fallen man: and their Titles and Dignities they received of man,
and from man, and one from another; and their Original Head, and Root, and
Foundation, was the Archbishops and Bishops (amongst which the Bishop of Rome,
called the Pope, was Chief, and Supreme head) until the Reign of Henry the
Eight, late King of England, as by the Laws and Statutes of this Nation does
and may appear. And these called Archbishops and Bishops, and such as received
Orders from them to be Priests, Ministers and Deacons, and Clerks as they
called them; were called the body Spiritual, and were and are called the
English Church, as by the Statute of 24. Hen. 8. Cap. 12. does and may appear,
And as that Statute declares: The Kings and Nobles of this Realm, endowed the
said Church both with honor and possessions, to keep them from corruption and
sinister affection. And the Pope and the Sea of Rome had the Trial (amongst
other things) of the right of Tithes, Oblations and Obventions. And by that
Statute it is ordained and declared, That all spiritual Prelates, Pastors,
Ministers and Curates within the Realm of England may use, Minister, execute,
and do all Sacraments and Sacramentalls, and Divine Service unto the Subjects
of the same: And by the Statute of the 26. Hen. 8. Chap. 1. King Henry the
Eight, and his Successors is declared the only Supreme Head in earth of the
Church of England: And by the Statute of the 25. Hen. 8. chap. 20. The Annals
or first fruits which were paid by the Archbishops and Bishops of England to
the Bishop of Rome, are taken from the Bishop of Rome called the Pope: And by
the Statute of the 26. Hen. 8. chap 3. The first fruits and profits of every
Archbishopric and Bishopric, Parsonage, Vicaridge, etc. are given to Henry
the Eight, and his Successors; and over and besides a yearly tenth of all
spiritual livings, as they are called. And by the Statute of the 25. of Hen. 8.
chap. 20. It is ordained and established, That the King and his Successors may
grant to the Prior and Covent, or the Dean and chapter of the Cathedral
Churches or Monasteries a License under the great Seal, as of old time has
been accustomed, to proceed to the Election of an Archbishop or Bishop at every
avoidance of any Archbishopric or Bishopric within the Realm of England: with
a Letter Missive containing the name of the person which they shall Elect, and
choose, etc. And by the Statute of the 25. Hen. 8. chap, 21. The Archbishops of
Canterbury have Power and Authority given at their discretions to grant
Dispensations, Licenses, etc. unto the King, his Heirs and Successors, for
causes not being contrary to the holy Scriptures; as before had been accustomed
and used to be obtained by the Kings of England from the Sea of Rome. And by a
Statute made 13. Eliz. chap. 12. It is ordained, that every person under the
degree of a Bishop, which does or shall pretend to be a Priest or a Minister of
Gods holy Word and Sacraments, etc. shall in the presence of the Bishop declare
his assent, and subscribe to all the Articles of Religion, which concern the
confession of the true Christian faith, and the doctrine of the Sacraments
comprised in a Book imprinted, Entitled Articles whereupon it was agreed by
the Archbishops and Bishops, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at
London in the year, 1562. And that none should be made Minister, or admitted to
preach, or administer the Sacraments in England under the age of 24 years: or
unless he be approved by the Bishop of the Diocese, being a Deacon at the
least, etc. And all admissions to Benefices, etc. and all Licenses or
Tolerations made to the contrary to be merely void in Law, as if they never
were. So that it is manifest, That the foundation of the late Archbishops and
Bishops here in England was Man viz. The Kings and Queens of England, with the
Priors and Covent of Monasteries, and the Deanes and Chapiters of the
Cathedrals. And that the Ministers, Parsons, Preachers, Vicars, and Curats, as
they call them, were members and branches, arising from that Root and Body, To
wit, The Archbishops and Bishops; which Archbishops and Bishops by a late
Ordinance of Parliament were and are abolished and taken away. And by another
Ordinance or Act of Parliament, the Kingly Power and Government was and is
taken away and rendered useless in this Nation: and the same declared to be a
free Commonwealth. And by another Ordinance of Parliament the late Deans and
Chapiters, etc. are also abolished and taken away: So that it is manifest by
the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances aforesaid; That the called Priests,
Ministers, Rectors, Parsons, Preachers, Vicars, and Curats, were Members and
Branches of the late Archbishops and Bishops of this Nation; and had their
rising, and sprung from that Root and Body, and of that Root and Body were
members and branches: And that the Archbishops and Bishops themselves were made
and had their rise from the late Kings and Queens of England, with the Priors
and Covents, and Dean and Chapiters aforesaid: which said Kings and Queens,
Priors, Covents, Monasteries, Deans and Chapiters, Archbishops and Bishops,
Root and Branch, and their Power and Authorities, being disannulled, rendered
and declared useless, abolished, and taken away as aforesaid: It does clearly
appear, and is manifest; That all the Priests so called, and Ministers in
England, with the called Rectors, Parsons, Preachers, Vicars, Clerks, and
Curats, being Branches and Members of that Root and Body, viz. the late
Archbishops and Bishops, as branches and members of that Body and Root, are
taken away, disannulled, and abolished; and the Root of their Root, the Kings
and Queens of England, etc. And thus having clearly proved, and made manifest
their foundation to be of man, and from man: and them and their foundation, and
the Root of their Root, by man razed, taken away, made Null, and rendered
useless; I leave them in the Pit; without foundation, either of God or man,
where they and their memory shall rot, who have brought nothing to perfection;
and all that go about to set up, write again, and uphold that which God has
cast down and disannulled; and blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances; the
commandment by which the Priests took Tithes, and changed the Priesthood that
was changeable, that had a commandment to take Tithes of the people, during
the first Priesthood, as you may read Hebrews the 7. And do witness Christ
Jesus the unchangeable Priesthood, the end of all Types, Figures, and
changeable things: and the Priesthood that had a commandment to take Tithes,
changed; and the Law by which they took Tithes, disanulled: because of the
weakness and unprofitablenesse thereof; for the Law made nothing perfect: but
the bringing in of a better hope made perfect, whereby we draw near to God,
Heb. 7. 18, 19. And do own and witness the Ministry and Ministers of the
Gospel, which is not of man, neither by man, whose foundation stands sure,
abides for ever, changes not, neither can be shaken; who are built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being their chief
and head, Ephesians. 2. 20. who by him are gifted, for the gathering together of
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification of the Body
of Christ, till they all meet together in the unity of the Faith, and knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man; and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. And all who are Ministers of Christ have
received a perfect Ministry, which freely they have received, and freely they
declare, without being burdensome to any: And do witness and own the Church
whereof Christ Jesus is the head, which is his body, which is holy; and the
assembly of the righteous, from which all the ungodly are excluded, Psalm. 1. 5.
And the Ordinances of Christ Jesus; of which none that are unholy can partake.
And do own and witness the worship of God, which is in Spirit and truth: and
the Law of God, which is holy, just, and good, which never changes by no
diversity of place or time: And do witness, That all Laws, Statutes,
Ordinances, Prescriptions, or Customs, brought in against this Law written in
the heart (which is the Law of the Eternal unchangeable God, though called by
many the Law of Reason, or of Nature) to be things void, and against Justice:
and being but the Laws of men, they are inferior to the Law of God which is
Superior; and therefore to it must they give place. And being that Tithes by
the Laws and Statutes of this Nation are given to God, and holy Church. And
being as before is proved, That by God, and the Church which is holy, Tithes
are denied: and that the called Church of England, the body spiritual, called
the Spirituality, who receive Tithes, are unholy, not being free from
corruption and sinister affection; but stand in need of honors and possessions
to keep them from corruption and sinister affection; for which end they were
given them, as by the Statute of the 24. Hen. 8 chap. 12. it appears:
Therefore by the Laws and Statutes of England, the cal^ed Priests, Ministers,
Preachers, Rectors, Parsons, Vicars, Clerks, and Curats, who are unholy, have
no right to Tithes; and an Evil custom or usuage is to be abolished and taken
away, says Cook upon Little^on. And that custom or usuage which requires me
to give wages to him that never did, nor does any work for me, or mine, is
against reason, which is said to be the ground of all Laws. And being as before
is said, That all Laws, Statutes, Cnstomes, or Prescriptions against the Law
written in the heart, called the Law of Reason, or the Law of Nature are void:
and if any be brought in against it, they be no Prescriptions, Statutes, nor
Customs, but things void, and against Just^ce, as you may read in Doctor and
Student, Chap. 2. Therefore all Laws, Statutes, Customs, Usuages or
Prescriptions, which would set up, and uphold that which God has disannulled
and made void, and his Law bears* witness against, and would have me to
contribute toward the upholding of a Ministry which is changeable, and makes
nothing perfect (who are not one amongst themselves: neither the same this
generation, that was the last before; but alters and changes with times and
men: as the called Ministers, and Priests of England, and their Predecessors
have done, as is manifest: that in the time of Henry the eight the late King of
England, their predecessors denied the Pope for their head, and owned Henry the
eight for their head: and in the time of Edward the sixth, their Predecessors
denied the M^sse Book, and received the book of Common Prayer at his command:
And again in Queen Mary her time, they denied the Common Prayer Book, and
received the Mass: And in the time of Queen Elizabeth they denied the Mass
Book, and again received the Book of Common prayer: And in the time of the late
Parliament they denied the Common Prayer Book: and received the Directory,
rather then they would deny their Honors and possessions: and what they now
own, is manifest to all the Children of Light; to me they are of no force, nor
of me can take hold being thereunto dead: and therefore from them freed, being
to another married, even the man Christ Jesus: who is raised from the dead,
that I should now bring forth fruits to God: and from henceforth serve Him in
newness of life, and not in the oldnesse of the Letter, and in so doing by
God, and that of God in every m^ns conscience I am ^ustified: who art thou oh
man that condemnest? Gods enemy thou art, who contrary to that of God in thy
conscience does act. And thus to all both Magistrates, Priests and people have
I cleared my conscience, and laid down the grounds and reasons why I, who of
the world and to the world am known by the name of Gervase Benson, deny the
called Ministers and Priests of England aforesaid: and to pay Tyths contrary to
the Law of God: which is written in my heart not with Ink, but with the Spirit
of the living God, who am the servant of the living God, who does him obey:
whose soul is made subject to the higher powers for conscience sake, and to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as unto
the Superior, or unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, 2 Pet. 2.
13. 14. For so is the Will of God that by well doing I may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men; who resisters are of the power which is the Ordinance
of God which whosoever does resist, shall receive to themselves damnation: for
Rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil, Romans 13. 2, 3. And if
for my subjection to the Higher Powers, for conscience sake: and for bearing
witness against all resisters of the power according to the Ordinance of God:
or for not swearing, contrary to the commands of Christ Jesus, who says, Swear
not at all, Matthew. 5. 34. And the doctrine of the Apostle of Christ, James 5.
12. who says: Above all things, my Brethren, swear not: neither by Heaven,
neither by the Earth, neither by any other oath, but let your yea be yea, and
your nay nay, least ye fall into condemnation: or for not putting forth my hand
to Act that, which that of God in my conscience does show me to be evil: or for
not owning a form which is contrary to the Truth: and so more then yea and nay,
I suffer, I suffer: knowing (if the Will of God be so) It is better to suffer
for well doing then for evil. And so to the Will of my God, I commit my soul
and body in well-doing, who says, If we suffer with him, we shall reign with
him: And before Governors and Kings ye shall be brought for my sake, for a
Testimony against them and the Gentiles.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle, near the West
End of Paul's, 1656.


