MARIE R.

WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, and c. To all Our loving Subjects,
of what Degree, Condition and Quality soever, within Our Kingdoms and
Domiminions, Greeting. Whereas Our Trusty and Well-beloved, John Dunton,
Citizen and Stationer of London, has represented unto Us, That he is Printing
an English Translation out of French, of the Edict of Nantes, in Four Volumes;
and that, in regard of the great Costs and Charges it has already been and
will be to him, he has humbly besought Us to grant him Our Royal License for
the sole Printing and Publishing thereof; We are graciously pleased to gratify
him therein, and accordingly We do therefore hereby grant unto him the said,
John Dunton, Our Royal License for the sole Printing and Publishing of the said
Book for the Term of Fourteen Years from the Date hereof; strictly charging,
prohibiting and forbidding all Our Subjects to Reprint the said Book in whole
or in part, or to imprint, buy, vend, utter or distribute any Copies or
Exemplaries of the same, or any part thereof, Reprinted beyond the Seas, within
the said Term, without the Consent and Approbation of him the said John Dunton
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns first had and obtained, as they and
every of them offending herein will answer the contrary at their Peril; whereof
the Master, Wardens and Company of Stationers of Our City of London, the
Commissioners, and Officers of Our Customs, and all other Our Officers and
Ministers whom it may concern, are to take notice, that due Obedience may be
given to Our Pleasure herein signified.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the 30th. day of June 1693. in the Fifth
Year of Our Reign. By Her MAJESTY'S Command. J. TRENCHARD.

THE HISTORY Of the Famous Edict of Nantes: CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF ALL THE
PERSECUTIONS, That have been in FRANCE From its First Publication to this
Present Time. Faithfully Extracted from all the Public and Private Memoirs,
that could possibly be procured. VOL. 1.

Printed first in French, by the Authority of the States of Holland and
West-Friezland. And now Translated into English.

With Her Majesty's Royal Privilege.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN DUNTON, at the Raven in the Poultry. MDCXCIV.

TO THE QUEENS Most Excellent Majesty.
MADAM,
YOUR Majesty's Eminent Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and the tender
Compassion and Charity you have shown to multitudes of French Refugiez, of all
Ranks and Degrees, who have been forced to fly hither for your Glorious
Protection and Relief, encourages me to hope, that your Majesty will be pleased
to pardon me this presumption, of humbly laying at your Royal Feet an account
of their deplorable Afflictions, by permitting me to dedicate to your
Illustrious Name, this Translation of their History of the Edict of NANTES.

Your Majesty may see in it with what an astonishing Barbarity the formerly
Flourishing Churches of France have been ruined and destroyed; with what Rage,
Fury and Cruelty their Persecutors have treated them, and how many thousand
Dangers those miserable Innocents have run, to find Sanctuary in your Kingdoms.

The Reading of this History, how afflicting soever it may be in it, self will,
I am confident, Madam, notwithstanding afford your Majesty some considerable
satisfaction; for though the Ruin of these Churches cannot but very deeply
afflict your most tender and Christian Breast, yet your Extreme Piety will
however receive no small measure of Joy and Comfort, to find, that this corrupt
and Infidel Age, wherein Open wickedness has reigned with Reputation, has yet
produced Martyrs and Confessors, whose Courage and Constancy have scarce been
inferior to those of the Primitive Church, though they have suffered almost
beyond Expression for the sake of their Religion, and for their Holy Faith have
undergone a Persecution, which, taken in all its dismal Circumstances, is far
beyond the Blackest of any that can be met with, in all the Records and
Monuments of Pagan Antiquity.

Nor, may it please your Majesty, will this History be unprofitable to your
Subjects; for it will teach them what Dutiful Respect, Obedience and
Acknowledgements they owe to your most Excellent Majesty's, by informing them
what a Horrid Persecution Popery was preparing for them too, and the
unexpressible Calamities into which they must inevitably have fallen, if God
had not wrought a Wonderful Salvation for us, by making use of your Majesty's
Piety and Zeal, to effect this Great and Happy Deliverance.

That signal Favor Heaven was pleased to show to England, at a time, when both
Church and State were overrun with Popery and Arbitrary Power, and brought to
the point of Destruction, gives those miserable Refugiez strong hopes, that
they shall one day be re-established; as it does your Subjects a mighty
Expectation, of seeing a Noble Change of the whole Face of Affairs, with
respect to the Peace and Liberty of EUROPE.

Your Refugiez have no other Recourse, next to Almighty God, than to your
Majesty's, who are engaged to labor their Re-establishment, not only by that
Tenderness and Compassion, so natural to all generous Souls, and which is so
peculiarly Bright in your Majesty to the Afflicted and the Miserable; but by
the endearing Obligations which one and the same Communion lays upon you, by
all the Christian and Honorable ways, to procure it for them.

And here, MADAM, I have a fair occasion to speak of the Royal Virtues which
adorn your Majesty's; to acquaint the world with that profound Reverence you
have for the Protestant Religion, and with that Great Zeal you show in the
Defense of it: with what a disinteressed Virtue the KING opposes the unjust
Usurpations of France, with what firmness of Courage He has exposed his Royal
Person to the most imminent Dangers of War; with what Prudence and Policy He
has united so many Princes of Europe of different Religions, and confederated
them all in a steady Resolution, to put an end to those unparalelled Violences
which have so long raged in a Neighboring Kingdom, under the name of a Most
Christian Monarch, who notwithstanding makes* it his Glory to be Insensible of
those almost Insupportable Calamities, which his own Subjects suffer and groan
under by his means, and is the Inhumane Ravisher of the Public Liberties of
Christendom.

I could enlarge upon these, and many other of your Great and Illustrious
Virtues, which are the supreme Ornaments of Crowns and Scepters; but where your
Majesty commands my Silence, I have nothing to do but to submit, and to pay a
most profound Obedience.

But I humbly beseech your permission to let me speak this Truth, that your
Majesty's have both testified, that an Universal Good has been the end of all
your Royal Cares, that you have preferred, the Raising of the Honor of the
Nation, to your own Glory.

How often has that precious, that Invaluable Life been hazarded abroad in the
public Cause of the Rights and Liberties of almost all Europe; whilst You,
MADAM, here at home, have governed with so Careful, so Just, so Wise an
Administration, that You have rendered your Name no less Illustrious for your
Prudence, and the rest of your shining Virtues, than the Greatest King in the
World, I mean, WILLIAM III. has made His Glorious, by His Valor, Conduct, and
the Infinite other great Qualities of his Mind: and both your Sovereign
Majesty's are become the Delight of your Honest and Loyal Subjects, the
Admiration of Foreign Princes, and the great Dread and Terror of your Enemies.

May you Both live long, that your People may be happy long, and rejoice long
in you; and that your Majesty's may be long happy in your People, having the
Hearts, the Esteem, and Veneration of ALL your Subjects to be the Felicity and
Glory of your Reign.

So Wishes, so Prays, with all imaginable Earnestness and Devotion, May it
please your Most Excellent Majesty, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful,
and most Obediently Loyal Subject, COOK.

To My Lords The Lords Deputy Counselors OF THE States of Holland AND
WEST-FRIEZLAND.
Most Noble and Puissant Lords,
IF I do (...) follow here the example of those Writers, (...) place a studied
Panegyric upon those ^^ whom they have made choice for t^ors, at the beginning
of their Works, it was (...) fear of ill success that hindered me, had I had any
such design, nor of exposing my self to the Distaste that has been long since
taken against such kind of undertakings. I must confess I have no great reason
to build much upon my Eloquence, but I might find in the abounding Treasure of
the Subject, wherewith to supply the defect of my Skill and Parts: and I might
hope withal to please the Reader, since I should have an opportunity to tell
him those things which he rarely sees in writings of the like Nature. It Is a
difficult thing at this day to force into such an Eulogy those bold strokes of
Wit or Rhetoric, that might adorn it with any Graces of Novelty: more
especially most people believe that Truth very seldom appears in such
Applauses. But it would be an easy thing for me to do something more then
usual upon the Subject which I should have in hand; in regard that tho my
Praises were never so transcendent, they would never be looked upon as
suspected or excessive. There would need no more for me then to consider YOUR
NOBLE PUISSANCES, as an August Body, to which all the Merit of the Illustrious
Members that compose it, is due. It would be easy for me by this means to
adorn my Discourse with a thousand Ornaments not common to the World: neither,
would any Person presume to suspect me of rearing the Glory of All together too
High:seeing that if we should take asunder every one of those who rae called to
those Eminent Dignities, we should find in his Name, in his Endowments, in his
Employments and his Services, as many several Subjects for a just and lawful
Panegyric. But I know well, MOST NOBLE and PUISSANT LORDS, that solid Virtue
is not ambitious of these vain Oblations. Only vulgar Souls are intoxicated
with such perfumes. They who have a Soul truly Great, choose rather to be
profitable to the Public by their noble Actions, then to hear either their
Persons or their Conduct extolld. I make no question, but your NOBLE
PUISSANCES, deem it far more worthy of your selves to engrave your Elogies in
the Hearts and Memory of the People by your Sage and Prudent Government, then
to read 'em in an Epistle Dedicatory. Therefore not to engage my self in a
labor that would be ^o way grateful to YOUR MOST NOBLE PUISSANCES, I will only
give you an account of the reasons which emboldened me to present you this
Piece, which I have now transmitted to public View. I have not so good an
Opinion of my self, MOST NOBLE and PUISSANT LORDS, to imagine that the Fruits
of my Labors are Offerings that merit your Acceptance. But the Nature of the
Subject which I handle in this History, dedicated to Your Lordships, may serve
to excuse the liberty which I take to lay it under the Protection of YOUR MOST
NOBLE PUISSANCES: and after a full Examination, it may be easily acknowledged,
that in reason and justice it could have been no other where addressed. It
contains a Recital of the misfortunes which in France have befallen those, who
for these fourscore and ten Years have lived in that Kingdom under the Faith of
the most solemn Edict that ever was published. It represents what they
suffered, till the Revocation of that Law, which had been so long the Buckler
of their Religion, and the Bulwark of their Liberty. It shows several thousands
of Families by Violence and Injustice reduced to abandon the Advantages and
Delights of their Native Country; and to seek, on every side, a Sanctuary for
their Persons, and Repose for their Consciences. It Is true that in all parts of
Europe, wherever these Persecuted Professors of the true Christian Faith have
been led by Providence, they have received great marks of the compassion and
good will of Foreigners: but in no State or Kingdom were they received with
more tenderness, nor cherished with more affection than in this. The Charity of
our Thrice Potent Sovereigns made have to meet their Petitions. Upon their
arrival, they found all manner of succor ready at hand. They shared, as I may
say, the Conveniences and Riches of the Country with the Inhabitants, by the
free and liberal participation which they met with. They no sooner breathed the
Air of these Countries, but they tasted the Abundance of it. They also whom the
common Tempest had cast on other Shores, were sensible of this Heroic
Beneficence: not only because it was a leading example to others, but because
the effects of it were not enclosed within the limits of these Provinces. If
the first Honor of this extreme Bounty be due to our Sovereigns, whose Zeal
and Piety became ^o signal by such a Glorious Testimonial; it cannot be denied,
at least, MOST NOBLE and PUISSANT, LORDS, but that the second belongs to your
selves. You found, you distributed the Funds whence these Immense Profusions of
Charity were drawn. It Was by the hands of YOUR MOST NOBLE PUISSANCES, that so
many Professors of the Christian Faith, so many persons of Great Quality, so
many Pastors and Teachers, so many ruined Families, so many people of both
Sexes, which the Persecution had reduced to utmost Exigency, have hitherto
received, and still receive all necessary Succor and Relief. In the midst of
such Prodigious Expenses, occasioned by a hideous War, The care which you take
for the Public does not slackn your Diligence for the Consolation of so many
afflicted Innocents: and your inexhaustible Charity does the same in procuring
them an easy and comfortable Life, which your Indefatigable Vigilance performs
in suffering nothing to be wanting to the Commonwealth in her lawful designs.
After all this, there is no question to be made, most NOBLE and PUISSANT LORDS,
that it is no more than justice to Dedicate to your selves the History of those
whose miseries you so generously assuage and soften. As it will make an Apology
for their Innocence, so it will also magnify, your Bounty and while it makes
it appear that neither Seditions nor Conspiracies, nor Civil Wars drew upon the
Reformed these dreadful Misfortunes, so will it also publish to the World, that
your Favors are so much the more worthy of Immortal Applause, by how much it
was impossible to place 'em better; that a compassion truly Christian produced
'em; and that you did not relieve those disconsolate Families, but because you
compassionated an Affliction which they had no way deserved. I may likewise
farther add, MOST NOBLE and POTENT LORDS, that in presenting this History to
your Lordships, I do not take so much upon me a liberty which has need of an
Excuse, as an Opportunity to acquit my self of a necessary Homage. It Is a mark
of acknowledgement, which all the Refugees in some measure offer to your
Lordships by my Hands, as it were to make the Returns of succeeding Ages to
YOUR MOST NOBLE PUISSANCES, of those Thanks and Testimonies of their Gratitude,
which are due to your Lordships. And I dare presume to say, that they make use
of my Pen to make this Protestation to your Lordships, that it is not so much
their design to preserved to Posterity the remembrance of those Sufferings, as
the Memory of that relief and those consolations which your Lordships afforded
'em. Nor do I hazard any thing in taking upon me to be answerable for their
Intentions and their Thoughts, in regard the conformity of our common condition
ought to inspire into us all an equal sense of Gratitude for the Bounty of our
Generous Protectors, whose Succor and Assistance was so seasonable and so
comfortable to us. Besides, it is no difficult thing for me to reach the
Sentiments of other peoples hearts, on this particular occasion. They loudly
enough express themselves, and every where declare, that they are beholding for
their Lives and their Repose, solely to your Lordships Bounty. As for my own
part, MOST NOBLE and PUISSANT LORDS, I wish to see this Work of mine may be
kindly received in Public, not so much for my own, as for the Interest of YOUR
MOST NOBLE PUISSANCES. And it would be less a pleasure to me, to see my own
Name consecrated to Eternity, if my Writings may acquire the privilege of
pretending to it, then to Immortalize your Glory, by informing future Ages,
what share you had in the relief of so great a number of unfortunate Sufferers.
But if my endeavors cannot soar to such a height, it will suffice me, MOST
NOBLE and PUISSANT LORDS, to obtain at least one thing which I aspire to, as
the Lawful Recompense of my labor; That in pursuance of that extraordinary
Favor and good Will, of which YOUR NOBLE PUISSANCES give such Proofs to all
the World, you would be pleased to accept this History which I present your
Lordships, with as a Testimony of my Profound Respects, and as an engagement to
be all the days of my Life, with as much Zeal, Submission, and Sincerity as the
Heart of Man is capable to express,

Noble and Puissant Lords, Your Noble Puissance's Most humble, most Obedient
and most faithful Servant, B. M. A. D.
April 10. 1693.
THE General Preface.
IF History be Properly consecrated to preserve to Posterity the remembrance of
things the most remarkable that fall out in the World, it cannot be denied, but
that the deplorable end of the liberty which the Reformed enjoyed so long a
time in France, is one of the most memorable Accidents that merits to be taken
in hand for the information of succeeding Ages. There is not any thing in that
Revolution, which does not deserve particular Reflections. Upon whatever
circumstance of that Horrid Desolation a man fixes his mind, he shall find
enough to exercise his Wit, either in wondering at the Malice and Wickedness of
those that were the Authors of it, or in admiring at the Patience, and perhaps
in taxing the Pusillanimity and want of Courage of those that were envelop'd in
it. That a Clergy composed in truth of great Personages, but of persons more
intoxicated with the Grandeur and Maxims of the World, then sensible of the
true Maxims of Religion, or capable indeed of understanding 'em, should make it
so entirely their business to Extirpate poor People that were no longer in a
condition to dispute their Possessions and Privileges with 'em, and who had no
further occasion of difference with 'em, then what concerned the Right of
Believing and Preaching, in certain places, what seemed to them to be most
agreeable to the Truth. This is enough to astonish those who understand, that
Men must have some specious pretense at least to excuse their proceedings to
Extremities of Injustice, and Cruelty. That a King, who might have passed for
one of the most Potent of those that ever wore the same Crown before him, and
might have been the most Glorious of all his Predecessors, had he given his
Subjects as much reason to admire his Equity, and the Fidelity of his word, as
he had given Strangers an occasion to dread his Prosperity, and his Conquests
should so far extend his complacency to a Confessor, and two or three other
Ecclesiastics, as without any apparent cause to revoke one of the most solemn
Edicts, and most worthy to have been inviolably observed, had it been for
nothing else but only in respect to the Author: That this same Prince should
deal more Rigorously then he would have done with Rebels, with an Innocent,
Peaceable and well-affected People, far from Plotting and Sedition; who for
above these five and fifty Years have ne^re been known to have appeared in
Arms, but for the Service of the State: And who when they had taken Arms in a
Conjuncture of high importance, performed Achievements as much to the
advantage of the Grandchild of Henry the Great, as their Ancestors had done
near a hundred years before, to support the Rights of that same Prince, of
Happy and Triumphant memory. These are things, I say, would hardly be believed,
had we not before our Eyes a thousand Testimonies that convince us of it. That
a Counsel so profoundly and refin'dly Politic, and which to all the
Enterprises it undertakes confers an Air of Grandeur, which may seem to exceed
the bounds of human Condition, nevertheless should carry on this particular
design after a manner so little proportionable to the ordinary Maxims it
professed, that for the Oppression of People, not in a capacity to defend
themselves, it should not spare to make use of Acts of Violence and Injustice,
of Litigions and Impertinent wrangling, the most mean and most malicious
imaginable, so as to forget some certain forms of Decency and Decorum, which
are never to be neglected in things that are acted under the Kings Name, is
thatwhich Posterity would never be convinced of, were it not confirmed to
future Ages, by Authentic Proofs. That a People also, who were able to raise a
hundred thousand Men, able to bear Arms; who in many places surpassed the
Catholics in Number, Wealth and Reputation; who were in no want of stout
experienced Officers, full of zeal for their Religion, who often met with
favorable opportunities for the resettlement of their Affairs: That such a
People, I say, for thirty Years together should undergo Oppression so unjust, a
hunderd times more difficult to be endured by men of Courage, then the worst of
injuries: That they should suffer themselves to be exposed on all hands; to be
reduced to such cruel Extremities, by a thousand shameful Artifices, so as to
behold nothing but Snares and Precipices on every side; to be so cowed as not
only not to dare to make the least Complaint, and show the least Resentment of
their Sufferings, but also not to dare believe what they felt; that they should
labor under a Persecution for a long series of Years, spun out by the Malice
of their Enemies; as if it were not so much the purpose of their Oppressors to
extirpate, as to weary 'em out, and put 'em besides all their Patience: That in
the midst of these Calamities and Afflictions, these People thus overwhelmed,
should sit still with such a Conscientious and precise Submissiion, without
seeking any other Consolation then that of Sighs and Tears, without opposing
the Designs of their Oppressors any otherwise then by repeated Petitions, by
humble, respectful, moving Remonstrances, enough to have mollifi'd the hearts
of all that had any remainders of humanity left; that they should literally
practice the Christian Precept of praying for their Persecutors; that they
should all along continue to the end in doing them Service, that erected before
their eyes the preparations for their ruin; That they should make it a point of
Duty to be faithful to those that always broke their words with them; This is
that which Ages to come will very hardly be persuaded to believe. Neither do I
know whether the Testimony of History will be sufficient to convince a Reader,
never so little difficult of belief, of the Truth of an Event attended with so
many extraordinary Circumstances.

Now in regard there are some things very false which often cover themselves
with such appearance of Truth, that the most Prudent and Circumspect may be
deceived; so there are some Truths, that have something rare and unheard of
that makes 'em taken for Improbabilities. And this, in my opinion, may be
rightly applied to the Persecution which I have undertaken to give the Public
an account of. And it may well fall out one day that some doubt may be made of
the most signal Actions that refer to this History; since they who have been
Eyewitnesses of them, they who have experimentally felt 'em to their sorrow,
have much ado to believe 'em; and cannot comprehend that the fruit of a long
fidelity, of several important services, of an Innocence beyond all reproach,
of a tried Submission, and chiefly of an invincible Patience, should be forced
by necessity to renounce the sweets and conveniences of a delightful Country:
to abandon their temporal Estates and Advantages; to lose the more precious and
natural part of Liberty, which is that of serving God according to the Rule
which we are persuaded he has set down himself. And lastly, to seek for that,
under another Dominion, and in a Foreign Air, which is denied 'em by the
Commands of their natural Prince, and by those with whom they had breathed the
same Air from their Birth. It happens sometimes that men may take a plausible
pretense for the commiting so many Cruelties, from the Politic Factions and
Enterprises of them against whom they are exercised: and in regard the service
of God has often served for a Cloak to the Ambitious, to cover the Design of
their Quarrelsome Claims, it is no wonder that sometimes they make use of the
same pretense against those whose Religion they seek to destroy, tho in reality
they had no Intent to disturb the public Peace. But there was nothing of this
that could give the least Color for the last Oppression of the Reformed. They
had neither Protector nor Arms, nor Cities, neither were they in Confederacy;
and the fear of giving an opportunity to those who had sought so long after one
to persecute 'em, obliged 'em to carry themselves with the most exact Obedience
imaginable. The Faith of the Kings Promises, and the good will of their
Sovereign had been so long preached up among 'em as a better security for them
then all the strong Holds in the Kingdom, that they avoided, to the utmost of
their power, all occasions of rendering themselves unworthy of his Favors. They
were deprived of the means to signalize themselves in public Employments,
because they had by degrees excluded 'em from almost all Offices of State: but
in all Employments from which they could not debar 'em, in the Exchequer
Employments, where their Exactness and their Fidelity maintained them a long
while; in Employments of Trade, the greatest part of which their Understanding
and Reputation had drawn into their own hands, in warlike Employments, to which
they ran as often as the Kings service called 'em: In a word, in all things
else wherein they were permitted to distinguish themselves, there was not any
of the French Nation that showed more Zeal than they for the glory of their
Prince, or who have more honored their Country by their noble Actions. I could
here set down a very considerable Catalogue of those who since the taking of
Rochel, as well by their merits as their services have removed all the
obstacles which their Religion lay^d in their way to Preferment, and attained
to the highest Employments both Civil and Military. It Is known that the most
noble Achievements of Turenne, and which were of greatest advantage to the
Crown, preceded the change of his Religion. But I cannot forbear saying this
farther, that at the very same time that the Act of Nantes was revoked, the two
greatest Captains in the Service were Both of the Reformed Religion. Marshall
Schomberg has spread the Reputation of his Masters Arms as far as well it could
fly; and after the death of Turenne, France thought her self happy in such a
person as he, to support the Kings Honor, after it had received so great a
loss. The deceased Prince of Conde, who was one that well could judge of a
Soldiers Capacity, made no scruple to compare 'em both together, and to
discover in M. Schomberg, something I know not what more sprightly, quick and
ready, when he was to resolve upon an unexpected Accident. The Marquis of
Quesne, who commanded the French Fleet, had no body after the death of Admiral
Ruyter that would dispute with him for priority in that Profession. So that
Merit has raised two of the Reformed, notwithstanding the malice born to their
Religion, to the Highest Dignities in the Military Art, as well by Sea as Land.

What likelihood was there that at a time when so many noble Actions spoke in
favor of the Reformed, they should not only endeavor, but accomplish their
ruin? That they should take a time to destroy 'em, when they could neither
accuse 'em of Rebellion, nor look upon 'em as useless to the Kingdom? Certainly
no man would have imagined a hundred years ago, that France would have exposed
her self in our Time, by such a piece of Injustice as this, to the reproach of
all Europe. At least people would suppose there might be some private reason to
treat with so much inhumanity a number of poor Christians, who by their quiet
dispositions, not to speak of their Services, seemed to merit quite the
contrary. It Is not easily to be suspected that one man should exercise the fury
of his hatred against another, without having at least some specious pretense
for it. How then is it possible to believe, that in France men should be
transported to the extremities of rigor against a Million of innocent Persons,
for no other reason, but merely out of an ill grounded hatred? Nevertheless
this is all that can be said of the motives of the last Persecution. Not only
hatred, but hatred without a cause, without pretense, without excuse, inflamed
against a People without defense, who sought to vanquish the aversion of their
Enemies, by their Patience, and by their Services. Doubtless therefore it is
but justice truly and faithfully to inform Posterity, that they be enabled to
give a right Judgment, upon an Event so little known; and do the same Justice
to the Authors of these Cruelties, as we now do to those who have given us a
Model of what was formerly committed in the first Ages of Christianity, as also
under the Bloody Reign of Charles IX.

But besides the general Reason of preserving the remembrance of this
Persecution, there are two others which deserve to be considered. The one is,
because that they who advised it have endeavored to anticipate Posterity upon
this Subject, by diverse Artifices. I know not how many Writers hired on purpose
to disguise Affairs, and to deprive Truth of her natural Weight and Matter,
have filled all Europe with their Pamphlets fitted out to make the World
believe that they who suffered all the effects of Violence and Injustice,
should be one day looked upon as Criminals, to whom there was a great deal of
Mercy shown. On the one side they set 'em out in most black and dreadful
Colors. They aggravate with an envenomed Eloquence what ever can be laid hold
on for a pretense to accuse 'em; and finding nothing in their Actions that may
serve as a foundation to their Invectives, they search for reasons in their
Thoughts, in their Desires, in their Inclinations, which they describe after a
very detestable manner. They attribute to 'em a troublesome, turbulent, unquiet
spirit, Commonwealth-Maxims, an aversion to Monarchy; a Heresy incompatible to
the repose of Kingdoms, and which infuses an ambitions, daring Genius, always
in Action, if it be not suppressed by a greater Force. But certainly this
accusation has been loudly contradicted by the long Peace wherein the Reformed
have lived. And it would be a difficult thing for these Calumniators to tell
us, what became of this Seditious spirit for five and fifty years together; how
it came to lose the opportunity of a Minority, and a Civil War, without laying
hold of the advantages of so convenient a season; how it happen^d not to burst
forth in a doleful Oppression of thirty years together. There seems to be a
great deal of rashness in an accusation of such Importance, when there are no
proofs of matter of Fact to make it out; and that it is only supported by the
Impudence of the Authors of it. But this will not put a stop to those Writers,
who are sufficiently pai'd for venting their Impostures, and can easily
qualify the Affront of a Lie publicly given 'em, with the hopes of finding
Credulous Readers, who without putting themselves to the trouble of examining
matters, will pin their Belief upon the slieves of such extravagant Authors. On
the other side they extenuate the occasions of complaint, which have been given
to the Reformed for so many years together. They talk of nothing but the soft
and charitable means that have been used to reclaim 'em from their Errors; of
their Paternal cares, and Spiritual Exhortations. There is not the least
Pamphlet that peeps abroad, wherein the Author is not very double diligent to
slip in a word, and tell us, how there could be nothing more Charitable or more
Evangelick, than the Expedients made use of for the Conversion of Heretics.
This Falsehood is become one essential part of their Epistles Dedicatory. It
would look as if something were wanting, if they did not crowd in by head and
shoulders some Elogy or other of that new sort of Tenderness and good Will,
which never make themselves known but by Condemnations, Imprisonments,
Confiscations, Banishments, the Galleys, Gibbets, the Wheel, and such like
merciful Acts of Clemency and Mildness. But in regard they dare not promise to
themselves that all men will take these extraordinary Violences for marks of
Charity, they have bethought themselves of another course to satisfy those
nice and difficult People, who call Cruelty Cruelty, and Injustice Injustice.
There are some Writers who have the knack of it, to deny matters of Fact, that
are known all over Europe, and to cry 'em down for Imposture, tho they that
carried upon their Bodies the marks of their sufferings, made loud complaints
in foreign Countries. Those People have the Confidence to give the lie to the
Eyes and Testimonies of all those that have seen and felt what has past. As if
there were not only a Million of People who are living proofs of it, but an
infinite number of public Acts which all confirm what has fallen out. Lastly,
that they may not omit any thing that lies in their power to disguise the Truth
of things, there are some Authors who have endeavored to make it out, that all
those Acts of Injustice, Violence and Fraud, which have been committed against
the Reformed, were the effects of an exemplary Justice. If they have taken from
'em their public Places of Exercise, 'twas done, say they, because those
places were usurped: if they have tormented 'em with a thousand vexatious
Ordinances, 'twas only, say they, to retrench 'em of those privileges which
they took, notwithstanding there was nothing in those Edicts which authorized
their enjoyment of 'em. If they did inhumanely delude 'em by confirmations of
the Edict and Promises to observe it, which they violated in the most Essential
Concessions, 'twas, say they, by interpretations of the true Sense, which had
been misunderstood. If they tortured 'em, by a thousand personal Processes and
Suits, by quartering of Soldiers upon 'em with License to live at Rack and
Manger; by diverse Outrages and Punishments; 'twas, say they, because they had
deserved it, by doing those things that were forbid 'em by the last
Declarations. In short, Declarations were expressly given out, to make those
things Criminal, which were either most Innocent or most Indispensable, to the
end they might be always secure of a Pretense to abuse and evil-intreat 'em,
because of their having done something which they could not avoid the doing, or
which in Conscience they were obliged to do so for their own safety and the
welfare of their Families. Thus it was that they were condemned to the Galleys,
when they sought to depart the Kingdom, or to send away their Wives and
Children into Places of more security; that they ruined 'em by their Garrisons,
dragged 'em from Dungeons to Dungeons, and sent 'em to the newfound World
because they refused to go to Mass. They were forbid the one, the other they
were commanded. All the mischief therefore which they suffered for having
disobeyed, was no more, say they, but a just punishment of their disobedience.
As if it had been a real Crime to abstain from things unjustly forbidden; or
not to do those things that were unjustly commanded. All these Artifices, and
others of the same nature, may so alter the outward Face of things, that it
would be impossible that ever Posterity should be rightly informed, if men did
not take the pains to represent 'em in their natural Condition, and with their
legitimate Circumstances.

The second Reason for writing the History of these Transactions, is, because
we do not meet with any thing, since the death of Henry the Great, which gives
us an exact account of the Affairs of Religion, in reference to the Churches of
France. Before that time we find Memoirs sufficient, Writings in abundance,
wherein Affairs of that Nature are laid down. And in regard the Catholics have
composed great Volumes to throw the blame of all upon the Reformed: They on the
other side have not sat mute, nor have they failed to make good defenses for
themselves. There have been passionate Writers of both Parties, who have
discoursed the general Affairs with heat and Violence, and who have run
themselves too far into ^omplaints and Invectives. But there have been others
more moderate, who have treated of the same things, with extraordinary Modesty
and impartial Equity. The President James Augustus Thuanus, and the Historian
Mezeray, are of the number of those who have handled this Subject with most
mildness and reserv'dness. And tho by the Style of their Writing they may well
be discerned to be Catholics, and prejudiced in favor of their Religion; yet
there is a certain splendour of Truth that shines forth, and which gives
satisfaction to an impartial Reader. A man may easily, in reading these
Historians, disintangle that which is infused by zeal for Religion, from that
which is the pure and naked Truth. And the matter of Fact being genuinely
recited, the Writer's judgment does no way deprive the Reader of his liberty to
be of a contrary opinion. But since the death of that Prince we meet no longer
with any faithful Historiographers. Several Catholics have written that which
passed under the Reign of Lewis XIII. But they have interlarded their Writings
with so much Violence and Fury, that there is no perusing them with Patience.
They who desire to make trial of this, need no more than only to cast their
Eyes upon the History of the Rebellion, or upon that which was compiled by the
unfaithful Du Pleix. They also who have not suffered themselves to be
transported to the same excesses which those Authors of Lower Rank have been
guilty of, nevertheless have not observed sufficient measures to procure 'em
the name of just and Equitable; as having stuffed their Writings with so many
venomous Expressions, so many malignant Reflections, so many Testimonials of
their Passion and Hatred, that that same perpetual Character of Bitterness and
Parliality renders 'em suspected in what ever they say, and is the reason that
we dare not believe 'em when they speak Truth. Nor have the Reformed been so
careful to oppose better Histories of their Affairs to these injurious
Relations: So that they seem by their silence to have authorized the Invectives
of their Oppressors, as if they had nothing solid to return 'em ^n answer. 'Iis
true, that there have been some persons, who either by the Command or
Approbation of National Synods, have attempted to Collect the Me^oirs of such
important events in reference to Religion. But the one have written with more
zeal than knowledge; others have been constrained to aband on the Enterprise,
because the Times would not permit 'em^^ deliver their Sentiments with freedom.
The Designs that were laid before the beginning of the Civil Wars under Lewis
XIII. could no longer be put in execution with security, after the prosperous
success of that Prince had brought down the strength and con^age of the
Reformed. 'Twas then a Crime of State ^ say, that the Court had broken their
word. To excuse the Actions of those who had taken up Arms, or set forth the
Justice of the Complaints upon so ma^^ Breaches of the Edict, which the Court
would never make good, was enough to expose a Man to all the Punishments of the
most infamous Rebels. After that the King began to be troublesome to the
Ministers, upon pretense that they had committed or spoken something
prejudicial to his service; and the least words that they could lay hold of to
mi construction, drew upon 'em Prohibitions not to meet at Synods; Commands to
stay till new Orders in certain places that were assigned 'em for Prisons;
Injunctions not to act in their Functions within the Kingdom; Menaces of more
severe usage if occasion offered: there was no body that dared take upon him to
inform the Public of these Truths, so ill received by those who thought
themselves offended by so doing, and so fatal to those that had the boldness to
utter 'em. It Is no time for a Man to make his Apology, when he is reduced for
his own preservation to submit in all things, and to take it as a favor at his
Enemies hands for granting life to the Innocent, upon condition they will
confess themselves guilty. However, such was the Condition of the Reformed,
after they were once deprived of all their Places of Security. Disarmed,
Disunited, Vanquished, that they were constrained to talk of their own Conduct
as the Victors discoursed; to condemn, with them, whatever was past, as if they
never had had any just cause of Fear, or any good reasons for them Complaints.
And to thank 'em as for a most endearing favor, that after they had taken from
their Churches all Support and Maintenance, they did not altogether quite
exterminate their persons. It Is not therefore to be thought a wonder, that at a
time when it was so dangerous to speak Truth, and so necessary to keep silence,
there should be no History of the Reformed written, which would have certainly
cost the Author inevitable ruin. But in regard that many times Truth grows less
odious the older it is, Time affords us more security to tell it, and gives us
liberty to rescue it from that darkness where the Terror of Punishment had
obliged us to conceal it.

These several Considerations have made me for a long time wish, that some
person capable of so great a undertaking, would give himself the Trouble to
compile so necessary a History, and to oppose against the Invectives with which
the Conduct of the Reformed have been blacknd for seventy Years together,
either a genuine and sincere Recital of what has befallen 'em, or an Apology
for their Actions, which have given the greatest advantages to their
Detracters. I never questioned but that it was greatly to their disadvantage to
suffer those to talk alone upon this Subject, whose interest it was to delude
the World; and that, one day, the Reformed persecuted with so much violence,
Injustice, Breach of Faith, would be exposed to the sinister Judgments of
Posterity, if succeeding Ages were not rightly otherwise informed of the
miseries they have suffered, than by the Relations of their Adversaries.
Posterity then would meet with nothing but outrageous Panegyricks, Hyperbolical
Elogies, and Studid Comparisons, exalting this continued inveteracy, and this
insulting Oppression above the Noblest Actions of the Greatest Hero's; and
well might our Offspring be excused for not discerning through these disguises
the Innocence of the Unfortunate, of which no Body had been so careful as to
preserve good Testimonials. It Is true, the Registers of the Council, of the
Parliaments, of all the Jurisdictions both Sovereign and Inferior are full of
Acts, the very reading of which alone might serve to prove the Innocence of
those against whom they were issued forth; and that the greatest part of 'em
were published with so little precaution, that they are rather Demonstrations
of their Accusers breach of word, and the ignominious compliance of the Judges,
than any proofs of the Crime imputed to the Parties accused. But in the first
place, it is impossible, confidering the present posture of Affairs, that any
one should undertake to make a Collection of those Acts, the very search after
which would render the person suspected: and it is yet more unlikely that there
will be any body, a hundred years hence, that will think himself so deeply
obliged in justification of the Innocent, as to take upon him an inquisition
which can never prove successful without a great deal of Care, Time, Labor and
Expense. Moreover, all the World is well acquainted with the Policy of the
Roman Church. She knows how to suppress what ever may redound to her prejudice.
There are now an infinite number of Acts not to be found in the Registers,
which being useful to her at the time when they were made, she was afterward
ashamed to have seen. By this means she has concealed the source of a great
many of her Usurpations. She has reduced those that fain would dive into the
Original of that Corruption, which she has introduced into all the parts of
Religion, to a necessi y of romaging all the Libraries of Europe, in search of
some Monument that might discover the occasions and progress of her
Enterprises. And she has had such good luck in several matters of great
importance, that she has rendered many Certainties almost doubtful and
problematical, tho she could not succeed so far, as altogether to deprive 'em
of the Character of Probability and Likelihood: which in things that cause the
Persons to blush, who are upbraided to have committed 'em, makes us lawfully
suspect that they suppressed the most convincing Proofs. And thus perhaps it was,
that she gave her Writers the privilege to call in question the famous History
of that Woman, who, as they say, sat in St. Peter's Chair at Rome for several
years under the name of John VIII. I should have a greater esteem for some
Historical Observations that seem to destroy what is averred concerning this
matter, but that I know that Prudence in suppressing the Monuments of shameful
Acts, and puzzling the circumstances of odious deeds, either by falsifying the
Date, or the alteration of some decisive, word, is no new sort of Prudence. But
when I add to this consideration so many proofs more than probable, which serve
as a foundation to this History, I must acknowledge my self almost convinced of
the truth of it. In things of this nature the just suspicion which men have of
the bad Credit of the accused, when they have already been frequently convinced
of having abolished such Monuments by which the truth of things was preserved,
is doubtless an imperfect proof against 'em. But when the matter of Fact is
farther suported by a multitude of pressing instances and strong presumptions,
it cannot be denied but that imperfect proof may become equivalent to a good
Demonstration.

But not to engage my self in an unprofitable digression, I shall only add,
That the Author who wrote the History of the Reformation of England had more
than once sufficient experience of the great care which the Catholics took to
deface the memory of things, which they were unwilling Posterity should know,
that the public Registers of his Country which ought to have been inviolable,
were not looked upon to be so sacred by those who met with any Acts which were
not to their advantage. I conclude from all this, that perhaps a hundred year
hence the Jesuits will have taken the same precautions to abolish the memory of
those Acts of injustice, which they have either committed or advised, and that
they will leave nothing in the public Registers to give us any knowledge of
what past in our days, in France, as to matters of Religion. So that I cannot
but think it necessary to prevent the Effect of their Artifices, and to
publish, at least by way of Apology, certain proofs of the Innocence of the
Reformed, and the violated Faith of their Adversaries; to the end Posterity may
be able to give a more equitable judgment of the matter of Fact that is not be
denied by either side, upon the Invectives of the Accusers and the Defenses of
the Parties accused. I had some reason to hope, some years since, that I should
see my desires accomplished, when I understood that a person whose name is
famous all over Europe, and whose Writings have enforced his very Adversaries
to admire his piercing Wit, his Exactness, his Sincerity and Solidity, was
about to have undertaken this great Work. But having changed his mind for some
reasons, I have been constrained to supply his place, and to expose my self to
ill success, in an enterprise so much above my ability, since it would have
been so proper for so great a Person. I shall not go about to anticipate the
minds of men in my favor, by humble excuses for my rashness; nor to incline
'em to pardon the faults I may commit in a Work so laborious as this, by
confessing before hand, that I am not infallible, and by declaring that I
submit my self to their Censure, provided they will be just in pronouncing it.
I well know what has formerly been said, and what may now be retorted upon
those, who strive this way to inveagle the Reader into a good Opinion of their
Works. It Is better to abstain from committing Faults, where it is in our Power,
than to beg pardon, on purpose to render 'em more tolerable. I night have let
writing alone, because I was not constrained to it: and if I were afraid of not
pleasing all the World in a Work of this Importance, 'twas long of my self that
I displeased anybody, who might have avoided the occasion of committing faults,
which no body perhaps will have the goodness to pardon; which I might have
easily done by sitting still and not writing at all. But I must confess that
the fear of seeing the design, of so necessary a History quite given over,
prevailed with me above all these considerations which might have diverted me
from it: and that I thought it more profitable for the Public, to oblige the
World with such a Work as I was able to produce upon this Subject; than to
leave men ill informed of so woeful a Revolution as has befallen the Affairs of
the Reformed. And that which has the more confirmed me in this resolution, is
this, that other persons having labored upon the same Subject a little before
I applied my self to it, I found in their writings a great deal of Apology, but
little History, tho I observed solidity sufficient.

Now this is that which appears to me in writing what has passed both for and
against the Reformed to be principally indispensable; to give a just extent to
the matters of Fact which concern 'em; to the end, that considering them on
every side with all their circumstances about 'em, it may be the more easy to
judge, whether they be the Marks of a Factious, Licentious and turbulent
Spirit, as their Adversaries give out, or the effects of a necessary prudence,
and a lawful precaution, as the Reformed pretend. When ^^ read a History in
Abridgement, the matters of Fact being too naked and too bare, afford not scope
enough to the Reader's judgment: So that before he can give his Opinion upon
what the Historian has related to him, he frequently desires to know the
circumstances which the Author's brevity has concealed from him. As for
example. Look into the Writings of Maimbourg, Soulier, la Croix; or any such
like Authors, who have only taken their Pens in their Hands to render the
Reformed odious: and if any one finds there in abstract, that the Reformed
having persever'd about eight or nine Years in the pursuit of certain
Petitions, which King Lewis did not think fit to grant 'em, the Prince being
importuned by their solicitations, took Arms to reduce 'em to his Will: took
from 'em their places of Hostage; broke their Vni^n; despoiled 'em of several
of their Privileges: ^ere is most certainly real matter of Fact; but the
^revity of the Relation does not satisfy the Reader. Therefore that he may
judge knowingly of the matter, ^is necessary that he should be informed of the
nature ^^ the things demanded by the Reformed, and the rea^ns why they were
demanded with so much perseve^ance: it behooved him to know what were the
grounds ^^ the Courts refusals, and what was the occasion of ^^eir taking Arms,
to stop the course of those demands which were made 'em with so much
importunity. Without this, it is impossible to know whether the ^ars of the
Reformed were just or no; whether their complaints were lawful; whether the
Courts refusals proceeded from ill will, or from the injustice of the Requests;
nor is it possible otherwise to judge whether the Reformed were duly punished
as Rebels, or oppressed, as unfortunate innocent persons, by the War which the
Court declared against 'em. Therefore the matter of Fact is to be unfolded and
laid open before the Reader's Eyes. It must be made clear to him, why the
Reformed complained: how they came to be under new fears and apprehensions
every day. Why the Court accused 'em of Disaffection, and sought all manner of
ways to surprise and destroy 'em. Thus the Reader having understood the state
of the Question, is at liberty to judge whether the fears of the Reformed were
Vain, and whether the Court had reason to overwhelm 'em as they did. If he be
not equitable in his sentence, that is no fault of the Historian, because he has
given the Reader light sufficient to judge with knowledge.

Now in regard that this Reflection may be applied to all matters of Fact that
concern Religion, I thought it not enough to publish a History in Epitome of
the misfortunes of the Reformed Churches in France; but that they ought to be
set down at large, that by going back to the Original of the whole matter, and
setting forth the Progress and Series of what has befallen 'em good or ill, not
only the variety would render the reading of Work the more delightful, but that
the display of the most important circumstances would make it likewise more
profitable; and would serve for the more solid foundation of an Apology, for
those forlorn and disconsolate Flocks at this day scattered over the Face of
Europe. To this purpose I proposed to my self to do that which I saw no body
else preparing to undertake: and to the end I might give an occasion of judging
more soundly whether the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, which we have seen
in our days, were an Act of Justice and Sincerity, I have endeavored
faithfully to set down whatever I could learn concerning the manner how it was
pursued, obtained, published, put in execution, or violated, while there was
yet some respect and reverence showed to the name and Author of it. To this
purpose I have under taken to write the History of whatever past in France upon
the account of Religion, from Luther to the Time that this Edict was set forth;
to the end it might the better be known what right the Reformed had to demand
it; what reasons obliged 'em to be satisfied with it; why there happened so
many Contests about some Articles which it contained; why the King had so much
trouble to grant it; why the Clergy were so unwilling to consent to it, and the
Parliaments showed so much reluctance to verify it. To this purpose it is
requisite that we should show what figure the Reformed made in the Kingdom:
what Ties and Obligations there were between Them, and the King, when ^e came
to the Crown; who were their Friends or their Enemies; and what were the
reasons either of their hopes or fears. 'Twas my opinion that in order to this
design it would be sufficient to set down in few words the most remarkable and
most unquestionable Events, from the Reformation till the death of Henry III.
as being enough to give at least an Idea, and a Taste of the general Affairs of
that time. On the other side, I judged it meet to be more profuse and copions
in relating the Transactions which belong to the Reign of Hen. IV. as having so
strict a Connection with the Affairs of the Edict; which unless they be more
distinctly known, it would be a difficult thing to judge how justly, and how
prudently it was resolved upon, and how necessary to be granted.

This design which has caused me to undertake a History of above fourscore and
fifteen years, not to speak of the Compendium, which comprehends above seventy
more, has rendered my trouble so much the greater, and gave me an occasion to
fear my inability to attempt so great a Work. I do not presume to boast the
extent of an extraordinary Wit; and I am clearly convinced, that neither Force
nor delicacy of style are fallen to my lot. My vanity perhaps may flatter me to
be worthy of being numbered among the midling sort: and if there be any who
believe it does not become me to soar so high, I am willing to descend a degree
lower. Moreover, I have spent the greatest part of my life in such kind of
studies as no way cultivated my Genius for the writing of History. And my
assiduity in another sort of employment would not permit me the leisure to
think upon other things. The Persecutions of the Church for so many years, have
all along overwhelmed me in tedious, frequent and irksome distractions, which
have engaged me to cares far different from those that are proper for a person
who designs to be a Historian. So that it was impossible on my Part, that I
should come furnished to the Work which I have undertaken, either with the
gifts of a surpassing natural inclination, or the sagacity of a cultivated Wit,
with so much care as necessity required. For 'twas impossible for me to acquire
the knowledge of several Professions, of which it is requisite to understand
the most common Terms, to speak after a manner proper to please and inform,
when occasion presents it self. Consequently it was impossible for me to avoid
falling into many errors, which perhaps more equitable Readers will pass over;
but Critics, who are always the greater number, will never pardon. This may
raise against me all those that think themselves more dextrous and witty than
others, not so much perhaps because they are able to do better, but because
that having studi'd nothing more in Books, than the defects of other Men, they
believe themselves to have acquired the Art to commend, and the Privilege to
censure 'em. It Is the custom of these people to fasten upon what is least
essential in Books, and to make a great noise of the faults which they find
there, to the end that they whose considerations never pierce to the bottom of
things, may judge from thence, that the whole Work is of no value. The Jesuit
Palavicini, by this Artifice has found no less than three hundred and sixty
faults, by tale, in the History of the Council of Trent, written by P. Paolo
Sarpio. But to fill up the number, he was forced to make use of all the springs
and little engines of fallacy and litigious Cavils; to make an ill marked Date
pass for a Capital Crime, one Number mistaken for another, Six for Five, Twenty
for Twenty one, and such like trivial Slipps; but more especially, to tax for
contradictory, matters of Fact which altogether may be true, and agree well
enough one with another. Who would not think that a Book, where no less than
360 faults are found, and Arithmetically numbered out, should be looked upon as
an ill Book? Nevertheless make an abatement from this number of the mere
Trifles, which change not at all the nature of the matters of Fact, and the
errors which appear not to be errors, only because the Censurer, who observes
'em, conceals the reasons that justify 'em, you shall see perhaps three fourth
parts of the faults pretended, vanish of a sudden; and the fourth part that
remains, will not be looked upon as well proved neither, till the Character of
both Historians be compared together; till the reasons that support the
Objections, the Motives that engage either the one or the other to deceive the
World, and the purity of the Springs from whence the Proofs are drawn, for what
they aver be rightly examined.

But I never thought that the fear of these inconveniences ought to stop me.
The cause of Truth and Innocence would be too much abandoned, if men should be
afraid of defending it, for fear of drawing upon 'em the Censures of People
that understand how to falsify backwards and forwards with an equal boldness.
We must either renounce writing for the Public good, or harden our selves
against these inevitable Rancounters. Principally when it is a matter of
History, and such a History which in favor of Oppressed Innocence, attacques
the most formidable Puissances in the world, we must expect a Tempest of
Injuries, Reproaches, Lies, and whatsoever else is proper to cry down the Book
and Author of it, and render both obnoxious to the Indignation of the Vulgar.
Now as I foresaw that this might befall me, it will never be a wonder to me if
it happen. And I thought I could not better arm my self against these strokes
of interested malice, than with Sincerity, Truth and Exactness; never minding
the trouble which imposture and brangling might put me to. We never ought to
write but for the sake of brave and generous Souls; and those of that Character
never judge of things without profound consideration, gliding over faults that
have nothing of Importance, or Essential. Now I hope they will never be able to
surprise me in errors of the latter quality. I have endeavored to s^un all
manner of disguises; and perhaps I have spoken too plainly and openly of
several things, which another would have envelop'd in a prudent silence. But
when it is Impossible to justify the Innocent but by revealing Truths, tho
somewhat nice and delicate, of necessity it behooves us to lay aside some
certain respects, that cannot be observed without betraying the Cause which we
desire to defend. This is the only excuse that I intend to make to those who
perhaps will find that I speak of certain things with too much liberty. I
thought it my duty so to do, to gain the reputation of greater credit, and more
clearly and faithfully to inform the Readers of the sources of Events, and the
grounds of my particular Reflections.

The same sincerity which I profess in History, obliges me to acknowledge that
there may be faults in this Work of mine, which may be found to be essential,
and which perhaps I may be willing to grant for such, when they shall be really
made out. But they will not be imputed to me for such by impartial Judges, when
I shall make it out from whence they may proceed. It Is certain that I had not
all the assistances which were requisite for an enterprise so great as that
which I have undertaken. There are many things, without question, which have
escaped me by that means, and which have enforced me upon several occasions to
make recitals not so full, nor so dilated, or fortified with Circumstances, as
I could have wished. The Reader might have justly expected that I should have
given him clearer illustrations of certain matters, and that I should have
prevented several questions that will remain for him to ask me, after due
examination of the matter of Fact which I relate. But I could not do better:
and in my opinion 'twas much more to the purpose to make but little stay upon
some Subjects, than to supply the defect of Evidences and Memoirs with the
boldness of my own conjectures. However I do not pretend thereby to lessen my
obligations to those who have assisted me with several important Pieces, and
who by their generous imparting to me their Books and Manuscripts, have
furnished me with the principal materials of my Work. I must acknowledge there
were several persons who sent me whatever they had proper to serve me, a
hundred and two hundred Leagues from hence: And as I received great assistance
from those remoter places, so have I had the help of many curious Persons in
our Neighborhood. Public and private Libraries, the Cabinets and Studies of
the more exacter sort, where Fugitive Pieces secure themselves, and several
other Springs and Sources of History were open to me. I should most gladly name
the Persons that gave me aid, not only in regard it is but just they should
share with me in the public acknowledgement, to whose instruction they have so
liberally contributed; but also because they are the Guaranties of what I
publish to the World, and for that the very names of some among 'em would
suffice to demonstrate ^he verity of the Evidences, from whence I have drawn
the materials of my Labor. But the greatest part having desired not to be
named, because of their being related to several persons that are still subject
to the general oppression, it is not in my power to afford 'em those Testimonies
which I owe to their good will, nor to make that Advantage of their names,
which I might have done, were I not obliged to a deference for their desires to
remain unknown. I shall speak in another place of a Collection prepared by the
deceased Mr. Tessereau, a person well known to all the World for being
Laborious, Exact, Curious, and capable of Collecting whatever might serve to a
great Work. Nor shall I dissemble the assistance which I had from the Memoirs
which he left behind, tho, at the time of his Death they were found to be in
great Disorder.

But notwithstanding all their aids, I failed in many others, from whence I
might have had great light. When the Council of France began to search into the
Rights of Exercise, 'twas their pleasure to oblige the Churches to produce the
Original Evidences which they pretended to make use of. This was a thing in the
main, of which there was no great necessity. But in regard that from that very
time they began to take their measures, which way to deprive Posterity of the
knowledge of their causeless Cavils, they were desirous to get into their hands
all the Monuments that might preserve 'em to Posterity, and only to leave the
Reformed such Writings, the authority of which they might the more plausibly
contest, because they were not Originals. The Council detained the greatest
part of those Writings, even after the Affairs were determined. There were very
few Churches that could obtain restitution of 'em. They who had lost their
Causes were told, that their papers could no longer signify any thing to 'em:
and they who had been more favorably used, were paid off with some scurvy
trick or other, on purpose to elude their importunities for the restitution of
their produced Originals. Sometimes they were told, that the last Decree was
worth all their Evidences, and so the other were absolutely of no use to 'em.
Also of late years, they bethought themselves of constraining the Consistories
to produce all their Papers, whether Originals or Copies: and the least piece
concealed was a reason sufficient for the Banishment of the Ministers, and
demolishing the Churches. So that there were very few Churches that durst
adventure to put it to the hazard, but delivered all they had of Instruments
and Evidences. The pretense for this vexation was, that they were resolved to
discover whatever they had of Estates, after the Confiscation of which their
Persecutors thirsted with so much Passion. But the main reason, tho the most
concealed, was their eager desire to deprive 'em of the means to preserve any
Memoirs, by which Posterity might be truly informed of the injustice that was
done 'em. However, to say Truth, notwithstanding all these precautions, there
remained sufficient to form the Body of a History large enough: tho it cannot
be denied, but that many Churches were despoiled of the means to afford me
those assistances which I might have expected from 'em, especially such where
the common Evidences belonging to each Province were deposited. Moreover, it
may well be imagined, that the Manuscripts in the King's Library, of that in
the College of four Nations, and in some others both public and private, were
never imparted to me: and that I could not find any body that would venture
himself to make Extracts useful for my design. I might there have found all the
Negotiations tending to the Edict, all the Instructions of the Commissioners,
all the Intrigues of the Court at the time of the general Assemblies, the whole
Project of the Wars, and Violences put in practice by the Council of Lewis
XIII. for the ruin of the Reformed. There is no question but that I might have
found in the multitude of those Volumes of Manuscripts, particular things which
I could not have met with otherwhere, and to which I could never attain by my
conjectures. But there are three Considerations to make us some amends for this
defect. 1. I have collected as well as I could, out of such Memoirs as came to
my hands, the substance of things which might have been found in those
Manuscripts more at large and clearer to the understanding; and I have supplied
from those printed Pieces, of which we met with a great number, the defect of
the Manuscripts. 2. In regard those Libraries were easy of access to all that
wrote against the Reformed, for example, Bernard, Maimbourg, Solier, la Croix,
and other indefatigable Persecutors of the Churches of France, it may be said
that whatever was to their disadvantage in those Manuscripts, was recited by
their Enemies in their Works; and if they have not extracted much, it is a sign
they met with but little to feed their Passion: so that no body loses but my
self, for want of those Manuscripts, from which I might have had some light
toward the justification of those whose defense I have undertaken. Now there is
no great likelihood that they who applied themselves with so much fury and
passion to destroy us, will impute it to me for a Crime, to have forgotten
something that might have laid more open the Evidence of their Injustice and
Cruelty. 3. If any one shall undertake to refute this work of mine, he must
furnish himself out of those Manuscripts with Arms to fight me. Which if he do
not do sincerely, his answer will put me to little trouble. But if he acquit
himself like a person of Faith and Credit, he must produce entire the
Foundations of his Reflections, and by consequence publish many secrets, which
may perhaps prove confirmations of our own Collections.

In the main, these Considerations ought to be as equally beneficial to me, in
the cause which I defend, as proofs in the claims of particular persons, or
strong presumptions of a Robbery, or House-firing, or of any other accident not
to be remedied, whereby they demonstrate the loss of their Evidences that
should have justified their claims, or the answers which they make to their
Adversaries. I prove that the Evidences that might be required of me are
detained, or taken away from me be a greater force; and which is of more
weight, I demonstrate, that the Authors of that Violence or that Robbery, are
the same persons that require me to produce the same proofs which they have
forcibly rifled from me. That there is knavery in their exceptions against my
proofs, because they have by force despoil^d me of my Evidences which were my
legal defense. That they had need of great and positive proofs to convince me,
because their Prosecution is suspected to be fraudulent; and for that slight
presumptions are not sufficient against me, because they have unjustly torn
from me those monumental Deeds, from whence I could have drawn stronger proofs.
But I am not altogether reduced to presumptions only: for that, maugre all the
Artifices of a malignant Prudence, an infinite number of authentic Monuments
of the miseries which the Reformed have suffered, have escaped the Gripes of
Plunder and Destruction.

After these reflections in general, it remains for me to give a particular
account of the method which I have followed in compiling this History. And
first of all it behooves me to answer those who may take it amiss that I adhere
to a side, show too openly of what Religion I am, and declare my self concerned
in the things which I recite. All people would have an Historian observe an
exact neutrality; that he should never suffer his particular sentiments to be
seen through; that he should not anticipate his Readers with his manner of
writing* and that in stopping at a description altogether of bare matter of
Fact and Circumstances, he should never incur the character either of Party,
Advocate or Judge. However, I have dispensed with these severe Laws; I have
argued the case; I have delivered my opinion; I have proved, I have refuted
sometimes, as I thought, the Subject required. But I could bring several
reasons to justify my conduct, were I not willing to be as short as is
possible. The example of almost all those who have undertaken to write, is
sufficient to make my Apology. We do not meet with any that have confined
themselves within these narrow limits: and indeed it is a thing so impossible
for a man to reduce himself to that ^trictness, that if they who prescribe
these Laws to others, were to give an account of any Transaction themselves,
they could never forbear violating the precepts of this painful exactness. I
shall therefore only speak two things in my defense. The first is, that my
Opinion and Ra^iocinations are to be considered as the Opinion and Reasonings
of the persons in whose behalf (...) speak; either because they are the
extracts of Discourses, and Speeches made in favor of 'em, or proceed from the
same things, and for that they represent that the Reformed would have said for
themselves, had they been judicially interrogated in Court. The ^^cond is, That
there was a necessity for me to give ^y History the character of a Defense,
because I wrote it on purpose to serve for a Reply to the violent Declamations
of those who have persecuted us. Therefore the mingling my Reflections
sometimes with the Rehearsal of matter of Fact, was a thing not to be avoided,
to the end I might the better prove the Fraud and Injustice of those whom I
accuse, and more clearly make out the Innocence of those whom I justify.
Nevertheless you may be assured, that upon several occasions where it seems to
be my self that speaks, I have so narrowly watched my expressions, that there
are few among the Reformed that will presume to disown what I say. In the main,
this liberty of delivering a man's own opinion is not incompatible with
impartiality in an Historian. All that sincerity exacts from him is, that he
neither disguise nor dissemble things; and as to that, I have imposed such
severe Laws upon my self as, I hope, will satisfy the most rigid Censurers.
But in regard the Readers are no way bound to submit to the private Opinion of
an Historian, which is rather as much subject to the Reader's judgment, as the
recital it self of the matters of Fact; therefore they ought to think
themselves rather obliged to the Historian for the trouble which he has taken
to prepare the Process, upon which they are to give their Verdict, fit for
Hearing, than to complain of his Anticipating their Judgments, by the liberty
he has taken to declare his Sentiments. They find the matter ready to their
hands, and without toyling themselves to reason upon the several matters, they
have no more to do than to pronounce whether the Author had a true notion of
the things, and has reflected as one that rightly understood 'em.

I have taken the liberty sometimes to alter the expressions of the Acts which
I have cited. But no body ought to be troubled at that; in regard it is
impossible to do otherwise, when there is a design to Abbreviate. Moreover, in
regard I am forced to transmit several of these Acts to public view, People
have the less reason to blame me for not reciting word for word in the Body of
the Book, what I have placed ^ll along in the Order of the Proofs. Besides,
that when there were any expressions in the Acts that were remarkable and
important, I always exactly retained ^he Sense and Substance of the matter.
This is sufficient to satisfy unbiased People. Words are not so much the
business as Deeds; and the alteration of words is of little Importance, when
the matters of Fact are represented with a faithful exactness.

I have set down almost all the Edicts and Declarations under the Date of the
Day wherein they passed ^he Seal, rather than of their verification in
Parliament, tho the said Acts begin to be in force, as Laws, from the day of
their being registered. But I took that to be the better way, in regard the
jurisdiction of France being divided under several Parliaments, it ^arely
happens that the said Acts are registered in all ^laces, or upon the same day.
So that it would have occasioned a kind of intricacy, and would have rendered
the matter dry and sapless, which of it self is not very opulent or pleasant,
had I put so many different Dates to every Edict. I know very well, that
usually they mind no more than the day of verification in the Parliament of
Paris, as having some certain privilege which distinguishes it from others.
But since an Edict which is therein registered has not the force of a Law in
another Parliament, till the performance of the same Ceremony there, I thought
it more to the purpose to keep to the Date of the Seal, which is fixed and
common over all the Kingdom. Besides, that at this day it is a Maxim of the
Council of France, that Edicts derive not the force of a Law from their being
registered, but from the King's Pleasure only, and from the impression of the
Seal; and that the Parliament has no other authority than to publish it, and to
put it in execution. So that I had reason to prefer the Date from whence the
Acts derive their force, before that which affords 'em nothing, and only serves
to remove from among the People all excuses of ignorance.

I also give this farther notice, in reference to the Dates, that if I have
fallen under any mistake, 'ti^ not I that am to be blamed. I followed that
which I met with in the printed Papers, which I made use of, and which being
almost all of 'em set forth by the Catholics, have received from them all the
alterations which are there to be found. Moreover if I commit any error in the
number of the Articles, several of which I divide into pieces, there is nothing
to be imputed to me. For that division is almost arbitrary: and sometimes you
shall find it vary in different Editions of the same Edict and the same Decree,
tho they be all equally Authentic.

You will find, that in some places I suppose that the Reader knows certain
things, without the knowledge of which it would be very difficult to understand
the matter of Fact of which I give an account. I know that this may well be
looked upon as a fault: and I have found it bad my self, when the Historian
neglected to explain somethings which he presumed I knew before, because they
were known to him. But I must confess, I thought it impossible to avoid this
fault; because that if a Historian were bound in favor of strangers to explain
whatever may put them to a puzzle, for want of having an exact knowledge of
Customs, of Families, of the situation of Places, and an hundred other
particulars, my History would have been swallowed up in Episodes, ^r
Digressions, with which I must have been constrained to load it. So that,
whether I will or no, I am constrained to refer the Reader, who is desirous to
know what I have not informed him, to such Authors ^ho have particularly
treated upon that Subject.

I do not believe they will be offended with me for ^ot enlarging upon Foreign
Affairs, because they were ^ot proper to my Subject. Nevertheless, when I
thought ^ necessary, I observed their Connection with those of ^e Reformed
Churches. I have not tied my self to the relation of Sieges and Battles, when I
speak of the Civil Wars, because other Historians have made long descriptions
of those matters; besides that I should run astray too far from my principal
aim which is only to relate after what manner the Edict was observed. I have
also taken the liberty to scatter some Sentences in my relations; wherein I
have done no more then according to the practice of all Historians. If they be
done with judgment, the Reader will not be offended: if they be little to the
purpose, he will not find 'em either so long or so frequent, as to chastize me
too severely for 'em.

It may be said perhaps that I tie my self too much to the Histories of the
Great Lords, such as Marshall de Bouillon, the Duke of Trimouille, the
Constable de Lesdiguieres and several others. But one reflection shall serve
for all, to show that I could not do otherwise. Those Lords were the occasion
of almost all the Good, or Mischief that befell the Churches. They did 'em
good, when they renounced their own interest to serve 'em; they did 'em
mischief, when they engaged 'em in their own particular Affairs. So that you
meet with 'em every where: nor can you speak of the Churches, without having an
occasion to mention those Eminent Persons, who have either supported 'em with
their Protection, or ruined 'em by their Quarrels and Contentions.

There are some words which perplexed me not a little. Conversion, Heresy,
Heretics, and the like, have quite another signification from the lips of a
Reformed, from what they have in the mouth of a Catholic. But I must have had
recourse to endless Circumlocutions, should I have been always studying to
avoid the making use of those words in the same sense that the Catholics take
'em. I thought it sufficient to distinguish the places where the words carry a
Catholic sense, by printing them in a different character from the Text: and
there is no great likelihood that the Catholics will be offended at me for
calling 'em Catholics quite through the whole Book. It Is a name they glory in;
and there are Edicts in France which forbid the calling 'em otherwise. Nor did
I think it proper to give 'em any other; because it is a long time since it has
been made use of by way of President, that it is no longer Synonymous with
Orthodox; and for that in common speech it signifies those who acknowledge the
Pope for Universal Head of the Church. It Is in that sense, that I give it 'em;
and I had rather comply with 'em so far, then give 'em any other name, that
would not be so pleasing to 'em. There is something more in that of Reformed,
which I give to the Protestants of France. For a Reformed Officer, ^ Reformed
Captain, does not always signify, in the French Tongue, such as profess the
Reformed Religion. But I could not meet with one more proper. ^^is a defect,
which all the exactness of the Academy, or the good opinion the French have of
their Language, could ever have avoided; that is to say, to have some words
that proved to be equivocal: so that the Reader must gather the true meaning
and sense of the word from the Subject in hand. I did not think such an
inconvenience sufficient to hinder me from making use of a word, that saved me
the labor of searching after Periphrases and Circumlocutions to express my
self: and it is my opinion that when we write for the Public, we are not to
mind the distaste of those that take a pett at such equivocals.

I shall not here go about to make any Apology for my sentiments touching the
Authority of Kings, and the Duty of Subjects. It Is true that the judgment which
will be made of my Book, depends in some measure upon the truth of the Maxims
which I sustain. But I should unprofitably extend this Preface, by the
discussion of a Subject which is at this day become the Theme of all
Conversations, and of several Books. There is nothing more A-la-mode than to
handle this important Argument. And perhaps a fairer opportunity was never
offered for people to believe this difficult question decided. All Europe has
considered of it; and all Kingdoms having approved the Revolutions in Great
Britain, have by consequence pronounce sentence in favor of the People against
the Pretenses of Sovereigns. Liberty has gained the point, and Arbitrary Power
is generally condemned. The Rights of Subjects are cleared up, and the
Usurpations of Puissances are disapproved. It Is not therefore necessary for me
to engage in giving reasons for my sentiments; since all Europe has divulged
'em for me; besides that, I shall be obliged to speak more expressly upon this
Subject in another place.

There remain only Three Remarks for me to make, before I conclude this
Preface. The first is, That some people may think I have done amiss, not to set
down in the Margin the names of the Authors, and the place in their Works from
whence I took my observations. It seems, this is come now to be thought as
necessary in Histories, as in Polemick Writings. But I must confess, it is a
custom which I did not think it my duty to submit to. In the first place, I
have the example of all the Historians of any reputation on any side; chiefly
those who having first of all applied themselves to this kind of writing, ought
to be looked upon as Models and Presidents for others. Besides, that it seems as
if this abuse were only introduced by the Captious, out of the Profundity of
their refined Cavilling, who are secretly preparing a way ^o decry the most
faithful Histories, under pretense of some Quotation found out as a handle for
Censure to ^ay hold on. The Authors of the first magnitude were ^one of those
that imposed this Law. But your Maimbourgs and Souliers; a sort of People; who,
if they can but find an opportunity to trifle upon some Quotation, believe they
have ruined at once all the Reputation of their Adversary. 'Twould be a very
hard case, that a man who has spent several years in reading hunderds of
printed Volumes, and thousands of Manuscripts, should see the fruits of all his
labors blasted by the Cavils of some captious Monk, or some skue-disposition'd
Wit, that should arraign him upon the Truth or Justice of a Marginal Quotation.
It would be more to the purpose for those that desire to confute my Book, to
take upon 'em the trouble of reading what I have read, that so after that, they
may be able to judge, whether I have faithfully reported what I found in the
Authors I consulted. Nevertheless, to let 'em see that I do not avoid a fair
Challenge, but only Cavil and Impudence, I have in two things, followed the
footsteps of the best Historians. First, I have given a Catalogue of the Books
from whence borrowed the Materials for my Work: and in the next place, I have
published the principal pieces which I made use of to take from thence the
matters of Fact, of which I have given the relations. They are Printed at the
end of every Part.

The second Remark concerns the Language. You will not find in it perhaps that
extraordinary delicacy, which now adays gives all the Life and Beauty to Books.
There is a great deal wherein the Reader will find me nothing at all, were but
the Lineaments of the Pen, and Features of the Draught only, taken away. For my
part I confess, there will be many careless neglects found in the Style, many
little Faults, of which Critics will make great Monsters. I freely give 'em
leave; nor will it be any wonder to me at all. Perhaps I am not really
persuaded that what they take for Beauties are really such. For it may as well
be true that that same Purity of Language, so much celebrated, which is only
learnt in Ladies Chambers, and by conversation with persons, who, to make a
right judgment of 'em, want nothing but good Sense and Understanding, does more
injury, then it affords luster and honor to the Language. It would be more
Opulent and Masculine, if the rules and regulation of it were sought for in a
better Fountain. However it were, I never labored any farther then to make my
self understood: nor did I ever take the pains to flourish my Style with
certain allurements, which perhaps I might have ^ound out as well as another:
So that where it is not worth my while, I never desire to pleasure those that
^nsist upon Trifles, because they are not capable of any thing that is more
elevated. Nevertheless, if they make ^udicious and impartial Remarks upon my
Labors, whether they regard the matter, or whether they have ^ relation to the
Style and Manner, I promise 'em they ^all find a Docility in me, which Authors
are seldom ^ilty of; and that if ever this History of mine be ^ought worthy of
a Second Edition, they shall see ^at I have profited by their just Corrections.

The third Remark concerns the manner after which I speak of the Clergy of
France, and chiefly of the Jesuits. Some will imagine, that I have suffered my
self to be somewhat too far transported by my Passion, when I have occasion to
say any thing concerning 'em; and that out of the bitterness of my Animosity,
there is a mis-becoming tartness and virulency in my Expressions. To which I
answer, that they are deceived: for I had not spoken those harsh things of 'em,
but out of a necessity of speaking Truth, which I impose upon my self. Besides,
that the evil I have reported of 'em, amounts not to a hundredth part of the
mischief they have done to all the World: and my opinion is, that the Jesuits
would not have known themselves in this History, had I flattered 'em. They are
so accustomed to see themselves painted out in black Colors, in all manner of
Writings, that it would have been thought I had spoken of some other Order, had
I given any other description of 'em. They also know so well themselves, that
their Bloody and Perfidious Politics are the cause of all our misfortunes; and
they pride themselves to that degree in not observing any measures of Faith or
common Humanity with Heretics, any more then with all the rest of Manking,
that it may be they will look upon all the Reproaches which I throw upon 'em as
so many Elogies, and behold all the Strokes and Dashes wherewith I blackned 'em
as so many Rays of Glory which is due to 'em. In a word, after all the
miseries which by their contrivances we have undergone, for so many years, it is
a very small revenge, that ought to bedispleasing to no body, to call 'em by
their right names; and only to revive those Reproaches against 'em, with which
the most prudent Catholics have loaded their Society from the very Infancy of
their Institution.

THE PREFACE TO THE First Part.
Although in the first Book, I only comprehend in short what was transacted in
France in reference to Religion, from the beginning of Luther's Disputes, till
the death of Hen. III. nevertheless that Part has so small a share in my Work,
that I may safely say, that it begins exactly from that Accident which brought
Hen. the IV. to the Crown. So that my design takes in the Reign of three Kings.
The first of which, whose Reign was the shortest, granted the Reformed an Edict
and Securities; the Second took from 'em their ^ecurities; and the Third
cancelled the Edict. Being therefore to give an Account of three such various
Events, which enforces me to relate whatever happened most memorable under
every Reign; ^y Subject therefore naturally dvides it self into three Parts.
The first contains all that preceded the Edict of Nantes; or that since it was
granted, regards the Execution of it during the Life of him that was the Author
of it. The Second recites the means that were used, under the Name and
Authority of Lewis the XIII. to wrest out of the Hands of the Reformed the
Cities and Assemblies that were their Security; and from whence ensued the
declination and ruin of their Affairs. The Third relates what passed under the
Reign of that Prince who wears the Crown at present, till the Revocation of the
Edict; to which I have added the Events of some ensuing Years, which are
natural consequences of the former Transactions: as the flight of so many
persecuted Families; their settling in foreign Countries, and several other
things of the same nature.

Now in regard our main business was to show that the Conduct and Behavior of
the Reformed has been always far different from the Portraicture which their
Enemies made of it, I thought it requisite, in every part, but chiefly in the
First and Second, where they appear with their Arms in their hands, to give an
account of those things which afford the clearest light for the display of
their Intentions; to the end it may be the better discerned, whether they were
not reduced to make use of those extraordinary Remedies, by a necessity that
admitted of no Dispensation. I shall discourse in another place of w^^ they did
after the death of Hen. IV. But I have here a design to speak one word of what
was liable to be blamed in their Actions, during the Life of that Prince. Not
that I intend to repeat what I have said, in their Justification quite through
the whole Book, but only to observe in few words the principal Circumstances of
Affairs, which you will find more amply laid down in the History it self.

The Reformed then are to be considered in three conditions, under the Reign of
this Prince. In the First, they had a King of their own Religion, but who
finding it would cost him a world of trouble to surmount the opposition of the
League, that under the pretense of Religion had armed the one half of the
Kingdom against him, resolved to change his Opinion, so soon as he could do it
with some appearance of Advantage. In the Second, they appeared in the Service
of a Prince who after he had abandoned their Religion, seemed to have altered
his affection for them too; and to mind nothing but his own Repose, without
much troubling himself what became of his most faithful Subjects, who had done
him such eminent Services. In the Third condition, you might see 'em living
under the Authority and Protection of an Edict, which they obtained at length,
after long solicitations; in the prosecution of which they had spent four
years, and much longer time in the Execution of it.

There could be nothing laid to their charge so long as they remained in their
first condition, in regard they were fixed to the King's Service, and bore Arms
in his Defense, as long as he had any Enemies either at Home or Abroad. If it
be objected, that they did not serve him then with the same Zeal and Affection
as they were wont to make appear; that their performances were not such as they
used to be; that they let fall some Murmurs and Reproaches* I answer, that if
they had carried it higher, it no way became the Catholics to find fault. You
will perceive then by the History, that the Catholics were afraid of nothing
so much as to see an end of the War, before they had constrained the King to
change his Religion; that they also held Intelligence with the Leaguers, who
might well be looked upon as Criminals, if the Reformed were Trespassers.
Besides that the Reformed were obliged to stand upon their Guards as well
against the Catholics of the Royal Army, as against the others; and that by
Consequence it was not just that they should expose all their Forces to the
discretion of those, who might have ruined 'em all in one Night, the more
easily to have ingratiated themselves with the League, and have disposed of the
Kingdom and the King's Person, as they had thought proper themselves. 'Twas
Prudence to reserve one part of their Forces against a pinch, to the end the
remainder might serve to revive and support their own and the Affairs of the
Kingdom, if the other should happen to receive a foil. You shall find moreover,
from his coming to the Crown, to his Conversion, that the King discovered to
'em every day more and more sufficient marks of his lukewarmness and
indifference for them: That, consequently, they had reason to believe, that the
more they enabled him not to want their Assistance, the more he would neglect
their Establishment and Security. Whence it would follow, That if they made use
of all their Forces, they should help to do their Enemies the Catholics
business, and be not only never the better, ^ut much the worse themselves. But
in the mean ^^me, it will be found, that they acknowledged ^he King without
condition; and that they did not make bargains with him, as the Catholics ^id
to serve him. They would have put him doubtless to a strange plunge, had they
been as nice and as scrupulous as others were. This severity ^ould have been
the Ruin both of Him and of all ^^e Officers of the Old Court, much more odious
(...) the League than the pretended Heretics; and ^ there were among the other
Royal Catholics ^^me persons of Honor, they must have had their ^are in the
vexation. It was urged against the Reformed as an expression highly Criminal,
that they had sometimes given it out, that they accepted of the Edict at a
time, when they might if they pleased, have divided the Kingdom with the
Catholics. I know not whether or no it be at if Crime to speak Truth; but I
know very well, that the Reformed had been but closely united together by their
own Interests, without meddling with those of the King or State; had they kept
to themselves above three hundred strong Holds, and almost whole Provinces; had
they expended the public Treasure upon their own Preservation; been sparing of
their Veterane Soldiers and well disciplined Men, to have joined with that
Party which had the upper hand of all the rest, they might have pretended
perhaps to something more than the half of the Kingdom. Their separation from
the rest of the Body would have infallibly been the utter dismembring of it:
and if such a thing had happened, I know not how it can be denied, but that the
best part would have fallen to their share. But their Generosity delivered the
King and all his Servants out of this Perplexity. They sacrificed all their
Policy and their Interests to their Duty They never hearkn'd to the wholesome
counsels of their just mistrusts: and tho they were perspicacious enough to
foresee the consequence of their good nature, they saw the Market concluded
with others* without being concerned; one of the Articles of which was, to
ravish from 'em the Person and Affections of the King. This unshaken
carelesnes^ of their own Interests fixed the tottering Crow^ upon the King's
Head: and this piece of service sufficiently deserved to have been never
forgotten by them who long enjoyed the Benefit of it.

In their second Estate, after the King had quitted their Religion, more
especially after the Chiefs and Cities of the League had submitted to him, they
appeared more fixed to his interests than they had been before; their Demands
were higher, their Union more solid, their Designs better converted, their
Assemblies more Numerous, and more ^ifly adhering to their Resolutions. But
there ^ould be nothing more unjust than to charge it upon 'em as a Crime; and
History shows such reasons for their conduct, that no unbiased persons ^n
disapprove. They saw the King resigning his ^bsequiousness to the Pope,
somewhat lower than became Humility; surrendering up his Heart and ^ind to the
Catholics; and abandoning himself ^ their Politics and their Counsels. He
purchased ^e Heads of the League not only by good Governments, by large
Pensions, by vast sums paid ^n in ready Money; but chiefly by concessions to
^^late the Edicts, under the protection of which the Reformed were in hopes to
enjoy their ^ves, their Religion and their Estates. For four ^ five years
together a thousand acts of injustice, ^housand violences were committed in all
the Pro^ces of the Kingdom, to the prejudice of the Re^rmed, as if the King's
conversion had purchased the Catholics impunity for all attempts of Oppression
and Wickedness. The King was so afraid of offending the Catholics, that to
pleasure them, he held the Reformed in suspense for several years together,
without granting them any thing more then general Promises, of which they saw
the effects delayed from time to time, upon a thousand disobliging pretenses:
in a word, he would never listen to the Peace which he afforded 'em, such as it
was, till all the Catholics were satisfied with it. So that he was much more
careful to gratify those who had by so many efforts endeavored to render his
Throne inaccessible, then to protect those from Persecution, who had assisted
him by so many services to ascend it. Besides that, the more his Affairs were
assured by his reconciliation with the Leaguers, the more uneasy he became to
the Reformed: and he was every day the mo^ sparing of his Favors toward 'em,
by how much he saw himself in a condition not to need the^ assistance.
Certainly that man must be no admir^ of Justice, who believes, that in such a
posture o^ the general Affairs it behooved the Reformed blindly to abandon
themselves to the honesty of Catholics who hated 'em, and the sincerity of a
Council that laughed at 'em: and who condemns 'em for (...) king some
precautions against that infidelity, (...) which they had had such frequent and
fatal experiences. Upon the whole, seeing that after (...) many importunities
and solicitations, they had obtained so little, it is easy to judge, that so
much would never have been granted 'em, had they showed less Resolution and
less Constancy.

But in their third Estate, after they had obtained an Edict, and some
Securities, one would think, that they should not have had any more excuses for
the continuance of their importunities; that their eager desire to maintain
themselves in Cities of safety, and to augment the number of 'em; that the
Petitions ^f their Politic Assemblies, and their general Synods; that the
renewing of their Union, and the Oath that ^asten'd it, and other such like
Proceedings had had ^o longer any lawful pretense. The Edict verified ^n all
the Parliaments of the Kingdom, was every where observed: the King most
commonly explained the difficulties that arose upon the execution of it in
favor of the Reformed; he cordially made use of 'em; and he was in Alliance
with all ^he foreign Protestants. One would have thought after all this, that
that same Spirit of Distrust, which they showed upon a thousand occasions, was
^o longer to be endured, and that it might have authorized the jealousies and
suspicions of their ^^rbulent and factious Humor. But History affords us
matter of Reply to this same plausible Objection. There need no more then two
considerations to show, that as these Mistrusts were not without a good
foundation; so the precautions, which they advised, were far from being
unlawful. The first of these Considerations is drawn from the present state of
Affairs, the second from future Events.

The present condition of the Reformed was not so calm or free from
disturbance, but that every day presaged an approaching declination, with which
the Constitution of Affairs threatened 'em, if they forbore to stand upon their
Guard. The alterations made in several Articles of the Edict by the King
himself, and by his single authority, only out of a Prospect to please the
Clergy and Parliaments, were not so slight, whatever was said, but that they
were no less sufficient demonstrations that the King, in other things so
jealous of his word, had suffered the Catholics to have a powerful Ascendant
over him. They who could persuade him to violate nine Articles of an Edict so
long time under negotiation, and concluded with so much solemnity, might well
one day oblige him to elude and frustrate all the rest of his Concessions.
Besides, the excess of his Obsequiousness to the Pope; his Ambition to bear
sway in the Conc'aves, and to procure himself Friends and Creatures in the
Court of Rome; His Alliance with an Italian Princess, upon Conditions which the
Pope had dictated; The art of terminating Controversies, and of a converter of
others, in which he took a Pride; The Affront which he caused to be put upon du
Plessis at Fontain Bleau, tho he were one of his most ancient and faithful
Servants; and several other things of the same Nature, were sufficient grounds
of fear, that at length his Affection would be quite estranged from the
Reformed; and that in some important Affair or other, he would not stick to
make an entire Sacrifice of their Interests to the Catholic Religion. Which
was the more probable, because he was accused of ^nconstancy in his Friendship;
and because among ^ll his Heroic Qualities, he wanted that of being Grateful:
and therefore, tho the remembrance of the Services which the Reformed had done
^im, were not utterly extinguished, yet Time might bring it to pass. A Prince
who had led a ^ife not very regular, or rather, to speak the real Truth, who
had wallow'd in excess of Debau^hery, might well be sensible as he grew, in
^ears, of the Pains of another World. And when these Pains once terrify the
Conscience, he would be willing to rescue himself from those ^errors, at any
price whatever. All Services and Friendships are forgot, when the main concern
is to make ensurances against eternal Death* and when there needs but one
Victim for a man (...) deliver himself, he never minds the value of ^he
Sacrifice. The recalling the Jesuits, wherein ^he King suffered himself to be
led away by a sole ^ar of a Stab from their Hands, contrary to the ^esires of
all good French men, and apparently against the interest of the Reformed,
showed what a power fear had over him; and what he was ready to do, to preserve
himself from being assassinated. But the Credit, into which that Pernicious
Society wound themselves at Court, so soon as they had set their feet in it,
the King's erroneous Complacency for Cotton the Jesuit, of whom he made choice
for his Confessor; his toleration of the Frauds, Attempts and Treacheries of
that Villain, who as if he had been assured of being secure from punishment,
never gave himself the trouble to conceal' em: His weakness in entrusting the
Education of the Dauphin to his care; and which obliged him to bequeath his
heart to that Society, for an^ Ornament to the Church de la Fleche, still
augmented more and more the mistrusts which the Reformed had of his totterring
kindness. And indeed there were enough to oblige people whom so many
experiments had renderd wise, and who had so often been chastised for their
credulous simplicity, to provide well for their safety; to the end they might
have wherewithal to defend themselves; should their Enemies once go about to
renew their Acts of Violence and Injustice.

But the foresight of Future Events, more especially required 'em to be
watchful over their own Preservation. The King might dye: there had been
frequent Conspiracies against his Life; besides, that his Health was often
attacked by dangerous symptoms. What tho he might live out twenty or thirty
Years longer, and that in his extreme old Age he might be vigorous enough to
uphold his Edicts, this was no more then a lingering of twenty or thirty years,
after which he was to pay the same Tribute to Nature with all the rest of
mankind. But there appeared such preparations against that time, that people
might be justly then afraid of strange Revolutions. The Jesuits would have ^ad
time to make themselves Masters of Affairs. (...) King of their own breeding
up, and Educated (...) a mortal hatred of the pretended Heretics, and (...)
the most paltry practices of superstition, terrified the Reformed, as a Prince
who would never think himself bound in Conscience to a faithful observation of
the Edicts. An Italian Queen, by ^clination a Spaniard, imbued with the
Politics* of Rome, and fully persuaded that the Reformed ^ight shake the
Fortune of her Children, by supporting against 'em the interests of another
Prince, was a new reason for 'em to expect some unlucky Revolution. The
Projecters of a double Alliance with the House of Austria, to say truth, little
li^en'd to by the King, but very agreeable to the Queen, supported by the Court
of Rome, pushed forward by the Jesuits, by the Leaguers, and by the Spanish
Pensioners, were other motives to make ^m provide against future Events, and to
be cautious to prevent surprises. The Dauphin being as yet in his Cradle, 'twas
no wonder the King gave no ear to propositions to an Alliance so unseasonable*
but he might change his mind, when his Son came to be of years ripe for
Marriage. And in truth the King at his death, left a Court that thirsted after
that Alliance between the two Crowns, which the Reformed could not choose but
look upon as fatal to their Churches. Nor is it to be said, that these were
vain fears; as the Event has too severely justified. The King's death, the
Alliance with Spain, the profound engagement of Lewis XIII. in superstition,
his natural hatredof the Reformed, his Obedience to the Councils of the
Jesuits, whatever the Reformed had reason to be afraid of, all happened almost
at the same time, and by degrees advanced the declination of that Party who had
now lost their Protector.

History affords us proof of all this; that all these Events of the Life of
Hen. IV. and the whole Conjuncture of Affairs, threatened the Reformed with
approaching* Desolation, if keeping to their Ancient Maxims, of believing all
things, hoping all things, and never mistrusting the sincerity of other men,
nor making use of any other Buckler but that of Simplicity, Generosity and
Innocence; not thinking of the Future, but with an imprudent resignation, they
provided not better for themselves than before the Massacres. I conclude from
hence, that the fears of the Reformed being but too well grounded, it was a
great piece of injustice to blame 'em for taking measures to secure themselves.
And since that time has made it out, that they were not so provident as they
should have been, that which may be hence asserted is, that they had prudence
enough to foresee the Mischief, but that they had not the good Fortune to
prevent it.

As to what remains, I have this farther Advertisement to give the Reader, that
it is impossible but that I must have made some mistakes in the Date of the
Years, in the First Book of this Part. The custom of beginning the Year at
Easter not being laid aside till under Charles IX. as I did not think my self
bound to count the Years according to that custom, so neither did I shun it
altogether. So that it may so fall out, that I have related under the Date of
one Year, what according to the custom of time ought to have been put down
under the Date of the Year preceding. If I did not take that care, my reason,
is that in so short ^n Abstract as that of my First Book, the mistake of Date
which refers to the beginning of the Year that which belongs to the end of
another, can be of ^o great consequence. I should have been more exact, had I
handled that part of the History more (...) large.

The Epistle of the famous James Augustus de Thou to Hen. IV. which serves for
a Preface to his History, having always been looked upon as a most accomplished
Piece, and not only for one of the Four Writings of that nature which have most
deserved the Approbation of the learned, but for an anthentick Monument of the
Sentiments of all the most worthy Men of his Religion at that time, concerning
Oppression and Persecution, there were many persons who believed, that Piece
had some affinity with mine, and that I should oblige the Reader if I gave him
a faithful Translation of it. I took it therefore for good Advice; and it is
done as much word for word as could be without speaking Latin in English: or if
any liberty be taken, to explain some things which the manner of expression or
the length of Periods might a little incumber, it is not such as can any way
render suspected the Fidelity of the Translator.

To the Most Christian King OF France and Navarr HENRY IV.
Done from Thuanus himself in Latin.
SIR,
WHEN first I applied my Thoughts to write the Story of these Times, although I
were not ignorant at this Laborious Work of mine, whater it were, would be
obnoxious to va^us Censures, This however was my ^fort, that I know my self
spurred ^ward, not by Ambition or vain Glory, ^t by the Reward attending a good
Con^ence: And I was in hopes, that the ^blic Animosities being allayed and
^inguish'd by a long series of Time, the ^ve of Truth would one day get the
upper hand; more especially, You reigning King, who by the particular Favor of
Heaven, having subdued the Monsters of Rebellion, and eradicated the Fuel of
those Factions that have long laid us waste, became the Restorer of Peace to
France; and with Peace have linkt two Things together thought incompatible by
others, Liberty and Sovereign Power. Add to this, that we first set our Hands
to this Attempt, at a time, when we could not but bewail the Causes of the
Civil War invelopp'd in the Private Affections and Desires of Ambitious Men,
and all hopes of Peace excluded from Public Counsel and Advice; and for that
reason, thought it so much the more lawful for us to speak freely, yet on this
side Envy or detraction, naked Truth. But as this Work went forward, which
being begun in the Camp, amidst the confused Noises of Trumpets and Sieges,
grew up to Bulk in your Court, and now among the Hurry and Clamours of the
Bar, and the delays of Travel, has reached your Reign, I perceived my
Inclinations far different from what they were at the beginning. For then my
Mind intent on the Variety and Importance of the Transactions to be related,
and seeking Respite from the Public Calamities, was wholly taken up in
Meditation and Writing. And this has brought a fear into my thoughts, that what
I wrote, surrounded with the clattering of Arms, and which might then perhaps
be acceptable, or at least not unworthy of Excuse, will now, that our
Commotions are appeased, not only be less pleasing, but offensive to the morose
and difficult Ears of some Persons: it being the general default of Human Kind,
that men are more prone to do ill, than to hear of Evil Actions committed. But
in regard it is a Law most exactly to be observed in History, for the Author
not to presume to utter Falsehoods; yet on the other side, to be bold and daring
in the delivery of Truth, I made it my business with all my might to dig for
Truth, absconded often, sometimes more profoundly ingulph'd in the Animosities
of contending Parties; and thus dig'd up, deliver it sincerely to Posterity: no
less careful, left prevaricating in so just a Cause, through a preposterous
Affectation of prudence I should injure the Felicity of Your Time, but seldom
known, wherein every man is permitted to think what he pleases, and to speak
what he thinks. For my own part, how far I am from Dissimulation, I hope is
well known to those who are acquainted with my Person and my Manners. Nor have
I lived so obscurely, that the most Partial can be ignorant of my candid and
upright dealing in Public Actions. For after once Your Prowess and Your
Clemency had reduced us to a peaceful Reconciliation, I so absolutely forgot
all personal Injuries, if any had been offered, and so freely laid aside the
least Resentment of 'em both privately and publicly, that I may justly assure
my self, that no man will have occasion to reproach my defect of Equanimity and
Moderation in what relates to the Remembrance of things past. I might call
those to witness, whose names will frequently occur in these following Books;
who when they have wanted my Assistance in any thing relating to that
Employment by You entrusted to my management, have always found me ready to do
'em any kindness that might not brand me with Corruption. What therefore
upright Judges ought to do, when they debate the Lives and Fortunes of Men,
that did we also, when first we undertook this History: often interrogating our
Conscience, whether it were touched with a smarter sense than usual, that might
turn us aside from the fair Path which we proposed to follow. To that purpose
have I softened, as much as in me lies, the Harshness of some Things by
smoothness of Expression; I have every where suspended my judgment and avoided
all Digressions: Lastly, I have observed a plain and naked manner of Writing,
that by my Style I might show my self no less exempt from Disguise and
Ostentation, than from the Partialities of Hatred and Favor. On the other
side, I beg both of my own Countrymen and Foreigners, that shall peruse these
Sheets, that they bring nothing of Prejudice along with 'em, nor pronounce
sentence upon this Labor of Mine, till they have diligently read it over. I
will not deny, but that it is a Task superior to my strength; and that the due
performance if it requires many Accomplishments which in me are wanting. But
the Public Good and my ardent Desire to serve my own Generation and succeeding
Ages, prevailed with me beyond all other Considerations; and when I consulted
the satisfaction of that passion, I rather chose to be accounted inconsiderate
than ungrateful. Nor am I so anxious for what may be thought of my Sincerity,
in reference to which I am not Conscious of any thing that can be laid to my
charge; or of my Industry, in excusing the defects of which I despair not so
much of your Clemency, or the Candor of the Reader, as I am afraid, lest what I
make the Greatest part of my History, may be tedious and irksom to most People,
who being out of Danger, as they believe, themselves, or are either not so just
in censuring the Miseries, or else over-remiss and unconcerned for the
Calamities of others. For to those other Mischiefs, with which this Age, in
Hostility with Virtue, abounds, that fatal Discord has joined it self,
occasioned by Religion, which, for almost this whole whole Century, has
turmoil'd the Christian world with continual Wars, and will continue still to
vex, unless timely Remedies, and other than hitherto have been employed, be
carefully applied by those whose chiefest Interest it is to manage that Affair.
For we have learnt by Experience, that Fire and Sword, that Exilement and
Proscriptions have rather exasperated, than cured the Distemper deeply rooted
in the Mind: and therefore not to be relieved or healed by Medicines that only
work upon the Body, but by sound Doctrine, and sedulous Instruction, which
being gently infused, persuades an easy passage to the Mind. All other things
are subject to the Sanctions of the Civil Magistrate, and consequently the
Sovereign Prince; Religion only admits not of Dominion, and never enters the
Seat of human Judgment, but when rightly prepared by a well grounded Opinion of
the Truth, assisted by the accession of Divine Grace. Torments prevail not to
enforce it; they but confirm the Obstinate, rather than subdue, or persuade.
What the S^oics have so haughtily boasted of their Wisdom, much more justly may
we assert of Religion; that where People are deeply affected with it, Torments
and Grief are little feared or valued, and all other Inconveniences whatever,
are overwhelmed and vanquished by that same Fortitude, inspired by Zeal and
Devotion. All the sufferings that Mankind is liable to undergo can never
terrify 'em. All the Misfortunes and Calamities that are dreadful to Human
Frailty, they never complain of Enduring. They know their strength, and whether
falsely or truly, if once assured of Heavenly support, they believe themselves
sufficiently able to bear the burden. Let the Executioner stand at their
Elbow; let the Tormentor appear with his Irons and his kindled Fires, it will
not shake their Perseverance: nor will they consider what they are to suffer,
but what they are to do. The s^ource of their Felicity remains within 'em; and
whatever happens from without is but a fly-blow, and only grazes the surface of
the skin. If Epicurus, branded among other Philosophers for the impurity of his
life, had such a high notion of a wise Man, that burning in Phalaris's Bull, he
would cry out, It Is pleasant, and concerns not me at all; can we believe a
character less signal due to their Courage, who a hundred years since contemned
and slighted all manner of Torments, all the inventions of Cruelty for
Religions sake? O^ that they would not be the same again, upon as terrible a
Prosecution of the same inhumanities? It Is worth the while to hear what one
among the rest both said and did, when tied to the Stake on purpose to be burnt
to death; how first he fell upon his knees and sung a Psalm, which the Flames
and Smoke could hardly interrupt; and when the Executioner, to mitigate his
terror, would have kindled the Fire behind his back, Come hither, said he, and
kindle it before my Face: for had I feared a little scorching, I had never been
brought to this Place, which it was in my power to have avoided. In vain
therefore, men by Torments labor to suppress the Zeal of those that meditate
innovations in Religion; which do but rather harden their minds to sufferings
more painful, and more daring undertakings. For when others have sprung up out
of the Ashes of others, and that their number has increased, their Patience
turns to Fury: no longer Suppliants, as before, they then begin to be
importunate and trouble some Expostulators and Demanders; and they who fled
from cruelties before, have of their own accords betaken themselves to Arms.
This we have seen in France for forty years together, and little less in
Germany. And things at length were brought to that extremity, that the growing
Mischief could not be lopt off with the punishment of two or Three, which at
first perhaps might be securely done. But when once it had over spread whole
People, whole Nations, and consequently the greatest part of Europe, in vain
the Civil Sword is then made use of; it requires the weapons of spiritual
warfare to mow down the Harvest of Oppression. They ought to be instructed, and
invited to friendly Colloquies and Conferences, where Equity and Moderation
preside. This did St. Austin, writing to Proculianus, a Sectary of the Donatian
stamp. He it was, who also interceeded for 'em to Donatus, Proconsul of Africa,
that they might not be put to death. Believing it became the professors of true
Religion not to recede from their prepetual resolution of surmounting Evil by
Acts of Lenity. And in another place, he writes to the President Caecilianus,
that the Aposteme of sacrilegious vanity was rather to be cured by impressions
of Fear, than to be cut off by the Sword of Revengeful persecutions. Therefore
in that splendid Epistle to Boniface, he adds, that in Causes of this nature,
where by reason of the Fatal scissures of Dissension, not this or that single
Person runs a hazard, but whole Communities of people lie liable to ruin, there
ought to be a Relaxation of Severity; and that the greater evils were to be
redressd by the more indulgent applications of Charity. Which Opinion so far
prevailed in the Church, that the sentence was more than once transcribed into
Gratian's Decree. St. Austin therefore, a Person both of a pious and meek
spirit, thus delivers his Sentiments, that the Career of those Mischiefs was
not to be stopped by rigor, by violence or domineering Authority; and more
advantageous progresses would be made, rather by instructing than commanding;
rather by admonition, than menaces; and that multitudes of sinners were after
that manner gently to be dealt with, severity only to be inflicted upon the
transgressions of a Few. Or if they who are superior in command are sometimes
constrained to make use of threats, that they ought to be uttered with a real
grief and sorrow for the miscarriage of the Offender; and that the Terror of
Vengeance should ^e derived from Scripture; not to render their own authority
formidable, but that it may appear to be the awful voice of God threatening his
Judgments upon Transgressors from their Lips; as he writes in his Epistle to
Aurelius, the Bishop. And certainly, if we have a love for Truth, ^f necessity
we must acknowledge, that ^^ all the ancient Monuments of sacred Antiquity we
find not any approved example extant of capital punishment inflicted upon
Sectaries; and that the Primitive church had always in abomination the ef^sion
of Blood. Or if such an accident ^ll out at any time, the Bishops truly pi^s,
manifested still their detestation of the Fact. As appeared in Priscillian, who
having spread the Poison of his pernicious Doctrine among the Churches of Gaul,
but more especially in Aquitaine, together with his Followers, was in the year
383. put to Death at Treves, by Maximus, otherwise a good Prince, only that he
had usurped the Empire from Gratian, whom he deprived of his Life at Lions. The
St. Martin had obtained a promise from the Emperor, that nothing Bloody or
Cruel should be acted against the Guilty; and had earnestly exhorted Itacius,
and some other sticklers to desist from their accusations. For all the rest of
the Bishops blamed the violence of their proceeding, as unjust and unbecoming
Christians. And tho Itacius, after the fact perfidiously committed, fearing the
scandal of it would fall upon his Shoulders, had withdrawn himself; yet
afterward he was condemned by Theognistus. Nor was it without great
reluctance, and by constraint of pressing necessity, that St. Martin could be
persuaded to hold Communion with the Ita^ian Party. In like manner St. Ambrose,
who was sent at the same time to Maximus by Valentinian, the Brother of Gratian
who was put to Death, testifies in his relation, that when he was at Treves, he
refrained the company of those Bishops that sided with Itacius, who demanded
that they who deviated from the Faith might be punished with Death. Afterward,
when those hair-brained Prelates had prevailed with Maximus to send certain
Tribunes into Spain with Plenipotentiary Power to enquire after Heretics, and
being apprehended to punish 'em with loss of Life and Confiscation of Estates,
the same St. Martin never left the Emperor, till he had obtained a revocation
of that inhumane Decree. For it was the care of that pious Bishop to set free,
not only the Christians, who were to be molested under that pretense, but even
the Heretics themselves. Foreseeing in his mind, that that same Tempest, were
it not diverted, would cause a great depopulation of the Faithful: there being
then but little difference made between the sorts of Men, when only the Eye was
judge of the distinction, and Heretics were marked out rather by the paleness
of their Looks, or by their Habit, than by their Faith and Doctrine.

However, after Priscillian was put to death, the Heresy propagated by
himself, was so far from being er adicated by the severity of his punishment,
that it gathered strength and spread it self more and more; and his Followers
who before had honored him as a Holy Person, began to adore him as a Martyr,
removed the bodies of those that suffered, into Spain, and solemnized their
Obsequies with extraordinary Pomp. Nay, they carried on their Superstition to
that degree, that it was accounted a most sacred Oath to swear by Priscillian:
which occasioned so cruel and so long continued a Division between the Bishops
of the Gallican Church, that fifteen years Bloody contention could hardly put
an end to; while the people of God, and all good men were in the mean time
exposed to Affront and Obloquy. Which words as often as I read in Sulpitius
Severus, who wrote the History of that Age with equal Eloquence and Fidelity, I
call to mind the years of my childhood, when at the beginning of the Commotions
about Religion, men were marked out by the Eye for Slaughter; not upon any
suspicion of their manners, or of the corruption of their past Lives; but only
out of a particular malice to their looks, or the fashion of their Cl^athes;
and what with their heats of Contention and Animosities, what with favors ill
bestowed, the pusillanimous Fear, Inconstancy, Drowsiness, Sloth and Arrogance
of those that sat at the Helm of Affairs, the Kingdom was rent into Factions,
and Religion it self pushe almost to the brink of the Precipice by the Troubles
and Agitations of the State.

After St. Marcin's time, more moderation was used in the Church toward those
that deviated from the Faith; whom they only either Banished or Fined, but
always spared their Lives. So that in the year 1060, when certain of the
followers of Berengarius Archdeacon of Angiers went about sowing his Doctrine
in the Territories of Liege, Juliers, and other parts of the Low Countries,
Bruno, Archbishop of Treves, thought it sufficient to expel 'em out of his
Diocese, never thirsting after their Blood.

Nor were they, after this, more severely handled by the Church, till the time
of the Vaudois; against whom when the most exquisite of Torments little
prevailed, but that the mischief was rather exasperated by the remedy
unseasonably applied, while their number increased, complete Armies were set on
foot, and a War of no less bulk was decreed against 'em, than that which our
Ancestors waged against the Saracens; the event of which was, that Murdered,
Massacred, Chased from their habitations, Plundered of their Goods, and
despoyl'd of their Estates and Signiories, their Persecutors gained a
depopulated Country, but not a Convert that was thereby convinced of his error.
Some there were who had defended themselves at first by force of Arms; who
being vanquished by superior power, fled into Provence, and the Alps adjoining
to the jurisdiction of France, where they met with a sort of skulking holes,
wherein to shelter their Lives and Doctrine: others retired into Calabria,
where for a long time they settled themselves, even till the Pontificate of
Pius IV. Some wandered into Germany, and fixed their Habitations in Bohemia,
Poland and Livonia; while another Remnant, turning Westward, sought for
sanctuary in England. And from some one of that number it is thought that John
Wickliffe descended, who for a long time taught Theology at Oxford, where after
various Contentions and hot Disputes about Religion, he died a natural Death,
above 300 years ago. Natural indeed., and yet more fatal to him then his common
mortality: for that several years after his decease, the Magistrate ordered him
to be taken up again, arraigned him, and caused his Bones to be publicly
burnt. After that time started up several other Sects that have continued till
our Age, wherein after the severity of Torments in Vain experienced, the
contest flamed out from private Disputes into open Wars, and Rebellions of
numerous multitudes, both in Germany, England and France; uncertain whether ^o
the greater detriment of the public ^ranquillity, or Religion it self: such a
^chism being formed and corroborated, and too long neglected by those, in whose
power it was, and whom it behooved to have applied proper Remedies in time.

These Things, of so great consequence, I have not so largely insisted upon,
with a design to revive that so often harrass'd Question, Whether Heretics
ought to be punished with death; which neither my Time nor my Profession will
admit of. My aim is only to show, that those Princes have acted most prudently
and most conformably to the Institutions and Maxims of the Primitive Church,
who have rather chosen to extinguish the conflagrations of War about Religion,
with disadvantageous conditions of an amicable composure, then to continue the
desolations of an obstinate contest, not to be determined but by the uncertain
chance of absolute Conquest. This Ferdinand, a most prudent Prince foresaw; who
having learnt by experience, in the furious and dangerous Wars of Germany,
under his Brother Charles the Fifth, the ill success of the Emperors Arms
against the Protestants, no sooner attained the Imperial Diadem himself, but he
reestablished the Peace of Religion by a solemn Decree, which he afterward
ratisi'd several times. And father observing, that greater progresses were made
in matters of Religion by friendly Conferences, as he himself had experienced
in the Dyets held at Ratisbonne and Worms, he resolved a little before his
death, and immediately after the breaking up of the Council of Trent, to follow
the advice of his Son Maximilian, a Prince of great wisdom; and to satisfy the
Protestants who were not at that Assembly, designed to have granted 'em another
Conference: In order to which, the Emperor made choice of George Cas^ander, a
person no less moderate than learned, in a friendly Conjunction with the
Protestant Doctors, to examine the Articles of the Confession of Auspurgh, that
were in Dispute. But the Crazie Constitution of that worthy man, and the soon
ensuing Death both of the one and the other, e^^^'d Germany the Fruit of so
Noble a Determination. After the Example of the Germans, the Nobility of Poland
cook the same Course in their Republic.

(...) Immanuel Philibert, Duke of (...)* after he was restored to the ancient
Possession of his lost Territories, by virtue of the Pe^ce concluded with us,
having rashly engaged himself, to his great Damage, in a War with the Vaudois
of Piemont, (whether it were to raise his Reputation in Italy, or to gratify
others at the Expense of his own Jeopardy, it matters not) made amends for his
mistake by a Timely Repentance; granting the free Exercise of their Religion to
his, otherwise, Innocent People, and afterward no less religiously observing
the Articles which he had concluded with 'em.

I now come to what concerns our selves, and am going about to handle a sore,
which I am very much afraid will draw no small inconvenience upon me, for only
laying my Finger upon it. But since I have entered into the discourse, that I
may dispatch in a word, I shall take the Liberty, allowed under your Reign,
frankly and ingenuously to declare, That War is by no means a Lawful way to
extirpate Heresy out of the Church. For the Protestants of this Kingdom, whose
Number and Credit daily lessened in time of Peace, have always gathered
strength in times of War and Division; and whether out of a preposterous Zeal,
or through Ambition, and a Desire of Innovation, it has been the pernicious
Error of our Statesmen to renew their Designs of extirpating the Protestants
by Wars often inauspiciously begun, and as frequently unluckily composed* to
the great hazard of our Religion. What need of Words? The thing it self speaks
loud enough. For after various Troubles and Commotions, and during those,
innumerable Cities, in every Corner of the Kingdom, wrested from the Public, no
sooner was Peace restored by the Restitution of those Places in 1563. but 'twas
a wonder to see what a sudden Serenity once more overspread the Nation. How
joyful was that Four Years Interval to all Good Men! While our Religion sat
safely protected, and most Excellent Laws, of which France will never have
cause to repent, were made by a most upright Moderator of Justice and Equity.
But then, the Fa^^ of France again declining, we began (...) grow weary of the
Public Security established by those wholesome Constitutions, and spurning from
us Peaceful Counsels, threw our selves into a War, (...) only Fatal to the
whole Realm, but (...) the Advisers of it also. They who were present at the
Unfortunate Conference at Baionne, are sufficiently sensible what persons I
mean. For from that (...) forward, while we were still deluded and cajoled by
foreign Fraud, all things we^^ carried on by Artifice and Force of Arm^ Then it
was, that the Duke of Alva being sent with a Potent Army into Flanders, after
Margaret of Parma, who had governed those Provinces with Extraordinary
Moderation, had by tacit compulsion laid down the Regency; then it was that
Alva mingled all things with Fire and Sword; erected Fortresses in every
Corner, sapp'd the Public Liberty with unheard of Impositions for the support
of the War, and breaking in upon their Immunities, reduced opulent Cities to
meagre Poverty, like strong Bodies emaciated by depriving 'em of Nourishment.
But these harsh and unadvised Counsels, the fruits of Precipitation, were
attended with the despair of the People, and lastly with Revolts. Which however
for a time appeased, ended in this at length, that the larger and more
abounding Part, and most commodious for Navigation, wherein the Wealth of those
Provinces chiefly consists, being as it were mangled and dismembered from the
rest of the Body, acknowledges now no Sovereign Authority, but that of the
States General, and wages auspicious War with all the Force of Spain. Which
misfortune of the Spaniards, Francis Balduin, one of the most famous Lawyers of
this Century, fearing long before, ad^iz'd the Peers of the Low Countries to
petition Philip, that he would vouchsafe their former Liberty of Conscience to
the Protestants every where turmoil'd and harassed; and sur^ease the Rigor of
Torments and In^isitions after suspected Persons. And (...) this purpose he
wrote a Treatise in French, whorein he proved by dint of ^^enuous Arguments,
that the Affairs of Religion, disquieted and tormented by restless
Controversies, would sooner be composed by Conferences, and an equilibrium
observed among the Dissenters, than by violence and force of Arms. Wherein if
they persever'd, he foresaw that the strength of the Protestants, then but
inconsiderable, and here and there dispersed, would be united by Factions; and
that from verbal Contests they would betake themselves to Arms and Revolt. I
have the more willingly recited this Prophecy of a Low Countryman, concerning
the Low Countries, more especially to your Majesty, for that he, having at
first embraced the Protestant Faith, yet afterward upon diligent perusal of
the Fathers, having altered his Opinion, nevertheless preserved the same
Moderation of mind; so as not to be transported with an Implacable Hatred, as
many are, against those whose Doctrine he had relinquished; but by a rare
Example of Christian Charity, foreign to this Age, admonished by his own
Error, to compassionate the failings of others, and to make it his whole
Business* that what had been done amiss out of precipitancy, and desire of
innovation, might be redressed by reviving the Practice of better Antiquity.
With these sentiments and resolutions returning out of Germany into France, he
found his Counsel no less prudent than pious, readily embraced by your most
serene Father, in whose Court he held an honorable Employment; sometimes
admitted into Council, and made choice of to take care of your Natural
Brother's Education.

Away then with those Ostentatious Vaunts, to the Dishonor of the Gallick
Name, so frequent in the mouths of many aspiring to a higher strain of Zeal
then other Men, and boasting that they never subscribed to any Treatise of
Peace with Heretics. Let 'em consider, what became at length of all their
egregious Counsels, and lament at leisure the loss of so many Flourishing
Provinces, and the Ru^^ous Dissipation of their own Estates consumed by Tumult
and Sedition, o^ se^u^ster'd by Conquest. How glad (...) (...) be now to learn
from our Example, what with so much Affectation they before detested! What
would they (...) to redeem the Loss of so many Years, which had they profitably
employed against the Common Enemies of Christendom, they had expelled those
Infidels long e're this out of Hungary, and both Maurita^ia's, to their
Immortal Honor, and no less to the Advantages of Profit.

But I am afraid, the same Imprudence which we blame in others, may be justly
laid to our Charge, while either spurred on by our own precipitate Fury, or
pushed forward by the Evil Counsels of those I have already mentioned, we have
pampered the Occasions of most pernicious Disturbances; wherein we have seen
our Cities sacked, our Churches levelled with the Earth, Churches which the Rage
of former Commotions spared; whole Provinces laid waste; old Animosities, that
Peace had lulled asleep, revived; Suspicions increased, and Arms laid down to
be res^m'd with more Implacable Rancour. Yet after all these foul Enormities
committed, at length a Peace was concluded, which the more precious it ought to
have been, so much the sooner was it violated by an Act, scarce ever to be
Expiated, unless Heaven, and that is all we dare to wish, would be pleased to
bury it in Eternal Oblivion; I mean the Massacre perpetrated two Years after,
wherein, Great Sir, Your self, of old by Heaven designed to re-establish the
Languishing Affairs of France, had like to have been envelopp'd.

After we were got clear of this same Formidable Caphareus, we fell in among
several other formidable Rocks, against which with equal Imprudence we
Shipwrackt our selves, Heaven's incensed Wrath not long procrastinating, but
revenging the Impieties of France by the Death of a Generous Prince, misguided
rather by the pernicious Counsels of others, then swayed by his own
Inclinations. What did his Successors? Returning out of Poland, the Emperor
Maximilian and the Republic of Venice, in whose Territories he rested by the
way, besides their Magnificent Entertainments, gave him sincere and wholesome
Counsel; which he contemning, at his entrance into the Kingdom, preferred a
wicked War, which they dissuaded, and from which the suppliant Protestants
implored him to desist, before a su'd for Peace. But soon repenting, he changed
his mind, and at the end of three Years made an Edict of Pacification, which he
peculiarly called his own, and which was attended with a seven years profound
Peace, unless it were for some slight Insurrections and Incursions of the
Soldiers: otherwise, no Important Commotions on either side. Till certain
Persons impatient of Ease, and not enduring that Peace had brought the Affairs
of France to such a Condition, as not to land in need of their Assistance,
kindled an unseasonable and mou^nful War, to which the King perniciously
ad-viz'd and by a fatal Mistak^^ suffered himself to be drawn in: and though
Your self at first were the pretended Mark, against which those Arms were
turned, yet all their Fury fell at length on his own Head. I tremble, when I
call to mind that Execrable Parricide, no less to the eternal Infamy of the
Gallic Name, then to the indelible Infamy of those that so inhumanly chuckl'd
at it: which doubtless had involved the Kingdom, and together with the Kingdom,
Religion it self (...) ruin past recovery, had not You, Great Sir, reserved for
these unhappy times by ^^e unlookt for Favor of the Almighty ^atching over our
safety, like a well fixed Column, supported the tottering Commonwealth; and by
Your Courage opt the Headlong Wheel of Public Ca^mity ready to crush in pieces
what ever ^rowl'd over. Yet all this while have ^stified by Your own Example,
that all ^ings else what ever are subject to Hu^an Laws, but that Religion
only, as have already said, is neither to be com^ll'd or lorded over. For
having been ^strain'd from Your Infancy to struggle ^th so many Adversities, in
the midst Civil Wars; having been surrounded (...) several Armies at the same
time; ^ter so many Battles won and lost (for was then equally mischievous to
vanquish le vanquished) though you had all along fore, like a stout Soldier
fighting in his ^nk, stood stedfa^^ to your first Religion, to be shaken either
with hopes or fears, length however at a time when you found that all things
gave way to your Prowess, you surrenderd of your own accord to the humble
Prayers of Your Subjects, and in the full Career of Victory, suffering Your
self to be overcome, returned to the Religion of Your Ancesters. Yet after
that, You still preserved the same sedateness of Temper and Moderation of mind,
which you had always experienced so beneficial to your self. For thus
persuaded, you recalled the Edicts which had been published in despite of your
Predecessors against the Protestants, and consequently against your self. And
after a Peace, to your loud Fame concluded not only with your Subjects, but
with Foreigners, you by a Third confirmed two former Edicts in favor of the
Protestants, whereby you restored 'em to their Houses, their Estates and their
Honors; and dignified several with the highest Employments in the Kingdom. For
it was your firm belief, that all Animosities asswaging by degrees, the Concord
ratified by the Edicts, would be more readily observed among Dissenters in
Opinions, and that Serenity and Tranquillity being restored to the Minds of
Men, all Heats and Passions, like a scattered Storm, dispersed, People would be
able with more sedateness to discern what in Religion was best to be made
choice of, as most conformable to Antiquity. And indeed, this was the Course
which those Holy Fathers always thought most proper to take with those, who
either out of hatred, or swayed by Error, ran astray from the Rule and
Communion of the Church: to the end they might make it appear, that they were
rather led by Charity then any desire of violent Conquest. And upon these
Considerations it was, that St. Augustine ever calls the Pelagians Brethren; and
that Optatus of Milevum no less affably treats the Donatists. For this reason
it was, that St. Cyprian, before them, was wont to say, that as it was his
hearty wish, so it was always his advice and counsel to the Church, if
possible, never to suffer any of the Brethren to perish; but to foster in her
Bosom, like an Indulgent Mother, all without distinction, as one Body of People
agreeing in their judgments. For indeed there are many among those that are
separated from our Communion, who, that I may use St. Austin's words, would in
order to their private Resolutions return, were once the Storms allayed. But
seeing 'em continue, or else fearing lest they should grow more outrageous upon
their reunion, they continue their Inclinations to advise and comfort the weak;
still without separating from their particular Congregations, defending till
death, and by their Testimony upholding that Faith which they know to be taught
in the Catholic Church. Yet all this while they patiently suffer, for the sake
of the Church's Peace, the Contumelies and Injuries offered on both sides, and
by their Example teach us, with what sort of Zeal, Sincerity and Charity, God
is to be served.

Upon these Considerations, as well taught by my own Experience, as confirmed
by Your Example, that it is my duty to consult the Peace of the Church, I have
abstained from all bitterness of language: I mention the Protestants with
honor; more especially those that excelled in Learning. Nor have I concealed
the Vices of our own People; as being of the same Opinion with all virtuous
Men, that they are infinitely deceived, who believe, in reference to the
manifold Heresies which at this day torment the World, that there is a more
Contagious Malignity in the evil Intentions and Artifices of their Teachers and
Followers, than in our Vices and Impieties. And I am verily persuaded, to the
best of my judgment, that the only way to provide against Both Mischiefs, as
well the Deviations of the Dissenting Party, as our own Enormities, would be to
remove from the Church and State all manner of Traffic and Brokage; That Virtue
be rewarded; that Person^ who excel in Piety, Doctrine, Learning, and Sobriety
of Manners, such as have given proof of their Prudence and Moderation, should
be advanced to the most sacred Functions: that no new Vpstarts, persons of no
value, but such as fear God and hate Covetousness, should be preferred to
secubar Dignities, not for favor ^^ by purchase, but only upon the
recommendation of their Virtues. Otherwise, when good and Bad are admitted
without distinction, it is evident that the Reign (...) Peace will be but of
short continuance; and that those Cities of necessity must ^^rish, whose Rulers
are not able to distinguish the Virtuous from the wicked; ^^^ suffer, according
to the Proverb, wh^ the Bees should only enjoy, to be devour'^ by Drones.

There is nothing, Sir, more opposite ^^ that Fidelity which in the first place
^^ owe to God, and next to Your self, an^ the People subjected to your Empire,
^^ that are entrusted with the Highest Employments and Preferments in the
Kingdom, than the hope of filthy Gain. Were which if we commence our entrance
into the Magistracy, it is to be feared that that will prove the Cynosure of all
our Thoughts and Cogitations; and that at length, blinded with Avarice, and
laying aside all care of Honesty and Justice, we shall falsify the Trust which
God, Your self, and your Subjects have consided in us. Avarice is a cruel,
inhuman, and insa^iable Monster, that never cries, It is enough; and therefore
not to be endured. Though the Golden Mountains of Persia, the Treasures of both
Indies were added to the ^mmense Heaps of France's Opulency, You ^ould not have
wherewithal to satiate the ^reedy Maw of Covetousness. For Vices know ^o
Bounds; their motion is restless; al^ays rolling headlong, and never cease ^ut
with their own perdition. On the other ^^de, Virtue, according to the saying of
^imonides, resembling a Cube, stedfast^^ withstands all Shoggs of Fortune and
Human Casualties; and subjecting it self (...) Nature, that varies after
several ways ^^e manifold Chances that befall the Life ^^ Man, preserves the
Mind and Con^^ience free and uncorrupted, contented ^ith it self; sufficient of
her self for all ^^ings. Restore but to this same Virtue, which thus forms the
Minds of Men, her ^^ Luster and Dignity, and you will ^^ve an overflowing
Plenty liberally to ^^ward the Truly deserving, without ^rd'ning your
Exchequer, or laying hea^^ Impositions on your People.

That the same Care may be taken in ^^e Church, if it be not directly under ^^r
Majesty's Administration, certain^^ it is a part of Royal Sedulity to be ur^t,
to entreat, request, and interpose ^ur Authority with those on whom the Burden
lies, that there be no neglect on their side. Assume to your self this Glory,
Sir, to which new Encomiums belong; and ponder this continually in Your Royal
Thoughts, that this blessed Ease and Leisure, which we now enjoy, together with
Your self, can never otherwise be expected to be Diuturnal, than by strenuously
employing this Interval of Peace, by the Almighty so favorably granted, to the
Advancement of his Glory, and Composing the Divisions of Religion. It Is a Great
Thing which I propose to Your Majesty; nor at this time, in the Opinion of
many, who contented with their present condition, disrelish wholesome Counsels
against future Inconveniences, to be too hastily undertaken. But Great Rewards
attend Great Enterprises; and a sublime and Towering Genius, the Gift of Heaven
conferred upon Your Majesty, can never stoop to common Attempts. Certainly,
after the suppressed llcentiousness of Riot and Rapine, and particular Families
confined to moderate Expenses proportionable to their Incomes, in which respect
France is more beholding to Your Majesty, than can be expressed, You can revolve
in Your thoughts nothing more worthy the sublime Pinnacle and Station where you
govern, than to compose and reduce into Order the Laws of God and man, all in
confusion through the Civil Broils of so many Years. Whence You will doubtless
reap this high Advantage, that the Wrath of God incensed against us being
thereby atton'd, and the Bishops and Magistrates strenuously laboring in the
several duties of their Employments, Candor and Sincere Charity will prevail
against Hypocrisy and Dissimulation; the Laws will combat Avarice and Luxury;
which two contending Vices the depravity of the Age has intermixed: good
Manners will be esteemed and improved; Modesty and Chastity, hitherto contemned
and derided, will regain their Ancient Reputation; and lastly, that Virtue
recovering her lost Honor, the Adorati^n, Luster and Authority of Money will
abate.

These are Your own Wishes, Migh^y Sir. For I have often heard 'em from Your
own Lips, when you have professed your self ready to purchase so great a
felicity to the Kingdom with the Mutilation of Your own Limbs. These are the
wishes of all Your most faithful Subjects: and this is my sense of the
Commonweal. Wherein, if I have been somewhat too prolix; or if I have used too
great a liberty of Speech, you will vouchsafe your pardon to an Innocent
Person, bred up under that Liberty, the Restoration of which to our Country is
a debt we owe to Your Majesty, and who had not otherwise presumed upon Your
Royal Patience, but that he deemed himself obliged to fix something by way of
Preface at the Portal of the Work; in some measure to restrain the
Assassmations of Calumny, and heave off the Burden of Envy from his Shoulders.

But when I thought that what I had hitherto said, either in excuse, or defense
of my Labors, had been sufficient, my Friends admonish me, that there will be
some who will object against me, that I might have spared such an exact
Commemoration of particular things relating to our Liberties, Immunities, Laws
and Franchises; affirming it no less to the disadvantage of Your own, and the
Dignity of the Kingdom, then Injurious to Private Persons. To which, although
there be abundant matter of Answer, yet should I enlarge my self too far: I am
afraid, lest many should think I affected an Occasion to fight with Goblins; or
if I should be altogether silent, lest Carping and Censure should lay hold of
the Opportunity: I shall therefore, as to this matter, deliver my self with all
possible succinctness.

So seasoned by Tradition to me from my Father, a most worthy Person, as all
men knew, to him from my Grandfather and Great Grandfather delivered; so
prepared, and with such Inclinations I entered into the Administration of the
Commonweal, that next to my Duty to God, there was nothing that I esteemed
dearer to me, or more sacred, then that Love and Duty which I owed my Country;
and that all my other private Affections, all other Considerations were to give
way to that. For so I always most rigorously persuaded my self, that my
Country, according to the Opinion of the Ancients, was a second Deity, and the
Laws of my Country a sort of other Deities, which whosoever violated, under a
sought for pretense of Piety, were liable to all the Penalties of Sacrilege
and Parricide. These Franchises, these Laws, upon which this Kingdom being
founded, had advanced it self to such an extended Grandeur of Dominion and
Power, if there be any, and would to God there be not, who work under Ground to
sap and ruin, when all their open Force proves vain, and ^^successful, may we
nere be deemed worthy of the Gallic Name, who e're we are that would be thought
true Patriots, if we do not might and main oppose the Incroaching Mischief,
more especially while You reign. For it is the voice of our Ancestors, men
highly eminent for Religion, that this is that Celestial Pledge of public
safety; This, that other Palladium of Franco-Gallia, which so long as we can
keep, there is nothing to be suspected from Foreign Treachery: but being once
lost, nothing can be secure from their Attaques. Wherefore, should it happen,
through sloth or stupidity, that these Ancilia should ^e stolen from us, there
is no question to ^e made, but the same Person that wick^dly commits the Theft,
like another U^ysses, Master of Pelasghian Fraud, ^ill certainly suborn another
Sinon, to ^et admited into France some other fatal Horse, crammed full of armed
Enemies; ^d by that means depopulate the most ^urishing part of Europe, with
the same ^onflagration that laid Troy in Ashes. ^ut God avert it for the
future: for ^hile you live and govern, and while ^eaven preserves the Dauphin
safe, ^ere's uo such dire Misfortune to be ^r'd.

And here it might be justly expected, ^t we should tell the World how much
(...) have deserved of the Republic; and ^t we should enlarge upon your
Praises, whom we are beholding for our Lives, (...) the enjoyment of our
Country and E^es. No more perhaps, then what they (...) with reason require
from us, who ^sure the undertaking rather by the ^ousness of the subject, then
the mean^ of my capacity. But besides that I ^gn'd not any Panegyric here; it is
^n, You take more pleasure in the ^ledge of what you have done, then ^e loud
Applauses of Haranguing E^nce.

Your Majesty, sprung from the most noble and Ancient Family of all that ever
Scepters held, and deducing Your more certain Original from Male descent, by
Birth a Pyrenaean, grew up, under the Education of Adversity, in the midst of
War; by providence protected, your Infancy escaped the treacherous Ambuscado's
of Your Adversaries. Your early Youth, and riper Manhood, 'both, became a
Terror to your Enemies. At last in the most furious heat of Hurry and
Confusion you were brought to the King, or sent for by him, from the farthest
part of Aquitaine, to the end no other but the Lawful Heir might possess the
vacant Throne; and vacant suddenly it was. Having obtained the Crown, you
tempered Sovereign Authority with an Alloy of Clemency and Humility, choosing
rather to win the alienated Affections of Your Subjects by acts of Favor and
Kindness, then to ride 'em with the Curb of fear. And such was the Confidence
that men, before your mortal Enemies, reposed in their now acknowledged
Sovereign, that they thought themselves more safe in Your Mercy, then secure in
the strength of their own Arms; and were not so sorry to see themselves
vanquished, as they were glad that You were the Victor. Of Suppliants they
became Friends and familiar Acquaintance: and the Delinquents were more deeply
sensible of their past Offenses, then you were apprehensive of their Injuries.
Your readiness to pardon was such, that they repented they did not sooner
acknowledge their Error. But what other way for them, who saw that the rapid
course of Your Victories could not be stemmed by any Opposition, but of their
own accords to submit to Your Majesty, whom nothing could withstand, and rather
to trust the Clemency of the Victor, then to try the doubtful Chance of Batte?
For your Prowess seemed to have restrained even Fate it self, in such a manner,
as that it seemed to have fixed the events of War, and clipped the Wings of
Victory, to prevent her flight from Side to Side. Not, but that to all this
uncontrolled Prosperity, your Vigilance, your Indefatigable Industry, your
patient enduring Heat and Cold, your neglect of other diet then the Place or
Season afforded, your Diligence in the Trenches, your Military Labors day and
night, your marching through tempestuous Showers and Storms of Hail and Snow,
your short Reposes, Naps on Horseback, sometimes on the Ground, and other
Personal Virtues mainly contributed and assisted. Thus by your own Example, the
most alluring way of commanding Obedience, you still preserved that exactness
of Discipline, which by others is hardly maintained, where want of Pay breeds
mutiny and disorder. By this felicity You every where became so terrible to
Your Enemies, that tho, for the most part superior in number, and all other
supports of War, they thought it sufficient to defend themselves within the
Walls of their fortified Towns and Cities; and looked upon their bare Defense as
an Achievement no less Glorious, then for You to vanquish in the Field. So
that it is no wonder, that after so many heinous offenses against your Majesty
committed, they should so greedily embrace an Opportunity of Reconciliation
offered 'em by Heaven it self, out of a certain hope of sincere pardon, and no
less afraid of Victory always abiding on Your side.

But if it be so, that War has rendered You so formidable to your Enemies; the
public Tranquillity shows you no less acceptable to those You have received
into favor; while the encouraged Arts of Peace are every where revv^'d by
Rewards and Immnnities. Witness the vast and lasting Piles in every Corner of
the Kingdom reared within so short a space of Time; adorned with Statues of
imcomparable workmanship, exquisite Pictures, and costly Tapestries, where the
Figures seem to speal and move; eternal Monuments to Posterity of the Greatness
of Your Soul, and Your desire of Peace. But above all things we return Your
Majesty Thanks, for restoring the Muses to their Seats from whence they were
expelled by the Barbar^y of the War, and for the reflouris^ing St^^ of the
Parisian Academy, under You Auspices restored to former Reputation, by your
Addition of a signal Embellishment* in calling thither Isaac Caesa^bon, ^^
second Luminary of this Age, and entrusting him with the Custody of your (...)
Royal Library. By all which Acts ^^ Princely Munificence it may appear, ^^^^
the uninterrupted course of so many L^rels was not so much Your Encouragement
to more Ambitious undertakings, a^ ^ cultivate Peace among your Neighbors and
to restore Tranquillity and Repose ^ your Subjects tired and almost worn ^ with
the vexation and turmoile of ^ preceding Wars.

Continue and prosper then, Great S^^ in your most generous purpose; and
proceed to establish that Peace, which ^^^ have procured your Kingdom and (...)
Country at the Expense of so much ^^ and Labor, by restoring the Authority of
the Laws, as already you have been begun to do: and be assured, that the Mind,
the Soul, the Counsel and Authority of a Commonweal reside altogether in the
Laws; and that as a Body without a Soul, so neither can a City, without Laws,
make use of ^er Organs, her Nerves, her Blood and Members. Consequently that
the Magistrates and Judges are but the Ministers and Interpreters of the Law;
and lastly that we are all the Servants of the Law, to the and we may be truly
Freemen, and enjoy ^he Blessing of our Liberty.

In hopes of obtaining this Liberty under ^our Reign, and taking advantage of
the ^^me recovered by Your Means, in the general Hurry and Confusion, and after
^ur Troubles were composed, I wrote the History of this Age, the first part of
which ^ now make public to the World, and de^icateit to Your most August Name,
for many reasons of greatest Consequence, both ^ reference to my own Person,
and the thing it self. It would have argued me ^angely ungrateful, not to
acknowledge ^y Advancement, begun by your Predecessor of Blessed Memory, and
by your Majesty still dignified with greater Advantages of higher Preferment.
And because ^as continually attending both in the Camp (...) at the Court, Your
Majesty entrust^^^ me with several Commissions of Importance; by the management
of which I attained to the Knowledge of many things ^^quisite to carry on the
work which we had been in hand. This farther Advantage ^o I had from my
familiar converse (...) several Illustrious Personages grown ^ in the service
of the Court, more di^ently to examine the Truth of many things ^at were
published upon several occasions concerning our Affairs in various Anonymous
Pamphlets. And thus I improved my knowledge, during my Attendance on your
Majesty, in the midst of public Business, till the Duty of my Employment
constrained me into this Workhouse of the Law. The honor of my being known to
Your Majesty is of no fresh date: For it is now above twenty years ago, that I
was sent with other Commissioners of Parliament by the deceased King, to attend
Your Majesty in Aquitaine; at what time You were pleased to vouchsafe me
particular Demonstrations of Your Particular Favor and Benevolence. And since
that, I presumed to a peculiar Considence, that the Fruits of my Wit, if it
were possible for so barren a Plant to bear any, would not be unacceptable to
Your Majesty. But there is yet another more important Reason why this Work
should be devoted to Your Majesty; for that he who undertakes an Enterprise so
full of Danger, must of necessity stand in need of powerful support against the
Detractions of repining Calumny; nor could I desire a more piercing Judgment
then Your Majesty's, wherewith you govern your own Affairs, to examine the Truth
of all those Great Transactions which I have transmitted to future Ages. For to
Your Censure, as it behooves me, I dare be bold to stand; whether you command me
to impart the rest, or stifle what I have already published; which indeed
cannot be said so much to be made public, as to be laid at your Feet, a
Specimen to be rejected or approved. What ever you ordain or command concerning
it, shall be to me in place of a Celestial Oracle. Nor do I question, but
whatsoever you allow will be unanimously suffered to pass current over all the
World. Or if there be any who are not pleased with your unerring Approbations,
they must be such who having been advanced to high degree by the Freaks of
Fortune, yet never doing any thing worthy to be remembered in story, think it
an Injury to themselves, when there is a true account given of all men's
Actions. But as I should wrong my Reputation by a compliance with their unjust
desires, so neither will my Conscience permit me wickedly to bury in silence
their Vices, generally in conjunction with the ruin of the State.

I cannot make a better Conclusion of this Preface, then with my vows and
wishes. Great God, the Author and Giver of all our Blessings, who with thy only
Son, together with the Holy Ghost, art God in three Persons, yet one in
Goodness, Wisdom, Mercy and Power, always one in all things; who wast before
all things, and wilt be Eternally in all things; who by thy Prudence disposest
and govern'st lawful Dominion, without which, nor any private Family, nor City,
nor the whole Race of all Mankind, nor Nature it self, by thee created out of
Nothing, can pretend to any thing of steadfast and durable; Thee, with the
Prayers of the whole Kingdom I implore, and most humbly adjure, that what thou
have vouchsafed to France and consequently to all Christendom, thou would be
pleased to appropriate the same to us; and as an accumulation to thy Blessings
to make 'em Diuturnal. In order to which, we put up to thy sacred Throne but
this one Supplication more, which comprehends all the rest, that thou would
preserve the King and the Dauphin. For upon their safety, we must acknowledge
that our Peace, our Concord, our Security, our Wealth and Welfare, and what
ever else is desirable on Earth, depend. To which purpose direct his Counsels
to rule with moderation that Empire which he has rescued from Destruction:
while the Young Prince springs up, like an auspicious Tree that grows upon the
Banks of some delightful River; to the end he may prove a Protecting Shade to
our Children's Children, under the security of which to be at leisure to
improve the more noble Arts of Peace, and promote both Learning and Piety.
Grant that both may reign together over France, in that order which is most
acceptable to all good men: that by their means, the pristin Sincerity and
Religion, the Ancient Manners, the Institutions of our Ancestors, and the Laws
of our Country may be restored to their Primitive luster; that all new Monsters
of Sects, new Fictions of Religions, and other Forgeries of Artifice and
Ambition to inveagle and corrupt the weak* and inadvertent, may be utterly
confounded; and that at length all Schism and Discord removed, Peace may be
established in the House of God, quiet i^ Consciences, and security in the
Commonweal. Lastly we invoke and beseech thee, most Great and Merciful God,
through the Grace of thy Holy Spirit, without which we neither are, nor can do
any thing, that as well they who are now living, as Generations to come, when
they shall read what I am now preparing to declare to all the World, may meet
with nothing deviating from that Liberty, Truth and Fidelity which becomes a
sincere Historian; and that my whole Work may be as free from the suspicion of
Adulation and Envy, as it is from any Constraint or Necessity of being Partial.

The Patent from the States of Holland and Westfriezland, for Printing this
Work, is a follows, viz.
THE States of Holland and Westfreizland Publish, that Adrian Benian Bookseller
at Delft, having made known to us, that he has been at great charge and trouble
in Printing a certain Book Entitled [ Histoire de 1^* Edit de Nantes,
contenant les chooses les plus Remarquables qui se sont passees en France avaunt
and apres ^a Publication a l' occasian de la diversite des Religions, etc.] in
Quarto in four Parts, and fearing that some other Person in our Dominions to
his great loss and damage might attempt to print the foresaid Book after Our
foresaid Petitioners Copy, has applied himself to Us, in most humble manner,
Praying that we would favor Our said Petitioner with a special Patent or
Privilege, by which Our said Petitioner, his Heirs, Administrators, etc. may
be favored and allowed to Print the said Book for 15 Years next ensuing, and
that they only may be allowed to Print Publish and Sell the said Book during
the said time in Our Territories, in such manner and Languages as they shall
think fit, forbidding any other to Print the said Book in any manner either in
the whole or in part, or to Sell or Publish any of the said Books that may be
brought into Our Country from other Parts.

We therefore having considered the Case and Petition aforesaid, and being
inclined to hearken to the said Petition, have of Our true Knowledge and by Our
Sovereign Power and Authority, Consented and Agreed to and Empowered, and by
these Presents do Consent and Agree to and Privilege the said Petitioner, his
Heirs, Administrators, etc. only to Print the said Book for the term of 15
Years next ensuing, in Quarto in four Parts, within Our Dominions, and that he,
etc. only may Print or cause to Print, Publish or Sell the said Book, in our
Dominions, etc. Therefore we forbid all others to Print Publish or Sell the
said Book in our Dominions during the said term, or to import or Publish or
Sell the said Book, tho, printed in any other Country, on pain of forfeiting
all the said Books printed after the foresaid Copy or imported in from Foreign
parts, and besides to pay a fine of 300 Guilders, one third part to be given to
the Officer that prosecutes; one third to be paid to the Poor of the Town where
the fault is committed, and the remaining third part to be paid to the foresaid
Petitioner.

But notwithstanding any thing contained in this Our Patent with which we have
gratified Our Petitioner, Our intent is that it shall only defend him from such
damage as may be done him by printing after his Copy, and no way authorize or
avow, much less being Protected by us as aforesaid, give any reputation or
credit, to the Contents of the Book, nor is the said Petitioner exempted from
answering any thing that may be charged on him, if it contains any thing that
is unlawful, and to that and We expressly command that he shall place this our
Patent in the fore part of the Book without any abbreviation or omissions: and
he shall be obliged to bring one of the said Books well Bound and in good
condition to the Library of our University of Leyden, and bring thence a
sufficient testimonial thereof on pain of losing the Effect of these Presents.
And to the end our Petitioner may enjoy this privilege, We Command all whom
these Presents may concern, that they suffer the said Petitioner peaceably to
enjoy the full benefit of these our Letters Patents.

Given at the Hague under Our Great Seal hereunto annexed, the 23d. of Feb.
1693.
The History of the Famous Edict of Nants, containing an Account of the most
Remarkable Things that have happened since its Publication to the Edict of
Revocation; as likewise of the principal Events that have followed since that
New Edict, till this present Time.
The First Book.
A Summary of the Contents of the First Book.
The Occasion, Design, and Platform of this Work. The Beginning of the
Reformation, and its Causes. Its Entrance into France. How it was received at
Meaux, and at Bearn. The Execution of John le Clerc, and Lewis Berquin. The
State of Religion in Germany. The Schismin England. The Inclination of Francis
the I. toward the Reformation, and how he was diverted from it by the Cardinal
de Tournon. An Accommodation proposed. The Synods of Bourges, and of Paris. The
Beginning of Calvin's Doctrine. The Year of the Placards, or Remonstrances. The
Devotions and Executions ordered upon them. Edicts against the Lutherans. The
Council of Trent, and its Translation. The Death of King Francis. Henry the
Second persecutes the Protestants. The Edict of Chateau-Briant. The King
protests against the Councils being transferred back again to Trent. The
Duchess of Valentinois Cruel to the Protestants. The Great Credit and
Influence of the Clergy. The Business of Merindol and Cabrieres. New Severities
and Punishments that forward the progress of the Reformation. Protestant
Churches formed at Paris, and other places. The Spirit of Moderation prevails
upon several Judges. An Assembly at Paris. The Character of Catharine de
Medicis. Calumnies against the Protestants. The Psalms sung in public. The
Original of the Factions. The Constancy of Andelot, and his Disgrace. The
Counselors of the Parliament of Paris suspected as to their Religion. The
first Protestant National Synod in France. The Death of Henry the Second. The
State of the Court. The Nature of the Intrigues then carrieh on there, with the
Character of the Heads of them. How Religion came to be made use of in them.
Courts of Justice Erected for the Burning of pretended Heretics, called,
Burning Chambers. The ensnaring Superstitions used toward Images, to discover
and entrap the Protestants. The Tragical Execution of Counselor Du Bourg. The
Apologetical Writings, published by the Protestants, which exasperate the
Higher Powers. A Project against Arbitrary Power. The Enterprise of Amboise.
The Cruelties of the Court. The Original of the Word Huguenot. An appearance of
Moderation. The Imprisonment of the Prince of Conde. The Death of Francis the
Second, falsely imputed to the Protestants. The General Estates assembled, who
seem to favor them. The Rise of the Triumvirate. The Conference at Poissy. The
settling of the Jesuits at Paris. The Fickleness and Inconstancy of the Cardinal
of Lorrain, and of the King of Navarr. A Sedition at Paris against the
Protestants. The Massacre of Vaissy after the Edict published in January. The
strength of the Protestants. The Admirals short continuance in Favor. The
first War against the Protestants begun by the Queens Orders, but afterward
disowned by her. The League between the Pope, the King of Spain, and the
Guises, against the Protestants. The Cruelties of Monluc, and of Adrets, and of
the Roman Catholics in general. The Massacre at Sens. Foreign Forces brought
into France. The Battle of Dreux. The Siege of Orleans. The Death of the Duke
of Guise, with which our Author charges the Admiral. Peace agreed upon. The
Marriage of the Cardinal of Chatillon, and what followed thereupon. Tithes
secured to the Roman Clergy. The retaking of Havrede Grace from the English.
Prosecutions against the Admiral. The End of the Council of Trent. A Revolution
in Bearn. New causes of Jealousy given to the Protestants. The Voyage of the
Court, and the Counsel of the Duke of Alva. The progress of the Reformed
Churches, The Reconciliation of the Admiral with the Guises. The Enterprise of
Meaux, and its consequences. A Peace clapped up before Chartres, without any
design to observe it. The 3d War. The Death of the Prince of Conde, and of
Andelot. Battles lost. The Admiral restores the Party, and gives new life to
them. A fraudulent peace. The incredible Artifices of the Court. The Massacre
of St. Bartholomew. The Princes of the Blood obliged by force to change their
Religion. The Inconstancy of Des Rosiers. The Sieges of Rochelle and Sancerve.
Factions in France. The Duke of Alanson Protector of the Protestants, and of
those called the Politics. The Death of Charles the 9th. Henry the 3d
returning from Poland, and succeeding him, continues the War. The Retreat of
the Princes. A peace broken as soon as made. The Edict of 1577. Synods. The
Conferences of Nerca and de Fleix. The King eludes the Edict under pretense of
observing it. Outrages committed by the Leaguers against the King, who is
forced against his Will, to make War upon the Protestants. The Courage of the
King of Navar. La Trimouille turns Protestant. The Battle of Courtras. The
Defeat of the Reiters. The Death of the Prince of Conde. The Edict of Union.
The Insolence of the Leaguers. The Estates held at Blois. The Death of the Duke
of Guise, and of the Cardinal his Brother. The Duke of Mayenne escaping revives
the Leaguers party. The extremity of the King's Affairs. He makes a Truce with
the Protestants. The King's Affairs in a State of Recovery. He besieges Paris,
and is stabbed by a Monk.

THE Reformation, which changed the Face of Religion all over Europe, at the
beginning of the last Age, met with great Oppositions wherever it was preached.
For the Court of Rome used her utmost Endeavors to extinguish at its very
Birth a Light that was likely to prove so fatal to her Grandeur, and set in
motion all the Springs of her most Refined Politics, to maintain the Errors
and Abuses from which she drew such vast gains, against those Enemies that so
clearly revealed and laid open its ambitious Artifices. She raised against them
all the different Bodies of her Clergy, whose miserable Ignorance and
Corruption they so briskly attackt. She spared neither her Bulls nor
Anathema's, to render them odious to all the World. She armed against them all
the Temporal Powers, where she had Credit enough to procure her Maxims to be
embraced; and on the other side, the Princes of those Times, who had their
secret aims for the advancing of their Authority, were glad of so fair an
occasion to satisfy their Ambition, and greedily laid hold on it. For the
aspiring passion after Arbitrary Power had so possessed the Heads of the
Sovereigns then Reigning, that thinking their Power too much confined by some
certain Relics of Liberty, which were by the Laws preserved to the people,
they were ravished to meet so patly with a Religious Pretense to employ one
part of their Subjects to ruin the other, as being very confident, that when
the soundest and most understanding part of them should be once oppressed, they
should easily master the rest. And the Court of Rome likewise in her turn, when
she smelt out the Intentions of the Princes, was in no small fear of them, as
well as of her pretended Heretic Enemies; and looking upon Absolute Power as a
Jewel fit only to be reserved fot the Triple Crown, she never sincerely
assisted those whose power was in a State of giving her any Umbrage in that
ticklish pretension. Yet for all these precautions the Emperor Charles the 5th
upon this occasion, had very like to have reduced all Germany under his Yoke,
but that after he had defeated the Protestants, an unexpected Revolution
reduced into Smoke all the prosperities of his life; And his Son Philip the 2d
was still more unfortunate, in that by his ill-managed attempts upon the
Liberties of the 17 Provinces, he gave the first Motion to those mighty
concussions that have since proved so ruinous to the Greatness of his House.
But the Crown of France has succeeded better in those designs; for tho in the
contest it has been reduced more than once to the very brink of Ruin, yet
Religion has been at last so useful an Expedient to its Monarchs, to advance
their power beyond all bounds, that they at this day acknowledge no other
limits to it but their own lawless Wills. However, all the Oppositions formed
by diverse Interests against the progress of the Reformation, were not able to
hinder it from spreading every where in a very few years time. It was too
necessary and too just, not to find some hearts disposed to embrace it; and a
multitude of good Souls had too long groaned under the intolerable Yoke of the
Superstitions and Tyranny of Rome, not to receive with open arms those which
preached with such forcible Evidence against her Corruptions, as well in points
of Doctrine and Worship, as of Manners and Discipline. But yet it met not every
where with the same contradictions, nor with the same easy successes. For
there were some States where it was received almost without resistance, others
where it found such Obstacles which it could never surmount, and others again
where the Difficulties it met with could not be mastered but by an infinite
number of Crosses and Pains. France was one of the places where the longest
oppositions were raised against it, and it was firmly settled in many other
parts of Europe, before it was known what would be its destiny in France; and
if we except the 10 or 12 last years of Henry IV. it may truly be said, it
never enjoyed any peace there, and that since its first dawning in that great
Kingdom, till now it has always been persecuted. For if its Adversaries have
seemed sometimes to give it any respite, and to renounce the further use of any
violent means to oppress it, 'Twas only to gain opportunity to compass it by
other more hidden, and consequently more dangerous and effectual practices.
They have successively employed against it Capital punishments, Wars,
fraudulent Treaties, Massacres, and all the Artifices of a profound and refined
policy, and whenever they met with a Juncture of time they thought favorable
to their design, they never were ashamed diverse times to make use of the most
odious and infamous methods of Sham Processes, Law quirks, and down right
breach of Faith, to promote its Ruin. And even in our days they have pursued
the Remainder of the Reformed, with penal Executions and Massacres, because
they found them too weak and disunited to defend themselves. It is not to be
imagined what has passed in that Kingdom upon this occasion, especially within
these last 30 years. Certainly never did over powering Force, or wheedling
Treachery, in any other Age or Place produce Effects either so infamous to
their Authors, or so dismal and fatal to Millions of ignorant people who
demanded nothing else but bare Liberty of Conscience, and who giving no
occasion by their Conduct, either to be feared or hated, had reason to expect
nothing less than to be treated with those unparalled Cruelties and
Injustices with which they have all along been so implacably pursued. The
Creasion and Design and Platform of this Work.


I have undertaken in this Work to inform Posterity of what has been done in
France toward the bringing that design to its proposed end. But my project
would be too much above my Power, if I should take upon me to give you the
History of all that has happened in that Kingdom upon that account, from the
first Preaching of the Reformation, to our days, such a work as that would be
great enough to deserve to be parted among several persons. And therefore
observing that the time relapsed since that new Light first begun to shine in
the World, till our time may naturally be divided into 2 periods almost equal
in duration, viz. The first, containing all the Occurrences of about 80 Years,
till the Edict of Nants, when the Churches enjoyed a little Respite. And the
other comprehending the Transactions which have past since that famous Edict to
our days. I thought I might pass over the first period, without speaking much
upon it, as well because the Histories of that Time are so full of events that
relate to Religion, whose concerns were then so intermixed with those of the
State, that it was impossible to separate them; as because the short Account I
shall give of them, will be sufficient to inform the Reader of all he needs to
know of the affairs of those times, to enable him to understand those which
have followed since; but I shall make it my main business to unfold the Events
of the second Period, because the affairs of Religion that belong to that space
of time, are not so well known, and that we have as yet no faithful Collection
of them in any History extant.

The ground of my subject shall therefore be the Edict of Nants, all the
consequences and dependencies of which, I here undertake to represent as
exactly as I could draw them out of all the public and private Memoirs it was
possible for me to get, having bound myself under the obligations of a very
strict Resolution, not to write any thing for which I could not produce good
Authority. But first, that they which are not better informed otherwise* may
see at least in general what passed before that Edict, without some knowledge of
which he cannot perfectly understand the justice and advantage of it; I will
premise a summary account of what past in France about Religion, till the Death
of Henry III. And because Henry IV. who succeeded him, was the Author of the
Edict which is the principal Subject of my Discourse, and which that Prince
granted to his Protestant Subjects, as a Recompense of their faithful Services,
I will begin to treat amply of those transactions that concern the Reformation,
since the Crown was devolved upon that K. After which it will be much more easy
to discern whether that Edict was a Favor extorted, or a pure Effect of
Gratitude and Justice; and whether the continual Contraventions of the
Successors of that Great Monarch, in prejudice to that Work of his Wisdom, and
the solemn Revocation that was made of it some few years ago, to the great
astonishment of all Europe, be proper Motives to induce posterity to bless the
Memory of their Authors.

After Luther once began to preach against Popery in Germany, 1517.
there past but a very little time before his Doctrine was communicated to
France; and tho the Faculties of Divinity, and particularly 1520.
that of the Sorbon, as well as the rest, had condemned it, yet inspite of all
they could do, it found Disciples every where which The beginning of the
Reformation, its progress and its causes.
greedily received it. Learning, which the favor and encouragement of Francis
I. had newly revived, had enlightened many persons, and made them ashamed of the
great number of Errors which had been introduced and established in the times of
Ignorance; and the Benevolence of that liberal Prince enticed into his
Dominions all the choice men of Learning that were to be found in the rest of
Europe, because the Pensions and Privileges he bestowed upon them sufficiently
secured them both from contempt and misery; Among whom there were some that
came from Germany, where 1520.
they had taken some tincture of the Doctrine which was called New, either out
of the Sermons and Books of Luther, or by reading Its entrance into France.
of the Scriptures, which were dispersed into the hands of all the World. They
imparted the same light to others, many of which took a liking to those
Opinions accounted New, because they were already disposed to it by the
contempt they had justly conceived for their blind Conductors. For in earnest,
the Ignorance of the ordinary* Pastors was so great, that many of them could
only read, almost all of them led scandalous Lives, and their Corruption was so
general, that those of them which had no other Vice but an insat^able
Covetousness, and an unmeasurable Ambition, might be called virtuous men, in
comparison of their other more profligate companions. Yet among the very Clergy
themselves, they which had any relics left them of Modesty or Piety, were
ashamed of the abuses which were laid to the Charge of the Roman Church; and
tho the greatest part of them were more inclined to keep their Vices and their
Errors than to hazard by a Reformation, both their Greatness and Revenues, or
to subject their Lives to the Rules of a stricter Morality, yet there were not
wanting even some Bishops whose Eyes were stricken with this Light; Brissonnet,
Bishop of Meaux, was one of that number; He got some tincture of the
Reformation at Paris, at 1523
some Conferences there held between 3 or 4 Learned Men, whom he heard with so
much delight, that he carried them into his Diocese, and permitted them to
spread their Opinions there. He further gave leave to his people to read the
holy Scriptures, and made no How it came to be received at Meaux,
opposition to Conferences and Meetings, and sometimes he took the liberty
himself to preach the same Doctrine which those private men taught; so that in
little time there were at Meaux above 400 persons who had imbibed Luther's
Opinions. But at last, the Reproaches of the other Bishops, the threats of
being prosecuted for Heresy, and the fear of losing a Bishopric so commodious
for them that love the Court for the Neighborhood of Paris, prevailed over
Brissonnet, and reduced him to the profession of his former Errors; after
which, his Doctors finding no longer security in his Diocese, separated, and
shifted every one for himself. Le Fevre, who was one of them, found protection
at the Court of Navar, where he was well and in Bearn.
received by the Queen, who was Sister to Francis I. and as great a Favourer of
Learned Men, as the King her Brother. Roussel, one of his Companions, after a
Journey into Germany, came back to Bearn, where the same Princess gave him a
like entertainment as to the former, and both of them together so strongly
inspired her with their Opinions, that she retained them to her dying day, tho
for several years 'twas thought she had quitted them.

These two men lost no time in those remote Provinces, and prepared the minds
of the people there the more easily to embrace the Doctrine of Calvin, when it
came to be preached there 10 or 12 1523
years after. Their Retreat hindered not the Church which they had in some
measure formed at Meaux, from preserving itself, and increasing, which was the
Reason that was the first place where the Courts of Justice began to take
cognizance of those pretended Novelties. One John Clerk, who had an indifferent
understanding in The Execution of John Clerk.
the Scriptures, the only book he had studied, served for a Guide to those
converted people, who received corporal punishment for calling the Pope
Antichrist, and after he had been banished from Meaux upon that account, was
not long after burnt at Mets, because his Zeal had transported him so far as to
break an Image. Six years after, Lewis Berquin was condemned at Paris, to the
same punishment, and of Lewis Berquin.
for teaching the Doctrine of Luther. 1529.


The progress of the Reformation was more rapid in Germany, The state of the
Protestant Religion in Germany.
where it was embraced by several Princes and States, who in the year 1530,
presented their Confession of Faith to the Emperor, and within a little while
found themselves strong enough to League together at Smalcalde, against those
which designed to oppress them. 1528.
The Schism of England.
The Schism made in England by Henry VIII. was only a step which opened the way
to a greater Work carried on in the following Reigns. But yet that Prince, who
had done Luther the Honor to write against him, and was answered by that Dr.
in somewhat too harsh and insolent a strain, would never suffer the Opinions of
his Adversary to take root in his Kingdom, tho at the same time he would fain
have persuaded Francis I. to have broken with Rome, as himself had done. The K.
of France would by no means hearken to him, and answered him with this
Compliment, That he was his Friend as far as the Altar, but there he must leave
him. But he continued not always so obstinate, for he was almost persuaded once
The Inclination of Francis I. t^ the Reformation.
time to yield to the earnest solicitations of the Q. of Navar; for the had
inspired him with some inclination for the Doctrine which she herself had
embraced, and of which she also had communicated some tincture to the King her
Husband, whom she carried privately with her to hear the Sermons of her
Teachers. The Duchess of Estampes, who possessed the heart of Francis I. and may
likewise be reasonably supposed to have abetted the same inclination in him,
because she was instructed and principled in the Lutheran Opinions, openly
favored those that professed them, and, after the King's Death, lived a very
retired life in all the exercises of the Protestant Religion, protecting all
those that professed it, to the utmost of her power.

This at least is certain that the King writ to Melanchton, the most 1534.
renowned of Luther's Disciples, and esteemed the most moderate of 1535.
them, inviting him to come into France, and assuring him he should take
pleasure to hear him. But whilst Melanchton spun out the time in delays, the
Cardinal of Tournon put by the design, and From which the Cardinal de Tournon
diverts him.
wrought so absolute a change upon the King's Mind, who had let him gain a very
strong Ascendant over him, that he would afterward listen neither to his Sister
nor Mistress, nor be persuaded to show the least favor to those accused of
Heresy. There is no doubt but the Cardinal had Orders from Rome, to that
purpose. For the King had discovered his Mind to that Court himself, in the
Instructions he gave to Cardinal du Bellai, whom he sent thither, in 1535.
which he ordered him to give the Pope an account of the Letter he had written
to Melanchton, and of that Dr's Answer, and most especially to move his
Holiness to consent to a kind of Accommodation, which he had a design to
negotiate in Germany, by an Embassy An accommodation proposed.
on purpose. The most important Article of that Accommodation was to be, That
the Pope should be acknowledged to be Head of the Universal Church, and in
other things the King would take from the Protestants as much as he could, and
as far as he could: That is to say, He would consent to gratify the
Protestants in many things that concerned Faith, Religion, Ceremonies,
Institutions and Doctrine, at least till a Council should determine them, and
it was already agreed what Concessions and abatements to make them; which
consisted of 7 Articles, in which the Mass was to be reformed, without changing
any thing in the Ceremonies of its celebration; viz. 1. That Mass should never
be said without a public Communion. 2. That the Elevation should be
retrenched. 3. And Adoration abolished. 4. That the Cup should be restored to
the Laity. 5. That in it no Commemoration should be made either of male or
female Saints. 6. That it should be celebrated only with ordinary fine Bread,
which should be broken by the Priest, and distributed to the people. 7. And
that Marriage should be allowed to Priests. The Mass so reformed was called by
the Vulgar, The Mass with 7 points. But alas, an Accommodation of this Nature
could not find acceptance at the Court of Rome, which was very sensible, that
the Authority of the Holy See could never be sufficiently supported by the bare
Title which was, given there to the Pope, and that to maintain it in so
exorbitanta power as it had assumed, it had need of the united force of all
those Errors, by which it first mounted to, and afterward established it self
in its present Greatness. And therefore that Court employed all their policy to
divert the King from that dangerous project.

The Cardinal of Tournon had already signalized his Zeal against 1285.
the Reformation, in a Synod assembled at Bourges, of which he was The Synods
at Bourges and Paris.
Archbishop, and had there condemned the Doctrine of Luther. The Cardinal du
Prat did the same, about the same time, in a Synod of the Province of Sens,
which he held at Paris, as fearing perhaps the Reformation might ruin the
Concordat, which was his Work, and by which he had completed the Corruption of
Ecclesiastical Discipline in France. But all this hindered not the Number of the
Protestants from daily increasing, especially after Mr. John Calvin had begun
1534.
to preach and write about Religion, who had several years before The beginning
of Calvin's Doctrine.
already taken distaste at the Roman Doctrine, and already run great dangers
upon that account at Paris, where he had some Disciples. He had likewise made
himself known in Berri, whilst he was yet a Student in Law, in the University
of Bourges, and a Lord of that Neighborhood had permitted him to preach
privately in his Parish. He had afterward conferred about Religion at Nerac,
with Roussel and Le Far, whom he found concurring almost in the same
principles with himself. But he spread his Doctrine most effectually in
Saintonge and Poitou, in the latter of which Provinces it is thought he gave the
first Form of a Church to the Assemblies of those who had embraced his
Opinions. When by persecution he was forced to leave the Kingdom, he made some
stay at Basil, where he published his Institutions dedicated to Francis I. But
that Prince being prejudiced against all Works of that Nature, would never read
them. From thence Calvin passed into Italy, where he was well received by the
Duchess of Ferrara, Daughter to Lewis XII. who testified a great affection to
such as labored to reform Abuses. At his return he was detained at Geneva,
which had newly shaken off the yoke of its Bishop, where, after he had
weathered some Oppositions and Encounters, he settled his Residence for the rest
of his life. From thence he filled all Europe with his Writings, which were
greedily read, both for their matter and eloquent style.

There was a seeming prospect then as if Francis I. who had so great an
inclination to an Accommodation, would have connived at the progress of the
Reformation in his Kingdom, especially because of the Confederacy he was
engaged in with the Protestants of Germany, who were always either in War with,
or apprehension of the Emperor. But it happened quite contrary to expectation;
for the 1534.
Placards, or Libels which were found fixed all about Paris, and The year of
the Placards or Libels.
at the very Court it self, and which treated the mysteries of the Roman
Religion in very injurious terms, and the Clergy in a very Satirical manner,
put the King into a great Rage. So that to expiate 1535.
those pretended Blasphemies, at the Request of the Clergy, he Devotions
accompanied with Executions. An Edict against the Lutherans.
made a solemn Procession, at which he assisted in Person with his Children,
and all his Court, and ordered the Pomp to be concluded with the Execution of
some of the poor supposed Criminals, who were burnt. He published a very severe
Edict at the same time against the Lutherans, in which all that harbored, or
concealed them were made liable to the same punishments with them, and the
Informer against them encouraged with the reward of the 4th part of all their
Confiscations. The Germans were offended at it, but some Lutherans of their
Nation reporting at their return into their Country, that they had been very
kindly used in France, took off the edg of their Resentments, and dissipated
their fears. Nevertheless, the King, about 5 years after, by a new Edict,
stirred up all persons 1546.
of every Order and Degree, against the French Lutherans, and the Emperor
making a new War upon them, the King afforded them but little aid, because the
Cardinal of Tournon filled his Head with scruples concerning Alliances with
Heretics; and he further gained so much power over that Prince, that he
persuaded him to renew the punishment of Death against them all over France,
that he might not appear less religious, and less an Enemy to those pretended
Heresies than the Emperor, who had taken the way of Arms to destroy them.

The Pope not being able to resist any longer the instances of The Council of
Trent.
the Emperor, nor the desires of all Europe, after he had been long importuned
to call a Council, and for a long time by diverse Artifices 1545.
eluded the Solicitations of the Princes, had at last resolved to fix it at
Trent, and publish a Bull of Indiction for that effect in the year 1542. But
yet it was not opened till 3 years after, by reason of new difficulties that
arose every day. The K. being willing to contribute 1544.
to the success of that assembly summoned to Melun several illustrious Drs. in
order to confer there together, and prepare matters fit to be represented to
the Council. But there were but few Prelates, one of which being the Bishop of
Lavaur, appeared there as Ambassador, who signalized himself chiefly by the
answer he made to a Partisan of the Court of Rome, who being minded to droll
upon the Remonstrances of a French Dr. concerning the Abuses committed in the
matter of Benefices, in allusion to the Latin word Gallus, that signifies both
a Cock and a Frenchman, had said to one of his Companions, It Is but a Cock that
crows. The Bishop keeping still to the same allusion, and applying it to the
story of St. Peter, whose Successor the Pope pretends to be, answered him
immediately, God grant 1547.
that by the crowing of this Cock Peter may be stirred up to tears and The
Council translated. The King's death.
repentance. Some time after, the translation of the Council to Bolonia, and
the King's Death, changed the state of affairs, and made most of the Potentates
take new Measures.

But the Condition of the Protestants in France was never the 1548.
Hen. II. persecutes the Protestants.
better for that; The new K. Henry II. proving more rigorous to them than his
Father, being pusht on to it by the D. of Aumale, who was afterward D. of
Guise, and in favor of whom the Land of Aumale was erected into a Duchy and
Peerage. He therefore in imitation of Francis. I. made such another like
Procession at Paris, and terminated it as he did his, with a like Sacrifice of
some poor Wretches who were condemned to the fire. And besides, tho he was at
first in very good intelligence with Paul III. so far as to declare himself for
the translation of the Council, and to send his Ambassadors 1549.
to Bolonia with good instructions, yet he soon fell out with Rome after the
Exaltation of Julius III. which still redoubled but 1551.
the more the persecution against the Protestants, and produced against them a
very severe Edict at Chateau-Briant, by which it was forbidden so much as to
solicit for those accused of Heresy. Since which time it has been remarked,
that the same policy has been often followed in France, always to persecute the
Protestants every time they had any difference with the Pope, and that they
never The King protests against the Removal back of the Council to Trent.
were more cruelly handled than when there happened any Quarrels between the
Courts of France and Rome. Those contestations were great at that time, and
produced the Protestation which the King made afterward by the Abbot of
Bello^ane, against the Council which the Pope had removed back to Trent.

The Duchess of Valentinois the King's Mistress, exasperated The Duchess of
Valentinois cruel ^^ the Protestants.
him likewise against the Protestants, both out of spite to the Duchess of
Estampes, whom she mortally hated, and out of interest, to gain by the
Confiscations of the Goods and Estates of the Condemned, which she obtained for
her self. But especially after the Edict of Chateau-Briant, she was accused of
making advantage by the rigorous Prosecutions then carried on against the
Protestants, and was thought even to have kept Emissaries on purpose to inform
against those who were rich enough to tempt her covetous inclination. The
Clergy on their side took pleasure in seeing so many innocent people Sacrificed
to the flames for their interests, tho on the other side, they had a great deal
of Indulgence for themselves; and accordingly, to put the world out of all hope
of the amendment of the Churchmen, they obtained from the Kings Council, the
The great Credit of the Clergy.
annulling of an Act of the Parliament of Toulouse, which tended to nothing
else but the suppression of the looseness and debauchery of Priests. That
Parliament was likewise lasht with bloody Satyrs, published by the Clergy on
that occasion, and when one of the Members of that Court had written an Apology
for that venerable Body, in which the Vices of the Ecclesiastics were too
openly reprehended, they yet had so much power as to cause it to be censured.
However all this hindered not some seeming Justice to be done 1550.
for the cruelties committed some years before by Oppeda the Executioner of an
Act of the Parliament of Provence, against certain remains 1545.
of the Vaudois inhabiting about Merindol and Cabrieres. The affairs of
Merindol and Cabrieres.
That affair had been hushed up in silence during the Life of Francis I. because
the Cardinal of Tournon, who then was very powerful at Court, was suspected to
have been the Counselor, or chief complice of that Barbarous Action; but after
the Government was passed into other hands, that Cardinal was removed from the
helm of Affairs, and the Constable who bore him no great good will, was
suspected in his turn to have excited those that were left of those poor
People, to demand Justice on purpose to bring the Cardinal into trouble by the
success of their Complaints, There was much ado about fixing upon Judges fit
for that business. The 1550.
Great Council first took Cognizance of it, from thence it was called up before
the King, and by him at last turned over to the Parliament of Paris, where it
was pleaded for 50 Audiences together; but yet after all that great Bustle, it
came to little effect, the principal Criminals escaping unpunisht; and the
King's Advocate in the Parliament of Provence, was the only man that lost his
life for it; as for the Count de Grignan he was only frighted with the fear of
losing his Estate, which was preserved to him by the favor of the Duke of
Guise; and Oppeda himself was acquitted by producing his Orders, and by the
Dukes interposition, who served him with all his credit; so that the
Protestants obtained no other vengeance for his Cruelties, than the
satisfaction of being informed, he Died afterward a horrible Death; and of
saying openly, That he suffered it by a just Judgment of God.

Those Executions did not at all diminish the number of the Protestants, New
Executions do but advance the progress of the Reformation.
the constancy of those who were burned serving to make more sensible
impressions upon peoples minds in their favor, than either their Books or
Preaching; but the King however, was inexorable, and tho the doleful spectacle
of those he had caused to be burned, after the procession above mentioned, and
their horrible cries in the torments of their sufferings, had so deeply struck
his imagination, that the remembrance of them was a lasting Terour to him all
his life after, yet did he not at all abate his severities; 1553.
for they burned, after that, some persons come from Bearn into France, where
they preached the Doctrine of their Country, among whom Lewis de Marsac was
most taken notice of, for that having been a Soldier all his life, and being
dispensed with from having a rope put about his neck at the stake like other
sufferers, out of respect to that noble profession, he complained, that such a
difference should be made between him and his Brethren, as if by retrenching
any thing from the infamy of his Punishment, they had designed to lessen the
glory of his Constancy.

That year the use of the Gag was first practiced, invented purposely to hinder
the Protestants that were put to death from speaking to the People, or singing
Psalms for their consolation, when they were led to Execution: And it is
reported, that Aubespine, who was the inventor of it, was some years after
struck with the lousy disease, which put him into so great a despair, that he
would needs let himself starve to death; which furious resolution obliged those
which were about him to open his jaws with a Gag, to make him take nourishment
by force, so that he increased the number of those, that have been known to
suffer those torments themselves, of which they were the first inventors.
Amidst these Executions, the Churches took the firmer root; and there were
already Churches firm^d at Paris. and many other places.
some that were governed by a regular discipline, and settled Pastors. And at
Paris it self, where the fires never went out* and under the King's Nose, there
was one which had its peculiar Pastor. The several Jurisdictions of the Kingdom
accused one another reciprocally 155^.
upon this occasion, for not executing rigorously enough the Court-Orders; for
which Reason the cognizance of Crimes of Heresy was sometimes committed to the
Royal, and sometimes to the Ecclesiastical Judges, and sometimes parted between
both those Tribunals; so that since the first introduction of that kind of
Process, there had been published 5 or 6 Edicts about the competence of Judges,
which revoked one another by turns. Nay, and in the following Reigns, there was
nothing fully fixed as to that matter. That year the Cardinal of Lorrain, to
please the Pope, deprived the Parliaments, in spite of their Remonstrances to
the contrary, of the power of hearing Causes of Heresy, which was transferred
to the Bishops, leaving to the Royal Judges nothing but the Executions of the
Criminals. And indeed this proceeding of the Cardinal was very reasonable, if
measured by the interest of the Clergy. For the Parliaments began to incline to
a Temper of Moderation, and there were some Spirits among them that could not
think those Rigours agreeable to Justice. Nay, there 1556.
were some Judges at Bordeaux that maintained, it was a thing unheard The
Spirit of Moderation prevails over some Judges.
of, that ever so many cruelties were at any time before practiced, as had been
exercised within the last 40 years; and that it was against Equity, to condem
any man for simple Errors, before Endeavors had been used to instruct and
reclaim the person accused: And that since the Council was still on foot, as
being only suspended, which was finally to determine that affair.

Their Decisions ought to be waited for, before they proceeded to condemn, to
such extraordinary punishments, any persons beforehand accused upon such
accounts. The party of those moderate men was so strong, that the Judges were
equally divided. But the zeal of Religion carried it against the Order of
Justice, and instead of following, according to rule, the favourablest side in
criminal matters; when Opinions are equally divided about them, they turned
over the Cause to the great Chamber, where the Order in case of division was
over ruled, and the severest Opinions preferred before the most mild and
equitable.

The perplexity into which the Court was put, by the loss of the 1557.
Battle at St. Quentin, gave the Protestants some hopes they should be A
Protestant meeting at Paris.
allowed a little respite; and therefore they assembled with less caution than
before, and among other meetings, they had one at Paris, in St. James's street,
so numerous, that it being impossible to escape the eyes of the people who saw
them come out of the House where they met. The Rabble fell upon them, which
caused such an uproar, that the Officers of Justice were fain to come to
appease it. In which scuffle some of the Meeters defended themselves against
the aggressours and got away, and others escaped by several means; but however,
above 100 of them were seized, among which, were some Maids of Honor to the Q.
And that Princess her self who was nothing less The Character of Queen
Katharine de Medicis.
than what she had a mind to appear, and who desired to pass for a sober chaste
Lady, was not unwilling to be suspected to incline to the Protestant opinions.
The better sort of People had a high conceit of them, and thought them of
unblameable Manners; but the Rabble were incensed against them by most horrible
calumnies; for Calumnies against the Protestants.
sometimes it was reported they were Jews, and used to eat a Paschal Lamb at
their Nightly Meetings; sometimes that they eat a Pig there instead of a Lamb,
and sometimes, that they roasted Children there, and made great cheer at those
monstrous entertainments, after which they put out the Candles, and coupled
together with all manner of unlawful Embraces. Nay, and there were some so
furiously Zealous against them, that they had the impudence to affirm they had
participated at those infernal Devotions. Several of those thus taken were
burnt, but the rest fortunately made use of all the shifts they could find out
in Law, to delay their Sentence, during which time, the Germans and Swissers,
of whom the K. at that time stood in great need, interceded for them, and those
severities were by little and little moderated, for fear of offending such
necessary Friends as they. The next Summer the people took a fancy to sing
Singing of Psalms in public.
in the Clerks Meadow, a place where all the Town used to divert themselves
with walking, Marot's singing Psalms that were set to very fine Musical Tunes:
which novelty at first was so pleasing, that the next day after, the K. and Q.
of Navar went thither, with an incredible multitude of People: but the Clergy
were terribly alarmed at it, and endeavored with all their power, to procure
all such Assemblies to be suppressed; and their zeal in that was very singular,
because they could not endure people should sing in the open Field what they
had without control sung in their Houses several years together, and at the
Court it self; during all which time, that singing was never thought any mark
of Heresy. But ever since that Enterprise, to these last years, the singing of
Psalms has always been insupportable to the Clergy; and tho they never employed
any serious efforts to hinder the singing of Profane and filthy Songs, which
have been too rise at all times; yet on the contrary, they never pursued any
thing with so much eagerness as their endeavors to deprive the Protestants of
the Consolation of singing with freedom those holy Canticles.

About that time first appeared in France that competition of those two Rival
Parties, that afterward had like to have ruined it, and The Original of the
Factions.
which was, as 'twere the Fountainhead of all the other Factions. One of them
was that of the Princes of Lorain, who took advantage by the defeat and taking
of the Constable to augment their own greatness. The other was that of the
Constable himself, and his Family, who possessed most of the great Employments.
That Lord huddled up the Treaty of Cateau in Cambresis, out of eagerness, by a
Peace, to procure his liberty and opportunity to return to the Court, to
prevent the ruin of his house. But the Cardinal of Lorain made use of the same
Treaty to find occasions to destroy him; for he had a secret Conference with
Granvelle Cardinal, Bp. of Arras, who complained to him how highly persons
tainted with Heresy, were favored in the Court of France, and named in
particular Andelot, Brother to the Admiral of Chatillon, and Nephew to the
Constable; which was an Artifice to engage the Lorain Cardinal whose Genius
Granvelle very well knew, in a Quarrel with the Family of those Lords, in
assured expectation that by the mutual opposition of those two Parties, the
Kingdom would be brought into great confusions which would be of considerable
advantage to the House of Austria. The Cardinal being a vain and busy man, and
who in his great designs had not always the prudence and constancy to carry
them on, snapt presently at the Bait, thinking to find his account in the News
he had heard, because he knew the suspicion of Heresy was enough to Exasperate
Henry II. to ruin the greatest of his Favorites. And accordingly he accuses
Andelot, upon which the K. immediately sending for him, and requiring to know
the truth from his own Mouth, he answered in so resolute a manner, and 1559.
declared his sense about the Mysteries of the Roman Church in such The
courageous behavior of Andelot.
vigorous terms, that the Historians of that time durst not repeat his
Expressions. At which the K. fell into such a fit of fury, that he suffered his
passion to transport him to commit very undecent Actions, for he would have
Killed him, and in the attempt, wounded the And his disgrace.
Dauphin his Son who was near him. In fine, Andelot was sent to Prison, and
deprived of all his places. But when the K's passion was over, the Constable,
after some difficulty, found credit enough to procure his Restoration. And so
the Cardinal's artifice had no other effect for that time, than to provoke
against him the Resentment of those puissant Houses, and to inform the
Protestants, That some of the most considerable Lords of the Kingdom were of
their Opinion.

This then hindered not the Reformation to continue its progress, 1559.
for it was embraced by persons of all sorts of conditions. It gained a great
number of Churchmen and Men of Learning, and was well relished by the most
eminent Persons in the very Parliament of Paris; so that the severities there
went on more heavily than ordinary, tho The Counselors of the Parliament of
Paris suspected about their Religion.
the K. hotly pressed the Execution of his Edict of Chateau-Briant. Having then
sent a new Order to the Parliament, commanding them exactly to observe it; Some
Spies informed him, that notwithstanding that, their Votes tended still toward
moderation; upon which, he goes suddenly thither, when he was least expected,
and surprises them when their deliberations were already very far advanced, and
after he had patiently heard them till they came to a conclusion, he ordered
several of them to be seized. Du Bourg and Du Faur were taken in their Houses,
and search was made after others which could not be found. The Prisoners were
Tried by special Commissioners; but tho they drove on the business with all the
have they could to satisfy the K's impatience, yet he had not the pleasure to
see the end of it; for Death prevented him, and when he The Death of Henry the
2d.
thought of nothing but Joy and Divertisement, he was killed by Mongomery whom
he would needs force to break a Lance with him. The first French Protestant
National Synod.
A little before the renewing of those severities, the Deputies of the Churches
already formed in the Provinces, held, in the Suburbs of St. Germain at Paris,
their first National Synod, and drew up that confession of Faith, which they
retain to this day, and the first articles of the Discipline which has since
been observed in all the Churches of the Kingdom. That Synod lasted four days
in the midst of the Fires and Gibbets, which were prepared in all quarters of
the Town, and it was held with so exact a secrecy, that the Assembly was
neither discovered nor disturbed.

After the Death of Henry II. all things changed at Court, except Francis II.
succeeds. The state of the Court. The Nature of the Intrigues and Characters of
the chief persons.
Vices, which having taken root there during his Luxurious Reign, assumed still
a greater Empire under those of his Children. The Interests there were very
different, and the Intrigues much divided. The Q. Katharine being Ambitious,
Voluptuous, Cruel, Vindicative, Perfidious, and of a humor to sacrifice every
thing to her Passions, had a mind to retain the Authority in her own hands. The
K. of Navar was of an unequal Temper, wavering in his Religion, weakspirited,
timorous, devoted to his Pleasure, and easy to be governed by any that knew how
to take him at their advantage, and bore a greater Figure than sway at Court.
The Prince his Brother was Bold, Valiant, Active, firm in his Resolutions, and
fixed in the Reformed Religion by motives mixed with Ambition and Conscience,
but most extremely poor for a person of his high Quality. Mompensier and la
Roche-sur yon had more zeal than knowledge in matters of Religion. The Guises
were animated with a violent Ambition, and besides were all-powerful at Court,
as well by the consideration of the great Merits of the Duke of that Name, and
because they were Uncles of the young Queen, Wife to Francis II. who being a
very beautiful Princess, was in power, by virtue of that charming Prerogative,
to assume a great Empire over the K. who was of an easy disposition, and even
confining upon down right simplicity. And besides, she was able the more
powerfully to second her Uncles Ambition, because she was a very apt Scholar in
Politics, and knew to a hair, how to imitate all the Maxims of her mother in
Law, as by the Sequel of her Life sufficiently appeared. The Constable was a
little wedded to his Interest, but otherwise superstitious, and not very
knowing in Religion. God assists the first Christian.
The Title of the first Christian Baron, and the Cry of War used by those of
his House, founded upon the same Fable from which his Ancestors had drawn that
Elogy, was to him a decisive argument in all controversies. The Coligni's were
puissant, brave, and persons of Great Honor, and if their Uncle had not
abandoned them, they might easily have made Head against the Lorain Princes.
But he supposed to find his account better in joining with the Guises, as
likewise did Mompensier and La Roche-sur yon, which obliged his Nephews to join
with the Prince of Conde, whose Constancy and exact fidelity to his Word, gave
them sufficient assurance he would never sacrifice them to his Fortune. All
which Combinations were in their first Original nothing but pure
Court-Intrigues, and Religion How Religion came to be conceru'd in those
Intrigues.
was taken into them only by accident, the Guises making use of it as a
pretense to clear the Court of all those that gave them any jealousy; and the
others were obliged for their better defense against such powerful Enemies, to
unite themselves in interest with those which were already united with them in
Religion. Philip II. then K. of Spain, followed the Maxims of his great
Grandfather Ferdinand, and like him, in all things he did, improved the
pretense of Religion to the utmost advantage. He had signalized himself by the
persecution of the Protestants in all his Dominions, to that degree of Rigor,
that he spared not the Memory of his own Father; and therefore was far from
neglecting so fair an occasion as the same pretense of Religion then gave him
to divide France, by exciting one of these Parties to ruin the other. All this,
joined to the extreme corruption of the Court, in which debauchery and impiety
were made soon after, the most powerful Tools of Policy, were the Cause why the
Condition of the Protestants was rendered not a whit better than before.

There were erected in the Parliaments certain Courts of Justice called Burning
Chambers, which burned a sufficient number of Courts of Justice called Burning
Chambers, erected.
those who past for Heretics, to deserve the Title given them. The President
de St. Andre signalized himself by his Cruelties, in the Jurisdiction of the
Parliament of Paris, being vigorously seconded by Le Moine, Inquisitor de
Mouchi, so named from the Village where he was born, from whence likewise those
that served him for Spies or Informers, to discover the Protestant meetings,
took the Name of Mouchards, which has since remained to all those that have
followed the same Employments. That bloody Hangman afterward changed his Name,
and assumed the barbarous appellation of Demochares, under which he is known in
History. And those Spies, or some like them, who were almost all of them
Apostates from the Reformation, were the men that published those Calumnies
against the Protestants I have before recited. A little while after, the
people, the better to discover those that were seasoned with Protestant
principles being moved thereto, either by their own Superstition, or by the
Abominable Superstitions toward Images.
Zealots, took a Freak to set up Images at the corners of streets, and to force
all passers by to salute them, and they that refused it were accounted to have
good luck, if they escaped only with a basting, because such a Refusal was
reckoned a mark of Heresy. It Is true indeed, many of those Objects of
Superstition were taken from the people, but instead of being abolisht, they
were placed in the Churches; And since that, their Passion for Images has
increased so prodigiously, that there is not a Town in which they have not
erected new ones, and where the people are not used to paint them, to dress
them up, to light Lamps and Wax Candles before them, to meet and kneel down
before them in the middle of the streets at certain Hours, and sing Hymns and
Litanies, all which Extravagancies are at this Day committed more than ever in
the open view of those very same Guides that take Heaven and Earth to witness
they pay no manner of homage to Images. In the mean while, the Trials went on
against the Prisoners, most of which came off with a slight punishment. But
Counselor du Bourg, after he had shown some weakness, which he soon retracted,
by the Exhortations of the Ministers, and others who writ to him, or visited
him, was condemned to the flames, as if he had been a common person. They
endeavored to blacken him, by accusing him as a Complice in the assassination
of the President de St. Andre, who had been one of the Commissionated Judges
appointed to try him. But that Accusation being sufficiently refuted by the
known Probity of that Venerable Senator, fell of it self. That President had
acted in the whole Examination and Prosecution of that business, more like a
passionate Adversary, than an equitable Judge, which Du Faur, one of the
Prisoners, charged him with very courageously one day; which cruel man happening
to be killed before the Trial of the Prisoners was over, one Mr. Stuart, a
Scotch Gentleman, and who pretended some Relation to the Queen, but in
complaisance to her Uncles, was disowned by her, was taken up upon suspicion
for that murder; to which, to make weight, they added several other
Accusations. But with all their Tricks, they could not convict him by any
sufficient Proofs, nor extort any confession out of his Mouth, no not by the
torments of the Wrack, which he suffered with such an unshaken constancy, that
as they were unwilling to condemn him upon imperfect Evidence, so they durst
not acquit him, because they feared him.

Whilst the Protestants were thus outragiously handled, their severe usage
exasperated them both to speak and write somewhat warmly in their own defense.
But their Apologies had the ill luck to incense the higher Powers but so much
the more against them because they maintained, That Women Foreigners ought to
be excluded from the Government, and that the administration of it belonged to
the General Estates of the Kingdom, and to the Princes of the Blood, during the
minority of Kings, whom they would by no means acknowledge at age fit to govern
at 14 years. And about 3 years after, they still brought upon themselves more
mischief, by reading in a Synod a Writing drawn up by a certain Author,
exhorting them to unite together against A project against Arbitrary Power.
despotick Power, Popery and Abuses in Law, which they called the three plagues
of human Kind, from which they who live by the Corruption of Religion and
Justice, failed not to give a malicious turn to the aversion they showed for
Arbitrary Power, and to take advantage therefrom, to reproach and traduce them
to this day, as Republicans, and sworn enemies to Monarchy; as if not to
flatter Tyranny, 1560.
were the same thing as to Rebel against a legal Government. The The enterprise
of Amboise.
power of the Guises began to grow Insupportable, and there began likewise from
that very time, to arise between them and the Royal House of Bourbon, a
competition that soon after degenerated into a declared Enmity, so that from
that time forward, those two Houses became Irreconcilable foes, which was the
true occasion of the attempt of Amboise, tho some will needs have it pass for a
pure business of Religion. I shall leave that talk to others, to treat more
amply of that subject, and to make use of the Testimony of those who assure us
that Q Katharine had secretly solicited the Admiral to free her out of the
hands of the Guises who had assumed all the Authority, and for my own part,
shall only be content to assert, That Religion was concerned in it only by
accident, by reason that those who were deprived of their part in the
Government due to them by their high Birth, professed the Reformed Religion.
Among near 1200 unhappy persons that were destroyed upon that occasion by
diverse sorts of Punishments, and most of which suffered all the severities of
the Tortures; there were but two in all, whom they could force by Torments to
say what they would have them; all the rest unanimously maintaining, that their
design was only to seize the Lorrain-Princes, and divest them of an Authority,
which they ought not to enjoy to the prejudice of the Princes of the Blood.
There is therefore as little reason to charge the Reformed Religion with the
blame of that Enterprise, supposing that according to the Rules of Policy it
deserved any, as to impute to the Roman Religion, the conspiracies of the
Catholic Princes and Lords, against the Tyranny of the Marshal D'Ancre; or
that of the D. of Orleans, against the excessive power of Cardinal Richelieu;
or those of the Parliaments, and of the Prince of Conde, against the Ministry
of Cardinal Richelieu, who went on in the steps of his Predecessor, to oppress
the public liberty: The heads and principal Members of those Conspiracies,
being Catholics, as those concerned in the design of Amboise were Protestants.
Since therefore the persons concerned in all those several Intrigues, were all
engaged by the same motives, and the same prospects, they must either be
equally imputed to the Religion of their Authors, and by consequence the Roman
Religion must be judged so much the more Guilty in this matter, than the
Protestant, as it has oftener stirred in those sorts of Commotions than the
other; or else it must be confessed, that Religion had no share, but by
accident, in those affairs, which were purely Politic of their own Nature, and
that those Interests which set the Wheels of those attempts in motion, were
indeed properly none of Hers. But the Cruelty of the Court, the principal heads
of The Cruelty of the Court.
which diverted themselves with the horrible Spectacle of so many Executions,
and seeing the blood run down in all the streets of Amboise, struck a horror
in all moderate persons: And this first Essay which was followed by so many
Massacres that stained the succeeding reign with so much Blood, touched the
Chancellor Oliver so much to the Heart, that he Died with grief, and L'Hopital
was put in his place, who in acknowledgment of that Favor, always adhered to
the Q's interest as his own. That Princess seeing the Authority of the Guises
increased by their Success in the Enterprise of Amboise, would not suffer the
Protestants to be prosecuted to extremity, yet could not induce them by that to
place any confidence in her, since for all that they examined in one of their
Synods, a Memorial to be presented to the General Estates, in which several
things were made use of not at all to her advantage. But however the Court kept
fair for a while with the Prince of Conde, tho they were well enough persuaded,
he was privately the chief contriver of that Enterprise; and the D. of Guise,
by a profound Dissimulation of his Thoughts, seemed to assent to his
justification. The Original of the w^rd Huguenot.


About the same time the name of Huguenot was introduced into the World, and
because it has been ever since retained as the distinguishing name of a Party,
I may very well without breaking off the thread of my History, say something of
its Original, than which nothing perhaps is more unknown. For they themselves
that saw this word first brought forth, yet give very different reports of its
rise, and perhaps it may not without reason be concluded from thence, that it
is one of those names the rabble invent they know not why, and that they retain
in use without knowing how they came by it. Only every one endeavoring to
explain the Original of the word, according to their own particular passion and
Interest, have by false Etymologies produced by those causes, made us lose all
traces of the true one. For some derive that word from John Hus, or from a
certain Sacramentarian, named Hugues, who is seign'd to have lived in the time
of Charles VI. which is grounded only upon an Analogy of Grammar, or upon some
conformity between the Doctrine of the one with the other in some Articles. Some
think it comes from the word Gnostick ill pronounced, which was applied to the
Protestants, because they were charged with the like abominations those
Heretics were accused of, which seems to be a mere conjecture, without any
ground; as is likewise the Fancy of those that fetch it from a certain Speech
made by some German Envoys, which begun with these words, Huc nos, and which
were so ill pronounced, that they made our Courtiers laugh, which is indeed a
story only fit to be laughed at. They who have observed, that in process of time
the Protestants were offended at that Name, as an injurious Term, imagined it
came from certain words in the Suissers Tongue, signifying seditious people, or
that it was taken from a sort of small money, of less value than the Mailles,
which because they were current in the time of Hugh Capet, were called
Huguenots, which Name was afterward in contempt applied to the Protestants.
But there are 3 Opinions, which as they are more common, so they 1560.
are more probable than the rest. That which is most followed, is, That it is
derived from a certain Spirit, or Robin Goodfellow, called at Tours, King
Hugon, from which one of the Gates of the Town was by corruption named the Gate
Fourgon, instead of the Port Hugon, because that Spectre appeared sometimes in
the Night, near that Gate, in the form of Fire. Now because the Protestants
held their Meetings about that quarter, in the night time, by reason that the
persecution was too hot to let them do it in the day time. Occasion was thence
taken to call them Huguenots: To which they further add this story, That the
first advice of that Conspiracy came from Tours, and that they which gave it
made use of the term of Huguenot already known in their Town, and which has
ever since remained in use. But there is one thing remarked by Historians, that
gives us great reason to doubt of the solidity of this conjecture, which is,
That according to them, that Enterprise was carried on so secretly, that the
Guises received the first notice of it out of Foreign Countries, and that the
first man who informed them of it in France, was one Des Avenelles, an Advocate
of the Parliament of Paris, at whose House La Renaudie, a known Ringleader in
that Conspiracy, was lodged, and to whom he was forced to reveal it, to obviate
the suspicions the great concourse of people to his house had justly raised
against him: So that it could not be from Tours that the Court received the
first Information of that Mystery. The 2d Opinion is much more probable, which
deduces that word from those words in the Swiss Language, Eid genossen, which
signifies, Allies, and which were brought into France by the Ministers which
come from that Country, as for a like reason they were called Fribours, in
Poitou, whilst it was believed that the Canton of Fribourg corresponded with
those of Geneva, in matters of Religion. Which Name became more common after
the Enterprise of Amboise, because that was the first occasion in which the
Protestants appeared united for their common Interest, and in which they most
constantly observed the Faith they had mutually given to one another. And yet
the 3d Opinion is no less probable than that, which pretends that Name to be
derived from Hugh Capet, because the Protestants were headed by a Prince of
that Royal House, and stiffly maintained their Interest against the Intrigues
of Foreign Princes, who endeavored to deprive it of the Government. It Is true,
it is not very likely the Guises had as yet framed any designs upon the Crown;
but there are several unquestionable Circumstances that give a great appearance
of probability to this Opinion. The Guises were then become very newly allied
to the Throne, by the marriage of their Niece to the K. and had any Children
proceeded from it, they would have been much nearer a kin to them than the
Bourbons, who (...) so Removes off; That is to say, at such a degree of
distance, in which all Hereditary Right seems naturally to cease of it self.
They had likewise at that time a great power at Court, close correspondence
with Spain, a particular Enemy to the House of Bourbon, because of their mutual
competition for the usurped Kingdom of Navar, and had entertained a formal
design entirely to usurp the administration of affairs from that Noble House.
Besides, it appears by the Writings, and by the Acts of the Synods of the
Protestants, that even in those early days they already asserted the Rights of
the Bourbons, and endeavored to maintain them in that Authority, against the
encroaching attempts of all Foreiners, not excepting the Q. Mother her self: So
that they were declared Partisans of the Capetians. As therefore from the Name
of Pope, the Guises, and their Adherents, who made Religion a serviceable Tool
for their Interests, were called Papists, and from the Name of Guises were
called Guisards, or Guisians, by the Protestants; It is probable, that from the
Name of Hugues, i. e. Hugh, the Rights of whose Family the Protestants so
stiffly maintained, they were called Hugenots, which Name grew public at the
time of the Enterprise of Amboise, because that was an eminent occasion in
which the opposition of those 2 Factions first broke out, and put the world
upon inventing Names to distinguish them. Which is the more confirmed, because
in the Memorials of that time we find that the Protestants at first esteemed it
an honorable Name, as thinking without doubt, it was in effect a Glorious
Monument of their Loyalty, in defending the Interests of their lawful Princes
against the attempts of Usurpers. But after the Memory of those Transactions
was abolished by diverse Edicts, and especially by the Extinction of the Guisian
Faction, they had reason to complain they should still be called by that Name,
because it renewed the Memory of those Troubles, and was given them by the
people, who were ignorant of the Original word, as a Name of some party of
Conspirators, on purpose to brand them with disgrace. But to return from this
digression, and re-continue the Series of Events, I shall remark, That attempts
were made about that time to establish the Inquisition in France, and that the
Chancellor, who would fain have hindered that pernicious Institution,
unwillingly consented, that Causes of Heresy should be once more turned over
to the Bishops, of whom there were some not very ill-inclin'd to the
Protestants: For Marillac, Archbishop of Vienna, and Monluc, Bp. of Valence,
spoke favorably for them in an Assembly held at Fountain-Bleau, where the
Admiral presented a Petition in the Name of the persecuted party, for whom he
begged Liberty of Conscience. The Court seemed disposed to moderation, and
accordingly talked of calling a A false appearance of Moderation.
National Council, prohibited all provocations on either side, and put a stop
to any further Executions; so that during that shadow of peace the Protestants
began to hold public Meetings in The P. of Conde imprisoned.
several Provinces. But yet when they least expected it, the P. of Conde was
made Prisoner, his Enemies having gained time in that deceitful Calm with which
they had purposely amused the World, to take the surer measures against him,
and pretended a discovery of his being engaged in new designs; upon which he
was prosecuted with such extraordinary diligence, that the Sentence of
Condemnation was already signed by all his Judges, except only the Chancellor,
who held off as long as he could; and he had certainly lost his Life, if the
K's sudden death had not delivered him from that tragical end; which happened so
patly for his advantage, that it gave occasion The sudden death of Francis II.
falsely imputed to the Protestants.
to their Adversaries to impute it to the Protestants, to insinuate as if they
had shortened that Princes days by the hands of his Surgeon who was of their
Religion. But sincere Historians have discharged them of that reproachful
Calumny, by informing the World, That Francis II. had some natural Infirmities
that brought on him that fate; that his Brain had no vent at all to purge it
self by the ordinary Conduits made for that use, as in other men; that about a
year before his Death there appeared upon his Face, some pimples that were
taken for signs of some extraordinary Distemper, which it is reported, his
Physicians went about to cure by a yet more extraordinary Remedy. From which it
may easily be judged, how much his Blood was tainted, and how extreme full his
Body was of corrupt humors.

The Estates who were in great haste Assembled toward the end Charles IX
succeeds. The Estates assembled, who seem to favor the Protestants.
of the year, gave the Protestants some hopes that the Q. Mother would be no
longer so much against them; because the Chancellor her Creature was so bold
there, as openly to censure all violent proceedings upon the account of
Religion; the Guises were fallen from their former Credit, as not having the
same Ascendant over Charles IX. who succeeded his Brother, as they had had over
the deceased K. who had Married their Niece; the Admiral having been
offensively treated in the Speech made by the Deputy of the Clergy at the
opening of the Assembly, reparation was made him for the Indignity. The Prince
of Conde was acquitted; and the Bishops of Seez and Valens having Preached at
the Court something very like the Doctrine of those called Heretics, were by
the Q. protected against the clamours of the Zealots; nay, she writ to the Pope
himself in their favor, and seconded their demands for the Restitution of the
Cup to the Laity, and for the celebration of Divine service in the vulgar
Tongue; and granted them the first Edict for Poleration that ever was
vouchsafed them: but she not being a Woman that could long forbear showing her
self in her true Colors, she her self stirred up the Constable to Murmur at it;
and the more effectually to hinder the Parliaments from obeying it, she slily
ordered it to be directed contrary to custom, to the Presidial Courts, and
accordingly the Parliaments failed not to complain of such an Irregularity, and
to oppose it by contrary Decrees. And the Court fell again into the same
irresolution they had often been in before, whom to declare the most competent
Judges of Causes of Heresy, and by an Edict of the Month of July, divided a new
that Jurisdiction between the Presidial and Bishops Courts, authorizing the
one, to judge of the unlawfulness of Assemblies, and the other, of the Doctrine
Preached in them, the Clergy having well Bribed them for that favor; for
taking a hot Alarm at some proceedings of the Estates who were removed to
Pontoise, that tended to favor the Protestants, they politickly ransomed
themselves from that fear, by consenting to a subsidy of four tenths of six
years. But the best thing done in the Edict of the Protestants was, That it
moderated the punishment of Heresies, which before was Death, to Banishment
only.

In that year was the first rise of the Triumvirate, that is to say, The Rise
of the Triumvirate.
of the threefold League between the D. of Guise, the Constable, and the
Marshal de St. Andre; the last of which engaged in it to exempt himself from
giving an account of immense sums of Money he had embezel'd And the Constable
did the same, for fear of being obliged to pay back a sum of 100000 Crowns. And
tho Religion was one of the pretenses of the Union, by which they did a World
of Mischief to the Protestants, yet it was to those other sordid interests that
The Conference at Polisy.
the Roman Religion was chiefly obliged to for its preservation. But there was
nothing more remarkable in the whole course of that year than the Colloquy or
Conference of Poissy, which held all Europe for some time in suspense. There
never was any Assembly that ever made so much noise, nor yet any that produced
so little effect, excepting only that they gave some Alarm to Rome. The
beginnings of it were pompous and stately, for all the Court was present at it,
as well as several Cardinals and Bishops; it began on both sides with very
solid and grave Orations; but one word which Beza unluckily let fall in his
Discourse, served for a pretense to the Cardinal de Tournon, and others of his
party, to make a noise, and to dissuade the K. from continuing to honor those
Disputes any longer with his Presence. And so that public Conference dwindled
into private Disputations, and the Bps. either disdaining, or being 1561.
afraid to confer with the Ministers, the whole business was committed only to
some private Doctors, and at last the Conferences were quite broken off; after
which, instances being made in vain to Renew them, The Protestant Deputies grew
weary of being shamm'd off with so many delays, and went away when they found
they were amused only with vain hopes. They spent some Months in reconciling
the differences about some controverted Articles; but when the persons
commissionated to treat of them, had agreed upon any point, it was always
traversed by some zealous Drs. who made Oppositions and Protestations against
such Accomodations; which particularly happened about the matter of
Image Worship. For the Dean of the College of Divinity hotly opposed what had
been 1562.
concluded concerning their use, and stiffly maintained, that they ought not to
abateanace of what the Roman Church had once authorized, tho owned to be
introduced at first by evil custom. And so obstinately have the Clergy of our
times adhered to that Maxim, that they never would consent to purchase the
return of the Protestants to their Communion, with the price of any of the
least Abuses tolerated by the Roman Church. And besides, from the very
beginning of that Conference, there appeared a certain presage, That no good
could be expected from it, since the Clergy at Poissy, about 11 days after the
opening of their Assembly, which was the 4th of September, when the Parliament
had referred to them the Jesuits Petition, for leave to settle in France,
authorized them to fix in Paris, upon conditions The settling of the Jesuits at
Paris.
which that Society never observed. And so that very Assembly from whom the
World expected an equitable accommodation of differences in Religion,
effectually served for nothing else but to establish in the Kingdom the most
mortal enemies of all equity, and that have taken up ambition, perfidiousness
and cruelty for the chief maxims of their Politics.

The Cardinal of Lorrain had shown some little inclination to The inconstancy
of the Cardinal of Lorrain.
the Lutherans Opinion about the real presence, and had ordered a Formulary to
be drawn up, that differed not from their principles. Now whether he was really
of that Opinion, or only dissembled an inclination for it, out of some politic
consideration, is not known. But certain it is, at least, that he, and the Duke
his Brother, made use of that Artifice effectually to hinder the Duke of
Wirtemberg, with whom they had an interview with Savern, from confederating
with the P. of Conde,, who sought his Alliance. The K. of Navar likewise, at
the persuasion of the Tutor to his Natural Son, had testified the same
inclination, but yet never stuck to any settled Opinion and of the K. of Navar.
in Religion, but continued wavering and doubtful in that 1561.
matter to his dying day.

There happened a great sedition that year at Paris, where the Protestants A
sedition at Paris against the Protestants.
were met for their Religious Exercises. For the Catholics having a Church
hard by their Meeting, were so malicious as to ring their Bells with more
noise, and much longer than ordinary, purposely to disturb the Minister, and
his Auditors, by their jangling; upon which the Protestants sending 2 men
unarmed, civilly to entreat them to leave off that troublesome ringing, The
Catholics were pleased to knock one of the messengers on the head, but the
other got away. Upon that, the people easily took fire on both sides, and fell
so fiercely together by the ears, that the City Guards, which were then
employed to prevent such Accidents, were not able to suppress them. The
Protestants overpowered their Adversaries in this Scuffle, and the doors of
the Church were broken open, the Images battered to pieces, some Catholics
killed, and some Priests put in prison. But the Protestants were made to pay
dearly for that advantage; for the Parliament condemned them for it, and ^^^^ed
up 2 or 3 of them, and imprisoned their very Witnesses (...) p^^ting in their
favor. Which Example has been followed (...) and the unhappy party always
judged in the^ ^been treated with the most^ ^am^ casion of the Massacre at
Vassi, which the Domestic Servants of the D. of Guise committed in their Mrs.
presence, killing about 60 persons, The Massacre at Vassi, after the Edict of
January.
and wounding above 200. For tho The Q. promised them Justice for it, yet the
K. of Navar, whom the Triumvirs had wrought over to their Interests, received
Beza but very ill, when he came to complain of it to him; and the Duke of
Guise, and Marshal de St. Andre baffled all their Prosecutions for the
punishment of the Criminals, and the whole blame of the Massacre was at last
thrown upon the pretended impatient humor of the Protestants. And yet that
action was a thing of no slight consequence, because besides the cruelty of the
Fact, it was a Breach of the Edict of January, which was the first that granted
a free exercise of the Reformed Religion in public, and was drawn up with the
approbation of an Assembly of the Notables, or select Council of Nobility, but
notverified Chief Nobility.
without great opposition, especially at Paris, where after several reiterated
commands, it was at last Registered with this provisional clause; That it was
done in consideration of the present conjuncture of Affairs, without approving
the new Religion, and to remain in force no longer than the K. should order
otherwise. That Edict was an effect of the extraordinary favor the Admiral was
then in with the Q. who highly caressed him, which gave so much jealousy to
the Triumvirs, that they retired from Court. But that great Lord suffering his
eyes to be dazzled, by the Artifices of the The strength of the Protestants. The
French term for Protestant Meeting places. The short favor of the Admiral with
the Queen.
Queen, discovered to her a little too much the strength of his Party by
demanding of her the liberty of building Temples or Churches for 2150
Protestant Congregations. For the Q. thereupon demanded to see a particular
account of the number of each Congregation, which he refufing, as being
sensible he had already been too openhearted with her. Ever after that she was
shie of the Admiral, as being unwilling to depend on him.

But the Triumvirs were not long absent from the Court, but returning and
restoring to the Parisians, who where passionately affected to them, their Arms
again, they reduced the Q. into such The first war undertaken by the Queens
Orders.
danger of losing her Authority, that she was forced to have recourse to the
Prince of Conde to deliver her out of their hands, authorizing him by pressing
Letters, wherein she recommended to him the K. the Kingdom and her self, and
complains, That the Guises kept her in Captivity, requiring him to take up
Arms, under the specious pretense of delivering the King and Queen. But that
and afterward disowned.
Princess afterward falling into the power of the Confederates, and being
constrained to disown the Commission she had given the Prince to take Arms, he
sent her Original Letters to those German Princes to whom he had a mind to
justify his Conduct, which she took for so heinous an Affront, that she would
never pardon it to him However, to hinder the people from joining with the
Prince, another Edict was published in the King's Name, to confirm the Edict of
January, which granted an Indemnity for all that was past, and permission for
the free public Exercise of the Reformed Religion every where, but in the City
and Suburbs of Paris. But the Prince baffled that Stratagem, by publishing the
Copy of a Treaty of Confederacy The Triple League between the Pope, the K. of
Spain, and the Guises, against the Protestants.
concluded between the Pope, the King of Spain, and the Guises, against the
Protestants, which he had newly intercepted. Not but that on that, and all
other like occasions, there was always a considerable number of Protestants
that suffered themselves to be deceived by those Illusory Edicts; Nay, and that
there always was some of them that have been wheedled in to bear Arms too
against their Brethren, for the Court-Interest. But yet still the Division was
not so great as very much to weaken the Princes Party; who, sometime after the
Queen had disowned them, having called a Council of Conscience of sixty
Ministers, to consult whether it were lawful after that, to continue the War;
they came to this Resolution, That since those Arms were at first taken up by
Order of that Princess, whilst free, against the Enemies of the King, and the
State, and the Violaters of Edicts, they were lawfully taken up, and ought not
to be laid down (by any Counter-Order proceeding from her) whilst under the
force of hers, and their common Enemies.

This War was very cruel in many places, because there were some The Cruelties
of Monlac, and Des Adrets, and of the Catholics in general.
Commanders on each side, that prosecuted it without any Mercy. For Des Adrets,
on the Protestant side, was noted for his Cruelties, and Monluc, on the other,
would spare no body; Nay, and Mompensier too, signalised himself not a little
by his Inhumanities. However, this difference there was between the Cruelties
of the Two Parties, That those of the Catholics were a continuation of what
they had exercised for near 40 years past, by so many Butcherly Executions; and
those of the Protestants were but actions of men made desperate by so long and
barbarous a persecution. Which, by the way, deserves to be remarked against the
Roman Catholic Historians, who always excuse, as much as they can, the
Excesses of their own people, though never so villainous, but represent the
Violences of the Princes Forces much horrider than they were. And indeed the
Protestants found no mercy at all; No Faith of Treaties was ever kept with
them, and not being content to destroy them by Fights and Massacres, The
Catholics wherever they had power, further employed against them he forms of
Justice. But nothing more furiously incensed the People against them, than
their breaking of Images, and burning of Relics in several places. That
likewise occasioned many bloody Edicts against them; and the Parliaments would
needs stretch the severity of those Acts of the Council yet to a higher pitch,
by their Decrees, especially those of Paris, Roan, Dijon and Toulouse. And tho
the Catholic Armies were guilty of as many outrages as the others, yet the
Protestants bore the blame of all, and were charged with the Sacriledges even
of their Enemies.

A new Massacre of the Protestants which happened at Sens, by the Cardinal The
Massacre at Sens.
of Lorrain's fault, who was Archbishop of that Town, broke off the
Negotiations for a Peace, and the War was continued a fresh both by Arms and
Writings. In which the Catholics were the first that Foreigners called into
France.
had recourse to Foreign Aid, and the Protestants imitated them, by procuring
assistance from Queen Elizabeth of England who seized of Havre de Grace for her
security. But before her Forces could join the Princes Army, a Battle was
fought near Dreux, the success of which The battle of Dreux.
on both sides was so equal, that the Duke of Guise was the only gainer by it.
The King of Navar died some time before of a wound he received at the Siege of
Roan, the Marshal de St. Andre was Killed, and the Constable taken in this
Battle, so that the Duke had now neither superior nor competitour at Court.
The Prince of Conde was likewise taken Prisoner, but that hindered not his party
from standing upon such high conditions, that no Peace could be agreed upon.
The Duke afterward laying Siege to Orleans, was there 1563.
Assassinated by one Poltrot, which miserable wretch being taken, Accused The
Siege of Orleans. The Murder of the Duke of Guise, charged upon the Admiral by
the Wretch that did it.
the Admiral and Beza, and several others as his Instigatours to that
enterprise, and tho he often varied in his answers upon Examinations, yet he
accused the Admiral with a little more constancy than the rest. However he was
willingly credited in that point; and the young Duke of Guise continuing, ever
from that time, a resentment against that Lord, as guilty of the Charge,
revenged himself nine years after, upon several thousands of Innocents, whose
blood he mingled with the Admirals, to expiate the death of his Father.

The Tragical Death of that great Man, dampt the vain thoughts of the Cardinal
of Lorrain then at Trent, whither the Council had been removed the third time
by a Bull of Pius IV. where the French Ambassadors had waited a good while for
the coming of the Bishops of their Nation; but the Cardinal came thither at
last, attended with some Prelates, with a full Resolution to insist upon thirty
four Articles of Reformation which seemed to be much desired by the Queen, and
especially the Restitution of the Cup, and the Marriage of Priests The same
accident likewise put the Court upon other Measures, and disposed matters to a
A Peace concluded.
Peace; for which an Edict was agreed upon at Amboise. The Prince took advice
only of the Nobility of his Party who were weary of the War, and would not
hearken to the Counsel of threescore and ten Ministers, who would have
persuaded him to abate nothing of the Edict of January. The Admiral was not at
all content with this proceeding. But however he was forced to seem to approve
of what he could not hinder; and to accept an Edict much less favorable than
the former, and where the Distinction of Rights of Exercise by virtue of Fiefs,
Possession and Bailywicks, was introduced.

The Peace was followed by an Event at which the Court of Rome was highly
offended. The Cardinal of Chatillon Bishop of Beauvais, which is one of the
most ancient Peerages of the Kingdom, turning to the Religion of the Admiral
his Brother, quitted both the Name and Habit of his Ecclesiastical Dignity, and
retained only that of Count of Beauvais. The Pope thereupon cited him, and
deprived him of his Cardinals 1564.
Hat. But that Lord, to show how little he valued the Papal Censure The
Marriage of the Cardinal of Chatillon, and its consequences.
immediately took up again his Cardinals Habit, and wore it at all Ceremonies
at which he was present, and even at the Registring of the Kings Declaration
upon the Subject of his Majority; nay and to carry his contempt further he
Married a Lady, and wore his Cardinals Habit on his Wedding day. The same year
the Cardinal of Lorrain called a Synod at Rheims, where the Cardinal of
Chatillon appeared not, tho he were Suffragan of Rheims, as Bishop of Beauvais.
They who were present at it, were content only to agree upon a resolution to
give notice to the King, that that Prelate was Excommunicated at Rome for a
Heretic. But that was put off till 1569. when the Parliament Declared him a
Rebel, and deprived him of all his Dignities, turning him over to the Judgment
of his Superior as to what concerned the i. e. Heresy.
Common Crime* But they durst not at first explain what they meant by the term
Superior, for fear of offending the Pope; but in another Decree, they plainly
owned, that by Superior, they meant his Metropolitan, the Archbishop of Rheims
with the Bishops his Suffragans, conformably to the Liberties of the Gallican
Church. And in fine, when this Cardinals Widow moved after the passing of that
Edict, to have her Marriage confirmed, she could not obtain it, as I shall show
more fully in time and place. The pretense urged against her, was, That there
appeared no Evidence neither by writing nor witnesses, to prove it an
Authentic Marriage, and not Clandestine. It Is true indeed it was then 40 years
since it was done, and there remained but one man alive that could witness it;
but yet that hindered it not from being very true, that the Marriage was
celebrated by the consent, and in the presence of the Cardinals Brothers, and
with all the Solemnity that the Simplicity of the 1568.
Reformation, and the circumstances of that juncture of time could permit.

That Cardinal passed in the time of the following Wars, into 1571.
England, to demand assistance from Queen Elisabeth, but as he was about to
return into France, he was basely poisoned by one of his own domestic
Servants. 1563.


The Chancellor took his opportunity after the Edict of Peace, to Tithes
confirmed to the Roman Clergy.
publish another commanding all the King's Subjects to pay Tithes as before, to
the Churchmen: And it was not doubted, but that Edict was the preservation of
the Roman Church, because had the Protestants been suffered to escape free from
paying those dues, all that had any Goods or Estates liable to pay Tithes,
would have wheeled about to their Party, out of greediness to augment their
Revenues at one jerko a full tenth part. Yet for all that, it appears by the
repeated complaints of the Clergy in all their Assemblies, that they had much
ado to enjoy the benefit of that Edict. And it is only since the Edict of Nants,
that they have been established in the full possession of those dues. And then
indeed that question was contradictorily decided to the advantage of the
Churchmen, and the recompense granted to the Protestants to indemnify them for
what they paid in Tyths, took from them all color of renewing any more
pretenses on that Subject; for till then, the Clergy had not been able to keep
possession of those Rights, because the Protestants paid them nothing in places
where they were strong enough to avoid it; and the Catholics in many places,
and especially the Gentry paid them but 'en what they li^ted. But that Edict
fortifying them with a new Title, they recovered by little and little the full
enjoyment of all their Rights, and under pretense of explaining, or confirming
them against the pretensions A Toulouse 6. and 8. March 1640. At the great
Council, the ^3. Feb. 1658. The re-taking of Havre de Grace.
of the Protestants, they often procured orders, which they made use of to the
Disadvantage of the Catholics themselves; So that they that for time out of
mind had been obliged only to pay certain fixed Tithes, were then forced to pay
Tyths of the Artichokes, Melons, Pumpions, nay, and of their Marjoram, and in a
word, of all the Herbs of their Gardens. And for the obtaining those Orders,
the Clergy was not ashamed to vacate the old customs that were confirmed by an
interrupted possession of 2 or 300 years. After the Peace, both Parties
contended which should be most active in re-taking Havre de Grace from the
English, who had a mind to keep it; and the Protestants seemed to espouse the
cause with more heat than the others, the better to wipe off the reproach cast
upon them, of having given new footing in the Kingdom, to a Foraign People that
had been so long its mortal Enemies. At his return from that Expedition, the
King was declared Major at Roan, and put forth a new Edict to confirm that of
Amboise, which was again renewed toward the end of the year by another which
explained some dubious Articles of it. But when the King was returned to Paris,
the Admiral was impeacht for the Murder of the Duke of Guise; the affairs was
very difficult to decide at that Juncture of time, because of the equal
Balance that seemed to be between the power of the Accusers, and that of the
Accused, and therefore after several insignificant proceedings, it was
cunningly put off for three years.

The same year likewise there began to appear, at Toulouse and The end of the
Council of Trent.
elsewhere, some seeds of a League against the Protestants, and the famous
Council of Trent was at last terminated, which having been long desired, as the
only salve for the Divisions of Europe, was for sometime 1563.
as 'twere the Shittle-cock of the Policy of Princes, and the Terror of the
Court of Rome, which was afraid, that in such a ticklish time in which she was
so much cried down, a Council would in spite of her attempt a Reformation of
her intolerable Errors and Abuses. But yet at last that Court found its
account well enough here, and that Council degenerated into a manifest Cabal,
confirmed all Abuses to the advantage of the Roman See, exalted her above
Princes, and made the yoke of the Roman Church more heavy than ever upon men's
Consciences.

The next year, the Spaniards did what they could to re-kindle a 1564.
new War; but the time was not yet seasonable to hearken to them. In
expectation therefore of a better occasion, they conspired with the Catholics
of Bearn to seize the Queen of Navar and her Children, and to deliver them to
the Inquisition for Heretics, which if effected, would have given a fair
occasion to Philp I^. to make himself Master of the rest of their Dominions,
which had escaped from the Ambition of his Great Grandfather. The Conspiracy
was discovered, but yet Queen Katharine had particular reasons worthy of her
self, not to order 1568.
the person to be taken up, that was the chief Intriguer in it. Four years
after, the Queen of Navar, who was forced to provide for A Revolution in Bearn.
her own and her Childrens safety, by flying to Rochel, from the fury of the
same Revolted Subjects, sent from thence Montgomery to chastise 1569.
them, after which she Banished quite out of her Country all exercise of the
Roman Religion, under the pretense of which, such a horrid Treatment was
designed her; And that was done by the consent of the States, without which
nothing can be legally done in that Principality. So that the Catholics lost
all their Privileges there, by a just punishment for their furious Attempt* in
going about to deliver their Lawful Sovereign Princess into the Power of a
Foraign Jurisdiction, and the Reformation was by this means received there by
the concurrence of that double Authority in which the Legislative Power of that
Country Resides. We shall see afterward what respect was had to those
considerations, under the Grandchild of that Princess.

But in France the Protestants were not long at quiet, without new occasions
1565.
to be jealous of the Court; for they were ill treated almost New occasions of
jealousy given the Protestants.
every where, and saw their Tranquillity openly conspired against; And the
Pope, the King of Spain and Duke of Savoy loudly demanded by their
Ambassadors, that the Edict might be Revoked, and the Decrees of the late
Council Published, to which the King's answer was in such general and ambiguous
Terms, that the Protestants could not but be alarmed at it. And besides the
Pulpits every where resounded with nothing but the praises of the King of
Spain, whom they extolled to the Skies, as the great Extirpater of Heretics;
and a Deputy of Burgundy in an Oration to the King, passionately pressed him ^o
suffer but one Religion in his Kingdom. Many Violences and Massacres were
committed in diverse places without any punishment inflicted on the Authors. The
concessions of the Edict were invalidated by distorted Interpretations, which
were renewed again in our Time. The Ministers were forced to reside in the
places where their Temples, or Meeting places were; and they were permitted to
teach no Schools. The exercise of the Protestant Religion was suspended in all
places whither the Court happened to pass. The Privileges of the Protestant
Lords were clipped, and none suffered to come to the Religious Exercises in their
Houses, but such as were their own Subjects or Vassals. All Synodical
Assemblies were forbidden. No Money was suffered to be Levied for the
Maintenance of their Ministers. The Marriages of such who had been Priests,
Monks, or Nuns, were disanulled. The Fortifications raised by the Protestants
in the Time of the War, were demolished, and yet strong Cittadels built to awe
those Towns that favored them. In a word, nothing was omitted to induce them
to believe, that the Peace was granted them with no other design, but to disarm
and disunite them, and especially, to break the neck of those Alliances they
had with Foreign Protestants All these violations of the Peace, obliged the
Prince of Conde to present a Memorial of Complaints to the King; wherein, among
other things, he reckons up no less than 130 murders committed since the
Peace, for which he could obtain no Justice. But yet all the Satisfaction he
got from his Majesty, was only a general Answer, and civil words.

It Is true, the K. made a Progress all over his Kingdom, with all his Court;
The voyage of the Court, and advice given them by the Duke of Alva.
but the Protestants were never the better for it; and then it was the Court
had an Interview with the D. of Alva at Bayonne, where they learnt of him, that
fatal and bloody Apothegm which they afterward so well improved in practice,
viz. That the Head of one Salmon is better than those of 50000 Frogs. The
Prince then but a child, and much caressed at that time by Q. Katharine, being
present at the Conference where this advice was given, tho he was but young,
yet well apprehended its consequence, The progress of the Protestant Churches.
and learnt thereby to keep himself upon his guard, against that Princess,
after he had lost her favor. Whilst those Intrigues were carrying on, as there
was yet no open War, The Protestants were busy in confirming their Churches by
convenient Regulations, and held some 1565.
Synods; by the acts of which, it appears, that the custom of Annexes, or
Pluralities, was already received among them, because they had more Churches
than Ministers; tho in our time, their Adversaries have been pleased to cavil
with them upon that account, as if the serving of several Churches by the same
Minister, had been a novelty among them. The Catholics on their side,
fortified themselves by Leagues, and some private ones were concluded in
several places, and Monlu^ proposed to the K. to make one too with his
Catholic Lords. At the same time the Admiral was attacked by dangerous
Calumnies; and a wicked Villain that had attempted to Murder him, thinking
thereby to escape Punishment, accused him of endeavoring to persuade him to
Kill the Q. But the time being not yet seasonable to accept such black
Impostures for good Evidence, that Traitor was convinced of Forgery, and broken
upon the Wheel.

But because the Court had a mind to trick the Protestants, they pretended to
1566.
^oncile that Lord with the House of Guise. And accordingly the accomodati^ The
reconciliation of the Admiral with the Guises.
was made with all the cautions usually observed in a sincere Treaty. But the
^ng D. was not at the conclusion of it, as designing, by his absence, to
reserve himself a Right to violate at pleasure, the promises advanced by his
Family. ^t for all that, a thousand wrongs were continually done every where to
the ^restants; for in places where they were weakest, they were openly oppressed
and ^ir complaints derided; but where they were strong enough to make them^es
be feared, the K's name and authority was made use of to stop their mouths
(...) make them tamely suffer all the evils their enemies had a mind to inflict
^n them. And besides all this, the March of the D. of Alva's Army, which he ^s
leading toward the Netherlands, where peoples Spirits were in a shrewd ^ment,
still more Alarmed the Protestants, and made them apprehensive, lest ^er a
color of some other design, the Court should make use of him to de^y them. All
these considerations induced the Prince of Conde once more to ^e up arms, who
attempted to self, and carry away the Court then at Monce^ in which he
narrowly missed succeeding, and would certainly have effected ^ad he not been
timely hindered by the diligence of the Constable: However (...) boldness of the
attempt made such an Impression upon the K's Spirit, that he The attempt at
Monceaux, and its consequences.
^ld never pardon it to the Prince. The most remarkable event in that War was
^death of the Constable who was killed at the attack of Paris* by the Forces of
the ^ce of Conde, who with a handful of Men, in the View of a Turkish Envoy,
who ^eld the fight from the Walls, resisted the whole effort of the Royal Army,
tho ^t by all the people of that great City. The War from thence spread it self
1568.
(...) the Provinces, whether both parties once more called in Foreigners to
their as^ce. A peace made before Chartres, without any intention to keepit.
At last a Peace was clapped up, whilst Chartres was besieged, by which the E^ of
January was restored to the Protestants without restriction, more out of de^ to
make them send back their Foreign Aids, than to restore Tranquillity to (...)
State. The most part of the Protestants were against this peace, because they
^tly enough judged, it was granted them only for a decoy. And the Prince him^
wa^ much afraid of it too, and therefore made no have to perform the Ar^ of the
Treaty that related to his own concerns; and, to say the truth, the Ca^icks
gave him but too much occasion of jealousy: For there was much a^o get the
Edict verified by the Parliaments, and that of Toulouse refused it till (...) 4
Reiterated commands; and before that too, had the insolence to put Rapin to ^h,
that was come thither from the Prince, to press its Registring But the Court ^t
not there* For they sent into the Provinces a form of an Oath, in which under
^ence of Allegiance the Protestants were to swear never to take Arms more* and
^onfess themselves worthy of the most rigorous punishments, if there should
^pen any disturbance through their fault in the places where they lived. That
is, they ^e them thereby responsible for all accidents, tho it were to their
own wrong, (...) they had learnt by experience, that the blame was always laid
upon them, right or ^g. In ^ Months time more than 2000 of them were Massacred
in several places, (...) nothing was to be seen every where but Injustices to
destroy them, or artifices ^ide them. That was the drift of an Edict, in which
the K. pretended to take (...) his Protection all Protestants that should live
peaceably at home; but that trick had ^ct, because it was too soon discovered.
Then came out another Edict, which (...) the liberty to exercise any other
Religion but the Catholic, which was soon followed by another, commanding the
Protestants to quit all offices; and the Order (...) Registring it in the
Parliament of Paris, added this clause, That all who succeeded (...) any
Offices for the future should be obliged to swear, to live and die in the Roman
Re^^^^^on. The Protestants likewise intercepted some Letters written by the
Court, to (...) Magistrates in the Provinces forbidding them to observe the
Edict of Peace. Th^^^ are others extant from the Q. of Navar to the Cardinal of
Bourbon, where (...) reminds him of a thing at which he was so terribly
alarmed, that he could (...) sleep for one whole night, which was, that during
Q Katharines last sickness, (...) sign was laid to act over again in France the
Scicilian Vesper. This ^right of the C^^dinal, as may be a hint by the way, was
a sufficient proof their malice aim^^ as much at the House of Bourbon, as the
Reformed Religion. They attempted l^^^ wise to surprise the Prince of Conde at
his house at Noyers, and that so sub^^^^ that he had hardly a minutes notice to
make his escape. But nothing more cle^^ly betrayed the Courts intentions, than
the Bull of Alienation of some Ecclesi^^^ Revenues granted toward the support
of a War against the Heretics, and which ^^ing dated some days before the
Protestants took Arms, was an evident proof, that (...) Court that had
solicited it was the first that designed a Rupture. However (...) Chancellor
suffered it not to be made use of, for fear the Protestants should (...) prove
it to their advantage* and they were fain to procure another three (...) after,
that granted the K. the same Alienation, under the notion of a Recom^^^^^ of
his Revoking the Edicts of Toleration. Yet for all that, the Chancellor was
^^^t graced, either because he was against the War, or was suspected to favor
the P^^testants for the sake of his Wife, his Daughter, and his Son in Law, who
were (...) The third War.
their Religion. Thus the Protestants were forced to a third War, in which
(...) suffered great losses. For Andelot Brother to the Admiral, and one of
their (...) 1569.
commanders died of sickness; and but a little before that the Prince of Conde
was (...) The death of Andelot and of the Prince of Conde.
at Bassac near Jarnac, by a treachery without example, committed in all
app^^^ance by the Court and Orders to the D. of Anjou; since that Assassinate
was (...) under his Nose by the Capt. of his Guards, himself showing no dislike
(...) exploit. This was the first noble head sacrificed to the D. of Alva's
Counsels. (...) same year the Protestants also lost the Battle of Moncontour,
so that after so (...) Battles lost
misfortunes, the Court seemed to have a prospect of having a cheaper barg^^^
(...) the rest. For indeed, the Admiral himself, tho never so great as in
Adversity, (...) then so stupefied with so many cross blows, that he was some
time before (...) could recover himself. But however, when they saw him take
fresh Courag^ (...) that after he had Marched almost round the Kingdom, through
so many (...) The Admiral re-establishes the party.
Troops and Towns, he was still in a condition with his Army, as much tired
(...) was, and unprovided of all necessities to oppose the Royal Army sent
against (...) they quitted all thoughts of destroying him by open force, and
resolved to dispatch (...) 1570.
by some master stroke of Treachery; and accordingly struck up with him a (...)
A fraud^lent Peace.
Peace, by which they granted him so many things so much beyond his ^^ that it
was easy to see they had a mind to trick him. That was the first (...) which
there were mentioned any cautionary Towns. But then 4 such were gi^^^ to the
Protestants for 4 years and they rested content with that security, tho (...)
had been so often deceived by the Court-Oaths, because they thought that (...)
might be sufficient to execute the Edict, and to accustom the French to (...)
Peace together, for all their difference in Religion. All the great persons in
(...) Kingdom Swore to this Peace, and the Spanish Ambassador seemed to be
highly (...) contented at it.

But the better to surprise the Protestants, they prevented their desires in
many things. For they consulted about the War in Flanders, which the Admiral
was very zealous for; they made applications to Queen Elizabeth, and the German
Princes, whose Ambassadors, Incredible Artifices of the Court.
and Exhortations to observe the Peace, they received very well. They
Negotiated a Marriage between Henry Prince of Navar, and Margaret the King's
Sister, as if they designed to stifle 1571.
all suspicions by so strict an Alliance. And in particular they caressed the
Admiral so highly, that the Old Gentleman, as wise as he was, let himself be so
ensnared by them, that he made the places of Security to be yielded back before
the two years were expired, and answered them who gave him private advice of
the Courtdesigns, that he had rather be drawn about the Streets through the
dirt, than to begin a New War.

During this Calm, the Protestants held two National Synods, at both which Beza
assisted, and at the first, which was held at Rochelle, were present the Queen
of Navar, the Princes and the Admiral. And the Queen was pleased to take the
Advice of the Synod for regulating the Religion of her Domestics, The
Complaints of that Assembly were favorably heard at the Court* who checked a
Sedition that had been raised at Roan, and promised Redress against another
that had been stirred up at Orange, and suffered 1200 Families of the County of
Avignon that had been persecuted there for Religion, to take Refuge in
Dauphiny* and in fine, omitted nothing that might convince the World, they were
heartily weary of the War.

But not withstanding this fair Outside, they neglected not to take measures
at a distance for what they afterward put in Execution. And it is said, They
deliberated first about it at Blois, in the very same Chamber where the Duke of
Guise was killed 16 or 17 years after, and that that Prince presided in that
Assembly; That a year after the Proposition was renewed at St. Cloud, in the
same Chamber where Henry III. was assassinated in the year 1589. and that this
Prince, who was then but Duke of Anjou presided in this Second Assembly. King
Charles, who kept the Secret with 1572.
a profound Dissimulation, during all these long Intrigues, did not forbear to
say enough to the Legate, who complained of the Favors which were heaped upon
the Protestants, to make him understand derstand that the Resolutions were
already formed at the Court, of those things which afterward happened. The only
difficulty was to agree about the Pretenses and Means to put them in Execution.
But at last they concluded upon one of the most detestable, which was executed
upon the 24th of August. The Queen of Navar was poisoned before, as was
supposed by the Queens means, who was very much suspected for the business of
Poisoning. The Admiral was wounded by Maurevel, who was charged to kill him,
and they took this way as most proper to push the Reformed on to Sedition,
which would give a specious pretense for their Massacre, or make them fall out
with the Guises, and so give the King opportunity to ruin either the one or the
other of them; But The Massacre of St. Bartholomew.
their patience was the cause of their being massacred without any pretense, in
the most cruel manner in the world. I shall not give a particular account of
this Horrible Action, since all honest Historians have declared and detested
it. I shall add only, that they are accused for having forced the King to ruin
them, to prevent a Conspiracy against his own Person; so that after he had
treacherously spilt their blood, he would blacken their memory. You must not be
astonished, if there be found some to apologize for this cowardly Cruelty,
since there was found those who were capable of committing it. Peter
Carpentier, a Lawyer, a Protestant Refugee at Geneva, sold his Pen to his
Brethren's Murderers, and being made known to Bellievre, whom the King had sent
into Switzerland to justify this Action, he received money from him, and
permission to return into France, and promises of great Recompense for
declaiming against the memory of the dead. This he does by a bloody Letter,
which was printed again not long ago, to justify the Cruelties of the last
persecution, as if the shameful perfidiousness of a Rogue of the last Age,
would serve for an Apology for the Injustice of this. As for the Guises,
because they were not willing to bear the Reproach of this base treachery; they
constrained the King to take it upon himself, and saved some of the Reformed
from the hands of the Massacrers, to keep themselves from the blame of so black
an Infidelity. ^.


The King of Navar, and the Prince of Conde run a great risque The Princes
change their Religion by force.
of losing their lives. The Prince was more difficult to be wrought on, but in
the end, both of them gave way to the violence. They took occasion for an
honest pretense of des Rosiers, who having been found in some Criminal Matters,
had redeemed his Life at the The Inconstancy of des Rosiers.
expense of his Conscience. The Reasons which had made him change, had the same
effect upon the Princes, because they were in the same fear as he. Monsieur had
drawn him out of trouble by his Credit, and having secured him to his Interest
by this benefit, was willing to make use of him to bring back his Daughter, and
the Duke of Bouillon, his Son in Law, to the Roman Religion. He already
procured a Conference at Paris 6 or 7 years before, between the Drs. of both
Parties, for the same end, but it had then no effect, for the Princess
persevered in her former Opinions. The Duke believed the Example and Reasons of
des Rosiers would have the same force to convert Heretics at Sedan, as they
had had at Paris. And therefore sent Maldonat the Jesuit thither, with this
revolted Minister, but the Jesuit obtained nothing, and durst not let des
Rosiers come to Sedan, because he did not believe him as yet to be a firm
Catholic. The Conference which he had with the Ministers did not shake this
Princess in the least, and tho he published a Relation of this Journey, where
he speaks very advantagiously of himself, and makes the Ministers to argue like
Children, yet he brought back from thence no other fruit but the loss of his
des Rosiers, who having followed him to Metz, fled himself 3 weeks after into
Germany, where he made an acknowledgment of his Faults.

But in France it was found more difficult to destroy the reformed Siege of
Rochel and Sancerre.
party than was imagined; For after so much blood spilt they stood yet upon
their feet. In a little time the War was kindled every where. The Duke of Anjou
lost his Time and Reputation before Rochel. Sancerre could not be forced to
surrender it self by the most cruel Famine that ever was recorded. So that they
thought themselves very fortunate in making peace, and to find pretense for it
in the Intercession of the Polanders, who were come to offer the Crown of
Poland to the Duke of Anjou. The Edict granted the Exercise of Religion but to
3 Cities, and revoked almost all the foregoing Concessions.

France was then divided into 3 Factions, and in the Duke of Factions in France.
Anjou's Army alone, there was 4; 1. that of the zealous Catholics, which was
the ruling party; 2. that of the New Catholics, discontented and suspicious;
3. that of the Politics, sprung out of the foregoing War, and without taking
part in Religion, formed one in the State, under pretense of opposing either
the Enterprises of the Court, or the ambition of strangers; and 4. that of the
persevering reformed Religion, which they suffered in the Army, the better to
deceive the rest, and to make them believe that they would not exterminate
them. They had already published an Edict to give this assurance to all that
staid peaceably in their houses, and to persuade them, that the suspicious
Conduct of the Admiral was the only cause of their misfortune. But the
Massacres either done, or commanded on the same day in the most considerable
Cities of the Kingdom, made it known to all them that had not lost their
senses, how false and ridiculous a pretense this was. The Princes and young
Lords of those several Parties had like to have raised New Troubles during the
siege of Rochel. But La Noue, whose wisdom they had a great deference for,
hindered the Effects of their headstrong resolutions.

But a little while after the Duke of Alenzon renewed those Intrigues 1574.
to get the same Authority in Affairs which his Brother had The Duke of Alenzon
Protector of the Reformed, and the Politicians.
before he was King of Poland; and the Reformed and the Politicians
acknowledged him for their Protector. But before he could escape from the
Court, his Plots were discovered. This cost him his Liberty, as well as the
King of Navar, and many others, and the Lives of some. But all this did not
hinder the War from breaking out again in many Provinces, and the Protestants
lost Montgomery, whose Head the Queen cut off, against the promise which
Matignon made him of his life, when he rendered himself his prisoner. The Prince
of Conde saved himself in a disguise in Germany, and made a public
acknowledgment at Strasburg, that he had been at Mass. A little after the Death
of Charles IX. the King of Poland was called The death of the King.
back into France, and in expectation of his return, the Queen made her self be
declared Regent, and suspended the War with the Protestants by a Truce of 2
months, by which she gave them leisure to make an Assembly at Millau, where
they chose the Prince of Conde for their Chief; but this also served their
Enemies to recruit their Army, and make their advantages. The New King Henry
III. received Henry III. at his return continues the War.
good advice at Vienna, Venice and Turin, where he was exhorted to give peace
to his people, but the Queen Mother, and her Favorites quickly effaced all the
impressions of those good Counsels.

The Council was divided into 2 Factions, one followed the Maxims of the
Chancellor of the Hospital, and were for peace; the other followed those of
Morvillier Bishop of Orleans, who was Keeper of the Seals some time; and these
were for destroying the Protestants at any rate soever. This last party was
animated by the particular hatred of the Queen Mother against the reformed, by
the ambition of the Guises, and by the Intrigues of Spain, who had a great
influence in the Council. Morvillier added the Charm of some Bigottry which he
had in his Head, and which was enough to dazzle the ignorant people. The
Protestants provoked the Cabal yet more by 1575.
a Memorial which they presented, in which they demanded satisfaction in 92
Articles, which touched the disorders of the Court too much to the quick to be
heard favorably there; and they principally insisted on the calling the
General Estates to remedy the miseries of the Kingdom.

In the mean time the Princes were set at liberty by the King, when the
Queen Mother presented them to him at his arrival in France, tho there wanted
not some to watch them so narrowly, The Princes Retreat.
that they were little better than Prisoners. But at last the Duke of Alenzon
retired from Court, and a little while after the King of Navar did the same. It
is observed of this latter, that passing by Alenzon, he there went to the
preaching. The Psalm which the Minister sung before the Sermon, was the 21st,
which begins with these words, Seigneur leRoy s'ejouira D'avoir eu delivrancee,
par ta grande puissance. etc. The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord! and
in thy Salvation how greatly shall he rejoice, v. 1. He inquired if this was
sung because of him; and when he understood that it was according to the Order
that the Psalms were sung for that day, he took it for a good presage of
Success in his Enterprises. Howsoever, it was a good while before he fixed
entirely to the reformed Religion. His Life at that time had more of the
Libertine in it than of Devotion; But the year after, his Servants, who saw
that this indifference in Religion did not accommodate his Affairs, obliged him
publicly at Rochel to repair the fault which he had been forced to at Paris,
by the terror of death.

These Conjunctures extorted from the Court a Truce of six months, and in the
end a Peace which they needed, to break the Union of the Confederates, and to
separate the Duke of Alenzon from their party.

They granted an Edict to the Protestants, such an one as they 1576.
were used to make, when they were not willing to keep it; this is that which
introduced the name of the Religion pretendedly Reformed. They gave them 8
places of Security, and at the same time concluded upon their ruin with the
Legate, and with Don John of Austria; and in the very same year it was openly
talked that the Edict should be revoked, and that they had granted it only by
force. They put it under Consultation whether Faith should be kept with
Heretics, and it was publicly Preached that according to the Council of
Constance, they were not obliged to it. After this then the Peace was broken,
and the Estates General, which the Protestants Peace as soon broke as made.
had demanded with so much earnestness concluded to destroy them, and to oblige
Henry III. to make himself chief of the League, because he was afraid that some
other should.

This League so famous was formed of the Union of many particular The League.
Leagues, all which had Religion for their pretense, but the principal end of
this general League was to set the Duke of Guise upon the Throne, and that the
King could not doubt of. There was a Writing which a certain Advocate of Paris
brought from Rome, which contained the Reasons and Methods for Deposing the
Descendents of Hugh Capet, and restoring the Crown to the Posterity of
Charlemagne, which fell into the hands of the Protestants, who Published it.
Vi^onne Ambassador in Spain, sent another Copy of the same Writing, and
revealed the whole Mystery of the League. The King, being of a timorous and
unsettled temper, followed the advice of Morvillier, who was as timorous as
himself, and believed he should more easily destroy this Cabal, by making
himself the Head of it, than by Methods more firm and agreeable to his Dignity.
He passed further, and declared, That as he had promised by Oath The King's
Oath.
at his Coronation upon the most holy Sacrament of the Altar, to suffer no
Religion in his Estates but the Catholic, he warned his Subjects not to
believe any thing he should either say or do to the contrary, and that if he
was reduced to make peace, he would not keep it, but till such time as he could
get an occasion to break it. But all these Protestations hindered not, but in a
little time after, he made a Peace with the King of Navar. Mompensier who went
to see that Prince Who notwithstanding makes peace.
to sound his intentions, advising him thereto at his return, and the third
Estate likewise helped the King out of his perplexity, declaring that they were
of advice to bring back the strayed sheep to the Roman Church by all convenient
methods, but that they had not counseled the War. The Honorable manner with
which the King of Navar received the Deputies and the Letters of the Estates,
facilitated the Treaty. He answered in Writing, That he was ready to quit his
Religion, if by any better instructions they could show that his own was not
good. This clause was taken as an ill augury by the Ministers of his Court, who
therefore razed it out, but he interlined it again with his own hand. The
Prince of Conde showed a greater Spirit, for he would neither acknowledge the
Estates, nor receive their Letters, nor give them an Answer.

Thus Peace was made and confirmed by an Edict given at Poictiers, Edict of
1577.
which they themselves, who excused it with the Pope, acknowledged to be less
favorable than any that had been granted to them before. But the Bigots were
angry at it nevertheless, because of the Article which declares the Protestants
capable of Offices and Honors. In short, it struck at the Designs of the
Guises, and it was easy to extend it to the Princes, That their Religion ought
not to render them incapable of the Crown, since it did not render other
Protestants incapable of Employs suitable to their Birth. This Calm gave
opportunity to Hold some Synods. That of St. Foy, held a little after the
Synods.
Edict of Poictiers, was remarkable, for a Cause that was judged between the
Prince of Conde, and the Consistory of Rochel, which had suspended him from the
holy Supper, because he had not well received the Remonstrances of the Company,
upon the Subject of a Prize taken at Sea, during the 40 days prescribed by the
Edict, for the laying down of Arms. It was found, that the Judgment of the
Consistory was too rash, and that the Prince, on the other side, had too little
Respect for the Authority of the Consistory, and Deputies were named to
reconcile them. This Peace, as to other things, did not cease all Jealousies.
And therefore to take away all pretenses for them, there 1579. Conference of
Nerac and Fleix.
was a Conference held at Nerac, where the Protestants had some new favors
granted them, and some new places of security. The King of Navar was then
permitted to raise a certain Sum upon the reformed Protestants; and all
Churches, which the Edict of 1577. had either maintained or re-established,
were rated to it, and accordingly every one paid his part, and took an
Acquittance. And this was pretended some few years ago to prove, that the
Churches which could produce them had their Right established from the year
1577. But neither the Intendants, nor the Council would regard any Titles of
this nature.

The young Gent. of the K. of Navar's Court began a 6th War, which was called
the War of the Amorous, because it was undertaken only to please the Ladies.
The greatest part of the Protestants did not enter into it. So that this fire
was not very hard to be extinguished ^^s course was stopped by the Conference
of Fleix; after this 5 years passed in peace, such as it was; the Edicts were
observed in some places, in others not regarded. The King was he that kept them
least of all; for he gave no Offices to the Protestants of his own 1580* The
King eludes the Peace, and ^et makes a show of keeping it.
accord. And when any of them asked any from him, he had always some pretense
ready to refuse the ^^* nay, he took them from those that possessed them already,
and stirred them up Troubles and Lawsuits, and always caused them to come by
the worst, to oblige them to lay them down, reserving expressly to himself the
cognizance of these sorts of processes, to be assured of the condemnation of
the pretended Heretics. He would not receive into his Household any Gentlemen
of the Reformed Religion, and his Courtiers knowing his mind, took care to tell
them that complained of those Refusals; that their Religion was the cause. In
one word, the King kept his promise to the Estates, and he did more mischief to
the Protestants by those Ar^s in 5 years* causing more Revolts among them, than
have been seen to happen in 30 years War and Massacres. Nay, you might have
seen some others who being ashamed themselves to quit a Religion which they had
embraced with great affection, yet had the weakness to bring up their Children
in the Catholic Communion, because they would not bring them up in a Doctrine
which the King would not suffer; and some again that used a quite contrary
Policy in turning Catholics for fear of losing their Offices: but for the
discharge of their Consciences, brought up their Children in the Reformed
Religion, because they believed it to be the safer way to salvation

During this false peace, all Europe was engaged in great conspiracies against
them whom they believed to be the Chief^ or Favorites of the Protestants. The
Duke of Alenzon, who had took the Name of the Duke of Anjou, and the Prince of
Orange, fell in them. They had a way in France to penetrate into the secret of
those dark Actions, but they were not willing to sound them to the bottom. In
the mean time, the security into which the King fell, made the Outrages done to
the King by the League.
Leaguers take Courage, Their Preachers exposed him in their Sermons, They
entertained the Catholics with nothing but the mischiefs which would happen,
if a Reformed King should mount the Throne, and they frighted the Bigots with
horrid Histories and Pictures of the pretended Cruelties which Queen Elizabeth
exercised in England. At last, the Guises began openly to persecute this
unhappy Prince, and drove him to incredible Extremities. He was forced to
undergo the Violences of the Duke, who had begun the War against him, under
pretense to secure the Crown for a Catholic Prince. He durst not murmur, tho
they disputed the right of Succession during his Life, nor at the assembling of
the States to debate that question; nor at their debauching his Officers and
Servants from him. Villeroi, who was one of his Secretaries of State, was
supposed to be Pensioner to the Duke of Guise, and the King not being otherwise
able to guard himself from him, obliged him to a distance from the Court, and
showed him always after that great marks of his displeasure. From whence it
came to pass that his Father and himself threw themselves into the League after
the Death of the Guises.

The War against the Protestants was then renewed against the K's Is forced to
a War with the Reformed.
mind, who had made peace with the Leaguers upon that condition: Great Sums
were exacted upon the Clergy, under this pretense; which they paid but
grudgingly, as may be seen by the Remonstrances of their Deputies. They
protested they had never counseled the War, tho it was notoriously known they
had endeavored with all their power the Revocation of the Edicts. The K* of
Navar made His Majesty great Reproaches upon that Subject, by his Letters he
sent him during the Sessions of the Estates, and there renews the Offer of
standing to the Decisions of a Free Council; He wrote to others of the Nobles,
and the 3d Estate, where he makes great complaints, That they forced the King
to make War against him: But the Courage and good Fortune which he had to affix
at Rome an Appeal against the Bull of Sixtus Quintus, by which he declared both
him and the Prince to be Heretics, relapsed, Favorers of Heretics,
excommunicated* deprived of all their Lordships, and incapable to succeed to
any Principality, and particularly to the Crown of France, did him greater
Honor than all the rest of his Actions, and procured him Esteem even with the
Pope himself. He appealed by his Remonstrance, to the Peers of France in
Temporals, and in Spirituals to the next Council, to which he cited the Pope,
declaring him Antichrist, if he refused to appear.

In the Height of the War, Claudius Trimouille the Son of a most La Trimouille
becomes reformed.
zealous Leaguer, embraced the Interests and Religion of the P. of Conde, and
took his Sister Charlotte Katharine in Marriage. This Alliance extremely
fortified the Reformed Party in Poictou, because that House is there very
powerful. The Conference of St. Bris between the Queen Mother and the P. of
Conde, toward the end of the year, allayed not their Spirits, and the next
year France saw her self overrun with Strangers, which both Parties had called
in 1587. The Battle of Coutras.
for Succors. The K. of Navar gained the Battle of Coutras against the King's
Army, which the Duke of Joyeuse commanded. But on the other side, the Duke of
Guise defeated the Reiters at Aunea^, Defeats of the Reiters.
insomuch that the Protestants had little fruit of their Victory, and little
service from their Allies. The P of Conde died some months 1588. Thedeath of P.
of Conde.
after at St. John de Angeli, being poisoned by some of his own Family; and his
own Wife being accused for the fact, The Judges of the place condemned her. But
the birth of a Son that she brought forth in September following, the great
Revolutions which happened a little after, and the Authority of some great
Persons to whom this Princess was nearly related, stopped their proceedings.

During these sad Times many Edicts were set out against the Protestants, but
the most bloody was that which was called the Edict Edict of Union.
of Union. The King put out this last for fear the Leaguers should procure the
King of Spain's Fleet, which was Equipped against England, to descend upon the
Coasts of France; yet after this, they ceased not to do him a thousand
indignities. So that at last he was constrained to leave Paris, to give place
to the D. of The boldness of the Leaguers.
Guise, and to ridicule him, they followed him to Chartres, whither he was
retired, by a comical Procession of Penitents, which went to demand pardon for
the Parisians, who had the impudence to advance their Barricadoes as far as the
very Gates of the Louvre. He was forced, in some sense, to receive Law from the
Duke as the stronger, to assemble the Estates, subscribe the Edict of Union,
and take The Estates at Blois.
an Oath not to lay down his Arms till he had destroyed the Heretics. However,
he had resolution enough not to sign the Act by which they would have declared
the K. of Navar unworthy of the Crown. He then saw clearly into the pretenses
of the D. of Guise, who did not intend, it seems, to wait for the King's Death
to possess the Throne; for his Party spoke of nothing less than putting him
into a Cloister, and adding a Monk's Crown to that of France Death of the D. of
Guise, and the Curdinal, his brother.
and Poland, which he had already worn. He could find no better way therefore
to parry off this blow, than by the death of the D. of Guise, and the Cardinal,
his brother. It is observable, that they were brought into the snare, in the
same manner the Admiral was, under the Name of the public Faith, under the
appearance of Reconciliation, and by a general Compliance with all their
demands.

But the King could not rid himself of the Duke of Mayenne, The Duke of Mayenne
being escaped, relieves the Leaguers party.
who was then about Lions, and who quickly formed a great Body, with which he
thought to overwhelm him. In the mean time, to make it known, that it was not
in favor of the Protestants, that he had killed their Enemies, he swore a new
to the Edict of Union, and without doubt did it with a true Hatred to them,
because, tho he afterward was forced by despair to throw himself into their
arms, he deferred for 15 days the publication of a Truce he had made with 'em;
being ready to break it, and make War upon 'em without mercy, could he have
succeeded in an accommodation with which he was flattered, between him and the
Duke of Mayenne. But the Duke had clear other thoughts, being in a condition
Extremity of the King's affairs.
to revenge with a high hand the death of his brethren. The King saw himself
forsaken of his best Cities, and was reduced to that point, that he knew not
which of 'em would open their gate to him. He preferred Tours before all the
rest, not because he was more assured of the Inhabitants, but because his
Presence was there necessary to prevent a Commotion just ready to break forth
to his prejudice. The Pope excommunicated the K. for the murder of the
Cardinal; they refused to pray for him in all the Cities of the League; at
Toulouse they committed terrible insolences, even so far as to hang up his
Image upon a Gallows, and to massacre those that durst take his part. Paris
offered to make the D. of Mayenne King. The Sorbon declared the French were
discharged from their Oath of Fidelity; and almost all the Clergy took part
with the Leaguers, whether it were in conformity to the Example of the Pope, or
because they were otherwise dissatisfied with the Government, the King drawing
great Sums of money from them, which the Ecclesiastics never paid with a good
will; besides, he had sharply taxed the Vices of that powerful body, in an
Answer to a harangue of their Deputies, which the Clergy could not suffer
neither, without great impatience. Nor were the Nobles more affectionate to
him; the D. of Guise had gained one part by his Merit and Liberality; the other
were obliged to the League by Religion, and they that were not leavened with
this Lump, durst not declare for the King, because they believed his affairs
desperate. He had few Men, and less Money, and he did not know whether he was
sure of those that were about his Person.

Well then, when he had no help left, when he had nothing to hope from the
Catholics, there remaining so few of them who adhered to his Interests, the
Protestants alone, whom he had hated with so much passion, persecuted by so
many Wars, by Massacres, by fraudulent Treaties, and whose ruin he had but
lately sworn, were the only people that inclined to his Succor. He had made no
Peace The King makes a Truce with the Reformed. His affairs grow better.
with them, but only single Truces, for the security of which he had given
Saumur to the King of Navar, because he had not Credit enough to deliver him
Ponts de Ce. By this Truce the third part of the Realm, where the Protestants
were at least strong enough not to fear the League, returned to the King's
Party. Thus it was the succor of the Protestants that saved this Prince at
Tours, where the D. of Mayenne thought to have surprised him, and which brought
him considerable success at Senlis, and elsewhere. But the most important of
all was the return of one part of his Nobility, who came over to him so soon as
they saw that this Truce did advantagiously relieve his affairs. So that in a
little time he became formidable to his Enemies, and marched toward Paris with
He lays siege ^^ Paris.
an Army of above 38000 men, to chastise the Inhabitants for their madness.
That Noble Army was for the most part Protestant. There were the Veterane
Victorious Troops of the K. of Navar, 10000 Suisses, which Sancy had levied in
the reformed Cantons. Some thousands of Reiters, and a Reinforcement of
English, which the King had received from Queen Elizabeth. Without which, the
remainder would never have been able to have withstood the Leaguers. But the
Chieftains of that unfortunate Party not being able to make Head against the
Kings Forces, thought it was high time to make sure of their game, by causing
that poor Prince to be assassinated Is assassin'd by a Monk.
at St. Clou, by James Clement a Jacobite Monk, who by that execrable blow,
delivered the Leaguers from that Horrible Tempest which was pouring down upon
them.

The End of the First Book.
The History of the Edict of Nants. The Second Book.
The Summary of the Second Book.
The change of Affairs. What the Protestants had hoped for from the deceased
King. The trouble of the new King. The Intreagues of the Army and the Court.
The Characters and Interests of the Princes of the Blood. Of the Officers of
the deceased King, and of both the Catholic and Reformed Nobility, and their
suspicions about the King's Religion. The hopes of the Ministers. The King's
wavering, and his resolution upon the conditions proposed by the Catholics.
The Reformed flatter themselves about the King's Instruction. Diverse affections
of the Catholic Lords. The dissipation of the Army. The Fight at Arques. The
effects of the King's Promises in diverse Provinces. What the Protestants
understood by a Protector. The reciprocal Protection between the King of Navar
and the Reformed. Jealousies, and the foundations of them. The King is angry at
the Proposition of taking another Protector, and the Reformed find it unjust
and unseasonable. A Letter from the Kings own hand upon this Subject. The
Forces of the King, and of the League. Divisions between the one and the other
Party. The Dispositions of the Catholics and the Reformed in regard to the
Peace of Religion. Writings upon the taking Arms for Religion. The Battle of
Yvry. The Siege of Paris. The project of Peace for the Protestants. The equity
of their Demands, and the Passion of the Catholics. The project is approved,
and afterward rejected. Remonstrances upon this Subject, and their effect. The
Bull of Gregory XIV. The Edict of Mants. Quarrels about the Verification of it,
of which the Reformed complain. The third party and their Designs. The
propositions of the Clergy that followed the King. Foreign Army. Viscount
Turenne Marrys the Heiress of Sedan, and is made Marshal of France. The
Pragmatick eluded by the Clergy. The Arts of the Catholics to gain the King.
Conferences between du Plessis and Villeroy without Fruit. Diverse aims in
promoting the King's Instruction. The Protestants continue excluded from
Employments. Rigours about their Burials. The continuation of the Artifices to
work upon the King's Conscience. Politic Interests which tended to the same
end. The mutual Policy of the Catholics and Protestants. The King's
Dissimulation. Preparatives to his change. The vain Ceremony of his
Instruction. The King's pretended Conversion. A Formulary which the King
refuses. A Trick to content the Pope.

THis unexpected Murder brought a great change upon affairs, Change of Affairs.
and was the beginning of a long Series of troubles. No body had time since the
truce to take measures either for his security, or advancement: The Protestants
thought they had lost more than others. They did not doubt but the last service
they had done the deceased King, had touched his heart, and that he had laid
aside those miserable prejudices, which caused him to have so great an aversion
for 'em. He had What the Reformed hoped from the dead K.
promised to change the Truce into a sound Peace, so that they imagined they
might hope from him the re-establishment of his Edict of 1577. and the
revocation of all those that had been extorted from him by the Leaguers. They
had the same reason to believe, that, that Prince being sensible of the
services which he had received from the K. of Navar, would by little and little
plain his way to the Crown. But there must be time for that, and chiefly to
subdue the Leaguers, without the destruction of whom, neither Religion nor the
State could be assured of any firm repose. But the Death of Henry III. happened
in a time when there was nothing ripe; and where the succession is contested,
it is impossible but the State must fall into great confusions.

It is true the King when he died gave great marks of tenderness The trouble of
the New King.
for the King of Navar, whom he acknowledged for his lawful Heir, and
recommended him to the Lords, and to the Officers of his Court and Army. But
for all this the new King met with a world of difficulties as soon as ever his
Predecessor expired. The Interests were so various between the Heads of the
League and the Lords, that it seemed to be impossible to reconcile 'em. Every
one was willing to take the advtange of this conjuncture, and to raise his own
Fortunes by the public misery. They put themselves then upon Negotiating, and
upon making Parties and Cabals, without regarding the body of the dead King,
and much less to revenge him, which ought not to have been long deferred, if
their only design had been to find an opportunity. There was scarce one
Catholic that declared himself The Intreagues of the Army.
for Hen. IV. without making his Market. The Marshal Biron who had a great deal
of credit in the Army, was so vain as to demand the Sovereignty of the County
of Perigord, and the King who was willing to buy this Lord at any price
whatsoever, consented to dismember one of the Provinces of the Realm,
notwithstanding the danger of the consequence: but as good luck would have it,
because every body could not promise themselves as much, there were men of
Honor who lost those ambitious thoughts; but the Marshal took so great an
Authority over the Troops, and in the Council, that in a little time he made
himself very uneasy to his Master.

The Princes of the blood gave more trouble than help to the K. And of the
Court.
The old Cardinal of Bourbon was his Rival, and the Leaguers acknowledged him
for K. under the name of Charles X. This old man who had neither force of Mind,
nor vigor of Body sufficient to bear the weight of a Crown, took pleasure in
the name of The Characters and Interests of the Prince; of the blood.
K and might have made some bustle perhaps, had he not been in a place where he
was not much to be feared. The Cardinal of Vendome, who took upon him the name
of the Cardinal of Bourbon after the Death of this old man, was unquiet and
Ambitious, and became the Idol of a third party, which he formed in a little
time after. The Count of Soissons his Brother could not agree with Henry IV.
and could more easily raise new stirs than concur to the good of the State. The
Prince of Conti was deaf and heavy by reason of a natural Indisposition.
Mompensier was the richest, and fully determined to acknowledge Henry IV. but he
held off upon his Religion, and was for absolutely having him to be a
Catholic. The Officers of the old Court staid with the K. more by The Officers
of the la^^* King.
reason of their Interest than Inclination. They could hope for no favor from
the League, because they had been either Counselors, Executors, or partakers
of those resolutions which carried Henry III. against the principal heads of
that Faction. And on the other hand were not without great perplexity, when
they thought on the ill Offices they had done the new K. while he was but K* of
Navar. Nor were they less afraid of the Protestants, to whom they had
occasioned a great many sufferings in the preceding reign, least they might now
take an occasion to revenge themselves. For these reasons they thought
themselves upon the Point of losing both their Offices and their Credit, to
which it appeared as if the Protestants would quickly succeed, since by this
Change the K. would avenge them of their ancient Enemies, whom he could not
assure himself of, and recompense his ancient Servants, whose fidelity The
Catholic Nobles.
was known. The Catholic Nobles prepossessed with the zeal of Religion, made
it appear clearly enough that they inclined toward the League, and that a
Protestant K. would not be agreeable to them. They consulted whether they
should acknowledge him for K. or no, and after diverse deliberations, they did
not resolve upon it, but upon very hard conditions. The D. of Longueville was
ordered to tell him, That the quality of Thrice-Christian being Essential to a
K. of France, they prayed him to receive the Crown upon that condition, that is
to say, upon condition to make himself a Catholic, according to the Opinion of
the Romish Church that believes there is no true Christianity out of her
Communion. The Duke at first accepted the charge of making this Declaration to
the K. but all of a sudden changed his mind when he was upon the point to
execute it. The Marquis D'O, who had managed the Finances of the Treasury under
the last K. refused the Commission of carrying this Message. He was the only
Man in the World that knew least of Religion, being drowned in Luxury and
debauchery, a great blasphemer, bold even to Insolence, and an implacable enemy
of the Protestants, whom he Persecuted even to Death, thwarting upon all
occasions the King's designs, when he was willing to do any thing in order to
their repose.

The K. saw no body but them in all the Army that did not raise him The
Reformed.
some trouble, and that did not form a Party to draw from him some advantageous
Capitulation. But they acknowledged him without any conditions and served him
as long as he had need of them. I know that, to lessen the Glory of their
Obedience, and the usefulness of their Services, it is objected, that they had
no other thoughts but of getting a King of their own Religion, and that it was
for this Interest that they hazarded all things. But supposing this to be their
Imagination, however this advantage cannot be taken from them, that their
interest and the Kings was so mingled, that what they did to establish their
Religion, served at the same time to assure the Crown to him: in which they
were extremely different from the Catholics, who separated the interest of
their Religion from that of the K. and appeared almost all ready to leave him
alone to his Affairs, (...), if their Religion did not find an advantage in
their Obedience. Time quickly showed that the K's. change, who forsook the
Protestant Religion, did not abate their zeal, and that they did not fail to
serve him, when he had bereaved them of all hopes of seeing a Protestant Prince
come to the Crown. The Catholic Historians themselves confess, That from the
beginning there was great jealousy about his stedfastness. In short, the Death
And their suspicions about the King's Religion.
of Henry III. happening too soon, they easily foresaw that the State would
fall into great disorders, and that the new K. might easily quit their
Religion, when he should need only that step to rid himself of so many
Encumbrances. The Offer which he always made, in a manner Offensive to the
Ministers and Zealous persons, of receiving better instruction when ever he
could be convinced his Religion was not good, gave reason enough for their
Jealousy. Those who had been brought up with him in his youth knew very well
that Patience was none of his Favorite Virtues, and that he was not of proof
against long enterprises, and by consequence would be quickly weary of the
difficulties of Conquering so many places as held out for the League, and that
if he could shorten them by changing his Religion, that would be no balk in his
way. It Is true indeed that he had some appearances of Piety, which might give a
good opinion of his Constancy; he knew many passages of the Psalms, and other
Books of Scripture, which he would apply very well, chiefly when he would
comfort himself after any cross chance, or recur to God Almighty in the
uncertainties of future events; and he behaved himself very well in his
ordinary Devotions, in his Prayers before a Fight, or in his Thanksgivings
after a Victory. But there is nothing which a Man treats in so contradictory a
manner as Religion; for he makes it the greatest of his Interests, and yet
sacrifices it to the least Affairs: it is the most invincible of his opinions;
and at the same time he plays with it as the most variable of his Thoughts.
No Passion is Mistress of his Heart with greater violence, and yet
nevertheless, nothing that he more easily puts in competition here; nothing
that he makes a greater show of on some occasions, and nothing with which he
troubles himself less on others. There was then a great deal of reason to be
jealous of the King's Constancy, when his mind upon this Subject was like
another man's, and their Suspicions of him increased, as soon as they saw him
King by the Death of Henry III. and were changed almost into certainty after
some steps that he made to gain the confidence of the Catholics.

But these Jealousies which were but too well verified by the Consequence of
Affairs, did not oblige the Protestants to take Security of him, nor make him
buy their services by advantageous conditions. It happened, as it is said, that
some Ministers in their The hopes of the Ministers.
Entertainments and Sermons Predicted the ruin of Antichrist, in terms a
little too harsh, and promised their Party a speedy triumph over the Church; a
hope upon which men often frame very agreeable illusions, because every one
makes an Application of the promises upon which he believes them founded, to
the age he lives in. Some Historians have alleged these over bold Discourses,
for an excuse of the irresolution of the Catholics. But there was more
particular Interest in the matter, than true Zeal for the good of Religion, as
appears by the Articles which they obliged the K* to promise before they would
acknowledge him He deliberated a great while with his ancient The uncertainty of
the King.
Friends, to know what to determine; during which the Catholics labored to
take their precautions. But after a long wavering the resolution he took was
not absolutely to refuse changing his Religion, but only in the present
conjuncture* come what would; that is to say, he would have Religion for an
up-stroak and see in the mean time what he could do by his prudence, and by the
fidelity of his servants. At last they present Conditions to him, upon which
the Catholics of the Army would acknowledge him. The first, That he should
cause himself to be instructed in six Months. as much as to say, according to
the style of the Roman Church, that he should make himself a Catholic in that
time. Thoseare 2 things which they neither distinguish in Speech nor Practice;
to be instructed according to them* being to promise to relish their Doctrine,
and to engage to make Profession of it. Whereas reason requires that
Instruction should be only an Essay, after which one should have entire
Liberty, to advance no further toward the Roman Religion, if after such
Instruction the Conscience be not fully satisfied. The second condition was,
That the exercise of the Reformed Religion should be suspended during that
time. The third, That the King should grant no Office to any Protestant for
those 6 Months; this the Catholics desired, to secure those that were in
possession of them, from being turned out. The last was, That they should have
permission to send to the Pope, to give him an account of their Reasons for
submitting to the Kings obedience.

Although it was very hard for the K. to buy a Crown so dear that was legally ^aln
to him* yet he consented to all but the 2d. Article. And His resolution upon
the conditions proposed by the Catholics.
in effect, besides the shame of depriving himself of the exercise of his
Religion, it would have been a piece of injustice, to take away from his
Subjects the privilege they enjoyed before his coming to the Crown; and 'twas
to be feared he would find them resolute and strong enough to maintain them, in
spite of all Prohibitions. The Catholics did not take well this denial, but
however to induce them to approve it, he promised to re-establish the Catholic
Religion in those places where the exercise of it was not before free. The
Article which concerned the K's Instruction was not much contested by the
Protestants themselves, of whom he took Counsel; and himself assures in a
Letter which he wrote upon this Subject, that the principal of those that were
his followers did not disapprove his proceedings. The Reason of it was because
the Protestants were persuaded, that if they proceeded to this instruction, in
a method agreeable The Protestants flatter themselves about the King's
Instruction.
to his Dignity, and the importance of the thing, they should ^ather gain than
lose by it. For they thought of nothing for that effect but General or National
Councils, or at least eminent Assemblies of the most Ecclesiastics,
Reformations of Abuses, sincere and serious conferences, and they hoped to make
the Truth of their Doctrine shine forth there so clearly, that instead of
losing the King they should gain many Lords, who hated not their Religion, but
only out of ignorance of its Principles. Du Plessis Mornay was pre*possess'd
with this Hope, as well as others, and it was for this Reason that two years
after he agreed so easily with Villeroy upon this Article.

The Catholics would have had a Declaration signed by the The various
affections of the Catholic Lords.
King for the assurance of the things which he had granted them, and
notwithstanding all the Complaisance he had for them, they were not entirely
contented. Some signed the Accord with regret* and others refused to sign it.
Vitri carried the matter further, and threw himself into the League. The Duke
of Nevers stood in a kind of Neutrality, under pretense, That his Conscience
would not let him join himself to the Enemies of the State, such as he esteemed
the Leaguers, nor serve the King, because he was not a Catholic. He persisted
in those Sentiments a long time, and it was nothing but the King's Victories
which determined him to his service. In the Provinces, the Governors of Places
who held for the King, did in a manner the same thing. Some were brought,
others promising to obey, declared without ceremony, That they should do it
with regret whilst the King continued an Heretic. But nothing did him so much
mischief as the Retreat of the Duke of Espernon, who quitted the Army without
discovering what Party he would take, nor the true reason of his Conduct. He
would fain have the World believe he did it out of a pure Motive of Zeal for
Religion, but 'twas suspected he had other considerations besides, etc. He
feared perhaps, that he was not in security at the New Court, which did not
love him, because he abused the Favor which he had under the late King, or
whether he could not resolve to submit to the mean figure in which he must have
lived had he staid, since there arose already some contests about his Rank:
either perhaps he had no inclination for the New King, nor confidence in his
Friendship, or whether in retiring to his Government he thought himself strong
enough to Cantonnize that part, and there expect what would befall the Realm;
and in case of dismembring it, he would keep what he had. Yet however in a
little time after his Retreat, he promised the K. to serve him in those
Provinces where he governed. But his Example proved of considerable
consequence, because the Lords and Captains retired likewise, and the Troops
disbanded themselves, and the fine Army, which would easily have brought The
dispersion of the Army.
Paris, and the League to reasonable terms, dispersed in a few days. Some even
of the Protestants with drew themselves, and because their enemies made it a
great Crime afterward, it is necessary to observe, that the Dissipation began
first by the Catholics, and for a few others quitting it, that Retreat ought
not to be imputed to the whole Party. It is certain, that the K's true Servants
were as useful to him in the Provinces as in the presence of his person. In
effect, there were many Cities which waver'd at the News of Hen. III. his
Death; and the Resolution taken at Paris not to receive an Heretic King upon
the Throne of St. Lewis, appeared so pleasing to the Catholics, that it drew a
great number into the League, and 'twas thought it would bring over many Cities
which held out for the King. And therefore the Protestants had need of some
part of their Forces to bridle those that had a mind to stir, and to keep their
own places from being surprised, in whose preservation the King had as much
Interest as themselves. So that they were obliged to disperse part of their
Troops into diverse places, to keep as much of the Country as they could in
obedience. From whence it follows, that if we judge equitably we must not make
the Protestants guilty of a Crime where they can excuse themselves, either by
the Necessity of the Time, or by the Example of the Catholic Nobles, or
because, if they did go off from the King's Army, it was but to serve him
elsewhere.

In the mean time the dissipation of the King's Army made the League take
Courage, and they had fresh Springs for succor; and the King, who was in no
estate to enterprise any thing, being retired toward Diepe, to receive the
Forces which he expected from England: the D. of Mayenne pursued him, and
reduced him to so great an extremity, that he was upon the point of passing the
Sea, as despairing of his affairs. But the Mareshal Biron hindered him from
leaving his Party* and the success of the Fight at Arques, joined to The fight
of Arques.
the arrival of the English, having made the Leaguers retire, the King put his
affairs into a good posture, and gained several advantages. During the time
that this passed, the promise which he had made to the Catholics of his party,
being sent into the Provinces, gave great Alarms to the Protestants. These
words were read with suspicion, which had slipped into the Copies, The late King,
whom God absolve: and as they knew these were taken from the ordinary Language
of the Roman Church, when it speaks of dead persons, they feared they were let
fall from the K. as an effect of a Resolution already taken to embrace the
Doctrine of that Church, or at least as a mark of little zeal and affection to
the Protestant Religion. This was chiefly noised about in the Provinces of
Poitou and Saintonge, where the discontents began soonest. They assembled
together in order to a conference at St. John d'Angeli, where under pretense,
'twas uncertain whether the K. would persevere in his Religion, they proposed
to choose a new Protector. It seemed but a Series of certain Intrigues which had
caused the trouble in the last assembly at Rochel, where some unquiet Spirits
complaining of the Authority which the K. of Navar took in affairs, would have
taken away the power which the Protection gave him, or limited it by rigorous
conditions, because Effects of the King's promise^ in some Provinces.
they did not intend to choose a Master in taking a Protector. For this reason,
perhaps, they would have chose rather to give this Quality to a man whom they
had a mind to honor, than to a Prince, who seeing no body but the King above
him, would think all other Qualities inferior to his Dignity. Since the Death
of Henry III. they had more reason than ever to renew the same Reflections,
because the K. of Navar having succeeded him, he was thenceforward too great
not to adjudge the Quality of Protector, as derogating from that of a K The
Reason why they moved in that business, at the conference, was, because they
talked of suppressing the Chambers of Justice, to please the Parliaments; which
the K. while he was only K. of Navar, had established in diverse places,
composed of Protestant Officers, before whom the Protestants brought all their
Affairs; and that they had settled Royal Judges in diverse places, which deprived
the Protestant Officers of their ordinary subsistence. That they had restored
the Mass in diverse places against the express Terms of the Truce, under the
pretense of executing it, and that their Protector had done nothing for them
since his coming to the Crown. That when the Truce was now ready to expire,
they saw nothing which tended to the peace which the late King had promised.
They complained also, That their Ministers, with whose maintenance the King had
charged his Finances, were worse paid under the New Reign than they had been
under the Old. Du Plessis in Negotiating the Truce, made this a Capital
Article, and carried it, after some Contradictions. The Order which was
observed for the Execution of this Treaty, was, That there were sent to the
Secretary of State of each Division, Rolls which certified the Names and Number
of their Pastors, which Du Plessis was to sign. And upon these Rolls so
attested, Ordonnances were delivered to the Exchequer, out of which it was paid
to the Neighboring Receivers of the places of their Residence. Henry IV. was
willing to have continued this Order for the Provinces where the Protestants
were strong, and this lasted till he changed his Religion after which he never
settled it, notwithstanding the promise, he had made. Moreover during the first
troubles of the new Government, this order was ill observed insomuch that the
persons interessed were not able to support themselves; and their condition was
more uncertain under a King of their own Religion, than they had ever been
under any that was their Enemy. This made them fear the event, both for
themselves and the common cause, which the King seemed to defend with no great
heat, and therefore they thought they must rely upon a Protector, who might
apply himself to their Affairs with less indifference.

But before we go any further we must explain what the Protestants What the
Keformed understood by Protector.
meant by a Protector, for fear it should be imagined that it was a Project of
Rebellion which was formed by them, under the pretense of this Election. The
Protestants then having been constrained, after the cruelties and wrongs of
more than 30 years, to unite themselves together for their common Defense, they
put themselves at first under the protection of the Prince of Conde. who had
the same Interest with them, and to whom the Guises owed as little good Will,
as to the Protestant Religion. The natural design of this Protection, was to
procure security and repose to the people who had embraced the Reformation, to
carry to the King the complaints and requests of the persecuted party, by an
authorized Intercessor; to repress, by the respect of their Protector, the
enterprises of the Cabals of Zealots, or the Intrigues which the Ambitious
might form for the ruin of the Protestants, to have a Trustee and Guardian of
the Faith of Treaties and Edicts, which might be obtained for Liberty of
Conscience; so that this Protection gave to the person to whom it was given,
nothing but the care of obtaining tolerable conditions for the Protestants, and
to procure them to be observ^d when obtained by his Solicitations and his
Credit; and by consequence, he could never give any jealousy to any Princes but
such as had no design to keep their Faith, since to render the Protector of no
use, there was no more to do but to permit the People to live quietly in peace
of Conscience; the Protection does then fall of it self, when there is no
infractions to redress, nor any Injustice ^o fear: Since all the proceedings of
the Protector aimed at nothing else but to obtain and procure from the King a
so^id Peace and Tranquillity unto a considerable part of his Sub^^cts, whom the
other Disaffected Party designed to oppress. The Royal Authority was always
respected, and indeed under that Protection. Since if any thing was restrained
or limited by this Protection, it was not the Royal Authority which the
Protestants desired rather to increase than diminish: but the Inhuman Zeal of
the Catholics, which after all the Protestant Blood they had spilt by infinite
number of Torments, talked of nothing but the utter destruction and
extermination of the rest. And if that formed a party in the Realm, Equity and
humanity will blame them less for it, that had but that one way left them to
defend themselves, than those that by a thousand Violences, Wrongs and Frauds,
forced them to have recourse to that Remedy. It is true, this Protection has
sometimes produced War, but it was by accident, because the infidelity of the
Court, the ambitious cruelty of the Guises, the violations of Treatys, and
Edicts, constrained the Protestants, with whom no measures were observed, to
defend themselves by Arm^ against such unjust and odious ways of oppression.

Furthermore the Protestants had had no Protectors, but what Protection
reciprocal between the K. of Navir and the Refo^med,
were Princes of the Blood; nay, and their Protectors have not been always
Protestants neither, for the Duke of Alenzon, who had that Quality, never
renounced the Roman Religion. Henry IV. while he was yet King of Navar, was
Protector in his turn, and one might well say, that between him and the
Protestants, the Protection was in a sort reciprocal, and if he served them for
a good General, others also furnished him with strong Holds, and brave Troops.
He then had done them the good Offices of a Protector for many years, managed
Wars, obtained Edicts, and Treaties, pursued the reparation of the injustices
that were every where done to the Protestants; for which Reasons they often
used to tell him since his coming to the Crown, that he knew their necessities
better than any body, for that he had often presented their Papers, and their
Requests, and pursued the reparation of the infractions and Violencies of which
they had reason to complain; But when he was mounted on the Throne, the
complaisances he immediately showed for the Catholics, and the little care he
seemed to take for the Security of the Protestants, inclined some of them to
believe that his Protection was ended, and that since he could be no longer the
Solicitor of their Affairs, it was needful to look out another, who might do
that office to him on their behalf. They began to foresee he would by little
and little alienate The Protestants jealousies, and their grounds.
himself from their Religion, and justly feared at the same time, that if the
Catholics could once influence him to change, they would inspire him with the
spirit of persecution, which is essential to the Romish Church, and prevail
with him to strike up a Peace to their cost, with the Pope and the Leaguers;
and that insensibly from a protecting Prince, they would make him become their
capital Enemy and destroyer.

And the Conduct of the Catholic Royalists still more confirmed those
Jealousies; For at the very time they were daily receiving signal services from
the Protestants, and but 6 or 7 months after they had rescued them from the
revengeful power of the Leaguers; by receiving into their Arms the late Henry
III. and his Court, when oppressed by the Forces of that prevailing party; The
Catholics had the confidence to demand of Henry IV. the Interdiction of the
Protestant Religion, the exclusion of Protestants from all Offices, and in some
sort the exclusion of the K. himself from the Crown, unless he embraced the
Romish Religion within 6 months. Nay, 'twas not without some visible
reluctance, they suffered the Protestants to have access to the Kings person,
they wrongfully engrossed all business from them into their own hands, so that
they could not enjoy their former freedom and privacy of converse with him. And
in all sorts of Affairs whatsoever, there appeared manifest proofs of the
Catholick's ^ll will toward them. For they endeavored to ruin the Garrisons
of the Protestant Towns by cutting short their pay, and putting them to more
trouble than 'twas worth to get the rest. They could not endure any business
should succeed well that was managed by Protestants; and therefore when Du
Plessis being employed to treat with Chavigny, to get out of his hands the old
Cardinal of Bourbon, whom they had a mind to have under a better guard, had
promised him certain sums of money, for which he himself stood security, and had
besides made other advances out of his own purse, for the better effecting that
important business, they paid him both of them in bad Assignments. This made
the Protestants think they had reason to fear ^ll things from such people that
showed so much ingratitude to their deliverers in the midst, as 'twere, of the
action itself, and whilst their deliverance was yet fresh. What then might not
they do one day, when they should once have made themselves as much Masters of
the K's Conscience, as they were already of his person? It was impossible but
such considerations must needs give a seasonable alarm to a distressed people,
that after above 50 years sufferings under their cruelty and perfidiousness,
could not be ignorant, that the Roman Church changes neither her Humors nor
her Maxims; and that by consequence, her hard headed Zealots would always be
prosecuting their ruin by the same pious measures.

But on the other side, the K. would not suffer the Quality of Protector The
King offended at the proposition of taking another Protector.
to be given to another, as not thinking it extinguished by his accession to the
Crown, but rather confounded in him with the quality of K. who ought to be the
natural Protector of all his Subjects. For he well foresaw (that once
admitted) that if the Protestants obtained any tolerable conditions, 'twould
not be to him they would owe the obligation, since they would be granted them
by the credit, and at the solicitation of another. And indeed, '^is the nature
of men in the matter of favors done by a Prince to his Subjects, to attribute
less to the good will of the Prince that grants them; than to the Authority of
the Mediator that obtains them, and to have more respect, as we may say, to the
channels by which they are derivd to them, than to the Fountainhead from
whence they spring. And therefore the K. was not willing another should
together with the quality of Protector, rob him of the Love and Confidence of
his Subjects, or to seem to grant at the solicitation of another, what he kne^
to be justly due to the Protestants, either by a natural right, or as a
recompense for their faithful services. Nay, and the wisest heads among And the
Wiser Protestants find ^t both unjust and unseasonable.
the Protestants were likewise of opinion, That proposition was made without
reason, and at a very improper time. Because the choosing of a Protector,
would necessitate the K. to engage the further in the interests of the
Catholics, when he should see himself suspected by his 1589.
ancient servants, of whom by consequence, he would have good reason to be
reciprocally Jealous. Besides, the injuries they complained of seemed to them
not so great, but that they well deserved to be excused by the necessity of the
time, and of which they might not very well hope for a speedy redress whenever
his Majesty pleased. It was likewise suspected, that proposition was suggested
by the Artifice of the Catholics, who had represented objects much bigger than
the life, purposely to create jealousies between the K. and the Protestants,
and to divide them, that so they might the more assuredly possess the K. alone,
and without any rivals; and influence him upon the first fair opportunity, to
destroy the Protestants.

That project therefore was backed but by few Persons, and was A Letter written
by the King's own hand, upon that Subject.
not very hard to break, especially upon the sight of a Letter written by the
K's own hand, to Du Plessis, as well to give the more force to the thing it
self, as because a Catholic Secretary of State was not so fit to express^th
K's sense upon that subject, as a Protestant. He there complained of the
proposition made at the Conference, which I have already mentioned, and of the
motives upon which it was grounded; and accused some malcontents, whom he
would not seem to know, of endeavoring to advance their own private interest
under that pretense; he reminded them of some sly practices at the last
Assembly at Rochell, which had been, as 'twere, the seeds of this new attempt.
He likewise recited at large, what had past between him and the Officers of the
Old Court, in order to remove the scruples of Religion, that hindered them from
declaring for his service, in which he protested he had done nothing, of which
the principal Protestants that were present, as Chartillon, la Noue. Beauvais,
la Nocle, Guitri, etc. had not been both Witnesses and Counselors: He assured
them, that he had with his own hand, blotted out of the Original of the Act, he
had signed to the Catholics, the words, whom God Absolves, which were inserted
again into the Copies, either by the Zeal of the Copiers, or of the Printer. He
attributed the complaints of the Protestants to the suggestions of some
Mutineers, and complained likewise on his side, that they who boasted so much,
that had exposed their lives, their labors, and their whole fortunes for him,
were now the very men that endeavored to divest him of that quality they
themselves had conferred upon him. After which he madegreat protestations of his
constancy in the Reformed Religion, excusing what he had done, that might give
them any suspicion to the contrary, by the Broils that hapn'd upon his
accession to the Crown; which he confessed, [had obliged him to do many things
to gain upon the Spirits of the Catholics, who were jealous of him, as being
persuaded he wheedled with them only at present, till being settled in the
Throne, he might afterward at pleasure destroy their Religion. He further
remarked, that he had the Swissers to retain, who had engaged themselves only
to the deceased K. that he had the Peoples affections to gain, which had been
debauched from their Loyalty by their preachers, and that he was most of all
perplexed to find out expedients to keep the Nobility and Gentry from Deserting
him who inclined to the Leaguers. He likewise modestly complained, that he had
been deserted by some of the Protestants. He excused all things that gave them
any jealousy by the necessity he lay under in that difficult juncture. He gave
them an account of his constant attendance on the exercise of his Religion,
which he had ordered to be continued in his Army with that diligence, that his
Chaplain D'Amours had sometimes preached seventimes a week at D^ep. And lastly,
He complained a little roughly of those who by their unconsiderate Impatience,
went about to rob him of his Protestant Subjects, who ought to be his by a
double acquisition, whom he tendered with a paternal Love, and whose
preservation could not possibly be so dear to any other person as to himself.

That Letter so tempered with complaints, excuses* protestations, and
expressions of a tender affection, much helped the wiser sort to repress the
Impetuosity of the rest; and the Protestants became thereby so caseharden'd to
endure the tedious delays of the Court, that 7 or 8 long years of excuses and
demurs could not afterward tire their patience. The rest of the years past in
this perplexity between hopes and fears: But however, before we meddle with the
events of another, it will be necessary to represent in a few words, the state
of the two parties that thus rent the Kingdom. The Leaguers were extremely The
state of the Forces ^^th of the Leaguers, and of the King'^ party.
strong, as having on their side the greatest Cities, and all the Parliaments,
except that of Rennes, which remained under the K's obedience, and that of
Bourdeaux, which Mabignon made a shift to keep in a kind of Neutrality, the
better to preserve there his own Authority, and which he brought not fully over
to the service of Henry IV. till a year after, nor then neither, without some
cost to the Protestants, by the suppression of the Court of Justice they had
within the limits of that Parliaments Jurisdiction, in which it made a great
breach. Besides those, the whole Ecclesiastical Order was still of the Leaguers
party, which was further supported by the Authority of the Pope, the whole
Force of Spain, and of all the Catholic Powers, except that of Venice, which
was the first that acknowledged the K's Title; and the great D* of Tuscany, who
was so well inclined, as to offer him Money upon condition to procure his Niece
to be Married to some Prince of the Blood, and effectually obtained more that
he demanded, since the K. was pleased to Marry her himself. The K's party was
composed of the major part of the Nobility and Gentry, of almost all the Lords
of the old Court, and of all the Protestants, who were ready to hazard their
All for his service; it was likewise considerably Fortified by the Alliance
with England, and other foraign Protestants, which Du Plessis, who studied all
means imaginable to fix him fast to the Protestant Religion, had proposed to
him, and prevailed with him to solicit, in spite of the opposition of the
Catholics, who feared it might divert him from that Instruction he had
promised to receive.

But though the League was very powerful in Respect of the parties The divisions
reigning in each party.
that composed it, yet it was otherwise weakened by the Division that Reigned
among its Chiestains, who had every one their particular aims and Interests.
Neither was the Kings party without the same Defect: For the Catholics and
Protestants could not agree, the former not being able to master the
prejudicate conceit they had of their own Religion, which cannot brook the
toleration of any other, and the latter still Retaining strong Jealousies of
the Catholic sincerity, as being by so long and cruel Experiences convinced,
they were but too well grounded. The one had for the protestants hatred which
nothing could appease, and the other a patience so much spent, that it was
ready each moment to turn into Desperate sury. There were among the Catholic
Royalists very few, or perhaps none at all that were Reasonable enough to
suffer the protestants to live in any equality with the others, as Children of
the same family, and as having the same Right as others, to the Liberties and
privileges of their common Country; no, They studied nothing else but how to
put them by all offices, and posts of public business, for fear if they were
once received into such places their Religion would make such a considerable
progress, that the Catholics would by little and little be debarred of all
employments. The protestants likewise on their side, had the same thoughts, and
hoped, that if things were once settled upon an equal foot between the two
Religions, in respect of the established privileges and tranquillity of a
Civil life, they should so^n see their party strengthened by a numerous
accession of Catholics whose conversion was obstructed only by this
consideration that the condition of the protestants was yet uncertain, and that
it would not quit their cost to embrace their Religion.

There were some then among the Catholics, who for all their high The (...)
^n^ a^sp^s^^^o^s of the Catholic Royalists ^^ a Peace in Religion.
pretenses to Equity and Moderation, would have thought they had done a
wonderful favor to the protestants, in exempting them only from Capital
punishment and suffering them to live privately among them after their own way,
without indulging them any public exercise of their Religion, or admitting
them to any share in honorable or gainful offices: Some others again more
superstitious, or more hotly prejudiced, would willingly have sacrificed them
to the League, had there wanted nothing but that advance, to have broken it,
and were afraid of nothing more than of Granting them any favor. And Montholon
himself, who was called the Aristides of his time, and to whom Henry the 14th
had Given the seals, yet was so far from a Reasonable temper in matter of
Religion, that he fairly returned them again to the new King, for fear he
should be obliged to seal any thing under that Reign, in favor of the
Protestants. By which example, we may Judge how strongly besotted those devout
men were with their mistaken Zeal. But there were another sort, who though they
harbored no better intentions toward the Protestants than the others, yet
were willing to comply a little with the exigences of the times, that they
might thereby gain advantage to make use of the same artifices that Henry the
3d had before practiced for 5 years together; and with this design, they
Readily inclined to grant the Protestants peace, the better to disarm them, to
make them effeminate, and to seduce and divide them, and were against
proceeding to the extremity of war, or to any violences, by which the Romish
Religion was more likely to lose than get; But yet they would have had a peace
of so little advantage to the Protestants, that there was small appearance they
would be contented with such low proffers, or be persuaded to place any
security in them. The Catholics of this last party made the gaining of time,
and putting off, as long as possible, the peace so much desired by the
Protestants, to be the main spring and moving principle of their whole design,
Because they saw that in the present Juncture, it was impossible to grant them
any but what must needs be too advantageous to them. And there were three
things they desired first to obtain, viz. First, the Reduction of the King to
the Romish Religion, Secondly a peace with the Leaguers, and Thirdly a firm
Alliance with Spain; for then they thought their Credit would be strong enough
to oblige the King to close with their advices, and that, all the force of the
Kingdom being by that means united, the fear of being totally oppressed would
force the Protestants to be content with such an Edict as they should please to
give them. This party was the strongest in the Council, where it began to
insinuate it self, even in the last Reign, and all the wearisome delays used to
spin out that business for 8 or 9 years together, proceeded from that politic
principle. Thence came all those Reasons of state with which the protestants
were amused every time they importuned the King to do any thing for them, viz.
The fear of hardening the Leaguers in their obstinacy, of offending the Pope,
and of Scandalizing the people, with which specious pretenses they likewise
amused the King himself.

From thence came that Maxim which past almost for a Law at Court, viz. That no
Edict ought to be Granted in favor of the Protestants, till all the Catholics
were first Reduced and satisfied by Treaties; It being but Reasonable, said
they, the Children of the Church should be fully provided for, before the least
favor were done for those which were Excommunicated, and declared Heretics by
the same Church. Lastly from thence proceeded all those Cavils which were
started to elude all their demands, and to defraud them of the benefit of those
Favorable Declarations, which the fear of making them Desperate, obliged the
Court sometimes to grant them.

From thence also partly proceeded the infidelity of several Catholic
Royalists that thwarted, as much as they could, the course of his Majesty's
prosperities, and made him lose the fruit of his most advantageous succesles;
for they were afraid, If the Leaguers were once subdued, or a peace made with
their chief Leaders, before the King were turned Catholic, there would be no
way left after that, to oblige him to change his Religion; and therefore they
made it their whole business, to drill on the war, till they had brought the
King to Mass. And letters were several times intercepted, especially during the
siege of Roan and the negotiation of Duplessis with Villeroy, that unfolded
that whole mystery, and sufficiently evidenced, that some of the greatest Lords
of the Kings party. writ to the principal of the Leaguers to advise them not to
make a peace, for fear they should thereby loose the opportunity of obliging
the King to Quit the Reformed Religion. These artifices were not without some
mixture of private Interest. For there were several Catholics, who though they
warmly pressed the Kings conversion, yet in their hearts desired it not, because
they looked upon it as a thing that would hasten a peace, after which they
should be discarded, as of no further use, and therefore would not have been
sorry if the K. had made a little more resistance against the importunities of
those that pressed him to change, so that both Religion and the State served
those Zealous Catholics but as Play-tools to manage the game of their own
private fortunes with the better Advantage.

Neither was the Protestants party without its faults: Some of The disposition
of the Protestants in regard to same matter
them dissuaded the K. from changing, because they heartily loved their
Religion, and these urged him with motives of Conscience, remonstrating to him,
how exceedingly he was obliged to God's goodness for so many signal favors,
and so many glorious Victories; And what a fearful vengeance he must expect
would attend him, if he should Quit his Service under pretense of facilitating
a peace, to which it would be much more honorable for him to force his
enemies; And they which acted by this principle, were considerable in number,
and as constant to the service of the King, as to the interest of their
Churches; But they were not the most pleasing Courtiers and accordingly had but
small share in the gifts and Recompenses of the Court, as appeared sufficiently
by the little that was done for Duplessis, De La Noue, and some others.
Lesdiguieres and Roni were none of the number of those Zealous opposers, and we
shall have occasion else where to speak of the Character of their piety; Roni
especially, was not at all nice upon the matter of Religion, and though he at
first started some difficulties against the Kings change, yet he afterward
showed more compliance with it than any man. For He thought, whilst the war
continued, his fortune would be Retarded, and that he should have more to do
after the peace, at what price soever the King obtained it. There were some
others again, that Doubted not that the Kings change of Religion, would make
them be looked upon afterward as the heads of their party, and that by
consequence, they should meet with more Honor from the Protestants, and more
Respect at Court, than before. But however all of them agreed at least in this
one thing, In that they did no violence as did the Catholics to their Princes
inclinations, nor imposed any laws or conditions upon him, to put any force
upon his thoughts. So that even after his Change the most Zealous among them,
never passed the bounds of a whispering murmur, and upbraided him with nothing
so much, as that in an action of such mighty Importance, he had not observed
the measures becoming his Dignity. They forbore not after that, to serve and
follow him without any condition, and the most part of them at their own
expenses, without any supply or Recompense from him. Upon due consideration of
which, he confesses himself by public Acts, and the Catholic Historians
publish from his words, That the Protestants had done him most signal services.
And it is probable they would have yet made greater efforts for him, could he
have forborne giving them just grounds of Jealousy. But at least they were so
moderate as to make no separate Parties, nor to thwart his Prosperities by any
underhand practices with his Enemies, nor to offer to obstruct the conclusion
of a Peace, for fear their Religion should be oppressed by it. That is in
general, as much as is necessary to be known of the disposition which both the
Spirits of Affairs of those times were in for the better understanding of the
causes of the following events.

About the beginning of this Reign, several writings appeared Writings about
the point of taking up of Arms. for Religion 1589.
upon the Subject of the times. But the most remarkable were those that
maintained the Arms of the Leaguers to be lawful, because taken up against a
Prince, who making profession of a different persuasion, could not be
acknowledged without indangering the Catholic Religion. So that according to
them, Religion was a sufficient cause to authorize subjects to take up arms
against their Sovereigns. Whereas the Low Country Writers maintained the down
right contrary, against those Provinces that had withdrawn themselves from the
obedience of the K. of Spain; nay, and in France it self when the Protestants
finding themselves driven to the utmost limits of Passive Obedience, by the
cruel and perfidious treatment of the Catholics, took up Arms to defend
themselves: the same Adversaries published other writings that moved upon quite
contrary Principles, and proved that even Religion itself could not authorize
subjects to take up arms against their Prince; but that they were always
indispensably bound to obey him, tho he were a Heretic. Thus the Roman Church
makes Laws for others, and exceptions only for her self; and her Divinity and
her Faith change according to her necessities, and the alteration of her
Interests alters likewise to her advantage the rules even of Conscience it self.

In the mean while the Sorbon let fly against the K. and condemned 1590.
as Heretical, all propositions that could be made in his favor; nay, and so
far did their zeal out-shoot it self, that they decided, he ought not to be
obeyed, no, not tho he should come to obtain absolution from his Heresy, which
proved a blow of mischievous consequence, because of the great reputation of
that renowned Faculty, and made the K. afraid of giving any pretense to the
Catholics of his Party, and that were not over strongly devoted to his
service, to do worse. About that time he won the famous Battle of Yvry, against
the D. of Mayenne, upon which occasion it may be Remarkt The battle of Yvri.
as a thing that shows the state of the Protestants at that time in the
Kingdom, that Du Plessis marching with all diligence to join the Army, to which
he arrived but just the evening before the Battle, passed through Chataudun,
where he ordered a Protestant Sermon to be preached. At which liberty of his,
the Magistrate being offended, Du Plessis was fain to appease him with a kind
of excuse, and to pretend, that it being one of the conditions of the Truce,
that the Reformed Religion might be freely exercised in the K's Army, he had a
right to exert that privilege, as commanding a part of it, and being upon his
March to join its main Body; and besides, that the Army of a K. of France was
always construed to extend 30 Leagues round his Camp. And yet the K. himself
had not so perfect a liberty in his own Army, but that he was sometimes under a
constraint in the exercise of his Religion, for fear of offending the
Catholics. For tho he had made D' Amors his Protestant Chaplain, to Pray
after the Protestant way, at the head of 1590.
his Squadron, before he gave Battle; yet after the Victory, he durst not give
public thanks for it in the field of Battle, as he had done at Courtras, but
was sain to defer it till he came to Roni, where he lay the night after the
Fight, and then it was done only in his Privy Chamber, and in the presence but
of a few People.

It was thought that Victory must needs have been a fatal blow to the Leaguers;
but the Marshal of Biron, and the Marquess of O. who had those Aims, which I
have Remarked, made the K. lose the fruit of it, by hindering him from following
the advice of De la Noue, who advised him to march directly to Paris, of which
it was very probable he would make himself master, if he would immediately
March, and present himself at their Gates before the Leaguers were recovered
out of their present amazement. Afterward, they would fain have Prosecuted
that Advice, and vain endeavors were used to get possession of that Town, when
'twas too late, and the Citizens had taken new courage, so that a resolution
was taken to reduce it by a Siege. But before that undertaking, The Siege of
Paris.
the Protestants labored hard with the K. to obtain some favor of him, for
their better security; but the Catholics still diverted him from it, by their
ordinary objections drawn from the consideration of the present State of
Affairs, and of the Leaguers, and advised him to put off that Debate till Paris
were reduced, because by the taking of that, the whole force of the League
would in all likelihood be crushed. And accordingly the K. made use of that
pretense to put off a Negotiation of that ticklish nature, which he found so
full of thorns and perplexing difficulties. Upon which occasion, it is said,
that Du Plessis, who could see no solidity in the Reasons alleged for that
delay, answered the K. who would needs maintain them to be good, that since his
Majesty was pleased to Postpone God after Paris, he was afraid God would not
give him Paris at all. And indeed, after he had lost a great deal of time
before that great City, and slipped many occasions of gaining it, he was forced
to raise the Siege, and give ground a little before the Leaguers, whose throats
till then he had in a manner under his foot.

After Paris was relieved, and the D. of Parma retired, the proposal for
satisfying the Protestants, was again taken into Deliberation; and the K.
moving toward Normandy, ordered a project of a Declaration to be drawn up for
the procuring of Peace among his Subjects, notwithstanding the difference of
Religion. A new project of peace for the Protestants.
In which, Du Plessis who framed it, laid open at large the K's Intentions in
order to the reuniting of all his subjects into one fold, if 'twere possible,
by the means of a General, or at least a National Council, or if neither of
them could be had, of a considerable Assembly of Select Church men, such as
should be judged the fittest to conduct to a happy issue, so holy an
enterprise; and in the mean time while such a reunion should be endeavoring,
the Catholic Religion was every where restored, with an entire liberty to use
the public service practiced by that Church, whereas nothing at all was done
for the Protestants but what was before granted them by the Truce, except only
that all those Edicts were recalled, which had been extorted to their
prejudice, by the Leaguers. And that one would think was very little for those
people who were of the K's Religion, and who had so usefully and faithfully
served him from his Infancy. And indeed, after so long patience, and after they
had run through many dangers, and toilsome labors, to obtain nothing else of a
K. that had been a long time their Protector, but what they had already
obtained from another that had been a great while their Persecutor, was even to
get just nothing at all. But the Catholics took the alarm as soon as ever any
proposal was offered, to grant any new favor to the Protestants, and were much
more disposed to make retrenchments from, than additions to the Edicts of
Toleration, and all they could hope to obtain from the equity of the most
moderate of them was that the Terms of the precedent Edicts, should be strictly
observed, without extending or diminishing any of their Concessions. So that
the Protestants were fain to be content with what they could obtain, and all
the pretenses they could make to any new favors in recompense for their long
services, were sacrificed to the K's Interests who could not do any thing for
them without imbroiling himself with the Catholics; and therefore they reduced
all their demands to these three heads, viz. A security for The reasonableness
of their demands.
their lives and consciences. 2. A liberty for the public exercise of their
Religion. And 3. An equal share in the Distribution of places and employments.
By the consideration of which, it is easy to judge, which were the most
equitable, the Catholics, or the Protestants. The Catholics would have both
the K. and the Protestants at their Discretion, and thought these latter
obliged to serve him without any recompense, nay, and without any security too;
but And the passion of the Catholics
yet had the face to demand a recompense for themselves, before any service
done, and would be assured of the K's Conscience, before they would give him
any assurance of their Allegiance. Whereas the Protestants on the contrary,
demanded only such tolerable conditions as were fit to be granted to honest
men, and good French men; and to be treated like other Members of the State, of
which they were a considerable part.

It was then enough to satisfy them, to restore them the Edict of Toleration
granted in 1577, with the Explications of it contained in the Treaties of Nerac
and Fleix; and to revoke the Edicts 1590.
put out against them only in compliance with the furious humors of the
Leaguers: So that the Edict that Du Plessis had drawn up, would certainly have
contented them, tho no other security were given them for the performance of
it, but the K's protection, who was himself their security. But whilst those
matters were in debate, This new suit of theirs was traversed by those whose
old custom it was to thwart the good Dispositions of those that were inclined
to let the Protestants live in quiet. Biron was one of those, and one of the
most fiery of them too: He would needs have but one Religion suffered in the
Kingdom, and yet what is most remarkably extravagant in one of that hot headed
temper, is, that he himself lived peaceably with his Lady, who was a
Protestant, and had permitted her for some time to bring up his Son in her
Religion; which made Du Plessis take occasion one day to tell him, he wondered
why he could not as well find means to make two Religions agree together in one
Kingdom, as he had found the secret to make them agree together in one Bed.
This Remark is proof enough, that passion and prejudice had a much greater
share in the opposition made against the Protestants, than either good Reason,
or true Zeal.

However, the project of the Declaration after it had been The project is at
first approved.
examined at Pont St. Pierre, in full Council, was found so reasonable, that it
was resolved it should be published; and the K. ordered the Chancellor and Du
Plessis whom he had made Counselor of State since the Battle of Yvri, to go
to Tours, to get it approved by the Parliament and part of the Council that
resided there, of which the Cardinal of Vendome was President; but the
Catholics bafled that attempt too, as And afterward rejected.
soon as the two Commissioners were gone, and procured the Chancellor to be
recalled. Their true reason was because they concluded, that if the Protestants
were once confirmed by an Edict, and cured of all the jealousies they had of
the King, it would be a great obstacle to that Prince's return to the Roman
Church, because then they would stickle the more vigorously to keep him in
theirs; and besides, would thereby get such footing in all posts of business,
under the favor of a K. of their own Religion, that they would soon overtop
the Catholics in power; but however their pretense was as it used to be, viz.
For fear of alienating the Affections of the People, and authorizing the
Jealousies of the Leaguers. ^u Plessis made vigorous Remonstrances to the K.
concerning the Remonstrances about it.
Equity of that Declaration; telling him freely in writing, that 'twas (...)
shame for him to let the Edicts of the Leaguers remain so long in force, those
Edicts that had been extorted by unjust Violences, that had 1590.
thrown the State into confusion, and caused the Death of Henry III. which had
declared Henry IV. incapable of the Crown, because of his Religion and in some
sort degraded the Princes of the Blood; that the Reinforcement of the Edict of
Toleration, granted in 1577 was in full ^nse of Law, included in the Revocation
of those others; that it was ^lemnly granted with the consent of the Princes of
the Blood, and of ^e most zealous Catholics; that it had brought Peace to
France, and ^ntented the King's Subjects; that it had maintained the Catholic
Religion in its honor and dignity, and yet at the same time provided for ^e
necessities of the other; that in a word, it had past as a thing finally
determined, and which was no more to be debated; that by the
(...)-establishment of the Roman Religion in the places where it was not (...)
the time of the Truce, its public exercise was restored in more than (...)
Towns where it was not before, so that the Catholics reapt more ^esent ^enefit
from that Edict than the Protestants; he further pres^d t^ to stand to it by a
motive of gratitude for the many mer^es ^d received of God; and to remove the
difficulties the Ad^es made him afraid he should meet with in the execution of
^an Edict, he represented to him; that he had already surmount(...) greater
than those, to ascend the Throne; and that it was a much greater leap from the
fundamental Law of the Kingdom to the Throne, than from the Truce to the Edict
of 1577. And because the Protestants were told in answer to their Complaints,
That they must have patience, and that they should be treated with at the same
time when the Leaguers were; he remonstrated by way of reply, That the
Protestants had already exercised that patience above 50 long years; that it
was not at all for the K's service, to let them suffer any longer in things of
that nature; and that tho they were willing to suffer, it was not his duty to
let them, because Religion is like a fire that goes out, if it be not nourished
and fomented; that it was the K's part rather to rekindle and stir up in his
Subjects that warmth of Affection they were obliged to have for Religion, than
to suffer them to fall into any coldness or indifference in matters of Piety;
that it was not just to treat the Protestants as the Leaguers, since their
Causes were very unequal, the Leaguers having always made War against the K.
and the Protestants always for him; That to deliver them from the oppression of
Conscience they labored under, they wanted nothing but a due regulation
between them and the Catholics, without being put off to expect the Issue of a
tedious Negotiation of uncertain Peace; that there were some things that would
admit no delay, such as are the Baptising of Children, Marriage and Burials
which occasioned every day new Scandals, Lawsuits, and Inhumanities for want
of a regulated Liberty to celebrate them; that Warants were daily given out, to
take up such as were found together, praying to God for the prosperity of the
K. or singing a Psalm in their shops, or selling a Bible or New Testament in
French, which proceedings were grounded upon the last Edicts; that they who
prayed for the K. modestly in their Chambers, and they which preached
seditiously against his person and his actions in their Pulpits, were treated
both alike; that such Grievances as those required speedy Remedies; that it was
a point of prudence, to prevent the demands of a People pressed with necessity,
because it was not good to give them occasion to learn how to complain, and yet
less policy to reduce them to seek a remedy, because in seeking one, tho from
the K. himself, there was danger that in the Assemblies held for drawing up
their Remonstrances, there might arise Cabals, and that several other changes
of ill consequence might daily happen; That a Foreign Protestant Army being
expected in France, there were several inconveniences to be feared, if they
should come before the Protestants were satisfied, because 'twas not to be
doubted, but their chief Commanders would importune the K. to do something for
them, which would be secretly to upbraid him, as a Prince that needed to be
solicited in behalf of his own Subjects, which would be but little for his
honor, and would make him loose all the credit and thanks of his Favor; and
that the Catholics would not fail to take occasion from thence, to pretend
those favors were extorted by a Foreign Force, and upon that ground to demand
one day their Revocation.

These vigorous and pertinent Remonstrances, were not altogether 1591.
unserviceable, because Gregory XIV. who held at that time the Sea of The
effect of these Remonstrances. Gregory the 14th's Bull.
Rome; and abetted with all his Power the Spanish Faction, unseasonably let fly
a Bull of Excommunication against the K. and all his Adherents, and sent it
into France by his Nuntio Landriano; which so extraordinarily nettled the K's
party that was mostly composed of French that had never failed to oppose the
Insolent attempts of the Court of Rome, that the Parliament, part of which
resided at Tours, and the other at Chalons, answered it with most terrible
Decrees, and gave out an Order to seize the Nuntio's Person, and to have the
Bull burnt by the common Hangman, and prohibited all Correspondence with Rome.
But the small Party of the Romish Clergy that followed the K. were not so
fierce, and when the K. assembled them at Mantes, and afterward transfer^d
them to Chartres, they observed more measures with the Pope, than the
Parliament had done. It Is true, they declared the Bull abusive, because the
1591.
Clergy of the K's Party was therein Excommunicated as well as the rest of his
Adherents, but yet were so far from consenting to have no more Correspondence
with Rome; that this despicable little Body resolved to send Deputies to the
Pope, and asked the Kings leave so to do: And yet the whole Clergy that followed
the K's. Party were able to furnish to this Assembly, but 2 Cardinals, 7
Archbishops and Bishops, and a very inconsiderable number of Church men of the
second Order. It may be judged by that, of how little strength so small a
number could be, in comparison of the rest of the Clergy, which was able to
furnish at that time 120 Prelates of the first rank. And yet alas, this feeble
Assembly would needs espouse a separate Opinion, and thwart by that
singularity, the Intentions of the Parliament that vigorously maintained the
Interests of the Crown. The Protestants were likewise alarmed at this Bull, and
sided with the Parliament, whose vigor was always pleasing to them, when they
employed their Authority to assert the Honor and Prerogatives of their K. And
accordingly they took this occasion to labor for their own safety, and to
press the K. to secure them in the quiet enjoyment of their Lives and
Consciences. Neither did the K. on his part forget himself in this rencounter;
for he called an Assembly at Mantes of all the Lords of his Privy Council, and
of his whole party; and in order to give satisfaction at the same time to all
the World, he put out there two Declarations; the one renewed that published
about two years before, wherein he protested, he desired nothing more than to
be better instructed, and was ready to submit to the Decisions of a General
Council, or at least, of such an Assembly of Church men as might be able to
terminate the depending Controversies; and in the mean while promised to alter
nothing in the State of the Catholic Religion; and he gave them soon after
very convincing proofs of the sincerity of his Intentions in that (...), by
granting the Town of Chartres upon its surrender to him after a long Siege, the
power to suppress the exercise of the Reformed Religion both in that City, and
within the whole extent of its Jurisdiction. In which he stretched his
complaisance for the Catholics to as ^ign a pit^h as it would bear; since to
pleasure them, he was content (...) exclude the exercise of his own Religion,
out of the precincts of a ^onquer'd p^ace.

The other Declaration was in favor of the Protestants, to whom it ^^^ Edict
of Mantes.
granted the Revocation of the Edicts that were contrary to that of 1577, which
was thereby restored to its full force and vigor, by way of Provision, till
the Differences in Religion should be agreed by the consent of all the Orders
of the Kingdom, when they should be reduced to the Kings obedience.

It was thought an Edict so very reasonable as that could not but pass 1591.
without contradiction, since it made no new concessions to the Protestants,
restored to the Catholics the exercise of their Religion in a good number of
places, out of which it had been banished during the last War; that it was in
effect, nothing but an Interim, or Temporary Provision, in expectation of a
Definitive Peace; and since, lastly, it reserved to the Leaguers, a power to
make new demands in behalf of their Religion, the whole matter not being to be
concluded without their consent when they should be reduced. Yet the Cardinal
of Vendome, who had taken the name of the Cardinal of Bourbon, could not
forbear making some feeble opposition against it in full Council. But after he
had shown his malicious intentions, to that degree, as to make an offer to go
out of the Council, rather than consent to an Edict of that Nature, he was glad
for all his huffing, to sit down again tamely at a small disdainful nod the K.
made to him. But the Parliaments were more surly and difficult to be won; for
those of Reunes and Bourdeaux absolutely Cavils raised about its Verification.
rejected the Edict, and tho that of Tours accepted it, yet it was with a
Modification by which Protestants were excluded from all public Offices and
Employments, and out of all Assemblies of States in most part of the Kingdom.
The pretense abused by some to that purpose, was taken from a Clause in the
Edict of Mantes, which ordered, That the last Edicts of Pacification should be
restored and observed as they were in the life time of the late K. now they
knew well enough, that Hen. III. never gave any places to Protestants, and that
he found out tricks to exclude them in spite of the Article in his Edict that
declared them capable to hold them; and therefore by virtue of those words,
which were either unwarily used, or foisted, by the Artifice of the Catholics,
into the Edict of Mantes, they would still have them remain Excluded from all
Employments, because they had been so treated by the deceased K. and they
thought it favor enough to let them enjoy Offices in Rochelle, and some other
places where the artifices of Hen. III could never prevail to exclude them. And
the Cardinal of Bourbon maintained that Banter, and openly declared, that the
Protestants did but deceive themselves, in pretending to be admitted to
Offices: and they were fain to spend many years in patience, and continual
solicitations, before they could surmount that obstacle, tho there was nothing
more unjust than that pretense. For Hen. III. had violated his own Law, in
excluding them by diverse Tricks from those Employments to which they were
rightfully admittable, according to the express terms of his own Edict, so that
they could not take any advantage against them, from the deceitful conduct of
that P. without wranglings not very suitable to Royal Majesty, to the prejudice
of the Public Faith.

The Reformed made no great complaints of the Edict, though the provisional
Clause, which differed the Decision of their Affairs till after the Reduction
of those of the League, ought to have seemed intolerable unto them, because it
did leave them in an uncertain condition, which could alter as Time and
Interests should serve. But they could not endure to be deprived of the Benefit
of their Birthrights Whereof the Reformed complain.
, or the Rewards of their desert, upon the sole consideration of their
Religion: whether because this Injustice bespattered their Religion and their
Persons, or because it did treat them as the Canon Law orders Heretics to be,
who are by this Law excluded from Dignities and Charges: whence it followed
very evidently, that they were put into the number of such as the same Canons
give over to the secular Judge, and whom the Catholic Kings oblige themselves
to destroy by their Coronation Oath. They further considered as a particular
reason of maintaining themselves in the right of partaking public Employs;
that the King had suppressed the Courts of St. John d' Angeli, of Bergerac, and
of Montauban, wherein Justice had been rendered till toward the end of the
foregoing Year, by Judges of their own Religion; for which they pretended that
the King ought to give them some Recompense; and for which they only desired to
be admitted to the same Employments; that they being of the Companies of
Judicature, might have some of their own Religion to take care to see Justice
done to their Brethren. Therefore they made heavy complaints of the wrangling
that I have just now specified, and omitted not to set forth, that the
Injustice done them reflected on the King himself; since those could not be
deprived of Employments for the sake of Religion that followed the same
Doctrine with him, without silently declaring him incapable of the Crown. But
they did not require the King to give an express Declaration for the solving of
this Equivocation, for fear the scrupulous Catholics should look upon it as a
new Grace, and should take occasion to grumble at it. They only insisted that
the King should verbally express his Intentions to the heads of the Sovereign
Courts, but so as to cause them to be executed. The King to satisfy them, sent
Commissioners for the executing of his Edict, in the Parliaments that
acknowledged his Authority: but this remedy was not sufficient to hinder new
occasions of Complaints to be given everywhere.

Meanwhile the Clergy being assembled at Chartres, to the small number that I
have mentioned, were drawing up Articles which lay open their unfaithful and
ambitious Mind. As the Ecclesiastics have always been for making the
Preservation and Safety of the Kings to depend on themselves, this small
Assembly undertook to take from the Parliaments, the right of watching over it:
and in this design required that they should be prohibited taking any
Cognizance of what should pass betwixt the King and the Pope. They presented to
the King some other Articles, upon all which Du Plessis sent a vigorous Memoir
to the Parliament of Tours, which that Senate approved; and it was upon these
grounds, that he advised the King by delays to frustrate the Pretentions of the
Clergy. Besides the honor of the Parliament that was concerned to maintain its
Possession, to preserve the authority and Dignity of the Kings against the
Bulls of Rome; there was moreover a reason of Interest that obliged it to
withstand the demands of the Bishops. There had been since the death of the
Cardinal of Bourbon, seen to grow a new Cabal amongst the Royal Catholics,
which was termed the Third Party. The pretense of those The 3d. party and its
designs.
that formed it was to put the Catholic Religion in safety, whose ruin they
thought could not be hindered, if Henry IV. came to reign peaceably without
changing his Religion. This Prince was growing suspected to them, because he
seemed to them too long to put off the Instruction that he had promised them;
and that they feared, by reason of the Prosperity of his Affairs, that he would
soon be in a condition to make his own Religion to reign, in spite of the
Rebels. The new Cardinal of Bourbon's Tutor, and David du Perron, who had been
of the Reformed Religion, and who was, even as they say, a Ministers Son, were
the Authors of this Faction; and they pretended to make it a way to the
advancement of their Master, who was the Idol of that Party. They casted for a
Foundation, that it was necessary to have a King who had always been a
Catholic, and that consequently would not be suspected: but that he must be
taken out of the Royal Family, that the fundamental Law of the Crown might not
be violated: So that they could cast their Eyes on none else but the Cardinal
of 1521.
Bourbon. This Party grew easily, because two sorts of Catholics joined in it;
to wit, those that mistrusted Henry IV. and who above all things were for the
safety of their Religion: and those, who, though they would not leave him, yet
were willing to make him afraid of losing his Adherents, if he did not speedily
embrace the Catholic Religion. Villeroy and Janin, who gave him both advice
and the example of it, though they both were deeply for the interests of the
League, joined, or at least made a show of joining to this Cabal, to weaken the
King by dividing his Party, or for to force him to change his Religion, through
the fear of seeing himself abandoned, for another. This Faction became so
potent, as that mention of it was made to the Pope, they desiring to have his
Authority for a Prop: So that the King was wonderfully troubled at it, and held
him for a long time in grievous Alarms. Therefore the most passionate
Historians, and who seem to have writ for no other end, but for to persuade
that the Catholics had reason on their side in every thing, have not dared to
justify this Conspiracy; and do confess that the Royal Catholics designed to
put the Royalty at a Compromize. Du Perron, the most ambitious and unfaithful
Man of his time, revealed unto the King the secrecy of that Party, although he
had been the Promoter of it himself: and 'twas by that means he gained that
Prince's Confidence, whose Favor some years after made him a Cardinal.

The Assembly of Chartres did favor this Cabal, and it was resolved there to
present the King with a Petition in their Names, to exhort him to become a
Catholic with all speed, because otherwise several who had been faithful to
him as the Lawful Heir, would take other Measures, and should be forced to
abandon him. This Petition was Printed at Angiers without the Printer's name;
^ut not presented. Notwithstanding the Cardinal of Bourbon made, or according
to others, caused to be made to the King a Speech in the same sense, and with
the same threatenings. It was ^ndeavoured, for the authorizing this Party, to
establish under the ^ame of Chamber, a kind of Parliament at Moulins or at
Clermont: and it was so public, that they sought to compose it of such as were
affected to that Cabal, and that it was called publicly the third Parties
Chamber. The Parliament sitting at Tours was very much concerned at the
erecting this Chamber because it could not 1591.
be done without dismembering from that Court, the Countries that should be
made to hold of this new Jurisdiction. But as it was profitable for the third
Party to ruin the Parliament, whose constancy, when the rights of the Crown
and Succession were to be treated of, concurred not with these new Pretentions;
those that entered into this Faction, and the Clergy as well as the rest, did
favor the settling of this Chamber, that they might have at their devotion a
Sovereign Court of Justice. Therefore the Parliament and the Reformed, to whom
the Creation of this Chamber gave an umbrage for different reasons, mutually
opposed the Enterprises of the Clergy. It was only the business of Employments
that the Parliament and the Clergy did agree in. The Clergy complained that
there were twenty six Heretics in the Parliament of Tours; and the Parliament
stuck fast to the excluding the Reformed from lesser Offices. Wherein they all
manifested their aversion for Protestants, and the same repugnancy to their
being in profitable or honorable Employments. The King being urged by the
Cardinal de Bourbon, on behalf of the Assembly of Chartres, to give him an
answer to three Articles, followed the advice of his Parliament, and got clear
of this Instance by general Answers. The first of these Articles was concerning
his coming over to the Propositions of the Clergy, that f^l^^^ed the King.
Romish Church. He defended himself from it by the ordinary Protestation of
being ready to receive Instruction, and to procure the end of the differences
that divided the Church; adding that he found it less honorable to turn into
it alone, than to bring back the rest with him; and excusing himself for not
being able to hearken to the Instruction which he had promised, by reason of
his Military Distractions, during which the Voice of the Canons of the Church
was stifled by the Noise of the Canons of the Arsenal. The second was touching
the Peace, which the Clergy desired might be concluded, by his Intermission.
Upon which the King was content in general to testify that he desired a Peace
The third was for obtaining permission to send to the Pope, as the Assembly of
Chartres had resolved, directly against an Act of Parliament of Tours, which
prohibited all communication with the Court of Rome. The King answered it was a
matter of State complained of by the deceased Pope, and the Pope regent
declared That he thought it contrary to his Reputation to court him, whilst he
did what he could against him, excused himself upon the Parliaments being of a
contrary Advice, which he had consulted about it, and upon that he desired the
Affair should be debated in a full and solemn Company: Mean while he sent the
Bishops into their Diocesses. The Clergy passionately desired to send to Rome,
to engage the King by that means into a Negotiation with the Pope, the Success
of which would oblige him to change his Religion, or else would deprive him of
the Service of the Catholics, if he refused to turn. They would also have him
sometimes for the same reason to write himself to the Pope, for to tie the
Party the more strictly. The Reformed opposed both, because they dispaired of
their own Safety, if the King should engage in any Commerce with Rome. Their
Reasons for to hinder him were drawn from Considerations of State, and from the
Kings Reputation, which would be in hazard thereby, whatever Success it should
meet with; because that in that Juncture of Affairs he could make no Offers to
the Pope, but what would be a prejudice to his Dignity. So that for that time
they had the Advantage over the Passion of the Catholics.

This was the year that the Viscount of Turene, being supported A Foreign Army.
by the Recommendations of the Queen of England, raised for the King a gallant
Army with the Protestant Princes of Germany, with whom, from that time forward
his Merit got him such Ties as he kept all his Lifetime. This Service, added
to so many others Viscount of Turene marries the Heiress of Sedan.
that he had rendered the King a long time, was the Cause that he was picked out
to be the Man, to espouse the Heiress of Sedan, whom it was of the King's
Interest to marry to a Man of Trust, by reason of the important Places she
held: And it was by this Marriage, that this Principality entered into the House
of the Tower of Auvergne, in as much as the Princess, who died without Issue a
little while after, left it by her last Will to her Husband. The King for to
bind more and more to his Service this Lord, made him a Marshal of France, though
the Catholics were mad to see a Reformed And is made Marshal of France.
raised to so high a Dignity. This new Grandeur augmented much the Credit he
had already amongst Protestants, and which sometimes had appeared so great, as
to give some Jealousy to his Master. But this Army set the Catholics very
much upon thinking, they fearing least the King with these new Forces 1591.
should easily conquer his Enemies, and afterward forget the Promise of
getting himself instructed. They therefore did their utmost to hinder it is
entering into France, or to disperse it after it should enter there: So as that
they used all their Endeavors to divert the Fund which was kept for the
payment of these Troops. But du Plessis, who was the Master of this Fund,
because it proceeded from the Alienation of the Dominion of Navarre, managed
the business so well, that he kept the best part on it, notwithstanding the hard
and severe Letters the King sent him upon that Subject. There was that same
year a kind of a Pragmatick drawn by form of an Interim, for the distributing
and administering Benefices. The Reformed were satisfied with it, as with a
Preparative for a general Reformation: The Parliaments upheld it, as profitable
for the good of the State: The Archbishop of Bourges did accept it, because he
hoped to be made a Patriarch: And if all the Clergy had been ruled by this new
Discipline, they had easily induced the Pope, who thereby would see that he
could be dispensed with, to make the King the Offers which they would fain
oblige the King to make him. But the Clergy chose rather not to serve the King,
than to disoblige the Pope; and never would consent not to depend upon Rome.

The following Year passed, as the former, in Military Expeditions, 1592.
and in Negotiations that availed nothing, if we except the Reformed, who
always lost somewhat thereby, through the Instances of the Catholics for what
they called the King's Conversion. The Catholics Artifices to gain the King.
For that they spared neither Cabals nor Artifices: They attributed all the ill
Successes to his Religion, whereof for the most part they were themselves the
Cause, because they were not willing to see things ended, before the King had
accomplished the Catholics Desires. They ever-more represented unto him, that
his Religion alone was the Pretense of the League, and the third Party's
Obstinacy: Though in truth, it had been better for the Ringleaders of the League
to treat with Henry IV. a Hugonot, than when a Catholic, for to have better
Conditions from him. It appeared even in time that it was not his Religion that
held them, seeing after that Pretense was removed by his turning, they grew
more difficult than ever, and held out the War for Four years longer. The Queen
of England had unthinkingly said, and to some Catholics too, That the King had
not done well to give the Edict of Nantes in favor of the Reformed, and that
that was out of season. This Princess's Intention was not to blame the King for
doing something for those ancient Servants of his; but because she did not
doubt of the King's Constancy in matter of Religion, she thought he could take
a more convenient time for to content them, than that wherein his Favors to
them were neither sufficient for to reward them, nor pleasing to the
Catholics, who mortally hated them. But the Queens Words were wrested, as if
they had intimated that she did not stick at Religion, and that she blamed the
King for preserring it to Policy: Whence it was concluded, that though the King
should change his Religion, he would not be a whit the less in her Favor. This
Craft was dangerous, because it took from the King one of his chiefest Reasons
to persevere in his Religion, next to those of his Conscience, to wit, the fear
of offending Foreign Protestants, whose Succors were so necessary for him. He
feared likewise the alienating the Hearts of his Reformed Subjects, who with
the rest of the same Religion, made at least the two Thirds of his Army. But
for to cure him of his Fears, they did represent what the Character of the
Reformed was; Men easily satisfied, provided they had Liberty of Conscience
given them; and such as never had blotted the Names of Kings out of their
Prayers, at the very time that they were persecuted by them. D'. O. made the
best he could of these only Considerations, and made use of them from the very
first Speech that he made to the King, after the Death of King Henry III.

But that which most annoyed the Reformed, was a joint Discourse between du
Plessis and Villeroy, which indeed ended without Fruitless Conferences between
du Plessis and Villeroy.
concluding any thing, by reason of the Insolent Propositions of the Heads of
the League; yet notwithstanding it prepared things for the changing the Kings
Religion, which happened the following year. The Heads of the League, whereof
Janin was the Interpreter, did not intend, said he, to be treated after the
Huguenot fashion, nor to accept of an Edict of Abolition and Amnesty, in that
all Edicts of that nature do presuppose Crimes; whereas they intended to
presuppose as a Foundation to their Treaties, that their Arms were just. They
scorned an Edict as from a King to his Subjects, but a Treaty by which they
would acknowledge him but upon certain Conditions; they presupposing they had
no reason to acknowledge him during the old Cardinal of Bourbon's Life, or all
the time that he was not a Catholic. Du Plessis was far from harkening unto
any such Conditions, and pretended before all other things, that the King's
Authority and Dignity should be acknowledged and presupposed. Therefore the
Negotiation could not take effect in his Hands: notwithstanding it went on very
far toward the King's Instruction, which the Leaguers resolved to be sure of
before mention was made of any thing else. The two Negotiators easily agreed
upon a Conference between the Doctors of both Religions, though each of them upon
this Subject had particular Prospects. Therefore all the difficulty betwixt
them consisted in the manner of the thing. Villeroy would have the King to be
instructed, Their different prospects upon the King's instruction.
with a Promise of making himself a Catholic: For he took the Words, to get
himself instructed, in the sense that the Romish Church has always given them;
to wit, for an irrevocable Engagement to enter into their Communion, after a
Conference in show, which in his Language is called Instruction. Du Plessis on
the contrary, would have them to be satisfied, that the King should testify a
desire to embrace the Romish Religion, if he could do it without wronging his
Conscience. They agreed at last on an expedient, which was, that the King
should get himself instructed at a limited time, with a Desire and Intention to
be joined to the Romish Church, provided a Method for his instructing was
found-out that should answer his Dignity, and be able to satisfy his
Conscience.

Du Plessis thought that this Instruction might turn to the advantage of the
Reformed Religion, in observing two things. The first was to hold a serious
Conference, where the controverted points should be thoroughly discussed, and
wherein he made no doubt but the Ministers and the Truth would carry a complete
Victory. His design was to assemble the most learned Protestants at Saumur,
there to study the controverted Matters; and to give to each a part a question
to be examined with all possible care to discover the beginning, the progress,
the changes of every particular thing; and with the Historical understanding
of these Matters, desired each one to seek such for Arguments in Law, as were
proper for the explanation of the Turth The King himself seemed to approve of
this expedient; and commanded him to prepare that Conference: to which he
invited du Jon, a famous Divine at Newstadt, and afterward at Leyden. But the
Catholics would admit of a Formal Conference only: and by little and little,
brought the King over to their Opinion. The second thing that du Plessis had an
eye upon, was, that before the stated time of the Conference should fall out,
the Catholics should have assurances given them of having nothing innovated in
Matters of Religion, there would then be two things to be regulated; the one in
supposing the Kings Conversion happened; the other in expecting till it came to
pass; and he hoped that on the latter point such advantages should be granted
to the Catholic Religion, for its Honor and Safety, that after this the
Catholics would give over the Conversion it self: Whence it would follow, that
the King being less urged to change his Religion, could continue in the
Reformed. In effect he had easily remained in it, ^f it had not hindered him to
reign in Peace: But he loved Rest and Pleasure, from which he met in the War
and the confusion of his Affairs with too tedious Interruptions; and the
unseasonable seeking whereof made him sometimes lose favorable occasions of
carrying great advantages over his Enemy.

The Negotiation therefore went on so fast, that Villeroy beginning to abate of
the high Pretentions of the League, it seemed that Peace would be concluded:
and that the King having heard the Report of du Plessis, Revol and he were
charged to draw up ^n Edict conformable to the Articles agreed upon in the
Confe^ence. But this Secret was smelled out, it not being known well ^y whom
the matter was revealed; the Reformed imputing it to the subtilty of Villeroy
and the Leaguers, who had feigned to ^earken to the Treaty, but for to draw
more Succors and better ^onditions from the Spaniards; and Villeroy on the
other hand ^^cusing du Plessis of Perfidiousness. The Royal Catholics took
^^re to encourage the Leaguers to stand more steadfast to the Reli^^on,
foreseeing well that it was intended by the Peace to free the ^ing from the
necessity of changing, which could never be im^osed upon him, but by the
Tediousness of the War, and the Fears of ill Successes. Moreover they imagined
they could never have sufficient Securities given them, if they consented that
a Reformed King should be established on the Throne; seeing he would leave the
Crown to an Heir of the same Religion. Chiefly in the manner that the
Succession then stood, they saw nothing that could ease them of their Scruples.
The Prince of Conde, who was the next Heir to Henry IV. was then at St John de
Angeli, in the Hands of the Reformed, and under the Tutoring of his Uncle
Trimouille, a Lord, whose Zeal and Valor caused already Jealousies at Court,
and acquired him the Confidence of those of his Religion. There was a
likelihood that this Prince, after such an Education, should tread in the
Footsteps of his Father and Grandfather; and that so the Catholic Religion
being no more the ruling one, it should fall of it self. Besides the Catholics
finding out, that they themselves did not design to grant any Favors to the
Reformed, but because they could do no otherwise under a King that was their
Favourer; but that they would cause them, if it were possible, one day to be
recalled, when they should have a King more depending on their Counsels; they
feared the same thing should happen, if the King did not change Religion, to
the Securities that necessity should give the Roman Religion. The Catholics
nevertheless obtained in these Conferences the freeing the King of the fear of
offending the Reformed, by taking the Measures for his Instruction; forasmuch
as he of all the Reformed, who was the least suspected in matter of Religion,
was very willing of this Instruction to make an Article of a Treaty of Peace.
The Hope of the approaching Fall of Popery dazzled this Sage Politician as well
as others; and he did reckon a little too fast, as did most of the Ministers,
upon the assured Victories of Truth, so soon as it would be brought to light by
serious Disputes.

At the same time the Catholics showed their Aversion for the ^.
Reformed in what they possibly could. Nothing could overcome the Obstinacy of
the Parliaments, always bent to exclude the Reformed from the Charges, how
great soever the cause was to fear, that the Indignity of that Denial, after so
many Services should bring them to a Resentment thereof. The Leagued Catholics
were more tractable in that than those that followed the King. They consented
that the Reformed should continue as the Edict of 1577. and the Conferences of
Nerac and of Fleix had prescribed them; and to take away all Disputes with them
concerning the number of Places that they could fill up, they were ready to
grant, that the quarter part should be held by them. Du Plessis was even in
hopes to make them agree to a third part. He chose rather to regulate the
number of Places, than to leave it indifferent and arbitrary, fearing lest the
King, who had an extraordinary Complacency for Catholics, being obliged to
nothing, should do nothing for the Reformed; whereas the number of Places that
should be given them being fixed upon, he would in some wise be necessitated to
put into places as many as were contained in that number. He saw that else they
should have but a little share in them; that all the Governments were given
unto Catholics, to the prejudice of the Reformed that deserved them: That Roni
himself, a Favorite of the Kings, found always his Pretensions crossed, when
he asked for any thing. It was therefore necessary that a Regulation should be
made, which by necessity should give Employments to the Reformed, seeing
Catholics could not suffer that they should obtain them by their Deserts. It
is true, that the Court of Aids made an Act, by which the Reformed were
admitted to the Offices of their Jurisdiction; but neither the Parliament nor
the Chamber of Accounts could be wrought upon to do the like.

The Patience of the Reformed was tried in other things, and particularly a
thousand Indignities were offered upon the occasion Rigors on their Burying.
of their Sepulture. The Inhumanity of Catholics on this Subject, during the
Siege of Roan, surpasses almost all Belief. There were Persons of Note amongst
the Reformed that died in that Siege. Piles amongst others, one of the
valianrest of the Army was slain there; but it could not be obtained of the
Catholics, that his Body should be buried in any place of their Churchyards.
It happened besides that many Reformed having been slain in the great Sally
that the Marquess of Villars made on the 25th of February, whilst the King was
observing the Duke of Parma, they were buried pell-mell with the Catholics
that perished on the same occasion; but the Catholics finding it out, were so
cruel as to dig them out of their Graves, and to leave their Bodies to the
mercy of Wolves and Ravens that commonly follow Armies.

On the other hand, the King was eagerly sued to hearken to 1593. Continuation
of the artifices to shake the King's Conscience.
his Instruction; and no Artifice was omitted which Converters make use of on
such occasions. At one time the Abuses of the Romish Church were extenuated,
which they represented to be too slight for to be the cause of a lawful
Scruple. At another time they granted him that they ought to be corrected; and
he was made to hope that they should be looked to, when he became a Catholic.
He was sometimes desired only as a shadow of a Conversion toward the
satisfying the People, and was permitted the Liberty of his Opinions on diverse
things, provided the People could see him at Mass. It was offered him, that a
Vail should be drawn betwixt him and the Ceremonies, that he might be the less
scrupulous to be present at it. The Commodity that his Change would give him of
humbling the Pope was magnified, and of lessening his Authority, by putting an
end to the Schism Political Interests that tended to the same end.
by a National Synod, when the whole Clergy would be brought under Obedience.
Mention was made of a Patriarch that should be established, for to render the
Churches of France Independent on that of Rome: An Allusion which at all times
has dazzled the Protestants, the simplest of which think, that for to make Truth
triumph, there only needs a Rupture with the Roman See. But nothing made a more
dangerous Impression on his Mind, than the Artifice that was used, for to
persuade him, that the Controversies which make the difference of both
Religions were of small consequence. Roni was one of those that inclined him
most to this indifferency, and would even tell him now and then, that a
Catholicity would be to his Advantage; and that it would be the most
efficacious means to quell all Conspiracies. He would reduce the whole Religion
for him to the Symbol of the Apostles, to the Ten Commandments, to the Love of
God and our Neighbor, to the Confidence in the Merit of Jesus Christ; and that
being supposed, all the differences of Religion seemed to him of small
consequence. In a word, he so disposed his mind, as that the Romish Religion
appeared to him as useful for Salvation as the Reformed, by not being possessed
with the Abuses which corrupt the Worship and Maxims thereof. Moreover they
omitted not to gain some Ministers, whose Ambition or Interest rendered them
tractable. Sometimes they were made to confess in the King's Presence, that one
could be saved in the Roman Communion. Sometimes they were made to dispute, as
by Rencounter with du Perron, to whom they would yield ill-disputed Victories.
And that what they should say might appear the less interessed, or of greater
weight, they were not obliged to change their Religion; their Prevarication
being esteemed more beneficial than a public Profession of the Roman Doctrine.
By these Artifices it was that the King was supplied with the Argument, whereof
Converters have since made great use; That the Reformed granted that one may be
saved in the Catholic Religion; and the Catholics on the contrary
maintaining, That there is no Salvation in the Reformed Religion, Prudence
would have us stick to the surest, and to take to that Communion wherein the
two contesting Parties grant Salvation to be possible. These Ministers had been
prepared of a long time, whereof Morlas, Rotan, de Serres, de Vaux, were the
most noted; and the latter of whom being troubled at his own Remorses,
revealed, they say, the whole Mystery. Cayer was also of those that were to act
this Comedy; but some Books not very modest that he wrote, and amongst others,
a Treatise for the reconciling of Religions, having rendered him suspected, he
was deposed in a Synod; and for a Revenge he turned Catholic. Roni for to make
his Opinions take, said, he had for Authors de la Roche, Chandieu, d' Esperien,
de Vaux, de Gardesi, and de Nord, very famous Ministers, yet whereof the
greatest part had quite different Thoughts.

Du Perron, whom Roni had got to be named* Bishop of Evreux, and whose
Eloquence in Conversation dragged along the minds, dazzled the King by the
vehemence and rapidity of his discourse* but his reasons of Divinity did not
persuade him so much, as the motives taken from Time and Political Prudence.
These reasons had a great empire over the mind of a Prince, that was weary of
the toilsome trade he had followed near twenty years, and who saw that his
labors were not as yet like to come to an end. The Misery of the People that
could hold out no longer, was represented in order to move his Compassion. By
setting forth the heads of the Protestants as restless and ambitious, and he
was made to fear them. He had cause to complain of several Catholics, that
treated him after an insolent manner, of whom he desired to be in a condition
of making fair riddance. Conspiracies were carried on against his Person, that
caused him to fear; nay he complained to du Plessis, that the Catholics of his
Party had plotted with the Duke of Mayenne to se^ze on him at Mantes. He was
under apprehensions, least the States of the League then assembled at Paris,
should choose the Cardinal of Bourbon, and that the Spaniards should uphold him.
Most of the Courtiers were weary of this laborious Life, where there was
nothing but pains to be taken, and as little to be gained. The fair Gabrielle
d' Estree, the Kings Mistress, shared in these Intreagues. She hated not the
Reformed, whom she judged to be faithful and honest Men; and even had many of
them in her Service. But the Protestant Lords had no great compliance for her;
and they never would have favored her ambitious Designs. On the contrary, she
was put in hopes that if the King changed Religion, she should have more reason
to pretend to Marry him, because he could get the Pope to make void his
Marriage with Margaret of Valois, and be at liberty to contract another;
whereas the Reformed Religion debarred him from such easy means of making that
rupture: And to assure the Crown to the Children that should come of this new
Marriage, she therefore added her reasons to those of the rest, and the King
who appeared more than half resolved upon this unworthy Marriage, suffered
himself thus to be overcome, partly by the Prevarications of his Confidents and
Ministers, partly by the advices of Policy, and partly by the Illusions of Love.

Nevertheless, he dared not as yet to declare his Intention, whether he was
ashamed of this timorous Conduct, or that he feared that the Reformed, whereof
some spoke of cantoning themselves, and of abandoning the King if the King
forsook them, should strike some desperate Blow. This was not the language of
all those that professed the Reformed Religion, the greatest part of whom, and
even some of the most authorized, preached Patience and Loyalty to the rest. It
appeared in process of time* that those who were of this Sentiment were the
strongest, seeing that after the Kings turning, there was none that formed a
Party against him; and that all of them remained four years more not only in
Obedience, but in his Service; there were therefore but a few men that used
these Menaces. They did not do it so much Mutual Policy of the Catholics and
the Reformed.
through a formal Inclination of cantoning themselves, but through a knack of
Policy, for to oppose a kind of a Counterpoise to the threatenings of the
Catholics, and thus to put in some measure the Kings Mind in an equal
Balance. The Catholics often renewed to the King their Threats of quitting
him for another, if he did not change his Religion. It was therefore requisite
that the Reformed should do the like, fearing least that the King having
nothing to fear but on one side, and finding on the other compliance and
gentleness, should with more ease suffer himself to be conquered by the
threatening Party. The Mind is governed as the Body, and when either the one or
the other sinks under an effort that makes it lean on one side, there must
strength be put on the other for to raise it up, and to restore it to its
natural Situation. So that for to put a stop to the King, who was dragged on
the Catholics side, through the fear of being abandoned by them, it was
necessary to oppose him with the like fear from the Reformed, if he quitted
their Religion; but there was a vast difference betwixt the conduct of the one
and the other. The Catholics Threatenings were followed with sad Effects;
Intelligences with the Leaguers, Cabals amongst themselves, and voluntary
Obstacles to the Kings Prosperity. There was also the third Party, whose Head
was known, and whom most of the Catholics threatened to acknowledge for their
Sovereign. But the Threats of the Reformed consisted only in bare words,
dictated rather by Prudence, than through an Intention of doing ill, and which
hindered them not from remaining Loyal.

Yet the King concealed his Thoughts from them upon that matter The King ^.
with a deep dissimulation, though his designs was so well known to the
Catholics, that the very Spaniards mistrusted it; therefore they insinuated to
him, that they would treat with him without touching his Religion: This they
did for to benefit themselves with the Leaguers by the Kings steadfastness, if
he suffered himself to be dazzled with this deceiving Proposition. But in order
to dissipate the Suspicions of the Reformed, the King already resolved to quit
their Religion, testified that he was desirous to provide for their Safety.
Therefore he came to Tours as they desired him, for to cause the Restrictions
to be taken off, wherewith the Edict of Nantes had been Registered: He went
through Saumur in his way thither, and the Ministers having the honor to salute
him, upon his departure he assured them, that he would dye in the Reformed
Religion; and declared unto them, that if they heard that he was fallen into
some Debauch, they might believe it, because he had many such like Frailties:
but that if the noise should spread that he was to forsake his Religion, they
should give no credit thereunto. But when he arrived at Tours, there fell out
things that made it visible he had other Intentions. He dared not to keep his
Bed of Justice, as 'twas thought he would, because the procuring an advantage
to the Reformed being in agitation, he might have given cause to the Catholics
to murmur, for as much as at his first sitting in the Parliament, he should
have constrained that Senate to receive into the Charges those that were called
Heretics. He for that reason Assembled only the Heads, to whom he declared his
will, and ordered them to consult thereupon: But this weak means advanced not
Affairs; and the result of this debate made it evident, that the King had
promised to turn Catholic. He made a show of being irritated at the
Parliaments resistance, and spoke very angry terms to the Attorney General: But
it was all the satisfaction the Reformed had. The Restrictions remained as they
were; and it appeared that the King had engaged to do nothing for them, before
he had embraced the Roman Religion.

It seemed, that if the Catholics had consented to what the King demanded,
they would have drawn him out of a great perplexity; and would have put him in
a way of quitting the Reformed Religion with more decency, because he should
have prevented their Complaints, by making their condition sure. But the
Catholics passion was so great, that they did consider nothing; and that they
would have perhaps desired no better, than to drive the Reformed to some
Mutiny, for to agree with the League at their cost, and upon condition of
turning against them their united Forces. But the Reformed lost not patience
for all these Injustices. The King was forced to take other measures
Preparations for his change.
for to enduce them to see his change by fair means, and without making a stir.
In order whereunto they made use of the Pretense of Conferences. Ten or twelve
Conferences had been already Preparations for his Charge.
held with the Leaguers, without doing any good: a new one was renewed amongst
the Royal Catholics and them; and that they might not be thwarted by du
Plessis, they agreed for a Preliminary, that no Heritick should be admitted
thereto. The pretense of it was to concur with the States of Paris to put a
Catholic King on the Throne; and to reunite the Suffrages in the Person of
Henry IV. in case of his Conversion. Therefore from the very opening of the
Conference he published a Declaration, that he had prepared, for to assure the
Catholics of his desire to receive Instruction. At the same time the Reformed
of the Court were solicited not to hinder the Kings Conversion: and the Duke
of Bouillon was chiefly entreated, because his opposition would give the
greatest difficulty: De Thou wrote to him upon ^his Subject, to persuade him
that it would be advantageous for he Reformed to have a Catholic King, of
whose good Intentions they might have full assurances. The Duke was deeply
o^liged to the King, and his Mouth was stopped with such a heap of promises, that
it would have been very difficult for him not to ^ave been overcome: The King
himself promised by a Writing that was signed by the Princes, and the chief
Lords of the Council, that the profession which he was about to make of the
Romish Religion, would cause no change in the Edicts which the Reformed had
obtained, and that no resolution would be taken in the Conference to their
Prejudice.

In the mean time, for to baffle the Reformed of the Provinces, ^.
another sort of Conference was proposed, under pretense of instructing the
King: but as his change was resolved upon, that se^^ous and grave Conference so
much spoken of was no more to be expected: It was only a Conference in show; to
which the King invited those that he pleased by express Letters, assigning
their Convention at Mantes, on the 20th, of July. It Is true, du Plessis ^^tered
the Superscription of the Letters; and that instead of sen^ing them to some
private Persons as the King had ordered; he ^^tained of him that they should be
sent to the Churches, that ^^ey might appoint fit persons for that matter. No
outward ^^ction of the King could as yet discover his design of changing: and
he continued in his Court the Exercises of the Reformed Religion as he had
accustomed: Nay he desired that all the Reformed throughout the Kingdom should
betake themselves to Fasting and Praying, for to implore of God a happy Issue
of this pretended Conference, as if he had been still dubious which Party to
cleave to. But at last the Masque was taken off, and it was evident that the
whole Instruction would be reduced to the hearing of the Bishops, without
admitting any Ministers in order to answer them. The Clergy had desired that
the business might thus go on, because they never set Victory at a compromize;
and that they were not so sure of the King's Conversion, as that an orderly
Dispute, where these Pastors should be admitted, might not make him have quite
contrary Thoughts. Notwithstanding the King thought to make use of his
Compliance to the Clergy, for to persuade the Reformed that he yielded but to
Necessity; that he abjured his Religion but in Words; that he would hear but
Catholics, because that he being forced to turn, it was more to the advantage
of the Reformed that he should do it without hearing them, than otherwise; that
they might have it to say, they were not vanquished; whereas if the King should
turn after a Dispute of both Parties, this Change of his had been a real
Triumph for the Catholics. But the Mystery was revealed by a Letter from the
Chancellor to the Bishop of Chartres, which was seen by the Reformed, wherein
he advertised that Prelat, That he might come with a full assurance, without
troubling himself with Divinity. Hereby it was seen, that a set Conference was
not agreeing to the Bishops Palate, and they chose rather to overcome without
fighting.

But though this kind of Instruction seemed very strange to the Reformed, and
that they judged it a very singular thing* that the King should be as 'twere
the Judge of so great a Cause, after having only heard one of the Parties: They
notwithstanding thought they should not omit to send their Deputies to Mantes,
either to obtain by their Presence something in favor of their Religion, or to
take from the Bishops the Pretense of Boasting* that the Ministers had shunned
the Conference. Time has declared how necessary this Precaution was, seeing
that not only in our days, but almost at that same time, and in the Presence of
those who knew how things had been carried on, they published that the
Ministers had fled before them, and had not the Courage to come to the Dispute.
It is true, that the Ministers of the Court entered not into Conference: But
that we may not repeat over, that the King's Instruction was agreed upon to be
without them, I shall at least say, that none should admire, That either those
who were gained to favor the King's Design had seigned to give way, or that
the rest seeing the Snares that were laid for them, and knowing the King's
secret Intentions, had required that all the Deputies of the Churches might be
expected, before the broaching of a business of so great consequence. However
they took another Precaution more formal against the vain Reproach of the
Prelates; and they engaged by a Public and Authentic Writing, to maintain in
the Presence of what Persons soever in a set Conference, the Doctrine that the
King had learned in the Reformed Religion. It was du Plessis's desire, that the
Ambassadors of the Protestant Princes, and some learned Ministers should be at
Mantes, that the Presence of these Ministers might delay, if it were possible,
the King's Change; or at least, that it might more forcibly oblige him to give
the Reformed tolerable Conditions. But the precipitation of the Clergy gave not
time for all these Measures. They waited neither the coming of the Deputies of
the Churches, nor of the Strangers: And after an Instruction of half a day,
where only such The King's Conversion.
were present as were not willing to hinder it, the King appeared to be
satisfied with the Roman Doctrine, and the very next day abjured at St. Denis
the Reformed Religion. It Is true, he never would promise to ruin the Heretics
of his Kingdom, which the Clergy would have him Swear to. Whether he acted thus
only through a sincere Affection for the Peace of his Subjects, or that it was
a premeditated Denial, to take away the Fears his Change might give the
Reformed. Neither would he by any A Formular that the King refuses.
means sign a Formular, which had been prepared for him; by which he was to
Swear, one after another, to all the Articles of the Romish Faith; and in like
manner to abjure all the pretended Heresies of the Reformed. They were forced
to draw up one on purpose, where Roni intervened, and where without an express
Profession or Abjuration of any Article, he in sum submitted himself to the
whole Doctrine of the Catholics. But as there was a necessity of satisfying
the Pope, the first Formular was sent him in the King's Name, which was
counterfeited by Lomenie Secretary of State, who had used to Sign for him, and
who imitated his Writing pretty well. The King agreed to this Writing, which
could neither set his Conscience at rest, nor please the Court of Rome, where
the Craft could not be long kept hidden, nor make the Reformed believe that he
kept their Religion in his Heart, though he had these different Prospects in this
Artifice.

The End of the Second Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of Nantes* BOOK III.
The CONTENTS of the Third Book.
Mistrusts produced by this Change. Boldness of the Leaguers. Renewing of the
Vnion-Oath. Conspiracy of Barriere. Pretense of the Rebels, that the King's
Conversion is not sincere: That he must have the Popes Blessing. Deputies from
the Reformed on their March. The King's Precautions against their Reproaches. A
Letter upon the King's Change* The Insults of the Catholics. Artifices to keep
the Deputies from seeing him, and to hinder him from giving them satisfaction.
Project of an Edict. A Precaution against the Order of the Holy Ghost and
Coronation. The Reformed not very well contented with the Project, neither
accept nor refuse it. Assemblies permitted. Union renewed with the King's
Approbation. Artifices for to corrupt the Ministers. A Design of a Reunion.
The Duke of Nevers obtains nothing at Rome. The Fears that the King's and
Pope's Reconciliation give the Reformed. A Truce prejudicial to the King. The
Reducing Meaux and other Towns. Clauses in the Treaties that are to the
prejudice of the Reformed. The Coronation Oath. The power of the Jesuits.
Injustices done to the Reformed. The Characters of the Chief of the Reformed. A
Synod at Montaubon; Orders Prayers for the King's Prosperity, and for his
returning to his Religion: Disclaims the Province of the Isle of France in
several points. Assembly at St. Foy. Propositions and Regulations for the
General Council; and for those of the Provinces. Secret Articles. Sedition of
the Croquans. Deputies amused at Court. Pretensions of the Duke of Mercoeur.
Overtures of Reconciliation with the Pope. The King wounded by Chatel. Jesuits
banished. Pyramid. Testimony that d' Ossat renders the Reformed. The Courts
Thoughts upon the Union of the Reformed. The King's Thoughts upon this Subject.
Causes for which it is resolved to declare the Reformed capable of Employs. The
Prince of Conde drawn from under their hands. Methods for to succeed in it. The
Article of the enabling the Reformed to be in Places passes with much ado. The
Attorney General's ill-grounded Wrangling, and the reason of new Mistrusts.
Assembly at Saumur; at first displeases the King, who at at last authorizes it:
Reasons for the permitting it. Necessity of importuning the King. The Assembly
demands a new Edict, and Securities. The King's desired Absolution: His Reasons
for yielding the first. Commissaries chosen for to treat about it* Du Perron
and d' Ossat. The Popes high Pretensions. Precise Instructions to the Attorneys
for the contrary. Testimony rendered to the present and past Services of the
Reformed. Prevarications of the Attorneys in the Words and thing it self.
Articles of Penitence: Complaints of the Reformed: The Excuses of the
Attorneys. Punishment of two Protestants at Rome. Secret Articles believed to
be promised to the Pope.

THis Conduct of the King changed once more the Countenance 1593. Mistrusts
proceeded from this change.
of Affairs. The Reformed Religion, which the Death of Henry III. had put upon
the Throne, was on a sudden removed far from it; and the Heads of that Party
began to fear, That seeing it had been possible to make the King by so many
Artifices quit his Religion, he should by little and little be disposed to
destroy them. Which was so much the more probable, that it being impossible for
the King to be ignorant of the mortal Grief they had for his Change, he was
likewise to consider them as Men, who perhaps for the future would consult only
Despair, and who at least would live with him in continual Diffidence. Thence
he on the other hand must take occasions of Suspicions and Jealousies; and
perhaps according to the natural Inclination of Man, who never fails to hate
those of whom ^e no more deserves to be beloved, to pass from the fear of their
Resentments to the resolution of ruining them. Men look upon the Presence of
those that have rendered them too good Services, and whom they for a Recompense
have manifestly injured, as a perpetual upbraiding, of whom they think to rid
themselves by ^estroying these troublesome Accusers: And the Reformed seemed to
be in a case of excepting no other Usage, seeing the sight of them could not
but trouble the King's Conscience, by continually upbraiding him with their
Services, their Misery and his Change. They saw moreover, that a Negotiation
with Spain was on foot, which ought to make them fear that the Alliance should
be made, ^ut at their Cost. La Varenne, a Man of Fortune, who notwith^tanding
had a share in the King's Confidence, because he was one of the Ministers of
his Love-tricks, took a Journey into Spain, under certain Pretenses, but in
effect to propose a Peace, and the Marriage of Henry IV. with the Infanta; for
to see that Princess in the King's Name; for to bring him her Picture, and to
promise to send a Lord of Note, if the King of Spain would ^earken to it. It is
not known whether the King's Intention ^as really so, or if he endeavored by
the Overture of that Proposition to make Spain abandon the Interests of the
League. But ^is Voyage alarmed the Protestants both at home and abroad; ^o'
England and the United Provinces had been included in the ^roject of this
Peace, because they feared lest at one time or ano^^er their Ruin to be the
fruit of that Alliance. But in France ^^e Reformed changed not their Conduct.
They were content to ^^rug their Shoulders through Astonishment, to exhale
their Grief ^ bitter Complaints, and to expect the Issue of their Deputation,
whose Members were on their way to wait on the King, who had given them fine
Promises for their Comfort.

As to the Catholics, those that followed the King's Party lost the Pretense
of their Broils, when they could no more reproach him with his Religion. But
his Affairs with the Leaguers fared in nothing the better for it. From the very
beginning of the Conference that was again taken up with them; they pretended
to treat not as Subjects, but as Equals; and even as Superiors, that Boldness
of the Leaguers.
gave Laws unto the rest. They would not treat with the King, but with the
Catholics that were of his side: They disputed with them whatever can be
disputed amongst those that are equal; Precedence, the Wind, the Fire, and the
Right Hand; and would have the Houses to be drawn by Lot; and after all, they
made still such Demands, as were impossible to be granted. Amongst other
Propositions, they made that of granting to the Reformed an Edict of Toleration
for a time. Thus they were forced to part, without coming to any Conclusion;
the King refusing to consent to such hard Conditions, and not very suitable to
the Condition of his Affairs; and the Catholics themselves that were of his
Party being ashamed to desire it of him. Some days after the King's Abjuration,
the League renewed the A renewing of the Oath of Union.
Union-Oath, to rouse the Spirits of those that this Action had shaken. A Copy
of this new Oath, which the Cardinal of Plaisance had Signed, and which he was
sending to Rome, fell into the King's Hands, who clearly saw that his Change
had not freed him of his Troubles. Even Villeroy and Janin, who had most
assured him that his Religion alone kept these Catholics from rendering him
Obedience, temporized as well as the rest. The reason of this was, that every
one was resolved to sell his Reduction; and that private Interest was more
valued than that of Religion, which they had given out to be their sole one.
There were but very few Examples of an uninterested yielding; few Towns o^
Governors surrendered without bargaining; all the rest got themselves to be
bought at the dearest rate they could. Therefore whilst the Reformed bewailed
the change of their King, and groaned under the Oppression of their Enemies,
the Catholics sold him his own Goods, and obtained from him great Sums or
great Places, as a Price at which they set their Obedience: And whilst his
ancient and most faithful Servants enjoyed neither their Consciences nor their
Lives in Safety, the Rebels, who had so often conspired against his Service,
received all the Favors and Rewards. Notwithstanding all this, about a Month
after he had embraced the Romish Religion, a Plot against his Life was
discovered. Peter Barriere, a Disciple to the Jesuits, had undertaken to
Barriere's Conspiracy.
kill him. He was apprehended and punished as his Crime deserved. The Pretense
of these new Difficulties was, that his Conversion The Rebels Pretense.
was not sincere, and that before he could be acknowledged a true Catholic, he
must be reconciled to the Pope, and receive his Benediction.

Mean while the Deputies from the Churches were on their The Deputies of the
Reformed on their march.
way to Mantes. The King was not willing to see them, because ^e expected
nothing but Reproaches from them. And Q. Elizabeth upbraided him more bitterly
then he expected. They of Geneva wrote to him after the same manner; and he
questioned not ^ut his own Subjects would talk to him in the same Language.
Therefore he took all Precautions possible to secure himself The King's
Precautions against their reproaches.
against the free and bold Discourses that he expected from them. Whereupon he
commanded du Plessis to let him know what the ^eformed did say of his Change,
as if he had a mind to accustom himself to such Remonstrances. This du Plessis
did in a pretty ^^ng Letter; but yet more sharp and smart, wherein heplainly
set ^^rth their Thoughts upon all the Circumstances of this Affair. ^e told the
King, that the Reformed had hopes that he would have ^^ken care for them,
without putting them to Trouble about it; ^^t that instead of giving them an
assured Settlement, he had not ^^ much as taken the Rope from their Necks,
seeing the Edicts of ^e League were still in force in several Parliaments: That
notwithstanding the Reformed did not desire, as the League, that the ^aw of the
Realm should be altered for their Profit, or that of a ^^reign Prince; nor as
the Royal Catholics, that the King according to their Pleasure should change
his Religion; and much ^^s, that the Kingdom should be torn into pieces, to
satisfy a ^all number of Men: That they desired Peace only for their
consciences, and the Security of their Lives, every one according this Quality
and Birth; which is a common Right, and not a ^^^vate Privilege, they being
resolved to obey their Prince without excepting against his Religion; That they
complained that their Petitions, granted by so many Edicts of his Predecessors,
and maintained by himself, could not be hearkened to under his Reign; which had
they not expected, and had it not been for the Affection they bare him, they
might justly and profitably have used the Methods they had been forced to make
use of under the former Reigns: That after a long Patience, they saw him quit
his Religion, without providing for them in any manner whatever: That the
Vulgar thence concluded, that whether he had turned of his own free accord, or
through necessity, there was no good to be expected from him any more: That the
wiser sort were in hopes he would never have forgot the Favors God had showered
down upon him, nor the Services of the Reformed; but that they feared at the
same time, that he having forgot them in the midst of his Prosperities, and not
having set them at liberty, when so many Victories gave him Authority to do it,
would for the future want resolution to do them good; and that those who had
been able to shake his Conscience* would likewise force him to make an ill use
of his Power. To which they added the Examples of the past, and the present
Discourses of several Catholics: That they doubted of his Constancy of
protecting them, having seen what he had done; more especially finding that
there was a greater distance betwixt pure Religion and Idolatry, then betwixt
Idolatry and Persecution; because a Man must meet with Difficulty to pass from
Good to Evil, But ^^ grow worse and worse is so easy, that it is scarce
perceptible. ^^ Plessis moreover observed, that the King had been imposed upon
their Insinuations to bring him to Mass; which having fully discovered, he told
him, that it was evident the Catholics intended to carry him on further; that
he would be obliged to send ^^ Rome, where no Absolution would be obtained
without Penance that Popes had sometimes enjoined that of making War against
the Infidels; that after the same manner the Consecrated Sword would soon be
sent him, to fight against the Heretics, meaning the Reformed, the Loyalest of
his Frenchmen and the sincerest Subjects; and that he should be brought
thereto by little and little ^^der diverse Pretenses, to overcome his good
Disposition. Then he showed the King the Progress of the Conference begun with
the League, the Delays of those that had made him change, the ^^ conveniences
of the Truce; the cause of fearing, that as he was thereby treated as Head of a
Party, he might be obliged by the Peace to become the Captain General against
the Huguenots; that the Peace without them could not be managed without
Injustice, nor without giving them lawful Suspicions: Whereupon he represented
what Extremities the Catholics were delivered from under Henry III. by the
Reformed; and how the ^atter had reason to suspect, that if a Peace was
concluded without them, all the Difficulties of it should be removed to make
them smart; that the convocating the Deputies of the Churches was a Cheat,
seeing that without waiting their coming they de^ated on their Condition, and
that of their Posterity; and that ^hey made the King give such Promises, as one
day would be used ^o make void all that he should grant them; that there were
effects that corroborated these Suspicions; that Protestant Sermons were
^^ready banished the Court and Armies; and consequently the Re^^rmed; seeing it
was impossible for them to live at Court without serving God, or to expose
themselves in the Army without ^y hope of Comfort, and without assurance of
Christian Burial; ^^at they were contriving to debar them from all places in
the Ex^^equer, Courts of Justice, and City Magistracy, for which they had ^ver
yet been importunate with him; that it was not just they ^ould injure their
Posterity to that degree, as to leave them in ^^e Kingdom to be ranked among
Jews and Leapers, instead of that was owing to their Services; that they could
better endure to ^^e under the late King's Truce, that granted 'em the Exercise
of ^^eir Religion at Court and in the Army, the Salary of their Mi^^sters out
of the Exchequer, Places of Safety in every Bai^ick or Senescalship; and that
besides had promised them a ^estitution of the Edicts before the year was
ended. Finally (...) added by way of Advice, That these Considerations had
wea^d the Patience of the King's Servants, who knew not what ^^swer to make;
that now there was no time for Delays; that ^^^ir minds were tired, yet heaving
and tossing, and upon seeking ^^emedy from Despair; that to take off their
desire for a Pro^^tor, it was requisite the King should free them from that
ne^^^sity, by being himself the Person, by preventing 'em, and ta^^^g 'em into
his Care; that he knew what would benefit or annoy ^; that he needed no more
then only call to mind the Petitions that he had presented for them to his
Predecessors; that they had lost nothing of their Justice; and that they ought
to have gained somewhat by the Increase of his Authority, seeing it was in his
power if he pleased, to be the Judge and Advocate, the Obtainer and Donor all
at once.

The Catholics seemed to fear, lest these different Motions Insults of the
Catholics.
should not make an Impression deep enough on their Minds; therefore they
exasperated them by insulting Language. Some of them called the Reformed Sots
and Blockheads, that knew not how to take hold of the occasion, and had
suffered the time to slip that was fit for their purpose. This sort of Drollery
was so much the more nipping, because that when they pressed the King to think
on them, it was cast in their Teeth, that they had mistaken the time; and were
threatened, that one day they might very well lose what they should obtain this
way. And they have ever since been thus dealt with. All the Methods they have
taken or proposed for their Safety have been accounted punishable Rebellions;
as also whatever they have done to keep their Enemies from destroying them: And
when they suffered without muttering one Word, all the ways that have been
undertaken to oppress them, they were styled Stupids and Rusticks, that knew
not how to defend themselves.

Du Plessis's Letter having prepared the King for such Discourses as the
Deputies were like to assail him with, He desired again ^^ see him at Chartres,
to accustom himself to the Presence of the Reformed, as well as to their
Remonstrances; persuading himself that if what he should say made any
Impression on his Mind* ^ would suffice to persuade the rest, who put an
extraordinary Confidence in that Gentleman. He saw him therefore, and excused
himself the best he could, striving to make him believe, that he Change was
altogether feigned and forced, so far as to detest those that had done the like
in imitation of him; and protesting that he had Sacrificed himself for his
People, and chiefly to procure with more ease the Peace of the Churches, which
he then called as he did a long time after, our Churches, as if he had still
he^ some Communion with them. These Reasons were the Satisfaction that he gave
the Reformed of his Court, to whom he Change seemed inexcusable; and would tell
them, even before he had put it in execution, that he made himself an Anathema
for his Brethren, whose rest he well saw could not otherwise be procured. Du
Plessis seemed not to be satisfied with these Excuses, nor to build upon the
hopes the King gave him of reforming Religion: but the assurance which he gave
him that his affection for the Reformed was not altered, might be a greater
satisfaction to him.

In the mean time the Royal Catholics having made themselves Masters of the
King by his change, were nothing the juster toward the Reformed; they omitted
no occasion of rendering them suspected or odious, in which they spared not
Calumny itself. It was for that purpose that a Rumor was spread amongst the
People, that duPlessis had intended to murder all the Catholics of Saumur on
the Eve of St. Bartholomew, to revenge the Reformed that had been served so
twenty years before at Paris. He understood very well the malignity of this
Artifice, which ten^ed to render all the Reformed suspected of a like design,
in all ^he places where they were the strongest: because it was more ^han
probable, that a Lord of that Wisdom and Authority would ^ot alone undertake
the project of this Vengeance, which would ^e too small for to extend only on
the Catholics of Saumur: Therefore he was willing to refute that Calumny in
due Form. He complained to the Parliament of it; information was ^ade against
the Authors of this Report, which was easily ^inc'd to be false: but the party
impeached was not punished as Du Plessis's expected. On the other hand, the
Catholics strove ^ith great vigor, to keep the Deputies of the Churches from
^^ming into the King's Presence: whether they feared that their Artifices to
hinder the Deputies from seeing him.
^^ght might shake him, he being as yet not well grounded; or ^at they strove
to hinder the Favors he was prepared to grant ^^em, to make them forget his
change. But the King being very ^ath to send back the Reformed Deputies without
hearing them, the ^atholicks endeavored to keep him at least from seeing
themall, and ^ould fain have admitted no more then six into his Presence: But
Du Plessis got the King to resolve the contrary. However the Catholics without
losing courage, endeavored to weary the Deputies at ^antes, amusing the King
near Fecamp, and other places of Normandy, ^^ give them occasion to Believe
that the King shund 'em, and was not willing to come to the speech of 'em: and
moreover they put him in some fear of the Pope, who would be offended if he
gave so soon, and so publicly, any token of affection to the Reformed. But du
Plessis still got the better of these Artifices; the King went to Mantes, saw
all the Deputies, heard their Complaints and Reproaches, they wanting neither
Strength nor Courage, made them fair Promises, heard President Feydeau that
spoke for them, received the Memorial of their Demands, charged the Chancellor
to examine it, and made them hope he would give them satisfaction.

The Catholics not being able to hinder him from seeing Project of an Edict.
them, endeavored at least to hinder his satisfying them; and advised him to
send them home with a promise to answer their Memorial in three Months. But the
Marshal de Bouillon and du Plessis showed so many inconveniences in that
advice, the suspicions so lawful, that the Deputy's return would give the
Churches, without carrying back any thing but words; so many sad Consequences
of despair that such a conduct would cast the Reformed into, that the King took
a contrary advice. And because they always alleged the Pope, who had not as
yet approved the King's absolution, and how the Edict that would be given the
Reformed would hinder his approving it; they replied, that there was no heed to
be given to the Pope, when their affairs were in agitation, because they knew
but too well that he would never be pleased that any thing should be done in
their favor. But to testify that the King's Service was as dear to them
before as after his change, and that they were not willing their Precipitation
should bring him any prejudice, they did agree that the publishing of the Edict
which would be granted them might be deferred, provided the Memorial was
presently examined, and the Edict drawn up in order to its Publication at a
less ticklish Juncture. They therefore obtained that seven Catholic
Commissaries should be named that what they should conclude might be the more
authorized: and in this very number were some of the most rigid, to ta^^^ away
all causes of murmuring if the business should be carried on without them. But
these Commissaries knew not where to begin; whether their design was to
frustrate the persuits of the Reformed, and to put them off to a time that the
King's Conversion should not be a new thing; or that out of their zeal for
Religion they were not willing to grant any thing to those that they held for
Heretics. So that after several Conferences, wherein time was spent, the
Marshal Duke de Bouillon, and du Plessis, were added to the Catholics, who
soon agreed with them upon several Articles.

The chief of them were, that the Edict of 1577 should be And to hinder him
from satisfying them.
^evived with the Interpretations given it in the Conference of Ne^ac and
Fleix; that the Edicts extorted by the League to the pre^udice of the former
should be repealed: That by reason of the changes caused by the disturbances of
the League, and the damages that the Reformed had suffered thereby, a new
Regulation should be made by way of amends for their Losses, conformably ^o
which the Chancellor and Secretaries of State should govern themselves upon
occasions, and give the necessary advices to the ^arliaments, in the Affairs
that should be Transacted by them; That the Catholic Religion should be
reestablished in all places ^^at the War had banished its Exercise from, which
should be per^rmed without Fraud, and without Prejudice to the Reformed: that
the Reformed should exercise theirs in the Cities under the ^ing's Obedience,
Because the War hindered them from assembling ^ith safety in the Country; which
however the King should or^^r according to the places: That when the King's
Sister was at ^ourt, the exercise of the Reformed Religion should be in ^^r
House; and in her absence, only in the Families of Lords, ^^ongst whom were
reckoned, namely, the Duke de Bouillon, a Trimouille, Rohan, du Plessis, yet
with that reservation, that (...) Psalms should be sung there: That it should
also be in the Ar^y, whether the King was present or absent, in the Quarters
the Captains of the Gendarms, and Camp-masters: That no Oath ^ade, or to be
made, should be a prejudice to the Article ^reed to: That a Fund should be
appointed for the Sa^y of their Pastors, according to the Rolls certified by
the ^^ovinces, and that it should be charged upon the Provinces ^^der the name
of Madame: That the Legacies and Gifts that ^^ght be bequeathed to the Churches
and Poor should be valid, ^d that the Reformed should be admitted to sue for
the Payment ^^ereof after the ordinary ways: That the Children of the Reformed
should be brought up in the Religion of their Parents, though the Fathers and
Mothers of them should not order the same in their last Will. They added
verbally to all these Articles that were written down, that the Reformed might
build and rent Colleges for the instructing their Youth.

The Reformed Commissaries got an Article to be inserted Precautions against
the Oaths of the Order of the H. Ghost, and the Coronation.
against the Oaths, under pretense of which all the Promises that should be
made might be evaded; because they knew very well that the King was to take the
Oath of the Order of the Holy Ghost, and that at his Consecration he would be
made to take another, whereby he should be obliged to extirpate the Heretics.
In like manner they obtained, that the Fund appointed for the maintaining their
Pastors should be charged upon the State, under the name of Madame, by reason
the Catholics looked on it as a very grievous thing, that the States of a most
Christian King should be charged with the Maintenance of Heretical Ministers.
But when these Articles were communicated to the Deputies of the Churches, they
were not satisfied with them for two principal Reasons. The first was, That
there was no care taken, that Justice should be administered to them as well as
to Catholics; whereas the Parliaments and other Judges did them great
Injustices in Civil Matters, and great Cruelties in Criminal ones, as if the
Protection of Laws and Common Right had not belonged to them. Add to this, That
the reviving the Edict of 1577. which seemed to provide for that, did not free
them from their fear (...) being deprived of its effect, by the same Frauds of
which they had^ Trial under the Reign of Henry III. The second was, that the
Securities given them did not seem sufficient against the Animosities of the
Catholics; os which they had a fresh example by the peevishness of the
Commissaries that had treated with the Marshal de Bouillon and du Plessis. It
had appeared by all their former Behavior, but still more by their sharp and
unjust Co^testations which they had upon each Article of the Memorial. So that
the remembrance of past Cruelties and Treacheries, suffered not the Reformed to
rely on the goodness of Enemies* whose hatred nothing could assuage. Therefore
they represented to the King the insufficiency of the Articles, granted them:
but all was in vain. The Council permitted not that any addition should be made
to the things agreed on, and the King who had reason to manage the Catholics
more then ever, durst not incense 'em by giving the Reformed too much
Satisfaction. The Deputies of the Churches were therefore forced to retire, as
if it were to give those that sent 'em an account of their Negotiation: and
they carried The Reformed dissatisfied of the Project, neither accept nor
refuse them. Assemblies permisted, Union renewed with the King'* approbation*
into their Provinces the Articles granted, without either accepting or
refusing 'em, as if they were to consider 'em more at large with their Brethren.

It Is true, the King gave them leave to call a Provincial Assemblies, there to
make a Report of their Deputation; and to prepare them for a general Assembly,
which they held at St. Foy the ensuing year. They also obtained leave to call a
National Synod to regulate their Ecclesiastic affairs, which were in some
confusion. But that which most favored them was, that even before the King's
face and with his Approbation, they renewed at Mantes the Union of the
Churches, to live and to dye in the maintenance and defense of their
Confession of Faith, as they had already sworn at the Assemblies of Nimes,
Millaud, Montauban, and Rochelle. But these former Oaths had been made under
the authority of a Protector of their own Religion: That of Mantes was the
first they made with the ^onsent of a King that had embraced a contrary
Communion. Du Plessis put this Notion in their heads, and advised them to let
the ^ing know it. They did so, and the King, whether in that he ^^llow'd his
own Inclinations, which favored 'em in the main, (...) that he judged it was
not a time to disapprove it, not on^^ permitted them to renew their Union, but
exhorted 'em (...) it, as a thing necessary for their Preservation; and said
nothing (...) them that might make 'em think he believed their Oath was
pre^^dicial to his Service. For this clause was always inserted in the Acts
(...) the Union, that it was made under the Kings Obedience, and without
quitting the fidelity that was due to him. It would have ^een difficult, I
grant, but on the other hand, it would not have ^^en just to oppose such an
Union, seeing that in effect to hinder ^^ople from uniting themselves for their
own safety, when they ^^ve formidable Enemies to deal with, would be a direct
Dearation that they were resolved to destroy 'em; there^^re this Union of the
Churches which has made so great a noise, and which has served Lewis XIII. for
a pretense to ruin the Reformed, was in its beginning equally innocent and
necessary: Since natural right of self-preservation grounded the necessity of
it, and for that the Approdation and Exhortation of the King who authorized
'em, was lawful and no way to be blamed.

This hindered not, but that whilst the Deputies of the Reformed stayed at
Mantes* great endeavors were used by the force of Intrigues Artifies to
corrupt the Ministers.
to corrupt some of 'em, either to sow division amongst 'em, or to color the
King's Change by some new Prevarication of the Ministers. Matters had been
prepared for it, by procuring the Deputation of some Provinces for such Persons
as were judged most pliable to the Promises of the Court. Rotan a famous
Minister was suspected to help on these Artifices, whether he was really
charmed by the expectance of some Favors, or that he feigned as if he
hearkened to 'em that so he might be made a Deputy; because that Commission
then was of no small consequence to honor those it was given to. A Conference
was therefore begun, to which du Perron was admitted, as assured of Victory, by
the Collusion of his Adversary. The dispute ran upon the sufficiency of
Scripture, and upon the Interpretation of the 16 verse of the 3 Chapter of the
11 Epistle of Paul to Timothy. But Rotan not daring, either in Honor or
Conscience, to be so base as he was reported to have promised, feigned himself
sick, which freed him from that trouble. Beraud a Minister of Montauban took
his place, but the Conference was soon at an end, when they saw that there was
nothing to be expected from the fraud agreed upon with Rotan. The Clergy sound
out the means to break it, without seeming to shun it; and the Ministers on
their part offered to take it up when ever occasion should offer: But by reason
these offers hindered not the Clergy to boast that they had made the Ministers
give ground, Berand and Rotan got the National Synod held a^ Montauban the
following year, to approve what they had done a^ the Conference. Beraud
persuaded Rotan to lay all upon himself; and this approbation stifled men's
suspicion, that the latter held any fraudulent Correspondence with the
Adversaries: and to show that they did not stand in fear of the Bishops, the
Synod named one and Twenty Persons of their Body, to whom they gave authority
of ch^sing Twelve of their own number to continue the Conference, whenever the
Catholics would reassume it. Amongst these Electors were three Foreign
Ministers; one from Geneva, one from England, and one from Holland.

The departure of the Deputies put an end to these dangerous Intreigues; but
the Reformed soon after were set upon by new Artifices: And secret Orders were
sent into the Provinces, to hinder their Ministers from using in their Sermons
too hard Expressions against the King's Change, and they were forbid to call it
a Revolt. Thus whilst on the one hand the Suffrages of some Preachers of the
League were bought off with ready Money, to engage 'em to speak advantagiously
of the King's Conversion in their Pulpits, the same means was mostly used to
stop the Ministers Mouths, and to make 'em speak modestly concerning the same
thing. Hereby it was expected that the Reformed People coming to hear this
Action of their Prince spoken of with so much Moderation, might be the more
easily inclined to imitate Him. Moreover there arose a World of Reconcilers of
Religion, who A design of re-uniting.
looking upon the Accomodations as very proper to flatter the King's
Conscience, by these unworthy means aspired to Rewards and Salaries. These
Reconciliations wrought upon some Ministers; but that which was most
surprising, was, that a whole Province was taken with these illusory Projects,
and had the Boldness to charge their Deputies to carry a Proposal of the ^ame
to the Synod of Montauban. These Artifices corrupted ma^y People, and
occasioned much trouble to several wise and ^onest Men, that were for
preserving the advantages of Religi^n and the Rights of Conscience, without
disturbing the Peace of ^he Churches.

On the other hand, the King's Negotiations with the Pope gave new Alarms to
the Reformed, who feared lest they should pay ^he Expenses of the
Reconciliation betwixt these two Potentates. The Duke of Nevers being sent to
Rome, seemed fit for the spee^y concluding of this business, because that as a
zealous Catholic, and originally an Italian, he would be acceptable to the
Pope; and as affectionate to the King, he would mind his Interest. In ^ffect he
was very intent upon the matter, and plied the Pope in a ^ost submissive and
earnest manner: But he got nothing by his Importunity. The Pope believed the
League to be still strong enough to hold out a long time against the King's
Power; and according to the Maxims of Rome, he continued inflexible, as long as
he thought things could not be done without him. The Duke of Nevers has The
Duke of Nevers obtains nothing at Rome.
thought fit in his Memoirs to make a particular Observation of the little
knowledge that Court has of the Gospel; where nevertheless, the Name of
Religion serves for a Cloak for all things. He relates, that as he was one day
remonstrating to the Cardinal of Toledo, how just it was that the Pope should
kindly accept the Offers of the King that courted him, seeing his Duty obliged
him, like the good Shepherd that seeks for the strayed Sheep, to have courted
himself that Prince, were he still strayed from his Flock; This Cardinal, one
of the most learned and famous of the College, answered him, That it did not
stand with the Dignity of Jesus Christ to run after the strayed. And continuing
the same Discourse, he named the Apostle St. Andrew in a thing that the
Evangelist St. John attributes to St. Philip; wherein the Duke, who knew more
then he, made no Scruple to show him his Error.

These Rigours of the Pope, and the bad Success of the Embassy of the Duke of
Nevers, who was not a little grieved to see that they did but laugh at the
Miseries of France in Rome, and in whose Presence this same Cardinal had
presumed to say, smiling at the Description he made of 'em, That he did not
know how to help 'em; All this, I say, made some of the Reformed take heart, in
hopes to see a Schism that might happen to their Advantage. But those who
understood better the Roman Policy judged otherwise, and believed, that all
these Scruples were raised only for to enhance the price of the King's
Reconciliation, and to draw more advantageous Conditions from him; amongst
which they highly feared, least destroying the Heretics, as one of the
chiefest, should be inserted. It is true, the King had charged the Duke of
Nevers to let the Pope know, if he were capable of harkening to Reason, that
considering the present posture of Affairs, he ought not be obliged either to
destroy the Reformed, nor to promise the compassing of it one day, because they
were strong enough to stand in their own Defense, and had well fortified Holds
to retire to. In consideration of which he besought the Pope not to take it
ill, that some other more moderate Course might be taken for the good of the
Catholic Religion, without mentioning the Destruction of the Reformed. Pisani,
who had made a Voyage to Italy before the Duke, had also been charged with the
like Instructions. But the Reformed were not ignorant of the Artifices of the
Court of Rome, that takes her Measures afar off to bring about her Designs,
whereof she never loses sight. The Pope also explained himself clearly enough
upon this Subject; and though he had resolved to give no positive Answer to the
Duke of Nevers, when he asked him, what he would have the King do in order to
obtain his Absolution; ^et told him, to be rid of his Importunities, that the
King should do the contrary of all that he had done till that time. The
Reformed understood well the meaning of those Words. They were not obscure to
those that knew with what earnestness the Court of Rome had, and still did
endeavor throughout all Europe, to destroy the Protestants: They saw well,
that the Popes meaning was, that the King who to that time had been the
Protector of the Reformed, must for the future persecute and destroy 'em. They
were moreover well informed, that diverse Advices were The fears that the King
and Popes reconciliation gave the Reformed*
given the King to divert him from favoring them; and that it was ever-more
represented to him, that that was the only ^^ans to bring back all the
Catholics into his Service, and bind ^he Pope to his Interests.

Mean while the Truce which the King had made with the Heads of the League
immediately after his Conversion, under pretense Truce to the King's prejudice.
^f re-uniting their Minds, and to wean them from the War, en^ed with the Year.
It was at first made for Three Months, and ^^en was continued. The Reformed of
the Council opposed it ^ith all their might, and endeavored to make the King
sensi^^e, that this Truce would prove the Ruin of his Affairs; be^^use it
would delay the good Intentions of those that were in^inable to return to their
Obedience, and give the Heads of the ^eague time to re-encourage their Party
that began to shake, and ^^ Opportunity of treating more advantagiously with
the Spani^^ds. But this Advice was rejected by them who foresaw that ^e design
of a Peace would throw the Reformed into despair, who ^^und more safety for
themselves in the Continuation of the War. Yet ^me convinced the World that
their Counsel was both wholesome and unbyassed. The particular Heads of the
League stuck close one to another whilst the Truce lasted, hoping that All
together should obtain better Conditions then separate and divided; and the
Heads made a bad use of it to draw more Succors from the Spaniards, who were
desirous to continue the Troubles in the Kingdom. The King therefore published
a Declaration, setting forth his Reasons for discontinuing a Truce so hurtful
to his Interests. But the face of things changed as soon as ever the Truce was
expired, and most of the Cities treated. Meaux was the first that submitted,
following the Example Reduction of Meaux and other Towns.
of Vitri the Governor. She drew great advantages from her submitting, and the
Edict that was given her served for a Model to the rest under the same
Circumstances.

All these Surrendrings gave new Jealousies to the Reformed, Clauses in the
Treaties that prejudice the Reformed.
against whose Liberties there were always some Clauses inserted in the
Treaties of the Governors and Cities. The very Articles that were agreed upon
at Mantes were almost all violated by these new Edicts; and the Reformed after
all these Infringements, found themselves in as bad a posture as at the
beginning. All the Towns did not show an equal Aversion for them; but they all
agreed, that no other Religion then the Catholic should be exercised within
their Walls Meaux was content to exclude out of her Cities and Suburbs the
Exercise of the Reformed Religion. Others banished it their The Circuit of a
League from any Town, being within the Precinct or Jurisdiction of it.
Banlieve. Several reduced it to the Limits of the Edict of 1577. fearing least
the Service of the Reformed should get 'em a more extended Liberty Several
desired that the Exercise of the Reformed might be remov^ from the Jurisdiction
of their Bailiwick. Some added pain of Death to those that should break the
Conditions. Paris removed the Liberty desired by the Reformed Ten Leagues
round. Villars banished it Roan, and all the Towns and Places that he caused to
submit to the King's Obedience; and added, That there should be neither Judge
nor Officer that was not a Catholic employed therein, and did not live
according to the Constitutions of the Romish Church. But to temperate this
rigorous Clause, it was subjoined, that this should only last till the King had
otherwise ordered it Poitieres, besides the removal of the Exercise of the
Reformed from the Town and Suburbs, and from all the places that the Edict of
1577. did not permit, demanded that the Catholic Religion might be restored in
diverse places of Poitou. Again limited her Bonlieve to half a league round,
where the Reformed Religion should not be exercised. Amiens prohibited it in
the City and whole Bailywick, without having respect to the Edict of 1577.
Beauvois obtained that it should be no nearer then three Leagues about, nor in
any places of the Bailywick, but where it had been in the late King's time. S.
Malo treated after the same manner. The Towns and Lords that returned latest to
their duty, followed the example of the rest, and got what they could from the
King against the Reformed Religion.

Some of the Edicts were published before the Reformed had formed the Assembly
they were permitted to hold at St. Foy; ^o that they had time to see what they
were to expect from the Reconciliation of their old Enemies with the King, and
to be ^onfirm'd in their fears of seeing the Kingdom pacified at their ^ost.
They saw even some of those Cities, which having held ^or the King, revive
their zeal after the example of the Towns of ^he League; and pretended that
their fidelity should not deprive 'em ^f the Advantages granted to Rebels;
whence they drew this ^onsequence, that they ought not to be forced to suffer
the exer^ise of the Reformed Religion, seeing such were freed from it as ^ad
for a long time stood out against the King. But their allarums ^ill increased
by the Ceremony of the King's Coronation, which ^as celebrated at Chartres,
because Rheims was as yet in the ^ands of the League. The Clergy that never
forgot their ^^terest in Ceremonies of this kind, which they have introduced
^^ther through Ambition then Necessity, inserted a Clause in the Oath that was
then taken by the King, whereby he was bound (...) express words, to root out
Heresy. He is made to swear, after some other things that concern Justice and
public Tranquity, I shall to the utmost of my power sincerely endeavor to
drive ^^om my Jurisdiction and Lands of my Subjection all Heretics de^ar'd
Oath of the Consecration.
by the Church* The Reformed knew well what share they had (...) this Article
of the Oath, they to whom what Catholics call the Church, had so often
declared their meaning; they against whom the ^opes had raised such cruel
Persecutions; and they to whom the ^rench, and even those of the King's Party
gave every day the odi^us name of Heretics. But part of the Suspicion which
this Clause might give, was removed by granting the Reformed a Brief, wherein
the King assured 'em that he did not mean Them in that Oath: And they had in
foam measure provided a Remedy against this fear, by one of the Articles that
were agreed on at Mantes.

Another cause of jealousy was the Favor into which the Jesuits The Jesuits
Answer.
had crept a little after the King had changed his Religion, and chiefly after
the Reduction of Paris. The Cardinal de Bourbon had undertaken to establish
'em, in spite of the oppositions of the University. The Duke of Nevers upheld
'em with his whole Credit; and many Lords openly protected them. Part of the
Parliament was for 'em; the King himself, who was brought to any thing in hopes
to soften the Pope, favored 'em. Their cause was pleaded pro and con; the
Rights of the University were maintained with utmost vehemence. Arnauld there
Advocate, enlarged much upon the Inclination, altogether Spanish, of that
Society, whose Founder had made a vow of mortal hatred against France; and
showed how formidable their power was. They had increased in fifty years to the
number of ten Thousand men; they had already two Hundred twenty eight Houses;
two Millions of Gold Revenue; great Lordships; Cardinals in their order: all
which clearly showed that they owed this propagation to their unquiet,
covetous, and ambitious Disposition. But it appeared at that very time that
they had a great credit in France, seeing their Cause was pleaded privately to
avoid Scandal. That is to say, these Refined Politicians by means of their
Friends, prevented their being told their own in a public Audience: Whence the
wise might perceive, that it was not safe to offend 'em. The Reformed beheld
the Settlement of the Jesuits as an ill omen for them, because they were their
sworn Enemies; born on purpose to oppose the Reformation; and the ordinary
Instruments of all their Persecutions. Moreover the Society was altogether
Spanishly affected; and consequently engaged to persecute the Reformed, whose
ruin Spain sought with all the strength of her Policy. But this Injustices
done to the Reformed.
terror did not go far; the matter was not decided; and e're the year was
ended, there fell out things that found the Jesuits other Intrigues to
disintangle.

The Reformed were still denied any places of trust; and there 1594.
were Catholics so unjust upon that matter, that they chose rather to see the
King lose a place, then to suffer a Reformed to have the Government of it. D'
O. publicly said, that it were better Catelet, a Frontire place of Picardy,
should be taken by the Spaniards, then that a Protestant should have the
keeping of it, because it wou^d be easier to retake it from the King of Spain,
then to drive a Reformed Captain out of it; But what made the Reformed more
sensible of the injury of this denial was, that whilst they were deprived of
lesser Offices, the chiefest places of the State were given to the Leaguers,
that demanded them for returning to their Obedience: As if Rebellion had given
more right to the highest Dignities, then long Service, and tried Loyalty to
the lesser ones. Nay at Tours itself would they make Recorders and Notaries
take an Oath, of living and dying in the Catholic Religion; which if it were
not done, the place was declared vacant and free for the purchase of another.
This so unequal a distribution of Recompenses mortally offended the
Protestants, who not without a just Resentment, found that the Parliament made
no Scruple to Register the Patents for Admiral or Marshal of France, granted to
the Heads of the Rebels; yet would not admit an Usher or a Procter of the
Reformed Religion, without obliging him to swear that he would live a good
Catholic. Nor was this all; the Governments and Places were taken from the
Reformed, and at the same time bestowed upon their Enemies. Diverse pretenses
were contrived, either to hinder them from fortifying the places they held, or
to persuade them that the keeping 'em was not worth while. Valognes in Normandy
was taken from 'em, under a pretense that it signified nothing to keep it,
because two or three useless Forts about it were rased. Mention was made of
demolishing all the places that kept Poitiers blocked up, as soon as that great
Town would be reduced. The Baron of Courtomer also was deprived of the
Government of Argentan to put Medavi in his place: and elsewhere many the like
Subjects of Complaint were given. The King to appease the Murmurings that were
occasioned by such Acts of Injustice, paid the Reformed with the Parable of
the Young Man, at whose return, after a shameful wasting of his Wealth; his
Father killed the fatted Calf, for Joy of his Repentance. 1593.
But they answered, that they ought at least to be treated as the Son that had
always been faithful, and to whom his Father said, Son, all that I have is
thine. That if they were resolved to spend the revenue of the Family, in favor
of a Prodigal to reclaim him, it was but just at least to make him a sharer, to
whom it was said, Son, thou have always been with me: That certainly the
obedient Son was not to be Sacrificed for the return of the other; nor to be
despoiled of his Rights to confer 'em on him that trampled under Foot the
Authority of his Father.

Besides these general affairs, there happened others particular in many
places, which were enough to weary the Patience of the most prudent and
moderate. The Lieutenant Civil of Paris put out an Order, commanding the
Reformed to bow to Crosses, Images, Banners, and Shrines, when they should meet
'em in the streets. This seemed to be of consequence, because it was done as
'twere in the very Presence of the King, who seemed to Authorize, seeing he did
not hinder it. An order of the Judges of Lions drove from the City and its
Jurisdiction, upon pain of Death, all those that should not profess the
Catholic Religion. The Parliament of Rheims prohibited on pain of corporal
Punishment, the selling, reading, or keeping Books for the use of the Reformed
Religion. That of Bourdeaux had made an Act, that authorized the digging up of
the Bodies of the Reformed, which in the space of fifteen years had been buried
in the Churches or Churchyards of the Catholics. The orders taken with those
that had the management of the King's Exchequer for the payment of Ministers,
were of no effect. The Courts that were promised for the Administration of
Justice in Guyenne and Languedoc, were not set up, though the Passion of the
Parliaments of Bourdeaux and Thoulouse, against the Reformed wanted but little
of Fury. At Orleance the Officers already received were deposed. The Parliament
of Roan caused the Proctors and Advocates to make a public Abjuration, before
they were permitted to plead or argue at the Bar: And even at Tours, the
Parliament before it is return to Paris, had caused a Judge Assistant of Saumur
to make his Abjuration, before his Pattents could be registered; which appeared
so 1594.
much the more strange, that Saumur was a Town of Safety.

Among the Reformed Lords, there were some that took no great Care of the
Affairs of their Party. Lesdiguieres minded no body but himself in Dauphine,
where he was very powerful. His manners were irregular, and his Life not very
edifying. He was covetous, ambitious and debauched; and he had joined himself
to the Reformed in his outward Profession, rather because their Religion had
been the raising of his Fortune, then out of any real Piety. There was a
Proposal also of marrying his only Daughter with la Trimouille, or the Marshal
de Bouillon, which would have very much advanced the Affairs of the Reformed.
But the Court prevented those Alliances; and a little after that, Lesdiguieres
married her to Crequi, a zealous Catholic. Neither was Roni less cold in the
matter of Religion. He was one of those wary Blades that will be always serving
God on the winning side; so that his Religion consisted only in Appearances,
and those but very superficial too. There were also Governors both of the
Provinces, and of strong Towns, whose Character was much the same; who though
in the main they were persuaded that their Religion was right, nevertheless
were so strongly engaged with the Court, that 'twas not very probable they
would break with Her to serve their Brethren. But there were several others who
laid things more to heart, and who used all their Endeavors to prevent the
Reformed from falling into any Snare upon the account of fair Promises, and
would not permit 'em to lose the Opportunity of securing their Persons, and the
Exercise of their Religion. The Marshall de Bouillon was one of these, and in
greatest Authority: A Person of great Merit and great Ambition. He had the
Reputation of a good Head-peice in the Council, and of a great Captain in the
Field, in Credit with Foreign Princes, and capable to be the Head of a Party.
His Estate was considerable, and he had Places of Strength in his Hands. More
especially Sedan, which, as he said, belonged to him by the last Will and
Testament of his Wife, who died but a little before without Children, and was a
Place of great Consequence, as being an Inlet for Foreign Armies into the
Kingdom. La Trimouille was next to him: Neither had Competitorship made 'em so
jealous of each other, but that they aimed both at the same Mark. Besides they
were united afterward by a more strict Alliance, in regard they married two
Sisters of Prince Maurice, to whom the United Provinces had granted part of
that Power, which William his Father had exercised until his Death. La
Trimouille was Young, Brave, Resolute, Daring, Courteous, Generous, Powerful in
Poictou, and drew a great Train of Nobility after him. The Court accused him of
being a Lover of Quarrels, and of being Headstrong. But others gave him a
better Character; That he was one who would listen to Reason, understood it,
and was capable of good Counsel; and looked upon him as a Person endu'd with
great Qualities, happy natural Parts; and one who only wanted a little Age and
Experience to ripen him for a perfect Hero. The Honor he had to see the
Prince of Conde, his Nephew, Presumptive Heir of the Crown, because the King
had no Legitimate Issue, and was by no means to be reconciled to Queen Margaret
de Valois his Wife, somewhat lifted up Tremouille's Heart, and made him looked
upon with more Respect by the Reformed, who despaired not one day to see him
their Masters Governor. But on the other side it rendered him suspected and
odious to the Court, where his Genius was dreaded. Some Proceedings of his at
St. John d' Angeli, where the Prince of Conde was brought up, were much
disgusted; of which I shall tell the reason in another place. And his vivacious
and courageous manner of supporting the Heretics afterward, rendered him
still more suspected. The King hated him, because he thought himself despised
by him, though he had done him great Services: And if he let fall any Word at any
time that carried with it the least Air of a Threat, it was always taken in
ill part, because they thought him capable of doing more then threaten.

These two Lords communicated their Mistrusts one to another, and laid before
each other the King's Easiness, the Tricks and Artifices of Rome, the Hatred of
the Reconciled Leaguers, who sufficiently showed by the Articles of their
Treaties, their eager desires to reduce all France to one Religion. There were
also a great number of Lords, Governors of Places, Captains and Persons in
Authority, who lay under the same Terrors; among whom there were some, who
having seen the times wherein Massacre and Treachery were so rise, made no
question but there was a design to destroy the Reformation, as soon as they
could meet with a favorable opportunity. The Catholics did those who were
thus Charactered the Honor to call 'em Brouillons, Troublesome, Restless
Disturbers of the Public Peace. As if People, with whom they had so often
broke their Words, were to blame in distrusting those whose Violation of Faith
they had so often experienced, and securing themselves against their wicked
Intentions. Du Plessis, who made a Conscience of Religion, was one of the most
zealous for the Establishment of it; and a great part of the Affairs, that
tended that way, were managed by his Counsels. But in regard he was a Person of
known Probity, the King still put a Confidence in him, and followed his Advice
in many things, because his Enemies themselves acknowledged 'em to be both
prudent and sincere, though they were often uttered with great Boldness and
Liberty. He it was that reunited those who were like to be divided by their own
Jealousies; who appeased those who were over-hot and furious; who put a stop to
those that ran too fast, and found out all Expedients proper to procure the
Good of the Churches, yet never failed in his Obedience. There was no body that
labored so much as he to keep the Reformed within the Bounds of due Patience,
during Negotiations for Four years together, at what time their Fidelity was
put upon cruel Trials, through the Severity, Delays and Artifices of the Court,
before they could obtain but tolerable Conditions.

These various Inclinations appeared in all the National Assemblies, both
Temporal and Ecclesiastical, which were held for naming of Deputies, and to
draw up Memoirs that were to be sent to the General Assembly which was to meet
at St. Foy. There were some of those particular Assemblies, wherein it was
debated whether a Protector should be chosen within or without the Kingdom; or
whether there should be a Form of Government erected, to stand upon their own
Legs without Protection. But the whole was referred to the General Assembly to
be there consulted. Those Proposals came from the Duke of Bouillon, who was for
conferring the Title of Protector upon the Palatine Elector, or some other
Prince of his House, and naming under him Four or Five Lieutenants within the
Kingdom, setting aside the Princes of the Blood, whose Interests were such,
that the Common Cause would suffer too much prejudice by 'em. He was in hopes
by this means, that the Chief Authority would rest in his hands; that others
would permit him to exercise it with less Jealousy under a Superior, then if
he enjoyed it in his own Name. But the Reformed, more especially they who were
called Consistorials, were weary of Personal Protection; and the Authority
pretended by Protectors had caused 'em to murmur a long time ago against that
which they called Protectoral Tyranny.

There could be no National Synods assembled since the Year Synod at Montauban.
1583. But that which was held in the Month of June at Montauban, a City far
remote from the Court, and passionately zealous for Religion and the Common
Cause, made amends for that long Interval of lost Time, and handled Affairs of
great Importance. The first of all their Cares was to order Public Prayers
Orders and Prayers for the King's Prosperity.
for the King's Prosperity; to the end it might appear, that his changing his
Religion had not disengaged 'em either from obeying or serving him. And this
tended yet farther to make the Passion of certain Orders of Monks more
evidently strange, who refused to pray for the King, though he were a Catholic,
and Crowned with the usual Ceremonies. This Diametrical Opposition of Duty in
the one, and Contumaciousness in the other, plainly made it apparent, on which
side the Law and Spirit of Peace was to be found. And prudent Men might easily
know where the good Subjects were, when they heard those, whose Religion the
Prince had relinquished, pray to God, according to the usual Custom, for the
Success of his Arms; while they whose Doctrine he had embraced, refused to name
him in their Supplications to Heaven. But least this Mark of the Synod's
Affection to the King's Prosperity should be taken for a tacit Approbation or
Dissimulation of the change of his Religion, the same Assembly ordered that And
to bring him back to the Reformed Religion.
Prayers should be said at the same time, that God would vouchsafe to bring him
back to the Religion which he had quitted; that the Ministers who were sent to
the Court should lay before him his Duty in that Particular to God; and that
Letters should be written to those that were usually about his Person, to make
him some Remonstrances.

After this, the Synod fell for a short time upon Political Affairs, Disowns
the Province of the Island of France in several particulars.
the occasion being given by the Province of the Island of France. The
Neighborhood of the Court had wasted a good part of that Province, and either
by kindness or by Favors done 'em, the Reformed in those Quarters had been
obliged to be content with the Edict of 1577. the Verification of which they
afterward most importunately su'd for. This Proceeding was disowned by the
Synod, as being contrary to the Resolutions taken at Mantes, where they had
obtained a Promise of a new Regulation, which should enlarge that Edict; and
the Society gave in charge, that their Complaints should be carried to the
General Assembly at St. Foy, which was convened the Month following. The
Reasons why they were not contented with that Edict, were, because the Force of
it was eluded by so many Frauds, that they could no longer be assured of having
any Advantage by it; that something was ^ar'd off every day by the Treaties
granted to the Cities of the League. That the Reformed, since that time, having
performed many faithful and important Services, it was but just, that in stead
of cutting off any thing from their Privileges, they should grant ^em new ones
in recompense for their loss of Blood, and Hardship ^ndergone. That, in short,
that Edict was granted at a time, when they had for their Leader and Chieftane
the first Prince of the Blood, who was their Guarantee for the Observation of
it: ^ut now that Prince having quitted their Party, the face of Affairs was so
changed. that they had no Assurance of Security in ^n Edict, without Warranty;
and therefore they wanted another ^uarant, or that their Lives and their
Consciences might be provided for by some other way more solid.

The same Province had also fallen into another Snare of the ^ourt. They had
given 'em a taste of a Project of Accommodation with the Catholics, under
pretense of uniting with 'em in defense of the Liberty of the Gallican Church,
against the Enterprises of the Popes. These Deputies came to the Synod with
^junctions to make the Proposal; and withal to add another for ^e naming of
competent Judges on both sides, to whom both ^arties should refer themselves
for the Decision of Controversies. and because the Court was afraid of these
frequent Assemblies, ^ey so ordered it, that the same Deputies desired that
Synods might be but rarely held, and only upon important Occasions. The
Mischief proceeded from hence, that they who carried the sway within that
Province, were every day with the Courtiers, who lost no opportunity of laying
before 'em the King's Power, who gathered strength every day more then other;
and therefore if they were over nice to day, they might be forced to repent to
morrow. They gave 'em farther to understand, that when the season ceased to
favor 'em, it would be in vain for 'em to wish back those opportunities of
securing themselves which they lost; and that in regard they were not so
numerously strong in the Provinces about Paris, they would be the first
oppressed, as being the most easily destroyed. The Promises and Favors, of which
the Court were prodigal, to those that turned their weak side to the Enemy,
afforded also more Strength and Weight to the same Illusions. But the Synod,
which sat in a place of security, was not so weak as to relish those Proposals,
which were therefore utterly rejected. Nevertheless, this was the Ground and
Beginning of a strange variety of Opinions and Prospects, the effects of which
have continued ever since. The Southern Provinces of the Kingdom, either as
being the remotest from the Court, and consequently less dazzled with the marks
of Grandeur; or else as being the strongest both for Number and Quality of the
Reformed, or for the Number and Strength of the Places which they possessed,
were generally inclined to more vigorous and resolute Opinions; whereas the
Provinces adjoining to Paris have followed the Example of that Metropolis,
whose Counsels have always recommended Submission and Patience. Posterity will
judge better then we, whether the aptness of the one to learn were an effect of
Prudence or Weakness; or whither the vigor of the other proceeded, as the
Persecutors give out, from a Spirit of Rebellion, or a constancy no less
laudable then just.

In the mean time the Deputies of the Political Assembly met at St. Foy, to the
number of thirty: nor had the Reformed taken out Letters of Permission for the
forming of that Assembly. But the King who feared the Consequence, and was not
willing to use 'em to so much liberty, which was prejudicial to his Authority,
nor desirous to vex 'em by an unseasonable Severity, sent 'em a Brevet which
authorized their meeting. Every one brought the Grievances of his Province, and
Memoirs conformable to the Hopes or Fears that prevailed among 'em. There was
one too among the rest, who proposed the settling a Pension upon one of the
Secretaries of State, to make him their Friend at Court: As also to provide
another Pension for the King's Mistress, who seemed to have some kind of
Inclination and Kindness for the Reformed. To this he added, that 'twas
requisite there should be a certain number of Deputies maintained at Paris, who
might consult with the Ministers of the Place, and the Lords that were then at
Court; and some Officers of the King's Household, if any business fell out that
required a more then ordinary Consultation. That Expedient no way displeased
the Catholics, because it would have broke the Union of the Reformed, and
laid 'em at the Discretion of their Enemies, who would not have had above
three or four Persons to manage, easily frightened or as easy to be corrupted
by ordinary Artifices. Others brought ample Instructions, to take it into their
Consideration, of what importance it was, not to lose the benefit of an
Assembly, for which they had so happily obtained a full permission from the
King. Long Discourses were made about what might create Distrusts for the
future: and Opinions were added concerning what was proper to prevent evil
Intentions. Upon occasion of which, they were earnestly advised to insist upon
the security which they were to demand, for the performance of things that
might be promised 'em.

The Assembly took all these things into consideration, as far as it was
thought needful for the disposing of the Minds of Men to take good Resolutions:
but the principal Affair was to lay a solid Foundation of Union. 'Twas thought
the King could no ^onger retain the Title of Protector of the Churches, since
he had quitted their Religion, and that it was a perfect Contradiction to take
upon him the Protection of the Reformed Religion, while he professed another,
which obliged him in reason of Conscience to destroy what he pretended to
defend. Neither would the Catholics endure that the King should think it an
Honor to him to wear that Title, and would be scandalized that a Catholic
King should take upon him to be the Protector of Heresy. It behooved 'em
therefore to unite under other Auspices: However they did not think it proper
to commit themselves again to the Discretion of a new Protector, but rather
chose to take such measures, that their Religion might stand supported by its
own Weight, and upon its own Legs. They therefore created a Proposals and
Regulations for the General Council.
General Council, which was to have all the Authority in the Affairs of
Religion, and by their Order all the Provinces were to be governed. To this
purpose there was a Regulation drawn up, comprehended in Eight and Twenty
Articles, which Ordained how the Assemblies of this Council should be formed
for the future. And this Platform was observed in all the Assemblies afterward
with little or no Alteration, only that the number of Provinces and Deputies
was augmented. Under the Direction of this Council General it was, that the
Affairs of the Reformed began to re-settle, and that it appeared to their
Enemies, that it would be no easy thing to ruin 'em. Then 'twas that they
began to use the Word We, whereas while they were under the Government of
Protectors, the Common Cause was frequently the Pretense to shadow the
Interests of the Head of the Party, whose Name alone, and Authority only
appeared in all Treaties and Edicts. And it was by the Instances and
Importunities of this Council that they obtained the Edict of Nantes: And in
regard that after they had set up this new Order among themselves, they were
forced to make use of all their Dexterity, Vigor and Patience, before they
could procure any firm Peace to themselves; it may be rationally conjectured
that they had never obtained it, had they taken any other Course. This
Regulation reduced the Number of the Provinces to Ten, every one of which was
to send a Deputy to the Assembly. It was decreed that there should be a
Distinction of States among the Deputies, according to the Model of the States
General of the Kingdom; since they were desirous that the Deputies should be
chosen, some out of the Body of the Nobility, some out of the Body of the
Ministers, and some out of the Third Estate. But the Ministers were not allowed
the same number as the other two Estates; whether it were for fear, that if
they had as equal a Voice as the other two, they would get all the Power into
their own Hands; or whether it were, that they thought that the Deputies from
the Nobility, or from the Third Estate, being in a Capacity to be also Elders
of some Church, though they were not Deputies under that Title, the Consistorials
would be always strong enough in the Assemblies. So that in the number of
chosen Deputies, there were to be Four Gentlemen, Four of the Third Estate, and
but only Two Ministers. The Provinces were to send Persons of these distinct
Qualities, every one according as they were in degree; and for the better
regulating of what Estate the Deputy of every Province should be for the first
Assembly that should be held, they had recourse to Lots. 'Twas also agreed that
the Deputies should be changed every Year: So that every Six Months the Five
Seniors quitted the Service, and gave way to Five others. It was likewise
agreed, that Dukes, Lieutenant Generals, or other qualified Persons, should
have Voices in the Assemblies, though they were no Deputies, provided they were
such as might be confided in.

By the same Regulation Provincial Councils were erected, composed Provincial
Councils.
of Five or Seven Persons of the Three Estates, and of which one Minister at
least was to be a Member, and one Governor of a Town in a Province. These
Councils were to answer the General Assembly, and to have the same Authority in
their several Jurisdictions, as the Council General had over the whole Kingdom;
and particularly to collect, digest, communicate Opinions and Memoirs; maintain
Concord among the Grand ones, and appease their Quarrels; make the
Distributions of Money that was to be raised for the Common Cause; to have a
watchful Eye upon the Garrisons, and to take care of the Fortifications and
Stores of the Strong Towns: And there was also a Regulation of the Time that
every Deputy was to continue in Service; of the manner of electing Presidents
and Secretaries in all Assemblies General and Particular; and of the Signing of
Acts and Dispatches. All the Deputies were obliged to take an Oath, and all the
Reformed to have a venerable Respect for the Persons thus employed; and they
resolved before the end of September, that there should be a Council of this
Nature set up in every Province. Measures were also taken there for preserving
the Places of Strength, whether the Court went about to take 'em away from the
Reformed Governors, or whether the Governors happened to die when the Lord
Lieutenant chanced to be a Catholic. It was ordered, that none should be
received into those Towns but Soldiers, whose Religion was attested by
sufficient Testimonies; and to provide for their Maintenance according to the
Model of the last Settlement, in case that any thing were retrenched from the
Strength of the Garrisons. Others advised the stopping of the Money called the
Deniers du Tablier, and the Money arising from the Impositions and Tax for the
Gensdarmes, to the value of the Sum sufficient for the payment of the
Garrisons, if they could not be paid otherwise; and if there happened any
Prosecutions upon these Proceedings, the Churches were to join together to save
harmless those that should be put to Trouble upon that account. They likewise
settled a Fund of Five and Forty Thousand Crowns for General Affairs, of which
every Province to the South of the Loire was to pay Five Thousand, and the rest
Two Thousand Five Hundred. This Sum was to be raised partly upon the Garrisons,
detaining one of Fifteen Pay's; partly upon the Benefices possessed by the
Nobility, of the Revenues of which they were to take the Sixth or Seventh
Penny; partly by voluntary Contributions, to which the Ministers were to exhort
the richer sort. This Sum was different from those that were set aside for the
payment of the Deputies that were to attend the Councils; and the way to raise
those Sums was left to the particular Provinces. Some Regulations were made as
to those that were willing to advance any Money, or to bestow any thing of Free
Gift. The particular Councils were permitted to look after the laying out of
that same Sum of Five and Forty Thousand Crowns, reserving to the Assembly
General to take Cognizance of the Expense, and to dispose of the Interest as
they should see most beneficial for the good of the Churches. There was also
Order taken about the manner of communicating Intelligence, which was to be
imparted to every particular Flock: Particular Councils were obliged to be
assisting to each other for their mutual Defense; and they referred back to the
first Assembly, which was ordered to sit at Saumur, certain Affairs which that
at St. Foy had not determined; particularly concerning the Maintenance of
Pastors, Scholars and Colleges.

To these were added eight other Private Articles, the first of which imported
the Administration of Justice; in order to which, they demanded Chambers half
one, half to other, Catholics and Reformed in all the Parliaments but that of
Grenoble, where the Reformed, who did what they pleased under Les Diguieres,
were well enough contented with their Condition. And if they could not obtain
those Chambers, they took a Resolution to appeal from all Parliaments,
Presidial Courts, and all other Royal Judges, in Affairs of which they have the
Power to determine without Appeal. And that they would set forth the Causes of
Appeal from all those Courts. The Second was, That they would apply themselves
to the Mediation of the Queen of England and the States of the United
Provinces, because they found the Affairs of the Churches in a deplorable
Condition. The Third, That the Grandees should be written to, and exhorted to
Piety and Union. The Fourth gave Liberty for that one time, to double the
number of Deputies that every Province was to send to the next Assembly, by
reason of the Importance of the Affairs which were there to be handled. The
fifth ordered, That the Exercise of the Reformed Religion should be forborne in
such places where it had been introduced by Surprise, provided it might be done
without Tumult or Sedition, and that Mass should be reestablished in such
places where it had been used before the War: Which was done to bereave the
Catholics of that Pretense which they took for not observing the Edicts,
because the Reformed broke 'em themselves, in not permitting the Mass to be
said in certain places of which they had made themselves the Masters. The sixth
put off, till the return of the Deputies that were to be sent to Court, the
positive Determination, whether they would admit the Catholics to Offices and
Employments in the Cities kept by the Reformed. That is to say, they were
willing that the Catholics should understand, that they should have the same
as they brought, and that if they would not share Employments with the
Reformed, they would exclude the Catholics in those places where they were
superior in Strength. The Seventh disowned all that one Province might have
done to the Prejudice, and without consulting the rest; which was done to
prevent Proceedings like those in the Island of France, of which we have
already spoken. The Eighth approved the Union of several Contiguous Provinces
in one Provincial Council.

While this Assembly was sitting. Perigord and some of the Sedition of the
Croakers.
Neighboring Provinces were overrun with certain Troops of those Seditious
People, commonly called Croakers. Their pretense was to deliver the Country
from the Exactions and Violence of the Court; though themselves committed the
greatest Havoc and Spoil, and did the Peasants the most mischief. These
Mutineers were above Forty Thousand Men in Arms, of which above a Third part
were of the Reformed Religion. One of the Artifices therefore which they made
use of to disperse this Multitude, was to infuse it into the Catholics, that
they were not to join themselves with Heretics; more especially not to share
with them the Honor of laboring the Reformation of the Kingdom. Which was the
reason that the Catholics, upon a Signal given, withdrew, and retired apart by
themselves; so that the Reformed found themselves of a sudden ready to be
assailed by them that had been their Comrades but a little before. But in
regard they were better Armed, and better Soldiers then the Catholics, it only
put 'em into a little Fear. Now during the greatest Heat of these Commotions,
the Reformed, who had a share in the Sedition, sent certain Deputies to St.
Foy, to know whether they could be any ways serviceable to 'em at that same
juncture of time. But the Assembly would not so much as listen to 'em; only
they advised 'em underhand to make their Peace, and to get good Assurances
from the Court never to be prosecuted for their Sedition.

This Assembly having ordered that the next should be at Saumur, Deputies
amused at Court.
where the Deputies were to meet the First of December, sent their Deputies to
the Court, which was then at St. Germans, where they were amused by many Delays
before any real Satisfaction was given 'em. The main thing which they insisted
upon, was, the Verification of the Edict, as had been agreed upon at Mantes,
and the new Regulation which had been promised 'em, to render their Condition a
little better then it had been, under the Benefit of the Edicts. The King shows
a great desire to content 'em, and every day renewed to 'em the Promise which
he had made. Nevertheless nothing went forward; however to pay the Reformed
with some Reason for the Delays which had almost quite tired 'em out of their
Patience, the Obstructions of the Verification were all thrown upon the Tricks
and Contrivances of the Factious. But notwithstanding this Excuse, the Reformed
were exasperated, and were apt to believe that the principal occasion of the
Delay proceeded from the Court. And this Suspicion was confirmed by the Offers
that were made to the Duke of Mercoeur on the King's behalf, to treat with him
in favor of the Catholic Religion for the Towns he held in Britaigne, and
other places; all which tended to exclude, for the King's sake, the Exercise of
the Reformed Religion out of a great part of Britaigne, and several places in
the neighboring Provinces. But Pretensions of the D. of Mercoeur.
the Duke, who thought himself strong enough to preserve Britaigne, insisted
upon higher Demands; and he pretended that the Exercise of the Reformed
Religion was forbid in Normandy, in Maine, in Anjou, Touraine and Poitou,
because there were some Castles in those Provinces that held out for him; but
which in the main were rather Nests of Robbers then real Fortresses of War. The
Reformed were therefore afraid, that whatever he demanded would be granted him;
because they had seen by preceding Treaties that nothing was refused the Heads
of the League, to the end they might reclaim 'em to Obedience.

On the other side, the Decay of the League began to be perceived at Rome; and
in regard the rigorous Demeanor of the Pope had somewhat shogg'd the King, and
the Catholics of his Party, who had French Hearts; they began likewise in
France to neglect the Affairs of Rome. They discour'd afresh in France of
drawing up a Pragmatick for the conferring of Benefices, and of creating a
Patriarch, to preside over all the Clergy. These Discourses caused great
Disturbances at Rome, and the King's Prosperity made the Pope believe, that
that great Prince might one day make a shift without him. This was the reason
that he began in Overtures of Reconciliation with the Pope.
his turn, to make the first forward steps himself, and that he gave ground by
degrees in the business of the Absolution. But he forbore not at first to make
such strange Proposals, that mere Disdain refused to hearken to 'em. Those the
Spaniards had suggested to him, to prevent his Reconciliation with the King;
And the Pope, who was a great Politician, though he well knew they were such as
would never be granted him, was nevertheless resolved to make 'em, that they
might not presume to propose him Offers too far distant from his great
Pretensions. But this very hotly alarmed the Reformed, who were afraid that
these high Demands had no other then this only aim to obtain their Destruction
of the King, and that all of a sudden the Pope would condescend to all the
rest, provided they would but content him in that particular Point. For this
reason they took all the Delays of the Parliaments for the Presages of their
Ruin; because the Edicts not having the force of a Law in the Kingdom, till
they are enregister'd and qualified to the liking of the Sovereign Courts, all
those that had been hitherto granted had proved useless for their Security;
since the Parliaments had either absolutely rejected 'em, or verified 'em with
odious Limitations. For which reason they looked upon themselves as living
still under the benefit only of a simple Truce, liable to broken every day,
whenever the King should have a desire to gratify the Court of Rome. The very
Word Truce made 'em tremble; because Truces were never made between
Fellow-Citizens and Friends, but between People that live in declared
Hostility, of which a Truce does but suspend the Effects; whence it followed,
that the Reformed were still looked upon as Enemies by the Catholics; far from
being treated as Members of one and the same Kingdom, and Legitimate Children
of the same Family.

In this Conjuncture of Affairs the King was wounded in the 1595.
Mouth by John Chastel, a Disciple of the Jesuits; and the Reformed had that
slight Consolation in the midst of their Afflictions and Fears, to see that
Society condemned to Banishment by the most August Senate of France. A Pyramid
was also ordered to be set up in that part of the House where the Parricide was
hatched; upon one of the Faces of which was engraved the Decree that banished
the Jesuits out of the Kingdom, and contained the Reasons for inflicting that
Punishment upon 'em. But the Parliaments of Toulouse and Bourdeaux would not
follow the Example of that of Paris; so that the Society kept their footing,
till they were again restored, in the Provinces under their Jurisdiction. In
the mean while this audacious Attempt made a great Noise at Rome, where d'
Ossat highly aggravated the consequence of such an Enterprise, at a time when
they were treating so seriously about a Reconciliation between the Pope and the
King. But that which this Accident produced of most remarkable, was this, That
it drew from the Lips of that Agent for France, although a zealous Catholic, and
bred up in the Maxims of the Court of Rome, an Authentic Testimony, how highly
the Reformed abominate all Crimes of this nature, and of the profound Respect
which they bear to the Persons of their Sovereigns. This Prelat giving an
account of the Fact to the Pope's Cardinal Nephew, and aggravating the Horror
of it, contrived and encouraged by them that called themselves the Support of
the Catholic Religion, told him in express Terms, That if ever any body had a
Testimony which d' Ossat gave the Reformed.
seeming just occasion to make use of such Assassinates, the Heretics had most
cause to purchase 'em, and set 'em at work against the King, who has quitted
and abandoned 'em, and of whom they had reason to be afraid; nevertheless they
never attempted any such thing, either against Him, nor any of the five Kings
his Predecessors, whatever Slaughters and Massacres their Majesty's had made of
the Huguenots.

This Misfortune did the Reformed no unkindness; for it put the King in
remembrance that he had never ran the like Risco while he was in their Hands.
Whence it came to pass, that he sometimes declared to his Confidents, that as
to what concerned the Safety of his Person, he had a far greater Assurance in
them, then in the Catholics. On the other side, the Result of the
Consultations of the Assembly at St. Foy, gave the Council no small occasion to
make particular Reflections; who beheld with Astonishment that numerous Body,
without a Chieftain, to reunite the various Members of it; to close and
confederate together in their own Defense, and take such proper courses to
become formidable to their Enemies. Therefore they would have had it looked
upon as a formed Rebellion, and an insolent sort of proceeding, what was done
by the Reformed at that time in order to Sentiment^ of the Court touching the
Union of the Reformed.
their Preservation. They called the Union a Design to set up a State with
separate Interests, and a distinct Government: And because this was spread
abroad at that time by passionate and violent Persons, all the Historians that
have since put Pen to Paper have not failed to exclaim against that way of
proceeding, and to black'n it with furious Declamations; as if it were a Crime
to be careful of Self-preservation, when People have Enemies to deal with void
of Equity, Faith, Humanity, such as the Catholics had more then once appeared
in reference to the Reformed. The King had no reason to be offended at these
Precautions, since they were made use of neither against his Person, nor
against his Authority; but against a sort of Zealots, who might abuse his Power
to oppress the most faithful part of his Subjects; and against the Court of
Rome, with whose cruel Intentions, and bloody Maxims all Europe was too well
acquainted.

Nevertheless the King forbore not to disturb these Assemblies, Sentiments of
the King upon the Assemblies.
and to look upon 'em at least as du Plessis had sometimes represented 'em;
that is to say, such as might degenerate, and give occasion to Factious Spirits
to raise Commotions and Tumults not easily to be appeased. Which was the reason
that sometimes he complained of their being convened, and sometimes he gave
express Orders for their Dissolution. But then the King followed rather what
his Councils peal'd in his Ears, then his own Inclinations; for as soon as
others laid before him how dangerous it was to reduce the Reformed to the
Provocations of Despair, by depriving 'em the Comfort of those Assemblies, he
revoked his former Orders by others, more expressly forbidding their being
dissolved. In a word, it was more advantageous for the King to permit that
Union of his Subjects, which obliged 'em to request his Leave for the time and
place of their Assembling, then to reduce 'em to throw themselves under a
Foreign Protection, by refusing 'em the means of securing both their Religion
and, their Lives under the Good Will and Authority of their Lawful Prince. It
was also better to see them united among themselves by that form of
Correspondency, then under a Protector, whose Courage might be elevated by his
Power, by Foreign Adherences and Domestic Discontents, and give him fair
Opportunities and Advantages to enlarge his Reputation.

But for the present 'twas thought, that the most assured means Causes why they
would not declare the Reformed capable of Offices.
to disperse those Assemblies, or prevent the Mischief they might do, was to
afford the Reformed some occasion of Content, to the end the first Assembly
that was called together might have no more to do then to accept the King's
Concessions, and to return him Thanks. For this Reason the Verification of the
Edicts which had been formerly granted, was pressed for at a more then usual
Rate, and the Confirmation of 'em by a new Edict, as had been agreed with their
Deputies at Mantes. The greatest Difficulty consisted in their declaring the
Reformed capable of all manner of Employments; and this was that which the
zealous Catholics were extremely unwilling to do, who could not by any means
brook the Violation of their Canons, by which the Heretics are excluded from
all sorts of Offices and Preferments. This Difficulty could not be removed by
Four Years Solicitations, nor by the express Orders of the King; nor by a new
Delcaration given at St. Germans in November of the year preceding. The The
Prince of Conde taken out of their hands
Council consented to it, as also to several other Provisional Regulations,
because they were then bethinking themselves of getting the Prince of Conde out
of the Hands of the Reformed, either because the King was desirous to have him
bred up in the Catholic Religion, to prevent the Pretenses of a Civil War,
which might be taken one day from his being Educated in the Reformed; or
because the Count of Soissons, a turbulent ambitious Prince, and who looked
upon himself as Presumptive Heir to the Crown, by reason of his Nephews
Religion, and for other Reasons, was very uneasy to him; or else because he
had a mind to lessen his Pretensions to the Crown, by opposing against him a
Prince much nearer to the Crown then himself: Or lastly, Because he would
deprive the Reformed of a Chieftain, who might one day head 'em, and demand new
Favors in their behalf.

The King told the Reformed, on purpose to make 'em willing Ways to bring it to
pass.
to surrender the Prince up into his Hands, that his frequent Infirmities
caused him to bethink himself of Death, and obliged him at the same time to
desire that he might have his Heir always by him, to secure him the Succession,
and put him in a condition to preserve themselves by ways more gentle then a
War. But this Hook would not take with the Reformed, who thought it much more
conducing to the Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom, that the King should
dissolve his Marriage with Margaret de Valois, and bethink himself of another
Wife, then to have a Prince near his Person, whose nearest Relations thought
they had Reason sufficient to dispute with him their Right to the Crown. The
King thus repulsed on this side, resolves to assail 'em on the other, and seeks
to engage 'em to put the Prince into his Hands, by granting 'em Admission into
Offices of Trust; an Honor which indeed would have been dear enough sold to
'em, since it must cost 'em a Prince who might be one day the Restorer and
Pillar of their Hopes. And this Consideration was made use of to persuade the
Parliament to the Verification of that Article; but this Reason presently
wrought another Effect then was expected: For there were some zealous
Catholics who found it so weighty, that they would have made it one of the
Conditions of the Verification of the Edict, to the end the Reformed might not
refuse to surrender the Prince, without the Forfeiture of all the Favors that
had been granted 'em. And this seemed so much the more reasonable, because it
was thought impossible that ever the Reformed would let go such a Pledge out of
their Hands: And there were many Catholics that wished they would have
obstinately refused it, that they might have had a specious Pretense to declare
War against 'em. But the King had other Thoughts. He was not willing to destroy
the Reformed, of whom he stood so much the more in need, that he might not be
altogether at the mercy of the Catholics, who treated him a little too
imperiously. Therefore he strove to get the Prince out of their Hands by gentle
means, rather then by force of Arms, or by the Authority of a Public Law;
knowing well, that they would have taken that Law for an Affront, because it
would have made 'em looked upon as Persons suspected, such as were to be
compelled to their Obedience.

'Twas therefore put to the Question in Parliament, whether The Article about
Offices passes with some trouble.
the Edict should be verified purely and simply, or no; and the thing was
debated with great Heat; more particularly the 19th Article of the Edict of
1577. which declared the Reformed capable of Offices and Dignities, was the
Subject of the Contest; nor did it pass without a vast deal of Trouble.
Nevertheless there were several who argued for the Verification of this Article
as the rest, without Restriction or Qualification. And they insisted very
fervently upon the Services which the Reformed had done the King and the Realm;
and they exclaimed against their Refusal to treat 'em according to their Merit
as a high piece of Injustice and Ingratitude. They likewise maintained, That
since they were equal to the Catholics in Affection and Fidelity, they should
be dealt with alike in the destribution of Honors and Rewards. Others to these
Reasons opposed the fear of injuring the King, being a new Convert, and still
at variance with the Pope; and of hardening the rest of the League in their
Rebellion, if such an important Favor were granted to the Reformed against the
Provisions of the Canon Law; and that so suddenly too, after the Return of the
King to the Catholic Religion. But those oppositions signified little, in
regard the pure and simple Verification was carried by the Plurality of Voices.
Servin, one of the Advocates General, strongly upheld this Opinion; and in
regard he was an Enemy of the Jesuits, he was just enough to the Reformed.
Seguier, his Associate, was of a quite contrary Judgment; but Guele the Proctor
General bethought himself of a Cavil, which had like to have engaged all the
Kingdom in new Combustions; for he put the Reformed in mind, that new Traps
were laying to ensnare The Proctor-General's Cavil ill taken.
their Sincerity, under Pretense of unheard of Affectation. He would not suffer
the accustomed Terms to be inserted in the Decree of Enrolment; Heard, and this
the Proctor-General requiring; though his Father, who had served in the Place
before him, when the Edict of 1577. was enrolled under Henry III. never made
any such Scruple. Neither would he have had the Words put in, Consenting to
this, as upon other occasions where the King's Council will not move; but only,
Heard the Proctor-General, 'Twas a very fair Escape, that such an Innovation,
put in practice Cause of new Distrusts.
at a time when the King was full of Jealousies and Suspicions, had not
produced pernicious Effects, and called to memory the unfortunate Cruelties and
Treacheries of the past Reigns. Chiefly, when they reflected upon the manner of
proceeding in the Verification of the Edicts that were granted the Leaguers,
which was done without Prolongations or Delays, and the Edicts unanimously
past, and sent to be enrolled pure and without any Alterations, 'twas
impossible but that they must look upon as strange and uncouth, so much
spinning out of time, so many Oppositions, so many Artifices which were made
use of to elude the Edicts that were granted to the Reformed.

The more moderate Catholics themselves blamed this unreasonable Severity:
Whether it were, that the Example of the Parliament of Paris rendered all the
other Parliaments difficult; some refusing to verify the Edict at all, others
not without several vexatious Limitations; or whether it were, because the
Reformed were just ready to hold an Assembly at Saumur, where it was to meet
according to the Decree of that of St. Foy. No body questioned but that the
Proctor-General's Behavior would furnish that Assembly with occasion of loud
Complaints; and perhaps put 'em upon taking such Courses, as would be a great
Obstruction to Peace, so necessary for the Re-establishment of the Kingdom.
This Assembly at Saumur had put the King to a great deal of Trouble, from the
very moment he heard it first discoursed of And the only reason why the
Verification of the Edict was so earnestly pressed for, was either to
anticipate it, or that they might have a fair Pretense to hinder the sitting of
it, or to dissolve it. It was to have met upon the first of December of the
preceding year, but there was not a full appearance till about three Months
after. There were some Provinces, the Deputies of which were stayed for a long
time, either because they expected the effect of the King's Promises for the
enrolment of the Edicts; or else, because the Intreagues of the Court had stopped
'em, either out of Fear, or delayed with Hopes. But at length they met at
Saumur, where they stayed a long time without doing any thing, in regard the
King refused to authorize their meeting. He also at the same time complained of
it to du Plessis, as of an Enterprise that wounded his Authority, and showed
that the Reformed were jealous of him. But du Plessis returned him such good
Reasons, that he was satisfied, and gave leave to the Assembly by his Letters
Patterns He at last permits it.
to sit.

These Reasons amounted chiefly to no more then two. The first Reasons for his
so doing*
was, That in the midst of so many occasions of Fear and Distrust that were
justly given the Reformed, the refusing 'em leave to be careful of their
Security would reduce 'em to Despair; and that in such a posture of
Discomposure, at what time the wisest Men never listen to Reason nor Duty, they
might look out for Remedies more vexatious then that of Assemblies: For that
the remembrance of what was past would not suffer 'em to be satisfied with the
present, and loudly alarmed 'em with Fears of the future. The other concerned
the Interest of the King himself, to whom Du Plessis declared. That in regard
he was upon a Reconciliation with the Pope, it became him to wish for
Solicitations on the behalf of the Reformed, to the end he might have
wherewithal to reply to the Pope, should he complain that too much was granted
to those that were held for Heretics. The King's Necessity of importuning the
King.
Answer would then be always ready, That he was in a manner forced by the
Importunity of their Assemblies, and to prevent a greater Mischief. Whereas if
he did any thing in their Favor, without being urged to it, he would have
nothing to say should the Pope be offended. Du Plessis also made use of the
same Reason to support the Reformed, who were either much disheartened, or
quite wearied out of their Patience. He told 'em that the King, who in effect
renewed his Promises every day, was very affectionately inclined toward 'em,
but that his present Condition would not permit him to do 'em any kindness but
what he was forced to, either in respect to the Pope, with whom he was about to
be reconciled; or to the Remainders of the League, whom he was very unwilling
to supply with new Pretenses to murmur; or to the Catholics of his Party, for
whom he could not choose but have a great Complacency: And thus he should have
wherewithal to satisfy all Parties, if the Reformed by their repeated
Importunities did but impose upon him a kind of Necessity to grant Them
something too. These Reasons seemed to restore a calmer Temper to those whose
Patience the Delays and unjust Proceedings of the Parliament had almost quite
worn out; and to take in good part the insipid and cold Answers which many
times the King gave their Deputies. They also revived the Courage of those that
were dejected by tedious and troublesome Protractions and puttings off from
time to time, believing they should obtain their Desires at length by
Perseverance and Importunity.

Now in regard these Reasons mollify'd the King, from whom the Catholics more
then once enforced the Revocation of Orders which he had given against those
Assemblies, it is easy to judge* that in a Word, he took delight to be
importuned* and that he looked upon it as a useful expedient to procure him the
Liberty to put his good Intentions in execution. In short, he always gave the
Reformed good Words; and when their Deputies were with him in private, he gave
'em better: And there would have been no reason to complain of his Promises,
had it not been that after he had so often repeated the same things, there was
no Fruit of 'em afterward to be seen.

The Assembly of Saumur then, began the 24th of February, and the Report made
by the Deputies of St. Foy having given 'em an account of the ill Intentions of
the principal Heads of the Council and Parliament, Resolutions were taken more
solid and vigorous then could have been expected from People that seemed to be
deprived of all Relief and Succor. They made new Proposals and new Demands.
They would no longer stand to the old Edicts, which had been canceled or evaded
so many times; and which were publicly derided, by reason of the Cavils of the
Proctor-General. They were no longer contented with demanding new Favors, by
way of Compensation for the Retrenchments made in the Edict of 1577. to
facilitate the reducing the Leaguers to Obedience. They could not brook, that
the King should grant such ample Rewards to Rebels on purpose to reduce 'em to
their Duty; and that Subjects always faithful, always devoted to his Person and
his Fortune, should stand in need of covering with the Name of compensation,
the just Recompenses which they might boldly challenge In a word, they began to
alter the strain of their Language, and to desire a new Edict, more to the
advantage and security of the Reformed, then the Edicts that were become
contemptible by the allowed License to violate 'em. They alleged, that the
King had promised another Edict to the Deputies that were at Mantes, and that
it was a mere piece of Covin to desire after that, that they should content
themselves with the Edict of 1577. which the King had fruitlesly confirmed by
two others. Therefore they The Assembly demands a new Edict and Securities.
demanded another Edict in recompense of so many Services, of so much Patience,
and of so much Blood which they had spilt. They debated a long time among
themselves what Articles to insist upon for the framing of the new Edict; and
at length they agreed upon certain Demands, which may be reduced to Six or
Seven Heads. 1. That a New Edict should be granted 'em without amusing 'em with
Promises to restore another, which no way satisfied 'em. 2. That they shoud be
allowed an entire and universal Liberty for the public Exercise of their
Religion over all the Kingdom. 3. That Public Salaries should be secured to
the Ministers, either by leaving 'em the Tenths which they refused any longer
to pay the Ecclesiastics; or by assigning 'em Funds, that should not be
otherwise emyloy'd; and they demanded the same thing for the Maintenance of
Schools and Scholars. 4. That the Reformed should be secured the Possession of
their Estates, as well those which they already enjoyed, as those which fell to
'em by Inheritance, Deed of Gift, Last Will and Testament, or by any other
Lawful Right. 5. That an equal number of Reformed Judges to that of the
Catholics should be admitted in all Jurisdictions. 5. That they should be
admitted indifferently into all manner of Offices and Employments like the
Catholics. 7. That for their Security, the Cities which they had in their
Hands should be left in their Possession; and that the Garrisons should be paid
^ut of the King's Money.

While they were preparing their Complaints, and drawing up their Papers to
send to the King, the business of his Reconciliation with the Pope was eagerly
pressed forward by the Court of Rome; and the Pontiff grew impatient of the
Delays which retarded the ^ending a Commissioner to treat with him about it.
However, in truth, as yet, the Pope did not seem to recede in the least from
his first Pretensions; but it was easily perceived that he would make an
Abatement in proper time, because he had vouchsas'd in ^^ving and general
Terms, to promise whatever lay in his power, ^rovided it were not contrary to
the Interest and Honor of the ^oly See. The King on the other side kept
himself to the same ^eneral Expressions, and would consent to nothing that
misbe^^me himself, or the Dignity of the Crown. There were two sorts ^ People
in the Council, whose Opinion it was, That the Pope should ^e left alone to
make the first steps himself; as being perswa^ed, that a little perseverance
would reduce him to grant a bare ^^d simple Ratification of the Absolution, as
the King received it ^ St. Denis's. The one were the Reformed, who could not
en^ure that the King's Honor should be prostituted to the Intriegues ^ the
Court of Rome. The other, were the Catholics not bigoted, who loved the King
and the Kingdom, and who not questioning but the Pope's Aim was to make the
King purchase his Favor by some ignominious Condescension, were desirous the
King should avoid that Snare, by letting the Pope alone till he sought after
him. But the high-flown Catholics carried it, because Absolution desired by
the King.
the King was willing to rid himself of Trouble, and for that he thought his
Repose depended upon his Reconciliation with the Pope. He was weary of the
toilsom Life wherein he had spent his most youthful Years. He saw that the
Succession would be His reasons for yielding first.
in a very uncertain Condition after his Death: He had a desire to dissolve his
Marriage with Margaret of Valois, by whom he had no Children; and he thought to
marry the Fair Gabriela d'Estrees, with whom he was enamored even to
Enchantment; either of which two things he thought it impossible to bring to
pass without the Pope's Assistance: And he knew it to be the last excuse of the
obstinate Leaguers, that he was not acknowledged by the Pope. The Duke of
Mayenne had sworn never to pay him Allegiance till he was reconciled to his
Holiness: He was in hopes that such a Reconciliation would secure his Life, put
an end to the frequent Conspiracies against him, under Pretense that the
Sincerity of his Conversion was dubious; would reduce the Monks to their Duty,
several of which refused to name him in their Prayers: And lastly, he was
desirous to be at leisure to settle the Peace of the Kingdom, in order to the
execution of some great Designs which he had projected abroad.

But though his own Will overruled him not to follow the wholesome Advice of the
Reformed and the more politic sort of Catholics, yet at first they had the
Credit to name one Man of the Council, and another of the Parliament, to be
joined with one Ecclesiastic, to go to Rome and negotiate this Affair. This
Deputation had been of great Importance for the Service of the King, and the
Pope must have been contented with it, had they had Resolution enough in France
to have stuck to this Advice. Never would any Person of Note, bred up in great
Affairs, have consented to any thing beneath the Dignity of a King; and he had
been well seconded by a Person chosen out of the Body of a Parliament, whose
Maxims are always opposite to those of Rome, when the Honor of the Kingdom
lies at stake. But the Pope knew well enough how to ward off this Blow; so that
the whole Commissioners elected to treat, D'Ossat and Perron.
Commission was referred to two Ecclesiastics. By which means the Pope at the
bottom was Master of the whole Affair, in regard he was the Sovereign of both
Commissioners that were to treat with him. One of the two the most notorious
Knave of his time; and neither of 'em very likely to render themselves worthy
of a Cardinal's Cap by an over-zealous Fidelity to their Prince. Nevertheless
D'Ossat, who was the honester of the two, seemed to be not a little vexed, that
there was more granted to the Pope than he had advised; but du Perron his
Associate, had the most Authority. He it was that brought the Instructions from
France: For as for D'Ossat, he was only joined with him, as one that better
understood the Slights and Politics of Rome, and might be a necessary Guide to
the other in a Court to which he was a Stranger altogether. This was the King's
Misfortune, that of those two Proctors that were to represent his Person in
this Affair, he to whom the Secret was entrusted, and who was chief in
Authority, was not the honestest Man. Nevertheless it was not du Perron who had
all the Thanks and Reward of this Affair. D'Ossat behaved himself so prudently,
that the Profit redounded to himself, and the Pope bestowed a Cardinals Hat
upon him some years after. It Is true, this Dignity seemed to have been
conferred upon him upon the King's Recommendation. But the Pope had given the
King formerly to understand, that he would bestow it freely and willingly upon
D'Ossat, if it were but requested for him. However, High Pretensions of the
Pope.
to get what he could from the King, the Pope at first made all the Demands
which the Spaniards suggested to him; nevertheless well ^ssur'd, that they
would never be allowed him. In the first place therefore he would have had 'em
to promise him, that all the Edicts which had been granted to the Reformed
should be revoked; That they should be excluded from all Offices and
Employments; That they should be all destroyed as soon as the Peace was
concluded with the Leaguers and Spain; That the Catholics should not be
constrained to observe the Edicts; That the Jesuits should ^e restored; That
all the Estates which Queen Jane had taken from the Ecclesiastics in Bearn
should be restored to 'em again, with several other things, to which the King's
Honor and Prudence would not permit him to oblige himself. Chiefly, they would
have had him declared his Crown and Kingdom forfeited if ever He relapsed into
Heresy. But the King made his Proctors Instructions quite contrary to these
Demands. He explained his meaning with a great deal of Elocution and Clearness,
and gave 'em their Lesson very precisely and accurately. There was The Proctors
Instructions quite contrary.
expressly set down what the King would grant upon the Demands, which it was
known the Pope would make; and it was directly enjoined, that they should not
consent to any thing that might be injurious to the Royal Majesty, nor pass
beyond the Limits which the King had set 'em. But that which was chiefly
recommended to 'em, was, not to consent to any Rehabilitation, as if the King
stood in need of obtaining the Popes Consent to be a Lawful King, or capable of
the Functions of Royalty: And the King prescribed 'em most exactly how far he
gave 'em leave to exert their Complacency upon so nice and delicate a Subject.
'Twas his pleasure also that they should be very careful of his Honor and his
Dignity; and that they should obstinately maintain the Validity of his
Absolution which he had received in France. Moreover, there was one express
Article in behalf of the Reformed, the Terms of which are so remarkable, that I
cannot but incert the chiefest part of it in this place. After they had
alleged the Reasons for advising the King to revive the Act of 1577. which was
the meanest of those which had been granted the Reformed, and laid down the
Mischiefs which the Revocation of it obtained by the League, had occasioned in
the Kingdom; together with such as might happen, had they secured the Reformed
from the Edicts of Proscription which the League had published against 'em, the
Instruction adds, That they of the said Religion being very A Testimony given
of the p^st and present Services of the Reformed.
numerous and potent in the Kingdom, as they are, greatly serve and strengthen
his said Majesty to defend his Dominions against the Enemies of it, as formerly
they have done; so that his said Majesty should be accused of Imprudence and
Ingratitude, if after so many Services as they have done him, and which he may
have need of fart^^^ from 'em, he should fall pell mell upon 'em, and constrain
'em to take Arms against his Person, as they have always done against those who
have gone about to force their Consciences. But his Majesty hopes ^^ give a
better account of 'em by his mildness, and the example of his Life, then by
ways of Rigor.

There is nothing more Authentic, nor more express then this Testimony given,
upon an occasion so public and so important, of the past and present Services
of the Reformed. If there be any Equity among Men, there needs no more to
demonstrate, that the Liberty of their Conscience, and the Security of their
Persons, their Estates and their Honor, besides that they are Dependencies
upon Natural Right, which oblige the Prince to assure his Subjects those
priviledg'd Advantages, were granted 'em as the just Reward of their long and
faithful Services. So that in depriving 'em in our days, both of the one and
the other of these Immunities, their Enemies have not only violated the most
lawful Duty of Sovereigns, who ought to look upon themselves as Conservators of
the Liberty and Welfare of their Subjects; but they have blackened the Great
Henry with the Reproach of Ingratitude, which he adjudged unworthy of himself;
by depriving an Obedient and Peaceable Offspring of what had been so lawfully,
yet dearly purchased for 'em, under the Reign of this Prince, by the Services
of their Fathers.

But whatever Caution was taken to preserve the King's Honor, Provocations of
the Proctors in the terms and matter.
his Proctors forbore not to comply with whatever the Pope demanded; and their
Excuse was, that they could not possibly do otherwise, and that they were fain
to accept of some Conditions, to avoid others that would be more irksom. They
would also needs persuade the King that they had done him great Service in
this, that the Article of Rehabilitation had been chopped and changed with so
much dexterity, that it might well be maintained, that there was not a Word
said of it in the Bull of Absolution; nevertheless, if there were any Persons
who thought it necessary, it might be affirmed on the other side, that there
was enough to the purpose contained in it. So that all the Fidelity of these
Proctors, in an Affair of so great Consequence, and where the main Concern in
Agitation was the establishing the Dependence or Independance of the Crown, was
reduced to unfold this weighty Question, by equivocal Terms, from whence equal
advantage might be drawn, as well for the one as for the other. This was by no
means well relished by the honest Frenchmen; but those Slaps with a Wand which
they received upon their Shoulders in the King's Name, as his Proctors, in the
Presence of the Cardinals, during the Ceremony of the Absolution, were far less
approved. The Spaniards made it the Subject of their Sport and Merriment; the
French Politicians murmured at it; the Reformed stormed at it; and threw it in
the Catholics Dish, as a high Affront put upon Royal Majesty, that the first
King in Christendom should be exposed to be swaddl'd upon the Shoulders of his
Proctor. The Court also was ashamed of such a pitiful Condescension; and du
Perron had much ado to ward off the bloody Reproaches that were cast upon him
for this Prevarication, at his Return. But he had such a Wit, that he could do
what he pleased with it; and he had such a graceful slight of expressing
himself, such a knack of making Black White, and White Black, that no body had
either the Will or the Confidence to contradict what he said. For which Reason
it is reported, that the Pope was heard to say at Rome, that he besought of God
never to infuse other then virtuous Thoughts into his Mind; for that if corrupt
and vicious Meditations got footing there, he had a Wit was able to defend 'em.
D'Ossat excused this Indignity, by saying that the Raps were so slight, that
they would not have hurt a Fly. As if the Affront had consisted rather in the
Violence of the Blow then the Ignominy of the Ceremony. Some Historians have
deemed this Circumstance so very disgraceful, the they durst not recite it
faithfully in their History; as if the Affront were the less real, when it is
minced and neatly daubed over.

These Proctors had consented to Sixteen Articles, which the Articles of
Penitence.
Pope imposed upon the King by way of Penance: And there were some of these, in
reference to which the King could have wished, they would have let him have
done as Time should have given him an opportunity. But the Proctors had been as
faithful in this, as in all the rest; for they suffered the Pope to impose upon
the King a Necessity of Obedience after a very coercive manner. Such were the
Third, Fourth, and Sixth Article, whereby he was enjoined to re-establish the
Mass in Bearn, and to restore the Bishops in that Principality to be maintained
at his own Charges, till they should be settled in their Estates; to get the
Prince of Conde out of the hands of the Reformed within a year, that he might
be bred up in the Catholic Religion; and to publish the Council of Trent, and
cause it to be observed in every thing that might not disturb the Public
Repose. The Tenth was couched in most Artificial Terms, and obliged the King in
all things to give continual Marks of his Respect and Favor to the Catholics
before all the rest of his Subjects, and to testify his eager desires to unite
his whole Kingdom in one and the same Religion.

The Reformed complained of these Articles which were granted Complaints of the
Reformed, Excuses of the Proctors.
directly to their Prejudice: But the Proctors endeavored to excuse one part,
by saying, that certain Expressions were added in favor of the Edicts, and
that they were forced to be contented, because it would have been impossible
for 'em to have obtained clearer or more precise Expressions to explain their
meaning. So that all the Security of the Protestants, in respect of these
Articles, depended upon certain equivocal Words, the Explanation or
Interpretation of which was reserved to those who had concluded the Treaty.
Thus it was, that they gave an Account of that same Clause of the Sixth
Article, touching the Publication of the Council, which had been ill received
by the Reformed; because they could not look upon the Publication of a Council
called on purpose to condemn 'em, otherwise then as a forerunner of their
Ruin. The Proctors upon this alleged, that they could not explain that
Article more at large: But that the Pope knew and very well understood, that
the Clause, not to disturb the public Repose, was added in favor of the Edict
of Bearn, and that he neither could nor would explain it better, for fear he
should be thought to approve it. In like manner in reference to other Articles,
that seemed to press the King too furiously to certain things more difficult in
France then Rome imagined, they affirmed that the Pope had no design to force
the King to Impossibilities, but that he would always be contented with what
lay in his Power. Thus they obliged the King to whatever the Pope should
please, and left it to the Popes good Humor to excuse the King, though it were
impossible for him to perform the Penances which he had enjoined him.

In the mean time we may judge by the Cruelties that were committed at Rome
upon those that were called Heretics, that they were not in the least become
more equitable or more moderate toward any other People of the same Character.
A Fleming was burnt alive in the Field of Flora; and an Englishman, who had
thrown the Host to the Ground, and had used the Sacrament like an Idol, was
punished at the same rate, after they had cut out his Tongue, and dismembered
him of one of his hands. And for fear his Punishment should be too gentle, they
singed him continually by the way with burning Torches, from the Prison of the
Inquisition to the place of Execution. The Reformed might gather from thence
what they were to expect, if the Sincerity of the Edicts that were granted 'em,
depended upon the Inspirations that came from Rome. But they had other Reasons
to be afraid of every thing. For they had Intelligence also from Rome, that
there were other Secret Conditions upon which the King was absolved, which were
spread about there; whether it were an Artifice of the Spaniards to sow new
Seeds of Distrust in the Minds of the Reformed; or whether the Pope had
demanded 'em, and that the Proctors had verbally promised certain things, which
they thought not convenient to put down in Writing. 'Twas Secret Articles
thought to be promised to the Pope.
reported at least, that the King was tied by those Conditions to exclude the
Reformed from all Offices and Employments, whatever Promises he had made to
admit 'em to Preferment, to marry the Princess his Sister to a Catholic
Prince, and to make War upon the Heretics of his Kingdom till they were
utterly extirpated. And the Marriage of the Princess with the Duke of Lorrain,
which happened some years after, confirmed the Suspicions of all the rest; so
much the rather, because she would have been courted by Princes of her own
Religion, if the King would have listened to it. Certain it is, that the
Reformed were convinced that these Articles were real; and that du Plessis also
wrote to the King, that his manner of Proceeding was imputed to his Compliance
with the Popes Demands; and that it was believed, of all that was proposed
against 'em, there was none but the Article that concerned their Destruction,
that he ever refused to hearken to.

The End of the Third Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of Nantes. BOOK IV.
The CONTENTS of the Fourth Book.
The Massaker at Chataigneraye, excepted by Letters Pattents out of the Acts
that were to be comprehended in the Amnesties. Artifices to persuade the
Reformed to deliver up the Prince of Conde. Interests of the Prince of Conti,
and Count of Soissons. Duke de la Trimouille suspected by the King. The
Princess's Process removed to the Parliament of Paris. whether Pisani carries
her with the Prince her Son. Precautions taken for the Princes Religion; ill
observed. Justification of the Princess. Deputies of the Assembly at Saumur
attend the King; paid with general Promises. War declared with Spain. League
with the Queen of England, who would needs have one Article inserted in favor
of the Reformed. Marshal de Bouillon opposes it. Discontents of the Reformed;
the Effects. Whence the King's Coldness proceeded. Suggestions of the
Catholics. The Popes Address. Different Language from the King; his Desires.
Reports of the Reformed being out of Favor; the Original of it. Assembly of
the Clergy. Edict of Travercy. Edict in favor of the Duke of Mayenne. Revenge
of Henry the Third's Murder neglected. State of the Kingdom and Project to
dismember it. Assembly meets at Loudun, with leave. New Suspicions and new
Complaints. Deputies sent to the Court. Resolution of the Assembly to defend
themselves till a Conclusion; ill taken of the King, who orders the Dissolution
of it. Effect of this Rigor. Du Plessis's wise Expedient, succeeds in the
Assembly; is approved by the King; who revokes the Order of Dissolution, and
promises a Commissioner. Patience of the Reformed; Continuation of their
Instances. Legate in France, revives their Fears. Garrisons retrenched or ill
paid. ^oni's Jealousies. Synod at Saumur. It Is Resolutions. Their Letters to
the King. Commissioners to the King. Complaints to the King. Constancy of the
Assembly; which is translated to Vendosme. Releases upon the Generality of Free
Exercise. Obtains by way of Compensation the Second Place of Bailliage; and the
right acquired by Possession of the Year 1596. The Edict of 1577. verified at
Rouen. The Reformed not contented with it. The Pope complains, and D'Ossat
appeases him. The Assembly discontented at the Return of the Commissioners; who
write to the King the necessity of satisfying 'em. Reciprocal Suspicions and
Distrusts. Divisions in the Assembly; which returns to Saumur. Surprise of
Amiens; Confusion of Affairs. Proposals of War to the Assembly. Motives of de
Bouillon and de la Trimouille. The King at a Nonplus. His various manner of
writing to the Assembly before and after the Surprise, Answers of the Assembly;
which (...) translated to Chastelleraud; more numerous then before. Excuses for
the Assemblies Constancy in requiring Securities. Their Conduct in respect of
the Siege of Amiens. Various Advices. Reformed serve at the Siege. Actions of
Bouillon and de la Trimouille Change of Commissioners. The Treaty continued.
Relaxations in both sides. New Possession acquired in 1597. Principle Articles
which the Count de Schomberg grants under the King's good pleasure. Debate
whether they should be accepted with a Proviso, (...) definitively. Cavils in
Council about the Articles. Interruptions of the Treaty. Last Instructions. New
Cavils, which the King puts a stop to by his Constancy. The Assembly implores
the Intercession of the Queen of England and the United Provinces. New Delays,
partly Malicious, partly Innocent.

WHILE this Affair was under Negotiation at Rome, the Reformed in France, who
performed their Exercises at Chastaigneraye, were massacred by the Soldiers of
the Garrison of Rochefort, who boasted that they had the Duke of Mercoeur's
Warrant for what they did. The Lady of the Place, who had already signalized
her self by other Acts of Violence, observing that the Reformed, who assembled
together from sundry places in the Neighborhood, carried Arms about 'em for
their own Defense, because the Garrisons of the League were always scouting
abroad, forbid the Meeters, under pretense that she might not forfeit her
Garranty, to come armed upon her Ground; and seconded this Inhibition with so
many Threats, that the poor People obeyed. And Massacre a^ Chastaigneray.
in that condition it was that the Garrison of Rochefort surpised ^em met
together in the House of one Vaudore a Reformed Gentleman. There were about two
hundred massacred, without sparing either Sex or Age. An Infant also that was
carried thither to be Christened was killed among the rest. Nor could the
Innocence of another, who would have given Eight Sols for his Ransom, procure
him the least Mercy. And the Reason alleged by these Hang-men to excuse their
Fury, was, That the Duke of Mercoeur had forbid 'em to suffer any of the
Huguenots to redeem themselves: And moreover they were sure, as they said, that
the Duke in making their Peace would procure 'em a full Pardon for that horrid
Impiety. The Lady of Chastaigneraye, who had contrived this bloody Execution
with so much Artifice, made it ^er Pastime, after the Fact was committed, to be
inquisitive after the Number and Names of the murdered People, and to inform
her self, whether such or such, against whom she had a more peculiar Antipathy,
were comprehended in the Butchery. This piece of Barbarism put the Reformed
into a Ferment equal to the Merit of the Fact. They called Assemblies to
consider of it: They armed themselves for their Defense against the same
Violences in the Neighboring parts, or to make the like Returns; and some that
were more chafed by their Excess of Cruelty, that talked of nothing else but of
righting themselves upon the Catholics. They besought the King never to pardon
the Authors Excepted by the Patents out of the Acts which should be comprised
in the Amnesties.
of such a Massacre, but to bring 'em to Justice as Robbers unworthy to be
looked upon as Soldiers. The King gave out Letters Patents, which declared that
this same Act of Cruelty should be comprehended in the number of Military
Violences, for which Treaties of Peace generally provided an Act of Oblivion:
In pursuanee of which La Trimouille and du Plessis caused some of these
Executioners that fell into their Hands, to be hanged up. But the Punishment of
Five or Six Scoundrels, was not looked upon as a sufficient Reparation for the
Massacre of so many innocent Persons. For which reason it was, that the
Reformed complained above two years after, that Justice had never been done 'em
for this, no more then for several other Outrages which had been every day
committed to their vast Prejudice in sundry parts of the Kingdom.

Moreover, while the Negotiation went forward at Rome, it was, Artifices to
persuade the Reformed to deliver up the Prince of Conde.
that they set all their Springs and Engines at work to get the Prince of Conde
out of the hands of the Reformed. The Verification of the Edict was not
sufficient to persuade 'em to a surrender of his Person; because it had only
served to give 'em new occasions of Complaint: Therefore it behooved 'em to set
new Slights and Stratagems on foot; neither would the King stay to make it his
business, till the Pope imposed a necessity upon him. One of their Artifices to
sound their Intentions was, loudly to give out, that they well knew the
Reformed would never deliver him up; and to support this studied Fear of theirs
with all the Considerations that could hinder 'em: To which they added
Reflections upon the Prejudice which would accrue, by their Refusal, to the
King's Affairs: Nor did they forget to slip in dexterously by the way, that
they should be forced at length to take him out of their hands by force. They
gave 'em also clearly enough to understand, that they were not to expect either
Peace or Security, while they continued obstinate in their Resolutions to be
Masters of the Person of the young Prince: That their Refusal to deliver him up
to the King would be taken for an apparent Rebellion; that they would be looked
upon to have forfeited all the Favors that had been granted; and that there
would be a fair Pretense found out to unite with those Foreign Powers against
'em, that so passionately thirsted after their Destruction. These
Considerations wrought upon three sorts of People: The Timorous, who after
Thirty Five Years Wars, which had cost the Reformed so much Hardship, Treasure
and Blood, desired only to live in Repose, and became faint-hearted upon all
appearances of a new War. The Courtiers, who never troubled their Heads much
about the Time to come, provided they had the Liberty of their Consciences, and
that their Religion were no Obstacle to their present Fortunes. And lastly, the
Wiser sort, who thought there was a necessity of Peace, to settle and preserve
'em in their Stations; that there could be no end of a new War but with their
Ru^ine; that it would be a Reproach to their Religion to re-kindle a War in the
Kingdom, when it was in so fair a way to be extinguished; but that on the other
side, 'twould be a great Honor to their Doctrine which the Catholics accused
of infusing the Spirit of Faction and Disturbance into People, to contradict
'em in an Affair of such important Consequence.

But there were other People to manage besides the Reformed* if they intended
to have good Success in their getting the Prince of Conde into their Hands. For
the Death of the Prince his Father was accompanied with such Circumstances,
which had filled the Minds of Credulous People full of Jealousies; and the
Prosecution commenced against his Widow, suspected to have contributed to his
Death, had persuaded many People, that she had strange Reasons which spurred
her on to that Extremity. The Interests of the Prince of Conti and Count of
Soissons.
Prince of Conti, and the Count of Soissons were in the number of those that
really thought, or would seem to believe, that there was something in the Birth
of that young Prince which did not permit that he should remove 'em from the
Crown. More especially the Count, of an ambitious and turbulent Spirit, and one
that agreed but ill with the King, was most to be feared; and they might well
think, that he would might and main obstruct what ever should be done to lift
the Prince of Conde to the Throne in prejudice of his Claim. There was also
another Reason, besides the general Interest of his Party, why the King
s^pected Trimouille. His Ambition, and his Courage, made him Trimouille
suspected by the King.
fear, that the Duke would never consent to the Delivery of the Prince, under
whose Name he might one day be Head of the Reformed, among whom he was in great
Reputation. He had taken a Journey to St. John d' Angeli, where the Prince was
bred up, which had made the Court very uneasy; believing he went to make sure
of the Person of his Nephew, and to order it so, that they who had him in their
Custody should never deliver him to the Catholics. But afterward 'twas known
by the Information of du Plessis, from whom the Reformed never concealed any
thing, that his Journey was only to get the Suspension from the Communion taken
off, which the Princess his Sister had been under ever since the Death of her
Husband, with whom she was thought to have been an Accomplice. This perhaps
might have been a Stop, in order to the going farther in time; but then it
proved of no effect to prejudice the Designs of the Court. In the main, it
would not have been an easy thing to support the Claims of that Prince, whose
Mother was suspected even by the Reformed themselves of being guilty of a
strange piece of ill Conduct, if the Catholics seeing him bred up in the
Reformed Religion, should have once bethought themselves of fost'ring against
him the same Suspicions, to exclude him from the Crown. So that a Headstrong
Resolution to keep him in their Power would have signified nothing to any other
purpose, then to have put the Reformed and his Uncle to a great deal of Trouble.

'Twas thought they might provide against these Inconveniences by the Care
which was taken to justify the Princess of (...). Trimouille was persuaded to
come in himself, for the Honor of his Sister, as being in some measure branded
by the Sentence which the Judges of St. John d' Angeli had given against her.
Therefore 'twas so ordered while the King was in Burgundy, where Trimouille
performed great Services both in his Person and by his Courage, that the
Kindred should present a Petition to the King, wherein the Judges who had
condemned her should be expe^'d as incompetent, and a Demand made, that the
Information should be cancelled, and the whole business be referred to the
Parliament of Paris, where it was proper for the Causes of the Princes of the
Blood to be determined. The King received the Petition, and granted by his
Letters Patents, that the Process should be sent back. This done, he sent the
Marquess of Pisani to St. John d' Angeli to be near the Person of the Prince,
and to find out a way to get him from thence together with his Mother, under
the pretense of carrying him to the Court where he might be present, at the
Prosecution of a Process, wherein he was so visibly concerned. But the Marquess
met with many Difficulties. There were several who by no means relished the
Reasons that were alleged, and thought it very imprudent to dispossess
themselves of so assured a Pledge for the Observation of the Edicts. Rochel
would not consent, but opposed it might and main; but the Intreagues surmounted
all those Obstacles; and the greater number was overruled by the
Considerations which I have set down; so that the Pisani carries her away with
the Prince her Son.
Prince and his Mother were delivered up to the King's Disposal. One of the
greatest Difficulties proceeded from the Consciences of zealous Persons, who
foresaw that if once the Catholics got him into their Clutches, they would
mould him in such a manner, as soon to make him forget the Religion of his
Father and Grandfather. Therefore they were desirous to take some Cautions to
secure him the Liberty of his Conscience: And the Court, who were unwilling to
break Precautions taken for the Prince's Religion ill observed.
off the Negotiation by engaging in new Difficulties, promised to do whatever
the Reformed desired. But they never remembered their Promises after they had
once got the Prince into their power: For a while they suffered him to have his
Reformed Domestic Servants about him; but they took 'em from him,
notwithstanding his Cries and his Tears, when they ^erceiv'd that he withdrew
into private places along with 'em to be catechized, to sing Psalms, and say
his usual Prayers. After which, they placed about him persons, who being of the
same Religion which they were desirous to infuse into him, ^oon choked the
Seeds of that Doctrine which he had learned among the Reformed. So that in the
progress of his Life, after he had been a declared Persecutor, he became a
great Casuist, and a Converter of others. In the mean time his Mother was fully
justified; no body appeared against her; and tho the Prince of Conti and the
Count of Soissons were Summoned, as Persons interested in the Affair, they
never made their Appearance; so that the Princess gained her Cause with little
or no Trouble. It Is true, that many People were very lavish of their Tongues
against her, and that the Reformed spared her no more then others. But after
she had got the Day, the Princess embraced the Catholic Religion at what time
the King lay at Rouen, and renounced the Reformed Faith, while the Legate, who
was arrived in France but a little before, held her by the hands. This same
Change was deferred till then, that it might not be said she had purchased her
Justification at the Expense of her Conscience; as might have been spread
abroad, had she quitted her Religion, before she had been cleared by the Law.
But in regard 'twas well known at what time that Reselution was taken, People
stuck not to ask the Question, to what Interest a Princess, in whose behalf so
many Reasons and Princes solicited, was obliged to Sacrifice her Religion, had
she been innocent. I must confess that some part of this Relation belongs to
the next Year; but I thought it more convenient to recite it entire in this
place, then to break off and return to it again.

In the mean time, the Assembly at Saumur having taken The Deputies of the
Assembly at Saumur attend the King.
their last Resolutions, sent away to the King la Nove, and l^ Primaudaye, who
waited on him at Lion, and there presented to him their Petitions and their
Papers, with new Proposals, which they were enjoined to make by way of Addition
to their preceding Demands. They accompanied 'em with a short Remembrance of
their Services, which was taken for a Paid with general Pro^ises.
kind of Reproach. However the King received 'em with outward Civilities which
concluded in nothing, and of which the Court is never niggardly. They only
obtained general Promises from Him. He assured 'em he would never forget their
Services; and that in a little time he would satisfy their Demands; but he
declared he could not do it then, by reason of the great Affairs that lay upon
his hands. In the mean time he earnestly exhorted 'em to continue their
Services on Picardy side, where he had great reason to fear the Attempts of the
Spaniards, against whom War had been declared but a little before with a great
deal of Ceremony; because till then the Hostility between the two Nations had
been but indirectly carried War declared against Spain.
on, by reason of the League, which they assisted with Men and Money. For the
Council thought it a shame to brook any longer that oblique way of attacking
France; and therefore that now the War was to be carried into the Enemies
Country, to hinder the Succors which they gave the French Rebels. The Duke of
Bouillon was one of those that pressed this Resolution most home; and the
United Provinces, who saw a certain Advantage for themselves in declaring a
War, labored it on their side, as well as Queen Elizabeth. It Is true, that
Princess appeared not a little offended, that the King did so little for the
Protestants of France; and she grew jealous of those Proceedings that renewed
their Terrors and their Distrusts. She was afraid of being the Victim of a
Peace with Spain, and of being abandoned by a Prince whom she had so generously
succored in Distress. But to re-establish a Confidence between the King and
Her, Marshal de Bouillon was sent to negotiate with her a new League against
the Spaniard. Nor was it a difficult thing to obtain it: But in regard the
Queen League with the Queen of England, who would have an Article inserted in
the Treaty in favor of the Reformed.
laid to Heart the Affairs of Religion, her Ministers proposed the obliging the
King to grant a favorable Edict to the Protestants of his Kingdom. There was
now a necessity to break off the Treaty, or consent to a Promise that would
have been attended with dangerous Consequences, partly through the Disgust
which the Pope would have taken at it; partly by reason of the great Obligation
which a Foreign Power would have laid upon the King's Subjects by virtue of
this Article; since they would have been more beholding to Foreign Favor for
their Security then to their Prince. But the Duke of Bouillon would never
suffer any such Article to be inserted in the Treaty, nor The Duke of Bouillon
opposed it.
that any separate* Act should be drawn up, with which the English offered to
be content, for fear it might be imputed to him that he had been employed upon
their Importunities, and that he had abused his Credit and his Plenipotentiary
Power, to make that Attempt upon Royal Authority for the benefit of Religion.
However the Proposal made it evident, that the Reformed would find Protection
abroad, if once they were in a condition to stand in need of it. In the mean
time the Queens good Intentions terminated in this, that she secretly
solicited the King to grant all necessary Liberty and Security to the most
faithful part of his Subjects; and the Reformed had often recourse to that same
Intercession.

But the Enterprise proved not so successful as it was just and necessary, and
the King lost several considerable Places. And from thence it was he took an
opportunity to exhort the Reformed to do him new Service, and jointly, with
him, to turn their Arms against their Common Enemy. But the Coldness
Discontents of the Reformed, and their effects
which the Deputies observed in the King's Answers, and the Inoongruity which
they found between requiring from the Reformed new Services, and referring 'em
till another time for the Reward of Services past, produced a very great
alteration in their Minds. It seemed to them, that an Affair which regarded the
Life and Conscience of so many Thousands of good Subjects, was as urgent as any
other; and in regard they desired no more then only to be treated like true and
faithful Frenchmen, they could not brook to be put off till another time for
the Examination of their Demands. For their parts they looked upon it as a flat
Refusal of the Security which they desired; or at least for a Declaration clear
enough, that they required time to cavil upon an Affair of so great Importance
to their Welfare. Therefore they thought it not to be endured, that they should
be invited to shed the Remainder of their Blood against a Foreign Enemy, while
they were refused Security against their Domestic Foes; and that they should
be told abruptly, that the King was not at leisure to provide for the safety of
them and their Families. The King also went about to persuade 'em, that the
Breaches, made by the Treaties with the Leaguers, of the Edict in 1577. were
not considerable, and that the great Benefit which accrew'd to the State by
those Breaches was such, that the Reformed might well sit down by the Loss with
Patience; as if it had been just, that they should purchase, at the expense of
their Security, the King's Reconciliation with their most implacable
Persecutors. For these Reasons it was that they proposed in the Assembly the
having recourse to more effectual Remedies. They also discoursed, among other
Expedients, of putting themselves into the same Condition they were in, before
the Truce between the two Kings, and to regulate the Custody of their strong
Holds, the Administration of the Finances, and the Method of Justice in the
same Order as they were at that time. Such a Resolution was enough to make the
Court and the Parliaments look about 'em, who each for their own particular
Reasons were afraid of nothing so much, as to see the Reformed Cantoniz'd: And
in regard the Springs of Fear and Interest more forcibly move the Minds of Men,
then those of Gratitude and Equity, this irksom expedient appeared to be the
best of all to bring the Catholics to a reasonable Composition.

However this Coldness of the King proceeded not so much Whence the King's
colaness proceeded.
from Nature as Infusion: And therefore he repented of this rigorous Usage, so
soon as he saw the bad effects of it. But he was continually spurred forward to
these affected Severities by the Solicitations of the Pope and the Catholics.
The Pope would fain have persuaded him to destroy the Reformed Root and Branch*
but the King would never hearken to that, and stood so positively to the
Negative, when they made him the Proposal, that after that, there was no body
at Court who durst propound it to him any more. But he listed more willingly to
those, who to bring about their ends, fetched a larger Compass, Suggestions of
the Catholics.
and who advised him to stay till he was rid of all his other Encumbrances,
that he might be in a condition to have the Reformed under his Girdle, and to
prescribe 'em Laws like a Sovereign, that acts according to his Will and
Pleasure. This Council flattered the King, who in that was like all other
Princes, who believe it more agreeable to their Supreme Authority, to give what
they please, then what is demanded from 'em. But those Catholics, of which the
greater part were Leaguers in their Hearts, or else prepossessed with that
false Zeal which breathed nothing more into 'em, then the Ruin of those they
call Heretics, had other Designs than to advance the King's Power. Their Aim
was to hinder him from obliging himself by any Edict, before they had taken all
their measures for the Destruction of the Reformed, for fear lest after that
they might not be able to persuade him to violate the public Faith, of the
Observance of which no Prince in the World was more jealous then himself. They
labored therefore with great Application to put off the Effects of his good
Intentions, of which they were not ignorant, and they made use of all the
Considerations to this purpose that might Incense the King, whose Courage
active to excess, and vigorous, easily took Fire. They fought to incense him,
by laying before him the Importunities of the Reformed, for recompense of their
Services, as an injurious Reproach; as if they had failed in their respect to
his Majesty, in upbraiding him with a Fidelity confirmed by long Experience.
And Kings are apt to show their Weakness in that particular. They love to be
served without Interest, and that after great Services done, they may be
permitted to forgive 'em. The more they are pleased with the Affection of their
Subjects, the more they dread the Reproach. They take it for an Affront, that a
Subject who has done no more then his Duty, should think he has any way obliged
'em; and many times also when they acknowledge the Services of any one, they
would have their Returns of Gratitude rather looked upon as Favors then
Rewards. So that it was no difficult thing to persuade the King, that the
Reformed were in the wrong to boast their Services as they did; and that the
more deserved the Recompense was, the more injurious the Demand seemed to be.
The Catholics were the first themselves that were provoked at these Reproaches
of good Services, because they almost all knew, that it was against them that
the Reformed had performed it; so that the one could not vaunt their Fidelity,
but the other were put in remembrance of their having been either Enemies or
Rebels. Moreover the Catholics represented the Reformed to the King as a kind
of Cabal, that was formed against his Authority, under the Pretense of
Religion, and who having Oaths of Union, Assemblies, Councils, Cheiftaines,
Strong Holds, and Finances or Exchequers, were a kind of another State set up
within his own, and which would prove a Source of Trouble and Confusion, a
Sanctuary for Malcontents and Rebels, and a Party always engaged in Domestic
Conspiracies and Foreign Correspondencies. The Pretense for these Accusations
was, that among the vast number of stout and brave Persons of which the Party
consisted, there were some that were turbulent and talked high, and some
perhaps who had Interests of their own apart by themselves, under the Vail of
the Common Cause. But it was a most malicious piece of Injustice to accuse of
Faction so many Thousands of peaceable People, that desired no more then the
Repose and Liberty of their Consciences. Nevertheless, because the King's
Vivacity rendered him susceptible of sudden Impressions, from thence it came
to pass, that he gave the Reformed either Cold or harsh Answers, while his Mind
was prepossessed with a present prejudice against 'em; though in the main, he had
always a Design to grant 'em part of their Demands.

The Pope on the other side, well knew how to improve The Popes Address.
his Advantages; and in regard he saw there were many things of Importance
wherein the King stood in need of him, he granted him nothing for which he did
not make him dearly pay. That Pontiff diligently heightened all the Suspicions
that were infused into him, that the King's Conversion was not sincere; and all
the Discourses upon which those Jealousies might be grounded. 'Twas easy to
pick out several Pretenses in the King's Conduct, which obliged him to speak
and act quite contrary, according to the Character of those with whom he had to
deal. To (...) the Catholics, it became him to show a great Disgust against
the Religion of the Reformed. On the other side, to satisfy the Reformed,
there was a necessity of telling 'em sometimes by way of secret Confidence,
that he had always a kindness for their Religion. His principal Allies were
Protestants, and it behooved him that his Ministers Resident among 'em should
let 'em know as much, to refix that Assurance in their Minds, which his
Reconciliation to the Roman Church and the Pope had almost quite eradicated.
They were afraid that another Religion had caused him to espouse other
Interests. Therefore he ordered his Agents to excuse, to his Consederates, his
outward manner of Proceeding, and to assure 'em, that only the necessity of
Affairs obliged him to dissemble; and that he had altered his Conduct, but not
his Sentiments. The Pope, who was informed of every thing by his Spies,
believed, or else seign'd to believe that this was true. And therefore he
extorted from the King many things under that Pretense, as Dimonstrations of a
sincere Conversion: And fain he would have drawn him, by these studied
Distrusts, into a League against the Protestants. But the King, who could not
confide so well in any but the Protestants; refused to hearken to those
Propositions: And when he called to his remembrace that he had been bred among
'em, and faithfully defended by the Protestants, or that he had been so well
assisted and served both by Them and Foreigners in so many Dangers, he could
not without Horror hearken to the Council that was given him, for their
Extirpation. Of all the Ten Things which he had made the Objects of his Wishes
in his Lifetime, one of His wishes.
the most ardent was; That he might be in a Capacity to establish the Reformed
Religion which he then professed. Therefore when he saw himself the Umpire of
his Wi^e, the Success of which depended upon his Will, he could not resolve to
destroy a Religion, the Advancement of which he had so much desired and
favored. However, there must be something done to pay the Pope. For which
reason the King enhanc'd the value of the Changes which had happened at Court,
as so many Effects of his Solicitations, his Acts of Kindnesses, or his
Example. Sometimes he acted the Converter, and disputed against such as
presented themselves before him, to the end he might boast at Rome the Benefit
and Sincerity of his Cares for the reducing of all his Subjects to one and the
same Religion. He assumed to himself also the Honor of the Decay and Ruin
into which some Reformed Families fell, and of the Advancement of some
Catholic Houses; as if it had fallen out through his preferring the one above
the other; whenas, for the most part, neither the one nor the other proceeded
from any other Cause then the Ingratitude and Capricio of the Court, among whom
there is as little Justice in the Refusal, as in the Distribution of Favors.
Certain it is however this way of proceeding drew upon him sometimes most cruel
Reproaches; and if we may judge of his Inclinations by the Satyrs of the Time,
no body will believe that Gratitude and Liberality were his overruling
Virtues, in regard they always represent the most ancient and most faithful
Servants of this Prince as buried in Oblivion and Miserable, while on the one
side, the Ministers of his Pleasures, and on the other, his Enemies, and they
who had the Courage to render themselves formidable, were loaded, and became
wealthy with his Favors and Rewards.

But the most effectual of all the ways he took to content the Pope, was the
Harshmess of his Answers to the Reformed, while his Mind was prepossessed with
the Jealousies infused into it; and Rome never failed of having Advice of it,
as of a Proof that the Reformed were no longer Sharers of his Good Will. In a
Word, they had taught him from that time forward to make a Distinction* between
the Religion and the Cabal; on purpose that they might accustom him to hear
their Destruction discoursed of without Offense, since they only talked to him
of ruining the Cabal that wounded his Authority, without meddling with Religion,
in the Exercise of which he was resolved never to make use of Force.

He looked upon the Dukes of Bouillon and de la Trimouille as the Heads of that
Party: And he would sometimes say to his Confidents, that one of his Wishes
was, That he might have 'em at his Mercy, to the end he might more generously
pardon 'em. But la Trimouille stood too well upon his Guard to expose himself;
and de Bouillon would never trust to his Generosity, as it fell out in an
Affair wherein he was engaged some few Years after. Neither did Rochel stand
fair in the King's good Opinion; and it is reported that when he was at the
Siege of la Fere, that when he beheld the Oyse overflowing the Streets of that
City, he whispered one of those that stood next him in the Ear, That if he
could bring as much to pass in Marseilles and Rochel, he should think himself
absolute in his Kingdom. This Resentment against Rochel proceeded from an old
Affront which he received there during his Protectorship, and which he always
retained in his Memory.

'Twas only to persuade Rome, that he had absolutely 1695.
abandoned the Reformed, that toward the end of the next Reports of the
Reformed being quite out of favor, and the Sources of it.
Year a Report was spread abroad, that he was highly incensed at a Petition
which they had presented to him, wherein it was said, That the Catholics had
only his Body, but that they possessed his Soul and his Affection; that he had
returned 'em a threatening Answer, telling 'em that he would join with the King
of Spain to their Destruction; and that if they did not keep themselves close
to the Terms of his Edicts, they should not have 'em so cheap from Him as from
his Predecessors. It Is said, that he received this Petition at la Fere, and
returned 'em this harsh Answer.

But if we may believe Monsieur D' Aubigney, he had too deep a 1596.
sense of Religion to treat those severely who persuaded him to maintain it.
This Historian tells us, that at that time the King was afflicted with a
Distemper which he believed mortal, and that he then underwent great Conflicts
of Mind, because he was afraid that his return to the Roman Church was the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, which is never pardoned. The like Discourses also were
spread by the Duke de Mercoeur, who had a design it should be thought that the
Wars of Religion were about to revive in the Kingdom, and that he was in a
condition to make his interest thereby as the last of all the Patronizers of
the Catholic Religion.

Yet, at the bottom, the King was not so displeased with the Reformed, but that
he sometimes gave the Romish Clergy cause of complaint against him. It was then
an authorized Custom to give Priories, Abbeys, and even Bishoprics, to the
Laity, whereby they pleased themselves with the Name of an Ecclesiastic
Confident; and the Reformed under this Reign shared the Benefits of this nature
with the Roman Catholics. It happened every day that Affairs of this kind were
promoted in all the Jurisdictions of the Kingdom, where they were generally
carried according to the Contracts of Confidence, until there was offered to
the Privy Council an Act which gave a Bishopric to a Woman in pursuance of
some act passed with her Husband according to this confidenciary possession.
This was an abuse that the Ecclesiastics had a great deal of difficulty to
reform.

In the beginning of the Year their Deputies were permitted to The Assembly.
assemble together. And on their part there was an Harangue made to the King at
Folembray: He that undertook it could not forbear speaking something of
Religion, but he behaved himself very moderately on the Subject, and only
proposed to advance the Catholic Religion by Doctrine and Example, whereas War
or Punishments had been the only Expedient preached up formerly. He exhorted
the King to issue out an Edict to invite his Subjects to return to the Catholic
Religion, which, said he, would be to imitate Constantine, who invited the
Subjects of his Empire to embrace the Christian Religion by his Example; and
also of Recarede King of the Goths, who being converted from Arianism, obliged
all his Subjects to turn with him. But, continued he, I desire not this
Conversion to be procured either by Arms or Violence.

He acknowledged likewise, that the King might not perhaps be so well assured
of many Towns and Persons which were returned to his obedience, that therefore
such Measures were requisite to be taken as might prevent any new Troubles
arising in the Kingdom.

In a second Harangue the Deputies of this Assembly pressed these Matters a
little farther; and to take away all suspicion which any persons might have,
that the Edict of Invitation tended to a renewing of the War, they declared
that they had need of Peace themselves, and would only have this Edict to
dispose the Reformed to receive their Instructions more easily. Nevertheless,
they had made an Address, upon which they obtained an Edict at Travercy, that
was very favorable to them. The Reformed, who suspected Edict of Travercy.
this Assembly of their Enemies, did all that in them lay to hinder any ill
consequences, and the Clergy also complained, after they had consented to this
Edict, that the King had not provided for the most important Articles of his
Demands. There were nevertheless some in this Edict which had respect to
Religion. The First ordained the re-establishment of the Mass throughout all
the Kingdom, the Ninth forbad Burial in Churchyards and other Sacred Places to
such who did not die Catholics, although they had the right of Patronage or any
other title of pretense. The Tenth permitted the selling of Relics or Church
Ornaments out of the hands of the Trustees and other Detainers, and to inform
against the Spoilers of Holy Places, at least upon a Civil Account, for the
recovery of things that were taken. This Clause of Civil Account, had a
reference to the reformed, who looked not upon the Catholic Relics or
Ornaments of their Churches as holy things, and it would have made a great
noise if they had been prosecuted as criminal for Pillages of this nature:
whereas the Catholics very far from being treated civilly upon such accounts
might in pursuance of the Canons be prosecuted as guilty of Sacrilege. The
Thirteenth commanded the restitution of all Ecclesiastical Goods of what nature
soever, and forbad the detaining of them, even under the pretense of
Reparations, Amendments, or any thing of the like nature: and gave a Grant of
Possession of the Livings belonging to the Bishops of Dags, Bayonne, Tarbes,
and Aize, which had been seized of in Bearn. This Article might interest many
of the Reformed, who were very probably entered upon the possession of these
Goods on the credit of the Attachment. But this was the main Design of all the
Attempts the Clergy had made. In their Harangues nothing was so much pressed as
the restitution of their Livings: and Charity was not the Motive that induced
them to desire Peace, but a Fear, that instead of regaining what they had
already lost, they might yet lose more in a new War.

These Intrigues of the Clergy continued near half a Year: An Edict in favor
of the Duke of Mayenne.
but in the beginning of them the Traty with the Duke of Mayenne was concluded,
which had been put off for so long a time; in which the Duke had proposed an
Article of being exempted out of the Enquiry that might be made into the Murder
of Henry the Third, whether it was, that he knew himself too nearly concerned
in it, which made him willing to secure himself from the Prosecution of the
Queen Dowager; or that he looked upon it as a reparation of the Death of his
Brothers, whom the late King had caused to be slain at Blois, to leave those
unpunished that had revenged him, even upon the Person of the King. The
Parliament had much ado to pass this Article, and perhaps it was the only one
amongst all that was agreed between the Leaguers upon which there was so great
a contestation. They would have obliged the Duke to have cleared himself by an
Oath, that he had no hand in the Parricide; or upon his refusal to have
ratified the Article with this Modification, That it was agreed to because of
the urgent necessity of Affairs. The Attorny-General, who had innocently
introduced into Henry the Third's Chamber the Monk that assassinated him,
thought himself obliged to bring the guilty to punishment, and formed great
difficulties, which the zeal of the Parliament seconded very briskly. But in
the end it was passed, and the Orders of the King were so strong, that they
confirmed the Edict without restriction. The King was obliged by many Reasons
to prosecute the Revenge of Henry the Third, besides the common interest of
Kings, who ought to their utmost to preserve the glorious Privileges of their
Persons; he owed this Revenge to his own Glory, to the end that he might not
appear to have advanced himself at the expense of his Predecessor's life; and
he had also engaged himself to do it by formal Promises to the Queen, and to
the Officers of the former Court. But the present Affairs made him forget both
his Duty and his Promises; and the Death of Henry the Third was not revenged.
Upon which one thing may be observed worthy the Reader's attention: Henry the
Fourth was also basely assassinated as his Predecessor had been; but there was
so little care taken to revenge his death, that even those were punished that
endeavored to discover the Authors of it. And in these two cases only the
Executors of both these Parricides were put to death; for they did not what
they ought, or what they might have done, either to punish or to discover the
accomplices. So that Henry the Fourth had the like respect showed him after his
death, as he had showed to him that reigned before him. This Remark is in the
History of the Reformed, for there was none in the Kingdom which complained
louder than they did, that revenge was not taken on the Murderers of their
preserver. But to return to the Duke of Mayenne, who only demanded the
exclusion of the Exercise of the Reformed Religion for six Years in those Towns
which he gave up to the King; and he was indeed after his reconciliation one of
the most equitable of the Court, when it was in dispute whether such an Edict
should be granted as might comprehend the Reformed.

Nevertheless they saw nothing which cured their distrusts; not only the
remembrance of what had passed gave them just fears of what was to come, as
Impartial Historians acknowledge; but they gave them every day new occasions,
which made a Secretary of State ingeniously confess to du Plessis, in a Letter
which he wrote to him, that they continually gave them too much subject of
complaint. But still Prudence would not let them push their Patience to the
extremity, in a time wherein it might have been the cause of strange disorders.
Throughout the Kingdom there was almost none less powerful than the King; the
Governors The Estate of the Kingdom.
looked upon their Places and Provinces almost as a Possession that belonged to
them by propriety; they were only made obedient by the power of Caresses and
Benefits: So that the State seemed remiss in the same point it had formerly
been when the House of Cartienna began to decay; upon which some unquiet and
ambitious Spirits built a like Project to that which brought Hugo Capet to the
Crown. This Prince bestowed part of his Kingdom upon those which had assisted
him in the gaining it, and gave the Dukes and Earls a Propriety to such
Countries as they were Governors of; keeping to himself, with that Country
which belonged to him by Inheritance, only the Sovereignty and Homage of all
these Lords, with the Condition of Reversion to the Crown in certain Cases.
This same Method was proposed to the King, as a good Expedient to pacify the
Kingdom. The The Project of dividing.
young Duke of Mompensier was engaged in this Project, and was to tell the King
of it; but the King's Answer so cast down this young Prince, as made him
sensible it was a slender experience had engaged him in this undertaking; but
this did not put an end to the design, for it yet continued in the minds of
several persons; and if the Reformed had but stirred then, many without doubt
would have taken an advantage of the occasion. There were strange Intrigues
carried on in France. The Duke of Mercoeur had already retired into Bretagny;
and Du Plessis had stopped a Courier of the Arch Duke's, who was carrying Letters
to this Prince, which discovered very strange things to them; the greatest part
of the Catholic Lords were interested therein. Even Biron, who afterward
suffered himself quite to be corrupted, was engaged in this Conspiracy; and it
was plain enough, that whatsoever fomented the Troubles at home proceeded from
a strange inspiration. If the Authors of these Intrigues could but have forced
the Reformed to some desperate Attempt, they would thereby have found a pretext
of making War against them, which would have been a fine occasion for them to
have taken better Measures to dismember the Kingdom than they had done by the
League, the success of which made them observe the defects.

But the Reformed only continued their Assemblies; and after The Assembly meet
at Loudun, with permission.
the ill success of their former Deputation, they agreed to meet at Loudun, the
First of April, to consult about the safety of the Churches. The King permitted
them because he had considered the consequences of his cold Answers, and he was
used upon all occasions to repair a harsh treatment by one more sweet and
compliable. The Deputies at their arrival found new cause of New suspicions,
inquietude, in that it was not long before the Cardinal de Joyeuse was to
return from Rome, whom they believed commissioned to make the first Overture of
Peace between the Crowns under the pretense of uniting them to make War against
the Turk. But the Reformed were not ignorant how the Court of Rome had abused
these holy Leagues, and on how many occasions these Croisades against Infidels
had been turned against the pretended Heretics, and therefore were
apprehensive, that the Catholics, under this pretexs, intended to ruin them,
and that in effect they would employ against them the Arms that in appearance
were taken up against the Ottoman House. In this Assembly they were wearied
with Uncertainties and Delays, and repulsed by the Rigor of the Parliaments,
in many of which, as well as in the inferior Courts, they still executed the
Edicts of the League, without considering the later Edicts which had revoked
them. The King had promised the Deputies at Lions to send Commissioners unto
the provinces, to cause those Declarations which he had made to be executed,
and to re-establish the Edict of 1577, with all its Consequences. But this
Promise had been so ill performed, that it was delayed, and so very little
effect came from the Proceedings of the Court, and from some Commissioners,
which were sent into some of the places, that the condition of the Reformed was
no ways bettered; besides, that they could no longer be content with the
re-establishment of this Edict, but demanded and subject of complaint.
a new one more ample and more favorable to them. The small advantage the
Commissioners promised or sent to the Reformed soon appeared in the
Parliaments, in which, during the same time, the Assembly offered up a
Complaint of their Rigours; that of Bordeaux made an Act which extended to the
ruin of a great number of their places of Exercise. It was enacted in favor of
the Marquess of Trans, who had great Possessions, that they should not Preach
within the limits of his Jurisdiction: so that, besides the places where this
Act absolutely put an end to the Exercise of the Reformed Religion, it produced
in them great Fears both of the Example and Consequence. The Catholic Lords, in
whose Possessions they had preached until then, might probably in imitation of
the Marquess, obtain Prohibitions for their continuing so to do: And as all
Roman Catholics are very near equally prejudiced against all other Religions,
so there was no room to doubt but they would signalize their Zeal by the like
Prosecutions. The Parliament of Toulouse, who by Articles of Capitulation with
the King had banished the Exercise of the Reformed Religion four Leagues from
the Town, demanded that they should not place within the Walls the Chamber of
Justice which they promised to the Reformed for Languedo^, passing an Act which
required all the Officers of Justice should be received in the Parliament, and
not in the Which was a Court for the benefit of Protestants, one half Roman
Catholics, and the other half of the Reformed.
Mixed Chambers, which manifestly excluded the Reformed from all inferior
Offices of Judicature, and from all subordinate Charges; since the Parliament
took such measures, as to admit none which would not take an Oath to live and
die Catholics. But the Parliament of Aix outdid all the rest, and forbad the
Public Exercise of the Reformed Religion throughout its Jurisdiction, on
forfeiture of Life: And when the Duke of Guise, after his reconciliation with
the King, had the Government of this Province committed to him, there was again
renewed the Names of Papist and Huguenot; which plainly showed the Spirit of
the League still reigned amongst them, since they thus revived the Names of the
Parties, which the principal Authors of this Faction had formerly given to
them. And what made the thing more odious was, that the Duke of Guise had been
introduced into the Province and confirmed in his Government by the Reformed:
And that the Acts of Parliament were passed two or three Months after that he
had been delivered by Lesdiguieres from the servitude of the Espernonists, and
that he had confessed, that this Lord had taken the Yoke from off his Neck. It
will appear plain, upon what this acknowledgment was founded, to any one that
reads the History of the Divisions of this Province.

The Assembly complained of these Injustices, of which they had Memoirs sent
them from all Parts; and of the small assistances that the Reformed found from
the King's benevolence, who, when they remonstrated to him all these
Oppressions, he returned the Deputies words without effect, and tiresome
delays. It was not long before they put up their Requests to the same effect as
the former, only a little illustrated with new Expressions and Additions to the
like purpose. It was almost the same method that the latter Assemblies
observed, who, as to the material Points, demanded as the precedent Assemblies
had done, only giving a little Explanation to prevent Frauds and Equivocations,
and to take away all pretexts of Disputes whatsoever. Vulson, Vulson sent to
Court.
whom the Parliament of Grenoble perplexed on the account of his having
obtained the Place of a Counselor, was deputed to go to the King to demand of
him the performance of his Promise made at Lions to the Envoy of the Assembly
of Saumur. Du Plessis writ by him to the King, to show him the importance of
this Journey, and the necessity of sending him back with some satisfaction. He
particularly advised him to send to the Assembly some peaceable Catholic,
qualified with sufficient power, to the intent that they might treat with him
to some purpose. But the Catholics which were near the King possessed him with
quite different thoughts. Vulson was received in the accustomed manner, with a
friendly Countenance and fine Words, but obtained nothing more than the rest
had done before him. The Promises were oftentimes reiterated, and as often found
vain, and which in the end were reduced only to the Edict of 1577; and some
Promises of compensation for what the Treaties with the Leaguers had
retrenched, which could satisfy no Man: But there was a Conclusion from the
Answer which Vulson made, that put an end to all their reasoning and patience.
The Assembly had given him order to tell the King, that they expected his
Answer at Loudun; and this was explained by the ill-minded Courtiers as an
injurious Menace to the Royal Authority, and with a Boldness of Rebels, who
would make the King to understand that they staid there to take new
Resolutions, if they were not contented with the Answer he should give their
Deputy. Passionate Historians make every thing on this side as odious as they
can, although the intention of the Assembly was much more innocent. The Deputies
were accustomed, after having put up their Requests, and named those which
should carry them to the King, to return again and expect the effect of their
Solicitations; and contenting themselves with meeting together, if affairs
required it; but this were an endless trouble. There were already two Years
past since the Assembly of Saint Foy had been going backwards and forwards, and
yet had obtained nothing; and when those which were sent to the Court received
any Answer, there was so much time lost in communicating it to the Churches, to
the Councils of Provinces, and in naming Deputies for a General Assembly, that
it was impossible to avoid tediousness. Therefore to bring things to a more
speedy issue, the Assembly of Loudun resolved not to depart, until they saw
some conclusion of the Affairs for which they had met together; and what they
had ordered Vulson to tell the King, was only a simple Declaration of the
resolution they had taken. And indeed this might confound the Council, who
found matters went more according to their minds in the preceding Conduct,
because the Year was run out before another Assembly could deliberate upon
their Answers; and this method served to gain them time, and to defer them to a
Conjuncture wherein the King might bring Affairs to such a pass, as he might
treat with the Reformed more at his pleasure; whereas now they perceived that
the Assembly were resolved not to part until they had brought things unto some
certain conclusion; and this, without doubt, hastened things more than
ordinary, and also hindered the ill-minded Courtiers from an opportunity of
finding out new Illusions to amuse them. But the King having taken the thing
according to the sense his Council had represented to him, was resolved to
answer this Declaration of the Assembly by a Mark of absolute Authority; and
therefore commanded the Assembly to break up, and to depart every one to his
own home, assuring the People of the good will of the King, whereof
nevertheless they carried no other Testimonies than general Promises. Such a
Command, made with a sort of a menacing Air, rendered all these fine words
suspected: The Protestants doubted not but the secret design of this separation
was to deliver the Court from these importunate Solicitors, who too strongly
demanded the effect of those Promises which they had no mind to perform; and it
is not to be wondered at if this Answer displeased the Assembly, since some of
the Council, who was not so very severe, had no hand in it; and even Lomanie,
writing upon this Subject to Du Plessis, confessed to him, that he knew not why
the Secretary of State had conceived it in such terms, and he did not doubt but
that he himself was offended, and that he had some secret reservation.

The Assembly therefore was very much offended with this Answer; and believing
they ought to defer their breaking up, until they had consulted together what
was necessary to be done in An Effect of this Rigor.
this unfortunate Conjuncture; they concluded they were no longer to expect any
assistance from the Court, but henceforth to seek it in their own strength. The
Deputies were authorized by the Provinces to do whatsoever should be judged
useful for the common Cause; so that the Assembly was ready to depart* having
resolved to put the Reformed again into the same condition they were before the
Truce with the two Kings. But Du Plessis, A wise Expedient of Du Plessis to
reunite the Assembly.
who feared the Consequences of these desperate Resolutions, and the Effects of
the Resentments that the Deputies might stir up in the Provinces, did an act
worthy his Wisdom and the Fidelity he owed to the King. He went to the
Assembly, and was so far from advising them to break up, that he proposed the
fortifying themselves with a great number of considerable Persons, and to enter
into a Mutual Promise, not to separate any more till they had obtained an Edict
with sufficient security. This they agreed to, and invited such persons to them
as were fitly qualified, to strengthen their Assembly by their presence: All
that were in the neighboring Provinces came to them; La Trimouille, who had
never assisted before, appeared there with the rest. But the Courage of many
Persons failed, when they came to sign the Union that Du Plessis had proposed,
because they expected no relief from the Court; therefore he signed first, upon
which all the rest resolved to follow his Example. Thus Wisdom prevailed with
them, and although their Patience was tired, yet it was not quite spent; they
gave Du Plessis time to write to the King, and to represent to him the
disorders that might proceed from a separation of the Assembly. He plainly told
him what the Deputies had reason to complain of; the Rigours of the
Parliaments, the Injustices of the Officers, which forbad paying the Garrisons
of the places; their Fears, Distrusts and Suspicions, and the Proposition of
bringing themselves again into the same condition they were in before the
Truce: And to appease all these Disturbances, he again renewed his Advice to
the King of sending a Commissioner on his account to treat with the Deputies;
he nominated the President of Thou, because he looked upon him to be a lover of
Peace: He applied his Advice to the Example of Henry the Third, who sent
Bellieveure to Montauban, in 1584. to treat with the Reformed; and he begged
the King not to believe the affair of small importance, because every person
amongst them was resolved to see what was to be expected for their security.
Hesperian, who carried the Letter with more particular Instructions upon the
Subject, in which was contained the Reasons the Reformed had to be afraid, with
an Account of their Complaints, and the Motives that ought to oblige the King
to yield to the desires of these alarmed persons.

As the King's coldness was caused by the displeasure the Catholic Is approved
of the King; who revokes the Order of dispersing, and promises a Commissioner.
Zealots had made him conceive against the Proceedings of the Reformed, so it
was not very difficult to change his thoughts, when they gave him better
Reasons for it; therefore, whether he was touch^ with the Remonstrances of his
faithful Servant, or that the effect of his harshness had convinced him, that
his Counselors had made him take wrong Measures, he gave pressing Orders that
the Assembly should not break up: He promised to send somebody to treat with
them, and fixed a time when he would send him; and strongly enjoined the
staying the Deputies until the arrival of his Commissioner. Thus the Mischief
that the zealous Catholics had done, was very near repaired by the wise Advice
even of those whom they had offended; and the Reformed by this Expedient were
hindered from any ill effect their despair might have produced. Yet without
doubt there was some difficulty in making every one patient, and especially
when they saw the time past that was prefixed, without any one being sent to
the Assembly from the King. Du Plessis was even told sometimes, That they ought
not always to exercise Patience, after so many Injustices and so many Delays;
the most peaceable were ready to answer, that they were weary, after seven
Years sufferings; having seen the King neglect them whilst he was of their
Religion; and turning from them and adhering to the Catholics, treating to
their prejudice, contrary to his Word, and the Promises signed with the Princes
and Lords of his Court, with the Members of the League; agreeing with the Pope,
and it may be engaged to destroy the Reformed, to please him; and, after all,
no answer to their Solicitations, but vain words; and their Services were like
to be no otherwise recompensed, than by endless Delays. Yet, however, they
waited the time the King desired, without taking any certain Resolution. This
Patience might very properly have past The Patience of the Reformed.
for a great piece of Service, since the only Motive with them was an
unwillingness to trouble the State, in a very unfortunate Juncture, wherein the
least disturbance might have confounded all, and in which, perhaps, the King
might have found himself to have had a less share of the division than any of
those that should have rent the Kingdom. But as they were jealous of the glory
of their Services, so they would not be corrupted; and they appeared always
very much afraid of being esteemed Authors of the ruin of the Crown. Their
Enemies have very ill interpreted, what they spoke either by their Deputies or
Requests, that if they were not assisted by the King in their pressing
Necessities, they should seek a Remedy from themselves; as if by that they had
threatened to take up Arms. That was never in their thoughts, they never dreamt
of forcing him; but only purposed to have stood up in their own defense, if the
King abandoned them to the Injustice and Fury of their Enemies. And to make it
a Crime for Men, (whom they had treated near 35 Years with so much
Perfidiousness and Cruelty) to be careful to avoid the like treatment for the
time to come, is, to speak rationally, a Proof that they would not spare them,
and that they seemed to intimate, they ought to suffer themselves to be
oppressed, without making any defense.

Although the Catholics rallied them bitterly sometimes, because they had not
known how to take their time, and make use of advantageous Conjunctures to have
prevailed in, they suffered them to pass this upon them, since they were able
by their Arms to make them agree to whatsoever they would. They yielded, even
all of a sudden, upon one of their most important Demands; and it appeared, by
the conclusion of the Treaty, how much their desire of preserving the State was
more powerful with them than the consideration of their own Interests. Those
amongst them that were inclined to have things carried quietly, had two
powerful Reasons to command their Minds. One was, the Reproach they should
deserve, if, by a Civil War, they encreast the King's Troubles. The other was,
the consideration of what might one day happen, if they should gain any thing
by force, as the state of Affairs then were. They very well foresaw, that their
quiet would not be very durable, if obtained at such a price; that the King
would retract these extorted Favors, as soon as he was in a condition to
resent them, and that he would reduce them again more than ever under the
discretion of the Catholics. Wherefore they contented themselves with
continuing A continuation of their Requests.
their Solicitations, by Assemblies, Deputations, Requests, Demands, and
Complaints. If these Solicitations are looked upon as importune, it must be
remembered, that the King liked the advice of Du Plessis, and that to have an
excuse to the Catholics and to the Pope, he was not sorry he was importuned;
so that these Importunities could not be criminal, since they were necessary
and tacitly authorized. It may be an offense to Princes, when they are
vigorously pursued to force something from them they are not willing to; but
Importunity is not amiss when it serves for an excuse to such persons as they
would not offend, yet care not to yield to.

The arrival of a Legate, that the Pope sent to France, obliged A Legate in
France renews their fears.
them to be more and more earnest in their Importunities. This Legation gave
the Reformed new cause of distrust, because they doubted not but the Legate was
ordered to use his interest against them, and they were afraid the King might
be prevailed on by his Solicitations, or that at least the credit of this new
Enemy would put a new stop to their Affairs; and the reason of this Fear was
too apparent. Although it was promised them, that the Bull and the Power of the
Legate should be verified with great Exceptions, yet they did not stick to do
quite the contrary; for they confirmed his Power to the utmost, although they
thereby injured themselves in many things. They continued likewise to retrench
the Garrisons of the Reformed in Poictou and Saintonge; they suppressed that of
Thouars, on purpose to disoblige La Trimouille, who was Lord thereof, and to
take away from him a place of strength. The pretext of these Proceedings was,
that the Money arising from this Suppression was to be made use of in the War
against the Low Countries; but it would have turned to so small account, that
it was easy to perceive their chief end was to perplex those that had an
interest in the management of these Garrisons. Roni, who began to dispose of the
King's Revenue, Jealousies of Roni.
might easilier have raised that Fund upon others than those of his own
Religion; but as he was friend to none but himself, and perhaps the King, to
whom his Fortune engaged him, so he was very jealous of all those that had any
reputation amongst the Reformed; and he was not sorry to have them far distant
from the Court, that their Merit might not stand in competition with his;
therefore he contributed what he could to their ruin, and he was not
displeased, when they had occasion to make any advances, which might procure
them the ill will of the King. He hated the Marshal de Bouillon, who had a very
acute Genius in the management of Affairs, and who was capable of prevailing
with the King, who had an high esteem for him. He loved not Lesdiguieres, who
would have no dependence on him, and whom he was obliged to have a great regard
for about the Affairs for Dauphine; but above all, left his Merit and great
Services might bring him to a higher degree of Authority, La Trimouille
disturbed him, being a Man that was no slave to Favor, and with whom in time
he was like to fall out. As for Du Plessis, he was insupportable to him, as a
Man that was the King's Confident; and who, if he had been at Court, would have
been able to have attained to the highest degree in the King's favor, because
of his honesty and intelligence in all Affairs. Wherefore he kept him always as
an Exile at Saumur, where the Fortune of this wise Lord, who deserved a better
fate, was limited. The occasion of his discovering his Jealousy, will be made
to appear in the Sequel of this History.

But to return: These Tricks put upon the Reformed about their Garrisons, had
an effect that was not foreseen at Court; for after they had used their best
interest for a redress thereof, they were forced at last to follow the advice
given in the Acts of the Assembly held at Saintefoy, and accordingly stopped the
King's Money in some places of Poictou, which they employed toward the
maintaining of their Garrisons. All this happening about the time of the
Legat's arrival, the Reformed were afraid, that, if he demanded it, the Court
would make him more Sacrifices, as new Marks of Honor; insomuch, that they
thought it a necessary Precaution, for preventing new Injuries, to press the
King hard, nay, to be more importunate with him than ever. Besides, they might
well see, that the Legat's presence was like to put the King to new
perplexities, and restrain that good will, of which they had daily fresh
assurances. It was not likely that any thing could be done for them, but it
would offend the Pope, if done in his Legat's presence, unless there was some
plausible excuse ready at hand. Therefore the only Remedy was to demand
importunately, that the King might not want an Answer whenever the Legate
complained. But this Prelate was not the hardest of all to be satisfied with
reason, and those Commissioners who managed the Edict of Nants, from the Month
of July, of this Year, to April 1598, found him more easy and tractable,
though a Cardinal and an Italian, than a great many French Catholics. The
President de Thou himself being charged before him with too much favoring the
Reformed, when he was one of the King's Commissioners to treat with them, was
obliged for his vindication, to give him an account of the whole Negotiation.
The Legate rested satisfied with it, and referred all the Interest of the
Catholic Religion to the Wisdom of the King's Commissioners.

In the mean while another National Synod was held at Saumur, A Synod at Saumur.
which opening at the same time with the Political Assembly, and so near the
place of their sitting, gave the Court fresh occasions of fear. They were
afraid, that these two Councils debating the same things, their Resolutions
should be more effectual, and that the Ministers would carry along with them to
their respective Churches, that Spirit of Eagerness and Discontent which they
saw prevalent in the Assembly. The Consistory-men were more dreaded at Court
than the rest, because the subsistence of a great part of them depending upon
their Religion, it was thereby become their only and darling interest; so that
they were firm and inflexible upon it, and could easily by their Eloquence draw
in their People to their Opinions. But Their Resolutions.
Du Plessis assured the Court, that Ecclesiastical Matters only would be
treated of in the Synod. And indeed, they did even take there a Resolution
which could not but be very pleasing to the Court, since it allowed the
Ministers to assist in the Assemblies where the preservation of the Churches
was treated of, only because of the present necessity; that is, that this
necessity being over, they were ordered to keep themselves within the bounds of
their Ministerial Duties. Whether the Motion whereon this Resolution was taken,
sprang from the tenderness and scrupulousness of some conscientious Men who
were unwilling to meddle with the Affairs of that Government, or that it was
inspired by the Court's Intrigues, it is certain at least, that it had mighty
Consequences in another Reign, and in several things gave an advantage to the
Enemies of the reformed Religion.

However, the Synod wrote to the King on the general Affairs, Their Letters to
the King.
and sent Deputies to him. They thanked his Majesty by their Letters for those
fresh Assurances of his good Will, brought to them by de Serres, which they
ascribed partly to his Natural Goodness, partly to the remembrance he had of
the good Affection and great Services of the Reformed, whereof he himself was a
witness. They complained next, that their Grievances were misrepresented to the
King, who was made to believe, That they were used almost as well as their past
Services deserved, and according to his good Intentions, which hindered him from
more earnestly thinking of their relief; whereas, on the contrary, they had
every day new Wrongs done them all manner of ways: That the Catholic Party
would have them be contented with the Edict of 1577, and the Conferences that
followed it, though it was in a manner made void by the Edict of Reduction; by
virtue whereof they were treated in most Parliaments according to the Edicts of
the League, all that the Rebels demanded being granted them to revive the same:
That the Reformed had reason to think it strange, that they, who had served the
King from his very Youth, and whose Services had, against all humane
appearance, been blessed by God, were in a worse condition in his Reign, than
under his Predecessors, whose mind was influenced against them with Prejudices
baffled by the event and time: At last they excused themselves for troubling
his Majesty with their Affairs, at a time when he had such weighty ones in
hand, by adding, that being the Reformed were such a considerable part of his
Subjects, and of the most Faithful too, their Concerns could be none of his
least important Business. The Synod wrote also to the Lord High Constable upon
the same Heads, but for all this they then could get nothing else but a
renewing of wonted Promises. But, in fine, the King having resolved to appoint
Commissioners appointed.
Commissioners in order to treat with the Assembly, he followed exactly the
advice of du Plessis, and offered the Commission to the President de Thou, a
Man of a known Integrity and Honesty all the World over; but he refused it,
fearing the Consequences thereof, because he was unwilling blindly to follow
the Zeal of the rigid Catholics, whose strictness he did not like, and whose
reproaches he feared, if he chanced to yield any thing to the Reformed. Upon
his refusal, Vick and Calignon were entrusted with the same. The first was a
Catholic, and the other of the reformed Religion. The Assembly was offended at
Calignon's accepting of a Commission to dispute and trifle with his Brethren
upon their demands, and to bring them such Answers from the King, as did not
satisfy their hopes. In short, their Powers went no farther than to grant the
Reformed the execution of the Edict of 1577* with a kind of Compensation to
make up what the Treatises of Reduction might have altered therein; so that
they were thought insignificant by the Assembly; and this first Journey of the
Commissioners did not promote the Work. The King had, both in the Instructions,
and Complaints of the King.
by his Commissioners, made some Complaints to the Assembly of their stiffness
in their Demands, and* above all* of their seeming to mistrust his Promises;
but had joined to it a kind of an Excuse for the Answer made to their Deputies,
which he thought would have been satisfactory to them, considering what
Circumstances he was under when he made it. Whereupon he mentioned the loss of
Calais and A^dres, together with the lingering and uncertain Siege of Fere.
There was, however, amidst these Complaints, a very advantageous acknowledgment
of their Fidelity, when he said, That the Remedy which they sought for their
Grievances was very far from that respect and affection they always had for
him, that which nevertheless he charged upon some among them, who making
advantage of the bad posture of his Affairs, were thereby willing to make
themselves amends for their distaste at his Answers. I have observed before
that the very Privy Counselors had deemed it capable of producing this bad
effect, and thought that the Contrivers of it had then some secret Slave to
sweeten it in due time. The Firmness of the Assembly,
But the Reformed grounded their holding fast to their Demands upon the Answers
themselves that were made them, and could not apprehend what kind of public
Good they were required to prefer before their own Preservation, since the
whole Matter amounted to no more than the retaking some Frontier Places from
the Enemy, which might be done at any time, so soon as all the Forces of the
Kingdom were reunited; whereas, now by delaying to do them right upon their
just Complaints, many thousands of the best Subjects the King had, were left to
the Mercy of their Enemies, Men trained up to Persidy, Injustice and Slaughter.

The Comissioners having given the King an account of the Assemblies
Resolution, he gave them new Instructions at Monceaux, where they met him.
These were no larger than the former; but the Commissioners were charged to
complain of their seizing the King's Money in some places, and demand
satisfaction for it, as being a thing the King was much offended at* they moved
also* that the Assembly should remove from Loudun which removes to Vendome.
to Vendome, that they might be nearer to the Court; which being consented to,
the Deputies repaired to Vendome, on the Tenth of November, where they waited
three Months for the return of the Commissioners. In the mean while they sent
new Deputies to the King then at Rouen, where they presented to him some
Articles drawn up upon Proposals made them, wherein they desisted from none of
their former Demands concerning their Security; they did not so much as revoke
their Orders for seizing the King's Money to pay their Garrisons, because they
were satisfied that their Holds were the only thing, their Enemies did value
them upon, and thought themselves lost, so soon as they should consent to the
disbanding of their Troops, and the ruin of their strong Towns. They were also
inflexible in their Demands concerning the maintenance of their Ministers, and
the administration of Justice, for the security whereof they would have, in
suspicious Parliaments, Courts, consisting one half of Protestants, the other
of Catholic Judges, commonly called Chambers Miparties. But they were somewhat
loose in They desist about a general Exercise.
the point of their religious Exercise, and accepted the Compensation before
offered by the King. It amounted to two new Grants, or such at least that
looked so. By the First, they were allowed to continue the exercise of the
reformed Religion in all places, where it had been publicly made ever since
the beginning of the then instant Year. The Second, allowed them a second A
second place of Exercise granted in each Balliwick, and their right acquired by
Possession in the year 1596. confirmed. The Edict of 1577. verified at Rouen,
does not content them.
place for Worship in each Balliwick or Precinct, commonly called Senechaussee,
almost the same Conditions prescribed by the Edict of 1577. in a Grant of the
same kind. There will be occasion to speak more at large of these Grants
hereafter.

The King not being willing to grant them their other Demands, held fast to
these two Articles; but as a proof of his good Will to them, he would not set
out from Rouen, before he saw the Edict of 1577. pass in that Parliament, as it
had passed at Paris. This really was of no great advantage, because the
Reformed were not contented with it, and would needs have had another Edict.
Moreover, this verification of an Edict, which they had so often declared they
could not be satisfied with, was but an Artifice to keep up their Patience, by
putting an end to those gross Wrongs done them in Parliaments, which occasioned
their Complaints: And it was easy to judge through the daily Denials made them
of farther Grants, that if they could be prevailed upon to live quiet under the
shelter of this Edict, until such time as a thorough settlement of the Kingdom,
both at home and abroad, could be made, they would then, doubtless, be made to
believe that another Edict was needless, since this had proved sufficient to
secure them. All that might be granted them over and above this, was to give
them some new places for their Worship, in lieu of those that the several
Treatises of reduction had taken from them. The Catholics themselves consented
to that kind of Compensation, and it seems that the King was resolved never to
grant them any thing but under the same pretense, it being a plausible Excuse
to the Pope or his Legate for all his Favors to them. It was clear enough,
that the Reformed could never be obliged to be content with less, nay, that
they might with good reason hold fast to their Pretentions, since 'twas but
just to indemnifie them for the loss of an advantage taken from them without
cause, against the express word of a King, and that Promise signed by the
Princes and Lords, which has been so often mentioned by us. But this
Compensation was not sufficient to the Reformed, who aimed at more liberty and
security than was given them by that means.

This Verification was, nevertheless, ill resented at Rome, The Pope
complains of it,
whereby it created the King, at least seemingly, a very difficult Work. The
Pope made bitter Complaints to d' Ossat, both of the thing and of the manner of
it, because, said he, the King had forced it upon the Parliament, overruling
their opposition. D' Ossat displayed all his skill and ability to pacific the
Pope; he D' Ossat appeaseth him.
enlarged upon the great advantage of Peace, after a Civil War of 35 Years,
which could not end but by this Edict; besides, he represented that Peace as
necessary for the conversion of Heretics, wherein the King did daily make
considerable Progress; he exaggerated the great Miseries which the War had
brought, especially upon the Church, and the spoil of the Ecclesiastical
Revenues, occasioned by it; he showed, 'twas not the King, but his Predecessor,
made that Edict, when he was obeyed by all Catholics at home, and assisted by
all those abroad; that this was the least favorable of all those ever obtained
by the Reformed; that so long as it was observed, their Religion did visibly
diminish, and that though the King was now opposed at home, and attacked abroad,
yet he had done nothing more than the late King, nor even without the advice of
the Catholics of his Party; that this Edict confining Heresy to certain
places, reestablished every where the Roman Religion; insomuch that one would
hardly have believed that the Reformed, after having so much contributed to the
preservation of the Kingdom, and strengthened themselves, during the War, with
above 50 strong Places, would ever be contented with it, in a time when they
might perhaps have extorted more from the King, almost overwhelmed with other
Affairs; that the King was very commendable for having so well managed the
Interest of the Catholic Religion, or was at least* more excusable for his
connivence, than his Predecessors; upon which he brought in the Parable of the
Tare, which is left standing, when it cannot be snatched off without spoiling
the Corn; he laid a great stress upon the Examples of all other Catholic
Princes, and on that of the King of Spain, who tolerated the Moors, and, to
bring back the Dutch to their obedience, offered them Liberty of Conscience,
and a free Exercise of their Religion: He made it appear next, that the
oppositions of Parliaments are but Forms, since they know well enough that they
must obey at last; and that, after all, no other Constraint was put upon them
but that of the public Necessity. Then he hinted at the ill Thoughts the
Reformed might have entertained of the King, had he left Rouen before seeing
the Edict verified; what would have been their Jealousies, and how well
grounded; how cunning the Faction was countenanced by the Spaniards, or what
Dangers the Church and the State were like to be brought into by renewing the
War: At last he concluded, with putting the Pope in hopes, that this Peace
would bring all other things to a State most agreeable to his Holiness. Those
that are not well read in the Policy of the Roman Court, may perhaps wonder at
this Verification making such a noise there, though at the same time they did
not speak a word of the public Treaty that was beginning with the Reformed,
under the very Nose of the Legate, who could not choose but give notice of it.
But it is a Maxim of this refined Court's Policy, That Affairs must be handled
in a manner like Plays, where the Actors never speak as they think, and know
how to distinguish what is to be taken notice of, and what to be dissembled.
According to this, the Gentlemen of Rome, when they are not able to obstruct an
Affair, do, before its conclusion, pretend to be ignorant of it, because it
would be an Affront to see it concluded, after having vainly opposed it; but
when it is past Remedy, then they fall a Murmuring, to show their dislike of it.
Thus the Pope delayed his complaining of the new Edict that was preparing,
until it was fully concluded; because then the noise he made about it could do
no harm to France, but might allay the Murmurs of the Spanish Faction.

The Commissioners came to the Assembly but at the beginning 1597.
of February, who immediately after their arrival protested, that the King
could grant no more than what was set down in their Instructions, for which
they gave only the reason of the bad posture of the King's Affairs, that
permitted him not to do better, what desire soever he had to favor them. This
reason of State was in the bottom nothing else but the Discontents, which the
King's favoring the Reformed might give to the Holy leaguemen, who not being
thoroughly pacified, might take a pretense from thence to stir up new Wars. The
King indeed feared it, and could not put any trust in those so lately
reconciled Enemies, who watched him almost as a Slave; nay, the circumstances
of the time seemed to render his fears more reasonable, for the Spaniard, who
still held an Intelligence with that half-suppressed Faction, had opened the
Frontiers in several places. But the The Assembly is discountenanced at the
return of the Commissioners.
Reformed were offended at that reason of State, yet not pacified, for upon the
whole matter, they thought the design was to make a sacrifice of their Repose
and Security, to the Passion of their ancient Persecutors; and, to say the
truth, to do nothing in their favor, for fear of giving offense to the League
men, was but to tell them plainly enough, that the King had better leave them
in their Misery, than displease their implacable Enemies, who might have an
occasion to be dissatisfied, if the Reformed were put out of their reach;
wherefore that reason of State had no great effect in the Assembly, who could
not relish that by a State. Maxim, the interest of so many faithful Subjects
should be sacrificed to the caprice of a violent Cabal; that their great
Services should be forgotten, their Persons exposed to new Cruelties, and
sufficient Security denied for their Consciences and Lives. Therefore they
declared to the King, by one of their Members, that they could by no means be
contented with what was granted them, and that the Oppression the Reformed
lived under, would at last force them to seek for a relief in themselves. The
Commissioners, whose Powers were always bounded by certain limits, which it was
not lawful for them to go beyond, being sensible that the Reformed were in a
discontent, wrote to Court, that they thought it much to the purpose to break
the Assembly, but that the Deputies must be sent home with whatever
satisfaction could be given them. The Count de Schomberg, and the President de
Thou, then at Tours, negotiating a Peace with the Duke of Mercoeur, wrote to
the same purpose, and the Count's advice was to satisfy those People, which he
called People sick, not with Rebellion and Factious Passion, but with
Jealousies and just Fears for what might happen to them, as we have it in the
most impartial Historians. It was not doubted in Spain, but that the Reformed
would be tired at last with so many Delays, and come to Extremities; and these
two wise Counselors saw well enough through the Artifices and various
Shiftings of the Duke of Mercoeur, that he waited to see what the Business of
Religion would come to, that he might take a Resolution accordingly. Wherefore,
they advised the King to pacify things at home, the better to make War abroad.
Du Plessis wrote the same, and the Reformed offered, after sufficient security
had been given them, to employ their whole force, either to reduce the Duke, or
beat back the Spaniards beyond their ancient Limits.

Now the words of the Reformed being maliciously construed, as if they had
threatened to take up Arms, though they did never so much as mention it, and had
only declared, they would no longer expect relief from the Court, but maintain
themselves as well as they could in case of Oppression: Their Words, I say,
brought the Court into an extreme Perplexity; insomuch, that the Jealousies
increased in both Parties, and the Court feared Mistrusts and Jealousies on
both sides.
more mischief from the Assembly, than perhaps the Assembly designed to do;
and, on the other hand, the Assembly apprehended more harm from the Court than
was there prepared for them. Thus, in dubious Affairs, Fear is often mutual,
and there is a kind of emulation, who shall show most Resolution and Courage,
when really the Fright is equal on both sides. The King severely complained to
the Assembly by his Letters, and laid openly the Fault at the doors of the
Dukes of Bouillon and Trimouille; but there happened such Divisions in the very
Divisions in the Assembly.
Assembly, as did even almost ruin their Affairs. It may be 'twas ^n effect of
the usual Intrigues of the Court, who designedly had drawn the Assembly nearer
home, the better to have them within the reach of its Caresses and Favors. Not
but that it might be also the effect of that Misfortune, commonly attending the
union of diverse Persons, differing in Genius, Abilities and Interest; who, though
agreeing in a general Design, do often fall out about the choice of necessary
Expedients. It is with them, as with that Harmony by which the World
subsisteth, through a correspondency of several discording Causes, which might
easily break out of that just proportion whereby they agree, if they were not
preserved and maintained by an Almighty and Divine Hand. Thus the union of many
Men, who aim at different ends, may break of it self, though they often have the
same Motives for acting concertedly, when each one would regulate the Conduct
and Interest of all others, by his own Maxims and Prejudices. The Assembly, who
ascribed the Progress of those Disorders to the influence of the Court, to
prevent more Mischief, thought it fit to remove elsewhere, and accordingly came
to Saumur on the Fifth of March. This removal might be They return to Saumur.
agreeable to both Parties; to the King, to whom du P^^ss^^ might be very
serviceable there, in allaying, with his Wisdom, the Heat of the most forward;
and accordingly the King had sent for him a while before, and commanded him to
go to Vendome, and endeavor to bring them to a better Temper; and it was
agreeable to the Reformed also, in that the Authority of du Plessis, his
Prudence and Equity might heal their Divisions, and bring them all to an
unanimous Effort for the common Cause.

In the mean while Matters went on slowly, and the Assembly being very little
satisfied with the Commissioner's delays, which were supposed, by several
Members, to be designedly made, they carried their Discontents along with them
to Saumur. Nay, on a Report spread abroad, that the King was secretly treating
of a Peace with the Archduke, their Jealousies increased, and they thought
that the Court used so many delays, to the end that, if a Peace could be made
before any thing was concluded with the Reformed, the King might be in a
condition to grant them only what the Catholics pleased. But a little while
after the Assembly was settled at Saumur, there happened an Accident, which did
extremely allarm all sorts of People; the Spaniards having surprised Amiens,
the defense whereof was left to its Inhabitants, Amiens surprised.
they defended it very ill. This Blow made a great noise through all Europe;
France was counted lost, the old Caballs began to revive, and the consternation
was so great, that People knew not what course or resolution was best to take;
the King himself was disheartened in this Misfortune, and fell from that
greatness of Soul he had always been Master of before. In short, one may judge
what condition France was thought to be Confusion in the Affairs.
in, by what happed in Britany. Brissac, who was Deputy*Lieutenant in that
Province and a late reconciled League man, caused an Assembly of the Nobility
to be held there in his presence, being therein, as 'twas said, countenanced by
Mompensier, and the Dukes of Bouillon and la Trimouille. There they proposed to
put themselves under the Protection of the Queen of England, by the Name of the
good French People, (bons Francois) taking it for granted, that the King, after
that loss, was no longer able to keep his Kingdom, and defend his Subjects
against a foreign Invasion. The same accident occasioned great Agitations
amongst the Reformed; some were for taking up Arms, and endeavored to draw to
their Opinion all such as were capable to bear them; A Motion for War in the
Assembly.
insomuch that one moved for an Attempt upon Tours, whither some Troops were to
be sent in the Name of la Trimouille; others thought, that they ought not to
make use of such a dismal occasion, and that it was even more honorable for
them to desist from their former Demands, than to make new ones. As for the two
Dukes, they pushed on briskly their Proposals, and endeavored to persuade
them, that War was the only remedy they had left: But almost all the Churches
rejected it; the great Towns, whose example might have drawn in the rest, and
the best part of the Nobility, were deaf to it, so that the Project of the two
Dukes fell to the ground. It was nevertheless reported abroad, that Discord had
alone hindered the Reformed from voting the War, because the Nobility and
Consistory*men renewed their old Quarrel, and fell out about the management of
the Money that was to be raised; the Nobility claiming it as their right, and
the Consistory*men being for Commissioners to be appointed by the respective
Churches for the safe management of it. But all these Intrigues, as it was
given out, miscarrying, through the dissension of the different Parties, every
one at Court, after the retaking of Amiens, valued himself for having no share
therein, and strove very hard who should make the first discovery to the King;
so that all the odium fell upon the two Dukes, who had been the authors and
promoters of the whole matter. From whence it follows, that their misdemeanour
might be misrepresented, and made a great deal more than The Motives of the
Dukes of Bouillon and Trimouille.
really it was, since in Reports of that nature, Men use to say more than they
know, and consequently run the hazard of telling more than the truth. As for
the Motive of the two Dukes, it is not easy to guess at them. The Catholic
Writers charge them with designing to make advantage of the Disorders of the
State, that they might get by force those Preferments that were denied them;
but the President de Thou, who saw the matters nearer than any body else, as
being present in all these Transactions, gives us a more innocent Motive of
those two Dukes. He ascribes their Design to Necessity, and the Public
Calamity, because in the General Confusion of the Kingdom every one did almost
despair of his own safety, and thought he ought to seek his security from
himself; for the proof of which, he says, that as soon as Amiens was retaken,
they submitted to what Terms the King was pleased to prescribe to them, because
then their former hopes of enjoying Peace, under a King capable to defend them,
were, without doubt, revived. That is, in a word, that we may reckon these
great Men's Motions amongst such things as are qualified by the event; and,
indeed, had the King miscarried before Amiens, they had been admired as
Masterpieces of State Policy, whereas they have been represented as so many
Crimes, because the good Fortune of the King did soon put him in a condition to
upbraid their Authors with them. Upon the whole matter, since all this was an
effect of some Lords private Passions and Heats, which were repressed by the
Patience and Tranquillity of the greatest number, it is most unjust to father
upon the whole Body the attempts of some of its Members, especially since that
the soberest part of them proved the strongest, and, in a manner, forced the
rest to lay down their Arms.

The King all this while was reduced to great Extremities, having The King's
perplexity.
neither Money nor Troops, and not knowing who to trust to, almost all the
Lords of his Court having had a hand in the foreign Conspiracies against him,
and the League-men lately reconciled to him were still suspected, and Biron
himself, who had persuaded the King to take heart again, and to besiege Amiens,
mistrusted these secret Enemies, whom he called New Converts. Besides, the
King's Treasurers were so absolutely out of Cash, that they wanted Money even
for the Charges of the King's Household, so that curing the Siege of Amiens the
King did more than once complain to Roni, that he had no Clothes suitable to
his Dignity. This obliged him to stoop a little below the Royal State, and to
beg a Subsidy from his Subjects, in a manner a little too humble for a great
King. When he heard that the Assembly was to remove from Saumur to Vendome, he
ordered presently Count Schomberg and de Thou to repair thither, and endeavor
to bring them back to Vendome, thereby to save Vick and Calignon his
Commissioners His different manner of writing to the Assembly before and after
the taking of Amiens.
the trouble of going so far. Their Instructions were full with Complaints of
the Assembly's Proceedings, but above all, of their authorizing the seizing of
his Revenues, with Menaces that he would not permit them to make new Demands
any more, adding withal, that he had rather lose with his Enemies, than be
slighted and disobeyed by his Subjects. But the loss of Amiens made him alter
his Language; he wrote to the Assembly at Saumur by Monglat, on the twelfth of
March, and his Letter contained nothing but gentle Exhortations to content
themselves with his Offers, or to put by their Demands to another time; and
besides, there were many earnest Entreaties to put an end to their Session, and
prefer in this urgent occasion the public good to their private interests,
justifying thereby the sincerity of their intentions. To this was joined a
Letter of Lesdiguieres to them, wherein he said, that he was going with all
speed from the Court to his Government of Dauphine, to watch the Duke of
Savoy's Motions, for fear he should attempt something on that side, whilst the
King was busy in Picardy, and likewise exhorted them not to take occasion from
the loss of Amiens to multiply their Demands. A little while after the King
wrote also to du Plessis in a style which expressed very lively the great
perplexity he was in. This faithful Servant had complained to the King of Count
Schomberg's Answer to the Deputies of the Assembly, it being, in his judgment,
too cold and insignificant to pacify their minds, but severe enough to offend
them. Therefore the King's Answer to du Plessis was moving and quite of another
strain; there he vowed, that if the Reformed could but know the state of his
Affairs, they would be sensible he could do no more for them. Next he
represented his present condition as a great deal worse than it was when he was
but King of Navarre, because he had no body to trust to, and none to assist
him: then stooping a little below the Majesty of a King, he desired him to
prevail so far with the Assembly as to rest contented with his Answer, lest he
should be forced to make Peace with the Spaniards.

The Count of Schomberg being arrived at Saumur with the other Commissioners,
gave notice of it to the Assembly, and required them to send some of their
Members to him, that they might hear the King's intentions; but the Assembly
would not treat with him by Deputies, not out of any contempt to the Royal
Authority, or to treat with the King upon even terms, as some slanderers gave
out, but because they thought it more safe to treat publicly, than by private
Deputations. So they refused The Answers of the Assembly.
to depute, and invited the Count to come to their Assembly, that they might
hear what was his Charge to them. He refused a while to agree to it, because of
his Character of the King's Commissioner, but at last he yielded to the
Assembly's desire. He sent Vick to them, and by him they knew the King's
Propositions, but they did not like them, and they made the Commissioners an
Answer that pleased them not. It was put very near into the same dress as the
Commissioners Instructions were, returning Compliments for Compliments; and as
all the Terms of the Commission, that were either pithy or obliging, amounted
to this, that the King was still resolved to grant them nothing, or to put off
their satisfaction so soon as the new service demanded of them was over; so all
their Protestations centred in this, that they could desist from none of their
just Demands, and that they were ready to employ both their Estates and Lives
for the Service of the State, so soon as satisfaction should be given them.
Their Answer to the King was very near in the same strain; for they expressed
therein an extreme sorrow for the taking of Amiens, and complained of the
lingering of Affairs as a cause which kept the Reformed from giving his Majesty
new Proofs of their affection to his Service, promising for the rest, that so
soon as the state of their Consciences was secured, they would be readie^ than
ever to give all that was dear to them for his Service; but next they
insinuated, that they could not desist from their Demands for the sake of that
public good that was urged to them, because both they and all the Reformed
were fully satisfied, that the security of their Religion, of their Persons and
Families, was no less a public good than the retaking of Amiens.

That the King being informed of the Assembly's Dispositions by his
Commissioners and by Monglat, who brought him their Answer, ordered new
Proposals to be made to them, and slackned a little upon some points of small
importance, which however could not satisfy them; so that he resolved to try
them with a new Letter before he set out for his Enterprise upon Amiens. He had
formerly writ to Count Schomberg, and complained of the Assembly, and to affect
the Hearts of the Reformed, he had not forgot to make the best of a slight
indisposition that he had about that time, concluding he must certainly sink
under the weight of his grief, unless they would rest satisfied with his
offers. But in the Letter he wrote to the Assembly it self by Monglat and la
Force, he spoke much higher. There he laid before them the new Troubles, their
Firmness, which he called Obstinacy, might bring the Kingdom to, and the great
Benefits the Spaniards, already so formidable, and puffed up with their
Victories, might reap by the Divisions of the French: Next he began to beseech
them by that great Affection he had always had for the Reformed, whereof he had
so often given them very signal Proofs, and by that Love they owed to their
Country, to lay by all other thoughts at present but that of beating back the
Enemy.

To these new Arguments, which were backed by Monglat with all the strength of
his Eloquence, the Assembly made the same Answer as formerly; and writing to
the King, they desired him to observe, that their Demands aimed at no more than
their Exercise of Religion and Justice; that their Pretensions were not
grounded upon any Avarice or Ambition ruinous to the State; that in respect of
the present posture of his Majesty's Affairs, their Proposals were fallen very
short of what they had been directed to ask by the Instrustions they brought
from the respective Provinces that sent them; and then they did highly commend
the Commissioners sincerity, but bitterly complain of the Privy Council,
declaring that they looked upon those pretended Impossibilities purposely urged
against them to elude their Demands, as so many visible marks of an ill will.
The Assembly sitting then at Saumur, as I said before, du Plessis, who was
Governor there, proved very serviceable to the King toward allaying the Heats
of those incensed Spirits, who were very near upon admitting of no other
Council, but such as their Fear and Despair might afford them. Whereupon he
advised the King, that it would be easier to bring them to a better temper in
an Assembly more numerous than this was, because then his Friends might depend
upon more Voices to oppose those Members whose powerful Genius and Authority
were to be feared. And, indeed, this was Which is removed to Chatelleraud; more
numerous than before.
one of the Reasons for removing them to Chatelleraud, whither they came on the
16th of June. The Assembly was more numerous than any before that time, for it
was made up of a Gentleman, a Minister, and a Lawyer, out of each Province,
besides several Lords of such quality as was required by the Constitution made
at Saint Foy, who represented no body but themselves. La Trimouille, who had
been the most considerable amongst them in the former Assemblies, was chosen
Speaker in this, where he maintained the Interest of the Reformed Religion with
so much Zeal, that the Jealousy and Hatred they had already for him at Court
was much increased by it.

One of the heaviest Charges laid upon the Reformed of France, is their
forsaking the King when he besieged Amiens; for their Enemies would fain
persuade the World, that thereby they committed a Fault sufficient to eclipse
the Glory of all their former Services. Two things, say they, are to be blamed
in it: First, The Assembly's steady resolution to remit nothing of their
Demands, at a time when the Interest of the State seemed to require of them the
sacrifice of part of their Pretensions. Secondly, Their refusing to follow the
King to a Siege, on the success whereof the safety of the Kingdom was thought
to depend. But to this it may be answered, That the Assembly's obstinate
Resolution to stick to their Demands was necessary, because being a Body made
up only of persons sent by the several Provinces as their Representatives, they
were bound to act according to their Orders, unless they would expose
themselves to be disowned by their Principals. Now they were bound by these
Orders not to The Reasons which may excuse the firmness of the Assembly in
their Demands about the Article of Security.
desist from certain Demands which the Reformed thought necessary, to secure
both their Persons and Consciences; and had the Assembly accepted the King's
Offers, it would have come to no more than a tumultuous breaking of it; and the
Provinces being frustrated of the hopes they had grounded upon the Fidelity of
their politic Assembly, had, no doubt, taken some extreme Resolutions, if they
had been betrayed by their own Representatives. In effect the Assembly failed
not to give notice to the Provinces of the Court's Proposals, that they might
be fully empowered, either to accept or refuse them, and having received at
Chatelleraud a negative Answer by the Deputies newly joined to the former, they
let the King know, that they could not be satisfied with his Offers. But, to
judge aright of the Assembly's Conduct, and whether they are guilty of
Obstinacy, or deserve Praises for their Constancy, we need but cast our Eyes
upon that Horrid Confusion the Kingdom had been in, if the Assembly had been
complaisant enough to accept an Edict, which the Provinces would have
unanimously rejected; had not the Reformed in this sad case been forced to
begin their Work again, and expose the Kingdom to a ruinous War? Moreover, the
Articles of the Religious Exercise being settled, there was no more left than
that of the security; and it was very strange, that the Court, after having
granted Liberty of Conscience to the Reformed, would upbraid them with
Obstinacy for not desisting from their Demands, in order to secure the
performance of a thing promised them. The truth is, the treacherous Methods
used in the reduction of the League, wherein their Interests had been
sacrificed, contrary to Agreements, even under the Hand of the chief Men at
Court, had utterly ruined their confidence in them, and one must be a great
stranger to Equity and Justice, who can accuse the Reformed, as guilty of a
crime, for obstinately requiring security of their Promises, of whose Treachery
and Double dealing they had such fresh Instances.

As for the Siege of Amiens, their Opinions were divided: Some Their Conduct in
respect of the Siege of Amiens.
were for doing fairly this last Service to the King, thereby to cover the
Enemies of the Reformed with shame, and make it appear to all the World, that
no Injustice was able to wear them out of their Allegiance; nay, by so doing,
they hoped to move the Difference in Opinions.
Hearts of the most zealous Catholics, and work upon them so far, that they
would let a People enjoy quietly their Lives and Liberties, who had neglected
their most Darling-interests, to run where the Occasions of the State invited
them. This was the Advice of Lesdiguieres, to whom the Assembly sent a
Deputation, with Offers very advantageous and tempting, which nevertheless he
refused; it is true, his Advice had the air of a Reproach, from whence one might
conclude, that he was less concerned for the Security of his Religion, than
that of his Fortune. But the greatest part stoutly maintained, that they had to
do with Men who regarded all their Services as necessary Duties; who thought
themselves beholding to no body, and would lose the remembrance of good deeds,
so soon as the occasion was over; that several amongst them, who most opposed
the Reformed, were the very same they had in a manner rescued at Tours from the
hands of the Duke of Mayenne; that it was easy to guess what would happen
after the retaking of Amiens, by what happened every day by the Severities of
the Answers sent them, and by the lingering of Affairs. They failed not to
observe the vast difference of Style used with them before and after the taking
of Amiens; that, before that accident, the Court began to threaten them, but
returned immediately after to cajoling and giving them fair words; whereby the
Assembly might well judge, that nothing was to be obtained from the Court, when
the retaking of that important place had put them in a condition to refuse
without fear. Some there were who minced not the matter, and thought it a mere
folly to contribute in the least to an action which might facilitate a Peace
between France and Spain, being fully satisfied that it could not be made but
at their cost. The Example of several Treaties made with the League-men caused
their jealousy, and the Double dealings of their Enemies, whereby they cheated
them in those occasions, made them fear the worst for the future; nay, the King
himself added much to their fear, when, to bring them to his terms upon diverse
points, he threatened them with concluding that Peace; and, besides, they were
not ignorant, that he hearkened to the Proposals made by the Spaniards toward
it, at the same time when he assured them, he would never do it but by force.
Others were for letting the Catholics alone, and observing how they could get
out of this scurvy business, and whether they were able to shift without the
helping hand of the Reformed, whose small Number and Services they were wont to
undervalue. Certainly these last Voters had an high conceit of their Party, and
thought it such a considerable part of the State, that the Catholics could not
but be very sensible of their absence; and really they were so, and could not
but acknowledge, that upon the great Emergencies of State the Reformed were to
be reck'ned something. The King was more sensible than any body else of the
great Mistake he had been in, by so long delaying to give them satisfaction,
when at the Siege of Amiens he saw himself in the hands of his lately
reconciled Enemies, whom he durst not trust, wanting those approved Friends, of
whose Fidelity he had such unquestionable Testimonies. Therefore the retaking
of Amiens wrought such an alteration in the minds of Men, that an Agreement
between the two Religions was universally wished for on both sides, even by
such as had most earnestly labored to obstruct it. The King, indeed, being
victorious, and having recovered his almost lost Reputation, talked higher than
before; and the Catholics did ever and anon upbraid the Reformed with their
pretended desertion; but, for all this, the wisest amongst them were more
seriously for a Peace, and facilitated it more than ever.

The experience of things past rendered these last Considerations very specious,
and even the remembrance of the Massacre at Paris gave weight to the advice of
those who were afraid, that if the Reformed were joined in a Siege with the
rigid Catholics and League-men, these being by much the strongest, might upon
so fair an opportunity revive their implacable hatred, and rid themselves once
more of the Huguenots. This they called a Bartholomew Campaign, a Term indeed
very fit to renew the Memory of the Paris Morning-Prayer. These Reasons were so
effectual, that the Ringleaders, who were those that might do the King the
best The Reformed serve the King before Amiens.
service, thought fit to stay at home. However it is false, that all the
Reformed did really forsake the King in that Enterprise, for he had both in his
Household and Army several Officers and Soldiers of their Religion, and even
part of his best Troops was made up of reformed Soldiers. The Regiment of
Navarre, which did excellent Service in the Siege, and the greatest number
whereof perished there, was almost wholly made up of them; and the Duke of
Rohan, whose Name grew so famous since, made there his first Campaign. The
Reformed answered the Charge at that very time, and marshalled up such of their
Brethren who assisted at that Siege, and were killed or wounded before the
place. True it is, that they did not serve there as a separate Body, and as
having Troops depending upon them; but here it is strange, that those very Men
who would have had the Reformed make a separate Body to serve the State, had
been three whole Years a grumbling, because they made a Body to preserve
themselves; as if Men, whose separating in order to secure their Consciences
was counted a crime, were obliged to separate for the preservation of their
Enemies. Moreover, very few amongst the Reformed were in a capacity to bring
Troops at their own charge to the other end of the Kingdom; so that the Charge
affected only a small number of the principal Men who might have served in
person. Yet the Count de Schomberg and the President de Thou, persuaded the
Dukes of Bouillon and la 'Trimouille to raise Soldiers, The Actions of the
Dukes of Bouillon and la Trimouille.
and received the King's Money for it; but the Troops of the former staid in
Auvergne upon some pretense or other, and those of the latter were employed in
Poictou for repressing the Excursions of some tumultuous League men. The King
was so much offended at these Lords coldness, that he could never forget it,
though, perhaps, if they had been less suspected by him, some reason might have
been found to have excused them. Certain it is, at least, that the President de
Thou, a wise and moderate Man, did what he could, both by Word of Mouth, and by
Writing, to vindicate the Conduct of those two Lords, fearing lest the
ill-affected Cabal, who cried down that Action, and branded it with the odious
Name of Rebellion, troubling the Legat's Head with perpetual Complaints about
it, should take advantage of it to thwart the Negotiation of the Edict. But of
all those who heard the Case pro and con, there was none so impartial as that
Prelate, and who better discovered the Illusion of those Complaints when the
true Reasons were offered to him. The state of the King's Affairs was not so
prosperous in Poictou and Britany, which the Duke of Mercoeur had opened to the
Spaniards, but he might as well fear to lose some Places on that side, as not
to be able to mend the Damage done by the same on the Frontiers. Therefore as
la Trimouille's Troops might be useful in that Country, du Plessis did often
represent to the King how important it was for his Interest, and for removing
the Jealousies of the Reformed, to give la Trimouille the Command of a Siege in
that Country.

Though the Council found Work enough before Amiens, they did nevertheless very
seriously think of Religion, which they began to regard as a very important and
material Business. Therefore as the Number of Deputies to the Assembly had been
augmented, when the Reformed took a Resolution to labor in good earnest for
their Security, so the King doubled also the Number The Commissioners changed.
of his Commissioners, when he resolved to think seriously of contenting them.
The Count de Schomberg and the President de Thou, had been added to Vick and
Calignon at Saumur; but these two being since employed in other concerns, the
two former did remain charged with the whole Negotiation, which ended happily
in their hands. The Reformed desisted from several The Treaty continues, and
they slacken on both sides.
of their old Demands, though they thought them very reasonable and just; but
in the present Conjuncture of Affairs, they would insist upon no Articles,
although never so just, but such as were absolutely necessary; nay, they did
also in process of time yield up several things, which they had formerly judged
most needful. Such was their demand of Chambres miparties in all Parliaments,
and of unsuspected Judges in all Courts of Judicature, but upon this Point they
were at last contented with some small matter, besides what had been allowed
them by the former Edicts. The King on his side did the like by degrees, and
even during the Siege of Amiens, he gave new Instructions and new Power to his
Commissioners, who came thither to give him an account of the condition the
Assembly was i^. He also heard there the Complaints they had ordered Constans,
Governor of one of their places to make to him, about his treating a Peace
with the Spaniards, by the Mediation of the Pope, being shrewdly jealous, in
respect of the Mediator, that the main scope of that Treaty was their utter
ruin. But the King, in his turn, complained to the Assembly, that whereas he
expected hearty thanks from them, he saw, to his grief, that they would not
accept the Offers made them by de Vick at Saumur, which he had himself
reiterated to Constans by word of mouth; that at a time when he was in person
before Amiens, the Reformed came not to his assistance, and so deprived him of
a considerable Succor, he might have expected from them, and which he never
stood in so great need of as now; assuring them however, that no Treaty of
Peace would be concluded to their prejudice, and that he had given full power
to his Commissioners to put an end to this long and tedious business with them.

But in the mean while, these Powers coming very slowly, the Count de Schomberg
made a kind of a Treaty with the Assembly, by which he agreed with them upon
the main Articles of their Demands; as for example, that the Right of religious
Exercise A new Possession acquired in 1597. Articles granted by Count Schomberg
with submission to the King's pleasure.
should extend to all such places where it was made, till the end of August of
the instant Year; that all their Places should still remain in their hands;
that a certain Sum of Money should be given them for the payment of their
Garrisons, and another to pay their Ministers; and had the Count been
sufficiently empowered, the business might have been ended by that means: But
whether he had a mind to gain time, till the Siege was over, or that he would
not go beyond his Instructions, and leave the Council at liberty to disown or
approve what he had agreed on, he concluded with the Assembly, with a Salvo,
that all these things should be done with submission to the King's pleasure.

They imagined that the Council would never review what had A Debate whether to
accept them provisionally, or definitively.
been granted; but it was still doubtful whether they should accept those
Articles as a Provision only, or if they should cause it to be passed into a
public and definitive Law by an Edict. The Court had given Examples of those
provisional Settlements, by the King's Declaration published at Mantes before
his turning Catholic, and by a Treaty made since at Saint Germain with the
Deputies of the Assembly of Saintefoy. Some amongst the Reformed, who were not
satisfied with what was granted to them, were willing enough to rest still in a
capacity of beginning anew, whenever the tranquillity of the Kingdom would
permit it, and were afraid that by a decisive Edict they should be debarred
from forming new Pretensions when they would: But others, who longed to see an
end of their Affairs after so many delays, thought it best to accept of
something, provided they might once know what Laws they were to live under;
insomuch that the matter was consulted at home, and abroad in foreign
Countries, where Advice was begged of all such as were thought capable of
giving it in such a weighty Case.

Schomberg and de Thou's Moderation was a great help toward a Conclusion; and,
on the other side, the Reformed were very sensible of the great Confusion and
Troubles of the State, being unwilling to draw upon them the Reproach of having
forced the King to a disadvantageous Peace with Spain. But the continual Delays
of the Court marred all that was well done by the Commissioners Wisdom; there
they would always review what had already been granted; there they would renew
all Questions The Council's Shiftings about the Articles.
and Difficulties, without coming to any Resolution; in short, their only
business, it seems, was, to abate something of what had been granted; and to
that end it was, that the Council would always give the Commissioners a limited
Power, for fear they might grant too much; and, on the other hand, when the
Reformed sent Deputies to Court, they tied their Hands with very precise
Instructions, lest that being wrought upon by the Artifices and Intrigues of
the Court, they might accept less than the Assembly desired; insomuch that both
the Court and the Assembly complained one after another, that the Instructions
respectively given to the Commissioners or Deputies were too much limited,
requiring mutually that they should be mended and enlarged. But that amongst
others which the Reformed were most offended at, was the often sending the
Commissioners elsewhere on several pretenses, and their being employed in other
Treaties, whilst the Affairs of Religion were put off till another time; such
was the Treaty then on foot with the Duke of Mercoeur, which took up the
greatest part of their time. But the Reformed could not endure that preference,
either because The Treaty is interrupted.
they thought themselves as good as the Duke with all his Interest in Britany,
or because they saw his Treating was but a sham, whereby he had amused the King
several Years together, or because they thought it easy to reduce him, so soon
as the rest of the Kingdom should enjoy a solid Peace; and accordingly they did
not fail to offer all their Forces toward that design, provided the Court
would first make an end of their business, and not baffle them with fair words,
as they had done for eight Years together. That which vexed them most, was the
unjust Prejudice of the Catholics, who could not brook, that the King should
think of granting a Peace to the Reformed, whilst there were some Catholics
whom 'twas not yet given to; for they fancied, that the Honor of the Romish
Religion was at stake, if the King should treat with the Heretics, before
having satisfied all those who took up Arms for its defense; and had therefore
secretly extorted a Promise from him, never to do any thing in behalf of the
Reformed, before he had reconciled all such as had a hand in the League; which
he denied not when he was blamed by some for his delays, endeavoring sometimes
to make the Complaisance he had for the Catholics go for a piece of Prudence
advantageous to the Reformed, in that the Edict he would give them, should
appear by so much the more voluntary and less extorted by force, that there
should be less Troubles and Discontents in the Kingdom; but they took it in a
quite contrary sense, and were afraid that after all his other Troubles were
over, he would force them to submit to his own terms.

In the mean while the Commissioners, at their return from New Instructions.
the King before Amiens, had brought Instructions, which confirmed, in part,
the things granted by the former; but several new Difficulties were started
upon some Articles, as, amongst others, about the manner of paying the
Garrisons, and re-establishing the Mass at Rochel, which that reformed City
would not consent to. As for the Garrisons, there was so little safety in
depending upon the Orders of the King's Treasurers for paying them, that they
demanded, that in case of refusal or delay, it should be lawful for them to
cause the Money to be seized in the Provincial Exchequers. But when, after a
long debate, they had agreed upon the matter, and removed all difficulties,
they must go to the Council for its approbation, which was no easy matter to
obtain, several tricks being made use of to oblige the Deputies to desist, but
they stood firm to their resolution; and the King, on his side, commanded his
Council to stand to what Disputes put to an end by the King's firmness. The
Assembly beggeth the intercession of the Queen of England and of the United
Provinces.
had been concluded by his Commissioners. He had nevertheless been offended at
the Assembly's begging the Intercession of the Queen of England and of the
United Provinces; in short, they had sent some Persons of Quality, as Deputies
to these two States, in order to desire their Mediation and Interest, for
obstructing the conclusion of a Peace with Spain, which they apprehended to be
levelled at the utter ruin of their Cause, entreating them to charge their
respective Ambassadors to look to it, and advising them besides to draw into
the same Precautions all such other States as this Peace was like to be fatal
to. Next they gave an account to the Queen how far they had gone in the Treaty
of Religion; what they had gained about the Liberty of Public Worship, and
what had been granted in this point over and above the former Grants; of the
Concession of miparted Chambers, with the Privileges allowed to Parliaments;
of the free admittance of the Reformed to all Charges, even of Judicature it
self, which Article had been obtained with a world of difficulties, and which
they were to enjoy by a new Creation in their behalf of six Places of
Counselors in the Parliament of Paris; of the several Sums granted them for
paying the Garrisons of their places of safety, which they made up one hundred,
strong enough to maintain a Siege, and hold it out against a considerable Army;
of the Settlement agreed upon for their Ministers subsistence; in a word, of
all that had been concluded upon with the King's Commissioners concerning the
Liberty and Security of their Religion. But 'twas no longer seasonable to take
notice of those slight Misdemeanors, which the King knew very well were not the
effect; of any rebellious Intentions in the Reformed, but of their Allarms and
Jealousies renewed every day by his Councils delays and shiftings. The Reformed
were certainly in the right on it, for, by that means, the final conclusion New
Delays, partly malicious, partly innocent.
of this affair lingered away even beyond the end of the Year; and there was
certainly affectation and malice in some of those delays; which cannot be
denied, if we consider that the paying of the Garrisons and repairing of the
Places was their greatest business, and the matter whereon the greatest
difficulties were renewed; though Roni was the Man who could do any thing in
the Treasury, and was able, had he been willing, to assign as good Funds to
those of his own Religion, as he did to the Roman Catholics. But it must be
confessed also, that some of the same delays were occasioned merely by
accident, by sickness, absence, or other excusable impediments of some, whom
the King had appointed to view the Articles of the Assembly, and to prepare the
Form of the Writs; which being made out by unquestionable Proofs, the Reformed
did not despond at all, but waited patiently till all these Difficulties were
removed by time.

The End of the Fourth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of Nants. The Fifth Book.
The Contents of the Fifth Book.
A Book setting forth the Grievances of the Reformed; blamed by some. The
Importance of its Contents. It begins with excusing the freedom of those
Complaints. Makes Remonstrances to the King about the delays of his Council,
and the general state of the Reformed. By what degrees the King had been drawn
from them. The design of their Petition. General Complaints made by them
against all the French: against each Order of the State, and the Clergy in
particular. The Public Exercise of the Reformed Religion obstructed, and
Private Devotions hindered. Instances of great Violences. The Boldness of the
Parliament of Bourdeaux. The Exercise interrupted or forbidden in several
places by diverse Decrees: in the Army: at Rouen, the King being there.
Complaints on the account of the places: against the Catholic Gentlemen; and
against the Treaties with the League men. The singing of Psalms hindered. Books
seized and burnt. Religious Assemblies prohibited. Consolation of the Sick.
Consciences forced in diverse actions. Christnings and other things concerning
Children. The Prince of Conde. Keeping of Lent and Holidays. Schools.
Colleges. Offices. The Poor ill used. Places where the Reformed dare not
dwell. Remarkable Injustice done at Lion. Trades. Violences. Wicked Acts.
Seditious Words and Speeches. Passionate Judges and Parliaments. Great
difficulties in re-establishing the Edict of 1577. Special Instances of the Ill
will of Parliaments. Burials made difficult; hindered; Tombs violated. A strong,
free, and pithy Conclusion. Reflections upon this Book. New Delays and
Difficulties upon particular Places. The Assembly breaks up. The state of the
Garrisons. Appointing of Governors. Annual renewing of the state of the
Garrisons; the number of the places of safety. Private Interests. The Edict
delayed till the Month of April, when there are no more Leaguers. Jealousies of
the Assembly. The King being armed, grants the Edict. Conclusion made at
Nants. Particulars of the Difficulties on each Article. 1st Demond, A new
Edict: Reasons pro and con. 2d Demand, Free Exercise; its extent. New
Concessions. The advantage secured to the prevailing Religion. A second place
of Exercise in each Bailiwick* was no new thing. Difficulties about the Place:
about the Proofs. Difficulties about the Tombs. 3d Demand, The Subsistence of
the Ministers. A Sum of Money promised by the King. Schools. 4th Demand, The
Possession of Estates and the Rights of Successions. 5th Demand, Unsuspected
Judges. Chambers Mipartie, or of the Edict. 6th Demand, To be admitted to all
Offices: the extent of this Concession. Illusion upon that Demand. 7th Demand,
Securities. Reasons for demanding them. The Election of Governors for the
places of security. How they were serviceable to the King. The paying of
Garrisons. Private Gifts. Debates upon the Form of Concessions, which does
vary, according to the nature of the thing. The distinction of Places. The form
of Payment. The Conclusion.

AS in the Sequel of the Negotiation of the Edict there was little Alterations
made in what had been agreed upon between the King's Commissioners and the
Deputies of the Assembly, it might be well said, that the Treatise ended with
the Month of August of the present Year, and that the end of the same was in a
manner the Epoch, or Date, of all the Grants peculiar to the Edict of Nants.
Thitherto the substance of things had been the main Business, whereas
afterward the rest of the Difficulties and Debates was for the most part only
about the Form and Circumstances. But before we come to the Conclusion of this
Important Affair, it behooves us, for the better clearing thereof, to take
notice of a Book which came out this Year, after the taking of Amiens, under
the Title of, Complaints A Book setting forth the Grievances of the Reformed.
of the Reformed Churches of France, about the Violences they suffered in many
places of the Kingdom, for which they have with all humility applied themselves
at several times to his Majesty and the Lords of his Council. The Manuscript of
this Book had been handed about last Year, and contained in substance the same
Complaints that were set forth in a Petition presented to the King during the
Siege of la Fere; but it was publicly printed this Year, with some new matters
of fact which the Reformed had occasion to add to it, besides some alteration
in the form. It can hardly be imagined with what cunning the generality of
Historians do extenuate or lay aside those Complaints, though they are indeed
as a Manifesto, which gives the reason of the Conduct of the Reformed, and
makes an Apology for their innocence. It is true, that amongst them there were
some who disapproved Elamed by some.
the Impression of the Book: but we shall not wonder at it, if we consider,
that they had their Politicians and Courtiers, who were always of a contrary
opinion, and whom the Court used as so many Tools, to divide the Minds, or
elude the vigorous Proceedings of the Assembly. Besides, that part of the
Reformed, who lived within the reach of the Court in the neighborhood of
Paris, being frighted at the sight of their small number, were apt enough to be
dazzled with fair Words and Promises, and highly commending that complaisant
Behavior, did always speak the Court language, either out of weakness or
interest. We shall see in the Sequel of this History the sad effects of that
timorous Policy, even after the expedition of the Edict, and when it was about
to be verified in Parliament. But the disowning of a small number, does not
hinder the Cause of those Complaints to be most real, and all the Matters of
Fact mentioned therein, to have been the Subject of so many Petitions presented
to the King, and the Occasion that made the Assembly keep firm to their
Demands. The Piece is very Eloquent for those Times, it moves the Passions
well, but especially Compassion and Indignation are so lively excited there,
that it is not easy to read the Work, without pitying those who complain of so
many Evils, and without being angry with them who refused to remedy them. There
you may see above two hundred particular Instances of Injustices, or Violences,
committed against the Reformed, with all the Circumstances of Persons, Actions,
and Time; which so exact particularizing of Matters of Fact, evidently shows,
that they had unquestionable Proofs in hand, and feared not to be
misrepresented, since they made so public Complaints, and gave such
Particulars thereof, as made the thing easy to be inquired into. Since
therefore the The Importance of its Contents.
Wrongs and Cruelties the Reformed complained of in that Book, were the Causes
of all those pretended rebellious Proceedings their Enemies have since
upbraided them with, it will be no great digression from the History of the
Edict, nor tedious to the Readers, to give them a View of those Complaints, as
short as things of that nature can bear it

First, The Reformed began with vindicating the Liberty they It begins with
excusing the freedom of those Complaints.
took to complain; which, in a Kingdom so free as France was, ought not to be
blamed in those from whom the quality of Subjects and Frenchmen could not be
taken away, who had been sufferers so long, and who had been so serviceable to
the State. They declared nevertheless, that they complained with regret, and
were forced to discover the shame of their Country, by the fury of their
Enemies, which they exaggerated with all the Expressions and Figures the Hearts
of Men are apt to be affected by. Afterward Makes Remonstrances to the King
about the Delays of his Council, and the general State of the Reformed.
they addressed their Discourse to the King, and the better to move him with
pity, they most submissively showed, that they were neither Spaniards nor
Leaguers, and there they made a rehearsal of their great Services done to the
State and to himself from his very Cradle, against those two sorts of Enemies;
and of the great Efforts they had made under his valiant and wise Conduct, to
defend that Crown which he wore on his Head; adding, that these Truths, which
were clear and known to all the World, had put them in hopes, that, though they
were asleep, the King himself and all the good Frenchmen that were left, would
have thought, in their stead, of not suffering such a necessary and servicable
part of the Nation to be ruined and lost. That yet, during these eight Years,
they had seen no diminution in the Catholics hatred, nor any abatement in
their Miseries. That their Enemies had now, if not more Malice, at least more
means to annoy them, because the Reformed did so frankly throw themselves into
the King's Arms. That the Catholics had even been emboldened against them,
from their Loyal Affection and Patience, as being assured they would never be
revenged of any Outrage done them, for fear of raising new Troubles in so
dangerous a Conjuncture. That the Truce, which their Enemies would fain have
pass for a Peace, which ought to content them, (if, as 'twas said, they could
be contented with any thing) was infinitely more prejudicial to them than the
open War, during which they were aware of their known Foes* and blessed be God
with sufficient means to take from them either the desire or the power of
hurting them. That a great part of their Enemies had taken up Arms against the
Crown for much less, even upon account of Fears without ground; whereas now the
Reformed remained peaceable, though spurred by real and present Evils, and
attacked on all sides with such a cruel animosity, that it might bring the most
patient People in the World to despair. That they were still striving with that
despair, by their confidence in the King's love, which having proved so
favorable to those who made War against him, could not be severe and backward
toward them who had always been his most affectionate Servants; but that the
Papists were hard at work to deprive them of this very Support, by endeavoring
with Pretenses of Conscience to oblige the King to destroy them. That first,
they had By what degrees the King had been drawn from them.
forced him to go to Mass, in order to draw him from them; whereupon he gave
them his Royal Word, that he would never consent to their ruin, but rather join
with them again, than suffer any War against them. That even those who induced
him to a change, and feared, that in such a case the Reformed might highly
resent it, and come to extreme Resolutions, (which however they bless God*
Almighty, that the event ^ad made it appear, they were not capable of; and that
they did not make use of Religion as a Pretense to disobey their King) that
those very Men represented to the Reformed the great advantage which might
accrue to them by that change, and that the King thereby might be in a greater
capacity to make them feel the effects of his Affection, and might even go so
far as to undertake a Thorough-reformation of the Church, as having nothing
changed in him, but the outside; whereupon they represented with exaggeration
how little likely it was, that the King, whose Conscience was so enlightened
and knew so well that Temporal Interest ought not to be preferred before the
Kingdom of God, would change his Sentiments on a sudden upon mere Reasons of
State. That nevertheless the Papists had obliged him to believe the grossest
Errors of the Romish Religion, and to take a Solemn Oath at his Coronation,
renewed since at his taking upon him the Order of the Holy Ghost, that he
would, to the utmost of his power, extirpate both the Heresy and the
Heretics, as they used to call their Persons and Doctrine, though the same Oath
had been established not only against them, but himself too, when he was
engaged with them in the same cause; from whence concluding, that their Enemies
might also by the same Considerations engage The Design of their Petion.
him to their ruin, they beg leave to let the King know the Particulars of
their Grievances, to the end that he may see thereby how ill they fare under
his Reign, since his Counselors do misrepresent to him the Miseries of their
present Condition; and that such as are free from Passion, may not take it ill,
if they demand so earnestly a general Liberty to serve God according to their
Consciences; impartial Courts of Justice, to whom they may trust their Estates,
their Lives, and their Honors; and sufficient Securities against those
Violences wherewith both the present and past time threatens them; and that
all equitable People may use their best interest for the relief of those who
are unwilling to survive the State, but only to be preserved with it, fearing
God, and honoring the King. General Complaints made by them against all ^
French.


Next they came to particulars, and declared, that in general they complained
of all Frenchmen; not but that there might be some who would do them justice,
but they were so fearful and weak, that they suffered themselves to be drawn in
by the rest; and so might be well included with them in a lump. Then they
hinted at all Orders and Degrees, complaining of the Nobility Against all the
Orders of the State. Against the Clergy in particular.
and Gentry, of the People, of the Magistrates, of the Council, but above all,
of the Ecclesiastical Order, as that which influenced them all, and inspired
them with injustice and hatred to the Reformed. They handled that Order pretty
roughly, with great Contempt and shrewd nipping Jests and Railleries. From
thence they passed on to their Sufferings, and said, that for 50 Years together
they had undergon all sorts of cruel Punishments; that they had been burnt,
drowned, hanged, massacred one by one, massacred by whole shoals, banished out
of the Kingdom by Edicts; that the Catholics had, for those fifty Years, made
a cruel War against them; to which they added, that the Exercise of their
Religion was free in those places only where they had been strong eno' to keep
it, but that they had lost it every where else. The public Exercise of the
reformed Religion obstructed, and private Devotions hindered;
They named some places where the Reformed were fain to go ten or twelve Miles
to hear a Sermon, and whole Provinces where they had not so much as one place
of Exercise allowed them, as Burgundy and Picardy; and others where they had
very little liberty, as Provence, in which they had no preaching but at
Merindol and Lormarin; and Britany, where it was allowed them but at Vitre.
They named other places, where, though the Reformed were the strongest, yet they
durst not exercise their Religion within the Walls, but were forced to go
abroad for it and expose themselves to fall into the hands of the Enemies
Garrisons; others, where even the French abused them at a strange rate, and lay
in wait for them to throw Dirt and Stones at them; others, where Seditions had
been stirred up against them, as at Tours on Easterday, where the Ringleaders
did insolently boast, that they had whetted their Weapons. Moreover, they
related, that an eminent Gentleman, Bordage by Name, being invited to stand
Godfather to a Child of the Lord Mongomeri at Pontarson, the Parliament of
Rennes had commanded the Militia of several Parishes to stop the Passes; and
that having avoided that danger, he was in his return set upon by two or three
thousand Men, who, notwithstanding the resistance of the Garrison of Pontarson,
which guarded him, killed two of his Men; and had it not been for the Garrison
of Vitre, that came to his help, he could never have escaped. They related
likewise, that at Saint Stephen of Furan, in the Province of Foret, (a
Parish Priest of which place did with impunity offer every day horrid Violences
to the Reformed) thirteen hundred People fell upon one hundred of them, as they
were coming from a place distant one day's journey from their Town, where they
had celebrated the Lord's Supper on Easterday; and then beat them, wounded
them, maimed them, leaving several for dead upon the spot; that the Night
following, their Doors and Windows were broken, and on the next day the
Catholic Mob gathered again together before their Houses, threatening them with
worse. The like had happened at Manosque in Provence, where the Reformed coming
home from receiving the Communion at Lormarin, were served after the same
manner; and it is observable, that the seditious Rabble, to give a color to
their intended Violence, had themselves pulled down a wooden Cross, and then
accused the Reformed of doing it.

They represented farther, that they were troubled even in their And in their
private Devotions. Instances of great Violences.
private Devotions at home, and for Instances thereof named places where Men
had been clapped into Prison for praying to God with a loud Voice, as well as the
Masters of the Houses where they prayed, for suffering the same. In other
places all those that were present had been taken up and threatened to be
drowned, to force them to go to Mass. In some others, Praying was forbid them
in their own Forms; and for christening Children in Country-houses, Warrants
were delivered against the Ministers; and all who had been present, were
adjudged to pay cost, and besides, severely fined for it. Upon the like
occasion they had in other places been in an imminent danger of being massacred
by the Rabble; some places were remarked, in which they were forbid to
assemble, on pain of Ten thousand Pounds fine; others wherein Houses were
forcibly entered into, if five or six Reformed were but thought to be there; for
instance, at Saint Stephen of Furant, the seditious Mob gathered together one
day to the number of three hundred Men before a certain House, upon a mere
suspicion of an Assembly, though the Magistrates, who viewed it, found no such
thing. Other places were named in which the Priests and Friars did openly say
in their Pulpits, That 'twas a shame to suffer the Reformed in their Towns; and
this upon a groundless Accusation of having assembled in the Neighborhood, as
the Officers found it after a strict inquiry into the matter. It was observed
besides, that when the Lady Catherine, the The boldness of the Parliament of
Bourdeaux.
King's only Sister, came to Bourdeaux, the Parliament had sent Spies to watch
those that went to hear Sermons in her House, and committed to Prison one of
the most considerable amongst them. To all this it was added, that the free
Exercise of their Religion being limited in some places to Public Prayers
only, which they were however very well satisfied with, yet at Montagnac, a
place of that kind, they had not been permitted to cover a certain House
purchased by them for that purpose; nay, that afterward the Lord High Constable
and the Parliament of Thoulouse had forbid them to pray there any longer. Then
they related those Violences committed at Marchenoir by the Duke of Nemours's
Troops, and those by the Soldiers of the Duke of Guise at Lormarin, where they
turned the Temple into a Stable, and threw seven or eight Persons into the
Water, and among them the School master, whom they took to be the Minister.
Whereupon they observed what we remarked elsewhere; that the latter had been
powerfully and chiefly assisted by the Reformed against the League, when he
took possession of his Government of Provence. They did not forget to
represent, that the Garrison of Roche-chouart in Poictou had fired with two
Cannons from the Castle upon fifteen hundred Reformed, assembled in the
Townhouse for their usual religious Exercise; that in another place a Man on
Horse back, breaking through the Crowd, fell upon him who prayed, and wounded
him with the bu^t-end of a Carbine, after he had vainly endeavored to fire and
shoot him with it; that the occasion of this Assembly was to sign a Petition
for re establishing the Exercise of their Religion, interrupted by the League;
that the wounded party offering to proceed against the criminal by way of
Justice, the Priests of the place where he sued him, had, by their private
Authority, committed him to Prison, and got him carried by the Lieutenant of
the Provost to the Goal of Puy in Vellay. That at Caen, on the twenty eighth of
March of the instant Year, the Catholics had burnt all that was found in the
place of their Exercises, to all which they joined a lively Picture of the
Massacre of la Chataigneraye, with all the horrid circumstances that attended
it; making here very pathetick Exclamations, to renew the remembrance of all
other Slaughters formerly made of the Reformed by the Papists: But above all
they urged in as strong and powerful terms as they could, that all this
happened under the Reign of a King, who was formerly the Protector of the
Reformed; and they did not forget to make a comparison of their Patience with
the Fury of the Catholics, to whom they did not render like for like in those
very places where they were the strongest.

These being thus premised, they did complain afterward, The Exercise
interrupted or forbid in several places by diverse Decrees.
that they could not obtain the re establishment of the Exercise in those
places wherein it had continued ever since the Edict of January under Charles
the Ninth, till the Edicts of the League were made; of the Catholic Governors
refusing to obey the King's Orders on this Subject; of the Decrees of the
Privy Council and Parliaments, whereby it was taken away from such places where
they found it established; in some whereof it was indeed maintained, because
the execution of those Decrees was not thought easy and safe. They did not
forget here to mention the Decree of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, by which the
Exercise was forbidden in all the Lands of the Marchioness of Trans, on pain of
Ten thousand Crowns fine; nor another Decree of the same Court, which tended to
make it cease also at Bergerac, a Town thoroughly and entirely reformed, in
forbidding the Inhabitants to assess themselves for the subsistence of their
Ministers, though these Assessments had been allowed them ever since the
Conference at Fleix. Next, the Decrees of the Parliament of Aix, which we have
taken notice of before, were brought in: Whereupon they did observe, that this
Court had emitted two in one and the same Year, to forbid the Exercise in some
places wherein it had been continued during two or three hundred Years; that
this Prohibition was made on pain of forfeiting both Body and Estate, and three
Months after the solemn acknowledgment made by them, that the Reformed had
saved their Necks, by calling Lesdiguieres, who delivered them from the fury of
the League, as I have observed in the foregoing Book.

Moreover, they complained, that though the Exercise of their Religion had been
allowed in the Army during the Truce under In the Army.
the Reign of Henry the Third, yet that it had not been suffered ever since
Henry the Fourth came to the Crown. That the Lady At Rouen, the King being
there.
Catherine her self had been forced to go out of Rouen on a Communion-day,
because the Legate would not permit her to receive it in that City, though she
had always had that freedom allowed her at Paris in her own House; that few
days after a Sedition had been stirred up against the Reformed in the very
sight of the King, without any respect to his Royal Presence. That Argentan had
been taken from the Baron of Courtemer, though it was one of the places of
Balliwick promised by the Treaty; that Beausse Ganville, a place held by the
Reformed, had nevertheless been demolished. They also made Complaints of the
reformation made in their Garrisons, which were weakened by diminishing the
number of Men, and paying the rest but ill, insomuch that it amounted not in a
whole Year to above three or four Months Pay; for which they had even very
remote and incommodious Funds assigned them, as for instance, the Garrison of
Royan had it upon the Treasuries of Quercy. They did Complaints upon the
account of the places.
also complain of several places taken from the Reformed, razed, or ordered to
be so by Decrees of Parliament; of some others dismembered, nay, given to their
Enemies. Thus Milhau, which belonged to the Lady Catherine, and which the
Inhabitants had, by virtue of an express Commission, fortified at their own
charge, had certainly been demolished, had not they had the Courage to oppose
it. In the mean while the reconciled Leaguers were very exactly paid, though
they received fifteen times as much Money from the King as the Reformed did,
who made it appear in the Assembly of the principal Men of the Kingdom at
Rouen, that for their Garrisons they had not Two hundred thousand Pounds from
the King.

They complained besides of the Catholic Nobility and Gentry, Against the
Catholic Gentlemen. Against the Treaties with the League.
who had caused the Exercise of the Reformed Religion to cease in such places
of their Lordships, as they had found it established in at the time of their
reconciliation with the King. They upbraided them with that Writing subscribed
by them at Mantes, after the King's turning Catholic, in order to assure the
Reformed, that they would never enter into any Treaty with the Leaguers, to
their prejudice, or without calling them in for a share; which solemn Promise
had been nevertheless broken in the Treaties made with eight and twenty Towns,
and with eight Princes or Grandees, wherein the Reformed had been deprived of
their Rights, and which were concluded without their knowledge; whereupon they
observed with indignation, that during the War, a little paultry Town, called
La ferte Milon, would not surrender, but upon condition, that the Reformed
Religion should be excluded out of its Walls and Territories; they also
exaggerated that famous Succor given so seasonably by the Reformed to Henry
the Third at Tours, and accepted then by the Catholics with so hearty thanks,
and yet so soon forgot.

From thence they came to complain of their being hindered Singing of Psalms
hindered. Books seized and burnt.
in the most minute acts of their Devotions, naming diverse places where they
had been sent to Prison on that account, and where even the Psalm-book had been
burnt by the Hangman; whereof, amongst many others, they gave one remarkable
instance, which is this: It happened at Meaux, that a very honest Man was caned
by the Major of the Garrison for singing Psalms; the King being then at
Monceaux, about two Leagues off, the Deputies of the Assembly of Loudun, who
were with his Majesty, failed not to complain to him of that affront; but all
the satisfaction they could get was only, that the King would speak to the
Major about it. In other places their Bibles and other Books concerning Matters
of Religion, were taken from them, and if they kept any by them, it was enough
to make them liable to Imprisonments, Exiles and Fines. At Digue in Provence
the Judges had impudence enough, to add to the punishment of being imprisoned,
a Fine of a hundred Crowns for such as should assemble, in order to pray to God
Almighty; and the Parliament of Rennes forbidding the Exercise of the Reformed
Religion, joined to it an Order, that their Books should be diligently searched
into, forbidding the Reformed to print, sell, or keep, any about Matters of
Religion.

Next came their just and charitable Complaints of being hindered Comforting of
the sick.
from comforting the Sick and the Criminals of their Party, and even that they
were forced to endure the presence and solicitations of the Friars; to which
purpose they did relate, that at Saint Quintin a Man was banished the Town for
comforting from the Street a person infected with the Plague shut up within his
House: Whereupon they did judiciously observe, that all such Articles, whereby
some advantage was taken from the Reformed, were punctually executed; but that
all which the Edicts had granted in their behalf, proved insignificant and
useless for them for want of due execution.

They did afterward hint at Matters of Conscience, complaining Consciences
forced.
that nothing came amiss to the Catholics that might afford a pretense for
oppressing them; that they were forced to hang up Cloths or Tapistries before
their Houses on Corpus Christi day, and even to assist at the Procession, on
pain of a Fine, which amounted sometimes to fifty Crowns; that they were often
imprisoned upon their refusing to comply; that the Count de Grignan himself
taxed his Vassals twenty Crowns for each offense; that the Parliament of Paris
inflicted a corporal punishment upon such as refused to bow to the Cross, and
prostrate themselves before the Host; that in other places they were condemned
to public penance for refusing to pay the same honor to the Sacrament when
they met it in the Streets; that the Parish Priest of Saint Stephen of Furant
did yet do worse than so, for on such occasions he would run after those who
fled before him, and beat them soundly, either with his Fists or even with the
Cross-stick; that in diverse Towns of France they were forced to contribute to
the charges of holy Fraternities; of Divine Service done after the Catholic
way; and of building and repairing Churches, and even to pay the Arrears of
their Contributions for many Years past; that in some places the Papists would
force them either to assist at the Masses sung before the Companies or Trades
incorporated, or to leave the Town; that the Public Notaries of Bourdeaux,
having set up a new Fraternity, they would force the Reformed of that
Profession to assist at the Masses of their Company, on pain of twenty Pence
forfeit for each offense; that the Judges of Angers had constrained a reformed
Fiddler to play at the famous Procession which is made there with a very
extraordinary pomp on Corpus Christi day; that in several Courts of Judicature
the Judges and Advocates of their Party were forced to take their Oath after
the manner and form of the Roman Church; that sometimes old People were dragged
along the Streets to Mass; that at Saint Stephen of Furant the Parish Priest
had almost starved an old Man to death to make him abjure, and at last forced
him to pass an Act before a Public Notary, whereby he bound himself to be
banished, if he should not live and die in the Romish Religion.

The same mad Priest, continued they, got himself accompanied by the Judges to
the Houses of the Reformed, where he christened Children in spite of their
Parents; and one day, upon a false advice, that a Woman was brought to Bed, he
forced his entry into the House, beat her Husband, searched every Corner, and
finding no mark of what he looked for, he got the Woman out of the Bed, and
forced her to show him her Belly, that he might have occular demonstration that
she was not delivered. They continued to give an account of several Matters of
Fact of the like nature; As that in another place, a Father carrying his Child
to be christened, the Servant-maid of an Inn had stolen him away whilst the Man
was leading his Horse to the Stable, and afterward, she calling the Neighbors
to her help, caused the Child to be christened in a Catholic Church. That at
Bourdeaux a Lady had been forced to abjure her Religion, to keep the
guardianship of her Children, and having a little while after reunited herself
to the communion of the reformed Church, the Attorney General sued her at Law,
and got her bound to remain a Catholic; that a Child being deposited in the
hands of his Grandfather at Orleans, when that Town was in the power of the
League, and his Father demanding him back again after the reduction of the
place, the Judge refused to deliver him up to his Father; that a Man was
debarred from all his Rights by the Court of Angiers, until he had got his
younger Brothers out of the reformed School at Loudun, to put them in the
Catholic College of Angiers, contrary to the last Will of their deceased
Father, who had crdered them to be brought up in the reformed Religion; that
the same Judges had appointed a Catholic Guardian over a Maid, who refused to
go to Mass. Then followed sad and grievous Complaints of the unjust way of
dealing with the Prince of Conde, whom the Reformed had surrendered to the King,
even beyond the hopes of the Catholics; they The Prince of Conde.
said, that this young Prince had bitterly wept, and strugled long with those
who brought him away from St. John d'Angeli; that since being kept at Court, he
was used to withdraw into his Closet, there to sing Psalms, to Pray, and
Catechize his Pages; but that at last they were taken away from him,
notwithstanding all the marks of his anger for it.

They complained afterward, that to all these so great and so public
Grievances, the Court had hitherto applied no other remedy, but Reasons of
State, as if the Interest of the State ought to have been opposed to their
Consciences, or that the Reformed had not been part of the State, or that the
State could not stand, but by their fall. Then returning again to the
particulars of the Injustice that were done them, they complained of their
being forced to keep Lent; that at Rennes the Parliament The keeping of Lent
and Holidays.
caused the Houses to be searched, to see if their Orders in this point were
obeyed; that the Bishop of Agde did the same by his own authority in the Towns
of his Diocese; that keeping of Holidays was also forced upon them; that even
at Saumur, one of their Towns of security, a Man had been sent to Prison for
being surprised at work within his House on such days; that their School
masters had been expelled out of several places, even without any form of
Justice; that diverse Parliaments had refused to verify the Patents obtained by
the Reformed from the King, for the establishment of some Schools, even after
reitera Colleges.
ted Orders from Court; but that nothing was comparable in this particular to
the boldness of the Parliament of Grenoble, who did not so much as vouchsafe to
answer a second Order sent them from the King, for setting up a reformed School
at Montelimar; that even so in several places they refused to admit in, or
turned out such of the Reformed as were appointed to teach and instruct the
Youth; which Article was concluded with these remarkable words: Are they then
willing to beat us into Ignorance and Barbarity? so did Julian.

Next they complained of their Poors ill usage: That the Laws The Poor ill used.
of Equity were so little regarded in this point, that in those very places
where the Reformed contributed most to the public Alms, the Poor of their
Religion had no share therein; that in many Places where the Reformed dare not
dwell. A remarkable Injustice done at Lion.
places the Reformed were deprived of their Birthright, and not suffered to
live there, though they promised to be quiet and make no public Exercise of
their Religion; that the Judges of Lion had banished out of their Town those
who having formerly left the Kingdom on account of Religion were returned
thither after the change of affairs; and that it had been confirmed by the
Edict of Reduction; upon occasion whereof they complained here, that the
Reformed were called Suspected People by the King himself, whom they had served
with so much Fidelity and Courage; letting this gentle Reproach slip withal,
that for one and the same cause the King had been declared unable to inherit
the Crown, and the Reformed banished from their Houses; but that since he had
been restored to his Throne by the assistance of the Reformed, he had not yet
restored them to their Houses. Here the Parson of Saint Stephen of Furant was
brought again upon the Stage; he did not suffer the Catholics to let out their
Houses to the Reformed, and constrained them to turn out before the term, such
as had already taken any; he hindered Tradesmen by grievous Fines from admitting
any Reformed into the freedom of their Trades. This mad Fellow of a Priest, had
caned a Man, born in that place, but settled elsewhere, who was come to the Town
upon some business; his pretext for abusing him, was, that he had forbid him to
come thither, as if he had authority to banish whom he pleased: But that Man
seeing himself abused with so much injustice, and that no body took his part,
killed the Priest in a passion, and so rid the Country of this furious Beast.
The King granted him his Pardon, but the Catholics hindered it from being
allowed by the Judges.

They remonstrated besides, that the Reformed were excluded Trades.
from Trades, and to color their exclusion, the Companies made new Bylaws, by
virtue whereof none but Catholics were to be admitted to them. That in several
places Violences against Violences.
the Reformed were countenanced by impunity; that a Man seventy five Years old
having complained, that some Children had hurried him in the Streets with
injurious Clamours, was sent to a Goal, instead of having satisfaction; from
whence afterward being released, he was pursued anew, and pelted with Stones
in the very sight of the Judges, who did but laugh at it; that a Fraternity of
Penitents, called, The Beaten Brothers, walking barefoot, in order of
Procession, their Feet happened to be cut by some broken Glass spread in the
Streets, which they did immediately lay upon the Reformed, because the Glass
was found before the House of a Goldsmith of their Religion; that thereupon a
Sedition was stirred up against them, but that at last the whole was proved to
be a trick of the Priests.

Then they began to give particular Instances of the crying Injustice done to
the Reformed about Offices.
Injustice done them about Offices; That in several places they were kept from
those of the Townhouse, and that it was publicly said at Lion, that none
ought to be admitted to them, who either was now of the Reformed, or ever had
been so, nay, not even any Son of one that had been so; that the States of
Perigord had declared void the Election of a Sheriff made by the Town of
Bergerac, according to the custom of that Province, merely because the party
elected was one of the Reformed; that even those who were appointed by the King
could not be admitted, before taking an Oath that they would be Catholics;
being moreover forced to declare their charge vacant, ipso facto, if they
should ever happen to break their Oath: In some places they were sent back,
without so much as hearing their Complaints; in others they were turned out,
even after they had been admitted and suffered to execute their Places; or else
they were forced to dispose of them in favor of the Catholics. The Parliament
of Bourdeaux had opposed, during three Years, the re establishing a Presidial
Court at Bergerac, where it had been settled before, and the Debate about it was
still depending in the Grand The Council of State is not meant here, but a
Court of Judicature in Paris, where some Special Matters are debated.
Council at the time of these Complaints. In several Provinces Gentlemen were
forbid to appoint Protestant Judges in their Fiefs, on pain of forfeiting the
same; nay, the Parliament of Paris, when yet sitting at Tours, inserted in
their Decree for verifying the Edict which revoked those of the League, that
upon the presentation of Letters Patents to the Court, an Inquiry into the
Behavior, Manner and Religion of the Presenters should be always ordered, and
that they could not be admitted without giving a sufficient Testimony of their
being Catholics, save only in the City of Rochel and other such Towns as were
held by the Reformed at the time of the Edicts of the League, as I have related
in the Second Book of this History in the Year 1591. About the same time the
Deputies of the Reformed were told even in the King's Council, that they were
under a great mistake if they thought they should ever be admitted to Offices,
whatever Edicts, Orders from the Court, and Decrees of Parliaments, they might
obtain; whereof they gave instances in all sorts of Offices, of Judges in
Parliaments, and Presidial-Courts, of Sollicitors General, of Public Notaries,
of Attorneys, and Sergeants. The Parliament of Grenoble, though formerly
rescued out of the hands of the Duke of Savoy by the Arms of the Reformed, was
now still refusing to admit Vulson, who had obtained a Patent for a Judges
place in the same Court, and had already been tired with five Years vain
pursuits. One of the Reformed having obtained a Patent for the Place of one
Colas, Vice Seneschal of Montelimar, an obstinate Rebel, who would never be
reconciled with the King, whom he forced to besiege him in La Fere, whereof he
styled himself Count; that Reformed, I say, could never get his Patent allowed
by the Parliament of Grenoble: but after he had, to facilitate the matter,
treated with Colas for the Place, and bought it of him, then the Parliament
admitted him to the Proof of his good Behavior and Manners, and kept him
eighteen Months about it, being even yet uncertain of the issue of this
business at the time of these Complaints. The same Parliament had taken away
the Precedence from some Judges who were ancienter than their Catholic
Brethren, and had been admitted even during the League; which put them to the
charge of obtaining new Edicts, new Orders, and peremptory Decrees from the
Council.

All this was followed with Complaints about many Seditious Seditious Words and
Speeches. Passion of Judges and Parliaments.
Expressions uttered against them and connived at in Parliaments and other
Seats of Judicature, where, in full Court, they had been called Dogs, Turks,
Heretics, Heteroclites of the new Opinion, a People who deserved to be
destroyed with Fire and Sword, and expelled out of the Kingdom. Their being
Heretics, added they, had been allowed in several Courts, as a sufficient
cause of exception; as if the Laws of the Emperors against the Manichees, had
been made against them. Seguier, one of the King's Sollicitors-General in the
Parliament of Paris, speaking in the Cause of Roche Chalais, a very
considerable Gentleman amongst the Reformed, had said, that they were unworthy
of the King's Edicts; that the benefit of the Laws belonged only to the
Catholics; and that if the Court should give a Verdict in favor of this
Gentleman, to restore him to his Estate, the King's Council would oppose, and
take it away from him, as from an unworthy Heretic. They related thereupon
several Instances of Justice denied to the Reformed; of Murders left
unpunished; of unjust Condemnations without a legal Process; of false Witnesses
tolerated, though convicted. A famous Highway-man, being thought to be of the
Reformed Religion, was sentenced at Bourdeaux to be quartered alive, and fined
five hundred Crowns, two hundred whereof accrued to the King, and the rest was
appliable as the Court should think fit: but the Criminal having declared to a
Jesuit, that he had been a Catholic for two Years past, the Punishment was
changed into beheading, and the Fine applied to the repairing of the Jesuits
College. The extraordinary Assizes of the Parliament of Paris being held at
Lion, such of the Reformed as went thither to demand Justice against the
Catholics of Saint Stephen of Furant, were called Seditious Persons, who
troubled the Judges with their Complaints.

They added, That the Writs obtained by the Reformed, for bringing Causes from
a suspected Parliament before another, were eluded, by denying them Letters of
Pareatis, or, Hereof fail not; which they were forced to sue for, sometimes
whole six Months together: but that at Bourdeaux they would do worse, for there
they judged the cause definitively, and then granted Letters of Pareatis.
Whereupon it was observed, that the Parliaments did the Reformed more harm by
their ill will, than the King was by his good will able to redress. Whereupon
they enlarged upon the great difference between the verification of the Edicts
granted to the League, and those granted to the Reformed in order to grant them
a Peace: the former being allowed without alteration or reservation, and with a
great deal of Pomp and Solemnity, as Edicts, the Syllables, Letters, and the
very Accents whereof were looked upon as so many Props of the State, whereas
the latter were either thrown off with a thousand shifts, delays and tricks, or
allowed with so many limitations and exceptions, that they were made altogether
useless. And here they brought in very pat the great Abuses formerly offered to
Parliaments by the League, the Massacre of Duranti at Thoulouse, and the
shameful Death of Brisson at Paris. There they showed also how little satisfied
the Reformed were with the Edict of 1577. which, in their judgment, was not fit
for the present time; for it put them in a worse condition than the War had
left them in: which reflected on them a thousand ways; therefore they had not
demanded, but constantly refused it. Whereupon they observed with what
Difficulties in reestablishing the Edict of 1577.
difficulty the Edict which re-established the same had passed in the
Parliament of Paris: they did not forget the shiftings and tricks of the
Attorney General, and the several reasons urged to hinder the verifying of it,
insomuch that it was carried in the affirmative only by three voices. They
named here the Parliaments which would not verify it; but above all they
observed the severity of that of Dijon, which likewise refused it, though the
King, going through that City in his way to Lion, had with his own Mouth
commanded them to do so; insomuch that Menaces were necessary to bring them to
a compliance: after which the Attorney General, following the example of that
of Paris, would not suffer this word, requiring, but only those of, not
opposing, to be inserted in the Decree of its verification; and the Court
formally declared, that they did it only to obey the King's often reiterated
Orders.

They also complained, that Decrees made even in 1585. and Special Instances of
the ill will of the Parliaments.
1586. were still every day executed, and the Reformed by virtue thereof forced
to restore to Clergymen the Incomes of their Estates taken during the League;
but that the Reformed were not allowed to take possession again of their own,
on pretense that they had not paid the King's Taxes in 1512. And then was
related a special Case of Florimond de Raimond, a Judge in the Parliament of
Bourdeaux, which runs thus: He had been made Prisoner during the War, and
afterward released upon ransom for which he compounded and paid down a
thousand Livers; but since he sued at Law those Reformed who had taken and
ransomed him, boasting every where, that he had already got from them four
thousand Crowns. Farthermore they complained, that every day the Parliaments
gave sentence according to the Edicts of the League, and that that of Rouen had
accordingly declared the Buryings and Preachings of the Reformed, to be
Trespasses upon the Edicts; whereupon two Presidents, two Counselors, and the
Attorney General, being sent for to Court, they had the boldness to say, they
had judged according to the Laws, because the Edicts which favored the
Reformed were revoked. They promised however to forbear executing the Decree,
provided it should stand still upon Record; but whilst they were at Court,
their Brethren caused it to be proclaimed with the usual Ceremonies. Besides,
diverse Parliaments made void every day the Sentences given in those Courts of
Justice which the King had suppressed, though he had confirmed them all by his
Edict of Suppression.

After these long Complaints they came to the Article of the Burials made
difficult:
Burials, and by way of transition, it was observed, that the Reformed were ill
used at their Births, in their Lives, in the Breeding of their Children, and
even in their Funerals. Therefore they complained, that in several Towns
Burying places were denied them; that in others they were fain to carry their
Dead five Leagues off; that their Funeral-assemblies were fixed at certain
Hours, and limited to a certain Number of Persons; that Hindered.
in some Places the Catholics committed great Insolences on their Graves, and
abused those who attended the dead Corpse, though the Burials were made in the
Nightime; nay, that in certain places they were fined for it, and forced to
buy the security of their Marches by 20 or 30 Crowns; that there were some in
which the dead Bodies were dug out of the Ground, either by the Command of
the Bishop, or by some other Authority, and even those who had been buried in
the Chapels of their Ancestors; that the same Barbarity was used on the Bodies
of Women, which were left naked on the Ground, and exposed to wild Beasts, no
enquiry being made into such a barbarous and indecent Usage. That some persons
who died with Marks of being of the Reformation, and on that account were not
suffered to be buried in Catholic Churchyards, their Relations were proceeded
against for laying them in the Burying-places of the Reformed. The
Parish Priest of Saint Stephen of Furant had a great share in that Article,
wherein he was represented making false Contracts, in order to exclude the
Reformed out of a Burying-place purchased by them; breaking the Tombs open with
a Hammer; ringing the Alarm-bell upon a Funeral-convoy guarded by the Soldiers
of the Garrison, and drawing together three or four thousand Men, who dispersed
the Convoy, and forced them to leave the Corpse at the discretion of this
profligate Priest; digging out of the Grave a dead Body, which he carried into
another Man's ground, who dug it out again; and in fine, constraining the
Wife of the deceased, even after she had obtained a Decree from the Judges to
the contrary, to bury him without the Parish-ground. Even so Florimond de
Raimond, being one day Chairman, (as ancientest Judge in the Parliament of
Bourdeaux) ordained the exhumation of a Child, adding in his Decree, that the
Bodies of all the Reformed, buried ten Years before in the Catholic
Churchyards, should be also dug out of the ground. Whereupon many instances
were given of dead Bodies which had been in an imminent danger of being
devoured by Dogs; and it appeared by all the premises, that the Catholics made
no distinction either of Quality, Sex or Age, and treated with the same
inhumanity, both Gentlemen and Commoners, Men, Women and Children, all alike.

All these Cruelties were exaggerated with much eagerness, and it was very
ingeniously observed, that Burying-places were usually enclosed with Walls, to
hinder Beasts from ravaging them; but that Men themselves were not ashamed to
violate and dig up those Sacred Assyles of the dead. The whole ended with A
strong, free and moving Conclusion.
a very pathetick Discourse: They said, that all this was but a small part of
those just Complaints that might have been made by the Reformed, whose Patience
was much enlarged upon; who had no other aim, but the good of the State; and
who, to be satisfied, demanded nothing, but to be secured from ruin and
destruction. They showed, that the fall of the State was inseparable from that
of the Reformed; and then very earnestly begged the Catholics compassion.
Addressing afterward to the King, they valued themselves for having neither
Dominican Friars or Jesuits capable of attempting on his Life, nor Leaguers
aiming at his Crown. He was told, that he knew the fidelity of the Reformed,
and that they demanded an Edict, not after the manner of the Leaguers, who
instead of humble Petitions for Peace, had never presented but the Point of
their Swords; that in the space of four Years the Reformed had six several
times renewed their Petitions, at Mantes, at Saint Germain, at Lion, at the
Camp before la Fere, at Monceaux, and at Rouen. Now upon the Reasons of State
they were still put off with, and upon their being told over and over, that it
was not yet time to grant them an Edict, they cried out, Still, O good Lord!
after five and thirty Years of cruel Persecutions, ten of banishment under the
League, eight of this King's reign, and four of constant petitioning! Then they
declared, that their being put off after the King had done with all the
Leaguers, gave them a great jealousy, that new Proscriptions were intended to
humor the Pope, who, they could not but know, was pushing on that design with
all his might and strength. They stoutly maintained, that the Catholics alone
were not the State, but that the Reformed made a great part of it. In fine,
they concluded with these words: We beg from your Majesty an Edict, whereby we
may enjoy what is common to all your Subjects, that is, much less than what you
have granted to your furious Enemies, your rebel Leaguers: An Edict which may
not constrain you to dispose of your Dominions, but as you please, which may
not force you to exhaust your Treasure, or to burden your People with Taxes.
It is neither Ambition nor Avarice moves us, but the Glory of God, the Liberty
of our Consciences, the Tranquillity of the State, the Security of our Lives and
Fortunes; these are the height of our Desires, and the only aim of all our
Petitions.

Although the reformed Courtiers in a manner disowned these Complaints, as I
observed before, yet it is certain, that they could not deny the truth of the
several Facts contained therein, nor that there was a necessity to put a stop
to so many Injustices and Violences; but they embraced the Opinion of the
Court, which was much offended at the Form of those Complaints, and would fain
have had the Reformed to wait for another time to publish them; but upon the
whole, the generality of the Reformed spoke their Minds in that Book; and it
cannot be doubted but it had been viewed by the ablest Men of the Party; nay,
it may be easily perceived by the Style, that the greatest amongst them had
notice of it, and even given to the Subject a great part of its Form. What most
vexed the Court in the printing of it, was their being now and then upbraided
in it with bitter Reproaches of past Services, which were so much the more
insupportable, because they were just and well-grounded; that the warm Strain
of this little Piece made them sensible they had to do with Men who took the
thing to Heart, and whose Courage was not yet lost; and that in fine, such a
long Series of Injustices, Outrages and Violences, made them ashamed of their
so long delaying to satisfy those who deserved at their hands a more
favorable usage, insomuch that the Court's dissatisfaction served only to make
them resolve to handle this Affair more seriously and put an end to such an
important Negotiation.

But before we proceed any farther, it behooves us to make (at Reflections on
that Book.
least slightly) some Reflections upon this Abridgment of their Complaints.
First, They make it appear, That this Business of the Reformed was no trifling
Matter, and that their Fears and Jealousies were but too well grounded; which
is the more observable, that in complaints of this nature, as every body knows,
commonly no other Facts are related, but such as are most notorious and
important, and that a great deal more are buried in oblivion, either because
the Complaints thereof have not been made by the Parties concerned, or that
they appeared less clear, or of a less moment in their circumstances. Secondly,
These Complaints do well answer the Reproaches made to the Reformed, That they
followed the King too close when he was in his greatest Perplexities: But this
must not be wondered at, since 'twas at that very time they were used worst, and
that the Facts here mentioned, except perhaps thirty, were all recent, and had
happened either in this or the foregoing Year, giving therefore just causes of
Fears and Jealousies to the Reformed, who were from day to day by so much the
greater sufferers, as the Peace and Reunion of the Catholics was more
forwarded by the reduction of the Leaguers. In fine, Those Complaints may serve
to show the Injustice of those Tricks used to elude the Edict in these last
Years, since that the Edict having been granted upon Complaints made by the
Reformed of suchlike Vexations, it was impossible to renew them, without
acting directly against the intention of that irrevocable Law.

In the mean while the Year was spun out with tedious Delays, New Delays.
as I observed before, and though the Reformed had with a wonderful patience
overcome their grief occasioned by them, the minds on both sides were
nevertheless grown sour and much exasperated; the King himself expressed
sometimes his resentment, nay, he would now and then let out some menacing
words very pat to the purpose, and he had once written to his Commissioners,
that it would grieve him to the very heart, to come to Extremities with the
Reformed, whom he loved more than they loved themselves. This new Language the
King had been taught of late, since the retaking of Amiens had a much worse
effect than it was thought at Court; and the Reformed, who found it so
different from that which was used with them, when the King stood in need of
their assistance, and when he invited them to shed the rest of their Blood at
the Siege of that place; they drew, I say, very sad Consequences from that
change, which seemed to them to imply as much as if they were told, that their
Tranquillity could never agree with the Prosperity of the State, since they were
cajoled only when the King's Affairs were embroiled; but that when the same
began to clear up, they were told, they must surrender at discretion; that when
the success of the King's Enterprises was dubious, fair Promises, Prayers,
tender and pathetick Entreaties, were used to them; but that when the Court was
puffed up with some advantageous Success, then their most just Petitions were
answered with Shiftings and Menaces; from whence they concluded, that since new
Causes of Mistrust were given them, they ought also to take new Precautions
against the ill Designs of their Enemies. The Dukes of Bouillon and La
Trimouille were the most exasperated of all, because they were sensible that
the Court's Threatenings chiefly aimed at them, being looked upon there as the
Authors of those Motions made in the Assembly, contrary to what the Catholics
called the Public Good, and the King's Service; but what the Reformed called
the Artifices of the Council, and the Oppression of their Consciences.
Therefore the Assembly was no less importunate than before. They had sent new
Deputies to Court with full Instructions, which were altered, as new
Difficulties arose; besides, they seriously examined the Answers sent them by
the King's Commissioners; and as they had sent some Gentlemen to England and to
the United Provinces, in order to beg the Intercession of those faithful Allies
of the Crown, they also expressly charged their Deputies to wait upon the
Protestant Ambassadors, now at the Court of France, and represent to them how
necessary it was to satisfy the Reformed, that the King might be able to give
the Spaniards, or the Duke of Mercoeur, some considerable Blow, to make them
sensible, that the Affairs of Religion, instead of being forwarded, were
delayed at Court, insomuch that they knew not when the end of such a tedious
Negotiation might be hoped for; and to engage them by the general Interest of
the Protestants to see it brought to a happy conclusion.

The Points left still undecided were not so little important And Difficulties
upon particular Places.
but that they well deserved this warm pursuit. The Council started new
Difficulties about the Right of Exercise, in respect to certain private Places,
wherein the Reformed intended to establish or keep it, which the Court would
not grant. Moreover, They demanded, that their Assembly should continue at
Vendome, until the Edict, which was granting, was verified in all Parliaments;
which the King would grant only for that of Paris, requiring them, after the
verifying of the Edict there, to break up and return to their respective
Provinces. But this made them jealous that the Court aimed at dispersing the
Assembly, afterward to elude with more freedom the execution of the Edict,
when none were left to sue for verifying the same; because Edicts in France,
having no force of Laws before that Solemnity, this might be still subject to a
thousand Tricks and Exceptions in those Parliaments where the same had not been
yet performed.

The King was necessitated to give the Reformed some satisfaction The breaking
up of the Assembly.
upon these Points, because he was resolved to put off the verification of the
Edict till the Legat's departure, the time whereof was still very uncertain,
and that he was of opinion, that the doing it in his presence might have been
an Affront put upon him. Therefore it seems, that to gild over this new Delay,
and make it acceptable to Men disheartened by so many others, and who justly
feared, that this would prove prejudicial to their Interest, or at least put
back the conclusion of their Affairs; it seems, I say, that the Court ought to
have complied with their desire of continuing their Assembly. Such as had an
interest in The state of the* Garrisons.
the keeping of the places of security, wondered at the King's proposing to
leave to the Council the settling the state of the Garrisons, and as they had
not all of them the like credit at Court, such as had little or none at all,
were afraid that this was an Artifice in order to deprive them of their Places.
Besides, the King The naming of Governors.
would name the Governors, before the Party named had taken the Certificate of
the Provincial-Assembly, in whose Jurisdiction the Place was seated; because,
if the Certificate should precede, it might then seem, that the Reformed should
give the Government, not the King, which would have been a breach made to the
Royal Authority. But on the other hand, the Reformed would needs have the
entire disposal of the choice, lest that if the Governments of their Places
should become Court-Preferments, the Parties so preferred would be also
Court-Creatures, and care but little to please the reformed Churches, as being
able to maintain themselves without them. They had a great mind also at Court
The Annual renewing of the state of the Garrisons.
to change the state of the Garrisons every Year, but the Assembly were afraid,
that it might be a color for weakening and shortening the same; nay, for taking
them away one after another: for they were well informed, that the King was
against leaving so many Places in the hands of the Reformed, who before that
time had never had above seven or eight granted them for securing the execution
of the Edicts, whereas now they kept above two hundred both great and small;
and that he was also afraid, that the Catholics might conceive a jealousy
from the state of those Garrisons, because of the great number of Places that
were to be set down therein: but the Assembly agreed on a public state, in
which such Places only might be named as both Parties should think sit,
provided always there was a secret one for the security of the rest. Private
Interests were none of the least occasions of Private Interests.
new Difficulties: Those of Rochel could obtain none of their Demands, no, not
so much as a confirmation of their Charter; 1598.
because the King, who had still a resentment of what had passed there, whilst
he was Protector of the Reformed, had a mind to make them sensible, that he had
Power enough to punish them for it.

The discussion of all these Difficulties, which the Council would The Edict
delayed till the Month of August, when there were no more Leaguers.
always be trifling about, even after they had been adjusted by the great
Wisdom of the Commissioners, caused the final conclusion to be put off till the
Month of April, insomuch that the Catholics got the Point they had so much
wished for, viz. That no Edict should be granted to the Reformed, before the
Catholics were all satisfied. The Treaty with the Duke of Mercoeur was
concluded toward the end of March, and even the Peace with Spain, made before
the Edict, for though it was concluded on the first of May, yet all the
Articles thereof had been long before agreed upon.

The King had long before that time been advised to march toward Britany with
a Royal Army, in order to rescue that Province out of the hands of the Duke of
Mercoeur, who hitherto had been but weakly attacked, and had never treated in
earnest, but when he saw himself even upon the point of being abandoned by the
Spaniards, and that the King was coming upon him with great Forces; in effect,
after he had trifled several Years with Sham-Treaties, at last the King marched
that way, so soon as the approaching conclusion of the Peace with Spain set him
at liberty to do it. His coming allarmed the Assembly at Chatelleraud, The
Assembly allarmed.
and they were in no small fear that the King would suddenly fall upon them,
either to force them to accept his own Terms, or to disperse them, through fear
of falling into his hands. At the same time the King's Commissioners pressed
them to come to a conclusion, which conduct was variously interpreted by Men
long since distracted by Allarms and Jealousies. The most distrustful, thought
it a kind of violence offered to the Assembly, so eagerly to press the King's
offers upon them, at a time when he was in a manner at their doors with a
powerful Army. This Passage is to be well observed, as one of the most notable
Circumstances of the time wherein the Edict was granted, and as a most proper
Argument against the Calumny of the Catholic Writers, who have represented it
as a Grant extorted by force. But to make a right Judgment of the Case, we need
but look upon the Troubles and Jealousies of the Assembly, on the approach of
the Royal Army; and indeed they accepted the Edict when The King grants the
Edict, being armed. Different Opinions about the Edict.
they were disarmed, and in a manner at the King's discretion, whereas the King
granted it when he was armed, and had the Assembly within the reach of his
Canon.

This long Affair was at last put to an end, to the great grief of some, and to
the full satisfaction of others. Some Catholics there were who grumbled at so
many Concessions; on the other hand, some Reformed complained that they had
obtained so little; but there wanted not some in each Party, who thought the
advantage to be equal on both sides, and who being truly desirous of Peace,
were apt to allow of any thing which might conduce to it. During the King's
abode at Angers, almost all the Difficulties had been adjusted there, though he
had spoken so high, and uttered such Menaces, that thereby the Assembly was
well nigh brought to despair: but this was but a show to salve the appearances,
of giving the Law like a King, and making the Edict less offensive to the
Legate and the zealous Catholics, by granting it with that affected sourness
and severity. Indeed, the King was very desirous to come out of those Troubles,
which plainly appeared in the kind reception the Dukes of Bouillon and La
Trimouille met with when they waited upon his Majesty at Angers, where he
welcomed them both with such signal demonstrations of Love, that thereby one
might easily conclude, that his threatening had been rather to maintain his
Royal Dignity, than the The Conclusion at Nants.
effect of any real Anger. Therefore, after the Assembly's Memorials had been
returned, together with the King's Answers to them, and the Articles and Forms
of the Grants had been finally agreed upon, the whole was again carried to the
King at Nants, where, having altered what he pleased, to show that he granted
it with a full Authority, and that nothing constrained him thereunto, it was at
last signed, sealed up, and deposited into the hands of the Deputies of the
Assembly, by whose order it was left in the custody of the Inhabitants of
Rochel, who, till the time of their ruin, kept all the general Records of all
the reformed Churches of France. Thus, from the place where the Edict was
proclaimed in the Month of April, it was called the Edict of Nants, by which it
has been famous all over Europe.

Hitherto I have only related the Complaints, Pursuits, Alarms, and Impatiences
of one Party, with the Artifices, Delays, Shiftings, and Difficulties of the
other, to the end, that I might give a better insight into the nature of an
Edict, which has been so long negotiated and debated with so much Maturity and
Wisdom. But, to do it yet more clearly, I shall make an Abridgment of such
Matters as were the Pretexts of these Delays, and for so many Years took up the
Time of the wisest Men in the Kingdom, wherein I shall only treat of what was
either demanded or obtained by the Reformed, without taking notice of what was
inserted in the Edict in behalf of the Roman Religion, because the Articles of
that kind always passed before the others, and that in all this Negotiation the
Catholics would never submit the Concerns of their Religion to the Success of
Disputes and Debates. None but the Pretensions of the Reformed met with
Difficulties, because the Catholics labored hard to make them rest satisfied
with less than they asked; though, indeed, there was no need to take away
another Right to satisfy them in their Demands. Therefore Difficulties arose,
both upon the Substance and the Form of Things, and the Court had no less
difficulty in agreeing upon the one, than on the other. The Demands of the
Reformed The Particulars of the Difficulties on each Article.
came to six or seven general Articles, but each of them was subdivided into a
great number of others, necessary either for the Explanation, or for the
Security of some principal Matter; insomuch, that at first the Reformed having
brought all their Proposals to a limited Number of Articles, am^unting to
Ninety six or Ninety seven, the Difficulties arising in the Series of the
Negotiation, obliged them to add several new Articles to the former, either to
remove or prevent Difficulties in the Conclusion or Execution of the Edict
Therefore without desisting from the Substance of their Demands, save only in
such things wherein they had approved the Alterations made by the Court, they
often added to their Memorials, and changed the Forms and Style thereof: So
they gave two different Titles to their new Articles. Those which were set down
last of all, and were not very numerous, had the name of Additions, the others
were called Explanations, because they were Articles upon which they desired
the King to explain himself, that no ambiguity should remain in the matter, and
to prevent all difficulties in the execution. Those Explanations followed each
Article, the Contents whereof they desired to be explained; and often there
were many added to one and the same Article, which went by the Names of First
and Second.

Their first principal Demand was for a new Edict, because they They first
demand a new Edict.
could not rest satisfied with those formerly granted; whereupon they said,
that in their opinions their Services deserved something better, and that after
the King's turning Catholic they had a solemn Promise of another at Mantes,
and a Year after at Saint Germain. The main ground of this pursuit was, that
Reasons pro and con.
they could not endure to be treated under the Reign of Henry the Fourth, after
the same manner as they had been under that of Henry the Third, and that they
thought it very unjust for a Prince, whom they had so faithfully served from
his Cradle, to grant them no more than what they had obtained from another, who
had been their greatest persecutor; so that their Pretensions were not grounded
(as the late promoters of the revocation of the Edict of Nants would fain have
persuaded us) upon the prejudice they had received by the King's Treaties with
the chief Leaguers, but upon the greatness of their Services, for which they
demanded an Edict as a recompense due to them. As for the breaches made on the
Edict of 1577. they were but little concerned at them, for they plainly
declared, they would not have it, thinking themselves rather prejudiced than
favored by it. Nevertheless, this last Consideration seemed to be the only
Motive of the King in this Affair, as being the most plausible that could be
alleged to the Catholics, either because it removed all pretexts of murmuring
at new things granted, since thereby the King did but make amends to the
Reformed for Injuries unjustly done them; or because, having received that
damage contrary to a Promise in Writing, that no Treaty should be made with the
Leaguers to their prejudice, the breach of such Promise could not be repaired,
but by granting them a sufficient Compensation for what Losses they had
sustained by it. This fancy of Compensation was the Sequel of the first
Pretension of the Catholics after Henry the Fourth's coming to the Crown. As
they had extorted a Promise from this Prince, that he would maintain their
Religion in the state he had found it, they looked upon all new Favors done to
the Reformed, as so many Injuries to the Catholic Religion; from whence it
was, that they stood so obstinately to their first resolution, never to make
them any new Grant; or if any should be made, then they would have it go by the
name of a Compensation for what damage they had received by the private
Treaties with the Leaguers; nay, even after the Promise made to the Deputies at
Mantes and at Saint Germain, the Catholics, moved by the same reason, would
fain have cheated the Reformed, by only granting them the restitution of the
Edict of 1577. Upon which account also the Council delayed sending the King's
Commissioners to the Assemblies of Saumur and Loudun, because a new Treaty
begun upon new Demands, and which could not but end in new Concessions, was, in
their judgments, a new Grant: But this difficulty was removed after the arrival
of the King's Commissioners, for the word Compensation was again revived, and,
after some debate, still remained, to satisfy the zealous Catholics and the
Court of Rome. But they had also a regard to the first Demand of the Reformed,
who at last obtained many things over and above the promised Compensation,
because the King was willing to gratify them upon account of their inviolable
Fidelity and great Services. In a word, he gave them a new Edict, which revoked
all others, and therefore could go no longer for a mere Compensation of
Trespasses upon them, since they were all abolished by the same, which, for the
future, was to be the standing Law in their stead. This Observation will be of
good use in the Sequel of this History, especially against the trifling
Arguments brought in of late Years, to elude all the Concessions of the Edict
of Nants; which trifling Arguments were grounded on this false Principle, that
since the Edict granted only a mere Compensation for Damages received by the
Treaties with the Heads of the League, in which there were Restrictions
prejudicial to the Edict of 1577; it was therefore likely enough, that such
Damages being very inconsiderable, the intention of the Edict of Nants, which
made amends for them, was to grant but little to the Reformed; but their
Principle being false, as is apparent by the Premises, their Consequence must
needs be very unjust.

The second Demand had respect to the Freedom of Exercise, and The second
Demand, a free Exercise, and its extent.
was of a very large extent, since it contained the Grounds of the Right of
that Exercise which was to be established, or continued; the Bounds of that
Privilege, according to the Times, Persons, and Places; and generally all the
Circumstances of the Exercise, together with the exemption from certain things
belonging to the Catholic Worship which their Consciences could not comply
with. The Assembly had at first demanded an indistinct Liberty of Exercise in
all the Kingdom; but they soon desisted from that Point: either because in
several great Towns there was not one single Protestant, and therefore the
grant of Exercise had been there to no purpose; or because at Bourdeaux,
Thoulouse, and other most important Cities, they would have rather begun the
War again, than suffered the Exercise of the Reformed Religion to be
established within their Walls: or because it had been granted to other Towns,
that no such Exercise should ever be introduced amongst them. Therefore the
Reformed were forced to restrain that Demand to a general freedom of dwelling
where ever they pleased, and to a free Exercise in certain places only, since
it could not be obtained every where: but they stood fast to their resolution
of getting it with a larger extent than before. This was at last granted them
in two Articles: By the first whereof their Exercise was permitted in all
places where they had established it ever since the Edicts of the League, till
the Truce was made between the two Kings, and after the Truce, so long as the
War continued with the rest of the Leaguers: and after some Debates, all those
Places were comprised under the general Clause of Places where the Exercise had
been made during the Years 1596. and 1597. The Catholics have of late
endeavored to confound the Rights of these two Years when they have sought for
trifling Arguments to elude the plainest Concessions of the Edict; and they
have pretended, that the Proofs of the Right acquired by the Possession, during
these two Years, might show, that the Exercise had been continued during both:
which, however, was not the design of the Edict, as it appears in that during
the Year 1597. the continuation of the Exercise had been granted in all places,
wherein they had it settled in 1596. but that the Edict not being concluded this
Year, new Exercises were set up during the following Year, which the Reformed
required to be confirmed with the rest; so that such Exercises as had not been
established before the Year 1597. needed no older proofs; this Year having
certainly been added to the Year before, as a favor, and upon the
solicitation of the Reformed: Now it could have been no favor, if thereby
they had been obliged to prove the continuation of the possession in 1596. by
that in 1597. since this would have been to lay upon them a new obligation of
proving by these new Titles a Right which they had sufficiently acquired by the
possession of 1596. But as in 1596. the actual exercising in several places was
a sufficient ground for a right for the future, though the Reformed had it not
before; so in 1597. the like actual Exercise, often reiterated, gave them the
like right in time to come, though they had it not before. And indeed, as the
Negotiation of the Edict was not yet finished in August 1597. the Catholics,
who were afraid, that during the new Delays of the Treaty, new Churches might
be set up, and the confirmation thereof demanded, as well as of those
established since the Year 1596. they caused all the Dates of those
Establishments to be fixed upon the Month of August of this Year 1598. Insomuch
that, to be within the Dates of the Edict, it was not needful to prove the
Exercise for these two Years, but it sufficed to prove it in either of them.
The other Article granted, that in each Bailiwick, or Seneschalcy, where, by
the Edict of 1577. the Reformed had already a public Place for their religious
Exercise, either in a Borough, or in the Suburbs of a Town, another should be
given them, besides the first; so that the Exercise of the reformed Religion
was grounded upon four different Titles. The first was, That of the Places of
Bailiwick, and of Possession, granted by the Edict of 1577. The second was,
That of the new Possession acquired during the two Years which had preceded the
conclusion of the Edict of Nants. The third was, That of the new Place of
Bailiwick, granted by the same Edict. And the fourth was, The Personal Right of
the Lords, grounded upon the nature of their Fiefs or Jurisdictions. In all
this the Catholics secured the advantage of their Religion, The advantage
secured to the prevailing Religion. A second place in each Bailiwick was no new
thing.
and would never suffer that of the Reformed to stand upon even ground with it,
by granting them a liberty equal to their own: so that the Roman Religion was
exercised every where, as prevailing; but the Reformed was limited to certain
Places, and restrained by certain Conditions, as tolerated. For the rest, The
Grant of a second Place in each Bailiwick was not really a new thing; for it
was grounded upon the Truce agreed upon between Henry the Third, and Henry the
Fourth, then only King of Navarre; whereby Henry the Third not only
re-established the Edict of 1577. and therefore gave again to the Reformed the
first Place of Bailiwck, which had been given them by the same, and added
thereto, besides a free Passage granted to the King of Navarre over the River
Loire, a Place in each Bailiwick for the sick and wounded of his Armies. This
Article of the Truce was very ill executed, either because of the sudden Death
of King Henry the Third, or because there was no occasion for it in some Places
where the Reformed had no Troops. Three Places only were given them by virtue
of that Article of the aforesaid Truce; insomuch, that when Henry the Fourth
granted them a second Place of Bailiwick, he did only perform what had been
promised them, giving, nevertheless, a larger extent to that favor, than it
had before; since he permitted then the free Exercise in those Places to all
sorts of People, whereas the Truce had granted it only for the sick and
wounded, and made perpetual what his Predecessor had granted only with a
Proviso. But there was little appearance, that this Prince, after having
received so great and important Services from the Reformed, would make their
Condition worse by the Peace which he promised them, than it had been by the
Truce; and it is easy to guess, that he would never have taken away from them,
by an Edict of Gratitude, what had been granted them by a necessary Treaty.

Great Debates were also made on the Nature of the Places Difficulties about
the Places of Exercise.
where the Exercise was granted; whether within the Walls of Towns, or in the
Suburbs; whether in Buroughs, or Villages. There were some upon the manner of
declaring the Places where the new Possession gave the Right of Exercise,
because the surest appeared the less advantageous; for it was proposed to get
all those Places numbered one by one in the Edict, or to comprehend them all
under some general Character. There was, it seems, a great deal more security
in the first, but the second gave a larger Extent to the Privilege, because
they hoped, that in the Execution of this Article, means might be found to
facilitate the keeping of the Exercise in some Places, where, perhaps, it might
be contested, if their Number was sent to the Council There was, at least, a
sufficient Ground to fear it, for the King had commanded his Commissioners,
before they came to a Conclusion upon this Point, to send him the aforesaid
Number, that he might see if there was any ambiguity concerning them: Therefore
the Reformed stood to the general Clause; but because the Catholics would not
permit them to settle themselves in so many Places, they also troubled them
about the Proofs they Upon the Proofs.
were obliged to give in, either to prove that the Exercise had been, or ought
to have been made in such or such Places, according to the Edict of 1577 or to
show that it had been actual performed where the new Edict allowed it: The
Protestants pretended, That Praying publicly, together with Singing of Psalms,
Marrying or Christning, ought to go for sufficient Proofs; but the Catholics,
who foresaw, and feared the consequence of such Proofs, if once allowed, could
never be brought to an Agreement upon this Point; and the King's refusing then
to admit of those Acts alone (and distinct one from another) as a sufficient
Ground for the Right of an Exercise, has since afforded to our late
Interpreters of the Edict of Nants a very specious Pretense, to maintain that
the same Acts were not sufficient Proofs for the Right of the Exercises in some
Places, in which they, nevertheless, found it continued for seventy or eighty
Years together: But it is a Case which needs a Distinction, for Prayer once
made, without any other Acts of Religion, and Marrying or Christning
occasionally, might not indeed be solid Proofs of the Right of an Exercise; but
the same joined together, continued and performed with all the ordinary
Circumstances of public Worship, ought in these latter Times to be taken for
Authentic Proofs of an Exercise so long since established.

All Points having a reference to that Demand, as the Liberty of Visiting and
Comforting the Sick, even in the Hospitals; of Difficulties about the Burials.
assisting the Prisoners, of exhorting the Criminals, and following them to the
Place of Execution it self: The Exemption from several things, at which the
Consciences of the Reformed were offended, as being parts or Circumstances of
the Catholic Worship, and several other Articles of the same nature, met with
proportionable Difficulties before they could be agreed upon; but that
concerning Burials occasioned the warmest Debates of all the rest. The
Catholics having, through a blind Zeal, contrived Canons, which under color
of Piety, destroy all Sense of Humanity, in forbidding all such as the Councils
or Popes have declared Heretics, to be buried in Holy Ground, as they call it,
their Clergy could not endure the Reformed should enjoy this general Right of
Mankind in common Church Yards, nor even the Gentlemen of that Religion in the
Chapels of their own Houses, or in the Churches wherein they had a Right of
Patronage. On the contrary, the Reformed, though no longer infatuated with the
ridiculous Conceit, That one Spot of Ground is holier than another, earnestly
demanded that the same Churchyard should serve for both Parties; either
because the Nobility and Gentry were desirous to preserve the Rights of their
Fiefs, o^ that the Reformed, in general could not brook that Distinction in
Burials, by which they thought themselves injuriously reflected upon: For,
Heretics being excluded out of common Churchyards, by the Canons, the Burying
of the Reformed in other Places, was a plain Declaration of their being
Heretics, and, besides, it exposed them, by such a public Blur, to the Hatred
of the Catholics, a People always zealous, even to Fury and Madness, against
any thing that appeared to them in the Shape of Heresy. Indeed, there was
little Appearance that the Reformed could ever enjoy a quiet Life or a happy
Society with them, who were taught to hate their Countrymen in their very
Graves, and to deny them the Honor of a Common Burial; and who could not see
without Scorn, nor frequent without Horror those Men, whose dead Bodies, in
their Opinion, would profane and fully the Places where they lay buried. This
important Article was explained by the Edict, or executed by the Commissioners
after such a manner as proved in our Days the fatal Spring of innumerable
Vexations and Injustices.

The third Demand was concerning the Subsistence of the Ministers, The Third
Demand, the Subsistence of the Ministers.
and the Maintenance of the Schools. The Reformed were willing to be freed from
paying Tenths to the Clergy, to whom they owed nothing, since they did not own
them as their Pastors; and they thought it unjust, that being at the Charge of
maintaining their own Ministers, they should also contribute to the Subsistence
of the Priests of a contrary Religion. They demanded, That at least their
Ministers should be paid out of the public Money, according to an Article of
the Treaty of Truce with Henry III. They also desired Schools for the
Instruction of their Children, with a public Allowance for the Masters; and
moreover, that the Reformed should be indifferently admitted to places of
Doctors, of Professors and Teachers in all the Universities and Faculties; to
the end that their Children might freely take their Degrees in the most
flourishing Colleges. In this Pretension of public Salaries, they thought not
so much of saving their Money, as they aimed at the most important point of
being owned Members of the State, equal to the Catholics, and capable, as well
as they, of all sorts of honorable and profitable Employments: But the
Catholics stoutly opposed all this, for fear the Reformed should be equal with
them; therefore they could not relish the maintaining of Ministers and
Teachers, out of the King's Treasury, because then it might seem, that the
Reformed Religion was owned as the Religion of the State, which eminent
Character they would by all means secure to the Catholics. Besides, they
imagined, that by settling public Funds toward the Subsistence of Men, who
labored Day and Night for the propagation of the Reformed Doctrine, they
should so firmly establish it, that afterward it could hardly be shaken;
whereas it might soon fall, if the Salaries of the Ministers were left to the
Charity and Zeal of their own People. But these Difficulties were in a great
Measure removed by their Demand of being freed from paying Tenths against their
Consciences, to a sort of Men, whom they looked upon as false Pastors, and the
Ministers of Antichrist. The Clergy could not abide to hear of losing such a
real and considerable part of their Revenues; and, besides, were afraid of the
bad Consequences it might have; such a fair Privilege being like to draw in a
great number of Catholics to the reformed Religion; for it was well known that
the Reformed taught, That the Tenths were not due to the Ministers of the
Gospel, by Divine Right, and that therefore a great Advantage would accrue to
any one, who keeping the Tiths to himself, might come off for a small
Contribution toward the Minister's Salary. As there wanted not able Ministers,
in the Assembly, so they did not fail to secure and promote their Interest,
insomuch that this Affair was debated with great Heats: But at last it was put
to an end, or rather eluded by the King's Promise, to pay the Reformed a yearly
Sum of Money, to be employed, A Sum of Money promised by the King.
as they should think fit, without giving an account thereof: But still they
trifled about the Quantity of the Sum, in respect to the Number of the
Ministers, for whom it was designed, about the Assignations of the Money, about
the Security of the Payment: And after all this, the Measures they took were so
uncertain, that, a little while after the Conclusion, the Reformed complained
of their being but ill paid, and that they enjoyed not the effect of this
Promise much longer than twenty Years. Moreover, as the promised Sum was not
sufficient to maintain such a great Number of Pastors, it was in a manner made
up by two Articles; by the first whereof the Reformed were permitted to accept
Gifts and Legacies for the Subsistence of Ministers, Scholars and the Poor: And
by the other they were allowed on certain Conditions, to raise Money upon their
People. But this was set down in the secret Articles, being too advantageous to
appear in the Body of the Edict.

The Article of the Schools was left in a greater ambiguity The Schools.
than the former. The Reformed, who were still prepossessed with an Opinion,
That their Religion should be triumphant, as soon as Men could embrace its
Doctrine, without being debarred from their temporal Advantages, thought, in
good earnest, that in a short time the Universities should be filled with
Reformed Professors and Teachers, if they could but get them declared capable
of holding those Places; which Fancy was not a little confirmed by the general
Reputation the Reformed had gotten in the World, of being Men of greater and
more polite Learning than the Catholics; from whence they concluded, That all
the Pulpits would be soon filled with Persons of eminent Doctrine, out of their
Churches. To the same end it was, that they importunately demanded, That their
Children should be admitted to public Schools, and to all the Privileges and
Immunities of Scholarship, even as well as the Catholics themselves; and that
they should not be excluded or molested upon the account of Religion. These two
Demands were granted them, but upon Conditions so ill explained, that a little
after the verifying of the Edict, some Difficulties were raised upon the first,
which brought the Concession to a small matter, and, by degrees, to nothing at
all. As for the second, it was so far from being advantageous to them, that it
proved one of the principal Springs of those great Vexations they have groaned
under, during sixty Years and above, because it served for a color to deny
them the Liberty of teaching any thing in their small Schools, except Reading
and Arithmetic; and they were told, that they had a Right by the Edict to send
their Children to the public Colleges, where they should not be molested in
their Consciences. When Experience had made them fully sensible of the Cheat,
they endeavored, under the reign of Lewis XIII. to remedy it, by erecting
Schools in the principal Churches of each Province: But the same Pretense, of
their being allowed by the Edict to send their Children to the public
Colleges, gave the Catholics occasion to hinder several of those
Establishments, to ruin the rest, and even to force the Ministers and
Consistories to suffer the Children of the Reformed to be sent to suspicious
Schools, as we shall have occasion to relate hereafter.

The fourth Demand concerned the securing of Estates, and of The 4th. Demand,
the possession of Estates, and Rights of Succession.
Civil and Natural Properties; by virtue whereof Children, or the next of kin,
inherit their deceased Parents or Relations Estates; and the Members of the
same Commonwealth are made capable of receiving Benefits, Gifts and Legacies;
of Buying and Selling; of Contracting, Acting and Disposing of what belongs to
them, according to Law. The Nobility and Gentry had, besides the general
concern, a special Interest therein, in respect of their Fiefs, Lordships,
Patronages and Honors. Now the Canons deprived the Heretics of these Rights,
and afforded so many ways of bereaving them of all the Advantages of civil
Society, that though they had not formally condemned them to Death, yet they
sufficiently brought them to the Necessity of Dying, by taking away from them
all Succors and Reliefs necessary for the maintenance of Human Life. Therefore
the Catholics observed those cruel Laws with much Severity, and formal or
equivalent disinheritings (by which they partly or wholely excluded their
reformed Relations out of their Succession) were always advised by the
Directors of their Consciences, or authorized by the Judges: So that it was
high time to put a Stop to such a great Disorder, and because a Healing Article
had already been inserted, upon this Matter, in the former Edicts, they needed
only to get the old Orders renewed; which was done, with Exceptions, in respect
to some particular Cases, some whereof were explained in the secret Articles,
and others left undecided, for Reasons of State.

The fifth Demand was for obtaining an equal number of The fifth demand,
impartial Judges.
Judges of both Religions, in all Parliaments, and was grounded upon the
ill will of these Courts, who daily did notorious pieces of Injustice to the
Reformed, and started a World of Difficulties and Scruples in the verifying of
the Edicts granted for their Security: Which they had made out with so many
Instances in the Book of their Complaints, that the Court was not able to deny
it; and thought it very insignificant to allow them only some Protestant Judges
in each Court, since it was certain, that wherever the Number of Catholics
were greater, the Reformed should be infallibly cast: But the Parliaments had
such an Interest to prevent the multiplying of Offices in their Bodies, and the
dismembring of their Jurisdictions, that this Affair met Chambers Miparties, or
of the Edict.
with many Difficulties and Obstacles. The King, nevertheless, granted one
miparted Chamber in the Parliaments of Thoulouse, Bordeaux and Grenoble, where
all the Causes of the Reformed should respectively be brought. There was
already one at Castres, and some reformed Judges had been established in the
Parliament of Grenoble, and it seemed that the Reformed of Dauphine, where
Lesdiguieres had a full Power, had nothing common in several Affairs with those
of the same Religion in the other Province; three Judges were then added to the
former, to make up a miparted Chamber, which at the very Time of its Creation
was incorporated with the Parliament, insomuch that its Members were called in,
when ever any thing was to be debated in a full House; Moreover, the King
promised to erect a Chamber at Paris, consisting of ten Catholic Judges and
six reformed, and those Protestants who lived within the respective
Jurisdictions of the Parliaments of Rouen, Rennes and Dijon, had their choice,
either to bring their Causes before that of their own Province, or before any
of the Chambers granted in the nearest of them. The King's Promise, made to the
Reformed, in respect of the Parliament of Paris, was not executed; but, it
seems, he made them amends for it, by creating some new Offices of Judges in
that of Normandy, and a Chamber of the Edict, upon the Model of that which was
established at Paris. They had not the same Favor in the Parliament of
Britany; either because the Judges of that Court, which were some of the most
furious against the Reformed, would not consent to it, for that it was not
judged necessary in that Province, where the Number of Protestants was very
inconsiderable; or, in fine, that all the Members of that Parliament were so
partial and passionate, that a sufficient number of equitable Men could not be
found among them, to make it up. Nothing was changed in what had been agreed
upon concerning the Parliament of Dijon. That of Rouen being a great Enemy to
the Reformed, they had therefore obtained the Choice I spoke of just now: But
this bringing up of Causes from one Court to another, had brought to the
Parliament of Paris all the Causes of Normandy, where the Reformed were very
numerous, and the Catholics themselves stuck not sometimes to beg their
Intervention in their own Causes, when they were jealous of their Judges;
insomuch that this Parliament losing much by that means, chose rather to agree
to the creation of a Chamber, like that of Paris, than to see almost all the
Law. Suits of its Jurisdiction brought to another. The Reformed found also some
Advantage therein, because they were no longer obliged to travel out of their
Province, and so far from their Friends; because also the Customs of Paris and
Normandy were very different, and that the Charges and Delays were more
troublesome at Paris than at Rouen. Besides, they were Gainers in that Bargain,
by the three Offices of Judges created by the King in their behalf: But, for
all this, that Parliament was not reconciled to the Reformation, and, as it was
the most corrupted and venal Court in all France, so there was none where the
Reformed were exposed to greater Vexations and Injustice. However this
Establishment was made but 15 or 16 Months after the Edict: Because it was long
doubted whether the Clause concerning Offices, inserted in the Edict granted to
the Marquess of Villars, permitted the Protestants to be sharers therein: But,
upon the whole matter, it was concluded, That the King had not by this Clause
deprived himself of his Right, and the Interest of the Parliament obliged him
to declare that it was but provisional.

The sixth Demand was, For a free Admittance to all Offices The sixth Demand,
to be admitted to Offices.
of State, War, Justice, Policy, Treasury, and to all Commissions, Employments,
Professions, Arts and Trades, without Danger of being excluded upon the account
of Religion. It was directly against the Canon Law, which debars from all these
Rights such as are not obedient to the Roman Church, and who are for that
Reason called Heretics; and it had been the Original of all the Oppositions
made to the Reformed, during so many Years together; but it was of such great
Consequence to them, that they would never desist from that Article; because,
besides the Honor and Credit of Offices, which they would not have their
Families to be deprived of, they saw well, that if that honorable Door was
shut to the Protestants, such as had more Ambition than Piety, would soon bid
adieu to their naked and barren Religion, and thereby bring the Reformation to
a declining State. The greatest Opposition came from the Parliaments, who
refused to admit them to the Places of the Law: But at last they obtained their
Desire, and the King declared them capable of holding all sorts of Offices;
whereby they thought they had gained a considerable Point, because that Honor
being refused to Heretics by the Canons, their being admitted to them was a
Discharge The extent of this Concession
from that odious and hateful Name. This Pretension extended much farther than
the former, by which they only desired a certain Number of impartial Judges;
but the latter aimed at no less than to be made capable of diverse Offices
which were supreme in Cities and Towns, of Shrievalties, Mayoralties,
Consulats, The Offices wherein Notaries Public, allowed by Authority, ingross
and register private Contracts
Tabellionages; of Places of Attorney, of Recorder, of Bailiff; of Places in
the Marshalsea, Admiralty, in the Table of Marble; of those of the Chamber of
Accounts, of the Court of Aids, of the Courts of Elections; of those of Judge
or Judge-Assistant in the inferior Jurisdictions, of Judge in chief in the
Court leets of the Lords. They were also admitted by the same to the Places of
Master of Requests, two whereof had been promised them gratis; and to those of
Secretary to the King, which are none of the least importance, in respect of
their Privileges. They were already possessed of some Governments and military
Dignities, and several among them were even Counselors of State. The same
Article had also a very great extent in the Profession of Mechanic or Liberal
Arts, and, in a Word, tended to a levelling of the Catholics with the
Reformed, by making the latter Civil Members of the State as well as they, and
equal Sharers in the Distribution of Favors and Rewards. Yet in this important
Matter the Reformed were highly Mistaken, The Sham of this Concession.
when they contented themselves with a wide and general Declaration of their
capableness of Offices, without solidly engaging the King that they should be
really conferred upon them. In effect, to appease the Pope, who made as if he
had been offended at it, they represented to him, That there was a vast
difference between declaring one capable of a Place and bestowing it upon him;
which perfidious Maxim the Event has shown to be too true, since the Reformed
have been so far from being admitted to high Places, or preferred to the
greatest Dignities, according to their Merits, that they have been shifted
with, even about the meanest Places, and the most inconsiderable Trades of the
Kingdom. There were some among them, who foreseeing that some Time or other
this general Declaration would be ministerpreted, moved in the Assembly for
fixing, in each kind of Employments, a certain number of Places, that should be
conferred upon the Reformed; and du Plessis, as I have said elsewhere, treating,
some Years before, with Villeroy, had obtained the fourth part of all Places,
and was even in hopes to obtain a third. But, besides, that such a general
Declaration had something more plausible and flattering than the limitation of
a certain Number of Places, because thereby the Reformed were more fully
equaled to the Catholics, it was more suitable to their different
Circumstances in the Provinces of the Kingdom; for in some their Number was so
great, that if they had been reduced to a fourth or a third part of the
Offices, they had been very unjustly dealt with, and the Court had been under a
necessity of calling Catholics from the other Provinces, to bestow the
remainder upon them. But in others they were so much inferior in number to the
Catholics, that there had not been enough among them to fill the third or the
fourth part of the Places. Moreover, a special Regulation had been necessary
almost for every Balliwick; insomuch that a general Clause was in a manner
unavoidable. Add to this, That the Provinces where the Reformed were the
strongest and most numerous, they did so little question their being able to
engross all the Offices to themselves, for want of qualified Catholics, that
it was no difficult Matter, for the Court to satisfy them with that indefinite
Declaration: And, indeed it was very advantageous, had it been observed bona
fide; but as the same had been formerly eluded by Henry III's Artifices, so his
Example has been followed since for above 40 Years, and this equitable Rule of
Equality has been turned into a Sham by the Treachery of his Successors. True
it is, that at the Time of the Edict the Reformed gained by it no small Credit,
since the best part of all inferior Offices fell immediately upon them, and
even the Catholic Lords were so well persuaded that they had a better Stock
either of Ability or Honesty than others, that they stuck not to prefer them,
before the Catholics, to such Places as were in their Gift; moreover, Offices
being venal in France, the Reformed bought them dearer than others; and, with
the Help of that strong Machine, overcame all sorts of Oppositions, which
happened especially for Places of a new creation, when he that bids most is
sure to be the Buyer: But this happy State of the Reformed lasted only till
after the taking of Rochel.

The seventh Demand was concerning the Securities, the principal The 7th
Demand, Securities.
whereof was, in their Judgment, the keeping of those Places which they had now
in their Hands, and were numerous and strong enough to resist their Enemies in
case of an Attack: But 'twas this very thing made the Difficulty; for the Court
was very unwilling to leave so many Fortresses in the Hands of brave and bold
Men, amongst whom there was a great number of warlike and courageous Nobility,
who had been permitted to unite together for their mutual Defense; but the
Reformed were inflexible upon this Point, and would, by no means, hear of
parting with what they had; for, first, the Experience of past Times made them
afraid that the Edict might be used as a Pretense to disarm them, and that the
Catholics might break their Oath as soon as their Places of Refuge should be
taken from them. Besides, they could not but know, that, according to the
Policy suggested by the Court of Rome to all Princes who submit to the Pope,
they keep Faith with none but such as they fear; and that therefore it might be
kept to the Reformed no longer than the Danger of breaking it should last. It Is
a Maxim no less general than true, Since Conscience and Honesty have not been a
sufficient Warrant for the Security of Treaties, that such as are concerned in
the Observation of them, must make themselves formidable to such as would break
the same, and make them sensible that they could not do it with impunity:
Therefore it was necessary for the Reformed to keep still some strong
Garrisons, to stifle in the Catholics Hearts the Desire of attempting their
Ruin, by showing them the frightful Prospect of an equal Danger on both sides;
moreover, all the rest of the Kingdom was in Arms: All such as during the War
had commanded, either under the King, or under the League, had some Place or
other at their Devotion; and as there was no great likelihood of so soon
disarming so many Men, who acted like petty Princes in their Government, so the
Reformed had good reason to fear, that if they should lay down their Arms
alone, they might soon be at the Discretion of their irreconcilable
Persecutors. This same Article comprehended also many private Interests besides
the general, because there was neither Lord nor Captain which had not some
Place in the Guard, and no one was so disinterested to give up his own, to
preserve that of his Companion. There was also as engaging an Interest which
concerned the common Cause, diverse Places had Catholic Governors that were
not bigoted enough to their Religion to neglect their own Fortune, though it
were advanced to the Prejudice of the Popish Cause; nor yet so well affected to
the Reformed to embrace their Party without an evident Advantage. They plainly
saw, that when a Peace should be established in the Kingdom, their Places would
become unuseful, their Garrisons broke, and their Profits cease; but concluded,
that if the Reformed obtained 1598.
the keeping of their Places, they needed only to change their Religion to
preserve their own, as being the same Reason whereby others should possess
them. The Memoirs of those Times give an account, That there were Men of this
Character, who had promised to profess the Reformed Religion, but declared they
would first see the State settled. 'Twas to favor these Conversions, which
might increase and Strengthen their Party, as made them demand, That if any
Governor of any Place embraced the Reformed Religion, his Place should be
continued to him without any Innovation: And Examples may be seen in the Reign
of Lewis XIII. of the Protection that the Reformed gave to those under such
Circumstances: But the Council, desirous to hinder the multiplication of the
Places of the Reformed, limited the Time in which they were to be at the
disposal of the Reformed, to the end that they might be able to reckon up their
strong Places.

This Article was very difficult to be resolved, because there were Disputes
about the Number and Quality of these Places, the Strength of the Garrisons,
the Nomination and Oath of the Governors, upon the Changing, in case of Death,
about the placing of under Officers, the time of the Guard, and many other
things which respected the Circumstances of this Affair. The Reformed chiefly
declared, They desired that those Places that belonged to them might not
exclude them from other Governments, whereto they might be chose, according to
their Merits. The Council employed all their Art to evade these Pretensions of
the Reformed, and, above all, to bring the Nomination of the Governors under
the King's Power, to the end that such as were admitted might be greater
Friends to the Court than to the contrary Party.

But to prevail with the Reformed to consent to this Proposition, it was
requisite to oblige those that should be chosen by the King to take an
Attestation from the Provincial Assembly, to the end that the Assembly might
object against them, if they were suspicious Persons. The King likewise
promised the Reformed to take their Advice when any Government should be
vacant, that he might not choose such Persons into those Places as would be
disagreeable to them. In which Proceeding there was something very different
from what happened on other occasions, where the People have any part in the
disposing of Offices. Generally the Subjects nominate to the King such as they
think fit, and he accepts or refuses them: But here the King names and the
Subjects have a Liberty to refuse; wherefore the King sends back all those whom
he chooses for the Attestation of the Assembly, obliged the Assembly, in case
they refuse them their Testimony, to give their Reasons to the Council; to the
end that by this necessity of giving an account of their Refusal, the Respect
due to the Royal Nomination may be observed, and that the King might always
appear Master and Arbitrator in the Affair. And upon the whole, the Reformed
obtained a great part of what they desired, and had it not been for the
Divisions among themselves, they might have gained much more: It was very happy
for them that there was not in every Province a Governor, as indifferent to
Religion, and as powerful as Lesdiguieres was in Dauphine. They would have
disunited them, in treating with each separately, as they did with him who
would never have his Garrisons comprehended with the rest, under the same
Conditions He made Religion a pretext to keep his Places, but he would have no
dependence on the Assembly, liking better to be sole Master in his own
Province. The Court would have gained by it if every Governor had been able to
have done the same, because by that means they would have ruined the Authority
of General Councils: But none of them besides Lesdigueres being in a condition
of maintaining himself, all were obliged to unite for their mutual Security.

But to return, these strong Places being held by the Reformed, How they were
useful to the King. ^
was not so contrary to the Interests and Intentions of the King, as some would
make us believe, and as he himself was even sometimes obliged to pretend. This
Prince was not yet free from the perplexity wherein the uncertainty of the
Succession, the Authority of the Nobility, and the Power of his own Officers
had put him. The Seeds of those Conspiracies which had been raised against him
and against the State, were rather hidden than quite stifled: And there was too
much reason to fear that so many Men being corrupted by the Practices and Gold
of the Spaniards, might form such a Party as would give him a great deal of
Trouble to destroy; upon which he often complained, That there was none about
him that prudence would permit him to confide in. On the other side, when he
thought of the Affection that the Reformed had so seasonably showed toward him
for so many Years together, he was satisfied there was amongst them such as
were proved Friends, and from whom, in the greatest extremity he might promise
himself all Assistance. It is true, at that time they were dissatisfied with
his indifference toward them, and his delaying their Affairs, but he was
certain he should always find them ready to lay down the last drop of their
Blood for his Service, as soon as ever he should give them any Testimony of his
former Confidence and Trust in them: And therefore he thought it a very
important business to preserve them, and spoke to his Confidents of the Peace
he had granted them, as a thing he had the most ardently wished for, and which
might be very serviceable to him in his greatest Undertakings. He looked upon
the Reformed as his Party, and their strong Places as his own: He knew very
well, that whatsoever Intrigues the Spaniards might carry on with the turbulent
Spirits of the Court, yet that part of the State which was held by the Reformed
could not be taken from him, and they might be serviceable even in keeping
others in their Duty Indeed there were some persons in this Party that were
suspected by him, and that he would have been very glad to have had at his
discretion, that he might have been able to have unhinged those Cabals whereof
he thought these Persons the Ringleaders: But he had seen by the Negotiation
of the Edict that this pretended Faction was not always the strongest, and that
those that were the most difficultly pleased, had, nevertheless, sometimes
yielded upon the Necessity of his Affairs: And, upon the whole matter, he was
not ignorant that he had the infallible means of re uniting them to himself,
whenever he would; and that he might depend as much upon them as on*the rest of
the Reformed, as soon as by the state of Affairs his Interest would permit him
to rejoyn himself to their Party: He had only a Desire of having a Power of
naming the Governors of their Towns, to the end that he might place such in
them who were as much engaged to his Fortune as to their Religion* and who by
consequence should depend more upon him than on the Councils or political
Assemblies: But to procure their Consent to this Article, he must find out an
Expedient, which might in some sort content them, because they were afraid that
by this means their Places might fall into the Hands of some treacherous
Persons. This same Reflection may be seen in the Reasons why the King suffered
so many Places to be held by the Reformed, in the Memoirs of those Times, and
in the Writings of those who have endeavored to justify the War that Lewis
XIII made against the Reformed, under the pretext of regaining the Places of
Security. This is one of their Reasons, That since the King had not consented
to leave them wholely to them, but only under their Names to keep these Places
for himself, against the secret Factions which might trouble the State; it was
therefore no longer just to suffer them in their Possession after these
Factions were extinct. We have already seen how dissatisfied the Marquess d'O
was, because the King had put as many Places as he could into the Hands of the
Reformed; and that, for this Reason, he had rather see a Place taken by a
Spaniard than kept by an Huguenot.

But there was, besides, a great difficulty about paying those The payment of
the Garrisons.
Sums that were necessary for the maintaining of the Garrisons, Fortifications
and the Walls of their Towns: There was nothing the Council was more difficult
to part with than Money, and the Catholics were much offended to see so great
Sums paid by the King to the Heretics, to maintain such Fortresses as rendered
them very formidable; nevertheless it could not be refused to Men who could
say, That the like had been done for the Leaguers, the greatest part whereof
had Pensions, or their Garrisons paid them out of the King's Coffers: The
Contestation therefore was reduced to the means how to save the King's Money,
and the Reformed were contented with so little, that it can hardly be believed
that all their Garrisons could be paid with so inconsiderable a Sum: And, in
effect, there were some of the Leaguers to whom they had given or promised more
Money than they had granted to the Reformed for the maintenance of their Towns
for many Years together. When all was thus settled, a new Dispute began upon
the manner whereby they should assure the Reformed of the Payment of the
promised Sums: They should have been very glad if they might have been
permitted to have stopped the King's Taxes at the respective Treasuries, rather
than to accept of such Assignments as they feared would be both inconvenient
and uncertain: But they judged it not handsome to let the King know they so
much distrusted his Word, and therefore they were forced to be contented with
the Promise he gave them of convenient and certain Assignments. There were some
private persons also, who having Gifts to private Persons.
neither Commands in these Places or in the Soldiery, made particular
Requests, some of Arrearages of Pensions, others of some Gift to establish
their Affairs; and, so others again, for some Gratification for their past
Services, which had not yet been acknowledged: And thus they were all made
under different Pretensions; but the whole of their Demands amounted to so
small a matter, that altogether it would scarcely equal the least Recompense
that the Leaguers had obtained.

When all things were agreed on, there still remained a general Contestations*
touching the Form of the Concessions,
difficulty, concerning the manner wherein those Concessions should be
published; an Edict appeared the most Authentic Security to the Reformed, but
there were so many Obstacles, so many Fears of offending the Catholics, and of
giving any Pretense to the Disaffected of beginning new Disturbances, and such
Hopes given to the Churches of mending their Conditions with the Times; That,
in fine, they agreed upon several Forms, under which diverse Concessions should
be granted, as had been done which is diverse, according to the nature of the
thing.
on other occasions. First, Therefore they gave an Edict, which contained to
the number of 92 general Articles, by which the Exercise of the Reformed
Religion was authorized in many Places, under such and such Conditions. The
Reformed were admitted to all States and Offices; the administration of Justice
was regulated by the setting up of Chambers Miparties; and many other things
were commanded, conformably to what had been practiced in the Edicts of the
same nature; a Pardon for whatsoever might be laid to the Charge of the
Reformed, was expressed at full length; all manner of Edicts, Letters or
Articles of the preceding Times, that were contrary to this New Edict, were
expressly abrogated by it: And for the Security of this, the King commanded all
his Officers to take an Oath to observe it with Care and Fidelity; and taking
all the Inhabitants of the Towns and other Places into his Protection, he put
them under the care of each other, to prevent Seditions and Violences.

To the Edict were added secret or particular Heads, to the number of 56, among
which there was many of great importance, which well deserved to have been
inserted into the Body of the Edict; but they contented themselves with placing
them in this Appendix, because it was addressed to the Parliaments as the same
Edict, and many of them verified it. Such were the Articles which exempted the
Reformed in respect of many things that belonged to the Worship of the
Catholics, the Privileges of the Ministers, the exercise of the Discipline of
the Reformed, with the holding of their Consistories, their Colloquies and
Synods, the Education of Children, the Liberty of Marriages in such degrees
wherein the Catholics are obliged to procure Dispensations, the observations
of Fasting and Holidays, the nullity of extorted Abjurations, and many others
the like; they forgot not the Confirmation of the Articles granted to the Heads
of the League, who had submitted to the Government. The Shiftings made use of
in our Time, upon many of these Articles, sufficiently show how needful it was
that general Articles should be granted thereon: But what seems most singular
in this Affair, is, that there were in these secret Articles some Passages
which formally regarded only what was past, or else the Time of the Edict it
self, that nevertheless were executed from the time it was published until its
Revocation, of calling them into Question, such were the Articles which
concerned Marriage in such a degree of Affinity as the Catholics were not
permitted without a Dispensation. This, in a manner, made some amends for
certain Articles of the Edict that had never been put in execution, which
permitted the Reformed freely to live in all places of the Kingdom. There were
all a-long many Towns wherein the Reformed could never appear with safety, so
far were they from living without Disturbance in them. But a particular Remark
may be here made upon Liberty of Conscience; The Edict had aimed expressly to
establish it, and yet there was no formal Article in it which gave it to all
the French, but it was so plainly presupposed by the Edict, and by that Spirit
of Liberty which they always so highly pretended to, even to the fancying that
France was the only Kingdom in the World where Freedom had the least
interruption, that all the King's Subjects were suffered to enjoy it for
fourscore Years, without any Person's ever being disturbed about it: And indeed
they durst not violate it, until they had in many respects ruined the Edict in
its most important Concessions.

The rest of the things that could not be comprehended in the Edict, nor in the
particular Articles, were Promises by private Patents, where with the Reformed
were not easily satisfied, because these sorts of Letters are not like a Law,
but only continue at the King's Pleasure, who revokes them when he has a Mind
to it: But as these Grants were the nicest, and such as the Catholics were the
least pleased with, so they were under a necessity of depending upon the King's
good Will, and allowing such Excuses as were taken from the State of his
Affairs, which would not permit him to do any more. There were Three Patents of
this nature: The first, which was dated the third of April, granted a Sum of
Forty five thousand Crowns for the Payment of the Ministers; it was assigned
upon several provincial Exchequers, for the Convenience of its Distribution,
payable quarterly in ready Money, with Precautions that were very favorable for
the Payment, and a Dispensation given to the receiver, appointed either by the
King or the Reformed, by which he was freed from giving an Account in any
Court. As the Court durst not declare openly that this Sum was designed to
maintain the Ministers, lest the Catholics should murmur to see part of the
King's Revenue employed in the Preservation of Heresy, so they were obliged to
put in some Clause which might secure it from giving them any Scandal.
Duplessis having inserted an Article on this Subject, among those which had
been agreed upon at Mants, after the King's turning Papist had obtained that
the promised Sum should be paid under the Name of the Lady Catherine, because
she might receive greater Gratifications from the King her Brother, without its
being suspected by any one: But she could not live always, and therefore some
pretext must be thought on which might serve them at all times: So that it was
declared in the Patent that this Sum was given to the Reformed, to be employed
in their secret concerns, which his Majesty would have neither specified nor
declared.

The Second Patent concerned the Places of Security: But it contained also many
other Passages, which explained several things that the Edict seemed to leave
undetermined. It was dated the thirtieth of April at Nants; and the King
declares there, in the manner of a Preface, the Motives that induced him to
grant them the keeping of these Fortresses: viz. That the Reformed thought it
necessary, for the Liberty of their Consciences, and Security of their Persons
and Estates; and that his Majesty was assured of their Fidelity, and of their
sincere Affection to his Service. To which he added in general Terms many other
important Considerations for the Advantage and Peace of the State. After which
there followed Twenty four Articles, the first of which permitted them for
eight Years, under the Authority of his Majesty, to keep all those Fortresses,
Towns and Castles which they had held until the End of August 1598. wherein
Garrisons were to be maintained according to the Settlement made in the Council
for it; the eight Years were to be reckoned from the Time the Edict was
published in all the Parliaments. The second promised, That nothing should be
innovated in any of the Reformed Towns, where there was no Garrison. The third
excepted some Places which they should not keep under the Title of Security;
and that even for the Time to come, if the King should place any Governor of
the Reformed Religion therein, they should draw no Consequence from it. These
Towns were Vendome, Pontorson, Aubenas and its Citadel. He commanded also that
Chavigni, which belonged to the Bishop of Poictiers, should be restored to him,
and the Fortifications thereof rased; but by one of the secret Articles of the
Edict the Exercise of their Religion was formally permitted continuing there.
The fourth gave them the sum of One hundred and fourscore thousand Crowns for
the maintaining of their Towns and Payment of their Garrisons. The fifth
excepted the Places in Dauphiny, of which a particular State was promised to be
set up by it self: Lesdiguiers liking better to defend them on his own account,
than for the common Cause, and the Court, favored this Division, to weaken a
Party, the uniting of whose Members would render it redoubtable. The sixth
promised good Assignments, and that the Money thereof should not be diverted to
other uses. The seventh promised, That the Reformed should be called, when the
state of the Places should be settled, to take their Advice, and hear their
Remonstrances, and afterward to do every thing as much to their Liking as
possible. The same Promise was made to Lesdiguiers for Dauphiny. The eighth
permitted, That in case any Change should happen in their Places, either by the
King's Pleasure, or through the Desire of the Reformed themselves, they should
act there in the same manner as when the former State was settled; that is,
that the Reformed were to be called in order, to give their Advice and
Remonstrances. The ninth assured them, That if by Death any of these
Governments became vacant, during the eight Years, none but the Reformed should
be admitted, who likewise must be obliged to take an Attestation of the
Assembly which belonged to that Province the Place was situated in: And added,
That if the Assembly should refuse their Attestation, then the Cause should be
heard before the King. The tenth provided, That after the eight Years were
passed, although the King was quitted of his Promise, he should nevertheless
continue those in their Governments that were then in possession, in such
Places as he thought good still to keep a Garrison. The eleventh declared, That
the keeping of these Places should not exclude the Reformed from other
Governments, whereto they might be received, indifferently with others,
according to their Merits: But that such Places as were given them upon this
account should not, nevertheless, be reckoned among their Places of Security.
The twelfth permitted the keeping of Magazines, Ammunition, Powder, Cannons,
etc. to those to whom the Reformed had given them, and to take a Commission
from the Master of the Ordnance and from the Commissary General of Provisions,
which should be delivered them gratis, under certain Conditions. The
thirteenth, provided for the Payment of these Commissioners out of the Hundred
and fourscore thousand Crowns, and not to charge the King's Exchequer with it.
The fourteenth declared, That the King had caused the Temple of Mets to be
removed, and granted Letters Patents to the Inhabitants thereof, which
permitted them to dispose of the Materials; and promised them to give them
another Place within the Walls to perform their Exercise in; for which Reason
this was not necessary to be inserted in the Edict. The fifteenth assured the
Reformed: Lords that might happen ^o reside at Court, that they should not be
questioned for what they did in their Houses with their Families only, and
their Gates shut, without they sung Psalms with a loud Voice, or gave any
reason to suppose there was a Public Exercise. The sixteenth had a relation to
the fourteenth of the Edict, permitting them to continue the exercise in such
Places where it was publicly allowed, if the Court (who made it cease by its
Residence) continued above three Days there. The seventeenth relating to the
same, declared, That because of the present state of his Majesty's Affairs,
Matters concerning Religion should remain in the same condition they were in
Bresse, Barcelona, and the Country on that side the Hills, but that when they
should be reduced to Obedience, they should be treated like the rest of the
King's Subjects, notwithstanding what was mentioned thereof in the Edict. The
eighteenth granted Provisions gratis to those that should be put into the place
of Presidents, Counselors, and Deputies of Attorney and Solicitor General, to
serve the first Time in the Chambers Miparties. The nineteenth promised gratis
the Places of Judges to those Substitutes, in the Parliaments of Thoulouse and
Bourdeaux, if it happened that Chambers were incorporated with them. The
twentieth declared Francis Pithou substitute to the Procurer General in the
Parliament of Paris, and after him assured the Charge to some of the Reformed.
The one and twentieth promised the Reformed two Places of Masters of Requests,
when they should be void by death, at the rate of its Value; and in the mean
while two such Places should quarterly be given them, who should report their
Affairs.

The two and twentieth permitted the Deputies of the Assembly of Chattilleraud,
to leave ten of their Members at Saumur, until the Edict was confirmed in the
Parliament of Paris, although by the Edict they were commanded to depart: This was
to reduce the Assembly to the Number which was set up by that of S. Foy; the
twenty third took from these ten Deputies the Power of making any new Demands,
and forbad them meddling with any thing, except the soliciting for the
Confirmation of the Edict, and sending Commissioners into the Provinces to see
it executed. The twenty fourth was the most important of all; the King, in
that, gave his Word and Faith for the Security of the Execution of the whole,
declaring that all that was contained in the Patent should be of the same Force
as if it had been comprised by an Edict, confirmed in the Court of Parliament;
Being, he said, those of the said Religion, to comply with what was for his
Interest, were contented not to press him, as the state of his Affairs was, to
put this Grant in a more authentic Form, trusting in the Word and Goodness of
the King, that they should entirely enjoy it: Upon which account he had
commanded all necessary Expedition to be made. Thus, as the private Articles
were a kind of Instruction for the Executors of the Edict, wherein the King
explained many things, that the general Articles had left obscure and
undecided; so we may say also, That this Parent served for a kind of a Salvo to
certain Articles of the Edict that the Times would not permit to be put in more
favorable Terms, although the Intention of the King was not contrary to it:
And above all, he justified the Reformed from the Reproach of having made any
Advantage of the Conjuncture of Affairs, in forcing him to grant them what they
pleased, since he declared, That they were contented with the King's Word upon
so many important things: because the state of his Affairs would not permit him
to give better Assurances.

The third Patent contained a distribution of three and twenty thousand Crowns,
to several private Persons, to some for one time, to others for two Years, to
some for four, and to others again for eight Years: To some by way of
Gratification, and to others as Arrears for past Services. The Historian
D'Aubigne, one of those that they esteemed at Court too zealous for their
Religion, who thought himself ill-requited for his Services, by this means
extorted a moderate Sum for the Arrears of a Pension that had been some time
detained from him. Thus all the personal Favors that the King granted to the
Reformed, amounted to a very small matter; by which it appeared, that private
Interest was not the Motive, as they declared in all their Requests. All the
Sums amounted not to Two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns: And even at the end
of eight Years the whole was reduced to less than a fifth part, which they gave
to the Reformed, in compensation for the Tenths, that they were obliged to pay
to the Clergy their Persecutors.

It seems not improper here to speak a Word or two of the Places that the
Reformed had in their Keeping, to the end that we may see what condition they
were in, as to the Strength of their Party, at the time the Edict was made.
There were two sorts of Towns comprehended under the Name of Towns of Security,
one of which had neither Governor nor Garrison, but defended it self: Such
were Rochel, Montaubon, Nismes, and some others. They had Privileges so great,
that they were almost free; and Rochel, above the rest had had such Treaties
with the Kings of France as had made them very near independent, though indeed
all was done there in the King's Name, yet each Place had its Magistrates which
had the sole Administration of the Government. These Towns were the firmest to
the Common Cause, because they had two Privileges to defend, their Religion
and their Liberty. This kind of Independence must not be imputed to the
Doctrine of the Reformed, since there were Catholic Towns which had as much
Liberty: But the Court made Religion a pretext to destroy them first, and by
the means of their Ruin sound a way to oppress the rest, who have all now
submitted to the Yoke.

There were other Places who had both Garrisons and Governors, some of which
belonged to particular Lords, who disposed of Matters therein, as they pleased:
The rest were governed by great Men, that had made themselves Masters of them
during the War; or else by such as the King, whilst he was their Protector, had
placed therein, to defend them. Some of these were properly Places of Security,
others were called Towns or Places of Marriage, because they had no Garrison of
their own, but were comprised under the Name of more important neighboring
Places; and that their Garrison was a Detachment from those of the principal
Place whereon they depended: Many of these Places of Marriage were only simple
Castles belonging to Protestant Gentlemen, some of which had not above six or
seven Men in a Garrison; but they afterward disputed them with the Reformed,
and pretended that these Places of Marriage were not comprehended in the number
of those that the King permitted them to keep.

The Payment of the Soldiers (without speaking of Dauphine, which had its
Affairs separate, and contained eleven Places) consisted The manner of Payment.
of two States, the one of which was public and the other private, because
they found it necessary to conceal part of their Strength and the good Will of
the King, for fear of offending the Catholics. The least Sum was employed upon
the Public State, and the rest was set down in the other, which was called the
little State. In respect to the first they followed the accustomed Order for
the Payment of the Garrisons, furnishing of Rolls of Acquittances, etc. and
they were paid by the extraordinary Treasurer of War; but the other was paid
with less, upon simple Orders obtained from the respective provincial
Exchequers.

Thus ended the long Civil War, whereof Religion was made The Conclusion.
the Pretense. The Reformed began to take Breath, and the Minds of the People
to be a little settled again. La Trimouille by his inflexibility incurred the
Hatred of the King, but gained the Esteem and Confidence of his own Party: The
Court endeavored all ways possible to draw him from the common Cause, but
nothing could work upon him; to that end the President de Thou offered him
incredible Advantages; but he answered very generously, Whatsoever they could
do for him would avail nothing, whilst the Requests of the Reformed were
unanswered; but if they would grant them the Security of their Consciences and
Lives, they might hang him up at the Gate of the Assembly, and that no
Disturbance would come upon it. They also endeavored to stir him up with
Emulation and Jealousy, when the Duke de Bouillon came to the Assembly, where
La Trimouille being youngest, gave him the first Place that he had held for two
Years together: But he was not concerned for this Point of Honor, which would
have shaken a Soul less Noble than his. He gave way without any regret, and
maintained himself unto the end with an equal Courage. There were many other
great Men which seconded him; the Minister Chamier was one of the most
undaunted; and, because of that, he became as odious to the Court, as he was
considerable to the Churches. There are some Authors among the Reformed who
affirm, That the King's Avarice was the Reason why the Division was less in the
Assembly than it might have been, if the King had been willing to buy its
Members at as dear a rate as he had bought the Leaguers. But that many
continued firm to the Common Cause, because there was no Advantage in
abandoning it. Indeed Aubigny, one of these Authors, might speak by Experience,
he was not rich, and he was very willing to make his Fortune; but they did not
love him at Court, because he was too free and satirical in his Discourses, and
disturbed them with the Reproaches of his Services. Though it was not really so
much from the King's Avarice as his Wisdom and good Intentions for the
Preservation of the Reformed, he chose rather to grant Favors to them in
general, whom he had some reason to love, than to raise the Fortune of some
private Persons, which he thought he might have cause to complain of.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of NANTS. BOOK VI.
The Contents of the 6th. Book.
THE Sentiment of the Reformed in the Provinces upon the Edict. Artifices to
gain them, at a Synod at Mompellier. The Number and Condition of the Churches.
What it is that Forms a Church. Uniting of many Churches into one. Reasons why
they are contented with the Edict obtained. Projects of Reunion. The Religion
of Lesdiguiers. A Treatise of the Eucharist. The Consequences of its
Publication, Three Important Negotiations with the Pope. 1. A Dissolution of
the King's Marriage. 2. The Re-establishment of the Jesuits, their Confidence
and their Credit; the Passion of the Monks against the King. The Persecution in
Piedmont, and in the Marquisate of Saluces, the Kings Reasons for favoring the
Jesuits Opposition. Marriage of Madam, her Constancy, the Unkindness of the
King unto her. The difficulties on the Popes side, and their Reasons. The King
goes on without staying for a Dispensation. The Pope is Offended thereat, and
persists in his Refusal, the Consequence of this Negotiation until the Death of
the Princess. The Advantages the Reformed drew from her Perseverance.
Difficulties upon the Examination of the Edict. An Assembly of the Clergy;
their Propositions upon the Edict. The Disgust of some Prelates. The Moderation
of the Nuncio. Contradictions of the Parliament. The Equity of the Duke of
Mayenne. The Resolution of the King. The withdrawing of the Reformed from the
Court upon many Articles. Prejudices of the Clergy. The Chamber of the Edict at
Rouen. The Mipartie Chamber in Guienne. The Examination of the Edict after
which the Pope makes great Complaints to stop the Mouth of the Spaniards. The
Answers of Cardinal de Joyeuse and Cardinal D'Ossat, agreeable to the
Inclination of the Pope. An Edict for the Principality of Bearn, which is
Received. Complaints of the Alterations made in the Edict. Article concerning
Burials. Particular demands. Precedence pretended by the Catholic Officers,
who composed the Chamber Mipartie is a Court of Justice, Erected in diverse good
Towns of France, in favor of, and for the righting them of the Religion, one
half of the Judges being of the Reformed, the other Papists.
Chambres Miparties, over the Reformed. Verbal demand upon Occasion of the
Chapels in Gentlemen's Houses. Answers to those Papers. Article concerning
Churchyards. Precedence preserved to the Ancient President. Martha Brosier
counterfeiting her self to be Possessed. The Consequence of that Comedy both
within and out of the Kingdom. The Kings Marriage dissolved. The Decree of the
Parliament of Bretagne upon the Oath referred by one of the Reformed to a
Catholic. La Trimouille made a Peer of France, the Pope grumbles, and d'Ossat
appeases him. He takes little Notice of Roni's Advancement. Commissioners to
put the Edict in Execution, and their Power. General Observations upon the
Edict. Reproaches of the Catholics cast upon the Reformed, Answered.

THE Edict being then at length Decreed in this manner, nevertheless did not
all of a sudden allay the general Murmurings: (...) Edict*
And when the News was carried into the Provinces, several people of Nice and
Difficult Palates found that there were many things altogether omitted, others
ill-explain'd, others inconvenient, and with which the Reformed had less Reason
to be contented then the Catholics. The delay of the Verification put 'em to a
great deal of trouble, and the Reputation of the Duke of Beuillon, who had
taken upon him to engage 'em to Patience in this particular was not sufficient
to stop the Mouths of all the World. But the Court had then recourse to little
Artifices to mollify their minds by gentle means, and Artifices to gain 'em.
bring 'em to that submission which she desired. She had her Confidents in all
places, who, according to the Genius of those people with whom they discoursed,
knew how to vary their Arguments and their Remonstrances. Sometimes they put a
Value upon the King's private Promises, who durst go no farther for fear of
Offending the Catholics, and returning their Arms into the Hands of the
Leaguers; but who had given his Word to do so many things for the Reformed for
the future; which was that which far exceeded all they had demanded, and which
was contained most favorable in the Edict. Sometimes the Prince himself was
represented as altogether of the Reformed Religion in his Heart, Weeping when
he spoke of the Churches, and causing his usual Prayers to be said before him
in private; and that, perhaps, was no Invention altogether. Moreover, he had
every day in his Mouth all the passages of Scripture, which all the Reformed
well knew how to apply to all the accidents of Life: And tho that all the
outward Actions of his Devotion were Catholic, yet his private Meditations and
Retirements had still sometimes a relish of the Reformed Religion. So that,
both at Court and at Rome, they were still afraid, or made a show of being in
fear, that he was only turned Catholic for the sake of the Crown, but that he
was still Reformed in his Will and Affection. There were a great Number of the
Reformed who were heartily of this Opinion; and who pitied the constraint,
wherein, as it seemed to them, the King was obliged to live. Nor was it a
difficult thing to win over those who were of this Opinion, and to make 'em sit
down contented with the present, in the midst of Extraordinary future
Expectations: So much the rather because that almost all the Reformed were
Anticipated with a full persuasion that their Religion would in a short time
Triumph over the Tricks and Artifices of the Roman See.

On the other side, to frighten those that were timorous of themselves, they
aggravated the Puissance and Prosperity of the King, who began to make himself
formidable both at home and abroad, and who being in a condition to force
Respect from Foreigners was the more able to constrain Obedience from his own
Subjects. In short, they who by their Intrigues had brought France within one
Ace almost of her Ruin, saw with astonishment, that the same Prince, whom they
had so rudely handled lived peaceable in his Dominions, in a Capacity to
trouble those in his turn that had so long and so Maliciously turmoil'd him
with incessant Vexations, and as it were of a sudden become the Terror of one
part of Europe, and the Protector of the other. But the most concealed of all
the Court Artifices was to give those some little Trouble who spoke too loudly
in the Provinces. They were sent for to Court, under various pretenses, either
of hard Words which they had let fall, or of some bold Actions which they had
over boldly committed, or of too violent Councels which they were accused of
having given. But when they had 'em in their Clutches, instead of treating 'em
with severity, which they had put 'em in some fear of at home, they lulled 'em
with a thousand Caresses; loaded 'em with praises and promises; and causing 'em
to be managed by persons who understood what they were to say, sent 'em home
somewhat Tamed and Mollify'd, and ready to believe themselves and persuade
others, that the best course they could take, was to comply with the King's
pleasure.

In the mean time the Reformed Assembled a National Synod A Synod at Mompelier.
at Mompelier; where their principal business was to draw up a State of the
Churches. Every Province brought thither a List The number of the State of the
Churches.
of such as were already Erected within their Jurisdictions; and it was found
that they amounted altogether to seven hundred and sixty. Upon which it
behooves us to observe in the first place, that while it was uncertain what
extent the King would allow to Liberty of Exercise, there were many places
whose Franchises were confounded one with another, and which were intermixed
with those whose Privileges were more immediate and uncontrollable, to the End
they might have the fewer disputes with the Catholics. But when the Edict had
Regulated the Foundations upon which the Right of continuing Free Exercise was
to be established, they began to unpester those confused Rights, and to
separate several Places into distinct Churches, which had been a long time
uncertain what would become of their Pretensions. Thus the King having
consented that such places where Free Exercise had been several times performed
during the year 1596. should be preserved for the future, those places, which
had been under uncertainty till then, betook themselves to a New Form after
that Concession; and Churches were Erected Correspondent to the Models in
Government of those of which they had been long in Possession. But in regard
the Edict was not concluded that Year, they made New demands the year
following, and obtained that the same Right of Free Exercise should be
preserved where it had been several times performed in that New Year till the
Month of August. A Term which the King limited for New Possessions, that they
might not multiply every day. So that the Places which had acquired this New
Right could not take upon 'em any Regulated Form, till they knew what could be
obtained of the King upon this New pretention. Moreover there were several
places where Free Exercise ought to have been allowed according to preceding
Edicts; but where it had been left off for several Reasons; either the
Opposition of the Catholics, or the Neighborhood of the Troops of the League,
or other Inconveniences which the Reformed there suffered. It was requisite
therefore, in resuming the Possession of those Places, to set up such Churches
as had a privilege to Assemble there, and whom those Obstacles had dispersed.
These were the different places where the Provincial Synods reported to the
National, that they had set up Churches; and there were yet several others, the
Settlement of which was contested; nor could the Disputes be determined till
after the Judgment of the Commissioners which the King sent into the Provinces
to put the Edict in Execution.

This may serve for an Answer to the Brabbles and Wranglings raised in these
latter years, as to the Number of the Churches above 760. or as to what
concerned others which did not appear to have taken upon 'em the Form of
Churches till after the Conclusion of the Edict. Nor was it for want of Right
that those Churches had not been set up, but because their Right remaining
undetermined, and in suspense till August 1597. they were unwilling to draw
together an Assembly of people, which they were not assured they were able to
maintain there. For they were not looked upon as Established, till they had
acquired a Right by the New Concession, or by the Commissioners who removed the
Difficulties. In the second Forming a Church what it is.
place, by what the Synod calls forming a Church, is not to be meant the
settling an Exercise in a place where it never was before; or the receiving a
Minister by Imposition of Hands, or appointing a Consistory, of which there is
not the least shadow formerly. But it is the rendering that perpetual and
customary, which was only provisional and by Intervals; the assigning a
peculiar and standing Minister to the place, which before was only served
occasionally; the subjecting the Elders to a Regular Discipline; the separating
the Families into Quarters, under the Jurisdiction of an Elder, who is to take
care of that business; the declaring to what Classis or Colloquy the Church
belongs; and putting it into the Number, among the rest of the Province. Things
formerly accustomed to be regulated Viva voce, and to be put in practice
without any other Law, than the Conformity of Custom received in the Churches
of the same Synod; which is the Reason that the Acts of these Establishments
are very rarely mentioned in Writing. In the third place it is to Several
Churches United into one.
be observed, that under the Name of one Church, they comprehended two, three
or more places where Free Exercise was allowed according to the Edict; but for
their Reciprocal Convenience put themselves under the pastoral Charge of one
Shepherd, who divided the Officiating his Duty among 'em according to the
private agreement. These different Places which they called Quarters, or
Annexes, were United, Separated, Closed, and divided, as the Synods pleased,
who as they saw convenient, of several Churches made one; or of one, several;
which might probably sometimes augment the Number of the Places of Exercise;
tho there were nothing of Usurpation in the Excess of the usual or prefixed
Number. Nevertheless, these Truths which ought to be beyond all dispute, by
reason they are so evidently demonstrable, have been looked upon in our days,
as Unjust and Chimerical pretensions.

But to return to the Synod, there were some Reflections made Causes of
contenting themselves with the Edict as it was obtained.
among 'em, what should oblige the General Assembly to depart from the
Pretentions of the Churches, to content themselves with the Edict as they had
obtained it. They were offended, as it was but just, that the Members of the
Assembly had been long at variance among themselves: But it was more easy to
declaim against the Disease, then procure a Remedy: And when the Mischief is
incurable, the discovery of the Cause adds little to the Cure of the Distemper.
There was also some Discourse in the Synod of Erecting of Schools and Colleges
of Divinity in several Places; several Regulations also were under Debate, for
the preservation of the Churches, and for bringing them under an exacter
Discipline. Nor were they less employed about Projects for a Reunion with the
Roman Church, with which the Kingdom was filled. For they had been very earnest
for the publishing several Pieces of that Nature, which were pleasing enough to
the Catholics, who were of Opinion, that an Accommodation could not choose but
be always to their Advantage. But the Reformed were as much scandalized at it,
for the same Reason, and looked upon all those Writings as Prevarications which
betrayed the Cause of Truth, and only tended to disguise the Errors of the
Roman Church, to render 'em less Odious. Foreign Protestants also were no less
Offended at 'em than others, and made their Complaints to the Synod. Which
Condemned some Books that went under that Character, and Ordered others to be
Examined, that were no less suspected. But this was all to no purpose; and the
Itch of Reunion lasted till the Revocation of the Act; at which time also the
Projects for an Accommodation flew about every where.

There was likewise one particular Act that was discoursed of in that Assembly.
The Province of Languedoc had Raised a Fund of 17760 Crowns, which was sent to
Geneva, there to be put out to Use, and the Revenue to be employed for the
Maintenance of Resolvers of Cases. Lesdiguieres, who minded nothing so much as
to take of all sides, seized upon this same Money, under pretense that it had
been Raised contrary to Law, and without the Kings permission, and that it
could not be sent out of the Kingdom; and that he might have some specious
Right to detain it, he begged it of the King, Who in regard he came so easily
by it, made no great difficulty to give it him, without ever troubling himself
the to consider what Complaints the Reformed might make, leaving it to
Lesdiguiers to defend himself against them, as well as he could. And indeed
Commissioners were sent to him to recover the Money out of his Hands, who laid
before him the Injustice of the Act, and put it hard upon his Conscience, as
being of the Reformed Religion; but that was not his sensible Part; so that
after many years and several Importunities they had much ado to get him restore
some part. By this it may be judged, that 'twas not his Conscience that
retained him in the Profession of the Reformed Lesdiguieres's Religion.
Religion; and the next year he did many things which would have cleared the
Suspicion, but that he was ashamed to do 'em publicly. For the Jesuit Cotton,
so Famous afterward in France, being then at Grenoble, Lesdiguieres entered
into a strict Alliance with him; but for fear of rendering himself suspected to
the Ministers, he built a Back Gallery, by which the Father might be brought to
his Apartment, without being perceived by any but those that were privy to the
Secret: By which means the Jesuits and He were frequent in Conferences.
Lesdiguieres's Daughter, of the same Religion as her Father, had the same
kindnesses for the Jesuit, and went much farther then her Father. For she
Abjured the Doctrine of the Reformed, while Cotton held her Hands in his, and
afterward privately gave her the Communion; and every year sent her a Priest
for the same purpose, till time and her Father should permit her to declare her
self. During this Interval, the Jesuit was not so tender Conscienc'd, but that
he gave her leave to make outward Profession, and Repair to all the public
Exercises, of the Reformed Religion; and perhaps it might be found that she
Communicated on both sides, if her Life were more narrowly Examined: Such is
the Religion of the Jesuits. For according to their Maxims, Hypocrisy and
Profaneness are no Obstacles but that people may be truly Pious and Devout at
the same time. As to what remains, in this Synod it was, that the first
distribution was made of Money granted in Lieu of Tithes; and there was a
Division of a hundred and thirty thousand Livres among the Churches.

Thus the Reformed were very diligent to make their Advantage of the Edict,
before it was fully brought to perfection, in regard it was not as yet
verified. For it was agreed at the importunity of the Legate, that they would
stay till he was gone before they published it. This delay put back the
Business so far, that the Reformed were impatient; and tho the Marshal de
Bouillon took upon him to make all whole again at the Assembly of Chatelleraud;
yet he could not be every where to give her Reasons to the mistrustful, nor
could his Reputation stop the Mouths of all Men. In the mean time there
happened one thing which made a great Noise, and which was attended with
tedious and unlucky Consequences Du Plessis published a Book in July, upon the
Eucharist. The Pope was therein very coursely Treatise of the Eutharist.
handled, as being called by the Name of Antichrist: And the Church of Rome had
seen very few Books set forth by her Adversaries, where there had been less
kindness showed to her Errors. Du Plessis had put his Name and all his Titles
in the first Page, and among the rest, that of Counselor of State. The Name of
the Author, (who was the Man of his time that had the most Learning and
Solidity, and wrote the best, tho his Style savored too much of the Latin
Phrase) and the Dignity of the Subject, caused the Work to be soon perused by
the Curious. The Noise of it reached Rome, and the Pope complained Consequences
of the publishing of it.
more especially, because of the Title of Counselor of State which the Author
had taken upon him; for that it seemed as if the Affront had Issued from the
Bosom of the Counsel it self, since it was given by one of the Members of it;
and as if the King had had a share in giving the Injury, since it came from one
of his intimate Confidents. The King himself was Offended at it, fearing least
the Pope, being exasperated by the Affront, should delay the Dissolution of his
Marriage, which was then seriously in Agitation. For that Reason he testified
his Resentment; and it was the beginning of Duplessis's Disgrace, which was
attended with Consequences of greater Importance. One would have thought that
this dissatisfaction of the King and the Pope, would have Authorized whatever
the Zeal of the Catholics should undertake against the Book or the Author.
Nevertheless the Jesuits that were settled at Bourdeaux having a great desire
to have the Book Condemned to the Fire, Dases the first President Opposed, and
only bid 'em refute it, if they thought it convenient. Boulanger one of the
King's Almoners, having made a critical Censure upon the Preface, and Accused
the passages to be falsiy'd, the Arch bishop of Bourges took him up, and
replied upon him very smartly. Nor did the Legate himself require any Vigorous
proceedings against the Book; only desired six Copies to carry along with him
at his departure out of France, and engaged that Bellarmine should Answer him.
But they bethought themselves of another way to Mortify du Plessis, the
Catholics finding it more easy to disgrace the Author, then destroy the Book.
That which happened that year and the Lent following was this, that the
Predicants let loose their Fury against the Book, and Revenged the Pope and the
Roman Religion, with all manner of Calumnies and Invectives upon du Plessis.
'Twas thought also that the Gentleman durst not appear in public without
hazard of his Life during the first Violence of their Rage. He therefore kept
his House for some days, till the Tempest was over: And in regard 'twas
believed that the people were sufficiently Incensed to have gone and Assaulted
him in his own House; Madam offered to receive him into hers for his better
security.

It may be thought, That slight Moderation was Affected to show, that the
Liberty of the Reformed was great in pursuance of the Edict, since they had the
Freedom to publish such Affronts against the Roman Religion, and yet that the
Catholics should be permitted no other means of Revenging themselves than by
the Ordinary way of Refutation; or else of mitigating the discontents of those
who did not find the Edict conformable to their Hopes, and who were vexed to
see the Verification so long delayed, and to prevent 'em from augmenting upon
the severity which they might have used to the first Book of the Reformed
Religion that appeared after the Edict was Decreed. In a Word, there being no
way wholly to quell the Bigots, they caused du Plessis's Book to be Condemned
to the Fire by some Inferior Court of Justice, and the Sentence was put in
Execution. The Assembly still sitting at Chatelleraud was very much offended at
it; and considering the thing was done at the very time that the first steps
were made toward the Execution of the Edict, they judged it to be of too great
Consequence to pass it by without complaining. But tho they were fully
determined to Testify their Resentment, they were willing first of all to
write to du Plessis, as being the principal person concerned, to know his
Opinion what was to be done upon this Occasion. This shows that they did well
to prevent the Sovereign Courts from making Decrees of the same Nature against
this Work: For as the Affront would have been more Heinous, most certain it is,
that the Reformed would have made a Louder Noise. But du Plessis, who did not
think his Book dishonored by these Transports of his Adversaries, was not the
person that troubled himself most about it. However, he declared by his Answer,
that the thing seemed to him to be of Great Importance, in regard that the
Doctrine of the Reformed being acquitted by the Edict from the Name of Heresy,
the Books that taught the Reformed Doctrine were not to be Burnt, since only
Heretical Books were to be Condemned to that Mark of Infamy: Therefore 'twas
his Opinion that they should Appeal from the Sentence to the Chamber of the
Edict, rather than to the Privy Council, where the business would be assuredly
Stifled. Nevertheless that it was a hard matter to apply a Remedy to a past
Mischief, since they had Executed the Sentence, and what was already done amiss
could not be amended. But this Book was attended with Consequences much more
Remarkable, which will not permit us to stop at these less weighty Observations.

During these Passages which I have hitherto related, there Three Important
Negotiations with the Pope.
were three things in Negotiation between the Court of France, and that of
Rome; and which were of Importance sufficient to put the Reformed in Fear, that
although they had obtained an Edict, the King would not purchase the prosperous
Conclusion of his Affairs at the Expense of his Favors toward them. The first
Affair was the Dissolution of the King's Marriage which he ardently desired:
And for the obtaining of which, 'twas thought he would humble him to any manner
of Compliance with the Pope. This Affair was of great Consequence to the State,
as also to the Kingdom, in regard the Mischiefs of a dubious Succession might
bring extremity of Consusion upon the Kingdom after the King's Death. The
Reformed also were very urgent for it, not a little fearful that a great part
of the New troubles which might Attend the King's Death would fall upon
themselves. But the King's obstinate Fondness for his Miss, had a long time
retarded that Negotiation. For the Pope was unwilling to favor a Marriage so
unsuitable; and Queen Margaret would by no means give place to a Woman that was
so much beneath her; and whose Virtue, it was thought, had surrendered it self
to other Suits, besides that of the King. That Mistress being Dead after such a
manner as might Raise a suspicion, that Roni and some others well understood,
that there was a kind of necessity she should dye; the King embroiled himself
in New Intrigues, and made a promise of Marriage to the Daughter of the
Marquess d'Entragues, to obtain what he desired of her. He had also been so
weak as to show this promise to Roni to ask his Advice about the Form; and Roni
was so bold as to tear it before his Face. But the King, who was not Master of
his passion, drew up another with such Clauses, that be thought himself
discharged of it by the success of the first lying in of his new Mistress. Now
in regard it was high time to look after this Affair in good earnest, the King
bent all his thoughts upon it; and the Pope, who knew the Importance of the
business, which could not be concluded without him; failed not to set it at the
highest price he could put upon it: Not but that he had his Reasons too, to
desire it should be brought to pass; whether it were that there was a proposal
for the King to Marry an Italian Princess; or whither it were that he was
afraid, that if the Succession came to be contested, some one of the
Competitors might augment the Forces of the Reformed to support himself, and
perhaps Embrace their Religion, to fasten 'em to his Interests. Whereas, if the
Succession were ascertained, he was sure that the King's Successor would be a
Catholic, and that his Right and Claim being founded upon a Marriage Authorized
by the Maxims of the Court of Rome, he would maintain it with all his Power,
and would rather strive to Lessen, than Exalt the Reformed in Strength and
Power. But for all this the Pope was Resolved to sell his Favor to the King at
a dear Rate, according to the Custom of the Court of Rome, which always strives
to make others purchase those things of which she makes a benefit her self. So
that the Reformed had all the Reason in the World to fear that they should be
made to pay the Expenses of this Affair.

The second Negotiation which might give 'em an Alarm, The Establishment of
the Jesuits.
was the Establishment of the Jesuits, which was prosecuted with extraordinary
sedulity. The Pope omitted no Opportunity of talking of it to the Jesuits, and
he thought he could not use better precautions against the Mistrusts which he
had of the King's Religion, then to set the Jesuits over him, either as Spies
or Adversaries. On their parts they were not Idle in Their boldness and Credit.
France; where they had the boldness to settle themselves in some places
depending upon the Parliament of Paris, maugre the Decree by which they were
Banished; And this Act of theirs appeared so insolent, that even at Rome it
self it was Condemnd. But they had good Protectors in the Kingdom. For the
Cardinal of Tournon stoutly supported 'em; and the Parliaments of Tholouze and
Bourdeaux upheld 'em within their Jurisdictions; and they who had been of the
League had always a great kindness for 'em. The Clergy also encouraged 'em to
Petition for their Restoration; and those Cunning Politicians well acquainted
with the Air of the Court, would by no means loose the Opportunity. The King
himself sided with 'em, because he was willing they should take his part: And
for that well knowing 'em to be in a Capacity to undertake any Attempt against
a Prince who had been their Enemy, he thought he should have no Reason to fear
'em, if he gave them occasions of Acknowledgment and Obligation. But all the
Religious The Monks all hate the King.
Orders mortally hated the King, even those that seemed to have renounced the
World; and not only the Jacobins, who had furnished the League with a Ruffian
to take away the Life of Hen. III. but the Capuchins also and the Chartreaux
conspired his Ruin. 'Twas too much at one time for him to Guard himself against
the Jesuits, besides with whose Genius he was experimentally acquainted, and
who never thought any thing sufficiently Sacred to protect the person of an
Enemy of what Quality soever from their most bloody Revenge. The pretense of
these frequent Conspiracies was, because the Bigots always suspected the
sincerity of the King's Conversion, and for that the Spaniards carefully set
afoot whatever they could devise to confirm the Suspicion. They laid to his
Charge whatever happened in Europe, where they thought the Catholic Religion
had not all the Advantages which they desired. Wherefore the Duke Persecution
in Piedmont.
of Savoy having endeavored to Reduce his Subjects (the Vaudois) to the Roman
Communion, and for that purpose having sent into their Country a Mission of
Capuchins backed with some thousands of Soldiers, to accomplish by force what
the Monks could not obtain by persuasions, the Spaniards failed not to make
their Advantage of it to the prejudice of the King. They compared the King's
Indulgence with the Dukes bloody Zeal, who observed no Medium between the
Conversion and Extermination of Heretics. He had Exercised the same Rigor in
the Marquisate of Saluces, which no way belonged to him, in regard he had The
Marquisat of Saluces.
Usurped it during the Civil Wars; and he had constrained all the Reformed
Inhabitants to change their Religion, or quit their Country. And his design in
doing fo, was to engage the Pope to maintain him in his Usurpation, which
indeed was one of the Reasons that the Pope would never do the King Justice in
that particular point; fearing least if the King were Master of the Marquisate,
the Reformed would abide there under the shelter of his Edicts. But to render
the King's Religion more suspected, the Spaniards accused him of having
hindered the Success of that mixed Mission by private Successors, tho it were
neither Honorable to the Religion it self, nor to the Prince that sent it.
It Is true there were some miserable Wretches that changed their Religion, and
that the Spaniards made the best they could of the ^o^quest. But d Ossat, tho a
Cardinal, much abated the Glory of those Conquests, when he found that the
Soldiers had done more than the Capuchins. Nevertheless this made an
Impression in the minds of the Zealots, and fostered the pretenses for the
Conspiracies of the Monks, who looked upon the King but as a hollow Catholic.
For which Reason, in regard the Jesuits were the most formidable of all, he was
willing to secure Reasons why the King favored the Jesuits.
himself from their Attempts, by doing them some signal favor that might
fasten 'em to his person and his service. Such are the Politics of Princes, to
Caress those of whom they stand in awe, and to neglect, if not oppress those
People whom they have no reason to fear. They partake of Fear with those that
are afraid of 'em, and redeem themselves by Favors from the Molestations of
those whom they mistrust. This sort of Policy was very rife under this Reign,
at what time the Reformed complained, that Favors and Rewards were far more
Charily bestowed on those that performed faithful Services, than on those who
were become formidable to the Disposer.

This Potent Reason made the King incline to recall the Jesuits; and this design
gave great Alarums to the Reformed, who well knew what they had to hope for
from that same always Perfidious, and always Mutinous Society; who if once they
got to be settled in Paris, would wriggle themselves into the Court, and there
put all things, according to their usual wont, into Confusion. The Parliament
of Paris, who stood upon their Honor in this Affair, by reason of the
redoubled Decrees which they had Issued forth against this pernicious
Institution, opposed their Restoration with as much Vigor as the Reformed, who
on the other side thwarted this Negotiation to the utmost of their Power: But
it was chiefly the Authority of the Parliament that rendered this Negotiation
so Tedious and Difficult. For Kings had then a great Respect for their
Parliaments; and those August Assemblies could distinguish between Subjection
and Servitude; so that then they were not acquainted with slavish
Obsequiousness to the Sentiments of the Court.

The third Affair was the Marriage of Madame the Kings Sister 3d. M^age of
Madame.
with the Duke of Ban, the Duke of Lorraines Son, which was consummated toward
the beginning of the following Year. The Pope started several Scruples and
Difficulties, not so much out of a Design to hinder the Match, in regard the
Marriage of that Princess with a Catholic was one of the secret Conditions of
the King's Absolution, as to draw some profit out of it to himself, either in
procuring by that means the Conversion of the Princess that was to be Married,
or to make the King purchase his Consent by some New Compliance with the Court
of Rome. But the Reformed had a perfect Reluctance against it, which they made
appear in the National Synod already mentioned. The Question was there proposed
concerning this Match, to remove the Scruples of the Princess; but she found
not her satisfaction there; only it was judged that such a Marriage was not
lawful. Nevertheless this was no Obstacle, but that it was concluded in the
Month of August, after the Princess had undergone great Temptations. There had
been several Conferences, at which she was present; Several Ministers and
Catholic Doctors disputed the Point: And in one of these Conferences it was,
that du Moulin, whose Name was afterward so Her Constancy.
Famous, began to approve with great Reputation. The Ministers had the better
in all these Disputes, because the Princess stood firm, in so much that soon
after a stop was put to these unprofitable Conferences. The Catholics,
according to their Custom, imputed the breaking off these Conferences to the
Ministers, and to Eclipse the Glory of the Princess's Constancy, they
Attributed her perseverance to her Obstinacy. They gave it out, that she
continued steadfast in her Religion, out of her Veneration for Queen Jane her
Mother, who had bred her up, and had given her in charge, to persevere in the
Reformed Faith. But tho they endeavored to make her Constancy to be Looked
upon as a Point of Honor, nevertheless it appeared to be an Effect of her
knowledge and surpassing Parts. She was greatly enlightened for a person of her
Sex, and she had more Care and more Leisure to inform her self then the King
her Brother. Which was the Reason, that she was more steady then He, and she
understood how to Answer very pertinently in Reply to the Argument which was
urged against her from the King's Example, that the Salic Law had made between
them two, the Partition of Constancy. But this perseverance brought her into
some trouble. The King himself, either out of Reason of State, or induced by
other Motives, used her somewhat severely. Fain he would have obliged her to
have put away her Domestic The King's Severities toward her.
Servants, under pretense that she too much confided in 'em, and that they
obstructed her Conversion. He threatened never to do any thing for her
Advancement, if she persever'd in her Obstinacy. But notwithstanding all this
Rigor she was still unshak'n in her Constancy, and she had a greater regard to
her Conscience and her Ministers, then to the Importunities and Pleasure of the
King her Brother.

The Pope so vehemently opposed this Match, that 'twas Scruples Raised by the
Pope.
believed they should never obtain the Dispensation from him, which the King
and the Duke desired. Nay more, he wrote to the Duke of Lorraine and the Prince
his Son in a very Magisterial and Passionate Style, to divert 'em from the
Alliance. But in regard those Oppositions of the Court of Rome never frighten
any but such as are willing to be afraid of 'em, they were no Obstruction, but
that the Affair was concluded at the beginning of the next year. The Popes
Pretenses for this Refusal, were nearness of Blood between both His Reasons.
Parties, and the Princess's Religion. He deemed it prejudicial to his Dignity
to send a Dispensation to a Person that did not demand it; who neither thought
it necessary, nor in his Power to give it. But the same Reasons never stumbl'd
the Successors of this Pontiff in the two Cases of the Marriage of Charles,
Prince of Wales, with the Infanta of Spain, and afterward with Henrietta. The
real Motives therefore of the Court of Rome are her Interests. When she finds
her Advantages in any thing, she never fails of good Reasons to surmount the
most plausible difficulties. Thus one and the same Interest caused one Pope to
refuse the King's Sister a Dispensation, because a Huguenot Princess in a
Catholic Country, as Lorraine, did not agree with the Sea of Rome: And the same
Interest caused his Successors to grant a Dispensation for the Marriage of a
Catholic Princess with the Presumptive Heir of the Crown of England, because it
was for the Benefit of the Roman Religion, to have a Catholic Queen in a
Kingdom altogether Reformed. Moreover, in regard the Princess who was already
somewhat in years, had often slipped the Opportunity of Wedlock, yet was
unwilling to dye a Virgin, 'twas thought at Rome that she would rather change
her Religion, then let this Proposal of Marriage Escape, after which she had
but little hopes to meet with an Offer so fairly Advantageous. But the Court of
France believing it would be more easy to make her Excuses to the Pope, when
the thing was done, then to obtain his Consent for doing The King proceeds to
the Marriage without staying for the Dispensation.
the thing, thought fit to proceed to the Marriage without staying for the
Dispensation. After which New Difficulties were started about giving the
Nuptial Benediction. As for the Princess, she would not have scrupled to
receive it from the hands of a Roman Prelate; but as she was Nice in Point of
Decency, she would by no means hear of being Married after that manner, after
she had bin given to understand, that such a Condescension would look like a
kind of going to seek a Husband, should she have that Deference for him, which
he was unwilling to have for her: That it became not the Dignity of so great a
Princess, to show her self more forward then the Prince desired; and that she
was engaged in Honor to be as steadfast in rejecting the Proposal of Marrying
according to the Mass, as he was firm in Refusing to be Married by a Minister.
And the Duke on the other side Protested that he would rather never Marry, then
receive the Benediction from a Heretic. But the King Reconciled the difference
by sending for both Parties into his Cabinet where he caused 'em to be
affianc'd in his presence by the Archbishop of Rouen. Who tho he were neither
Learned nor Devout, forgot not however to suffer himself to be entreated,
before he would perform the Ceremony: And the want of a Dispensation stuck so
close to his Heart, that if Roni had not found the way to droll him into a
Compliance, all the Authority of the King would never have been able to have
brought him to Reason.

This Expedient put an End to the Difficulties of the Marriage: But the Pope
was as inflexible after Consummation as before; and showed himself as obstinate
in denying the Dispensation, as the Princess had appeared Resolute in refusing
to demand it. He also complained of the Kings Precipitancy, for being so hasty
in an Affair of such Importance. He filled the Dukes Conscience with Scruples
and Terrors, so that the Prince lived a long time with the Duchess his Wife, as
if they had never been Married. Which was the reason that the Duchess was
solicited more then ever to change her Religion; and that not only
Instructions, Promises, and Flatteries were made use of to overcome her, but
Artifices and Lies. There could be nothing more Impudent then that same
Cozenage of Commelet the Jesuit, of which she her self gave du Plessis an
Account, some Months after she was Married. This Jesuit was so bold as to tell
her, that du Plessis being accused for having inserted several false Quotations
in his Book of the Eucharist, had promised to go to Mass, if they could but
show him one that was such as they said; that he had been convinced before the
King; upon which the King loading him with Reproaches, he went out of the way,
no body knowing what was become of him. Never was Lie told with more probable
Circumstances, nevertheless there was not a Tittle in it but what was found to
be merely Forged. The Duchess knew it very well; and Commelet gained so little
upon her, that in a Letter which she wrote to du Plessis upon this Subject, she
assured him, That her Converse with the Jesuit had but the more confirmed her
in her Religion. Seeing therefore they could do no good upon the Princess, The
issue of the Negotiation till the Death of the Princess.
the King was very Importunate at Rome to incline the Pope to Sentiments more
Moderate. D'Ossat found out Presidents of a Dispensation granted, in the like
case, to Persons of Inferior Quality. The Duke also went himself to Rome,
under pretense of the Jubilee, to desire Absolution, but the Pontiff would by
no means yield to any thing. Nevertheless, 'twas believed that the Prince had
obtained a private Absolution, in regard the Pope gave him leave to gain the
Jubilee, and to visit the Churches where Indulgences were given out; and for
that, upon his return Home, he lived with the Duchess after a more Conjugal
manner then he had done before. But the Report being every where spread abroad
that she was with Child, the Pope grew much more mild; foreseeing, that if he
did not confirm the Marriage, the King would be obliged to seek without him,
for some other way to secure the Title of Legitimate to the Infant that should
be Born. Nevertheless, this Atonement of the Popes Wrath signified little or
nothing, for the Report of the Princess's being with Child proved altogether
groundless, and the Princess died at the very time that the Pope consented to
the Marriage. I have related this Affair in a continued Series, to the end I
might have no more occasion to return to it again, tho the business was spun
out in a Negotiation of three or four Years.

The Reformed looked upon the Perseverance of the Princess The Advantages which
the Reformed got by her Perseverance.
in their Religion to be a great Victory, in regard it secured 'em several
Advantages which could not be refused to her Person, and which made greatly for
the Honor of the whole Party: Their Ministers Preached at Court while she was
there; and that was often done in the same place where Mass had been said but
some hours before. When the Princess went, or returned from France into
Lorrain, or from Lorrain into France, her Minister who attended her always
Lodged in the same Abbeys where she lay, and in the same Episcopal Palaces upon
the Roads, and there she likewise caused him to Preach. The Catholics received
this Mortification, and the Reformed this Satisfaction at least once a Year;
for that she never failed every Year to Visit the King her Brother. She had
also Sermons Preached in her own Apartiment in Lorrain; and it was a kind of
Triumph for the Reformed to see their Religion introduced, by this means, into
the same House from whence their most violent Persecutors were gone but just
before. Du Moulin, who was known to the Princess by reason of the Conferences
held upon her account, wherein he had often delivered himself, was highly in
her favor. The Ministers of the Church of Paris were bound to Quarterly
Attendance upon her; and generally it fell out so, that the time when she took
her Journies happened to be in Du Moulin's waiting; so that in a little time he
acquired a great Reputation, which drew upon him the Hatred and Persecution of
the Catholics.

But at Paris they were busy about an Affair of Importance quite different
from those already related. The Catholics Difficulties about the Verification
of the Edict.
had taken all Advantages of the Delay of the Verification of the Edict. It was
attacked by all the Orders of the Kingdom, both before and after the Legate's
departure. That Prelate however, not caring either to have any Reproach put
upon him, or to have the Lie given him, never desired that the greatest
Oppositions should be made against it in his Presence; and there was a great
deal of noise upon this occasion, after his departure. The Clergy, the
Parliaments, the University, the Sorbonne, started all the Difficulties
imaginable. The Sorbonne refused their Consent, till the Reformed took their
degrees among 'em. The University was for shutting the Gates of the Colleges
against 'em; nor would they admit 'em either to be Masters of Arts, or
Professors, or to the Regency. The Faculty of Physic was most difficult to be
overcome, as if it had been the Grand Concern of the Physicians to Quarrel with
Heresy; and they always continued their Aversion ever since that time.

But the Clergy made the most weighty Opposition: They Assembled at Paris in
May; nor did they fail to send their Deputations and Remonstrances to the King
according to their usual Custom. But their Deputies in all their Harangues were
much less violent then their Predecessors had been; they talked no longer of
Destruction and Extermination; Their Discourses breathed nothing but Peace, the
sweetness of which Flattered all the World; and you should hardly hear 'em so
much as mention the word Heresy. All their Discourse ran solely upon the
Disorders in Ecclesiastical Discipline, and upon the Alienations of the
Spiritual Demesnes, the Augmentation of which the Clergy never failed to demand
under the Name of Restitution. For which reason they were importunately urgent
for the Release of Pensions assigned to the Laity upon Benefices, and to the
Payment of which the Incumbents were obliged, either by Writ of Nomination, or
by some Secret Reservation in the Grand Deeds. The Reformed had a share in
these favors as well as others, as also in the Trusts; and it was at them the
Clergy aimed under a pretense that seemed plausible enough. It seemed but Just
to deprive the Heretics, who were Enemies of the Church of Rome, of all the
Privileges of enjoying Revenues, to the prejudice of her Altars. But that which
was most remarkable in this Prosecution was this, that to the end they might
procure a Discharge of Lay-Pensions, the Clergy were not ashamed to say, That
the Ecclesiastics had little enough to live upon; tho it were notoriously
known, that they possessed the third part of the Revenues of the Kingdom, not
comprehending what many enjoyed moreover in other parts for other Reasons, as
by Right of Inheritance or Purchase. The King consented to one part of the
Favors which the Deputies demanded, and for the remainder gave them good
Words, tending to let them understand that they must have Patience; and which
covertly contained certain Promises, with which the Reformed would have had no
reason to be satisfied, had they not looked upon 'em as Words of no
consequence, and by which the Court never thought themselves obliged to any
thing. These Words were so remarkable among others, that they have been
repeated by several Historians: I will act in such a manner, said the King, by
Gods Assistance, that the Church shall be in as good a Condition as it was a
hundred years ago, as well for the Discharge of my Conscience as for your
Satisfaction; but Paris was not built in a day Some understood it as if these
Words were to be Interpreted, that in time he would destroy the pretended
Heresy, which had put the Clergy to so much trouble for above Fourscore Years
together; but the Reformed were persuaded that they were only words of course.

Nevertheless, this put the Clergy in hopes of making Their Proposals upon the
Edict.
some Attempts, perhaps not altogether unsuccessful, to alter something in the
Edict; for their Intention was not to obstruct the granting an Edict to the
Reformed, in regard themselves had too much need of Peace to wish the breaking
out of a New War; but their business was to reduce the Concessions to such a
trivial Invalidity, that had they obtained what they aimed at, the Reformed
would never have accepted 'em. To that purpose their Agents demanded three
things at the first dash; that is to say, That the Ministers should have no
other Advantage on this side the Loire, but only to be free from the
Molestation of Prosecutions; and that the Reformed, in that part of the
Kingdom, should content themselves with having the Free Exercise of their
Religion, in such places of which they had made themselves Masters by force of
Arms: That is to say, That they should be shut out from all the New Possessions
in those Provinces, and the Bailliage Towns: That the Exercise of the Roman
Religion should be restored in those places where the Reformed were most
prevalent, even in their strong Holds. Thirdly, That the Catholics should be
discharged from paying toward the Maintenance of the Ministers, in those
places that were held by the Reformed. They vehemently Labored also, that the
Ecclesiastics, who had any differences with the Reformed, might be exempted
from the Jurisdiction of the Chamber, that was to be settled at Paris, as
fearing to Plead against 'em upon equal Terms. They no less vigorously opposed
the Liberty granted to the Reformed to hold Synods when they pleased, without
obliging 'em to any Acknowledgments of Dependency, and without hindering 'em to
admit Foreigners, or to send Deputies out of the Kingdom to Assemblies of the
same Nature; and Bertier, one of the Clergies Agents, was very hot upon this
Point. He maintained, in opposition to the Marshal de Bouillon, that such a
Liberty, without restriction, gave 'em an opportunity to hold Intelligence and
Correspondencies abroad and at home, to make Leagues, and enter into
Conspiracies, and to betake themselves to their Arms, when they pleased
themselves, without any possibility of preventing 'em. He gave out, that
Schomberg and de Thou, who had concluded the Edicts, were but a sort of Mungrel
Catholics; meaning such as were not intoxicated with his Bigotries. Of Jeannin
he said, That he was no less moderately inclined then the other two; and
treated 'em as persons to whom the Mass was as indifferent as Preaching. He was
Spurred on to these Transports by The Transports of some Prelates.
some Prelates, among whom there were some so hot, that they caused Prayers to
be said in their Diocesses, to implore of God that the Edict might not pass.
The Moderation of the Nuncio, who staid after the Legate was gone, more plainly
discovered the Fury of this Irregular Zeal, for he desired The Nuncio's
Moderation.
no more but that care might be taken of the Interests of the Catholic Church,
and that they would laboriously endeavor to reduce those whom he called
Devoyez, or such as were strayed from the right way; and upon these General
Conditions he put 'em in hopes, that the Pope would bear with all things else.
Bertiers Warmth was severely rebuked by the King; however he would not desist
for all that, and at last obtained Assurances that the Edict should be amended
in several things, according to his Demand.

The Parliament joined with the Clergy in several Points. The Opposition of the
Parliament.
They could not resolve to consent to the setting up the Chamber which the King
was about to Erect. They opposed with all their might, too much freedom of
Assemblies, as being derogatory to the Royal Authority, already too much
enfeebled by Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction; that the Clergy had reason to complain,
that greater Prerogatives were granted to the New Predicants then to them:
However, that the Reformed were obliged to beg leave expressly to assemble
together, and to admit Foreigners into their Assemblies; and that they had not
forborne to employ farther and more extraordinary Precautions against the
Prosecutions of the Clergy, by the Nomination to Benefices which the King had
reserved to himself, and by Appeals of Temporal Persons from the Ecclesiastical
Judges, which they were suffered to put in, not in respect of the whole Cause,
but for some small or By-Point thereof. The Parliament also revived the
Question, among others, Whither the Reformed were capable of Offices and
Employments; and several Writings were Published on both sides upon this
Subject. There was a Necessity of proceeding to repeated Jussions, or Commands,
to bring the Parliament to Obedience; but in Opposition to all those Commands,
the Parliament ordered Remonstrances. The Duke of Mayenne was also secretly
solicited The Justice of the D. of Mayenne.
to oppose the Verification of the Edict, as if they would have rather chosen
to see the Civil Wars re-kindl'd, then consent that the Reformed should be in
any Tolerable Condition. But that prudent Prince refused to meddle, and
declared, That he would consent to the Edict; not that he was desirous of the
Repose and Quiet of the Reformed, but as a necessary Expedient to prevent the
breaking out of a New War; and they who had been the most Zealous for the
League, followed the Example of this Prince. Jeannin, in the Council, was all
for Lenity and Moderation; and the Counselors of Parliament, formerly Leaguers,
were the most moderate upon the present occasion.

The Members of the General Assembly who staid at Chastelleraud, in Expectation
of the Verification of the Edict, labored on their part to prevent the
Mischiefs which those Oppositions might produce, and sent Deputies after
Deputies to Court: but these Sedulities afforded no Remedy; there was no
mollifying neither the Clergy nor the Parliament. The King was not a little
perplexed at these Obstructions, nor did he know how to get clear of these
Difficulties without giving somebody an occasion to complain; not but that he
still stood firm, and sometimes expressed himself with more then ordinary
vigor. But in regard he was desirous to bring things to pass with mildness,
and, as I may so say, to reconcile both Parties by their own consent, he made
use of all his Prudence, and all his Address, to bring 'em to Reason. He
protested to the Clergy, That the Edict should turn to their Advantage,
provided they would let it pass, and that they did not revive the Ancient
Distrusts by starting new Difficulties. He assured the Commissioners that
brought him the Parlaments Remonstrances, That he did nothing but what the Pope
Approved, as being done upon good Grounds; that the Legate had corresponded
with him as to what concerned Peace at home; and that he had never insisted
upon the Discourses that were made him to render the Edict suspected. But
sometimes he spoke in a louder tone, when the Parliament disgusted Things with
an Air not agreeable to the Kings Honor, and when they were desirous to make
private Reservations, not to admit the Reformed to Offices of Bailiffs,
Criminal Assessors, Kings Proctors and Advocates, or the like, in Inferior
Courts of Justice, tho the Article which declared 'em Capable were verified
without any Restriction, the King would never endure such Dishonest foul Play.
Upon this Subject of Reservations, by which they would have made the Edict a
mere Mockery, it was, that the King uttered these Noble Expressions, cited by
so many Historians, so highly becoming the Majesty of a Great Prince, and so
worthy to be preserved to Posterity, to teach Sovereigns the Value which they
ought to have for Truth of Word. I do not think, it fair, said he, to Intend
one thing and Write another; and if there be any who have done it, I will never
do the same: Deceit is Odious among all Men; more especially to Princes, whose
Word ought always to be Unalterable.

All this however did not conclude the Affair: for after 1599.
the New Year was begun, the Edict was still Forty days in Debate before it was
verified. But the Reformed in Paris, The Reformed forbear insisting upon
several Articles.
and at the Court, put the King out of his Trouble by their Easiness, for at
last they suffered themselves to be vanquished, after they had a long time
disputed their Ground; and tho they had very much abated of their General
Pretensions, by accepting the Edict, such as it had been given at Nantes, they
condescended to forgo several other Articles which were highly contested in
Opposition to their Demands. Marshal de Bouillon gave his Consent, and du
Plessis himself enjoined Beraud, one of the Deputies which the Assembly at
Chastelleraud sent to the Court, to persuade an Accommodation upon the
Difficulties in Dispute, for which he propounded Expedients himself; so that at
length they obtained that there should be no Limitation of the Liberties, in:
reference to Free Exercise, nor of the Article concerning Offices and
Employments. But upon the Demands of the University, the King agreed that the
Reformed should have no Employment there, by which they should be Authorized to
broach New Opinions; only that they should be admitted into Regencies and
Professorships in all other Faculties but that of Theology. He refused the
Clergy only the first of the three Articles which I have mentioned, and
promised 'em satisfaction upon the other two. He limited the Liberty of Synods,
and leaving the Reformed Masters of the Time and Place, he obliged 'em only to
Address themselves to him for Leave to Assemble; and not to admit Strangers but
upon the same Condition. But in August following, he granted 'em a Brevet,
which exempted 'em from the Observation of that Article, and which imported in
express Terms, that he gave 'em permission, notwithstanding the said Article,
as to the Assambling and holding the said Consistories, Colloquies and Synods,
to use the same Forms and Privileges which they had practiced formerly,
without restraining 'em to any stricter Obligation. And thus by particular
Concessions, he restored 'em what he had been as it were forced to take from
'em by Public Acts, to keep the Catholics Quiet. He altered the Form of the
Chamber of the Edict, which was to sit at Paris; and instead of composing it of
six Reformed Counselors and ten Catholics, as it was decreed at Nantes, he
filled it up with all Catholics, except one Reformed; and the other five that
were to be of the same Religion, were to be distributed into the Courts of
Enquests And to remove all fears from the Reformed, that they should not have
Justice rightly done 'em, they themselves were permitted to choose the Catholic
Judges that were to compose that Chamber. The Name also of the Chamber of the
Edict was confirmed to it, to the end that the Name might put the Members of
which it consisted in perpetual Remembrance, that they were the Guardians and
Executors of the Edict, which was particularly to be a Law to 'em in the
Administration of Justice. The thing was done according to the Decree, and the
Commissioners which the King appointed, formed the Chamber according to the
List of moderate and peaceable Catholics, which the Reformed presented.
Nevertheless the Reformed lost one Employment of substitute to the Proctor
General of the Parliament of Paris, which had been promised 'em; but which was
deemed no longer useful to 'em, after the Alteration made in the Establishment
of the Chamber.

The Clergy upon this Occasion gave one Mark of their Obstinacy of ^^^ Clergy.
Headstrong Obstinacy, even in things wherein they were little concerned. They
had demanded at the beginning, that the Ecclesiastics should be exempted from
the Jurisdiction of the Chamber, and had obtained it; but when there was a
Resolution taken to alter the Form of it, and not to admit above one Reformed,
they would never Renounce the Exemption that had been granted 'em. Wherein they
made it evidently appear, that they were afraid, when ever they happened to
have any differences with the Reformed, that they should not have Judges at
their Devotion. For all the difference between their New Chamber and the
Chambers of the Enquests consisted only in this, that into the one there were
no Judges to be admitted, but such as were conspicuous for their Mildness and
Moderation; whereas the same Choice was not observed in any of the other. The
Reformed therefore having no more then one Voice, either in the one or the
other, there was nothing could make the Clergy prefer one Chamber before
another, but that they were assured of finding more Favor before Bigoted and
Violent Judges, then in a Court where only the most Moderate and Prudent Judges
were admitted.

The same Course was taken at Rouen to Regulate Religion Chambers of the Edict
at Rouen.
and Justice, after they had once agreed upon the Erecting a New Chamber there,
according to the Model of that at Paris. The Place for the Exercise of Religion
was appointed within three quarters of a League from the City; and the Judges
were Elected according to the Roll presented by the Reformed to the
Commissaries. In this Parliament were Created three Employments of Counselors,
who were distributed into the Chambers, as at Paris. This manner of forming the
Chambers of the Edict lasted several years: And since the Establishment of
General Deputies, they who were preferr' to that Employment, conferred every
year, with the Chancellor, the first President, and the King's Learned Council,
for the Election of the most Moderate Catholic Judges. Which Custom while it
was duly observed, the Chambers of the Edict Administered Justice very
Regularly, and because their Jurisdiction was more Noble and more Profitable
then that of other Chambers, all the Catholics* Affected to be moderate and
equitable Judges, for fear of being Excluded from serving in those Chambers.
But the Affairs of the Reformed falling to decay under Lewis XIII. these
Chambers were no longer formed as they were wont, but Elections were carried by
under hand Packing and Caballing, wherein the honestest Men had not always the
best Success; and at length they were admitted without distinction, and without
so much as the Ceremony of Choice: So that the Reformed met with no more
Justice there then in other Places.

The Chamber called Mipartie, half one, half the other, in Chamber Mipartie ^n
Guien.
Guien, was formed after the Model of that at Castres. In the Year 1600 a
Provincial Assembly was held at Saint Foy, where Nine persons were Nominated
to fill the Employments that were to be Created for the Reformed: and all that
were preferred to those Offices were forced to Swear, that when they were
willing to lay 'em down, the should resign 'em Gratis to those whom the
Churches should appoint; and without exacting any Composition for their own
profit. This was renewed some years after, at a general Assembly held in the
same place; but with permission to compound for the Expenses the Person should
be at to obtain his Patents, So that it was easy under that pretense to elude
the Institution of the Assembly. But at length after the Establishment of the A
kind of a Newyears Gift given for the contiance in an Office.
Paulette, those Employments were put to Sale and became Here. ditary, like the
rest. Moreover all that took upon 'em these Employments, were obliged to Swear
to the Union of Mantes and to subscribe their Oath: And it was Ordained that
the Oath should be taken by those who had the Nomination of Churches, in the
Consistory of the particular Church of which they were Members.

Thus at length the Edict was verified with all these Alterations, Verification
of the Edict.
and several others of less Importance, which I shall set down when I come to
speak of the Complaints which the Reformed made. It was Registered the 5th of
February, a day which fell out to be the same which the Catholics call Ash
vednesday. It passed also in the other Parlaments much about the same time.
Nevertheless there were some places where it was not Registered but under
certain Restrictions, which all the King's Authority could not get off; nor was
there any Remedy for it during his Life. The particular Articles Addressed to
the Parliament of Paris were verified in a short time after, but not in the
other Parlaments. And this inequality was the Occasion afterward of a great
many Acts of Injustice, in regard advantage was taken of their not being
received in certain Courts, as if that had been a Proof that they were not
received any where else.

Hitherto the Affairs of the Edict had made no Noise at Rome. True it is, that
the Pope had complained to Cardinal de Joyeuse, and the Duke of Luxemburg
toward the end of the preceding year, that the King was about to Grant the
Heretics a New Edict; but it was but very coldly; for he only told the Cardinal
that it would have been more to the King's Advantage, both at home and abroad,
if he had proceeded in another manner. But this year he Renewed the same
Complaint to the Cardinal upon the same occasion, before the News of the
Verification of the Edict arrived at Rome: To which he added other Complaints
that the King had proceeded to the Marriage of Madame, without staying for his
Dispensation. It cannot be said, That it was his ignorance of what was
contained in the Edict that caused the Pope to talk so Calmly, in regard that
the Legate and the Nancio, not to speak of a hundred other Spies that he had
at Court, had not failed exactly to inform him of it; which they might easily
do because they had been very far concerned in the Negotiation. But it was not
yet seasonable to make a Noise, as I have observed in another place. 'Twas
requisite to stay till the Business was brought to such a Head, that whatever
Noise was made about it, it would signify nothing. But then the Pope changed
his Note, and it is not to be imagined what The Pope makes great Complaints to
stop the Spaniards Mouths.
a Clutter he made about a thing which he had dissembled for three years
together. True it is, that this Fire was soon quenched, and that after the
first time, he spoke no more of it, or at least he returned to his first
indifferency. The Reason of all that heavy sputter which he made, was only
because it behooved him to stop the Mouths of the Spaniards, who stunned him
with continual Reproaches, and to be Revenged for the Absolution he had given
the King in despite of all their Opposition, turned into Crimes all the Kings
Actions that were not to their liking. And in regard that all their principal
Accusations moved upon the Hinges of His Religion, which their main Aim was to
render suspected; they forgot not to cry out loudly against the Edict which had
been verified, as a Testimony of his Inclination to favor the Reformed, even
to the prejudice and maugre the Opposition of the Catholics. The Pope
therefore, least he should be looked upon as a Favourer of Heretics, could do
no less then exclaim as they did, and Testify his Resentment against a Thing
which he will knew a long time before, could not be hindered. To this purpose,
upon the 27 of March he sent for the Cardinals de Joyeuse and d'Ossat, whom he
had promoted but some few days before, to come to him, and in his Discourse he
omitted nothing that might give 'em to understand how highly he was Offended.

He prevented before hand what they might have urged upon him, that he had
Opportunity to make known his Senments of that Affair, before the Business was
Decreed: And he told 'em moreover, that he had thought that the Edict had been
only promoted to Content the Huguenots in show; and that the King would have
been pleased at the Opposition of the Clergy and the Parliament; but that the
Event had discovered to him the contrary. That the Edict, the most Cursed that
ever was set a foot, permitted Liberty of Conscience to every one, which in his
Opinion was the worst thing in the World: Freedom of Exercise every where:
Admittance of Heretics into Parliament Employments, and to all other Honors and
Dignities, to Ruin the Catholic Religion, and Advance Heresy. That the King
had made this Edict during the full enjoyment of Peace both at home and abroad;
so that he could not plead, that he was forced to it. Upon which he compared
his Conduct with that of other Kings, who had never Granted such Edicts, but
when there were Armies in the Field to constrain 'em; yet because they had been
always Catholics, they were exempted from any suspicion of Leaning toward the
Heretics. That the King had showed great Zeal, and been very vehement for the
passing of the Edict: That he had used Compulsion to the Clergy and Parliament
who opposed it; that he had declared his Indignation against the Archbishop of
Tours, who had Ordered Prayers to be said in his Diocese, that God would turn
the King's Heart, that so the Edict might not pass. That the King Acted much
more remissly in Favor of the Catholics, and had showed that he stood more in
awe of others, and that he had a greater Value for 'em. That he exerted his
Authority when he spoke to the Parliament to pass the Edict, but never spoke a
Word to oblige 'em to publish the Council of Trent. After that he came to smart
Language, and Taxt the King with breach of Word and Oaths, which he had Sworn
to obtain the Absolution which he gave him. He threatened to second his Words
with Deeds, if Occasion required, and declared that he took the Edict which was
made in Defiance of him, for an Affront, no less injurious, then if he had
given him a Slash over the Face. But at length, for fear the Cardinals should
not apprehend the Reason why he ranted so loud, he cleverly gave 'em a hint
where his Interest was touched, by telling 'em it had done himself an Injury,
and unhinged all his Contrivances in those Affairs which he had with the
Spaniards, about their Usurpations upon the Jurisdiction of the Holy See both
in Naples and Milan: And that when he sent to complain of those Sacrilegious
Attempts, they laid it in his Dish, that he quarreled with them for Trifles;
but suffered Edicts, that tended to the Ruin of the Catholic Religion to come
forth, without saying a word: And therefore it it was, that he was obliged to
Testify his Resentment. After that, he concluded his Discourse more calmly
then he began it, telling the two Cardinals that he was unwilling to do any
thing without first acquainting them with it, and that he desired their Advice.
They who never so little understand the Court of Rome, well know the meaning of
all this; that the fluster bluster of these Complaints was only to stop the
Spaniards Mouths, when they Taxed the Pope with the kind Correspondence between
Him and the King, and that all the Transport of this Discourse was rather an
Effect of Prudence then Choler.

But because it was no less necessary that it should appear that the French had
laid these Complaints seriously to Heart, and that it was to the purpose that
it should believed the Pope had made these Complaints in good Earnest; the
Cardinals wrote to the King after such a manner as might be serviceable to this
End; and wherein they spoke of the Popes Disgusts in such Terms, as might
satisfy the Spaniards. Nevertheless they gave him an Account of the Reasons
they had given the Pope, to appease him. And they were so well grounded, and so
decisive, that there was no other likelihood, but that the Pope who was a
shrewd Man, was apprehensive of their Solidity. But this was written with so
much Circumspection, that if the Spaniards had grumbl'd against the Popes
Conduct, there would have needed no more then to have Read that Letter to 'em,
to have made his Apology. And thus, at the same time, the same Reasons
justified both the Pope and the King; since the one could not with Justice
carry his Complaints too far, and the other had done no more then what the
public Welfare obliged him to do. The Cardinals therefore Answers of the
Cardinals de Joyeuse, and d'Ossat.
in their Answers to the King, told him, that they began their Replies to the
Pope, by assuring him, that they labored under the same Sorrows as himself:
That they had presupposed, that such Edicts being evil in themselves, the King
had never Granted the Edict in Dispute, but with a great deal of Reluctance, as
being too much concerned to extinguish that Faction, which they looked upon as
too prejudicial to his Authority to fomenr it: That afterward they laid before
him, that the Edict was no New thing, but only a renewing of that in the year
1577. the most easy to be tolerated of of all those that had been Granted for
seven and thirty years together in Favor of the Reformed: That the Treaties
made with the Cheiftaines and Cities of the League had made several Breaches in
that Edict: And that they of the contrary Religion being ready to take Arms and
Recommence the War, there was a necessity of renewing the Edict, and supplying
it with some new Articles instead of those, of which they had been despoyl'd by
those Agreements: That the Pope believed there were some things in the Edict
that were not there; as for Example, among the Rest, permission to Preach all
over the Kingdom, which never was, never had been, nor never would be, in
regard that all the preceding Edicts forbid it, and for that the particular
Treaty of the City of Paris was contrary to it: That what was contained in the
Edict was looked upon by the Pope to be greater, and of greater Consequence,
then really it was: As for Example, the declaring the Heretics capable of
Honors and Dignities; which was also in the former Edicts, and yet the
Heretics were never advanced to the highest Employments in the Kingdom; in
regard it was one thing to be declared capable of a Dignity, another thing to
be in possession; Employments never being conferred in France but according to
the King's Pleasure. From thence they past to explain the meaning of the
Chamher of the Edict, and the Miparties, and to show the little prejudice which
the Counselors of the Reformed Religion could do the Catholic, because their
Number was so inconsiderable. They added that Peace was more necessary, and
would be more Beneficial to the Clergy then to any other Orders in the Kingdom;
that the Catholic Religion also would gain great Advantages by it: That it
would be admitted into all the Cities where the Reformed were most powerful,
and from whence it had been a long time exterminated: That the Ecclesiastics
would be Restored to the enjoyment of their Estates: That the King also by
means of this Edict, having healed up the Jealousies of the Reformed, would
deprive the Lords of that Party of ability to sustain their Faction, which only
served for maintenance of Heresy, which loosing once the main support of it,
would be more easily destroyed by the Care which the King would take in
conferring of Bishoppricks, and his painful endeavors to convert the principal
Lords: That he was not to impute the Edict to the King's Intention, of which
the Pontiss had Reason to be well assured, but to necessity and the Conjuncture
of Time; which they supported by Examples of other Princes, who had done the
same in Cases of the like Nature. And because they knew it would find a
Gracious acceptance at Rome, they Represented the King as one who was
persuaded, that his Authority would never be well secured, so long as that
Faction continued in the Kingdom; from whence they concluded that he would
bring it down as low as he could: But that was a Task that required time, and
was to be done by fetching a compass, and winding about, for that was the
expression they used, like a Pilot who fails not to reach the Port he aims at,
tho he cannot always steer directly forward. After this, to show that the Edict
was not made in a time of settled Peace, they looked backward as far as the
surprise of Amiens, and made it out, that it was then, that the King was
constrained to grant the Edict, to hinder the Reformed from taking Arms: That
although they had not as then betak'n themselves to Force, yet he lay under a
sufficient Restraint, in regard he might be justly afraid they would not
forbear what they were usually wont to do, when they suspected a Revocation of
the Treaties made with 'em; and for that he knew that a War would be no less
pernicious to the Catholics then to others, as it had been found by experience:
The Huguenots being both Resolute and Politic; being Masters of so many strong
Holds; able to Command Foreign Aid, and sure to be assisted by Numerous
Additions of Catholic Malcontents, Loose-Livers, and such as sought an Asylum
for their Crimes, who would be the first to Pillage the Priests, Churches and
Monasteries: That the Oppositions of the Clergy, and the delays of the
Parlaments were accustomed Artifices, to show that the Clergy did not consent
to War; and that the Parliament were no less unwilling to hearken to that
boystrous Remedy; tho both the one and the other knew it would come to that, at
length: That the King had neither constrained nor threatened 'em, but quite the
contrary had graciously receciv'd the Clergy's Petition, and the Remonstrances
of the Parliament, and in pursuance of both, had limited and qualified many
Things; and therefore that they had branded with falsehood a Writing that had
appeared at Rome, under the Title of The King's Answer to his Parliament.
Afterward, they Discoursed of the difference between the Edict of Nantes, and
the Council of Trent, which they pretended to be such, that there was no
Comparison between the one and the other; upon which they made an Explanation
at large. The Rest contained only Justifications of the Pope against those who
undertook to blame his Conduct. To which they added, by way of giving him that
Council which he had demanded of 'em, that it no way behooved him to show his
Resentment against the King, nor to threaten him in the least.

The Pope, who was not so much offended as he would Accommodated to the Popes
liking.
needs seem to be, as may be easily gathered from the Observations I have made,
was half appeased by these Answers; so that his Resentment made only a Noise at
Rome, where Policy required that he should give some Marks of his Displeasure,
to see Heresy protected in France, from Persecution and the Inquisitors. Only
he Resumed his Discourse from time to time concerning the Council, of which he
was greatly desirous that the King would have made Publication, in despite of
the Parliament, as he had done of the Edict. Cardinal Aldobrandini, whom the two
others went to visit, after they had left the Pope, was much better satisfied;
only he again proposed the Publication of the Council, as the greatest
Consolation which the Pope could Receive: To which he added the
Re-establishment of the Catholic Religion in Bearn. d'Ossat wrote himself to
Villeroy, some days after, that all the Popes Wrath would be appeased, if there
were but once a Publication of the ^ouncil; and that it would satisfy all the
Catholics in the Court of Rome, who were unseasonably Scandalized at the Edict.
Which shows, that they would have bin content that the King should have Granted
greater Favors to the Heretics, would he also have allowed the Pope some
considerable Advantage by way of Compensation. Moreover the Cardinals
complained, that the King had never sent 'em any Order what to say at Rome
concerning the Edict; so that they were forced to return such Answers to the
Pope, as came into their Thoughts. By which it is easy to be seen, that the
King's Intentions and Reasons for granting the Edict, were not to be looked for
in their Replies, in regard the King had never imparted 'em to their Knowledge,
but that they had framed Answers of their own Heads, such as would be grateful
to the Court of Rome, and serve the Pope for an excuse to wipe off the
Reproaches of the Spaniards. The same Affair is often variously represented by
the Ministers of Princes, and Attributed to diverse Motives, on purpose to
render it agreeable to the Relish and Interests of the several Courts to which
they are to give an Account of it. So that neither the Discourses of the said
Ministers, nor many times their Instructions are any great Helps to discover
the Intentions of their Masters. The King, who did not find things so well
prepared within his Kingdom for the Publication of the Council, was
nevertheless willing to gratify the Pope upon the Second Article of
Consolation which Cardinal Aldobrandini had proposed. Therefore, while he lay
at Fontain Bleau, he Granted an Edict for Bearn, no less favorable to the
Catholics Edict for the Principality of Bearn.
of Bearn, then the Edict of Nantes to all the Reformed throughout the Kingdom.
He Reestablished two Bishops, one at Lescar and the other at Oleron; and
promised the one a Pension of 3000, to the other a Pension of 1800 Livers; for
the payment of which he undertook himself. He set up the Mass again in Twelve
places, and in all places under Laic Patronage, the Patron being a Catholic. He
admitted the Catholics to Offices and Employments like the Rest, provided they
should not exceed the Number of the Reformed. He also by the same Edict
confirmed all the Ecclesiastical Regulations that had bin made either by
himself or his Predecessors, from which he declared he would never derogate by
his Edict; and gave it, as to that of Nantes, the Title of perpetual and
Irrevocable.

The States of the Country had Refused to Obey an Edict, Which is received.
which Henry, when he was only King of Navarr, had granted at Paris, after the
Massacre in 1572. asserting that their Prince was not free, and that the Edict
had been extorted from him under the Terror of Death. But this they never
opposed; nor did they murmur at all because it was put in execution without
their Consent; tho the Attempt were directly contrary to their Privileges. But
two things obliged 'em to be satisfied with this Change. The one was, that the
Catholics who demanded the Free and public Exercise of their Religion,
promised what as time made appear they had no Intention to stand to, that they
would make no more New Demands, if the free Exercise of their Religion might be
allowed 'em. The other was, because the Churches were afraid of a greater
Mischief then that which they suffered; in regard that nothing was taken from
'em to be bestowed upon others, and that they left 'em their Regulations and
their Privileges. So that they took a small Mischief for a Favor, because
they were afraid of a greater; and for that knowing how earnest the Pope was
for the Re-establishment of his Authority in that Province, they thought
themselves rid of it at a cheap Rate, by the moderate Course which the King had
taken to content all the World.

But in all other parts of the Kingdom the Reformed were not so well satisfied;
and the Assembly which sat still, tho not in a full Body at Chatelleraud,
expecting the Verification of the Edict, had labored with great earnestness to
hinder the Alterations which the Court was resolved to make in that which was
Signed at Nantes. So that it required a great deal of pains to persuade 'em to
receive it with a General and Unanimous Consent. It happened therefore, that
the Assembly drew up Ample Memoirs of those Alterations, which they formed into
Complaints, and sent to the King, demanding Justice. They Marked out the
Alterations which had ^rmplaints of the Alterations made in the Edict.
been made in a dozen of Articles, where they had blotted out, added and
altered several words, as also whole Clauses, and Periods. There were some of
those Alterations which seemed too slight to be taken Notice of. Nevertheless
the sequel made it appear, that they were of greater Importance then they
seemed to be; in regard they were made use of in our Time, for a Pretense of
several considerable Acts of Injustice. The first thing therefore that they
excepted against, was an Equivocal Word in the last Line of the Third Article
of the Edict, where the Word Houses of the Ecclesiastics, wherein the Exercise
of the Reformed Religion was forbid'd, might be adjudg'd to comprehend their
Feifs and Signiories in the Prohibition. They also complained that the words,
by them Established, were added in the Ninth Article, as being Words which
might give an occasion of Dispute upon the Explanation of the Right and Freedom
of Exercise which had been Granted 'em. They could not Relish the two Clauses
made use of in the Eleventh Article, which excepted out of Places, where the
second Place of the Bailliage might be allowed, Cities Episcopal or
Archiepiscopal and Ecclesiastical Signiories. They Complained, that the Clause
forbidding the rebaptizing Infants that might have been Baptized by the
Ministers, was razed out of the Eighteenth Article. They were not pleased with
the manner of forbidding people to work, tho their Shops were shut, set down in
the Twentieth Article, and permitting Informations against Transgressors of the
Inhibition. They demanded that the Words which imported Prohibitions to insert
in Grants of Offices the Clause of Catholic Apostolic Religion, which had been
taken out of the 27 Article, might be put in again. They pretended, that the
Promise to create a Substitute to the Proctor General in the Parliament of
Paris, ought not to have been pared off from the the 37 Article. They looked
upon as derogatory from the Jurisdiction of the Chambers of the Edict, that
part of the 34 Article which forbid'd the bringing Causes thither in Reference
to Suits that concerned Benefices, and which debarred 'em of taking Cognizance
of Criminal Processes, where Ecclesiastics were Defendants. They Complained
that the Chambers were not settled within Six Months, as was Ordained by the 43
Article. The Words which were added to the 35 Article concerning Particulars to
oblige the Reformed not to assemble their Synods without the King' leave, were
left out, which might be of il Consequence; either by Reason of the Charges of
obtaining the King's permission; or because of the danger that would accrue for
want of the due exerci^e of Church Discipline, if the King refused his License.
Lastly, 'twas said, that by the Alteration made in the 45 Article, the Reformed
were deprived of all that was formerly favorably allowed 'em, in reference to
the Enterrment of their Dead. Now to understand the Reason why they complained
of this Article, it is requisite to know, that at first it was couched in these
Terms. In case His Majesty's Officers provide no commodious Places for those of
the said Religion, in the time prefixed by the Edict, after Request made, and
that there should be any delay or remissness in that Respect; it shall be
lawful for those of the said Religion to bury their Dead in the Churchyards
belonging to the Catholics, in Cities and Towns where they are in possession to
do it, till due provision be made. The Clergy could not brook this Article; and
therefore caused it to be Reformed in such a manner, that there was not one
Word left of what it contained before: And whereas it had been drawn up in
Terms that had a Reference to the Future, and which put the Catholics to an
absolute Necessity, either to afford the Reformed convenient Burying Places, or
permit 'em to enterr their Dead in the Ancient Churchyards; instead of that, I
say, they drew up the Edict in Terms that only regarded the time past. These
New Terms imported, That for the Enterrment of those of the said Religion that
had been formerly Buried in Catholic Churchyards, in any Place or City
whatever, it is not His Majesty's meaning that there shall be any Inquisition,
Innovation or Prosecution, and his Majesty's Officers shall be enjoined to stop
their Hands, This debarred the Reformed from having any Privilege for the
Future to Bury in the same Places, nor did it compel the Catholics to allow 'em
any other. For which Reason, ever since they began to Treat about the Affair of
Burying according to this Reformed Act, they always met with Vexations and
Cavils about that matter, which were never terminated but by the Revocation of
the Edict.

The Assembly also drew up a Paper of Particular Complaints, which they would
not intermix with the General. Particular Complaints
The first had Reference to an Affair which the Parliament of Toulouse had
Transacted in the Chamber de Castres. The President de Paul had been sent
thither by the Parliament, together with the Catholic Counselors that were to
compose the Chamber. This President tho the younger of the two, would
Precedence pretended by the Catholic Officers that composed the Chambres
Miparties, ever the Reformed.
needs take place of Canaye the Reformed President; Which having been disputed
with him at Castres, he returned to Toulouse, and there got a Decree passed in
his Favor, all the Chambers being Assembled. The Reformed, not willing to
submit to it, complained to the King of the matter of Fact as a Breach of
Common Right, which adjudges the Precedence, among persons of equal Dignity, to
the first Preferred. Besides that this Attempt was contrary to the 36 Article
of the Generals of the Edict, and to the 48 of the particulars; of which, the
one Ordained, that the Presidents and Counselors of the Chambers should be
accounted Members of the Parliament where they were settled; and the other, that
the most Ancient President should have the Precedence. The Parliament, on the
other side, pretended, that the Presidents Elected out of their Body were to
have the Precedence, tho, Junior over those of the Chamber, tho their Seniors:
And this pretension was become a leading Card for the Degree of Counselors,
who had the same Reasons and the same Interests as the Presidents. They
alleag'd therefore, that the Chamber not being incorporated into the Parliament,
their Officers were to give place in all things to the Members of Parliament;
more especially because Toulouse is one of the most Ancient Parlaments in the
Kingdom. That the President of the Chamber of the Dauphinate, where the
Precedence belonged to the Eldest, made nothing for the Chamber of Castres,
because That of the Dauphinate was incorporated, and for that the Officers
belonging to it, were reputed Members of the Parliament of Grenoble, where they
had Seats and Suffrages in all Affairs that were handled in the Assembled
Chambers. They added, Cavilling upon the Order of Words, that in the Erection
of the Chamber of Castres, the King always Named the Catholic President the
first, and the Reformed the second; as if it had been his Pleasure to
distinguish the two Employments by their Degree; and to declare thereby, that
the Office of first President was to be held by a Catholic. Opon this Occasion
they magnified the Pre-eminency and Dignity of the Catholic Religion; and
forgot not to allege that in regard the Reformed President did not wear the
Mortar Cap, which a President in Parliament wore, as a Badge of his Dignity,
that very difference decided the Question, and set the Catholic a Degree above
the Reformed, which obliged him to give place and precedence to the other. The
same Remonstrance demanded, that the Hostilities committed before 1985. should
be comprehended in the Amuesty Granted to the Province of Languedoc. The third
Article concerned the Inconveniences which the Reformed suffered for want of
Burying Places for their Dead, by Reason they were denied convenient places for
that purpose. The fourth had Reference to a particular matter of Fact that was
done in the City of Pamiers which was almost all Reformed, and which the
Parliament of Toulouse would enforce to pay a Legacy left to the Jesuits, tho
the Consuls were priviledg'd in the Chamber half Catholic, half Reformed. The
Deputies who presented these Complaints were enjoynd to demand by Word of
Mouth, that the Catholics should Verbal demands concerning Chapels in
Gentlemen's Houses.
forbear the Exercise of their Religion in Churches and Chapels within
Gentlemen's Houses: Which was of great Importance, because there were few
Gentlemen's Houses without a Chapel. Which constrained the Reformed Gentlemen
to keep their Houses open, whither they would or no, for the Catholics to come
and say Mass in 'em.

These Papers were answered toward the end of August, but The Papers answered.
the manner of answering 'em was very particular, and Merits to be considered,
because it may be useful for the understanding of the Edict; and to show what
were the Kings Intentions touching the Execution of it. There were some of the
Articles that concerned the Alterations made in the Edict, upon which the King
would not Grant any thing at all, nor would make any New Alteration. Such was
the Article about Unbaptizing of Children, the Prohibition of which the King
looked upon as insignificant; the Repeating of Baptism being disapproved by the
Clergy it self, and there being very few Examples of Priests that ever
practiced it. Of the same Number was that, touching the Observation of
Festivals; that of the Chamber settled in the Parliament of Paris; That of
Creating an Office of substitute to the Proctor General; and lastly, That
concerning Burials. All these Articles remained in the same Form to which they
had reduced 'em, on purpose to facilitate their passing in Parliament. It Is true
that by a Tacit Permission the Article about Burying recovered the Force and
Efficacy which it had before. The Commissioners put it in Execution as it had
been Decreed at Nantes, as I have said in another Place; and in the Printed
Copies this Article was couched in the first Form, according as it was Granted.
And it was above twenty years before the least alteration was made in it;
besides that there was so much Justice in a Regulation that left the Catholics
Masters of their Churck-yards, provided they would allow of others, that no
body grumbl'd at the Ordinances of the Commissioners conformable to those
allotments. But in the next Government the Scene was quite changed. They would
needs persuade the Reformed, that they had falsify'd the Article, and that
during so long a Series of years they had deluded the King, the Council, the
Commissioners, the Clergy, and the whole Kingdom, causing that to pass for an
Article of the Edict, which was no more then a false and unjust Pretension. The
Reader may judge whither such a Delusion were possible. The truth is, that
because they would not draw upon themselves the Complaints of the Clergy, they
let the Article go in the Clergies Terms, but enjoined their Commissioners to
Execute it according to the first Regulation. Otherwise, I leave it to any Man's
Judgment, whither it be Crebible, that in three or four different Deputations,
the Catholic Commissioners should have conspired for Twenty years together, all
over the Kingdom, with the Reformed, to Cheat the World, and Violate their
Instructions. But there were others wherein the Reformed obtained their desires
as that for the Explanation of the Equivocal Term of Houses Ecclesiastical,
which was ordered to their Advantage; the signification of the Terms being
reduced to Buildings designed for Persons, or Service Ecclesiastical. Also upon
the delay of Establishing the Edict, they obtained a New Order to settle 'em in
three Months, upon pain of Interdicting the Parlaments that refused to do it.
Upon other Articles they were referred to the Chancellor, to know the Kings
Intentions; as upon the inconveniences they were afraid of, if they should be
obliged to Request the Kings Permission for holding their Colloquies and
Synods; or else they were remitted to the Instructions of the Commissioners, to
which the Reformed had likewise agreed, and according to which the Edict was to
be Executed. Such was the Article wherein they complained of an Addition of the
Equivocal Words, By them Established, in the 9th Article of the Edict. From
whence, it appeared that they were to seek for the Meaning of this Term, in the
Manner of the Commissioners or Judges ordering the Confirmation of Right or
Privilege grounded upon this Article; whereas in our days, they would needs
derive the Interpretation from the Discipline itself of the Reformed; as if it
could not be said, that an Exercise had been Established by them, if they had
failed to observe the least Formalities therein. Lastly in others, besides the
General Instruction, which was written on the side of the Article Answered,
there was a secret Reservation, according to which they were to Govern
themselves in the Execution of the Thing; and those Reservations were always to
the Advantage of the Reformed. So that although the King left the two Clauses
complained of in the 11th Article, because said he, in his Answer, That the
second Place of Bailliage was a favor, which he might have Limited with all
the Restrictions which he thought proper to add; Nevertheless there was this
Reservation, That if it proved more difficult to Establish the second Place of
the Bailliage, either because of the Exception of Ecclesiastical Demeans, or
for want of some convenient place in the Kings Demesnes, it should be settled
upon the ^eife of some Catholic Lord. Also upon the Exception of Ecclesiastical
Causes, which the Chambers are forbid to take Cognizance of, tho the King
preserved this Privilege to the Clergy, yet there was this Reservation, That
the Leading-men of the Parliament should be treated with, to send back Causes of
that Nature to the Chamber of Edict, since there would be but one Reformed
Counselor in that Chamber. But the Clergy would never surrender this Point,
for fear it should be taken for too express a Mark of their Consent to the
Edict, should they own the Jurisdiction of a Chamber that bare the Name of it.
As to the Change that was made in the 27th Article, from whence they had taken
away the Prohibition to insert the Clause of the Religion Catholic and
Apostolic in Grants of Offices, 'twas answered that the Prohibition was made in
the Chancery; and so that they would make that Prohibition pass for
Insignificant, because it had been put in Execution. But that Alteration was
one of the most Important, and Lewis XIII. took his Advantage of it, to debar
the Reformed from all Offices and Employments. The truth is, that the King
supposing always in his Grants and Patents the Religion and Good Manners of the
Person who enjoys any Place of Trust, had slid in, after the Word Religion, the
Words Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman, to exclude from all Employment all those
that made Profession of any other Doctrine. But now that the Edict declared as
well Reformed, as Catholics, indifferently capable of Employments, it was but
just to take away that Mark of Distinction, and to require only Testimonials of
the Religion of the Person to be preferred, without expressing what Religion,
since it was indifferent what Religion the Person admitted Professed, whither
the one or the other. This was very useful to the Reformed for the time it was
observed; but Lewis XIII. thought it the better way to mark the difference of
Religions, to the end that the Name of Pretended Reformed being inserted in the
Grants, might be a signal to give notice to the Jurisdiction where the Parties
were to be Presented, to start Scruples upon the Admission of those that were
the Bearers of 'em.

The particular Remonstrance was answered much after the same manner. The King
ordained, upon the point of Precedence, Precedence preserved to the most ^
Ancient President.
that the Articles of the Edict should be observed; and there was a private
promise that the President de Paul should be commanded to return to Castres,
and obey the Regulations. Thus the Reformed gained their point; but for the
Honor of the Parliament of Toulouse, the Matter was privately adjudg'd. The
Amnesty of Hostilities committed before 1585, was granted to the Province of
Lang uedoc, and promised to all the rest that stood in need of it; as also to
particular persons who might be put to trouble under that pretense. The Affair
of Churchyards and Burying-places was referred Article of Churchyards.
to the Commissioners; but there was this Reservation, that the Commissioners
should order Places for Burying the Dead to be allowed Gratis; or otherwise,
that they should order the Corporations to purchase 'em, without putting the
Reformed to any Charges of Contribution. As to the Process of the Jesuits
against the City of Pamiers, it was ordered, That the Decrees of Council made
in favor of the City should be put in execution, not withstanding any Decrees
of the Parliament of Toulouse to the contrary. As to what concerned the Churches
and Chapels in Reformed Gentlemen's Houses, as it was only proposed by Word of
Mouth, so it was determined after the same manner. The King gave leave that
particular persons, who were concerned therein, should appeal to him, and he
would treat with the Clergy, in order to persuade 'em to remove into other
places, and to rebuild at the Charges of the Reformed, in places left to the
Bishops choice, Chapels and Churches endowed, wherein the Catholic Service
should be continued for the future. But as for places not endowed, and where
the Service was only performed at the pleasure of the Proprietor, that the
Clergy should agree to leave 'em at the Discretion of those to whom they
belonged. This seemed to be nothing but Justice then, but the Law being altered
in these later years, the Clergy is become Master of all the places of this
Nature, without any other pretense then that of the Name of Chapel, which
those places bore, or some Figure of a Cross, or some other Footsteps of the
Roman Worship still remaining.

But while the Assembly, that kept firm at Chast^lleraud, were busily employed
in drawing up Papers and getting Answers, the Zealous Catholics were preparing
new Devices to disturb their Repose; and not finding the Wiser sort disposed to
make new Broils, they resolved to stir up the Mobile, by means most proper to
put 'em in a Ferment. Martha Brossiere, the Daughter of a Mary Brossiere ^eigns
her self possessed by the Devil.
person of mean Extraction, Born at Romorantin, having a good Wit, but a very
Infirm and Diseased Body, and joining Hypocrisy to her Infirmities, would
needs set up for one possessed by the Devil. Her Father, being Advised by some
Bigots, or Flattered by the Hopes of Profit, by reason of the Concourse of
people to such Sights, and the Alms which they pour forth upon people under
such Circumstances, carried her up and down from Province to Province, under
pretense of getting Relief and Cure for her. But the Bishop of Orleance's
Chancellor soon perceived it to be a Cheat, and the Bishop of Angers convinced
himself of the Fallacy by a very pleasant Experiment. For it is Reported, That
while he feigned to put his Episcopal Crosier in her Hand, which ought always
to be very well replenished with Relics, he dexterously slipped into it the
Key of his Chest, where Obloquie taxed him to keep locked up such things as
never frighten the Devil; but the Daughter deceived by the Coldness of the Key,
fell a Crucifying and Tormenting her self with the same extravagant Postures
and Contortions of her Body as should have been the effects of the real
Relics, according to the Opinion of the Catholics: Which causing the Prelate
to smile, as it did all the people who were present, he refused to have any
more to do with her. But in regard this was not sufficient to disabuse the
people, the pretended Female Demoniac was to be carried to Paris, where by Men
of Prudence the thing was looked upon to be a mere Trifle, and it was adjudg'd
to be an Artifice that only tended to the reviving of New Troubles. Now the
Distempered Patient in her Raving Fits talked of nothing but the Reformed and
the Edict, and of the Toleration of Countenanced Heresy; threatening withal,
the Wrath of Heaven against them that were the Authors of it. 'Twas easily The
Sequel of this Comedy within and without the Kingdom.
understood by that, that this Comedy was the Contrivance of some Cabal; nor
did they deal by this pretended Demoniac as one that stood in need of
Ecclesiastical Remedies, but as one that was seized with a Distemper of which
others endeavored to make an ill use. Nevertheless the Party that favored the
Imposture, either out of Malice or Suspicion was so great, that they durst not
take those due Courses with the Counterfeit as she deserved. The Capuchins,
whose Credit is grounded upon an Affectation of outward Mortification, and who
for the most part are Ignorant and Zealous to the lowest and meanest degree of
silly Bigotry, were the first that made themselves Masters of this Unfortunate
Wretch, and spent a World of Exorcisms upon her, as if she had been really
possessed. The Bishop of Paris stood upon his Guard, unwilling to hazard the
High Opinion which People had of his Judgment and his Religion, by taking her
part too soon; and therefore caused her to be visited and observed by several
Physicians. Among these, there was one whose Name was ^uret, famous in the
Faculty, who alone by himself maintained that she was possessed; and his single
Suffrage prevailed so far, tho contradicted by three Opinions directly
contrary, which would hardly allow her to be troubled with so much as the
slighter Distempers of the Spleen and Hypochondryac Melancholy; as also by a
fourth, who would neither give his Opinion Pro nor Con, till he had had a Trial
of three Months; This single Suffrage, I say, prevailed so far, that it
encouraged, and in some measure Authorized the Exorcists to send for other
Physicians, who, to the Eternal Ignominy of their Profession, Voted all of 'em,
that the Hypocrisy and Vapors of the Patient were the effects of a
Supernatural Distemper. Upon this, there was a necessity, that to silence the
noise which this Business made, the Parliament should interpose their Authority,
and appoint other Physicians to examine the matter. Those Physicians agreed
unanimously, that there was nothing of Supernatural in the Maids Distemper;
thereupon the Parliament, who had a long time ago banished from their
Considerations the frivolous Stories of Witchcrafts, and Diabolical
Possessions, put her in Prison, to the end they might be the better enabled to
distinguish, whither it were a Distemper or an Imposture. A little after they
discharged her, and returned her to her Father, commanding him to keep her at
home, and to have such a strict hand over her, that she should not wander from
Province to Province as she had done before.

But it was not so easy to impose silence upon the Predicants, who loudly
declaimed against those who sti^l'd that Voice which they called Miraculous,
and which they would have to be an Oracle very proper to convince the Heretics.
Time did more then all the Authority and Remonstrances of the most Sage and
Prudent, and by degrees asswag'd this Tempest; but it had like to have broken
out again in a more dangerous manner. An Abbot of St. Martin, whose Name was
Roche Foucaut, Brother of the Bishop of Clermont, and of the Family of Randan,
which had been strictly devoted to the League, and which had put the King to a
great deal of trouble in the Province where it had an Interest, got this Maid
into his Custody, and undertook to make something of her Impostures; but the
Cheat was so known, and so cried down in France, that the Abbot was constrained
to seek for Credulous Supporters out of the Kingdom. He thought that he should
find Protectors anow at Rome, but he was deceived; for D'Ossat being advertised
of the Business, forestalled the Pope, and the Pope was not so much offended at
the Publication of the Edict, as to make use of this Ridiculous pretense to
uphold his Exclamations. The poor Abbot therefore found himself abandoned by
all the World; Nay the very Jesuits, unwilling to offend the King, with whom
there was some discourse of a Reconciliation, would not so much as meddle with
this Intreague, tho since their Re-establishment it had been seen, that for
several Years together they had always had some Demoniac or other at their
Devotion, to Rave according to their Instructions for the support of their
Interests. At length the Maid was shut up in a certain Nunnery, and her Patron
was constrained to have more Wit, because that all the Measures of his Project
were quite broken.

In the mean time all Endeavors were used in earnest to Dissolution of the
Kings Marriage.
Dissolve the Kings Marriage with Queen Margaret, that he might be free to
Marry another; and the Kings Mistress being Dead, as I have already said, the
Queen showed her self to be less scrupulous then she had been any time before.
'Twas requisite that she should prefer a Petition her self, that she might be
Degraded; and she agreed to every thing that the King desired. The greatest
difficulty was to find pretenses sufficiently plausible for the Dissolution of
this Marriage; Nine were produced, which were thought prevalent enough to do
the Turn; but which, to speak sincerely, were at the bottom of so little
Validity, that had it been the case of a private Person, they would not have
been so much as listened to. D'Ossat also frequently wrote, that there was but
one that could be thought to strike home, and that at Rome they would make but
little reckoning of all the rest. That which he thought would be of greatest
weight, was a pretended Violence which Queen Margaret alleged had been offered
to her, for which proofs were produced more proper to excite Laughter then
procure Belief. Nevertheless the Witnesses were carefully Instructed, and some
had their Depositions ready drawn to their hands. The Pope was willing to
prepossess himself, and tho he were to be a Judge of the Affair, he could not
forbear, in some measure, to come in himself for a Witness of the Constraint of
which the Queen complained, by repeating the Words that were spoken by Charles
IX. to Cardinal Aldobrandini, whose Domestic Servant he was. So that in showing
he had particular Reasons for giving Credit to the proofs of the Violence which
that Princess had sustained, he prepared Men's Minds to lay aside all Doubts,
that he would make it a point of Conscience to ordain the Dissolution of the
Marriage. For at the bottom, if the proofs that appeared were not solid, he had
Reasons which he reserved in his Breast, which rendered the Divore Lawful even
in the Judgment of the Reformed; and it behooved him to be satisfied with what
he could find, for fear that if better Reasons were alleged, it might chance
to cost the Queen her Life. Every one had his particular prospect in this
Affair, besides Reasons of State and Conscience. The Reformed were in hopes of
being firmly settled under an Heir bred up by a King who was beloved by 'em,
and who was beholding to 'em; and the Pope saw well the Advantage that would
redound to Him, that there would be a King in France one day, that could never
question the Authority of the Holy See, without putting in doubt at the same
time his Right to the Crown.

I might here pass over in silence a particular Affair that A Decree of the
Parliament of Bretagne, touching the Oath referred by a Reformed to a Catholic.
happened this Year in the Parliament of Bretagne, did I not think it useful to
show how the Parliament* were inclined at that time toward the Reformed. The
Chamber that was to be Erected at Paris was not yet ready; for which reason
they could not make use of the Privilege of removing Causes where the Suit was
proper, out of the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Bretagne. Now a Reformed
pleading there against a Catholic, in a Cause about something that depended
upon Honesty and Sincerity, declared that he would be concluded by the
Catholic's Oath, provided he would take it upon the Sacrament, which was the
most Sacred Thing in his Religion. But the Catholic being willing to avoid the
Oath, or else to take it only according to the usual Forms, the Parliament
adjudg'd the proposal of the Reformed not admittable, because he had not the
same Veneration for the Sacrament as the Catholic. Casuists, much more
equitable then the Judges of that Parliament, might have blamed the Reformed
perhaps, because he required his Adversary to Swear by that which he did not
believe was the Object of Worship; but would have dispensed with the Catholics
taking it, because the Oath taken under a certain Name Dishonours not the
Object there Named, but on the contrary, has a great Veneration paid it by him
that Swears. At least the Primitive Churches were much of this Opinion; they
would have condemned a Christian, who should have required a Pagan to Swear by
the Name of one of his Deities; but they would have pronounced those Judges
Unjust that should have dispensed with a Pagan for taking such an Oath, under
pretense that the Christian abominated Idols. For in truth, the Religion of an
Oath is grounded upon this, That he who takes the Oath is always presumed to
Swear by those things which he esteems most Amiable and most Sacred. The
Catholics who now Trade among those whom they call Infidels or Heretics, would
think it strange that those people should not be permitted to Swear by what
they believe most Venerable, under pretense that the Catholics have not the
same Veneration for the same Things.

Toward the latter end of this Year, the King in favor of Trimouille made a
Peer of France
La Trimouille, added the Dignity of Peer to that of Duke, which he had
already, and he took his Oath at the beginning of December; which favor
proceeded not so much from the Kings Affection, as from the Fear and Awe that
he stood in of the Duke's Wit and Courage. The Court was full of Malcontents,
but the Dukes of Bouillon and Trimouille were not the least formidable, either
by the Puissant Alliances of their Families, or their Reputation among the
Reformed; therefore to prevent their joining with others, they endeavored to
gratify 'em with some particular Favors. And the Peerage, which had not as
yet been conferred upon all sorts of people, was esteemed an Honor that might
satisfy the most Ambitious. However the Duke was not raised to that Dignity,
without murmuring at it. But Marshal de Bouillon already enjoyed the same
Honor, and by consequence it was no Novelty, since there was already a
President for it; nevertheless, 1600.
the Spaniards made a great noise about it, at Rome, and the Pope complained of
it. They had put it into the Popes Head, that together with the Dignity of
Peerage, he was to enjoy the Office of High Admiral, the Authority of which, as
he thought, extended to Command in all the Sea Towns. But d'Ossat appeased him,
by making it out to him, that the Edict being Granted, the Granting some
Honors to those that were declared Capable could not be avoided; more
especially, when they were persons of that Merit and Quality as the Duke; that
the Title was an Honor without profit, and which Invested the Duke neither
with any more Power, not any more Revenue then he had before, but which engaged
him to greater Expenses, without affording him wherewithal to defray 'em; that
neither Offices nor Governments were annexed to it; that in bestowing such sort
of Favors the King had always a regard to the Good of the Catholic Religion,
and by kindnesses of that Nature sought to gain the principal Heads of the
Heretics to his Party. The Pope relished these Reasons, and so the Noise spread
no farther. They were yet more tractable at Rome, in reference to the Business
of Lesdiguieres and Roni, whose Religion they well knew, would never transport
'em so far as to displease the Pope. There appeared Roni's Advancement not much
wondered at.
some discontent that Roni had obtained the Superintendency of the Finances,
which the King had conferred upon him about the time that the Edict was
concluded. But in all probability, this discontent was raised by a Cabal of the
Council, of which Villeroi was the Chief, who not being able to waste the Kings
Treasure, by reason of Roni's severe Management, would fain have had that
Employment in the hands of a Courtier more remiss; for which reason, d'Ossat, a
Creature of Villeroi's, engaged himself too far in this Intreague for his
Profit, for that having written those things to the King, which tended
indirectly to the taking away the Finances from Roni, the Cunning Treasurer
made him suffer for it, by reducing him almost to Beggary, for want of his
Pensions duly paid. Nor was this any obstruction, but that within a little time
after, Roni, without quitting the Administration of the Finances, was made
Master of the Ordnance, Duke and Peer, Governor of the Bastile and a Province,
no body opposing this great Preferment of a Heretic. It Is very true, that when
he wrote to the Pope, he gave him the Title of His Holiness, as a Catholic
would have done.

The Obstructions of the Edict had lasted almost till the beginning
Commissioners for the Execution of the Edict and their Power.
of this Year, tho they had begun to put it in Execution in several places, and
that the King had appointed two Commissioners in every Province, to act in such
a manner as to content both Parties. One of these two was a Catholic, the other
a Reformed; but the Catholic was Elected also with the Approbation of the
Reformed, because they were their fears of being deprived by the Cavils of a
Bigoted Commissary, of what was Granted 'em by the most Solemn Edict that ever
was Granted by a Prince, in favor of his Subjects that were to be healed. Now,
tho their Power were equal, nevertheless, to the end the Catholics might have
the Advantage in every thing, the Catholic Commissioner had the Upper hand
almost every where, and bore the greatest Sway. They were Empowered to receive
all manner of Petitions and Complaints, touching the Execution of the Edict,
and to decide all Differences that might arise upon that occasion. Their Orders
were as good as a Law, especially in things that were not Contested, and where
both Parties Consented; nor is there any President, that I know of any Appeal
to the King, upon any Decree of that Nature; but when any Dispute arose, they
were to give an Account of their Sentence to the King; and their Decree was
only made with a Proviso, till the King had pronounced his Judgment. And
indeed, to speak properly, their Commission was no more then the Act it self
explained, and limited by particular Articles, and the King by Word of Mo^th
reduced their Instructions to two Heads; The one was to Re-establish the
Exercise of the Roman Religion in all places where it had been disturbed; and
the other was to settle Peace over all the Kingdom by a due Observation of the
Edict.

Thus hitherto I have given an Account of the Negotiations and Treaties that
preceded the Edict of Nantes, and which prepared the Matter, and formed the
Articles; And I have set down the principal Obstructions that so long hindered
either the Conclusion, or the Verification of it. Henceforward I am to speak of
the Observation of it, or of the Breaches and Violations of it, till our very
days. But in regard that this is in some measure a New Subject, my Opinion is,
that I can no where better insert then here, some General Considerations upon
this Edict, to show the Force and Nature of it, that so the Reader, coming to
see the Recital of Matters of Fact, upon which I intend to build my
Reflections, and not being obliged to go far to seek for the Heads from whence
I shall derive my Consequences, may the more easily apprehend and observe the
Truth of 'em. To which purpose I shall speak of three Things. First, I shall
give a brief Account of the Reproaches, General Observations upon the Edict.
at that time, cast upon the Reformed by the Catholics, and afterward so many
times revived. Secondly, I shall set down in few Words the Replies of the
Reformed in their own Defense. Lastly, I shall make more ample Reflections upon
the Justice, Benefit, and Importance of the Edict; from thence to conclude,
that of it self, and in its own Nature, it was Irrevocable, tho it had never
been so styled; and withal, I shall Reply to some Objections, which were the
first occasion of all the Clergies Enterprises to destroy it. I shall handle
this Matter by the way of Historical Remarks, leaving the Lawyers to explain
'em by Observations agreeable to their Principles.

From the time then that the Edict was set forth, there were several Discourses
and Writings concerning it, to and fro. The Reformed were assailed with many
Reproaches, and they set forth several Apologies in defense of themselves. The
Zealous Catholics, who were mad to see a Party, which they Mortally hated,
Established in such a manner that they could not be stirred, revenged
themselves by Invectives; and the Reformed, secured by the Edict, sought no
further then to Ward off their Calumnies with Words. But the main Reason which
induced the Catholics to frame these several Accusations, was, Because the
Edict seemed to perpetuate, to their lasting shame, the remembrance of the
League, contrived among 'em to Exclude their Lawful Prince from the Throne,
under the pretense of Religion. It Is true, the Edict forbid the Reviving the
Memory of Things past, but we know that these sort of Prohibitions can never
hinder Posterity from coming to the Knowledge of such things as others would
fain obliterate by such precautions; Amnesties do but keep up the Remembrance
of those Crimes which they pardon. In a word the Measures that are taken to
stifle those events of which the Memory is odious, may put a stop to the
Inquiries and Pursuits that may be made after 'em, without such Inhibitions, by
Prosecutions and Indictments at Law. But such proceedings are so far from
razing such Events out of the Memory of Men, that they Engrave more deeply in
their Minds such an Inscription as will never permit their being Buried in
Oblivion. The Edict therefore, by forbidding to revive things past, ceased not
however to be a kind of Monument to preserve 'em always in their Thoughts. It
appeared by the Edict that there had been Hostilities, Mortal hatred of each
other, Oppressions and Ravages; and although the Reformed should have forborne to
upbraid the Catholics with 'em, who had been the Authors of the greatest part
of those Mischiefs, and the occasion of the rest by their Cruelties and
Violations of so many Treaties, it seemed that the Edict alone cast a Reproach
upon 'em so much the more uneasy to be endured, because it is perpetual; it is
a Voice that always repeats as loud the Inhumanities, the Massakers, and the
Treasons of Time past, as that of the Law which prohibits their Contrivance.

The Catholics then, who began to blush at things past, and Reproache^ of the
Catholics thrown upon the Reformed.
knew well they could never be Interpreted to their Advantage, endeavored to
pick out something that was equally liable to Reproach in the Conduct of the
Reformed; to the end that by way of Compensation, both the one and the other
might appear equally Guilty or Innocent. To which purpose, they were about to
turn the Edict to the Dishonor of the Reformed, and to raise up against 'em a
perpetual Character of Criminal Behavior. They sought for pretenses that might
be serviceable to 'em, in the Time and Manner of obtaining so favorable an
Edict. They forgot not that the Reformed had taken the opportunity of the Siege
of Amiens to put a value upon themselves, and to draw from the King more
Advantageous Conditions, through the Necessity of his Affairs. They looked upon
it as if the Reformed has lost all the Honor of their former Services, by
their coldness and indifferency at that time, and that that same kind of
Desertion was as Criminal as all the Attempts of the League; but it may be
seen, that the Reformed very well defended themselves from that Accusation, as
I have made appear in its due place. They were upbraided also with this, That
it was a piece of Felony to transact with their King concerning Peace; That
what they obtained by force of Arms was an Eternal Monument of their Rebellion,
how advantageous soever it otherwise appeared; That a King could not make Peace
with his Subjects, but it must appear that he had made War against him; Nor
Pardon 'em, but that it must be evident they were Criminals. That the Reformed
at first Assembled without Arms, and strove with Emulation to pray to God for
those whom they called Persecutors; so far were they from repelling Violence by
Violence; but that at length, they had taken Arms to render themselves
Formidable. That after the first War they were contented to take the Royal Word
for a Pledge and Security of the Peace; but that afterward they would have
strong Towns, Garrisons, Chambers half one, half the other, and a hundred other
Securities. From whence they branched out another Calumny, that their Religion
was degenerated into Faction; that their aim was to set up another State in a
State, and that they aspired to get themselves loose of the General Laws, by
the help of particular Concessions.

The most part of these Objections were no more then a Reviving of those that
had appeared in the Reign of Charles the Ninth, and which had since that time
been solidly refuted. But there had happened, after that, so many Novelties,
that had augmented the Rights of the Reformed, and given new Demonstrations of
the Justice of their Complaints, that 'twas easy to judge, the Catholics did
not revive those Idle Calumnies, but only because they knew not where to find
any other fit for their turn.

The Reformed confessed a great part of what their Enemies Answers.
laid to their Charge, not without some Aggravations of their own; but either
they made it out that there was no Harm in what they had done, because they had
done nothing but what was grounded upon the Law of Nature it self; or if they
had done amiss, that the Guilt lay not at their Door, but that the real Authors
were to be blamed. That when there is a Necessity of endangering the Life of an
Enemy, the Reproach ought not to fall upon him that stands upon his Defense,
but it is to be charged upon the Violence of the Aggressor; That the insisting
upon Cautions and Securities was not to be imputed to those that demand 'em,
but to those whose breach of Faith reduced the others to require 'em. That
Negotiations of Peace between Subjects and their Kings might be Styled
Felonious Acts, had the Kings been always the Fathers of their Subjects, and
the Just Gonservators of the Rights and Privileges, which by Nature, or by
Birth, belonged to 'em; for that being presupposed, there can be no pretense
for the taking up of Arms. But in regard that Self-defence was the only
occasion of the War on their side, when the Princes had lent out their Names
and their Authority to Patronize the Cruelties, Treacheries, and Perjuries of
Persecutors; when they had given 'em the Command of Armies to Extirpate the
pretended Heretics; when they were the declared Heads of that Destroying Party;
when they had Sworn the Ruin of their own Subjects without Pity or Compassion;
when they had engaged to Sacrifice the Blood and Lives of those Unfortunate
Wretches to the Interests of Foreign Power, which had no other reason to bear
an Antipathy to the pretended Herctics, but because they detested the Tyranny
it asp r'd to; and went about to free the Neck of their Kings from the Yoke
which it strove to impose upon their Necks; when they had Sworn never to keep
their Oaths with their Subjects, unless they were forced to it; nor to observe
any Treaties of Peace, but when they could no longer make War upon 'em with
Advantage; that then they might Lawfully betake themselves to their Arms, and
by consequence were not bound to lay 'em down, till after a Treaty of Peace
concluded, by which the Partys oppressed might find themselves sufficiently
secured. That the Reformed had never sought Relief by Force of Arms, while they
were under the Protection of any Form of Justice, by leaving 'em the means to
be answerable for their Faith, and to unfold their Doctrine against the
Accusations of their Adversaries: That they had patiently suffered all the
Mischievous Injuries that had been done 'em, for Thirty Years together, by
Bloody Edicts, that stirred up all sorts of persons against 'em, and deprived
'em of all manner of shelter and Sanctuary; that they had with the same
Constancy endured their being haled from Jurisdiction to Jurisdiction, when
their Enemies were both Parties and their Judges; that is to say, The
Ecclesiastics, whose hatred they had only Merited, by revealing the Corruption
of their Doctrine, their Discipline and their Manners; and when they had also
Erected New Tribunals to their Ruin, and had delivered 'em over to the
Inquisition. That they were still Masters of their Patience, when the Clergy
put Thousands to Death, by Decrees drawn up in form indeed, tho both Cruel and
Unjust; when there were no less then Eight Thousand Sentences of Death Recorded
in the Public Registers, not to speak of Imprisonments, Confiscations,
Banishments, and several other Vexations and Oppressions which they were forced
to undergo. That they never took Arms, till after the first Edict for Liberty
of Conscience had been Violated by the Court in several Branches, and after
several Manners; but that they had laid 'em down again, both upon that, and
sundry other Occasions, upon the first Offers of Peace. In reference to which,
they forgot not the Maxim of Kathern de Medicis, who never made it a Matter of
Conscience to break her Word with 'em, because if she did not find her
Perfidiousness stood her in any stead, she had always a sure way to Disarm 'em,
by giving 'em, to use her own Expression, Their Belly full of Preaching.

They made it out that the first Edict was Granted before the War began; and
that it was obtained by Petitions and Conferences only; that the Enterprise of
Amboise was only a Politic Affair, wherein Religion had never been concerned,
but because the Heads of both Parties professed a different Religion; That the
Treacheries, the Cruelties, and more especially the Horrid Massacre of 1572,
had made it evident that the Royal Word was made a May Game, and a Snare, to
surprise the Innocence and Credulity of the Reformed; that after they had
caused 'em, by Fraud and fair Promises, to lose the opportunity of obtaining an
Advantageous Peace, while the King and the Catholics themselves stood in need
of their Assistance, they had amused 'em by a Thousand delays, provoked 'em by
a Thousand contempts, and a Thousand injurious flouts, for having so little
Prudence and Policy; of which however the Catholics had all the reason in the
World to Repent, when at the Siege of Amiens they saw how Necessary the Union
of the Reformed, with the rest of the Kingdom, was for the preservation of it.
After this, to load the Reformed with Accusations, because they would not
Surrender themselves, without bargaining for their Security, to the Discretion
of their Old Enemies, was to imitate the Justice of Highway-^en, that should go
about to bring their Actions against Travelers, because they refused to
confide in their Words; or else, because they rather chose to make 'em run the
half of the Danger, by putting themselves upon the Defensive part, then to
suffer their Throats to be Cut without Resistance. That as for the pretense of
a State in a State, it was a mere Chimera; that the strong Holds which were
left in their Hands belonged to the King as well as the rest in the Kingdom;
Possessed by him; Paid with his Money; Kept in his Name; and that the Trust of
'em was not Perpetual, since they were to be no longer in their hands, then
till the Catholics should be at leisure to Accustom themselves to live at Peace
and Unity with 'em; and therefore, if they desired they should be Surrendered,
without any Trouble, at the end of the Term prefixed, that the Catholics had no
more to do, but to observe more faithfully the New Edict then they had done all
the rest.

The End of the Sixth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of NANTS. BOOK VII.
The Epitome of the 7th. Book.
QVestions upon the Nature of the Edict. The Benefit of it. The State of the
Kingdom before and after the Edict. Wars about Religion are the most Cruel.
What diversity of Religious Policy ought not to suffer in a Kingdom. What is
the Nature of the Reformed Religion. The Justice of the Edict which restored
Humanity and Sincerity. Services done to Kings by the Reformed. The Justice of
Rewards after Service done. What Recompense is. The Edict grants nothing to the
Reformed which distinguishes 'em from the rest of the French, in the Quality of
Subjects. For that reason the Concessions in it are so much the more just. What
the Edict grants the Reformed do no body any prejudice. The Catholic Religion
has been a great Gainer by the Edict. The Edict ought to be Irrevocable. A
Consideration upon the Word and the Thing. Rights of Conscience. The Force of
Edicts that maintain the Liberty of it; and those that are Granted for the
Preservation of Societies. The Preservation of their Subjects the Chief
Obligation of Sovereigns. There is Naturally an Express or Tacit Treaty between
the Sovereign and the Subjects; as also between Master and Servant. The Force
of Treaties. The Edict of Nantes is a Treaty, which the Form of an Edict
renders more Venerable. Two Considerations of a Treaty in the Edict. 1. Between
the King and the Reformed. 2. Between the Reformed and the Catholics. The
Reformed Treat with the King. 1. About Reward for their Services. 2. About
Security against their Enemies. Places of Security. Kings may Treat with their
Subjects. Proofs. The Reformed were in a Condition to Treat with the King. Six
Considerations that make it out. Other Reflections. Considerations upon which
the King Treats. The King Arbitrator between himself and his Subjects, to Grant
the Edict with the Consent of the Catholics. A Maxim of the Clergy in the
Questions of the Regale. The King Security for his own Edict. Successors bound
to observe the Treaties made by their predecessors. That the Parlaments, the
Clergy, the Pope himself, have as much share in the Edict as was necessary to
remove all pretense of Complaint. A Resuming the Series of the History.
Commotion of Men's Minds upon the Publishing the Book of the Eucharist. Diverse
Writers attack it. The King is willing to satisfy the Pope, and content du
Plessis. Du Plessis taxed for fall Quotations stands upon his Honor. He
Challenges his Accusers, and his Challenge accepted by Perron. A Conference
Granted. Difficulties started by the Clergy as to the Matter and Thing. Others,
by du Plessis's Friends. Degrees of Foul Play. 1. Perron has Notice, but not du
Plessis. 2. Perron is Dispensed with from giving in VVriting the Number of the
Passages which he promised. 3. The Order and Choice of the Passoges is lest to
him. The Conference almost broken off is continued upon unequal Conditions. 5.
Perron prescribes the Laws fer it. 6. Theeesoore and one Passages delivered to
du Plessis to justify in eight Hours. 7. They deprive him of his Rest in the
Night. 8. The King appoints the Commissioners. 9. Gives the plurality of Vices
to the Catholics. 10. Changes two that were first appointed for two others more
suspected. 11. Makes choice of two tottering Reformed: Chrracters of du Fresne
Canaye and Casaubon. 12. Forbid making use of the Terms of False and Falsity.
Reciprocal Protestations. Perron's Malice. Form of the Conference. Du Plessis
condemned in Nine Passages. General and particular Reflections. Du Plessis falls
Sick, and the Conference breaks off. The Catholics insult and Triumph.
Consequences of the Conference. The Assembly removed from Chastelleraud to
Saumur; where it breaks up.

BUT there are other considerations to be made upon this Subject, which are no
less important. It Is fit to be inquired, Questions upon the Nature of the Edict.
whether, supposing that the means, by which they obtained the Edict, were
Innocent, it was beneficial to Grant it: Whither it were one of those Edicts
that become Essential Laws of the Kingdom, in Respect of the Nature of the
things which they decide, or the manner of Ordaining 'em, or rather one of
those which being Granted only to serve the present Occasion, may be revoked
upon the change of Affairs.

The Question concerning the Benefit of the Edict may be The Benefit of the
Edict.
determined in few Words. There needs no more then to consider the vast number
of Mischiefs that rendered it necessary; and which it has successfully
repaired, and the Great Advantages which it procured to France, while it was
observed with any appearance of Fidelity. There needs no more then to compare
what France was, before the Edict had laid the more solid Foundation of Peace,
and what it arrived to in a few years after the public Tranquillity was
established. I shall say nothing of the Terrors of a Civil War considered in it
self: They are well known to all the World. There is no Body but Trembles when
he calls to mind, that the Members of one Body, that owe each other mutual
Defense, are Hurried to mutual Destruction; that a Kingdom should employ her
The condition of the Kingdom hoth before and after the Edict.
own Forces to prey upon her self: That Rage and Fury should violate all the
Ties of Nature and Society; that it should Arm Citizens against Citizens;
Relations against Relations, and Brethren against Brethren. There may be found
the same Remarks in a thousand Authors. But I cannot pass over the dreadful
wast and depopulation that so many years Wars had made over all the Kingdom.
The Country was almost all Ruined; the Houses, the Castles, the Cities were
generally run to decay; nothing every where to be seen, but heaps of Rubbish
and Desolation. And the strong holds that were fortified, were rather Ruins
half repaired, whither the people Retreated for shelter, then places that
enjoyed the Luster and Beauty of Cities. There was no body that could depend
upon his Revenue. The Nobility, Gentry and Soldiers subsisted all upon Plunder
which Necessity Authorized. The Bourgesses, who only Rented other Men's Lands or
Houses, depended upon the strogest side, and frequently were undone by the
Incursions of the Enemy. The Merchants broke, in regard of the decay of Trade
in a Ruined Kingdom. The Ecclesiastics complained that their Estates were
Seized or Usurped; and that as the one part of the Kingdom was unwilling, so
the other was disabl'd from paying their Tithes, and their Rents. The King also
was poorer then his Subjects: His Revenues were engaged; his Taxes ill paid;
all his Duties came to little; and as I have already observed, he was so far
from having wherewithal to support a Royal Magnificence, that during the Siege
of Amiens, he had not wherewithal to supply his Table, and Cloth himself like
an ordinary Gentleman. And the Civil War was to be continued, to complete what
was already brought to such perfection, the Destruction of a Kingdom by Misery,
the Members of which that were most Vigorous, did but linger out and Languish
upon the Brink of a Total Dissipation. It may easily be conjectured also what a
Confusion the unequal Distribution of Justice occasioned in differences between
Man and Man; and how many encumbrances the Troubles of so many Years, which had
interrupted almost all the Functions of the Judges, must have ensued by setting
up Prescriptions, Bickerings about Jurisdictions, with incertainties of
Possession, had not a stop been put to the Progress of these Irregularities, by
a happy Revolution. Several faults had been made upon the Royal Authority,
during those long divisions, as tho it had been no more then an Airy Title,
which was neither of any Efficacy, or Power to support it self: And the
Kingdom, which for so many Ages had kept up so high a Degree and Reputation in
Europe, was become the Scorn or Pity of Foreigners, according as they had a
kindness, or diskindness for France. That Kingdom which had been for so long
time the Sanctuary, and Refuge of the Oppressed, was now no other then the
Stage of Oppression, and the Theater where the strongest side Acted the most
bloody Tragedies.

However, no sooner was the Edict set forth, but France recovered Peace; in so
much, that in twenty four hours, as a Man may say, there was a Reformation of
Forty Years Disorders. Plenty and Prosperity re-enter'd by degrees into
Families; and Order and Property took place again. The Country began to be
Tilled: And the hopes of a lasting Tranquillity encouraged all people to repair
the Ruins of their Inheritances. Every Body took Possession of their Estates;
and the Courts of Law were open to Legal Suits and Demands. Nor did the
Ecclesiastics gain less than any of the Rest. But the King got more then any
Body. Splendour and Majesty Readorn'd his Palace: He resumed his Authority over
his People; and Foreigners once more began to look upon the Flourishing Kingdom
either with Respect or Dread. The repose of France balanced all Europe: The
King jealous of his word, was soon confided in by his Allies; and in regard he
had no other Ambition then to Reign for the good of all the World, without any
desire of Usurping what belonged to others, without Cruelty, without Devices
and Tricks, so soon as they saw him at Quiet, he became the Love of his
Subjects, an Umpire among the Christian Princes, and the Admiration of his
Enemies. The Politicians dreaded his Power, and for fear it should grow too
great, they thought it convenient to rid themselves of him by an execrable
Assassination. The Rapidness of this happy Re-establishment may be easily
conjectured at, by the small time they suffered him to live, after he had
restored Peace to his People. Hardly ten Years were expired, after the
settlement of Peace at home, before they posted on to this dismal extremity:
And if he lived so long, 'twas not for want of sooner Attempts upon his Life,
by cruel Conspiracies. Now in regard there is no greater Proof of the Benefit
of a thing then by the Effects of it; it may be judged by the consequences of
the Edict, that never any Prince conferred upon his Subjects a more wholesome
and comfortable Law. And therefore the principal Reasons that were made use of
to satisfy those, to whom there was some excuse to be made for the Edict, were
generally drawn from the benefit of it: And there was no other way then that,
to stop the Mouths of those who had the most desire or Interest to hinder the
increase of the Reformed. They acknowledged that the Kingdom stood in greater
need of a Peace at home then abroad; and that having been so near Destruction
by their long Divisions, they could never recover themselves but by Concord.

And this was so much the more necessary, in regard that War^ about Religion
the most Cruel.
the Dispute being about Religion, those Wars that are made under that
pretense, are always the most Cruel; because the Hatred is more implacable, aad
becomes more violent every day then the other, through the Zeal that kindles
and incenses it. The Cruelty of the most Savage, may sometimes be Governed by
Reason; but a Devout Cruelty will heark'n to no Counsels that are able to
confine the violence of it. For people of that Character make a Duty of their
Cruelty; and easily persuade themselves, that the more Outrageous the more
Religious it is. So that if the Edict had not put a Period to Wars of this
Nature, the Kingdom could never have escaped a General Dissolution; in regard
the weakest Party was strong enough to reduce to Extremity those who would have
undertak'n their Ruin; and so the one half of the Kingdom that would have
exterminated the other, would have no longer after that, been able to support
it self.

All that can be said to the contrary is this, that a Kingdom is disfigured by
variety of Religions; that this difference of Sentiments fosters a secret
Alienation in the Breasts of Men, which consumes the Kingdom by degrees like a
Hectic Distemper; and that it always keeps a Door open for the Renewing Civil
War, because it cherishes in the Kingdom the Immortal Seeds of Faction. I
confess it were to be wished that What sort of variety. Policy ought not to
suffer in a Kingdom
Christianity were more Uniform; but in regard it is not my Province to handle
this Matter like a Divine; I shall only say, that there is a sort of Variety,
which Policy may Condemn; that is to say, such a one as is attended with Evil
Consequences, and which gives one Party an opportunity to oppress an other. But
where there is a Variety, the bad Effects of which are prevented by good Laws,
it is not to be condemned. It would have been pernicious to the Kingdom to
suffer two Religions, and permit 'em always to be at odds, and in a continual
struggle to advance the one by the Opposition of the other. But there is no
reason for that Kingdom to be afraid of any thing, that engages different
Parties to a mutual Toleration. There is a variety of Religions, as of several
Professions. If people that follow several ways of living should be permitted
to make War one upon another; for Example, should the Lawyers be suffered by
open Force to destroy the Merchants and Husband Men, the Damage to the Kingdom
would be visible; but by Uniting 'em together in Peace, the Kingdom looses
nothing; and they are useful one to the other. In like manner, when a Kingdom
is reduced to Tolerate various Religions, it is impossible but that it must be a
great disadvantage to the State, should both Parties be left to themselves to
destroy one another. This is that which creates Factions and Parties; while the
Conspiracies of the one engage the other under a necessity of Uniting to defend
themselves. But when they are restrained by Laws that are Just and Moderate,
there needs no more then to have a watchful Eye upon 'em, to prevent the
Mischief arising from variety of Sentiments. Subjects are in a Kingdom, as
Children and Servants in a Family; and the variety of Sentiments is like the
Diversity of Tempers and Inclinations. Now then as diversity of Humors is no
hindrance to the Repose of a Family, when the Laws of Oeccnomy are wisely and
faithfully observed, in like manner, Variety of Religions never disturbs a
Kingdom, when the Members of it look mutually one upon another as Children of
the same Father, or Servants of the same Master; and the Sovereign doing equal
Justice to Both, notwithstanding this difference, carefully Observes, on every
side, the Laws of Peace which he has granted 'em.

Hence it comes to pass, that in Countries, where there is a Free Toleration,
and perhaps too Universal, that the Tranquillity of the Subject is nere the
less; and that the difference of Religion, even in France it self, has not
hindered the Kingdom from-enjoying a Prosperity of Fifty years together, and to
mount to that Degree of Power that has subdued a great part of Europe. Now to
speak like a Politician, that which never disturbs the Tranquillity of a
Kingdom, that which never interrupts the Happiness of it, that which never
suppresses the growing Grandeur of it, never disfigures or deforms it. There is
nothing that Offends, or Disgraces the Ornament of a Government but that which
is pernicious. Every thing is lovely, every thing is profitable, at least every
thing is fit to be tolerated from whence no Mischief proceeds, This cannot be
contradicted in those things that never ranverse Divine Right, nor Moral Equity
and Honesty. Consequently this is true in Toleration. It does not in the least
disfigure a Kingdom, when it extends not to Sects that sap the very Foundations
of Piety Rather it ought to be taken for an Ornament, because it garnishes the
Motions and Intercourse of the People with an Air of Peace and Charity, which
is one of the most Glorious Characters of Mankind. Now What is the Nature of
the Reformed Religion.
the Religion of the Reformed, granting it came short of that Purity which is
Attributed to it, is at least one of those Religions, that cannot be accused of
overturning the least Foundation of Piety. Neither can the Morality of it,
without Detraction, be called Corrupted, nor the Doctrine of it be said to be
impious, nor the Discipline of it Seditious. If it be true that it has any
Defect; it is a scrupulons Delicacy which will not suffer it to believe and
practice what it is persuaded that God never commands nor approves, a Niceness
to be endured, if ever any were; since there is nothing against which the
Conscience ought to keep a stricter Guard, then against the Doctrines or
Worships which are introduced under the Name of Religion, to the prejudice of
Gods Commands. Consequently it may be tolerated, and yet the Liberty allowed it
be no disfigurement to the Government which permits it.

If the Benefit of the Edict were so great, the Justice of it is The Justice of
the Edict.
no less. It is just, not to be Cruel; or if some times Men have proved Cruel
either through prejudice, blind Zeal, or Transports of Passion, it is but
Justice not to be so always. It is also more just, to be neither perfidious nor
treacherous; or if sometimes our Reason goes so far astray, as to permit us to
become so, it is a necessary piece of Justice, as soon as may be, to return home
to sincerity. Cruelty and Perfidiousness are the Disgrace and Ignominy of Human
Nature; Compassion and Fidelity the most solid Blessings of Society. If they
have been Wrested from it by Fraud and Barbarism that have assumed their Room,
there is nothing more just then to restore 'em to it again, by re-establishing,
as soon as may be, the Rights of Honesty and Humanity. Now it was a long time
since, that both the one and the other were Renounced, in Respect of the
Catholics, and that neither Pity nor Sincerity, was to be found in their
Breasts. For above Fifty years together, the unfortunate Reformed were
destroyed and havoch made of 'em by all manner of Torments: Above thirty years
together, the Catholics made War upon 'em, without giving Quarter; and only
Granted 'em a little breathing time of Peace, to take better measures and
fitter Opportunities to exterminate 'em. However, this same Zeal of the
Catholics, tho it had been just and rational, ought to have surceas'd, after so
many vain Effects. Tho there had been something of Religious and Evangelic in
those Cruelties, the Catholics had done enough to discharge their Consciences.
It was but just at length to return to means more Mild and Gentle. 'Twas time
to mitigate those Rigours, that did but augment the Number of the Reformed.
They had in vain attempted the Reducing these pretended Wanderers, by all the
means both Lawful and Unlawful, that Invention could Devise; even to the
bringing the most flourishing Kingdom of Christendom, within a Fingers breadth
of Desolation. Allurements, Promises, Favors, Writings, Pulpit-Harangues,
Conferences, Threats, Torments, Massakers, Acts of Injustice, Fraud, Treachery,
all the Artifices of a Deceitful Peace, all the Violences of a Merciless War
had been made use of to no purpose. They had Banished, Re-call'd; Dispoil'd of
all, Restored; Prosecuted in all the Ecclesiastical and Secular Courts, even by
the Cruelty of the Inquisitors, whatever carried the Name of Reformed. They had
had Edicts of Peace and War so often Granted, so many times Revoked, that it
was impossible any longer to Play a Game so pernicious to Human Society. It was
not Just that Religion should serve any longer as a pretense for so much
Confusion; it was therefore but Just that Sincerity and Humanity should resume
their Station in the World, and that Wandering Consciences should be permitted
to Govern themselves according to their own Illuminations, after their Enemies
had so long labored to subdue 'em to the Judgments of others.

Moreover, these pretended Wanderers, who had done the Kingdom no other harm,
then only taken Arms to defend themselves from unjust Oppressors, had done the
same Kingdom both long and faithful Services, attested by all the Records of
Time that preserve the Memory of 'em, confessed by all Impartial Historians,
contradicted only by Missionaries, whose Impudence is a Shame and Scandal to
all Men of Honor. Now there is a reason derived from Natural Right and Equity,
which binds Reward to Service, and which looks upon as an Act of Injustice, the
Persecuting, Oppressing, and Exterminating, with an Ou ragious Fury, those from
whom they have received both advantageous Succor, and kind Offices of Defense
and Preservation. The Reformed* who had all the French Catholics for
Testimonies of their Fidelity, some because they had gained by their
Assistance, others because they had felt the smart of it, talked loudly of
their long and important Services; and of these two sorts of Catholics, there
were some who were not ashamed to acknowledge 'em. When Henry III. put the Duke
and Cardinal of Guise to Death, the Catholic Rebels were infinitely much
stronger then they who continued in their Allegiance; but when the Reformed
joined the Kings Party, the Face of Affairs changed, and the Honest Party were
soon in a Condition to overwhelm the other. And there needs but a little
Partiality and Equity, for any Man to see what share they had in the
Preservation of the Kingdom, when joining with the King, they not only
balanced Affairs, but turned the Scale on the Kings side. It might be said,
without doing any body wrong, that they alone preserved the State, since they
preserved the Catholics who jointly labored with 'em afterward in the same
performance. However I shall say no more, but that they lent a helping hand to
the preservation of it; that they shared with the faithful Catholics the Honor
of supporting the Crown, and fixing it upon the Head of him to whom it Lawfully
appertained; that after they had fastened it upon the Head of Henry III. they
assisted his Successor to Justice of Reward after Service done.
recover it again, and to defend his Claim against the fury of the League, and
the Conspiracies of Spain and Italy. It was but just then that they should
share in the Reward, after they had undergon their part of the Toils and
Hazards of the War; that they should partake of the Repose and Pleasures also
of the Peace. Now this is all that the Edict of Nantes has done for 'em.
Nevertheless, there is something more to What Reward is.
be said. When we speak of Recompense, there is something to be understood,
which distinguishes one Man from another; which confers upon the one, by reason
of his Merit and Services, somewhat which is not bestowed upon another, because
there is not the same reason for the preference. Between the Prince and
Subject, Recompense gives to the Receiver something more then is owing to him
from the Prince under the Quality of a Subject, and distinguishes him from that
Equality wherein others remain. If it be Just then, and grounded upon the most
evident Principles of Natural Understanding, that Faithful Subjects should have
Rewards conferred upon 'em, that signalize and distinguish 'em, how much more
Equitable is it, to Grant 'em for their Recompense, that which does no more
then equal 'em with others, and put 'em into the same Condition? Now the
Favors and Privileges of the Edict are no more then Recompenses of the last
Order. The Edict Grants nothing to the Reformed that distinguishes 'em from
others The Edict Grants nothing to the Reformed, etc.
under the Quality of Subjects, or which may be taken to be any Mark of
Preference before another. It grants 'em nothing but the Security of their
Persons, their Estates and their Lives, the Liberty of their Consciences, free
Privilege to Worship God, and procure the Salvation of their Souls, according
to their own Opinions and Judgments, to share alike with others the Protection
of the Laws, and the Benefit of Justice; to have the same Liberty of Preferment
to Employments and Offices, by their Merit; to Professions, by their
Sufficiency; to Trades, by their Capacity: To have power to Assemble and Confer
together, and Mutually to Assist each other in the Performances of Religion and
Piety; to enjoy equally with the Catholics the Right which Nature gives to
Fathers over their Children, to Masters over their Hired Servants; to
participate of the Mutual Succors of Society during Life, and the Duties of
Enterrment after Death. In a word, there is nothing in the Edict that grants
any thing more to the Reformed then what all other Subjects enjoy. On the other
side, the greatest part of these Common Rights are granted the Reformed with
certain Limitations, which clearly showed that all the Sway and Dominion was in
the hands of the Catholics, and that the Reformed were only Associated to these
Advantages by a Treaty of Mutual Toleration. The Securities also are a
sufficient Proof that the Equality was not perfect, and that the Reformed had
neither Power nor Credit. Securities are never taken but from those that are
the stronger, or the most suspected; and they that require 'em, acknowledge at
the same time a kind of Superiority in those that Grant 'em.

This not being to be questioned in the least, it was but a The Concessions for
this reason so much the more Just.
piece of Justice to Grant the Reformed for their Services, those Favors that
did no more then equal 'em with others. This was indeed to grant 'em just
nothing; it was no more then a Restitution of what belonged to 'em, to maintain
'em in their Rights of Nature, and in those which they had by Birth, like
others that breathed the same Air, and obeyed the same Prince. There is nothing
can be called Just, if the Preservation of Common Right may not deserve that
Name; more especially in favor of those, who have performed for the good of
their Country, the same Duties and Services with the rest of their Fellow
Countrymen. Let us suppose, for a moment, that these Advantages were refused
the Reformed after their good Services; or rather, without supposing any thing,
let us look upon 'em, as they were before the Edict was Granted, and what they
are since it was revoked. We shall see Catholics and Reformed, at least under
the same Obedience; preferred to the same Offices; sharing in the same
Exigencies of State; embracing the same Opportunities to serve their Prince;
having the same Civil Laws, the same Obligations, the same Interests, the same
Enemies. So much Equality in all these things, requires that it should be the
same in all the rest; but we shall find it cease, so soon as we shall but turn
our Eyes upon the Reformed, deprived of the Favors of the Edict. We shall find
'em abused in their Persons; ruined in their Estates; excluded from all
Employments either of Honor or Profit; banished their Country; deprived of all
the Privileges of Conscience and Nature; and notwithstanding their Merits or
Abilities, bereaved of all Equality with others, no better Subjects then
themselves; so far from obtaining distinguishing Rewards. Certainly, there
cannot be imagined the least Idea of Justice in such a prodigious
disproportion; in such a violent separation of Merit and Recompense, that they
who might justly reck'n upon their Deserts, instead of obtaining favors equal
to those which are granted to others under the same Circumstances, can hardly
find Subsistence and Security, for all their Pains and Labor. How is it
possible that Justice should brook, that that part of the Kingdom, which, to
say no more, so strenuously contributed with the other to preserve it, should
be Oppressed, Destroyed, and Prosecuted, with Fire and Sword, by the other that
could not have been preserved without it. It Is the same thing, as if a Prince
that had won great Conquests by the Assistance and Valor of his Soldiers,
should order the one half of his Army to cut the other in pieces, to Reward 'em
for their good Service.

I confess, that after all these Reflections, one difficulty would What the
Edict grants the Reformed does no body harm.
still remain behind, were it so that others were to be deprived of those
Favors, before they could be bestowed upon the Reformed. Justice does not
require that one should be dispoil'd to enrich another, seeing that the
Principal Duty of it, is to secure to every Body his own Right; but the Peace
Granted to the Reformed took nothing from the Catholics. The Rights of Nature
and of Birth, are Blessings which every individual Man possesses; in the
Enjoyment of which, the Advantages of the one part never injure the other. The
Liberty of one Man, let it be never so far extended, never confines the Liberty
of his Equal within ere a jot the narrower Bounds. While one is allured by the
Right of aspiring to Rewards and Dignities by Merit and Services, there is a
Door left open for others to ascend by the same Steps. A Father loses nothing
of his Lawful Authority over his Children and his Family, tho all other Fathers
enjoy the same Power. The Conscience of a Catholic is never the less free, tho
the Conscience of a Reformed Person be not put upon the Rack. In a word, all
these Advantages are such, that the one may gain by 'em, and the other never
lose; as the Privilege of Burgessship is no Dismembring of his Freedom from
another. In like manner the Liberty which Nature gives to every Man to breath
the same Air, and enjoy the same Sunshine, is no hindrance, but that every Man
has the same share both of the Air and the Light. Moreover, the Catholics have
taken all the Caution imaginable, not to be losers themselves. They have
restored their Religion to every thing which the War had taken from it. Time
has made it out that they have been great Gainers The Catholics Gainers by the
Edicts.
by the Edict. Their Religion wanted much of that Splendour and Pomp which
afterward it attained to; which is no small matter, since Worldly Luster is
one of the Principal Objects of the Politics of that Religion. Besides, it is
by the Edicts that she preserves her Superiority, her Churches, her Houses, her
Revenues, her Churchyards, and her Ceremonies; and far from seeing her
Privileges lessened, she has acquired new ones. So that the Concessions of the
Edict being grounded upon the Nature of the Things, and the Civil Rights that
every Man is Born to; and moreover, depriving no body of that which they
secured to so many Lawful Members of the Kingdom, it was an apparent Act of
Justice that the Reformed should enjoy it. There was no room here for the
Exception of another Man's Right, which the Kings of France formerly excepted in
all their Letters, and which ought to be Naturally understood in all Acts,
intending Sincerity, and published by Authority, wherein it is not expressed.
And as the Favors done the Reformed are things which Create no Loss or Damage
to others, there is no body that can, or ought in Justice to find fault with,
or oppose'em.

From these two good Qualities of the Edict thus joined together, The Edict
ought to be Irrevocable.
arises a third of Perpetual and Irrevocable, which agrees with nothing more
Naturally then with Laws and Treaties, the Justice and Benefit of which ought
never to be disputed. It Is not my design to insist upon these two Words, in
regard they are made use of in the Edict it self. I know very well, it would be
a thing that would produce extraordinary Consequences, were it sufficient to
give 'em the Name of such, to render Laws Eternal and Unalterable. Although that
Vows and Oaths are the strongest Obligations with which a Man can burden his
Conscience, yet there are some that carry in themselves a Character of Nullity,
that breaks the Bond of their Assurance. Such are those by which a Man is
obliged to things Unjust or Impossible. The Epithites of Rash and Inconsiderate
will always cleave to 'em, but they cannot be thought Irrevocable, tho it were
so expressed in the Draught with all the Words that imported such a meaning.
There are also Laws that carry in themselves the Marks of their being fit to be
revoked; tho he that made 'em obliges himself in never so express Words, never
to revoke 'em. Such are those Laws that oblige to Injustice or Cruelty. Such
are those Treaties also that oblige the Ratifiers to violate Humanity and
Honesty. Such is the Edict by which Lewis XIV. revoked the Edict of Nantes;
which is nothing in the Main but a Solemn Promise never to do Justice to a
great Number of his Subjects. Let 'em call these Acts Irrevocable as long as
they please, they cease not however to be liable to Revocation, because they
are void in themselves; and for that the Maxim touching Oaths may be justly
applied to 'em, that they ought not to be observed in things that are Dishonest
and Ignominious. Nevertheless, Considerations upon the Word.
it is not to be imagined that these Terms are Illusory, like certain Clauses
that are never inserted into Contracts, but merely for Formalities sake; but
which neither add to their perfection nor their firmness. It Is not to be
thought, that those words, the meaning of which is so well known, lose it as
soon as they are put into an Edict; as if they only would infer, that the thing
shall remain in force no longer then the good pleasure of the strongest side.
This would be to break all the Bonds of Civil Society, and to ranverse all the
Foundations of Honesty and Sincere Dealing, should Men go about to change the
most express Words into Delusions, which are made use of to deceive those that
take 'em according to their Natural Idea's. It must be confessed at least, that
in Things which include nothing of Unjust, nothing Inhuman, nor Dishonest,
whatever is promised as Irrevocable, ought unalterably to be observed. These
Terms then are of great weight, and give a great force to those Laws wherein
they are inserted; more especially when those Laws proceeded from the pure and
sole Free Will and Inclination of the Legislator, without being admonished,
required or solicited to make 'em. It might be said, that when a Prince
Promulgates a Law merely because it is his Pleasure so to do, the Benefit which
he Grants his Subjects depending clearly upon himself, may be confined to his
Pleasure, and endure no longer then he thinks it convenient. But when those
Laws have been sought for, su'd for, solicited, and obtained, after long and
mature Considerations, after the Negotiations and Conferences of several Years;
if they have been Proclaimed with the Title of Irrevocable, they ought to be
such effectually, because it is certain they were Requested and Granted under
that Qualification. Otherwise there would be nothing stable in the Concessions
of Sovereigns, nothing assured in the Condition of Subjects. And in regard
there are always several Families whose settlements are founded upon these
Concessions, they would be always in fear of approaching Ruin, if they could
not rely upon the Title of Irrecoverable which the Prince has stamped upon 'em.
All this ought also to be still more evident, when the Concessions are just and
profitable; when they make for the Welfare and Advantage of any one, without
doing any Body an Injury: When they are likewise in some measure due and
necessary; either, because they who have obtained 'em have deserved 'em; or for
that without 'em they could not be assured either of their Repose, or of their
Lives.

But not to insist upon Words, I have some other Reflections And upon the things.
upon the things themselves. I say then, that the Nature of the thing requires
that Edicts should be irrevocable, either when the matter which they contain is
just in it self, or when they supply the place, and have the Force of a Sincere
and Honest Treaty. Both the one and the other is to be met with in the Edict of
Nantes. The matter which it ordains is a natural piece of Justice, as I can
make out by Reflections different from those which I have already made. All that
it contains may be reduced to two Heads; that is to say, Liberty of Conscience,
and securing the Reformed in their Natural and Civil Rights. Liberty of
Conscience is a Piece of Justice so evident, that in the very Bosom of the
Roman Rights of Conscience.
Church it self, which looks upon it as a part of her Duty to persecute others,
there are Doctors who do not hold it proper to make use of Extremities to
constrain it. At least it is certain that it ought not to be forced because it
cannot be compelled. Whatever Violence may be offered to Men, it is impossible
to force 'em not to think what they think, or not to judge things Good or Evil,
according as they are represented by their Understanding and Knowledge. The
Conscience was made to depend upon God alone; to whom all the Motions and
Inclinations of it have a kind of Resemblance in the Nature and Constitution of
it: And is as it were a kind of substitute under the Eternal Justice to give an
Account to God of the Heart of Man; but never gives it to any but God himself.
So that at the same time, that you extort from a Man by Violence an outward
Approbation of things which the Conscience condemns, it protests in secret
against what the Lips are forced to utter; and even during the Torment it self,
or in the rude Hands of Armed Soldiers, preserves the Liberty both of seeing
and judging that a Man is compelled to Sin, when he is made to do that which
his Conscience cannot approve. Now therefore, it is the highest Piece of
Injustice to go about to bereave a Man of that which constraint it self and
utmost violence cannot force from him; neither can such a Compulsion produce
any other then one of these two Effects: Either he must be made Guilty of
abominable Hypocrisy, by compelling him to declare a Veneration for what he
abhors; or else he must be condemned to Tortures and Cruelties, of which there
is to be no end, but with his vanquished Constancy or his Life. There are some
things so Sacred in the Rights of Conscience, that God himself, to whom alone
it is only subject, would never assume to violate; and therefore he so wisely
manages the Operations and Victory, of his Grace, in the Conversion of Souls,
that he never Offers Violence to that Liberty. Whence it follows, that Men who
have no Jurisdiction over it, cannot go about to force it, but they must commit
a most Apparent Act of Injustice. But The Force of Edicts that maintain Liberty.
there arises from hence a second consequence, that since it is so unjust a
thing to compel the Conscience; it is but justice on the other side to allow it
all the Privileges that belong to it. If then the Concessions grounded upon
this Justice are to be Eternal and Unalterable, like that Justice which gives
'em their Authority, there can be never any Edicts that more deserve to be
exempt from Revocation, then those that secure the Conscience that Liberty
which Nature gives it, and which discharges it from all constraint.

It Is the very same thing with Edicts that are Granted And of these that are
granted for the preservation of the Societies.
for the Preservation of Subjects, and which secure their persons, their
Fortunes and their Rights. Certainly, never any people, when they first embody
under certain Forms of Government, pretended either to give, or suffer others
to assume an Authority to destroy 'em. Surely they never renounced that
Independency wherein they are Born, every one singly in respect of others, but
only because they found more safety in their Uniting for the common defense, or
in the Protection The preservation of Subjects the chief Obligation of
Sovereigns.
of the Stranger. Nothing can recompense 'em for that Subjection which takes
from 'em one part of their Liberty, but their Assurance of preserving by that
petty damage all the rest of their Privileges. It Is therefore the Natural Duty
of Sovereigns to secure 'em alike to all to whom they belong; because they are
advanced to Sovereign Power to be their Conservators, and for that the
Preservation of their Subjects is the principal Obligation of their Crown.
Their Authority is the Image of Providence that Governs only to preserve. There
is nothing but our Rebellion, either as God's Creatures, that causes us to
forfeit the preserving Aid of Providence; or as Subjects, that deprives 'em of
their share of the Public protection. But as for Subjects Peaceable, Obedient,
Faithful, and the most recommendable by their Merits and their Services, it
cannot be imagined, why leave should be given to bereave 'em of the Privileges
that preserve 'em; or that a Sovereign who is obliged by his Character to
uphold 'em, could ever revoke Edicts that were so necessary for their Defense.
Either they must take from those that live under the benefit of the Edicts, the
Quality of Subjects, with which they were born, and of which they carry the
Essential Mark in their Obedience; or else they ought to have left 'em as well
as others, whatever appertains to 'em in the same Quality. But how can they
take from 'em the Quality of Subjects? They are neither Foreigners nor
Enemies. They are not Foreigners, because they were born in the same Air, as
the rest were, as also under the same Authority, and under the same Laws. They
are not Enemies, because they pay Homage and Allegiance. Being then Subjects,
it is impossible that those Edicts which maintain 'em in the Privileges of
their condition, should be thought liable to Revocation; unless they thought at
the same time that a Prince might lawfully destroy a State that was Obedient to
his Government; or that among Members of one and the same Dominion, one party
should have leave to oppress the other, without any regard to Justice or
Humanity.

But if such Edicts are irrevocable, in respect of the Nature of the things
themselves, they ought to be yet far more unalterable, by reason of the Treaty
which they include. In general it may be said, that all the Edicts of
Protection which a Sovereign Grants his Subjects are equivalent to Treaties;
because they are no more then a Renewing the Original and Fundamental Treaty,
upon which all Societies are established. Let 'em use all the shifts they can,
it is never to be denied without a voluntary blindness, but that the Power of
Sovereigns An Express or Tacit Treaty naturally between Sovereign and Subject.
Springs from an Express or tacit Treaty, by which their Subjects submit their
Persons and Estates to their Dominion, upon condition of doing 'em Justice at
home, and protecting 'em abroad. In Conquests also the weakest Treats with the
strongest, upon conditions of Surrender; and they who yield to the Discretion
of the Victor, make him only Master of the conditions of Preservation which
they expect. So soon as the Articles are agreed on, on both sides, the Laws
prescribed the Conquered are changed into a Treaty, by which the Conqueror is
obliged to leave 'em either their Estates, their Lives, or their Liberty, upon
Condition that they perform those Duties which necessity imposes upon 'em.
Otherwise it is not to be conceived, that Men would submit themselves to be
destroyed at the pleasure of the strongest, without reserving some Assurance of
being able to preserve themselves by a profound Obedience. Servitude is
contrary to Nature, and according to the sentiment of several Lawyers, it is not
in the Power of a Man, to submit his Life, without any Condition, to the
fancies and Capricio's of a Master. But I am desirous to consider it here,
under a less Odious Character, as a Degree of extreme subjection; as the most
strict engagement, to which a Man may be reduced, in respect of another. In
this case, I say, that it includes something of Reciprocal, and the Slave does
Also between Master and Slave.
not yield his Master the Power of Life and Death over him, but to make use of
it in case of Revolt and Rebellion; but supposing Obedience and Fidelity,
Slavery it self has those privileges, which the Master is tied to Observe. A
Slave does not Sacrifice his Liberty, but for the preservation of his Life. So
that he resumes the Rights of his Liberty, if his Master persecutes him, and
assails his Life, while he perseveres in his Duty. Liberty is priviled'd. As it
is one of the most Natural Blessings of Mankind, and the most inseparable from
him, so he recovers and re establishes his Rights, so soon as he to whom they
are submitted abuses 'em to the Destruction of those that are subjected to his
Power. If there are Examples in the World of any contrary Usage, that never
proceeds from Right, which can never Authorize Tyranny; but from the Violence
of the stronger Party, which through Terror stupifies and silences the Voice of
Nature and Innocence. Besides, it is not to be found, but among People, where
Barbarism has Usurped the place of Nature; and where Force never listens to the
Maxims of Justice. According to this Principle then, wherever the Lessons of
Justice and Nature are listened to, the Relations of Severesgnty and Subjection
are grounded upon a Primitive Condition, which sets up all Authority on the one
side, on purpose to be employed for Common preservation; and gives all
Obedience on the other side, upon Condition of the Recompense of Protection.
Which being a Treaty, either Tacit or Express, the Articles of which are varied
in several manners, according to the different Constitutions of States, all
Edicts, by which this Protection is promised, or which are necessary to give
assurance of it, are only Renovations of that Fundamental Obligation, which is
the Natural Duty of Sovereignty. These are therefore Treaties, because they are
in Truth but Ratifications of the Former; and they are no more to be Revoked,
then the Fundamental Condition of Supreme Power.

But not to have recourse to general Considerations, I say The Force of
Treaties.
particularly, that never any person questioned the stability of Treaties,
where the most Essential Things have been observed, which have been concluded
between Parties of sufficient Power, by persons of Capacity fully informed of
their business, after mature Deliberation, without Fraud or Violence. The Edict
of Nantes a Treaty.
If all this were to be found in the Edict of Nantes, it cannot be denied, but
that it ought to be as irrevocable, as the most Solemn Treaty that ever was
mentioned in Story. The Appellation of Treaty has been likewise given it by the
most passionate Catholics, even by the Jesuits themselves, who of late years
having labored to annihilate it, acknowledged before it was Granted, That the
Negotiation and the Treaty held on for several whole years together. In a Word
History most evidently demonstrates it. There you shall Observe Parties having
different Pretensions, who Depute, Confer, Contest, and agree. Four Years were
spent in these Negotiations, if we begin from the Assembly of St. Foy, where
the first Foundation of this Work was laid. Two Years at least were spun out;
if we begin to reck'n from the time that the King promised to send
Commissioners, with Instructions and Plenary Power. Never Treaty between a King
and a King, or between a State and a State, had more Marks, or more
Circumstances to make it a real Treaty. It Is true, that when it was Published,
they did not give it the Name of a Treaty, but of an Edict. However the Name
did not change the Thing; and if the Title made any difference in the Outward
Form of an Edict, or a Contract* nevertheless such an Edict, and such a Treaty
vary nothing in substance. Treaties also that are made with Foraigners,
sometimes assume the Form of an Edict, when they are Published in the Kingdom.
Thus in the first Civil Wars, after a Treaty concluded at the Head of the
Armies, there was an Edict Composed, which the Reformed reaped as the Harvest
of the War. Besides, that the Form of the Edict, in such a The Form of the
Edict renders it more Venerable.
Gase, serves only to give it new strength, since it adds the Majesty of a Law
to the firmness of a Decree. Whence I conclude, that an Edict where these two
Characters concur, as in that of Nantes, is so much the more irrevocable, in
regard that at the same time it is both a Law just, wisely Ordained, Venerable,
and a sincere Treaty.

But to make this matter yet more clearly out, I shall consisider this Treaty
two ways: Either as made between the King and his Reformed Subjects, or between
Two things relating to a Treaty in the Edict. 1. Between the King and the
Reformed. 2. Between the Catholics and the Reformed.
the Reformed and the Catholics, under a kind of Comyromise, or mutual
Reference to the King, who by Virtue of that Character is the Sovereign Judge,
and Born Umpire of all diforms that arises between his Subjects. I say that
these two Relations are no way contradictory, but may naturally be included in
the same Act. The Edict then is at the same time a Treaty where both King and
the Reformed oblige themselves to certain conditions; and where the Catholics
and Reformed are regulated and moderated, as to their Differences, by the
King's Decisions, the only lawful Arbitrator of their Reciprocal Pretensions.
The thing is of that Importance as Merits to be Examined upon these two
Respects. Considering it then, as a Treaty between the King and the Reformed, I
say that the King, when he came to the Crown, found 'em Armed, upon two
Accounts. First they had been constantly The Reformed Treats with the King. 1.
^^r Recompense for their Services. 2. Touching their being secured against
their Enemies
exposing their Lives and Estates for near twenty years together, to defend the
King himself against those, who went about to Ravish from him his lawful Right.
And moreover they were in Arms for their own Preservation, against people that
had prosecuted 'em for near Thirty Years togethe, with all the Rigourous ways
of Injustice and Cruelty. So that the Treaty which they made with him, was a
Treaty touching Reward for their Services, and on the other side a Treaty of
Precaution against their implacable Enemies, upon the assurance of which they
might lay down their Arms. Whence it followed, that whatever is contained in
the Edict is nothing else, but either Concessions to satisfy 'em upon their
Demands, or securities Equivalent to those which they might have obtained by
their Arms and their Courage. By that means they in some measure resigned their
Arms into the King's Hands, who reciprocally took upon him to Defend and
Protect 'em. So that they sincerely and faithfully commit themselves to the
Care of his Protection, and he on the other side engages to preserve 'em by his
Authority from the Artifices and Violences of those, who for so many years
together had labored their Destruction. He could not therefore depart from his
promised Protection, without violating his Word and Faith, which is the Soul of
all Societies, and the only Bond of their subsistence.

Should it be Objected that it is not true, that they resigned their Arms into
the King's Hands, since they held so many strong Places and well provided
Garrisons; which in reality was to remain in Arms, when all the rest of France
had laid down theirs; this a difficulty not hard to be unfolded. First, Places
of Security.
the Reformed saw their Enemies Masters of a great Number of strong Holds,
where the King was no otherwise Obeyed then as it pleased those that Commanded
'em. Moreover, although the Royal Authority began to resume some Life and Vigor,
yet it was but in a Tottering Condition. The King was rather Besieged, then
served by the Catholics of his Court, and chiefly by a Great Number of those
who had been Leaguers. His was at their Devotion, rather then they at his.
Experience of what had past was a fair warning to the Reformed, what Factious
and Discontented Persons might cause the King to do, when his Person was in
their Hands. They were afraid and that justly too, least he might be
nonstrain'd to Sacrifice their Lives to their Enemies, for Fear least their
Enemies should make some Attempt upon his. Besides that the Custody of those
Places was but a Depositum or Trust, which was to be Surrendered up so soon as
the Term was expired: And if they intended that the Reformed should not require
a longer time, 'twas the best Course the Catholics could take to live in
brotherly Union with 'em, and to Observe the Edicts more Faithfully then they
were wont to do. Which being well considered, shows that the keeping those
Places, was but a Pledge, which the weaker Party took to assure themselves of
the Fidelity of the others, and no way hindered the Treaty on the side of the
Reformed from being Real and Sincere. For Pledges given for the Performance of
a Contract between Private Men, no way lessen the Sincerity of the Treaty, nor
weaken the Strength and Virtue of it.

There is nothing to be said against all this; but only that Kings may Treat
with their Subjects.
it is not with Treaties between a King and his Subjects as with those that are
made between private persons; as well because the Obligation of Kings toward
their Subjects, depends only upon their good Will and Pleasure; as for that the
Inequality between Subjects and Princes renders 'em incapable of making such
Treaties whose Obligation may be equal on both sides. But neither the one nor
the other of these two Assertions is True. These Maxims are only proper for
those who desire to convert all Political Authority into Tyranny. But since it
it the greatest Glory of Sovereigns to be Proofs.
the Image of God, it is ill done of Flattery to persuade 'em, that it is beneath
'em to deal with their Subjects, as God deals by all mankind. Now God is not so
jealous of his Majesty, but that he condescends to Treat and Contract with Men,
to engage himself to 'em, and bind them to him by Reciprocal Conditions. Nor
does he ever allege the Pretense of his Grandeur, or of the Inferior
subjection of his Creatures to elude the Force of those Treaties which he has
made with 'em; and yet he has Privileges much wore absolute over Men, then
Sovereigns over their Subjects; nor is there any Government in the World, how
Arbitrary and Despotic scever, that can equal the Power of God over the
Universe: Whither we consider his Infinite Perfections, or the being which he
has given to the Grand Structure of Heaven and Earth. It Is not therefore to be
imagined, that the Exaltation of a King above his Subjects should invalidate
the Obligation of a Treaty, since the Superiority of God above his Creatures
does not do it. For which Reason it is, that the Clergy make no Question but
that such Contracts may be made between the one and the other. And to say
nothing now of such as are entered into, between Princes rnd che Clergy every
day, whereby they draw from 'em certain Concessions, upon condition of certain
Assistances, which they might have required from him without a Treaty, like
their other Subjects; I say, not to mention these daily Contracts, the Clergy
have changed into Treaties the Concessions which they have obtained at several
times, through the easiness of the Princes. The Lawyers who have Written in
Defense of their Interests, have made this Observation in Favor of 'em, not
questioning but that their Privileges became more certain and lasting, and by
consequence that Princes and Subjects might lawfully and effectually Treat
together. Whence it came to pass, that to renew the Reciprocal Obligations of
these Treaties, the Kings at their Coronation Swear to maintain the Clergy in
their Privileges; and that every one of those who enjoy Benefices by the
King's Nomination, Swear Fealty to him, before they take Possession, The Kings
of France also make no doubt of the validity of these Treaties, which appeared
from the Politics of Lewis XIII. of which in due place, during the Wars about
Religion, which lasted about ten years under his Reign, he always avoided the
Name of a Treaty, as well in the Articles of Cities that surreuder'd to him, as
in his Edicts, with which he amused the Credulity of the people, because he
would be Master of the Advantages which he Granted the Reformed, to the end,
said he, That all the Liberties which he left 'em to enjoy, should depend
merely upon his Pleasure and his Word. From whence 'twas evident, that when he
consented to any thing by a Treaty, he thought himself no longer Master of it:
Consequently, that he was convinced that Treaties between Kings and their
Subjects are as binding, as those between other Men, and their Equals; and that
when there are any such Treaties between 'em, the Prince has no more Right to
Violate 'em, then the Subjects themselves.

Which is grounded upon this, that although the Iuequality be very great between
the Sovereign and the Subject; yet there remains a certain Equality, which the
difference between Empire and Subjection cannot destroy: That is to say, an
equal Obligation to be Just, Equitable and Sincere; without which it is
impossible that they should mutually render to each other what is mutually
their due. Now this equality is sufficient for Treaties, in regard that upon
these Foundation it is, that all their Efficacy is established. If it be
pretended, that at least generally and according to Order, Subjects are to
Treat by way of Petition and Remonstrance, and w it for the Determination of
their Prince, without Negotiation, and demanding it by Treaties; I will suppose
this to be generally True, and in Affairs that follow the Regular Course of
Government.

But there are doubtless some Cases, that admit of another The Reformed were in
a Condi^
way of proceeding, wherein the Subjects may demand a Treaty, and look upon
whatever they gain by it, as obtained by a Treaty. This is evident in Civil
Wars, where Rebels themselves, whose taking Arms is Unjust, do not always
surrender at Discretion, but return to their Obedience upon Conditions agreed
on with their Prince. Now it would be a most Palpable Absurdity, that Rebellion
should give Subjects a Liberty to treat with their Sovereigns, and that never
any thing should be able to render Authentic the Treaties of Faithful Subjects.
This would be an Invitation of the Subjects to revolt, every time they would be
assured of their Privileges, to pretend they could never obtain a Confirmation
of 'em by Treaties, unless they were Rebels. If ever then there were any
Occasions upon which Subjects might be allowed to Treat with their Princes, the
Treaty upon which the Edict of Nantet was grounded most certainly, was one.

First, one Part of the Kingdom had declared against the Six considerations
that demonstrate it.
other, and had persecuted it by all the Ways that a most mortal and inveterate
Hatred could Devise: And this Persecution had lasted till the Time of the Edict
for above Fifty years. They were not content with Vexations and Cavils to
perplex and Harass the Oppressed Party; but they were come to the last
Extremities; nothing would serve 'em but Extermination; and they had shed the
Blood of the pretended Heretics in all parts, by all manner of Butcheries.

Secondly, These Violences had Obliged the Persecuted to Unite together, in
Defense of their Li^es, and to Repel by Force of Arms the Fury of their
Enemies: Which being grounded upon the Law of Nature it self, cannot be looked
upon as unlawful but by those, who believe that Innocent people forfeit their
Innocence, when they will not suffer their Throats to be Cut, without defending
themselves.

3. By this means, there were two Parties formed; of which the one was the
Aggressor, the other stood upon the Defensive Part; and which having Interests
as different as Destruction and Preservation; and Forces that were not so
unequal that the one could exterminate the other without exposing themselves to
half the Danger, either the Kingdom would have been laid desolate by continual
War; or both Parties must Treat together for the common Tranquillity.

4. The King's had taken sides in these Quarrels; not only because it was in
their Name, that so many poor people were Condemned to terrible Torments; but
because they were the persons themselves, who had raised Armies to destroy 'em;
who had brok'n Treaties; revoked Edicts of Peace; and who had Ordered and put
in execution several Massakers.

5. Henry III. went farther then all this: He had Sworn to destroy all the
Reformed, Root and Branch, and never to be at Peace with 'em. He had declared
himself Head of the League, which was made under a Solemn pretense to
exterminate 'em as a Wise Man observed of the King, That he was become Head of
a Party, and of a Common Father, an Enemy of one Part of his Subjects. And then
it was, that those Persecuted Subjects who could not have pretended to any such
Right before, were Authorized to Form a Party that might lawfully Defend 'em,
since their Prince had declared a merciless War against 'em, and had Devoted
'em as Victims to the Fury of their Ancient Enemies. Their Arms could then no
longer be looked upon as taken up against the King's Authority, but against the
Violence of a Destroyer: Against an Enemy, in whom they could no longer
confide; since he had Sworn never to observe any Treaties of Peace, that ever
he made with 'em, but till he found a fit Opportunity to break 'em.

6. The Change which happened by the Death of the Guises, and afterward by
that of the King, had not Cancelled that Distinction of Parties, seeing that
the Catholics who were United before, to make War upon the Reformed, being then
divided into two, the Reformed were actually in War with those who followed the
Duke of Main, and with the other lived in a kind of secret Enmity, concealed
under the Name of a Truce. On the one side, the War still continued; on the
other it was still suspended. At that time there was a Right which rendered 'em
capable of Treating one with another, to terminate their Divisions by a Peace.
Hen. IV. also having relinquished the Catholics, and set himself at the Head of
the Catholics, whose Religion he had embraced, the Reformed were under the same
condition, as they were under his Predecessor; that is to say, in the Condition
of Enemies to the rest of his Subjects, whose security depended upon the
Sincerity of a Truce.

He was willing it is true, to have re-assum'd the Title of Common Father; but
that could not be done, but by quite surceasing the Causes of the Animosity; or
by re-settling Concord by a Treaty, which might procure Confidence and
Assurance. I say this moreover. The Reformed were if possible, more capable of
Treating in his Reign, then under the Reign of Hen. III.

1. Because he had given 'em Authority to embody, had exhorted 'em to Unite
together in their own Defense, permitted 'em to Erect Councils and Assemblies,
which he had, as it were Legitimated by his Letters Patents, supposing they had
not been Legitimate without it. He had been the first Author of their Union,
when he put himself at their Head, to defend 'em against Hen. III. and by
consequence, as much as their Union was just under the Reign of that Prince, as
just it was under the following Reign, when they had the same Differences to
dispute with Hen. IV. as they had with his Predecessor.

2. He had acknowledged those Assemblies capable of Treating with him, by
sending his Commissioners to Treat with 'em according to their Commissions and
Instructions; and by permitting the Proposals on both sides to be Debated,
Argued, Explained, Decreed, as is usual in all Treaties.

Now the King could not enter into a Treaty but in these Respects upon which
the King Treats.
two Respects: The one, as Chief of the Catholics, upon which he very much
Valued himself, and whose consent he had, as will presently appear, to conclude
a Peace that should for ever extinguish all Animosities and Discords: The other
as King, to whom the Kingdom belonged, and to whom it belonged to preserve in
Union all the Members of which it was composed. In the First Respect, that
which was Negotiated between his Commissioners and the Deputies of the
Reformed, can never be taken for any other, then a means to reconcile the
Opposite Pretensions of the Reformed and Catholics, and to regulate the
separate Conditions under which they were to live: Forming out of these
Agreements a New right, which was to serve as the perpetual Law of their Union
in Civil Society; so that the contrary Interests of both Parties, being managed
in such a manner in this Negotiation, that there was nothing on the one side
which msght turn to any remarkable Prejudice of the other, but which made a
Compensation, within a little Matter equal for their Advantages and
inconveniences, it cannot be denied, but that whatever is comprehended in a
Treaty is comprehended in this, as in all the Acts that have born the Name of
it. Now it is so evident, by what I have said of the Condition wherein the King
found the Kingdom after the Death of Hen. III. that he Treated with the
Reformed, as Head of the Catholic Party, both as he was Successor to a Prince,
who had Solemnly taken upon him that Quality, as for that he had also put
himself at the Head of that Party, by his reconbiliation with the Church of
Rome, that I need not make any longer stay upon it.

I pass then to the second Consideration; and I say, that he Treated in the the
Quality of a King, in whose Power it was, to give his Subjects all the
Assurances of the Protection which he owed 'em, and whatsoever else is called
by the Name of Favor, Liberties or Privileges. Now certain it is, that the
Quality of King includes within it that of Common Father, who when Quarrels
arise among his Subjects, keeps the Balance equal between 'em, and by his
Paternal Justice, limits and Bounds the Enterprises of the one upon the other.
Which being done with a true knowledge of the Cause, becomes the Decision of an
Arbitrator, whose decision is the Warrant of what he has judged Convenient.
This is that which made me say before, that the Edict ought to be considered as
a Treaty between the Catholics and the Reformed, under the Authority of the
King, as their their Natural Arbitrator, whose Majesty stood bound to Warrant
the Edict, against all Breaches that might be made on either side. This very
Warranty was clearly expressed by the Clauses of the Edict, which imported that
the Violations of it should be Prosecuted in the Kings Name, by his Proctors
General. In regard it is Natural, that Treaties being Warranted by a Power
which is supposed to be sufficient to enforce Observance, the people always
apply themselves, in case of Breaches, to those that Warrant 'em, and require
their Protector to reduce the Violators to more exactness of performance.

I say then, that the Catholics, and the Reformed are the Parties between which
the King, as their lawful Sovereign, The King his Subjects Arbitrator.
their Arbitrator born, procures and Warrants the Peace by his Edict; well
understanding the Cause, upon a due examination of the Pretenses and Replies,
and having obtained the consent of the Parties interested as far as is
necessary. It appeared, that the Catholics and Reformed were parties in this
Treaty, because they were the persons that reaped the benefit of it; that is to
say, the Concord and Peace which it procured 'em; and for that the Differences
and Contests between 'em surceas'd, so soon as the Edict came to be put in
Execution. It appears, that the King determined 'em, because it is he that
speaks in the Edict, and from whom all the Decisions flow, in reference to the
matters in Dispute. It appears, that what he did, was done with a true
knowledge of the Cause: Since he was informed of the Demands of the Protestants
by their Papers, their Requests, and their Deputations; and of the Pretensions
of the Catholics, by their Contradictions and their Oppositions. Lastly, it
appears, that there were sufficient Marks of consent on both sides, by several
Reasons which are easily drawn from History.

The Consent of the Reformed is express and plain from their long endeavors
and pursuits to obtain those things which were Granted 'em by the King's
Commissioners; and the Consent of the Catholics was Apparent, by what I am
going to relate, after I have first observed that their Oppositions no way
destroy their consent. By the usual Method of Proceeding, it is certain, that
the Disputes and Contests before an Arbitrator are no Obstruction to hinder
those that raise 'em from submitting to the Award of the Arbitrator: Those
Contests only serving to clear the Matters, and to instruct the Person who
takes Cognizance of the Difference. In like manner the Oppositions of the
Catholics were no more then a Contest in Form of Law touching such Matters, of
which the King was to be Judge, which however did not hinder 'em from
consenting to stand by the King's Decisions. I say then, that there are several
Marks of the Catholic's consent to the Edict which the King was about to Grant
the Reformed. First, the Truce between the two Kings is a good Proof, that the
Catholics that followed the Kings party were no way averse to Peace. There is
no great Distance between the one and the other. They that can make a Truce
with their Enemies, so as to live tegether in the same place, and join their
Arms for the common Interest, are in a fair way to be Friends. They that
consent to a Truce, which is but a Provisional peace, show plainly that they
have no Reluctance to a Decisive Peace. Which is more especially true in this
Case, where the Truce made in behalf of the two parties by their Chieftains was
an Interim, in expectance of the peace in Order to which the Truce was made. In
the second place, the Act passed between the Catholics of the Army and Court,
and Hen. IV. after the Death of Hen. III. by which they oblige the New King to
no more then the preservation of the Catholic Religion, without demanding the
Extirpation of the Reformed; and that he should permit himself to be instructed
in the Roman Doctrine, without forcing the Rest of his Subjects; this Act I
say, is a proof of the same thing. Of the same Nature also, in the third place,
is the Writing Signed by the Catholics Lords and Princes at Mantes, before the
Conference of Surene, wherein they not only consented that the King should
preserve the Reformed, but they promise that no prejudice shall be done 'em by
the Treaty they were about to enter into with the Leaguers. All this together
makes up a kind of Compromise, or mutual Consent, by which it is evident, that
the Catholics of the King's party agreed, that he should Judge of the Civil
Differences in the Kingdom upon the score of Religion.

But the Marks of the Leaguers Consent, are yet more clear and more Authentic.
There is not one one of the Treaties concluded with them, where there is not
one Article for the Religion. But never did that Article demand more then two
things; that is to say, the Re-establishing the Roman Religion in certain
Places, and the reducing the Exercise of the Reformed Religion to certain
Limits. The clear meaning of which is this, that upon those two Conditions,
they who Treat consent, that the King should tolerate the Reformed. It Is a Law
notoriously known, and a General practice, that all Restrictions confirm the
Law in Cases to which that Restriction is not extended, and that the Exception
of a particular. Clause, is a ratification of the General Decree. We see then
here the Catholics, even those who have been more conspicuously and more
vehemently Zealous then any Others, closing with the King in reference to the
means of procuring Peace between them and the Reformed; and excepting in two
conditions wherein they include themselves, leaving his Authority at Liberty to
Act as he shall see convenient. And after the passing of all these Acts it is,
that the King has given a Definitive Sentence in this Great Contest, and that
having called together both Parties upon the Heads of their Disputes, as well
by the Negotiations of the Deputies, as by the Decisions which he pronounced in
favor of the one and the other, in things wherein they could not agree among
themselves, he Formed between 'em the Irrevocable Treaty which is contained in
the Articles of his Edict. And here we may very aptly apply the Grand Maxim of
the Clergy Maxim of the Clergy in the Question about the Regale.
of France, which carried 'em so far in the Affairs of the Regale. After the
Parliament of Paris had began that process toward the beginning of this Century,
the Clergy set all Engines at work, to hinder the Cause from resting in the
hands of those Judges, who held several Ecclesiastical Privileges for
Usurpations. And they obtained so far, that the King summoned the Cause before
himself; and after his Council had left it undetermined for above Sixty years,
at length the Clergy lost their Cause some years ago, and the King adjudg'd the
Regale to himself throughout all the Kingdom. The Grand Reason which one part
of the Clergy has made use of to persuade the other to submission is this; the
Parliament was not a competent Judge of that Affair. They only judge of Causes
between Man and Man, not of those that altogether concern either one of the
States, or the first Estate of the Kingdom. The King alone is the only Judge of
those great Questions. He has taken the business into his own. Cognizance by
the Citation which the Clergy demanded. They had a Right to dispute the matter
till then: But now the thing is at an End. The Sovereign Arbitrator has
pronounced Sentence; the Oracle has spoke; and there is no more to be said.

Thus likewise in the Affair of the Edict, there was no competent Judge but the
King. 'Twas not the Business of one of the Estates, but of the Three Estates
who were Interested in the Affair of Religion. The King was possessed of the
Business, by the Petitions of the One, and by the Oppositions or Acts of
consent of the other. The thing was delayed and spun out in his Hands for
several years; during which the whole Business was sufficiently sifted and
discussed to give a true understanding of the Cause. At length he pronounced
Sentence; he made a Law; he made an Agreement between the parties upon
conditions that were prescribed 'em. And thus there was a Final End of this
Business; nothing more to be said or done in it. The consequence is so much the
more necessary, in regard that between the Cause of the Regale and the Edict,
there is a difference advantageous to the Latter, not to speak of others that
may be observed there. The Clergy holds for Decreed what the King, as Sovereign
Arbitrator, has judged in his own cause: But in the Edict, the King Judges
under the same Character, without suspicion of partiality in the cause of his
Subjects; where he has no personal part, where he interests himself no
otherwise, then as a common Arbitrator, and Father of his Country.

Now in an Affair of this Importance, the Decision of which The King Warranted
his own Edict.
United all the disordering Members of the State, and by a happy Peace put an
end to their long Fatal Divisions, it is evident that the King became security
for the Concord which the Treaty reestablished among his Subjects, as being
the person whose Authority had cimented it together. It Is the Privilege of
Supreme Authority to Warrant, and put a Value upon things where it intervenes.
It Is because the Virtue and Force of particular Contracts are founded upon it,
that the King's Name and Seal are affixed to 'em; that he Judges Parties by
their consent; that as the Protector of the Rights of every one of his
Subjects, he sets up those Acts which his Power Authorizes, and which are drawn
up in his Name, in favor of Sincerity and Innocence against the Cavils of
Fraud and Injustice. If then in those Acts, where the King is not presumed to
Judge, but because his Name appears there, his Quality of Sovereign Arbitrator
in all the Causes of his Subjects, obliges 'em to a Tacit Warranty that they
shall be firm and inviolable, how much more evidently ought it to be present in
a Treaty, which Unites the differing Parties of a State after a long War; and
wherein the King himself pronounced the Articles with his own Lips. This Treaty
ought to be inviolable to the Parties, whom it behooves to be content, after the
Oracle has once spoke: Nay, inviolable to the King himself, since he is
naturally as well the security for his Subjects Observation of their mutual
Contracts, as the Supreme Arbitrator of their Differences. Now it is not
readily to be imagined that a Prince should be Legally the first Violator of
Treaties who is entrusted with the Warranty for their Observation, and tho
Treaties grounded upon Principles of Honor and Fidelity can never be violated
without Infamy, 'twould be less Igniminious for him to make a Breach, that were
only concerned as a simple Party in the Treaty, then for him that stands
security for the Public and Common Faith, and who is obliged by that
Characted, to cause others to observe the Treaty. It follows then, that the
King being on the one side, as Head of the Catholics, a Party with the Reformed
in the Treaty upon which the Edict of Nantes was Granted, and on the other,
being security for the Observation of it between the Catholics and Reformed, by
his Quality of King and Common Father, it is impossible, that either as Party or
Security, he should ever Ordain, or permit the Revocation of the Edict, as
being the Structure of his Paternal Love, his Prudence, his Justice, and his
Royal Authority.

If it be Objected, that this indeed might properly concern Hen. IV. the Author
of the Edict; but that the Case is not the same with the King's Successors, who
have met with many Alterations in the Kingdom; and for whom it was lawful to to
take New measures, according to the altered condition of Affairs; I answer that
this Objection will be more proper for another place, where I shall have some
Reflections to make upon the Revocation of the Edict. I shall only say by the
way, that when Successors ratify what has been done by their Predecessors, they
engage themselves in all their Obligations; Successors bound to observe the
Treaties of their Predecessors.
and that they ought to imagine any Alterations of things, when the same
Reasons of Justice and Humanity still continue; when the Benefit is the same;
when the Parties Interested are still in Being, nor become unworthy of the same
Grants and Privileges. Here the Children supply the Room of their Parents; and
this is the Reason, that certain Immunities remain perpetual in Families.
Because it is presupposed, that he who has obtained 'em never dies, so long as
he leaves behind him a Posterity that renews his Life. Now it is so easy to
apply these Verities to the Edict, that it would be needless to enlarge my
Digression that must be other where Repeated.

I come then to the last Thing which I proposed, and which I shall conclude in
a few Words. It relates to the Objections that are made against the Edict,
which are almost all grounded upon one Principle, which is derived from hence
that it is an imperfect Treaty, to which the principal Catholics never were
called; that the Edict was drawn up without hearing the Parlaments; without
giving Opportunity to the Clergy to represent, or defend their own Interests;
and without having the Popes Approbation, or at least his Consent, which is
necessary to Legitimate the Consent of the Catholics, in things that concern
their Religion. But this Objection is the most infirm, and the fallest of all
the Rest; the most infirm, because, that tho it were True, 'twould stand the
Raisers of it in no stead; the falsest, in regard there was an Assembly of all
the Parties, as Public and as formal as could have been desired. I say that tho
this Objection were true, it would be of little or no Use, because it would
have been only a Defect of Formality, which in things of that importance, which
the Edict Treats of, ought not to be taken into Constderation to the Prejudice
of the things themselves, when they are both Just and Necessary. In Civil
Affairs, between Man and Man, such a Default might bereave the Person that
falls into it of certain Advantages which might have accru'd to him, had he
been more exact in his proceedings; but it does not deprive him of his Rights.
Where the Lives of Men lie at Stake, 'twould be yet more strange, that an
Unfortunate Person should be enforced to loose his Life for the bare Omission
of a Formality: And Nature would murmur to see any one Perish, whose Innocence
should in all things else appear well proved, had not his Condemnation been
grounded only upon a Mistake of that sort. How much more strange would it be,
that in an Affair which concerned the Lives and Welfare of so many Thousands of
Stout and Faithful Subjects, and constant in the Service of their Prince, and
who have no other Crime, which their Enemies can Tax 'em with, but that they
bear a Conscience too delicate to submit to the Authority of another; how much
more strange I say, would it be, that in such an affair, Men should not think
themselves obliged to observe their Promises to these poor people, under
pretense that they had not Summoned their Adversary's, in Form, to appear in
Court, for the Regulation of the Differences between 'em? But tho there were
nothing more in it, the thing was Public. 'Twas impossible that either the
Clergy or the Parlaments should be Ignorant, that there was a Treaty on foot
with the Reformed. They saw their Assemblies, their Deputations, their
Writings; the going and coming of the Kings Commissioners. 'Twas the Discourse
of all the Kingdom; and it was Transacted in the Sight of all Europe. In an
affair that made so loud a Noise, 'twas the Fault of those that were concerned
therein, if they neglected being present at the places of Debate; so that if
they were not there, it must be attributed either to an affected Carelessness,
or a sly and overreaching pretended Ignorance.

But in the Second Place, this Objection is False: The Parties That the
Parlaments had a share in Edict. That it was necessary not to give 'em the
least occasion of Complaint.
that were to be Summoned were present, not after the business was concluded,
and the thing past all Recovery, but before the Edict was verified; that is to
say, by consequence, before the Edict was ratified and passed in a determined
matter. This is so true, that upon their Interposing, many things were altered
which had been agreed upon at Nantes. I shall not here so much as take Notice,
that one of the King's Commissioners was a Member of that Parliament: But give
me leave to say, that the Interposition of this Senate is sufficiently known by
the several Deputations they made to the King, after the Edict had been sent
him to be Registre'd. They heard his Remonstrances; they considered his
Objections; they suffered him to speak more then once, before they made a
positive Order for Registring the Edict; they Granted him some of his Demands,
and for other matters they gave him their Reasons. Insomuch, that the Command
which succeeded that, can pass for no other then a sort of a Contradictory
Decree, after both Parties had been heard, and their Pretensions and Defenses
duly weighed.

The Clergy also were present there, and they made their The Clergy.
Remonstrances and Objections, as the Parliament had done with some Solemnity,
and Deliberation. They met a little after the Conclusion of the Edict, the
Legate being still in France. They Addressed themselves to the King by their
Deputies, and presented him with Cases and Petitions; but he did nothing
without Consulting the Legate, and after his Departure without the advice of the
Nuncio. The General Agents went farther likewise in their Oppositions then this
Prelate, and behaved themselves with so little Respect, that they were even
Guilty of Undecent Language Their Remonstrances however, had partly their
desired Effect. They obtained Immunities and Favors for the Clergy; and caused
some of the Articles of the Edict to be Altered. Insomuch, that afterward no
Man, with any Confidence, could say he was not heard. If the King did not
Consent to every thing the Clergy desired, and made 'em quit some part of their
Pretensions: yet it cannot be denied, but that he heard 'em, and Judged of the
Dispute, with a perfect knowledge of the Cause. The Murmurs of the Clergy,
after the matter was ended, would not allow them to Complain, that they were
not heard, no more then a Man has Reason to say after Sentence has passed
against him, that the Judges did not perfectly know his Case. To which we may
add, That the Clergy reaped greater Benefit by the Edict in many things, then
the Reformed themselves. So that, tho they had been totally excluded from
having any Negotiation in the Edict, yet they could have had no reason to
complain, that Affairs were not managed to their Advantage, without giving 'em
the trouble of attending 'em.

In short, The Pope himself had given his Consent as far as The Pope himself.
could be desired of him. He was made sensible from the time that the Treaty of
a Reconciliation between the King and him was on foot; and that the King would
not be obliged to Destroy the Reformed. In the very Articles to which his
Council agreed, they made use of General Clauses, that implied a Consent to the
Edict which was to be made for Liberty of Conscience. At least those Proctors
did positively assure His Majesty, that it was clearly the sense of those
ambiguous Terms with which they must be satisfied, because the Pope neither
could nor ought to suffer others; which is as much as to say, That the Church
of Rome esteeming it a point of Duty and Honor, to Massacre, Burn, and by all
manner of means to Extirpate those whom they call Heretics, the Pope could not
think it looked well for him to Consent in express Terms, that he should suffer
'em to live in Peace, and that of course he was obliged to express himself in
obscure Significations. The Testimony of the King to the Parliament that the
Pope had approved of all he had done, is a Demonstration in this case, and what
happened some time after the verification of the Edict confirms the same. The
Pope vigorously pressed the Publication of the Council of Trent, and to obtain
it, insisted upon the promise which was made him upon his demand in the Kings
Name, before he gave him Absolution. Among other things, the Chancellor
answered to these Instances, That this Article could oblige the King no farther
than the welfare of the Kingdom would allow of. This Answer being carried to
the Pope, by such as had a mind to Exasperate him against France, was expounded
in such a manner that it gave him no small displeasure. But d'Ossat, who was
desirous to remove all occasions of disquiet from him, told him, That the
Chancellor intended no more by these words than what du Perron and he had said
to His Holiness himself, when they Treated with him about the Absolution of the
King, to wit, That by the Publication of the Council the Edicts of Pacification
should not be Abrogated; That the Heretics should not be compelled to observe
'em; And that the King should not be obliged to renew a War with 'em; That for
the same reason du Perron and he had refused to pass the Clause which was
designed to have been Inserted in the Formulary of the Profession of Faith, to
wit, That he who did it, should be engaged to cause it to be done to all his
Subjects. The Pope replied, That he well enough remembered, that what was meant
by the welfare of the Kingdom was so Explained to him; and if this Chancellor
meant so, there was no great hurt in it. These words do sufficiently evince
that he agreed to observe the Edicts, and that he gave many marks of it as his
Dignity could conveniently permit.

We may add to this what I have said elsewhere, which shows, That he was well
enough acquainted with the whole proceedings of the Edict; That he had at that
time a Legate in France; That his Legate was informed of all that passed there;
That there were people who gave him occasion to suspect the Conduct of the
Kings Commissioners; That the President de Thou was obliged to give him an
Account of his own particular Conduct; That this Prelate having understood it,
seemed well enough pleased with him, and with the proceedings, and left the
management to the discretion of the Commissioners. I said also, That the
presence of the Legate was the cause of delaying the verification of the Edict.
He made likewise such pressing demands, that they durst not refuse him, tho we
could have wished, without this obstruction, that the Publication had been
made, whilst those of the League were stunned, as it were, by the Kings
Successes, lest Time should force 'em to take measures to cross this design.
When the Legate left France, a Nuncio supplied his Room, without whom the Clergy
would not proceed one step; and who was also much more moderate than the
General Agents, and some Prelates of the Kingdom; in regard that, without any
scruple, he promised the Pope's support, provided they took care of the
Catholic Religion. So that, if after that, the Pope showed some Signs of
dissatisfaction, it was only, as I have observed, by way of Comedy, which the
Politicians know well enough how to play when they have any prospect of saving
themselves. 'Twas necessary, as he himself said, complaining of the Edict, to
stop the mouths of the Spaniards, who having some concerns with him, sought all
occasions of blaming his Conduct. This was the reason, why after the first
clash, he never desired the Repeal of the Edict; and all he did was to press
the Publication of the Council, and the Re-establishment of the Jesuits, in
recompense of those favors which the Heretics had received. These were as
great marks of his Consent as could well have been desired, in an Affair where
his Religion and Dignity would not suffer him to write Briefs and Bulls of
Approbation.

This is sufficient in a business whose Nature chiefly requires that it should
be managed with Justice, to show that nothing was wanting which was Necessary
to Authorize the Decision of it. A Treaty maturely deliberated where the
Sovereign himself is a Party; Parties that agree in many things by the
Negotiation, and between whom a Sovereign, Born their Arbitrator, decides those
Matters which were still in dispute; A Reformation of several Articles upon the
Oppositions of Parties Intervening, A General Compliance on one side, diverse
marks of Consent on the other; All this makes a certain degree of Surety which
ought to render these Decisions Eternal and Unalterable, by how much the more
it was impossible to revoke 'em without a downright Abuse of Justice it self,
and the same Duty which caused 'em to be made. But it is now time to return to
the Series of the History.

All necessary Preparations were made throughout the whole A Return to the
History.
Kingdom for the Execution of the Edict; and the Commissioners, who were
appointed to procure it, began to set it afoot this year, and made many Decrees
upon the Contests that arose. But before they could almost make one step in
their Business, we began to be sensible of the principal Advantage of the
Edict, namely, A Universal Tranquillity, the sweetness of which gave us good
hopes of the rest. However there happened one thing very Remarkable, which made
the Catholics Triumph, as if they had procured an utter Extirpation of the
Reformed Religion, tho in effect they had gained nonothing but the Honor of
knowing how to lay a Snare better then the Wisest of the Reformed knew how to
escape it. The Book of Du Plessis concerning the Eucharist, of which I have
already spoken, was the occasion of this matter.

I have observed already, that the Catholics made a great noise about it. I
know not how many Writers indeavo^^'d to ^^fute it. Fronton du Due, a Famous
Jesuit, undertook it, after Dafis sent away such as proposed to him the burning
of the Book, and bid 'em rather to write a formal Answer to it. But there were
many Authors of less Note, who engaged themselves in this Dispute, and who
pestered the Public with whole Loads of little foolish Pamphlets, which were
rather Invectives against the Author, than Answers to his Work. The Doctors of
the Faculty at Paris Condemned it by Public Censure. Several particular Persons
published Inventories of falsify'd Passages, Catalogues of Omissions of
necessary Words, and many other little Trifles of the same Nature. The Reason
of this great Fermentation amongst 'em, besides the Importance of the Matter,
the Merit of the Author, the slender respect he had observed in his Book for
the Mysteries of the Romish Religion, and the manner of bringing it to light,
was also his Method of handling the Subject. Du Plessis did not confine
himself, as others till then had done, within the bounds of Scripture; he
Sallied forth out into the vast Field of Tradition, and had Quoted in his Book
above Four Thousand passages of the Schoolmen, or of those who were called
Fathers. This was (as it were) a bringing the War into the very Bowels of the
Church of Rome; Attacking her in her strongest Entrenchments, and violently
wresting her very last Weapons out or her hands. There had been nothing left
for her Defense, if after having taken away the Scripture from her, which the
Reformed accused her for having in a manner forsaken, she should suffer the
Fathers to be ravished from her too, and the Fountains of Tradition, wherein
she places her last Refuge. But all the noise both of the Preachers and Writers
served only to make the Book sell, and to advance the Glory of its Author. They
Attacked it so weakly, that, most certainly, it had been better for the Romish
Church to have let it alone. l'th' mean while the Refutations promised from
Rome came not at all; and the Pope was vexed at the heart to see himself
Treated in so sharp a manner, and that too-by a Person so considerable and
great as Du plssis. It caused the Pope to suspect the Sincerity of the Kings
Conversion, and that he was not hearty in the Profession of the Catholic
Religion. There was then at Rome a certain German, who boasted that he had
learnt this secret from a Protestant of A^sbourg, who said, That Bon^ars, the
Kings Envoy to the Protestants in Germany, assured 'em he had not changed his
Religion in his heart: And D'Ossat, who thought it convenient for the Kings
Reputation to stop the course of such Reports, would fain have searched to the
bottom, to see if he could find out from whence these Rumors arose. Wherefore
toward the latter end of this year, he acquinted the King with what he had
Learnt of their Original; for these Rumors were not new; and since the Kings
Conversion they were daily revived; Insomuch that the Pope had opportunity
enough to make his best advantage of it; whether this Germans Discourse came to
his Ears long before the Cardinal writ to him of it, or whether he had received
any Intelligence of it from the Spies which he has in every Princes Court. The
King was concerned in Interest that these Reports should not make any
Impression on the Minds of the Catholics, The King willing to satisfy the
Pope, and to mortify du Plessis.
however they were advantageous to him, serving to gain him Credit with the
Protestanis, whose Alliance his Politics obliged him to preserve at any Rate
whatsoever. But as the good will of Rome was necessary for him in his present
Affairs, so he was desirous to satisfy the Pope, and to mortify du Plessis
and the Reformed by some Signal Action, which might make Rome believe that they
had lost his favor. Du Plessis's look furnished him with a colorable
Pretense; And he offered such an Indignity to this Gentleman by little
Artisices, beneath the Grandeur of a King, that one may safely say, That that
Action was none of the best of all his Life. Observe now how the matter went.
Almost all those who wrote against du Plessis, how different otherwise soever
they were in the Style and Method of their Writings, yet agreed in this, To
charge him with false Quotations: And as such Accusations are hard to be
Explained, to those who are not capable of thoroughly Examining Matters and
Authors, they were made use of as the only proper Argument to seduce those whom
they would pervert to their Religion. Thus people are apt to be misled in such
Affairs as are beyond the reach of their Capacity; Difficulties are raised, of
which they are not competent Judges, and they are told sometimes that it is
impossible to solve 'em, because they are not capable enough to do it
themselves. This Cheat has been used in France among the Controvertists all
along from first to last. As often as any Book of worth has come forth, the
Missionaries to be sure have found out a Trick to accuse the Author of some
fault or other, with which they have broke the Peoples Brains; as if every
thing that they were not able to understand or refute was a sign of the falsity
of his Religion: And the Credulous and Wavering people many times mistake those
Reproaches, which if they were allowable, would only affect the Reputation of
the Author, for Reasons prejudicial to his Doctrine. Yet these Deceits and
Frauds served chiefly to lay those flat who were already staggering, and who
were only seeking for a plausible pretense to Change. Of this Number at that
time, was St. Marie du Mont, a Gentleman, who was resolved to part with his
Religion, and only delayed the Formalities of Renunciation, till du Plessis had
been ill treated at Fontainblean, suffered himself to be persuaded by du
Perron, and others, that du Plessis had falsely quoted, a great many passages;
and being with him in Paris at the Princess of Orange's, he justified to his
face that he had found many passages of this Nature in his Book. This Gentleman
was one of those, whose Learning, being very mean and shallow, gives them
however a great share of Confidence; The Scandal of false Quotations reflects
hard upon the Honor of du Plessis. The Challenge that he makes to his Accusers
accepted by Perron.
and being fully resolved, as I said, to turn Catholic, he was willing to think
all those reasons very good with which they had inspired him. But du Plessis,
who had stood firm as a Rock against all the Storms which his Book had raised
against him, could not support the Calumny of being thought a Falsifier, and
therefore reckoned his Honor was concerned to make good the Sincerity of his
Quotations. So toward the end of March he published a Writing, wherein he
invites his Accusers to join with him in presenting a Petition to His Majesty
to appoint Commissioners, before whom he might justify the passages from Line
to Line. Some few days after du Perron received one of these Writings, and
Answered it in accepting the Challenge, and Offering to show Five hundred
enormous falsities in du Plessis's Book, in downright Number and without
Hyperbole; and at the same time Writ to the King to desire the Conference. Du
Plessis would not let this Bravado pass without a Reply: But for Fear this
multiplicity of Writing to and fro should break off the design of the
Conference, Villeroy hindered the Bishop from Answering this. In the mean time
du Plessis Writ to the King, and caused the Marshal de Bouillon to present his
Petition to him. The King being desirous Conference Granted.
of this Conference, readily complied with it; and at the very beginning of
April, gave Order to the Chancellor to endeavor to procure it.

But at first great Difficulties arose about it, which held the thing long in
suspense. The Nuncio opposed it, for as they Difficulties in the thing and
about the place raised by the Clergy.
were to appoint Commissioners in a matter of Religion, he alleged it was a
Prerogative of the Ecclesiastical Authority, which the King would violate, if
he took upon him the Nomination of them; besides he thought it might give
occasion for people to suspect, that the King had still some doubts about the
Truth of the Romish Doctrine. The Archbishop of Bourges likewise Remonstrated
the consequences of it to the King. Benoit, Nominated for the Bishopric of
Troyes, but to whom the Pope would never Grant his Bulls, because he was too
good a French man, and too little respectful to Rome, represented in like
manner his scruples about the same thing. Cardinal de Gondi, Bishop of Paris,
was strangely surpised to hear say, that this Conference was like to be held
in his Diocese. Others likewise made their trivial Objections: But the King
satisfied 'em all; assuring 'em, that matters of Doctrine should not be touched
upon; that the Commissioners should not be Judges of any thing relating to
Religion; that they should only be merely Spectators, Witnesses, and Vouchees
of the verity of the Acts; that they should only give their Opinions of the
Sense of the Words, not meddling any farther then in this particular relating to
du Plessis, to know whether his Quotations were False or not. And he promised
besides, that such care should be taken, that the Romish Religion should lose
nothing by it. On the other hand, there were several Persons, who advised du
Plessis not to carry on the thing too far; telling him, that they had left him
Others of du Plessis's Friends and ^.
passages enough, the Truth of which was unquestionable, to save his Honor,
tho he should concede the others to them. But he could by no means endure the
Word False; and he was so well assured of his own exactness, that he did not
believe, that all the Bishops Craft could do him any Injury. He relied chiefly
on the King's Justice; and tho he believed him not a little displeased with the
Publication of his Book, yet he hoped that the Memory of his Services, the Fear
of too much provoking the Reformed, and of lessening the Royal Majesty, by a
proceeding that deviated from Justice, would oblige that Prince to see that he
had not the least Foul Play.

On both sides people longed for the Conference, every one expecting the
Triumph of his Party, and even before the Combat, rejoicing at the Defeat of
his Adversary. Insomuch, that on either side, there were people enough to
invalidate the Reasons of those who desired to hinder the Dispute. It was
therefore Resolved upon, and du Plessis found himself too far engaged to
Retreat. But on the King's part, such wary measures were taken, that 'twas
impossible that du Plessis should come off with Honor. For if he should break
off the Conference, then they would have Charged him with declining the Combat,
for fear of being confounded; and if he should maintain it; then they had laid
the Snare so cunningly, that he could not avoid it. It Is very hard to know
whether the King's design was in good Earnest, rather to break off this
Conference, or to procure it. But it is certain however, that du Plessis was
obliged to keep it up, and that on such very hard Terms, as it is likely they
would not have proposed 'em to him, but to engage him to quit his Resolution;
for they would rather have Triumphed in his Flight, then have undertook a
Conference in good Earnest, with a person whom they knew so well skilled in the
Art of defending himself; which will easily appear by the particulars of the
principal Circumstances.

After those Difficulties were removed which the Chief of The Steps of their
foul Play.
the Clergy had suggested, and that it was found more expedient to hold the
Conference at Fontanbleau then at Paris; whether it were to satisfy the Bishop
of that place; or to hinder the Commonalty from intermedling in this Dispute;
or whether it were to deprive du Plessis of those helps which he might have had
from the Libraries, and the Learned Men who were so Numerous there, the
Chancellor Writ to du Perron to come to Court; but du Plessis had no Notice
sent him Du Perron has Notice, but du Plessis has not.
for his coming there, tho the King had commanded that he should. Of which the
Chancellor cleared himself, by telling the King, when he asked him the Reason
of it, that he did not imagine his Majesty had any such Intention. But as the
Terms wherein such a Command is given, cannot be ambiguous; especially in a
business where it is a Natural Right, that the persons concerned should have
equally Notice, it is plain enough that this was a Trick of the Chancellors, to
make du Plessis's not appearing at a day prefixed, to seem as if he had a mind
to shun the Dispute, after he had so much desired it; which would have made
people believe that he doubted his Cause: Whereas the Bishop appearing first at
the place assigned, seemed likewise by his diligence more assured of his
Conquest. But du Plessis followed his Adversary the Bishop so close, that he
had nothing wherewith to charge him about it: One arrived there the 27th of the
Month, and the other the next day. Du Plessis was immediately for Regulating the
manner of the Conference, for which he made his Application to the King. He
entreated that the passages of his Book might be Examined in Order, 2 Du Perron
is dispensed with from givine the five hundred passages under his hand, which
he had pro^.
that so those which were not Taxed with false Citations, might be looked on as
verified: And on the other side, he thought it but reasonable, that the Bishop
should give him the five hundred passages charged with Falsehood, in a paper
Signed under his hand. The Bishop had more Wit then to comply with his first
demand. But the Reasons he gave for it, were very Weak and Childish. He said,
he had shown Reasons for this refusal in the Answer he made to the first
Challenge that Du Plessis had Published: Besides, That du Plessis having
Summoned him to appear, without refuting his Reasons, or Offering any thing in
his own Defense, he had quitted that pretension by a tacit compliance: Whence
he concluded, that he ought not to be permitted to renew it. These Reasons of
his Answer obliged him to spend a great deal of time in Transcribing all those
passages, with the Bishops Reflections; as if length of time ought to be
considered, when things of greater Moment were in Agitation. This Evasion,
which at Court would have been Hissed at in a matter of less consequence,
passed however for current in this Affair: Tho if they had designed things
fairly and honestly, they would have scorned such little Formalities. It Is
true, that to support this mean way of cavilling, Du Perron added, that the
Business at that time was not to examine the Book, from one end to the other; and
that after the first business was decided, he offered to stay Six Months,
without stirring, to make this Examination. This specious offer engaged him to
just nothing at all; for the King could not so long attend a Conference of this
Nature, nor suffer it but in his Presence: And they well knew, that it would
break off before they came to the substance of the Book. But as for du
Plessis's second pretention, the Bishop offered to leave the five hundred
Passages in 3. The Order and Choice of the Passages is left to him.
the King's Hands, from whence he would every day take fifty as he thought fit
to examine 'em. The design of this Artifice was apparent enough; for if the
passages had been given to du Plessis, he might have been assisted by those to
whom he should have Communicated 'em, and so have come better prepared to the
Conference. On the other Hand, the Bishop having every day of the Conference,
his choice of the Passages, he might hold du Plessis in perpetual uncertainty
on which side he meant to Attack him; so that he should never have had any
longer time to prepare himself, then what his Adversary should please to allow
him. In short, among the five hundred passages which he had to peruse, the
Bishop might pick out such as had carried the likeliest appearance of being
quoted Wrong; so to prepossess on the minds of Men by this Artifice, and to
insinuate to 'em, that the Rest were all of the same nature. Thus is the World
for the most part prepossessed: The first Impressions are generally the
deepest, and the suspicious we suddenly entertain of any Man's Honesty, can
hardly be effaced by all the other Proofs of his Integrity.

Du Plessis perceiving the Snare that was laid for him by 4 (...) Plessis (...)
thre^ Artifice of it.
this Wile, would not be satisfied with these Offers of the Bishop; but desired
notwithstanding in a New Address, that the Passages might be left in the Hands
of two of the Commissioners whom the King had Nominated. But du Perron would
not consent to it. Du Plessis remained still Resolute for sometime, And for
some time refuses these Conditions.
and urged as a Reason for this his Resolution; that he plainly saw, that after
they had made an effort upon five or six Passages, they would find out a way to
break off the Conference, so to fix in Men's minds a like Opinion of the Rest:
To which he added what the King's Religion, what the Religion of the Nobility,
and of the Greatest part of those who were to be present at the Conference,
gave him just Cause to fear. The Chancellor replied very faintly to these
Objections: But they desired du Perron to take some Course, that might remove
du Plessis's Jealousy of this foul Play. The Bishop proposed to Examine fifty
passages presently, whose Falsities he would engage to lay open in two Hours
time, and the other four hundred and fifty in nine days after; Offering not to
stir from Fontainbleau till the matter was ended. Du Plessis did not find that
this Proposal removed his Scruples. But the Chancellor, together with four of
the Commissioners whom the King had appointed, and Roni, who at this
Consultation sat They Terrif^ him by threatening to Examin^ the Passages in his
^.
in the place of Calignon, who should have been the Fifth, and the only
unsuspected person, adjudg'd, that du Perron offered him Fair. Du Plessis would
not submit to this Judgment the Partiality of which was but too visible. But
the Chancellor being very willing to persuade him to be satisfied with it, told
him, that the King was resolved to know the Truth of this matter; that whether
du Plessis were present or absent, it must be Examined; that it would be more
advantageous to him, if it were done in his presence; that his going away would
be looked upon as a Flight; that it would turn to his Disgrace which way soever
it was taken; either because he would be suspected of having spoken Falsities
in Holy matters, or else they would blame him for deserting the Cause of his
Religion in things that he maintained for Truths. 'Twas the King himself who
had ordered the Chancellor to tell him, that his Absence should not any way
prejudice him, but that he would cause the Citations to be rightly judged of,
which they had charged him with having wrongfully Quoted. Insomuch, that they
did in a manner compel this Gentleman, either to lay himself at the discretion
of his Adversary, or to expose him to the disadvantageous Censures they might
pass upon his Book, if it were Examined when no body was present to defend it.
But as he very well knew, that no Men of worth would look upon his Prudence,
not to throw himself Headlong into a manifest Snare, as any thing like a flight
he was not at all shaken by the Chancellour's Discourse However, he again
consulted Roni and Casaubon, who did not advise him to alter his Opinion. Roni,
who was not sorry that du Plessis had received some kind of Mortification that
would lessen his Reputation, and absolutely remove him from business, was in
that respect nothing the honester Man then the Rest of 'em, and did what he
could to lead this poor Gentlman to a precipice. And from thence it happened,
that to give the greater Reputation to the pretended defeat of du Plessis, he
boasts in his Memoirs, according to the report of those who collected 'em, that
he was the occasion of breaking off the Conference; that du Perron was
contented to speak no more of it; and that du Plessis was an Obstinate person,
and would never agree to it. All this past, till the third of May in the
Morning; when the King seeing the Constancy of du Plessis, commanded, that the
Examination of the passages should not be put off any longer, then till three a
Clock in the Afternoon. But under some pretense or other, they were deferred
till seven a Clock next Morning. Mean while, the King kept the Bishop with him
all day; consulting how he should carry himself in this matter. On the other
side, the breaking off the Conference made the Reformed Court Party very
uneasy, whether they were of a Cabal with Roni, or whether they were
intoxicated with Conferences, as there ^re but few people who are not, we know
not. But Castelnau, Chambret, Beaupre and some others, undertook to renew it;
and so managed du Plessis, that they made The Conference almost broken off, is
renewed on unfair conditions.
him consent to it upon very unjust Terms. At the same time du Perron should
have sent to du Plessis fifty or sixty Passages, upon Condition that he 5. Du
Perron prescribes the Laws for it.
Answered 'em all by seven a Clock the next 6. Du Plessis Robbed of his Nights
Rest.
Morning; and in the same Order that du Perron had placed 'em; he was to have
been furnished 7. Sixty one Passages are given him to justify in Eight Hours
time.
with what Books he desired; and they to be of the Edition of Geneva, of
He^delberg, or of Bale. This Negotiation continuing till Nine at Night, du
Plessis could neither have the Books nor the Passages till Eleven; insomuch.
that instead of taking his Rest, he was forced to spend the Night in Examining
his Citations. To make him amends for this foul Play, du Perron sent him Sixty
one Passages, instead of Sixty which he had promised. The Morning came, du
Plessis declared he could not Examine above nineteen of the Passages which were
fent him. But that he would maintain the truth of those Citations with the
Hazard of his Life. Du Perron complained loudly, that all the Passages were not
Examined; as if it were Just or Reasonable to expect, that a Man should compare
Sixty Passages with the Authors from whence he had taken 'em, and that he
should Examine the Contexts, that is to say, what preceded and what followed, in
time almost, then it would take up to Read 'em. Moreover the Bishop would fain
have begun with other passages, then those which du Plessis had compared, as
thinking he should the more easily prove their Falsity. Only he showed himself
Coy, because he would be entreated, and that he might have an opportunity to
say, after the Examination of the first, that there were yet others whose
Falsities were more Notorious. And thus with much ado, he submitted at last,
and the Entering into the Conference was put off till one a Clock in the
Afternoon.

The King had Named for Comm^^^oners, who 8. ^.
should determine this Matter, three Catholics, and two of the Reformed; to the
End that (...) 9. ^.
might be assured of the Plurality of Voices. Thou. Pithou, and le Fevre the
Prince of Conde's Tutour, were the the three Catholics; and the Reformed were
Calignon and Casaubon. But the King changed two of those he had Deputed, and
Substituted Martin, one of his Physicians, in the Room of le Feure, and instead
of Calignon, du Frene Canaye who arrived at Court just as the Conference was
ready to begin. It had been much more Just and Equitable, that the Parties
themselves should have chosen their Arbitrators; but the chief Reason why the
King had the Nomination of them was. That the Reformed might not appear too
Resolute and Confident. 'Twas for this Cause that Calignon was excluded from
it, and du 10. He changes two of the first Nominated, for two more suspected.
FreneCanaye put in, who came Post to Court on purpose to change his Religion,
which he did in a little time after. For thence forward he industriously
endeavored 11. He chooses two of the wavering Reformed.
the Ruin of the Reformed; as it appeared by the proposition he made to the
King; to destroy The Character of du Frene Canaye.
'em, in bringing over all the Nobility of that Party: Which he engaged to do,
upon condition, that a Sum of Money, of less Value then his own Estate, should
be put into third hands that should still remain as a pledge for the security
of this Sum. It Is said, that the King being Wiser then he, would not hearken to
him, but told him, that if there were no Nobility among the Reformed, it
behooved him to send some thither, because he had always found their Gentlemen
very serviceable to him. Casaubon was a Man of a And of Casaubon.
Weak and Wavering Temper, whom du Perron had gained by his Artifices. He had
promised to change his Religion: But he was so narrowly watched, and he knew so
well how to make his Advantage of the King of England's Offer, who invited him
over to England, that he seemed at least, to be settled. It Is certain, that
before he went over into England, he told du Perron, that he could be more
serviceable to him in gaining that Prince, if he continued in the Profession of
the Reformed Religion, then after he had quitted it. Insomuch, that it is not
known, whether his perseverance were Sincere or no. However, it is sure, that
Religion was not a matter of very great importance to that Family; for a little
after his Death, his only Son turned Catholic. Such were those in whose Hands
du Plessis was constrained to hazard his Honor. There was more Honesty to be
hoped for from Thou and Pithou, then from those very people who being of his
Religion, pretended to be most favorable to him.

At the time appointed, they came to the place where the Conference was to be
held, and every one being duly placed, the Books were laid on the Table, to
which they might have recourse in the process of the Examination. I will not
Justify what is said by some, that du Perron having already put one Cheat upon
du Plessis, in causing the first Leaf of the Edition of Bale or Geneva to be
placed at the the beginning of Books Printed elsewhere, played him another
Trick worse then that, to confound him absolutely, by Ordering other Books to
be laid on the Table, then those he had made use of all the Night before. There
was no need perhaps of this great Abuse, to perplex a Man that was almost quite
tired out already, with Watching all Night long, and who besides had spent all
the Forenoon in matters of great importance. But they set another Trap for him
more craftily, under color of avoiding such Words as might di oblige, when the
King Ordered, that in their Discourse, they should forbear the Terms of Falls
and Falsity. And thus there was a Large Field opened for du Perron, who could
turn the Conference as he pleased. 12. Another Artifice made use of, by
forbidding the Terms of False and Falsity to be mentioned.
It had been indeed proposed before upon a Charge of Falsehood; and du Perron
was obliged to convict du Plessis of Enormous, or Irregular Falsities And yet,
nevertheless he was dispe^s'd with from proving the Falsity; and he could
extricate himself from those matters, by charging on du Plessis qu^te another
thing, then that of having falsely quoted the passages in debate; as if he had
ill understood 'em, ill translated 'em, ill applied 'em, etc. Which might be
called mistakes, but could not be looked on as Falsifications. Du Plessis on
the other hand found himself so much the less able to defend himself, as that
under this pretext, of shunning Undecent and Offensive Expressions, they might
raise a thousand Objections against him, which he never expected. And so
instead of being cleared, as he believed, by showing beyond all denial, that
the Authors had said what he had taken out of 'em, they might turn the Question
and ask him, whether he perfectly understood what their meaning was.

The Chancellor who in this Affair was to preside above the King, declared that
no matter of Right or Doctrine was concerned in this Dispute, but of Fact and
Citations; which the King confirmed with his own Mouth, and in the same Terms.
Du Perron highly extolled the King, that he would not lay his hand upon the
Censor, nor meddle with Matters of Faith, which he ought not to do. And
afterward protested he extremely Honored du Plessis, and did not design to
cast on him the blame of those Falsifications which were in his Book, but only
charged them upon those who had furnished him with the Memoirs; That is to say,
in acquitting du Plessis from an Accusation of being a Deceiver, he ridiculed
him by another, which taxed him for an Inconsiderate Person; that made use of
the Citations of other people without ever inquiring into the Truth of 'em; and
filled his Books with the Testimonies of Authors which he had never taken the
pains to Read. Besides that the Accusation became by that more malicious,
because it overspread and affected all the Learned of the Party, by whom he
supposed du Plessis was supplied with his passages. As if the Reformed, the
better to Assail the Roman Church, had made a kind of Combination to Quote the
Ancient Authors false. Du Plessis protested, That what was done was but a
particular Act, which concerned him only, and that what should happen should
neither prejudice the Churches nor their Doctrine. That being over, they began
the Conference. And the Order they observed was, That after du Perron had
proposed his Objections, and du Plessis his Reasons, the Chancellor should
withdraw with the Commissioners; and after a short Consultation, should return
to deliver their Opinions, which was ever declared Uniform. The whole
management of it was as peaceable as an Affair of that Nature could permit;
there happened but one Interruption, which was of no consequence. A Minister
that had got in among the Assistants could not forbear speaking upon the
occasion of a passage in St. Chrysostom; after which he went his way; and the
King, without being disturbed, was pleased to deal with him like a
Harquebusier, that wheels off so soon as he has discharged his Carbine.

It Is said du Plessis made but an ill Defense; which may not be improbable,
considering that he had weakened his Spirits by his Watching and Study; that the
Marks of the Kings displeasure might astonish him; that the Disposition of the
Assistants, among whom there were but a few that would do him Justice, might a
little distract his Brains; that it had been much fitter for him to have
considered, and deliberately to have prepared a Paper, then to have spoken (as
it were) extempore in a Scholastic manner, on the Cavils of Criticism. But on
the contrary, du Perron, besides the King's and the Assistants Favor, had time
enoug to consult what he had to say; and his Grave Deportment, the Cadence of
his Voice, which was at once, both very agreeable and Majestic, the freeness of
his Action, and the facility of his Expressions did in some manner impose on
his Hearers, and gained 'em over to his party, even before they understood his
Reasons. However it was, the Judges condemned du Plessis in Nine Passages that
were Examined: But upon which they durst not perhaps have declared that the
Citations were False, had they kept themselves to the strictness of the
Challenge. In two Passages, one of which was taken out of Scotus, and the other
out of Durandus concerning Transubstantiation; they Du Plessis Condemned in
Nine passages.
said that the Objection was taken for the Solution. In two other, out of St.
Chrysostom, and a third out of St. Jerome; they judged that some Words were
left out, which it had been necessary for him to have inserted: Another, taken
from St. Cyril, was judged not to be found there. The Seventh indeed, was just
so as du Plessis had cited it from Crinitus: But because Crinitus was mistaken
in citing it from the Code, they said du Plessis ought not to have alleged it
upon the Credit of a Modern Writer, and one likewise who was of no very great
Authority. They took occasion to condemn him upon the Eight, for that he had
not divided, by some Mark, two passages of St. Bernard, which seemed but one as
he had cited 'em. The Ninth, which was taken from Theodoret, gave 'em an
Occasion to Dispute about the difference between Image and Idol: And they
declared that that Father spoke of Pagan Idols, and not of Christian Images.

I should transgress the limits of my design, if I should go ^ctions.
about to excuse du Plessis upon these Nine passages; I do not write his
Apology, it is the History of the Edict, where that of this Conference ought not
to intervene, but only as an incident that is somewhat remarkable. But I owe so
much to Truth as to say in general, That they prevaricated in this Affair, for
they did not find any thing which might justly be termed Enormous Falsehood; no,
not so much as Real Falsehood; And the way of citing in those times was much
more free than it has been since; it was then sufficient to point out the
passages, without Copying 'em word for word all at length; they very rarely set
down any words but what they deemed Essential: And this way of Citations was
never called Falsity, because they only referred to an Author where the passage
might be found more at large; because the Disputants having been often hard put
to it to refute the passages to the purpose, stepped by little and little to
the Circumstances, and began to Quibble upon the manner of Quoting, of
Translating, and of Copying the passages; and for that, to avoid these
digressions which caused 'em to lose sight of the principal thing in Dispute,
the whole Body of the Book must have been filled with long Quotations, and the
Margins with the Original Texts; and the Disputes must have been Immortalized
through the opportunity that those long passages would have given to many
litigious Cavils.

In particular, a Man may sometimes Quote the Objection And Particulars.
of an Author which he refutes, without committing a Falsity; whether it be to
show that these difficulties were known at the time the Doctor Quoted, or to
discover the propensity he had himself to a certain Opinion; although some more
Superior Authority had made him determine on the contrary. This chiefly takes
place amongst the Schoolmen, who would sometimes receive Opinions opposite to
those of their Church, if the dread of her Ana^^ema's did not force 'em to a
blind acquiescence in her Decisions. A man might also often repeat but one
Series of Words, without making any long Extracts of the whole, when the parts
of an omitted passage are not Essential: And this was undoubtedly the case of
du Plessis, which he has demonstrated at large, in a Book which he published
two Years after the Conference. Where likewise he says, that what he had Quoted
out of St. Cyril were not his proper Terms, but a brief Extract of his Opinion;
and that, therefore it was no matter to him, if this passage were not delivered
in so many Words; that having only alleged Crinitus, his Citation ought not to
have been judged but by Crinitus, who having been a Catholic Priest, could not
be suspected to have falsify'd this passage; That he ought not to have been
Charged with the omission of an, etc. among so many several passages of St.
Bernard, since what was between those two, related nothing to the Subject; and
that elsewhere he had alleged out of the same Author, passages of much greater
force, for the Opinion which it was pretended he would have hidden by this
omission. That, in fine, the difference was so little between the Idols of the
Pagans, and the Images of the Catholics, that that might be applied to the one,
which Theodoret and other Doctors of his time say of the other. By which it may
be Judged, that in the time of these Fathers, the Worship of Images was so
great a stranger to the Practice of Christians, that they could* not have
spoken of it but by the Spirit of Prophecy.

But tho the matter was thus, du Plessis was so sensibly Du Plessis falls Sick,
and the Conference is broken off.
touched with the manner of their playing upon him in this Affair, that he left
Fontainbleau the next day, without so much as taking his leave. In the mean
while the King having what he desired, as well as du Perron, who thought he had
sufficiently exploded the Book of du Plessis by this foul play, they took
occasion from the Sickness of du Plessis to break up the Conference. And
without so much as staying till his departure, the Commissioners were
discharged that Night, to the end that, though du Plessis had Recovered, they
might have had an Excuse ready not to renew it. Du Plessis could not withold
his Complaints; and his Son, a young Gentleman of great hopes, spoke louder
then he. Indeed they spoke too much Truth to please. And it was so visible that
the King had Sacrificed du Plessis with a desire to satisfy the Pope, that it
was impossible that the Reproaching him with this Injustice* should not offend
him. The Chancellor made Remonstrances to du Plessis; but that did not hinder
him from speaking yet louder, when once retired to a place where he had no more
occasion to fear any thing. In the mean time the King vaunted his Triumph upon
this occasion as high as he could raise it; and it was observed, that, tho he
did not love the Duke Espernon, yet he was pleased to give him an Account of
this success in rejoicing Terms, and in such as he might have written to one of
his most familiar Friends. Roni, like the rest, Insulted o'r the unhappy
Gentleman, and vented his Railleries upon him with the King himself. They
boasted The Triumphs and Insults of the Catholics.
highly at Rome of this advantage, where things that succeed well are ever
counted Lawful by what means soever they are brought about. They found by this
a dangerous Heretic removed from the Kings Favor and Trust; his Credit lost,
and his Reputation obscured; more especially they saw the King quite alienated
from the Reformed, since he could prevail with himself to give 'em so great an
occasion of Discontent, at a time when they seemed to have the greatest hopes
of his Favor.

But although the Conference was broken off, yet the Noise The sequel of the
Conference.
of the Dispute continued for a long while. The Parties Interess'd writ against
one another upon this Subject. Du Perron Published the Acts of the Conference,
and that he might not want a considerable Witness, he got the Chancellor to
Write a Letter to him, containing a Relation of the whole matter; and wherein
he made great Protestations of his Sincerity. Du Plessis on his part forgot not
to make his Apology, and to take notice of all the Cheats and Injuries that had
been done to him. He justified above all things, the Allegation of the Nine
Passages in a Book sufficiently large, which he Published two Years after, as I
have said; wherein he gave an Account, not only of the Integrity of their
Citation, but he likewise made it appear by a great many Authorities, that he
had as much reason of his side to have had Justice done him, as he had been
Sincere in matter of Fact; and that he made the Authors Quoted speak no more
then what effectually they did. More especially, he there Charged du Perron
with the Falsification of the Acts of the Conference, which he had made
himself; and that he did both alter and change 'em diverse times before he
published 'em: Insomuch, that after he had shown 'em to some persons at Lions,
who could not forbear speaking, he Tore 'em, to make others which he set forth.
But du Perron was not much troubled at these Reproaches. 'Twas none of his
Ambition to be an honest Man, but to fawn upon the Court and raise his Fortune.
Never was Man overwhelmed with so many Accu^ations of Frauds, Falsities,
Ignorances and Contradictions: Nay of all the Crimes that a Writer can be
Guilty of. But the pleasure of wearing a Cardinals Hat, and to see his
Adversary disgraced, easily Atton'd for these little Injuries. Aubigne, who put
as great a value upon himself as he could, would have re-assum'd the Conference
against him, and some things were written on both sides, which were left in the
King's Hands: But there they stopped. Aubigne was not so considerable as du
Plessis; and du Perron would not stake the Reputation he had acquired, against
him.

There was one thing in the mean time which stuck in the The Parliament removed
from Chatelleraud to Saumer.
King's mind. The Assembly of Chateller and had removed to Sauthe twenty fourth
of Novem^^r, the foregoing year; where they had passed the Winter, without much
advancing Affairs; because the Duke of Savoy being come into France, about the
Dispute of the Marquisate of Saluces which he had Usurped, and the King had a
mind to Recover, the Council was wholly employed in Negotiatians and Intrigues.
But it seemed they had no design to Adjourn, till the Edict was Executed
throughout the whole Kingdom; lest it should be but disadvantageously Executed,
when there was no body to look after it. It Is true, that the Edict forbid
Assemblies of this Nature; and this at Saumer seemed to be a formal breach of
this Article: But they did not think they were obliged themselves, to be the
first to put the Edict in force, seeing the Catholics crossed the Execution of
it with a thousand Obstacles from all sides. The Place and Time made t more
suspicious then ever; and 'twas difficult to be apprehended what the
Discontents about du Plessis grumbling in that Assembly might then produce. In
a word, what had passed at Fontainbleau much troubled Men's Minds: But du
Plessis never having made a general business of his own personal concerns,
would not deviate from his usual wont upon this occasion, nor took advantage of
this opportunity, to trouble those who had so unworthily Treated him. Besides
the common Interest of Religion forbad the making a Public concern of a
pretended disadvantage of a particular Person, for fear the Disgrace of this
imaginary Defeat should fall upon the Doctrine of the Party. When they broke up.
However, du Plessis and the Reformed in good time found the means to be
Revenged on the Pope, and to give New Cau^es of Mortification to the Court of
Rome. The Assembly nevertheless did not break up so soon; and it was but the
next ^^ar after that they delivered the King and Court from their fear of New
broils.

The End of the Seventh Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of NANTS. BOOK VIII.
The Aagument of the 8th. Book.
THE War of Savoy, and the success of it. The Estate of the Country of Gex. The
Keformed Governors of Places on the Frontiers of Italy. A New Creation of
Offices. The Execution of the Edict, different according to the pl^ces. The
Negligence of the Reformed, and their Prejudices. The Exactness Commissioners.
The difficulty on the Edict of 1577. favorably taken away. Limited Exercises.
Places of Bailliage. Burying Places. Appeals of Ordinances. The Assembly of
Saumer. General Difficulties on their Institution; and Alteratious in the Form
of Naming 'em. The Synod at Gergeau. Papers Answered. Gex. Te Succession of
England. The Death of a little Child of the Admiral de Chatillon. The Birth of
the Dauphin; and prediction of M. de la Riviere. Notice given to the Reformed
of a League formed against 'em. The general Assembly at Sainte-Foy; and their
matters. The disgrace of the Marshal de Bouillon. The Sedition at Rochelle. The
Spanish Cabal in the Council, presses the Destruction of the Reformed, in hopes
to withdraw the King's Forces by a Civil War. Jealousies and Fears are sowed
among the Reformed; whom the Assurance of being in the King's favor preserves
in Peace. Roni is provided of the Government of Poitou. The Death of Queen
Elizabeth. The Character of King James the First who succeeds her. Breaches of
the Edict. The Duke of Rohan. The Recall of the Jesuits. The Synod at Gap. The
Theses of Ferrier Professo^^ at Nimes. His Character, and that of Chauve. An
Article made to be inserted in the Confession of Faith, which imports that the
Pope is the Antichrist. The King is Angry, and threatens. The Reasons of the
Synod. New Editions of the Confession of Faith, where the Article is inserted.
The Artifices of the Court to evade this Decree. The false Moderation of
Clement the Eight. Other Affairs of the Synod. Conditions of the Recall of the
Jesuits. Satyrs against 'em. Cotton Wounded. Is made the King's Confessor. The
Character of that Jesuit. Questions which he ought to propose to one possessed.
The preservation of Geneva, against the Attempts of the Duke of Savoy. The
palliating of this Enterprise in Writings of the Jesuits. The Death of the
Duchess ^f Bar. The Progress of du Perron's fortune. The Treachery of an
Officer of Villeroy. The Intrigues of Spain in the Court of France.

WHile the Execution of the Edict was a foot, the King The War of Savoy.
made his Expedition into Savoy; and in the Progress of this Journey did many
things that were very obliging to the Reformed, but very ungrateful to Rome.
The Ministers of G^nema came to pay him their Respects near to St. Catherines
Fort, which the Duke of Savoy had caused to be Built to annoy the Town, who
made open War upon it under the Protection of France. Beza being then above
fourscore years Old, made him a Speech; and the King received him so
Graciously, that the Catholics were Jealous. The King called him his Father: A
Title rarely used among the Reformed and their Pastors; but of which the Monks
are very Proud, and which they have in a manner appropriated to themselves
among the Catholics. It was therefore a great Offense to them, to give the same
Appellation to a Minister of the Heretics; and to him too, who of all the
Ministers since Calvin, had done most hurt to the Roman Religion, by his
Reputation, by his Counsels, and by his Works.

On the other side the Garrison having delivered up this Fort And it is success.
to the King, he restored it to those of Geneva, who rased it to the Ground
with all imaginable Expedition. The Legate which the Pope had sent to Trear of a
Peace between the King and the Duke, was enraged at this business. He
complained, and threatened, as if the Roman Religion had been thereby brought to
the Brink of certain Ruin. The Edicts which were made for Heretics, were never
worse received at Rome, then this little Accident. One might have said, that
Geneva had been a New Carthage, the preservation of which bereaved Rome of the
hopes of being the Mistress of the World. However it behooved to be pacified
after a fruitless Clamor; because 'twas to be wished, that the King were
removed farther from Italy, where the Neighborhood of the French always causes
some suspicion. He was brought to consent to an Exchange of the Marquisat of
Saluces for Bresse, the Country of Gex, Bugey and Val-romey, which the Duke of
Savoy not withoutsome regret surrendered to him. Those of Berne had made
themselves Masters The State of the Country of Gex.
of this Country, where the Neighborhood of this Canton had introduced betimes
the knowledge of the Reformed Religion. The Dukes of Savoy had tolerated it
there, with a Proviso for a time so long as they were Masters there, in
expectation that a Council would have determined the Controversies: But some
years after the End of the Council of Trent, they commanded all their Subjects
to submit to the Doctrine that had prevailed in that Assembly. This rigor did
not extinguish the Reformation in that little Country; And those of Berne
having made themselves Masters by Force of Arms, it was there so well
Established, that there were fewer Parishes in the Country of Gex, then places
where the Exercise of the Reformed Religion was Public. The Roman Religion was
only tolerated; and those few people that professed it, no longer Exercised it
with that Pomp that attends it where it is Mistress. The Reformed enjoyed all
the places, and applied the Ecclesiastical Revenues to their Use. They were in
possession of Houses and Churchyards. There was no Town but only that of Gex,
within whose Walls had not yet one Church.

This was the condition of this Country when it fell under the Dominions of
Henry the Fourth, who, as soon as he had taken Possession, gave the Government
of the Citadel of Bourg, Capital of Bresse, and the only place of Defense that
there was in those parts, to a Gentleman of the Reformed Religion. The Reason
of this Choice was, that he believed these places better secured to him by the
Reformed, then those he had given to the Catholics; in regard he did not look
upon the latter to be resolute enough to hold out against the Spanish Faction:
When as he was perfectly assured of the Fidelity of the other* and this was a
third thing that displeased Rome, which could no digest that a Man inaccessible
to all the Intrigues that are hatched beyond the Mountains, should be Master of
a Place so near Italy; chiefly because his Relgion was the Cause that he was
preferred before the Catholics. There was yet another, that the Pope could not
endure; to remove whom he was long very Importunate with the King: This was the
Governor of Chateau Dauphin; an inconsiderable Castle on the very extremity of
Dauphine, which a Reformed held, not only as Governor for the King, but also
by a Deed of Engagement. He had established his own Religion there, and a
Reformed Garrison. The Duke of Savoy exasperated the Pope upon this occasion;
for that this Castle incommoded him, and that he would fain have removed a Man
thence, that would not easily engage in his broils. Insomuch that this Trifle
made a great Noise at Rome, so that they appeared there sufficiently troubled
to see all Dauphine entirely, and a 11 or 12 strong places in particular, at
the Command of Lesdiguieres.

The Creation of New Employments in all the Jurisdictions of A New Creation of
Offices.
the Kingdom, even in the Parlaments which was one of the Expedients that Roni
proposed to Raise Money, may be looked upon as one Business of the Edict. These
New Creations ever Vex those who are in Possession of Old Employments, whose
Fees are made less considerable in retail, when the Number of Persons that
should share 'em, is Augmented. This is the Reason, that the Parliament of Paris
would have confounded these New Offices, with those out of which the King was
to gratify the Reformed, according to the Edict; one part of which was of a
Preceding Creation; and the other of the first Offices of Ancient Erection which
would become vacant by Death. The Parliament was desirous by that to lessen the
Number of New Offices. But that did not accommodate the Reformed, who were to
have the Places that were designed 'em given 'em Gratis, whereas the others
were to be Purchased Besides this confusion had been of no Advantage to the
King, who had partly lost by that the Fruit he expected from these New
Creations; which was the cause that he readily promised the Reformed, that
their Offices should not be comprehended in the Number of New Employments.

But the most important Assair of this Year, was the Execution of the Edict, to
which End Commissioners were sent into many Provinces. But the measures they
took were not alike* For there were some places where they did acquit
themselves, with the same exactness that was done in others. There were some
Provinces where they went from Town to Town, from Jurisdiction to Jurisdiction,
and where they Visited the Places, which ought to be delivered for their
Exercise therein, in Order to settle all things as close to their Commissions
as possibly they could. Others only went to the Capital Cities, contenting
themselves to receive the Petitions, the Pretensions and Objections of Parties,
without coming near the particular places where the Disputes arose to which
nevertheless they commonly sent Subdelegates. There were likewise some
Provinces to which they never went at at all. There were Places where the
Catholics were more scrupulous; others where they were more Moderate and
Tractable. There were some where the Reformed were Exact and Diligent, and
others where they did their business with a great deal of Negligence. Which was
grounded upon diverse considerations. They waited an approaching The Negligence
of the Reformed and their Prejudices.
decadency of the Roman Religion, as if they had had express Revelations: And
they doubted not that their Doctrine would make great Progresses in a little
time; for that they might Embrace it without exposing their Goods, their Lives
or their Hopes: As if there had been nothing to surmount but the Prejudices of
Interest and of Fortune, to the End that the Truths, of which they were
convinced, might become evident to all the World. This was the Reason that they
did not think it necessary to take their measures in many things, in which this
Happy Juncture might have been much more securely provided for. This thought
inspired 'em with another of vexing the Catholics a little, in placing
themselves, as far as the Edict would permit it, in those Places where the
Clergy were troubled to see 'em. This was one little Mortification which they
would have put upon 'em, in return of those many acts of Injustice and
Cruelties with which they had Treated them. This was the Cause that in some
places they had less regard to their own profit, that they might have the
pleasure of putting their Enemis to more Pain. A third consideration served as
a Foundation for their Negligence. They relied too much on the Integrity of
these who made 'em believe, that no interruption should be given to the
establishments once made; and as they were resolved to make no Attempt on the
Catholics, they were apt to believe that the Catholics would never consult to
disturb their Possession with Wranglings. In fine they imagined, that as these
settlements were made in the sight of the Catholics, and that the Grounds of
that Right which they had acquired were public and manifest to all the World,
the Children would never come to dispute what had been so Evident and Notorious
in their Fathers time. One or other of these Considerations cast the Reformed
in many places into a Negligence, common to those who believe that what they
once possess shall never be taken from 'em. Many were contented with the
notoriousness of the things as sufficient proof of their Possession, never
minding to have it attested by the Commissioners. Many were satisfied with the
Verbal or tacit consent of the Catholics, in the places where it was necessary
for the Establishment of their Rights. There were Bailliages where they had
forgotten to demand the deliverance of a convenient place, wherein to hold
their Public Exercises: Others where the demand having been made, it was not
pursued: Others where the demand appeared made for one place, and the Order
given for another: Somewhere the Rights were confounded, and that of the
Bailliage, for Example annexed to a Gentleman's Demesnes: Others that were
taken in places where there were so few of the Reformed, that they never did
'em any good: Others so inconvenient, that they were obliged to forsake 'em*
These little inadvertencies have given great Opportunities to the Injustice of
our time, where the Treachery of the Bigoted Cabal has given us to understand,
how necessary it was that our Fathers should have taken more exact Precautions
to have prevented 'em.

During this, the Commissioners behaved themselves on their part, with as much
Application as was expected from 'em. The Exactness of the Commissioners.
To Preserve or Establish a Right of Exercise, they made Inquiries and took
Informations; they took the Depositions of Catholic or Reformed Witnesses
impartially; they Examined all the Titles and Acts that could be produced;
either they or their Delegates came down to the places, when their presence
themselves was required by any one of the Parties; they summoned the Officers
of the places; they heard the Clergy themselves in their Pretensions and
Defenses. Of whom they had as many things to demand at least in many Places as
of the Reformed, and these Judges frequently received from one and ^'other part
large Papers: Upon which they were obliged to give several different Judgments.
The General Rules they followed, was to Examine the reciprocal demands upon the
Grand Maxim of the Edict; and which might well be called the Soul of all these
Concessions; to Wit, to Confirm or Establish As and altogether as they were, in
the Terms specified in the Articles of the Edict. They kept themselves so
exactly The Difficulty on the Edict of 1577. favorably taken off.
within the bounds of this Rule, that they gave the Reformed a great deal of
trouble upon the Exercises whose Right was founded on the Edict of 1577. The
Expression of which being a little Equivocal seemed to bound that Concession to
places where the Exercises had actually been made the 17th of September; a day
that happened on a Tuesday, on which were found but few Examples of Assemblies
for Acts of Piety. The Commissioners took no notice of the Proofs of the
Exercises made the Sunday before; they inquired precisely of this day, without
minding the other. Tho to judge of Terms by the Ordinary Style of Edicts, 'twas
only meant that the Exercise was Granted to the Reformed, in the places where
they had not begun it since that day; but which they had in some sort Peaceably
enjoyed before and till that day. There was the same strictness in the
Regulations which were Limited Exercises.
made for the Places, the Buildings, the Bells, the acquists of Places and all
the Dependances of the right of Exercise. There were therefore places where
they Established limited Exercises, as well for the Number of persons, as for
the Quality of the Acts of Devotion that might there be exercised. In some,
they suffered none but the Inhabitants of the Town and Jurisdiction to go to
the Assemblies. In other places the Number of Strangers was limited who were
permitted to be present. In others they were only allowed to meet to pray and
to sing Psalms without calling the Minister thither. In some 'twas permitted,
that a Minister should come and give the Lord's Supper four times a year. But
setting aside these little Diversities, which did not extend it self to many
places, their Orders agreed in General Liberties, conformable to the Articles
which spoke of the Nature of the Ezercise which was in hand to be Established.
These differences then were but an effect of the exactness of the
Commissioners, who would not extend the Rights beyond that which the Possession
had gained, nor abolish 'em under pretense that the possession did not give 'em
extent enough. Nevertheless they have served for opportunities in these latter
years, to condemn these imperfect Exercises, as if they had been ill grounded:
So that it had been happier for those of the Reformed Religion, if the
Commissioners had sometimes been pleased to transgress the Limits of their
Power:

One of the most remarkable parts of their Commission, was the delivery of
places called Places of Bailliage, 'Twas necessary Places of Bailliage.
they should be taken in those where another Right could not be presumed, for
the multiplying the places of Exercise as much as was possible. Besides it was
convenient to have 'em in the most considerable places of the Bailliage, where
there was some concourse of people, for the common benefit. To Mortify the
Clergy a little, they demanded of 'em, when they could, the nearest to the
Episcopal Cities, since they could not have 'em in those very Cities. They of
Nimes demanded the next place to Pont St. Esprit, or at V^lle N^uve d'Avignon,
that was no farther distant from Avignon then the breadth of the Rhone, thereby
to give the same Cause of discontent to see the Religion of his Enemies
exercised, at the very Gate of a City, of which he is the Sovereign, and where
some of his Predecessors have held their Sees* These different prospects were
the Cause why they did not obtain throughout the whole the most important
places, in as ample a manner as might have been desired.

The Dispute of Burying places occasioned more trouble, then Burying places.
the settlement of the places of exercise. The Clergy opposed almost through
the whole, the Liberty of burying in the Catholics Churchyards: And when the
Reformed took it of their own accord, they complained against 'em to the Kings
Justices or to the Parlaments, where they were always favored. A Gentleman of
the Reformation having caused one of his Children to be Buried in a
Parish Church of the Bailliage of Chartres, the Parliament of Paris made a
Decree, which Ordered that those should be informed against who were Named in
the Complaint which had been delivered, that prohibited Burying in the Churches
and Churchyards of the Catholics: But the Decree did not Order the Bodies of
such as were already buried to be taken up. The severity of the Canons
perplexed the Curates, because it would not permit that Service should be
Celebrated in the Churches where the Bodies of Heretics 1601.
were interred, unless they had first been reconciled. But the difficulty had
not been hard to remove, if the Spirit of contradiction would have given way to
the Spirit of Peace: Since that the Reformed accord to the Edict, being no more
to be Treated as Heretics, they ought to have been as well dispensed with, as
to the Rigor of the Canons, which deprived 'em of Sepulture in the Ordinary
places, as those which declared 'em incapable of all Employments, or which
condemned 'em to the loss of Goods and Life. By these means a great many people
had not been deprived of their Rights which they had acquired by Ancient
Foundations, nor had good People wanted the satisfaction of being buried in the
Sepulchers of their Fathers. But in regard this business every where occasioned
Suits; almost all the Difficulties were removed by Orders that matched the
Decree of Parliament. Nevertheless, when places were to be delivered to the
Reformed at the common expense, the reparations were not so uneasy as the
Clergy. As they had been ruined by the long Wars, they chose rather to partake
the Ancient Churchyards with the Reformed, then to be at the Charge of buying
New; which was the Cause that the Commissioners divided the Churchyards,
between the Catholics and the Reformed; and the part most remote from the
Church, was assigned to these for their Place; of Burial. There were places
where these Portions were not separated but by single Divisions. Others where
they were contented to dig a little Ditch: Others where they built some Wall,
to the end that they might give the less occasion of Scandal or Tumult, when
the Bieres of both sides met at the same time, or lest there should happen any
disturbance on one side or other, in performing the Ceremony. Nor was it not
only in the Places where the Reformed were in great Numbers, that these
distributions were made: 'Twas the same thing in the Provinces where there were
but few: And in Paris it self there was one part of a Churchyard, which was
called Of the Trinity; the other part of which was the common burying Place of
the Poor that died in the Hospital. Insomuch, that the Commissioners could not
be charged with having done any thing contrary to their Instructions, whether
it were in maintaining the Reformed in their Portions of their Churc-yards
which they had already, or allotting 'em New by their Orders; since, that in
the Face of the Court, of a Bishop and of a Parliament, there were seen
dividends as equal as those they had made in the Provinces. By this procedure,
conformable to the forty fifth Article of the particulars, such as it had been
drawn up at Nintes, this Article was tacitly reestablished in its first form;
and there was no scruple made to Publish it in this manner in the Printed
Copies of the Edict, because it was so put in practice.

It was impossible, that the Commissioners being to pass Appeals of the Or^^^^.
their Judgments in so many places, and upon so many things, should have the
good Fortune always to please all parties. 'Twas therefore, that there were
Appeals from each part, on which the King was to determine: But the Reformed
had almost every day the better in those Decrees; and there will be found but
very few Examples, where the Orders of the Commissioners have been corrected to
their prejudice; tho there are a great Number that redound to their advantage.
From whence two things may plainly be inferred: One, that the Commissioners had
rather have Executed the Edict in favor of the Catholics, then of the
Reformed: The other, that the King's Intention was, that the Articles of the
Edict should not be eluded by rigorous constructions, since that every time
occasion presented, he expounded 'em himself to the advantage of the Reformed,
by favorable extensions of what the Commissioners had too much contracted. But
tho the Commissioners had labored in the Execution of the Edict, during part
of this year and the following, there remained a great many things to be
executed. More especially there wanted many things in the principal part of the
Commission of those whose business it was to attend this Affair. That is to
say, to make all the Officers in the Provinces Swear to observe the Edict;
which could not be done in the places where the Commissioners had not yet been.
Wherefore the Reformed being Assembled again The Assembly of Saumer.
at Saumur, and fearing lest the Execution of the Edict should remain imperfect
in so important an Article, as also least there being no other Assembly on
Foot, to send about in order to its uniform Memoirs, they might lose many of
their Rights, by the unequal manner in which they would proceed in every place,
they were willing to continue this usual Remedy of all their Fears, and
Translate themselves to Lo^dun. But the King would never permit it; and sent
Orders to the Deputies, that were there, to separate themselves. At the same
time a National Synod was held at Gergeau, who sent an Express to the King,
beseeching him to permit the continuation of this Assembly: But nothing
prevailed; they must Obey and Dismiss themselves. Ever since the Month of March
they had received Order to do it; but they excused themselves as much as they
could. The Orders were renewed at the beginning of May; and were not fulfilled
till the last day of the same Month. It Is true, the King permitted another
Assembly at Saint Foy, for the 15th of October following, to the end, that
they might Name Deputies to reside near him, and to present him the Petitions
and Complaints which should be sent 'em from the Provinces. There were two
Interests so opposite upon the Subject of this Assembly, that it seemed
impossible to reconcile 'em. One was that of the King's, to whom they were
become suspicous, because of the Authority of the Lords, who were in a capacity
of acting something against his Service. The Other was that of the Reformed, to
whom they were necessary; for that in the Present State of Affairs there were
an Infinite Number of things, to be regulated by any other Method. The
Colloquies and the Synods not having Power to meddle with any but the Affairs
of Church Discipline, with the Inferior Policy of the Churches, with the
distribution of the Money which the King gave for their Ministers; another
Council was requisite to advise in matters of another Nature; for the execution
or observation of the Edict; for Reparation of the Breach of Articles; for the
Solicitation of the Suits which might arise on each side; for the Preservation
of Places, and a hundred other things, without which, the Edict might be daily
eluded by a Thousand Cavils. This Correspondence was mainly endeavored; for as
they desired to preserve it, that so they might be more secure from the
Attempts of their Enemies by their Union; so likewise their Enemies labored to
deprive 'em of means of effecting their mutual Defense. But there was an
inconvenience on both sides, to permit these Assemblies, because of the
Consequences; or to hinder 'em, because of the many businesses, which brought
the Deputies from all parts to Court, and exposed the Council to great
importunities, and have thrown the Reformed into injurious perplexities, and
insupportable expenses.

But the permission of having Deputies near the King in the General Deputie^*
Name of the Provinces, which was Granted 'em to take from 'em the pretense of
continuing the Assembly at Saumur, seemed to make amends for all. The Reformed
from all parts could send 'em Memoirs, on the Affairs that should happen. The
^xpence of their Maintenance was not great, because the King, who was not
troubled at their attendance upon him, took upon him to allow 'em a certain
Sum, which should be laid yearly on the Privy Purse. But because the Reformed
would bind 'em as well to their Cause by some Interest, they resolved at the
National Synod of Gap, that if the Deputies were not absolutely assured of
their allowances, what was wanting, should be raised, half on the Money that
the King gave to the Churches, and half on what he gave to the Garrisons. But
by little and little, that which was not Ordered, but by way of Succor, in
Case the Allowances were not sufficient, became Ordinary, and was converted
into an Augmentation of the Salaries of Deputies General. This Institution was
no burden to the Council, that could not be troubled with so few persons, with
whom all Affairs might be ended without Noise and Bustle; and who had nothing
to fear from their Intrigues. But this Innovation had almost absolutely ruined
the Assemblies, which had now no more pretense to Meet, since the Deputies
could supply the use of them, in all things which required their sitting. This
is the Reason why they were suffered no more but for the Nomination of
Deputies, which done they were Ordered to separate; and to oblige 'em to it:
Their Messengers were neither heard, nor their Papers ever Answered, till they
had separated themselves. However they kept up their Credit as long as they
could; and maintained themselves powerful enough, till the taking of Rochelle.

The first that undertook this Employment, were St. Germain and des Bordes,
Named by the Assembly of St. Foy for Difficulties o^^ ^ir Institution.
one year: But they were continued by the Synod of Gap, and kept this
Commission long enough. They would have joined to these Deputies, one of which
was chosen out of the Nobility, and the other of the Third Estate, a third who
was to be a Minister. But the Court that loved none of the Consistory, hindered
'em from sending any of those people, whom it esteemed untractable. Nor was
that difficult to be done, because 'twas judged that a Residence at Court was
not suitable to a Minister, who ought actually to abide near his Flock. The
Reformed would have limited the duration of their Commission to a Year; but the
King would have it to be longer. Both had their Reasons: The Reformed, under
color that the discharging them, whom they had kept at a distance from their
own Affairs, to attend the prosecution of the public business, would prevent
their Deputies from accustoming themselves too easily to the Court Air, if they
should stay there long. And the King who knew well, that the Charms of the
Court tamed the most fierce, would avoid frequent changes, as not willing to
see Affairs pass out of the Hands of a Deputy already taught and familiariz'd,
into those of a New Comer; whose first Movements would always be Brisk and
Severe. On the other hand, the short Service of Deputies was one Reason of
renewing the Meeting of Assemblies, as often as New ones were to be Named;
which was the Reason that the Reformed would change 'em so often; and that the
Council for the same consideration would have 'em serve longer. The Reformed
desired again, that the King would stand to their Nomination, and that he would
agree to those Deputies that they should appoint; because as they only were
concerned in the Affairs, which their Deputies were Ordered to Treat on, so it
was but just that they alone should be left to choose their own Procurators.
The matter passed thus at present: But not long after, the King would have 'em
name to him six persons, of which he would take two that best pleased him;
whether it were that he would have part in the Obligation of the choice, or
that he would be sure not to have in his Retinue, persons that displeased him.
He obtained likewise with a little difficulty and time, that the duration of
their Commission should be for three years. It seemed that this Institution
should have ceased as soon as the Edict was Executed. But because it was never
fully done, and that when good Provision was made on the one side, there was
presently some New breach of promise on the other to be repaired, this
Commission became ordinary, and lasted as long as the Edict. This was at the
time of the Assembly which was held four years after at Chatelleraud, that the
King to take off the Reformed from concerning themselves with Marshal de
Bouillon, permitted 'em to have frequent Deputies at the Court; and that the
time of their Service should be regulated, as well as the manner of naming 'em.
It Is certain, that this Deputation has been changed several times since the
Institution of it, to the time it was put down; and Leuis the thirteenth was
the Author of these changes. The first was, that having forbidden the Politic
Assemblies, to whom the Nomination of Deputies belonged, he Transferred the
Right to the National Synod, A^^ ^g^s in ^, N^* ^.
by a Brevet on purpose. This was in Truth no Novelty, because as much had
happened in the Reign of Henry the 4th, at the Synods of Gap and Rochelle. But
there was at least thus much of Novelty, that under Henry the 4th the Synods
did not meddle in this Affair but by way of Proviso, in expectation of a
Politic Assembly; whereas Levis the thirteenth made it the Synods business, and
would no longer hear of other Assemblies. The second Change was, that he
charged himself with the full Pension of the Deputies, when he had taken from
the Reformed all the Sums which his Father had Granted 'em, The Third was, that
he substituted a New Deputy by his own Authority, in the room of one of the
other two that died in the Interval of the Assemblies. It Is true, he writ to
the Provinces to consent to this Substitution: But they understood well enough,
that his entreaties were those of a King, that were as good as Commands. A
little after it became a Custom. The Fourth was, that the number of the
Deputies was reduced to one, because the vacancy of one of the two that was
Dead, was not supplied. The Fifth was, that the Commission became perpetual:
And the last was, that in the end, the Churches lost all the part that they had
had in the Nomination; the Right of which the King reserved wholly to himself.
So that, for near forty years the Reformed have had no other General Deputies,
but those whom the King has appointed 'em. This Abridgment is sufficient here:
But the sequel will give occasion of speaking more at large.

Few matters of Importance passed in the Synod of Gergeau, ^od at Gergeau.
where they only examined some Books of Reunion, which were Published under all
manner of Titles. They writ once again to Lesdiguiers for 17000 Crowns which he
kept back; but they received no more satisfaction then before. They Writ to
Casaubon to congratulate his Constancy in Religion, of which they had very much
doubted; but of which he had given assurances to the Synod. They forbad
Ministers to be the first Aggressors in Disputes of Controversy. It seemed by
the Measures that were taken in this Assembly, to hinder the Abuse of removing
Causes to the Chambres Miparties, or Chambers half Protestant, half Catholics,
that Litigious Cavils had made their advantage of their Institution. But what
was most remarkable of all that there passed, is that the Brevet for 45000
Crowns for the Payment of Ministers having been given to the Churches but three
years before, Roni was so little ^zact in paying his brethren, that there was
due to 'em the Arrears of this Sum for three years.

Some Months after the separation of the Synod, the King ^^.
Answered some Papers, sufficiently Large, that had been presented to him, of
which principal Articles were, that the Reformed in Dauphine were Taxed for the
places of their Churches and of their Churchyards; that in many places they
deprived their poor of the General Alms, and thrust their Sick out of the
Hospitals; that at Bourdeaux and Xaintes, the Ju^ats and Judges would have
seized upon the Money that was gathered for the poor at the Church-Doors; that
at Rouen they refused the Petitions presented in the Name of a Reformed Church,
Body, or Community; that at Orleans and elsewhere, they tendered to the Officers
at their Admission, Oaths, to live in the Roman Religion: That at G^rgeau the
King's Proctor had Deposed his substitute for the Sole Cause of Religion: That
at Lions the Chevalier du Guet would by Force accompany the Attendants at
Funerals, an^ exacted excessive Fees; and those who kept the Hospital of the
Bridge of Rhone, disturbed these Funeral Attendants as much as they were able.
Upon all which, they had all they could desire Granted 'em; to Wit, most severe
Prohibitions against continuing to do 'em the same Injuries. Nor were their two
last Articles less favorably Answered: By one of which the King was obliged to
preserve the Churches of the Country of Gex in the same State in which he found
'em, when he United it to the Crown; and the other, that the Reformed might
Traffic in all the Duke of Savoys Dominions, without fear of being disturbed
for their Consciences. The King promised to the Inhabitants of the Country of
Gex Liberty of Conscience, and the exercise of their Religion as to the Rest of
his Subjects. This was as much as to say, that he Granted 'em the Protection of
his Edicts, according to which the Roman Religion ought to be Re established
there, and that for the rest things should remain there, in the same condition
in which they were found: Because that was properly the General Rule for
Executing Edicts. In Effect he reestablished the Mass there in some time
after, and he sent the Baron of Lux on purpose to make this Re-establishment:
But he left the Reformed Churches in Possession of those Privileges which they
enjoyed when the Country was yielded to him. He referred the Reformed for the
other Article to the Fifty third of the particulars of the Edict, where what
they desired was entirely Granted 'em.

At that time there was a Great business a Foot at Rome, in which they would
fain have engaged the The Succession of England.
King. It concerned the Succession of England, which the Pope labored to have
settled in the Hands of a Catholie. There was in prospect a Prince of the House
of Parma; and a Church man was sent over into that Island with the Title of
Archpriest, to incline the Catholics of the Country to it. The King of Spain
would have gotten this Crown for himself, or for a Prince of his House; and
there were Writings dispersed wherein the Jesuits did Impudently maintain that
it was devolved to him. The Motive of this Intrigue was Queen Elizabeth's Age,
who in all probability 'twas thought could not live long. It wasnot known how
she would dispose of the Suucession: But it was well known, that she would
never leave it to a Catholic Prince. And 'twas feared, that the King of
Scotland her next Heir coming to the Crown, might be capable of doing a great
deal of hurt to the Roman Religion, if he had an Affection and Zeal for the
Reformed. He was yet but young, and as he had hitherto lived under a kind of
Guardianship, his Genius and his Inclinations were not yet known. But they
altered their measures, when they knew how to hit his Humor; and they carried
things so far, that they made use of him himself to endeavor the reducing of
England to its former Obedience to the Pope: But while they expected that
things should come to that, the King did not Relish the Intrigue. He gave his
hand to the project of reducing this Kingdom to the Catholic Religion; and
during the rest of his Life, he was the Mediator and confident of this design:
But he was not willing to aggrandize his Enemies by this change. The other
designs which he had in his Head did not require that there should be no more
Protestants in Europe.

Cha^illon the Admiral's Grandson, was taken off this year The Deuth of the
Grandson of the Admiral de Chatillon.
by a Cannon shot in Ostend, besieged by Archduke Albert. Never did a young
Lord give greater hopes. He was born for War; and among the good Qualities that
are necessary to a Commander, he had the knack to make himself beloved by his
Soldiers, whose Hearts and Confidence he had gained. It Is said, that he had so
great a Credit in the Army of the Stat^s, that Prince Maurice could not forbear
being Jealous. Nor was he of less Authority amongst the Reformed of France, who
loved in him Virtues equal to his Fathers and Grandfathers. He was continually
talking of their Actions, and aspired to no more then to imitate 'em. The most
Ardent of his desires, was that of being like his Grandfather at the Head of
the Reformed, and to fight one Battle for their Interest. His Merit made him
lamented by the King, when he heard the News of his Death. But when Courtiers,
who always speak of the Dead or Absent, what they durst not of people in a
capacity of revenging themselves, had drawn to the King what Picture they
pleased of the Ambition and the Designs of this young Lord, he took for a Sign
of Prosperity what immediately before he looked upon as a Subject of Grief. It
was in this The Birth of the Dauphin.
year too, that the Dauphin came into the World. His Birth gave great Joy to
all true French Men, who by that saw all the Seeds of War suppressed, which the
several pretensions to the Succession might have produced. But that did not
hinder the Spaniards from preparing all occasions of disturbance; nor prevented
from time to time the spreading of a Rumor, that the King having promised
Marriage to the Marchioness of Verneuil, there was a doubt whither the
Succession belonged to the Children of Mary de Medicis. There were some Spanish
Casuists that made it a Question whether the Dispensation was fairly obtained.
In the Low Countries some Preacher or other had the boldness to Preach in
favor of the Negative: And at diverse times Libels were dispersed about
concerning this matter. A Capucin who was suspected to have learned his Lesson
at the Court of Savoy, put off a thousand extravagancies on this Subject in
Italy and in Rome it self: But there was a stop put to the course of these
mischievous Intentions by the Authority of the Superior. In the mean time, as
the Birth of the Dauphin made all the World talk, La Riviere one of The
Prediction of La Riviere.
the King's Physicians, a great Astrologer and much possessed with Predictions,
Erected a Scheme of his Nativity; the King that gave a little too much heed to
these Vanities, either through his own Inclination, or by the Example of Roni
his Favorite, who gave much way to it, or by the Inducement of the Queen, who
was prepossessed, as almost all the Italians are; the King, I say, having
obliged him, notwithstanding several denials, to tell him his Judgment of this
Child according to the Rules of his Art, answered him half in Choler, that he
should Reign; that he should destroy what his Father had Established, that he
should scatter all that he had husbanded; that he should leave Posterity,
under* which all should grow worse and worse. The State which at this day the
Religion and the Kingdom are in, may make this Prediction to be Ranked among
those which make most for the Honor of Astrology.

But there were very dangerous Motions in the State, which were stirred up by
Foreign Intrigues. The Court was full of Male Contents which were there
engaged under diverse pretenses. Biron a Man of a Presumptuous Spirit and
without Judgment, was so deeply involved in 'em, that it cost him his Life. But
'twas believed, that the King was yet strong enough to quash this Conspiracy,
as long as he had the Reformed at his Devotion; this is the Reason that nothing
was wanting to engage 'em in the Party. They were admonished as by way Notice
given to the Reformed of a League made against 'em.
of Friendship, that the Peace of the State was the way to their Ruin; that
there was a powerful League concluded against 'em; seeing that the Peace of
Savoy was negotiated; that there was a Project laid for a kind of Croisade;
that the Catholic Princes had sworn it by their Deputies; that the Oath was
given upon the Eucharist by the Legate; that every one was Taxed at a certain
Sum, and a* certain number of Soldiers; that the League was to last till the
Protestant Religion was exterminated; that there were two Originals of this
Treaty Signed by the Pope, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Savoy; and that
that Duke had one in his Hands, which he offered to Communicate to the
Reformed. To this were added the greatest promises of security that could be
thought on, provided they entered into the League that was proposed to 'em.

This Advice was confirmed by that which one Brochard Baron gave to Marshal
Bo^illon, touching the Leagues Sworn against the Reformation. This* Baron* who
called himself the Nephew of Cardinal Baronius, boasted that he was sent by the
Pope to the Catholic Princes, to make 'em Sign the Project of New Cro^sade; and
before all things to have presented the Book of this Institution to the King of
Spain. He said, that the Instructions of those that were entrusted to engage
the Princes to a Protection of this League, recommended chiefly three means to
succeed in the Conversion of Heretics. The first was to institute Missions to
instruct those that were gone astray by good Sermons and Examples. The second
was to tolerate the Enterprises of Magistrates against the Liberties of
Heretics; and to make use of Politic Artifices and Pious Frauds, to take away
their Privileges. The Third was to use Force and Arms to reduce 'em. The
Jesuits business was to sow great Divisions between the Great ones and in the
Provinces: And great Liberality was to be shown to the first Converted, to
serve for a Bait to others. He aver'd, that there were five and twenty thousand
gained in England, that were able to bear Arms; and Ministers enough, to hope,
that the Reformation would be Condemned by the the Mouth of the very Ministers
themselves. He discovered great Designs that were laid against all the
Protestant States; and he pretended that a great part of the Nobility in
Germany were corrupted. I know not whence he had got the Mysteries he laid open
in his Discourses; but in the sequel the things he spoke, have been so exactly
practiced, and with so great success, that if his Relation may be judged by the
Event, rather then by the Picture he made of the Design, he must be looked upon
as one that spoke positive Truth.

This Baron not being rewarded as he expected, went into Germany and Holland to
put the same Ware off there; and if he did not persuade those who had a share
in the Governmente he found the people more apt to believe him. There were,
Preachers, who during the Siege of Rochelle, remembered his Discourse, and
applied it to the State to which the Reformation was reduced at that time in
France and Germany. To elude his Testimony, they would have had him pass for an
Incendiary, who had invented one part of what he said. Nevertheless, there was
not in all his parts, one story made at random. There was Erected a little
while since, at Th^non a Town belonging to the Duke of Savoy, a Friary for
Conversion of Heretics; and to render it more Venerable to the people, it was
called by the pitiful Name of The Congregation of our Lady of Compassion of
Seven Griefs. This New Society was no sooner set up, but they Writ to the
Catholic Princes, to invite 'em to enter into this League. D'Ossat did not deny
to the King, that they writ to the Pope. But he assured him, that the Pope
rejected this vain proposition, as capable of Uniting the Protestants for their
mutual Defense; which could not but endamage the Catholic Religion; and give a
fair Opportunity to the Turk to extend his Conquests over Christendom, during
the Divisions of Europe. This Prelate likewise accused the Duke of Savoy for
having abused the Commissions and Procurations of this Fraternity; on which the
Work of this imaginary League was built to serve him in his Designs to imbroyl
France. For the rest, he describes this Baron as a Man the most fickle and
inconstant that ever was. He had been a Priest, and during that time had
committed a Murder; he turned Protestant, it may be to avoid the punishment he
had deserved. He married; but being soon weary of a Marty'd Life, he returned
to the Roman Religion, which in the sequel he forsook a second time. This is
according to the Picture the Cardinal makes of him.

But tho there had been nothing to have been said against Baron, the Duke of
Savoy was too much suspected in point of Religion, to gain Credit among the
Reformed. He had not the Reputation of having too much Honesty; and if they
judged by what d'Ossat says of him, he was a Prince of a strange Character; A
General Assembly at Saint Foye.
and who had always some contrivance in his Head against the Peace of Europe.
In the mean time the Reformed were Assembled at Saint Foye, where they were
not satisfied with naming Deputies General; but where they Treated on many
things that regarded the General, and the particular of Churches. A little
while after there was a Paper presented to the King, the first Article of
which, after having Congratulated him upon the Peace of the Kingdom, and upon
the Birth of the Dauphin, demanded a Re-establishment of the Edict, in the
state it had been Granted at Nantes; and this demand was supported with a
pretense that the King had promised this Re-establishment as soon as the
Affairs of the Kingdom could permit it. The Chief of the other Articles
demanded that the Parlaments, which had not verified the Edict, but under
certain Modifications should be obliged to take 'em off: That some Immunities
should be Granted to Colleges, that the Reformed should found, in pursuance of
the Liberty which the Edict gave 'em. That the Counselors which were placed
there, should be obliged to serve in the Chambers of the Edict many years; and
that but half of 'em should be changed every time some Change was desired. They
were not Answered upon this Paper, till in the Month of March, in the year
following, and the Answers were first resolved on with the Deputies, and about
three Weeks after reported to the King, who approved of 'em. The first Article
was absolutely denied 'em, under pretense that there was no great matter in it;
that these little Changes were made for the common good, and to facilitate the
Execution of the Edict; that the Advice of the Principal of the Reformed had
been had as being called to the Deliberations that had been made upon these
matters; that they could not be revoked; and that there was no promise given to
do it. It may be judged by this, either that those promises were not made but
by people whom the King was not afraid to disown, as there are always at Court,
Managers of business, by whom she puts people in hopes of an event, for which
she has no mind to be answerable; or that the Reformed had taken for serious
promises, certain windy Words which were given 'em to put 'em in Heart, that
things might Change, and that then they would cause Restoration to be made 'em
of what the present Juncture constrained 'em, to suffer 'em to be deprived of
'em: Or that in fine the Reformed at the Court had invented these promises as a
secret, to keep off the Reproach of having so easily consented to these
Changes. Upon the other Articles they had all the satisfaction given that they
could desire: But because they asked the Liberty of continuing their Assembly,
under the pretense of the Difficulties the Parliament made of Executing the
Edict, the King declared in his Answers, that he had given such Orders for the
redress of 'em, that this continuation of the Assembly was needless.

But they set forth much larger Papers at Saint Foy; and without stopping long
at the repeated denial that the King had made to resettle the Edict in the same
State that it was settled in at Nantes; they did not forbear to demand again a
little after the same things by Retail which they could not obtain in Gross.
This is the reason that in demanding the Execution of the Edict throughout the
whole Kingdom, such as it had been verified at Paris; they had hopes, one day,
to repair those breaches which the Council had made therein: Insomuch, that
they seemed not to accept it but on condition. Many Provinces were Named in
these Articles, to which the Court had sent no Commissioners; others where they
had not been but in the Capital Cities; many particular Places, where the
Exercise was not granted but under certain Restrictions, as I have already
observed. They complained, that in judging the Right of Possession acquired by
the Edict of 1577. they limited themselves strictly to the 17th of September,
having no regard to the Proofs of the Exercise that was had in the same month
before and after that day; if it had not been likewise proved that it was had
precisely upon that day. This almost reduced the Reformed to a Nonplus, and
made an illusion of this Right, because that the 17th of September fell that
Year on a Tuesday, a day wherein the Reformed could not have had their Public
Exercises but in a kind of Hazard. It was demanded, that in the places where
the Commissioners Named the Kings Judges for their Sub-Delegates, those Judges
should be obliged to take an adjoined Partner of the Reformed, whom the
Reformed themselves should appoint to labor diligently together, and Scot free
in the Execution of the Commissioners Orders. They complained, that in many
places the Catholics would not suffer the Reformed to Inhabit: That they drove
the Tradesmen out of certain Towns: That they would not allow 'em as
Journey-men in their Shops: That they spoke Injurious things to 'em unpunished,
when they went to their Exercises: That the Preachers in their Sermons, The
Advocates in their Pleadings, took the same Liberty, without being repressed.
That the Royal Judges in many places did not do Justice, in the Abuses
committed their Persons. That in many Diocesses they caused 'em to be Enrolled,
and put certain marks on their Houses, to distinguish 'em from those of the
Catholics: That wherever there were yet any Colleges of Jesuits in the Kingdom,
that is to say, in the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Toulouse and Bourdeaux,
they had found out another manner of distinction, causing the Houses of the
Catholics to be marked with the Cross, or Garlands of Flowers, to the end that
those might be better taken notice of that wanted such Ornaments: That at
Vervins they put a Minister out of the Town, who traveling that Road arrived
there upon Easter Day; and that they refused so much as to give his Horse
Stable-Room. 'Twas a Complaint that in several places the Judges hindered 'em
from Building Churches, tho the Exercise were there permitted: That in many
others, that were Named, the Exercise likewise was hindered, either through the
opposition of the Lords of the Places, or by the Orders of the Commissioners.
It was reported upon this occasion, that at Aubenas, where the Marquis of
Montlaur committed a Thousand Violences, tho the Commissioners had caused the
Steeple, the Bell and the Churchyard to be Surrendered to the Catholics, and
left the Townhouse to the Reformed for their Exercises, the Jesuits had built
a Chapel against the Wall, through which they had made a hole, that they might
see all over the place; that they caused a Bell to Ring during the Exercise;
and that they had set up a Cross over the Entry. It was demanded, That the
Lords might enjoy the Right of their Precincts and Jurisdictions, and have
their Exercise free therein, although they were enclosed in Episcopal Towns;
and that the King should forbid any farther searching in Booksellers Houses for
Books of Religion, at Rouen, Bourdeaux, and elsewhere, and seizing upon 'em,
tho not exposed to Sale. 'Twas Remonstrated that in many Colleges they had
refused to admit the Regents and the Scholars, for the sake of their Religion
only: That in many places the Reformed had no Churchyards: That to avoid the
Inconveniences of Funeral Attendance in the Night, and which exposed the
Reformed to a Thousand Affronts, from which they could not Guard themselves,
they ought to be permitted to Bury in the Day. To this were added Complaints
against several Curates, who had caused diverse Bodies to be dug up again, in
the very places which had been assigned to the Reformed for their Burial-places
before the Civil Wars; of which they demanded leave to inform. But above all,
they aggravated the Outrage done to the Body of a Lady by Cardinal de Sourdis,
Archbishop of Bourdeaux, a Man the most Passionate and most Rash of his time,
and who perplexed himself in all sorts of Affairs with the least consideration.
He ordered the Body to be taken up Eighteen Years after it had been Buried, and
made the Bones to be thrown into the Highway.

There was a long Train of Articles that concerned the Chambers of the Edict or
Miparties; and by their diversity it may be observed that the Catholics would
have subjected these Chambers to the Parlaments, and have made 'em a kind of an
Inferior Jurisdiction, whereas they ought properly to have been Little
Parlaments, which having nothing to do with those of which they were Members,
but that they were composed in part of Judges taken out of those greater
Bodies, had the same extent of Jurisdiction and Privileges. These Articles then
required, that the Six Counselors of the Parliament of Paris, and the Three of
the Parliament of Rouen, might be admitted all together into the Chambers of the
Edict, because of those Acts of Injustice that one alone could not hinder: That
the Invasions of the Parliament of Toulouse upon the Jurisdiction of the Chamber
Established at Castres, of which Examples wholly new were produced, might be
repressed. That the Reformed Counselors that served at Rouen in the Chambers
of Inquests, might judge of Clerical Privileges, and of Crimes of which the
Ecclesiastics were accused; That the Chambers of the Edict might take
Cognizance of all Causes where the Reformed should be Parties; as also of
Causes relating to Benefices in Possession, of Tithes, of Ecclesiastical Rights
and Demains; of Criminal Causes where the Ecclesiastics were Defendants: That
there should be an Expedient found to Protect the Reformed from the severity of
the Parlaments of Toulouse, of Bourdeaux and Grenoble, from which no Justice
was to be expected, in Affairs the Cognizance of which was taken away from the
Chambers: That in Causes relating to a pretended Ecclesiastical Fund, the
Chambers might have power to examine the Nature of the Fund, to retain the
Cause, if the Fund was not of the Quality pretended: That the Affairs of the
Reformed against the Ecclesiastics, in some Parlaments where the Judges had
their Children possessed of Benefices and Church-Employments, should be brought
before the Parliament of Paris, or the Grand Council: That the Chambers should
take Cognizance of the Affairs of the Reformed concerning Hospitals: That they
should be allowed the Cognizance of Affairs of Subsidies and Accounts given to
the Parlaments of Rouen and Provence, in Causes where the King was not to
Intervene, and where only his Farmers were to be dealt with: That Matters of
Corporation-Government, where the Reformed were Parties, should be sent back to
the Chambers of the Edict, when they demanded it: That the Chamber of Grenoble
might give Audience with open Doors; and that the Parliament should admit
Advocates of the Reformed Religion: That the Orders of this Chamber might be
executed in Provence without demanding Pareatis: The Conclusion of a peremptory
Warrant, like our Hereof fail you not.
That in each Bailliage an Office should be Erected, for which the Patents
should be given at the Nomination of the Reformed, empowring 'em to do whatever
concerned the Edict, and the Execution of it, because that in Normandy, and
other parts, the Parliament refused Pareatis's for the Execution of Decrees of
Council, Letters Patents, and other Acts of the same Nature: That at Paris
should be Created a Substitute to the Advocate-General, who should be of the
Reformed Religion: That removing of Causes to the Grand Council should not be
granted to the prejudice of the Chambers: That the Causes of Presidents and
Counselors should be kept in the Chambers where they served, without being
constrained to go Plead at the nearest Chamber: That Causes should not be
removed under pretense of Kindred which the Parties should have in the
Chambers: That the Exceptions should be Judged there, before the King gave his
Letters of Removal: That there should be a Fund raised for the Maintenance of
the Sessions of Vacations in the Chambers, as for those of Parlaments: That the
Commissioners of Registers in the Chambers of Castres and Nerac should be half
Papists, half Protestants: That the Parlaments should not oblige the
Counselors which they sent to serve in those Chambers, to Judge according to
certain Rules, that should too much limit the Jurisdiction: That in the
Criminal Instructions to Parlaments, Reformed Assistants should taken in, such
as the Parties should agree upon, or who should be Named ex Officio, if the
Inquisitors were Catholics.

There were other Articles which spoke of Employments. There was a Complaint
that the Catholics held Contests with the most Ancient Counselors upon the
point of Precedence; and that at Paris, upon the Request of the
Attorney General, those of the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion had
informed against Mol^, Possessed of Presidents place. There was a General
Regulation demanded, conformable to the Declaration which the King had Verbally
made on many particular Affairs touching the Right of admitting indifferently
to Consulships, and other Elective places, without distinction of Religion,
those who should be called thereto by ordinary means, Ancient and Accustomed.
The Reason of this demand was, That the Reformed being the strongest in almost
all the good Towns of Guyenne and Languedoc, and persons capable of these
employs being no where to be found but amongst them, it happened that they
always filled the most Honorable places, if they were given according to the
Ordinary Forms, to those who should be judged worthy by the plurality of
Voices: On the contrary the Catholics would deprive the Reformed of this
advantage; and obstinately persisted almost every where, that there might be an
equal Division of these Places between Papists and Protestants. In which they
buoyed themselves up by the Example of certain Treaties, which had been made in
some places before the last Edict, that equally divided the Consulships between
the Reformed and the Catholics. But there arose daily Lawsuits upon these
opposite pretensions, which being carried to the Council either directly, or
upon the Partitions that happened in the Chambers called Miparties, engaged the
Commonalty in long Disputes and Ruinous Expenses.

There were yet other Articles that concerned the places which the Reformed had
in possession; in which it was demanded that the Catholic Inhabitants should be
obliged to contribute to the reparation of the Walls, and to the charge of the
Court of Guard. 'Twas likewise demanded, that certain Fraternities of Penitents
that swarmed in the Kingdom, and who turned the Austerities of Mortification
into a Pious Masquerade should not be reestablished in the Towns of Surety; as
it had happened in some places, where the Fraternity A Sect ^^ people that beat
themselves twice a day and once a night
des Battus was restored, by Virtue of an Order made upon a Petition. There was
a Complaint of some Castle which a Catholic had begun to Fortify, to incommode
some Neighboring place; and it was demanded that the Fortifications might be
demolished.

There were others again that concerned particular Cases. There was a complaint
that in many places, when the Reformed had been Fined, the Judges to vex 'em,
declared the Fines applicable to the support of Covents, or of Catholic
Churches: And the States of Languedoc made 'em contribute to Gratuities that
were raised upon the Province for the Ecclesiastics, or for the Mendicant
Monks: That at Bourdeaux and other places they would not receive the Petitions,
or the complaints of the Reformed, under the Name of an Agent, or an Advocate
of their Corporation: That they had denied the Assistance of Ministers to the
Condemned; and that they have been forcid to be accompanied to the place of
punishment by the Monks: That they have rated the Ministers for the King's
Taxes, as also for their Salaries. The King was Petitioned to permit the
Inhabitants of the County of Marle, that had no place of Exercise within eight
Leagues of 'em, to meet in the Jurisdiction of a Reformed Gentleman, tho he was
not resident there: And they begged of him to obtain for his Subjects that
Traded in Spain, the same Liberty of Conscience that was allowed there to the
English, to the Scotch, to the Danes and to the Germans. The occasion of this
Address was, that a certain Man called Pradilles of Montpelier going to Spain,
to recover a Sum that was due to him, the Inquisition caused him to be
Arrested; condemned him to the Amend Honorable; to be kept in Prison a year
and a day, and to the Confiscation of all his Goods.

All these Articles remained a long time in the Hands of the An Ignominious
punishment so called.
Council, who kept 'em till the Month of August 1602. They were variously
Answered: Some purely and simply Granted, others Extended and Amplify'd: Others
absolutely refused; others Granted in Part, and partly refused. There were a
great many on which the Council took time to consult the King's Advocates, to
give Orders according to their Advice: Others where the King sent back the
Parties concerned to redress themselves before him by way of Petition: Others
where he demanded to see the Decrees of Court, and Acts wherein they were
mentioned: Many wherein he reserved himself the Power to order what he thought
good. But in General there was in all the Answers, a temper of Favor and
Equity, which made the Intentions of the King appear openly, and that plainly
showed, that without Disguise or Equivocation, his meaning was that the Edict
should be observed, and that the Difficulties that arose upon the Execution of
it, should be favorably expounded. This favorable and equitable Mind of his
appeared above all, in the Orders he gave for the Execution of the Edict, in
places where it was not yet done: In those which he sent to the Judges and
Officers, to enjoin 'em to let the Reformed live in all places, without being
molested: In the explication of the Privilege of the Edict of 1577. which he
thought fit should be applied to all the places where the exercise had been
held during the Month of September, without stopping precisely at the
seventeenth of the Month: In the prohibition of the Inrollments, and the
seditious Marks that were put on their Houses: In that of speaking injuriously
of the Reformed in their Sermons or Pleadings: In that of searching the
Booksellers Houses: In many Articles that concerned the Jurisdiction, the
Dignity or the Privileges of the Reformed Counselors at the Parliament of
Paris, of Rouen and Grenoble; or the Jurisdiction of the Chambers called
Miparties, and the execution of their Judgments. In the Declaration of his Will
upon the indifferent admission of the Reformed and Catholics to Consulary
Employments, according to the customary Forms, without distinction of Religion,
or limitation of number: In the extension he gave to the Right of Exercise,
that the Commissioners had agreed to certain places with Inconvenient
Restrictions. In like manner there were many oaths, where the Reformed as in
the preceding obtained all they could reasonably demand, pursuant to the Terms
of the Edict, which was to be the common Rule of their pretensions and their
Rights. Those that were refused 'em were only either the same in particular,
which they could not obtain in the whole, or such as Treated of things, for
which there were specious Reasons not to grant 'em. This observation discovered
the King's Integrity and Exactness; who, that his Edict might be the better
observed, Solemnly decided the difficulties that concerned execution of it, as
soon as they arose: And it appeared by the same consideration, that it was
unjust to Renew and Enlarge these difficulties in our days, since that in the
time when they were first invented and raised, they had all been decided. These
same decisions ought to be so much the more respected, in that they were given
by a King who knew what he meant by each Article of his Edict: In a time when
he saw things near at hand, and could judge of 'em with knowledge of the Cause.

It is evident, That since they were as ancient as the execution of the Edict
it self, and pronounced upon the difficulties which rose from the Execution it
self, they ought to be taken for the Rule of well understanding it, and the
true Interpretations of the intentions of the Author. All the World knows, that
when there are any difficulties in any Law, there is no body can better resolve
'em than he that made 'em.

But these good Intentions of the King did not hinder, but that 1602.
there were several Rumors raised, to fill the Reformed with fears and
jealousies, on purpose to dispose 'em to an Insurrection. 'Twas spread abroad,
that the King was going to retrench two thirds of their allowances; that they
should have no more particular Pensions of him; that he would no longer
continue 'em in places of Trust; that he would give 'em no more employments,
without inserting in the Pattents the Clause of being Catholics. But these
Artifices took with no Body. They beheld likewise without any concern the
Flight of Marshal the Duke of Bouillon, who was thought to be involved in the
Conspiracy of Marshal du Biron. And indeed the Duke Transported by his
Discontents, was engaged a little too forward in those Intrigues. Tho his
design was not to give the King any disturbance but he would have removed Roni
from the management The Disgrace of Marshal de Bouillon.
of Affairs where he had got too great an Authority. This Favorite finding
himself held up by his Master, abused and injured all the World without Fear
and Wit; under pretense of his Husbandry, which flattered the inclinations of
the King, he made all those uneasy who would fain have had to do with a more
liberal Prince. The Duke had let the King know, that Roni's Credit was the
pretense of the Malcontents: Neither had Roni failed to do the like by the
Duke, which forced him to fly the Kingdom, after the Death of Biron, left like
him, he might have lost his Head upon a Scaffold. The King would fain have had
him left himself to his Discretion; and he gave great assurances of showing him
favor, provided he would freely confess his Fault. But the Duke would never
trust him: Whether his Conscience made him fearful of his safety; or that he
feared Roni, whom he knew able to do any thing, when he could conceal a Crime
under pretense of serving the State, or that both these Reasons together
augmented his distrust. But that his Innocence might be cleared of the
Accusations that were formed against him, he presented himself voluntarily
before the Chamber of Castres, under whose Jurisdiction he pretended to be,
because of his Territory of Turenne: And he writ to the Court to demand his
dismission: In which he derogated from the Privilege of Dukes and Peers, whose
Causes are of Course referred to the Parliament of Paris. The Chamber gave him
an Authentic Act of his Submission; but because the King's Counsel took no
Notice of it, he found himself no longer safe in the Kingdom; and therefore
passing through Geneva, he retired into Germany, where he staid some years
before his Peace was made.

During his absence, almost all the Protestants Writ in his behalf. He gave 'em
to understand, that Religion was the principal occasion of his Persecution; and
he alleged Reasons which might persuade it. There were many others, said he,
that had a greater share in the Conspiracies then they pretended he had:
Nevertheless they chose to draw up an Impeachment against him, tho he strongly
denied to have been concerned in it, and that they had no charge against him.
Which could not proceed but from the difference that Religion put between him
and the rest, to whom they said nothing. But neither his Reasons, nor all the
Credit he had in France, could make his Case pass there for a Case of Religion:
And the Reformed kept themselves within the bounds of Intercession only.
Foreigners that wrote in his behalf, did the same; and only prayed that their
Zeal for Religion might not overruled their Justice in this Case. Queen
Elizabeth, who had a great esteem for this Lord, was the only person that
pleaded for him in another Tone. She excused him by her Letters as much as she
could, and cast all the accusations that were raised against him upon the
hatred of his Religion. The King dissembled the discontent that these Letters
gave him: But he appeared incensed at the Synod and the Polic Assemblies for
concerning themselves in the Affairs of the Duke: And he showed openly, that he
took in ill part the Protection, which it seemed, The Chamber Miparti had given
him, receiving his Petitions and retaining his Cause. At the end he continued
inflexible to all the Entreaties that were made him at home, or from abroad.

But if this Affair occasioned no more Tumult, the King's severity to the City
of Rochelle produced no Effect, that much more extraordinary. An Assembly held
at Rochelle like a kind of Petty State, had established a certain Right, which
was called the A Paper containing the particular Rights or Customs due to the
King.
Pancarte. This Right was to be suppressed at the term of some years: But the
King's Farmers continuing to raise it after the time expired, it caused diverse
disturbances in the Provinces. Many great Towns opposed this exaction by open
force; and Rochelle among the rest committed some violences; but was forced,
like the rest to submit it self Sedition at Rochelle.
to the King's pleasure. She received Roni himself, accompanied with twelve
hundred Horse within her Walls, and all the Interest she had in the party could
not hinder, but that the rest of the Reformed remained in their Obedience.
There was nevertheless among 'em particular persons, full of suspicion and
mistrust, who feared that the King had some hidden designs against 'em: And
others that foresaw by the Attempts that were made, that the Public Liberty was
in danger of being oppressed. La Trimouille, Free and Bold, spoke on this
occasion in such a manner, as made him be looked upon as very obnoxious at
Court: Marshal de Bouillon was formidable by means of his Intrigues, although he
was absent; and du Plessia incensed by the Injury which he pretended to have
received from the King at Fontainbleau, was as much suspected as the rest. They
were afraid so much the more, in that, 'twas well known that their distrusts
were not without some Grounds. There was at the Court, and in the Council it
self, a Cabal The Spanish Cabal in Council presses the Destruction of the
Reformed.
entirely Spanish, who were enlivened by the Intrigues of the Council of Spain,
and by those of the Court of Rome. This Cabal moved all sorts of Engines to
engage the King to destroy the Reformed: And after having used the direct
means, they took indirect and remote, to bring the King to it, of which he was
not aware. For that Reason it was, that they vigorously pressed the Repeal of
the Jesuits; that they had already formed Projects of an Alliance between
France and Spain; that they caused it to be loudly spread abroad, that at the
same time that there was a Dauphin born in France, there was an Infanta born to
the Catholic King; as if this occasion had been a stroke of Providence, to
oblige these two Crowns to Unite themselves by the Marriage of these two
Children, for the Destruction of Heresy* Taxis, Ambassador of Spain, pressed
the King incessantly to extirpate the Heretics of this Kingdom, and to give
that as an evident Sign of the sincerity of his Conversion to the Church of
Rome. They say likewise, that this Ambassador having spoken to him one day, in
Terms that offended him, this Prince Answered him, that he wondered that they
should go about to force him to destroy a people, who had done him good
Service, and who, tho they held Errors which the Church Condemned, yet at least
Adored Jesus Christ, and believed him the Son of God, while His Catholic
Majesty tolerated in his Territories the Mohammedan Sects, whose Religion was
nothing but a Complication of Blasphemies against Christianity. The King made
this Answer in such Terms, as by his pronouncing 'em seemed to imply a
necessity of doing that in France against the Reformed, which the King of Spain
had done at home against the Moors: Insomuch, that Taxis taking him in that
sense, only replied to the King, that he beseech'd him to be mindful of his
word. 'Twas thought that this was the first motive for the Banishment of those
unhappy people: And that Taxis having given an account of his Discourse with
the King upon this Subject, the Council of Spain had as soon formed the design
of Persecuting those miserable Creatures. But it may likewise be believed, that
this design was formed a long time since. That Taxis who well enough knew it,
laid hold on the occasion, and would have made that pass for an effect of the
Zeal of the King his Master, which was but an effect of his Policy. Discretion
advised to rid himself of these people, whose inconstancy and Infidelity caused
every day great troubles.

Not but that Spain had really a design to destroy the Reformed in France. It
was necessary for the Projects that he had laid, and that they should be strong
enough to render themselves formidable. But it was also necessary, that they
should not be With a Prospect to divert the King's Forces by a Civil War.
at peace, to the end, that they might give a diversion to the King's Forces,
which might hinder him from giving succor to Foreign Protestants; because the
House of Austria hoped easily to destroy 'em, if they could deprive 'em of the
Protection of France. The Council of that House, which at that time contained
the most profound and most refined Politics of Europe, and which at that time
had the Jesuits on their side, had already moved a long time toward the same
Mark, without losing sight of it: And they kept themselves fixed to the same
design about thirty years, with hope of approaching success. But the divisions
of the Reformed, the good Fortune of Louis the thirteenth, the Prosperity of
Gustavus, and the Intrigues of Cardinal Richlieu overthrew all his Projects,
and subrogated, if I may so say, France to the pretensions that this Powerful
House had to the Universal Monarchy. It was then the only drist of the Council
of Spain, to set the King to handy blows with the Reformed, while they labored
to set up a Catholic King in England, to subjugate the United Provinces, and to
Ruin the German Protestants. 'Twas believed, that it would require so much time
to destroy the Reformed, that Spain would have Leisure to execute her Grand
Projects: Nor would she be wanting to employ her Money and her Intrigues, to
prevent that Parties being too soon oppressed; which may be judged by what she
did in the Reign of Lewis the thirteenth. At least this Civil War would embroil
the King with the Foreign Protestants; which was one of the prospects of Spain,
because without their Alliance she believed France could not hurt her, nor the
Protestants resist her. This is the Reason why all the other Projects having
failed, and the Death of Biron having dissipated the most dangerous
Conspiracies, there remained no other Wheel to be set a going to trouble the
Kingdom, then to make the Reformed take up Arms, if it were possible. To
succeed in it, Taxis on one side endeavored to render 'em suspected to the
King, in representing 'em as become his Enemies, since they believed him a
Catholic in good earnest: And he added as boldly as if it had been true, that
they had often desired the assistance of Spain to begin the War. On the other
side, he spread among the Reformed (...) of Suspicious and P^ars between the
Reformed
a thousand Rumors of Leagues that were making against 'em; and he made 'em
always believe, that the King had gone a great way in these Combinations, to
the end that he might alienate the Reformed from him, by a distrust.

He said too much to be believed. The King knew well enough how he ought to
take the Counsels that came from Spain; and the Reformed well knew, that the
true Interest of their King was, to preserve 'em. Every one knew, that as he
had Prospects altogether opposite to those of the House of Austria, so it was
as necessary that he should maintain the Protestants at home and abroad, as it
was necessary for that House to suppress 'em or destroy 'em. Nevertheless, as
Men are subject to deceive themselves, when they pretend to judge of the
Interests of Princes, who having their Passions, or their Weaknesses like other
Men, are often ignorant of, or quit their true Advantages, for other imaginary
designs, they who amongst the Reformed were in reputation of great Prudence,
were of Opinion that they should provide against* uncertain accidents. They
believed, that 'twas better warding off a Thrust with what force soever made,
when a Man is on his Guard to receive it, then when he does not expect it: And
that it is but a Weak excuse in Politics, and which can never repair the
mischief of a too great security, to say, I never believed it. This is the
Reason that there were some who proposed to put themselves under the Protection
of King James the first Queen Elizabeth's Successor: But the Weakness of this
Prince which soon discovered it self; the Love of the Reformed for their King,
and the firmness he showed in his Design to preserve 'em, dissipated these
useless propositions.

He talked freely of the Affection he had for the Protestant Party: And it may
be, he talked too freely for a King who had great Designs, who ought to have
said nothing which might discover 'em to those whose Interest it was to oppose
him. He called those of this Profession his intimate and approved Friends; he
confessed that it was not safe for him to renounce their Alliance; that that
would but too well Fortify the party of his Enemies, in weakening his own; that
he and the Protestant Party had mutually occasion for one another. He testified
likewise, that his Heart could not endure the thought of Per^ecnting the
Reformed, when he called to mind, that they had assisted him with all their
Power, when he was Attacked on all sides. It was not only to the Reformed of
the Court that he spoke thus: But he said likewise, yet more to the Catholics;
and one time among the rest in the presence of many Lords, among which there
was none but Roquelaure that was not Bigoted; he made a long Discourse of the
Services that the Reformed had done him. He testified, that he had ever found
'em Constant and Faithful; that they had often hazarded their Lives for his;
that for this cause he would give 'em an equal share of his Love and Bounty;
that Rochelle, Bergerac and Montauban had always been places of Refuge to him,
where none ever dared to Attack him; that apparently God made use of 'em in the
time of the League to save his Life; that he loved 'em for this Reason, although
sometimes they were somewhat faulty; and that he gratified 'em every year with
something, for their Fortifications and for their Colleges.

When these Words were related to the Reformed, they fetched Tears into their
Eyes; they gave a new Vigor to the tenderness That the assurance of being
b^belov'd by the King kept 'em in Peace.
which they ever had for their Protector; and they expected from him yet
greater Actions, then the expressions were obliging. It Is the greatest
Privilege of a King who holds his Subjects by the Heart, that he is assured of
'em when he pleases, and that to disperse all the Jealousies they could have of
him, he is obliged to no greater expense then a few flattering Words. He never
loses the Fruit of the tender expressions that he makes use of, and the Hearts
prepossessed with the Love of him, believe yet more then is told 'em. But as
the King feared la Trimouille, who besides the General Credit he had in the
whole Party, and the share he had in the Foreign Intrigues, as Brother-in-Law
to the Prince of Orange and Marshal de Bouillon, was also very powerful in
Poitou, by the places he held, by the great Number of Nobility that paid him
Homage, by the Neighborhood of Du Plessis, who was become formidable since he
had been injured, because he was a Man of Brains, and Governor of a good
Place, and in fine, by the great Number of Reformed that were in that Province.
The King therefore to Counterpoise this Power, gave the Government to Roni, who
having Roni is made Governors of Poitou.
the money and the Authority, could easily break the measures of those, with
whom the Court was dissatisfied. He did, it may be, more then was hoped; and la
Trimouille did not live long after this Favorite was Established in the
Province.

But that did not happen till toward the latter end of the The Death of Queen
Elizabeth.
year; and before the King had lost his good Sister Elizabeth Queen of England;
and the Prince that succeeded her, being by that the most Powerful of all the
Protestants, it was of great Consequence to know him, and to prevent him, and
to see how far his Alliance might be depended on. Roni was Employed in this
Commission, and went over to England, to see what might be hoped for from him.
He found this Court quite changed. They durst not there speak of Elizabeth,
whose Memory the people Adored: And King James the first would not suffer 'em
there, to mourn for that Princess. Roni had Orders not to Communicate the
King's designs to him, if he found not his Temper inclined to assist him, or
capable of great things. He only Renewed a Treaty of Alliance, which hindered
not the English from presently making another like it with Spain. But upon the
whole he came back with a bad Opinion of the Affairs of England; and time made
it appear, that this new King would be no great help to the other Princes of
Europe. For he was Fearful, Irresolute, a Dissembler, Occitant and Scrupulous.
He loved not to talk of Business; and he suffered himself to be Governed by two
or three of his Council. His Wife was Imperious and Bold; and he had not
Courage to Command her. He was more delighted with Contemplation then Action;
and he loved Theological Disputes better then War. Hunting was his only
Passion; and after he had taken the pleasure of it in the Morning, with a
Violence that tired all his people, he slept all the Afternoon. It was a great
complaint during his Life, that instead of endeavoring to break the Bonds that
the House of Austria prepared for all Europe, he lost his time in studying
Theology, and that he almost never remembered that he was a King. He thought to
undo the United Provinces, by the disturbances he Created there: And tho he had
given occasion by that, to Assemble the Synod of Dordredcht against the
Remonstrants, he mingled so many politic Intrigues with those matters of
Doctrine, that we are but imperfectly obliged to him for the Sage Decisions of
that Assembly. The Heat of Disputes, and the Animosity of Parties did more
Hurt, then the Judgment of the Synod produced good Fruit and Schism remained
after the Decision. This Prince Writ a Book concerning the Power of Kings, upon
the occasion of an Oath which he had exacted of his Catholic Subjects: But this
Work served for no more, then to show the little Account the Catholics made of
the Author. It was not looked upon in Spain; 'twas burnt in Florence. The
Inquisition at Rome put in the Number of Prohibited Books; 'twas ill received
in France by the Catholics, and the King forbad it should be Translated or
Printed. 'Twas only at Venice where the Reading it was not prohibited. These
Qualities acquired him the Title of Captain of Arts, and Clerk of Arms: And the
Spaniards to make him out of Conceit with France, endeavored to persuade him,
that it was Henry the 4th who had given it him. Charles his Son had no
Inclination to the Spaniards, but he was Weak and Unconstant: Whereas the Queen
was a Spaniard in Affection, and inclined her self to the Roman Religion; so
that she wanted but a little of draying her Husband and all England after her.
Breach of promise to the Edict.


In the mean while, the Edict was not carried on in France, in a manner so
Uniform and Sincere, but that there was occasion every day to make new
Complaints. This is the Reason why the Deputies General presented a Paper to
the King, wherein were contained some that were important enough. They took
notice of an Attempt of the Governors, and the King's Lieutenants in
Provinces, who upon a bare Petition of the Catholics, commanded the
discontinuance of the exercise of 1603.
the Reformed Religion, without taking Cognizance of the Cause. The Count of
St. Paul had done it in some places of Picardy. Marshal de Biron, who had no
Religion, but was resolved to play the Bigot, so far as to come out of his
Coach, or to light from his Horse, that he might kneel every time he met a
cross, during the course of his Conspiracies, had done the same thing in
Burgundy, before his practices were discovered: And Matignon had very lately
provoked 'em in Normandy. The Inferior Officers by their Example took the the
same Liberty: As among others the Lieutenant General de Mortagne, in the
Province of P^rches, who in spite of many Orders of Council, which gave the
second place of that Bailliage in one Suburb of the City, without heeding the
oppositions of the Catholics, forbore not to hinder 'em from holding their
Exercise peaceably. The Bishop of Eureux a little while after did the same
thing at Aigle, which was in his Diocese. He caused the Catholics to oppose the
establishment of a place of Bailliage in their Town; and tho the Lady of the
place had said she would not be backward in consenting to it, he forced her to
disown this consent which the Reformed pretended to have had of her. In this
Paper was likewise to be seen, that the contest for the Precedence had not bin
determined, notwithstanding all the Regulations possible which had bin made to
that purpose. To these and some other Articles the King made 'em as favorable
Answers as they could desire. The Duke of Rohan.


This was the Year that the Duke of Rohan saw the Foundation of his Fortune
laid, and of the Credit he had under another Reign among the Reformed Party.
The King owned him for his Kinsman by the Mothers side; and it is certain, that
if he had Died without Children, he had not had a nearer Heir to the Kingdom of
Navarre. This made the King without any scruple call the Mother of this Lord
Aunt. His Merit had already a great deal of Luster; and the King who desired
strictly to unite himself with the Protestants, had a design to Marry him to
the Daughter of Charles de Sudermania, Father to the Famous Gustavus. This
Charles was a declared Protestant, and wrested the Crown of Sweden and Poland
from Sigismund his Nephew, a strong Catholic Prince, and who had a design to
extinguish the Reformation in his Northern Territorys. This Marriage did not
succeed: But seeing this Young Lord had a design to Ally himself in such a
manner as did not please the King, and to that end cast his Eyes about on all
sides upon Foreigners, the King some Years after Married him to the Daughter of
his Favorite. This Woman was as Bold and as Zealous for Religion, as her Father
was Cold and Indifferent. She got a little the Ascendent over the Genius of her
Husband, and as she was assisted by her Mother-in-Law, who was no less Zealous
nor less Courageous, they had no great trouble to lead the Duke to all that
they desired; a Person who of himself had a great Heart, a perspicacious Wit,
and capable of the highest Undertakings. The King therefore, who had a mind to
advance him, and who believed him a proper Subject for some Foreign Alliance,
made him Duke and Peer this Year, and he took the Oath the 7th of August.

But it was also about the same time that the Jesuits at last The Repeal of the
Jesuits.
obtained leave to return into France. Father Magio had visited the King at
Lions in the Popes Name, during the War of Savoy, where he had obtained nothing
but Words in general, and Assurances of Good Will. But the King having made a
Journey this Year toward Mets, of which he resolved to make sure of, the
Jesuits of Pont a Mousson waited on him at Verdun, and obtained positive
Promises for their Re-establishment. The Jesuits Armand and Cotton were ordered
to come to Paris, in which they took care not to fail: And Cotton, by his
Flattering Conversation, by Preachments to the Palate of the Court, by a
profligate Hypocrisy, of which he knew the Art better then any one of his
Robe, so possessed himself of the Kings affection, that he got immediately into
the highest degree of his Favor. That which is remarkable in it, is, That this
Jesuit was not known to the King but by the Recommendation of Lesdiguieres, who
never did so great a piece of Service (it may be) to the Honest People of his
Religion, as he did by this means to the Jesuits. Their principal Prop at Court
was La Varenne, who raised himself by his Compliances with the Kings Amorous
Intreag^es, and who had a greater share in Affairs then a great many more
worthy men. Nor did the Spanish Cabal spare any pains on their side: But every
good Frenchman had so great an aversion to this Re-establishment, that the
King met with great difficulties in it. This Affair lingered on till the Month
of September, ever the Jesuits obtained any Edict: But when it was proposed to
Register it at Paris, the difficulties were renewed, and the Parliament had much
ado to consent to the return of a Society which they had cast out for such good
Reasons. The King took occasion to make a Journey to Rouen, to make this Edict
pass in the Parliament of Normandy; and he found but little Resistance. But that
of Paris did not follow the Example; insomuch that the rest of the Year was
spent before the Edict was verified. They would likewise have made it be
believed, that what happened at Gap, where the Reformed held a Synod, had
forwarded the matter, which had it not bin for that, might have yet Spun out a
longer time. But the affront that there had been given to the Pope, in making
it pass for an Article of Faith that he was The Antichrist, had laid a
Necessity on the King to break through all obstacles that were raised to the
Reestablishment of the Jesuits, to the end, that by this he might make
Reparation to the Pope for the injury that was done him. The Business was this:

The Reformed had got leave to call a National Synod in the Month of October at
Gap, a Town in the Dauphinate. It was one of the most Celebrated that ever they
held, and they there A Synod at Gap.
Treated of great Matters. But the most Important of all was the Question about
The Antichrist, which was there considered. The Reformed Taught frequently,
that this Title belonged to the Pope; and in their Sermons and Writings,
applied to him all the Characters, by which the HOLY GHOST gives a description
of him to whom it belonged. The wrong that was done to du Plessis, and which
stuck to the Hearts of all good Men, inflamed their Spirits more then ever in
that respect, because that was the pretense laid hold on, that he had given the
Name of Antichrist to the Pope; insomuch, that they set themselves to speak
upon this Subject more then ever; and more then ever to foretell the approaching
Downfall of Babylon, and the overthrow of the Man of Sin, by the Light of the
appearance of JESUS CHRIST. The Pulpits resounded nothing but this Name of
Antichrist; and there were likewise some Churches which the Judges disturbed,
because that this Doctrine was Preached there. But nothing made more noise then
the boldness of de Ferrier, Minister and Professor of Divinity in the Royal
College of Nimes. He set up Propositions on Posts which he publicly defended,
and where this Thesis, That the Pope is the Antichrist, was maintained. Nor did
he spare Clement VIII. whose Name was clapped in all along. The Parliament of
Toulouse brought him to his Trial upon this matter, and sought to have Arrested
his Person; but Ferrier, who would not expose himself to the Judgment of that
Merciless Court, provided for himself at the Chamber of Castres.

This was enough to stop the Proceedings of Parliament, but to have yet a
stronger Protection, Ferrier would make appear by some Proof that his Doctrine
was that of the whole Party: And as there were but few Ministers who did not
believe, and Preach, and Write the same thing; and for that it was evident that
there were more Churches besides that of-Nimes, that were Persecuted for this
Doctrine, he obtained that the matter should be Debated by the Synod, and his
Doctrine approved by it. The Genius of Ferrier was Compounded of Good and Bad
Qualities; but the Bad were most predominant, which was the reason why they
drew him into a precipice; and never was the end of a Man so unlike the
beginning. He suffered himself to be Corrupted by the Artifices of the Court;
and the Jesuits boasted themselves, that in the Year 1600 their Father Cotton
being at Nimes, where he had a Conference with Chamier, wherein they attributed
to him all the advantage, he contracted some Acquaintance with Ferrier, whom he
inspired from that very time with an Inclination to betray his Brethren.
However it was, he embroiled every thing in the Politic Assemblies wherever he
came, which made the Synods forbid him to meddle any more. He Acted such things
in his Church and his Province, that caused him be turned out thence: And
growing weary of being a Minister, he got to be a Counselor in a Presidial
Court at Nimes, tho he had promised at Paris to continue the Exercise of the
Ministry in some other place. At length he was deposed as a Deserter. In fine,
he Revolted, and Died a few years after, as much hated by the People as at the
beginning he His Character.
was beloved. He was Self-ended, Knavish, Ambitious, Inconstant, a Boutefeu,
without Judgment, and but little capable of the Intrigues wherein he had the
Imprudence to trouble himself. But he had Courage enough, a quick Wit, an
Imagination all Fire, a great facility of Speech, the tone of a Commanding
Voice, a vehemence in Action and Discourse which drew his Hearers along, and
which hardly gave 'em the liberty of Contradicting him. This was the reason
that the Multitude, who are easily dazzled by these Qualities, was ever of his
Party, and that he often prevailed, even in the And that of Chauve.
Synods, against Chauve his Competitor. This Chauve had much more Uprightness
and Judgment, and above all a Charming Gravity, which made him very
considerable in the Assemblies; but the Fire of one prevailed over the Phlegm
of the other, and the Vivacity of Ferrier obscured the Solidity of Chauve.

In the Synod then of which Chamier was President, Ferrier held the second
place, and was joined with the Moderator; insomuch that it was no hard matter
to obtain, that what there was Personal in his Affair should be favorably
Judged. The Synod ordered the General Deputies to Entreat the King, not to
suffer these Churches, or particular Persons, to be put to trouble for this
Business, or that the Liberty of Confessing should be taken away from 'em, or
of Teaching what they held for Truths. They writ to the Chambers Miparti, that
they would take into their Protection such as were molested upon this occasion.
But they did yet more. And to the end that it might not be doubted that it was
the Doctrine of all the Reformed, the Synod ordered that it should be inserted
among the Articles of Faith, and that an Article should be made, which should
be placed immediately after the 30th, where the equality of all the Pastors,
and all the Churches in Power and in Authority is spoken of. This Article,
which for the time to come was to be the 31th in the Confession of Faith, was
to have run in this form.

And since the Bishop of Rome, having erected to himself The Article made to be
inserted in the Confession of Faith, which imports that the Pope is Antichrist.
a Monarchy in Christendom, Attributes to himself a dominion over all Churches
and Pastors, and has Exalted himself so even as to call himself GOD, for to be
Adored, and that all the Power of Heaven and Earth may be Attributed to him, to
dispose at his Pleasure of all Ecclesiastical Things, to define the Articles of
Faith, to Authorize and Interpret the Scriptures at his Pleasure, to make a
Traffic of Souls and of their Salvation, and to dispense with Vows and Oaths,
to Ordain a New Service of God, and in reference to Civil Government, to
trample under foot the Authority of Magistrates, taking away, and Giving and
Changing Kingdoms, we Believe and Maintain that he is properly The Antichrist,
and the Son of Perdition foretold in the Word of God, the Whore Clothed with
Scarlet, sitting on the 7 Mountains, and the Great City; who had his Reign over
the Kings of the Earth, and do expect that the Lord, as he has promised and
begun overthrowing him by the Spirit of his Mouth, will finally destroy him by
the brightness of his coming.

The King who had his Spies in the Assembly, had notice in good time that this
Decree was framing; but he could by no means hinder it, and the Article was
received almost with a General Approbation. The Catholics were offended in the
highest degree. The Nuncio made bitter Complaints. The The King is offended.
Pope was in a Rage when he heard the News. The King himself expressed a great
resentment of it; and after the Deputies General, which had assisted at the
Synod, had given an Account in Court of what had passed there, they had Orders
to write how much the King was Incensed at this Affront. He complained that the
Reformed, whom he had put in a Capacity of maintaining themselves, had started
such a thing under his Reign, which no body ever Dreamt of since the Confession
of Faith was made; that they had never thought of this Decree, in the time when
the Crown had reason to be dissatisfied with the Popes; but that they had set
it on foot; now that the King and the Pope were strictly reconciled together;
and that they had quarreled with a Pope who was esteemed the most moderate in
Affairs of Religion that had Sat since the Doctrine of Luther. To this he
added And threatens.
Threats, That he would neither suffer the Printing of this Article, nor the
Sale of the Books wherein it should be inserted; and to punish those who
endeavored to trouble the State with Propositions so offensive and
unseasonable. The Catholics inflamed his Anger by remonstrating to him, That
the Injury would fall upon him himself, and that he was scandalized in an
odious manner by this means; that in re-entring into the Roman Church, he was
become a Favourer and a Disciple of Antichrist; whence they drew terrible
consequences against the Affection and the Fidelity of Subjects, who had such
thoughts concerning the Religion of their Sovereign.

The Authors of this Article defended themselves, by the necessity The Synods
Reasons.
of loudly maintaining what they were persuaded in their Consciences. They
pretended this Article could not pass for new, because it was presupposed by
all their Doctrine concerning the Church; that it was necessarily deduced from
what they believed touching her Corruption, her Desolation and Ruin; That this
was the reason that most clearly evinced the Necessity of their Separation from
the Church of Rome; That all the rest, which made it appear, that it behooved
'em indispensably to break with her, and which drew 'em from the depravations
of her Doctrine, of her Worship, of her Government, and of her Morals, were at
the bottom but a deduction, and a manifest display of this same, which
comprehended 'em all; That in saying That the Pope was the Antichrist they said
all; that since a full Liberty of Conscience was granted 'em, they could not
take from 'em the Right of joining a Decree to the other Articles of Faith,
which was naturally comprehended therein; the subsistence of which was found in
the Terms of the other Articles, in all the Writings of their Doctors, in all
the Sermons of their Ministers, in all the Complaints that are made of the
Popes, even many Ages before the Reformation; that the same Name had been given
many times to the Roman See, by those very People who were never suspected to
be bad Catholics; that they ought therefore to be less surpised to see this
Truth believed and confessed by the Reformed, who saw more clearly into the
matter, which they had studied more, and of which they were convinced by
Invincible Reasons.

The Article then passed in spite of all Obstacles, and the New Editions of the
Confession of Faith where the Article is inserted.
Kings Threats hindered not but that there were new Editions of the Confession
of Faith in a short time, in which it was Inserted. The People furnished
themselves with these New Editions, very well pleased to see their aversion to
the Roman See encouraged by so Authentic a Decision; and almost persuaded that
it was enough that the Pope was publicly called Antichrist, to give 'em
grounds of hoping thence that his fall was near. But the Court having not been
able to hinder things from coming to this pass, would have eluded the Decision
by some Artifice; and to satisfy the Pope, they made him believe that they had
succeeded therein, and that they had rendered this troublesome Decree
unprofitable. They endeavored therefore to make some considerable persons of
the Party disown it, whether without or within the Kingdom, to the end that
this disowning it might make it pass for a particular Doctrine. Now was it a
difficult matter to get Roni, and such as himself, to disclaim it, who treated
the Pope with His Holiness. But he had been already so often reproached with
his coldness for Religion, and the little Care he had of advancing the concerns
of his Brethren, that his Name stood 'em in little stead upon this occasion.
There were a great many found, who without disowning the Doctrine, judged only
that the Doctrine was a little out of Season, and that in the beginning of a
Peace which had been so much desired, it would have bin better to have left the
Articles of the Confession of Faith, such as they had been, till that time,
then to have added such a one which might re-kindle the hardly extinguished
hatred of the Catholics. Some for fear, some in complaisance, favored the
designs of the Court, tho they had no reluctance to the thing decided. They
buoyed themselves up more especially with the Opinion of Scaliger, who had
condemned the Article: But the Reformed had as little respect for him, when he
treated of Theology, as they had a veneration for his knowledge in other
things. Mean while, by thus disowning it, they distracted those who would have
maintained the Doctrine of the Assembly.

But because Ferrier was looked upon as the Promoter of this Affair, by reason
that he was vexed to have been proceeded against for the Propositions which he
had published, it was believed that all would be suppressed if he could be
appeased. The Endeavors were so fortunate, that more was gained then was hoped
for. They corrupted both his Understanding and his Heart. They attacked him
with Pensions, and hopes of Interests at Court. He made no more use of his
vehemence and heat but to trouble his Brethren. And in fine, she precipitated
himself, as I have said, into Desertion and Revolt. It was of great advantage,
to have for a The False Moderation of Clement VIII.
ground to cry down the Synod, the Moderation of Clement VIII. of whom they did
not then stick to say, That he had made no noise of the Edicts granted to the
Reformed, but out of a decent Formality: And that in effect, he had given as
formal a Consent to those Edicts as could be expected from a Pope. It Is true
likewise, that he did not seem like his Predecessors, to Advise Massacres and
Punishments. Experience had taught him that the Reformation advanced it self
amidst oppositions, and that in every place where they would have destroyed it
by War, it had increased to the danger of the Catholic Religion: That in
Germany the War did the business of the Protestants; That it strengthened them
in the United Provinces: That it was favorable to 'em in many other places; and
that in France it might have had yet the same effect. In other places he feared
that War would reunite the Protestants, who when they undertook to help one
another had very formidable Forces. But at the bottom it was the Pope, fully
desirous to re-establish his Authority every where, where the people had shaken
off the Yoke: And it was under his Pontificat that the first knots of these
pernicious Intrigues were knit, which cost Henry the 4th his Life, and which
had like to have destroyed all Europe. He was desirous to play a sure Game, and
procure between all the Princes of his Communion a League so secret and so
strong, that it might overwhelm the Protestants all at one blow, who could not
foresee this Tempest.

The same Synod had likewise done some other things, which Other matters of the
Synod.
had angered the King. They had admitted Foreign Ministers. They had received
Letters from the Palatine, and had Answered 'em. They likewise Writ to the Duke
of Savoy, on the Account of the Reformed of Saluces whom he Persecuted. They
received the Duke of Bouillon's Letters, which they answered without any
Hesitation, and the Synod themselves took upon 'em to solicit for him. This
did not please the King, who expressed some resentment of it: Tho he did not
complain but in Pardoning it, because he believed, said he, that they had done
it, rather out of Indiscretion then Malice. He added nevertheless, that if
these Ecclesiastical Assemblies did not behave themselves with more Moderation,
he would deprive 'em of their Liberty; which hindered not, but that they used
it as formerly, till a great while in the Reign of Lewis the Thirteenth. The
Deputies General also were Ordered to represent to the King many things which
they drew up in Writing. The most Remarkable Article was that where the
Reformed desired, that they might not be obliged to give themselves the Name of
Pretended Reformed in the Public Acts, or in the pleadings of their Advocates:
And the Synod exhorted 'em to abstain from those Terms. An expedient was found
out to content 'em, which changed the Words and left the thing: And 'twas
allowed 'em to call their Religion, Reformed in the Terms of the Edict. But the
Judges, the Advocates and Notaries preserved yet a long time the custom of
abstaining from the New expression, and from the Word Pretended: And continued
to give their Religion simply the Name of The Reformed Religion.

During this the Jesuits followed their business, and solicited Condition of
the Repeal of the Jesuits.
the Parliament, for the Verification of the Edict by which they were Recalled.
It was founded on the conditions that the King had proposed a long time before,
and they were discussed at Rome. There were five or six which the Jesuits found
very hard: Not because they were in themselves Unjust or Inhuman; but because
they put too strict Limits to the desires of this Covetous and Ambitious
Society. The first that displeased 'em, was that they were commanded, not to
receive into their Order in France, any but Natural Frenchmen. This was very
opposite to their Politics at that time, whose main drift it was to subjugate-
France to a Foreign Power. The second was, that they were to take the Oath of
Fidelity; which was extremely contrary to the Intentions of a Society naturally
unfaithful. But it was not any Respect of the Oath that troubled 'em so much:
It was because they were Marked with Infamy, in taking a security from them
which was not demanded of the others. The Third was, that they were forbidden
to purchase Lands, without the King's leave. They had well recovered themselves
of the Error into which Laiuez their General had fallen, during the Council of
Trent, when he would have had his Society excepted out of the permission of
possessing Estates, which the Council Granted to the Mendicants: And they had
made so good use of the Advice which the Jacobin La Torre gave this General, to
make him desist from his Modest demand, that they could no more likewise
suffer, that the Liberty of Enriching themselves by all manner of means, should
be taken from 'em. The Fourth was, that those who had once taken the Habit,
should not be permitted to return to the Possession of their Estates, when it
should please their Superiors to turn 'em out of their Order; which they have
retained the power of doing, before the fourth Vow is taken, when they cannot
accommodate themselves with the Genius of those who put themselves under their
Discipline. This Article grieved 'em sorely, because they drew a thousand
advantages from this Power, of sending back into a secular Life, those who were
imbued with the Maxims of their Order. But there were such good Reasons not to
leave 'em this means of troubling the peace of Families, that the imposing of
this troublesome condition could not be avoided. The Fifth and the Sixth
subjected 'em entirely to the Jurisdiction and Correction of Bishops; and
likewise to take from them permission to confess those of their Order. This was
Hard, that a Society which sought to trample under Feet all that was remaining
of Dignity to Bishops, should be constrained to pend upon their good Pleasure.

But by the Interest of Father Cotton, some things of these Articles were
moderated; and when they have once gotten Possession, they well enough know how
to make themselves free of the Rest. Nevertheless, the Parliament opposed their
return as much as they could. They made re-iterated Remonstrances; they would
have qualified the Edict which they had obtained: But the Edict was to be
Obeyed and Verified just as it was. Indeed this was not brought about without
Satyrs against 'em.
the Quipps and Ferks of a thousand Satyrs, a thousand Pasquins, thousand
Bloody Railleries. All was let loose against 'em; and the Negotiation of their
return was likewise made into a kind of a Farce, where they were Treated after
a very Comical manner. But they comforted themselves for all that, with the
Pleasure of their Success, and that which astonished all the World, was if it
may be so said, from the very next day of their Re-establishment, that the
Interest which they had in France appeared so great, that there was not any
person who had ever so much. Their Joys nevertheless, were interrupted by an
accident, which had like to have forced 'em to begin again.

Cotton the Jesuit, who seemed to have Enchanted the King, Cotton the Jesuit
Wounded.
whom he managed as he pleased, thought one Night, that he had been killed in a
Coach: But the Wound that he received was not Mortal. They would have charged
this Assassination on the Reformed, tho there were many Catholics, to whom the
Interest of this Man, who by his Insolency abused it, gave more Abhorrence then
to them. He was one of those, who pursuant to the Conditions of their return
were to remain at Is made the King's Confessor.
Court, to serve as Hostages for the Fidelity of the others. The King made him
his Confessor, and ever since that, the Kings have had no other Confessors but
Jesuits.

It Is not known for what Reason this Man was set so high in the King's Favor.
Never Man had so perfectly the Spirit of The Character of this Jesuit.
a Jesuit. Deceit was so natural and familiar to him, that he had one piece of
Knavery or other a foot; and when that succeeded ill, he had another just
ready. Tho he was countenanced by Roni, he did not forbear to do him a thousand
ill turns: And after having more then once Solemnly received the Lie, for what
he had preferred against him, and against many others, he carried himself
loftily, because he had not Modesty enough to make him blush. Nevertheless, the
King either feared him, or loved him so much, that these Accidents never made
him lose any of his Favor. That which happened to him on the occasion of a
Woman pretended to be possessed, whom he had Order to exercise, had like
absolutely to have Ruined him: But the King connived at it, and no other harm
came to the Jesuit, then to wipe off the Cruel Railleries upon it. He had
Questions to be proposed by him to a Woman possessed.
prepared Seventy one Questions, upon which it was said, he was to Answer the
Spirit whatsoever it was, that had seized this unhappy Woman. There were many
of 'em, that in good Politics rendered him Criminal against the State; since
they concerned the Life of the King, and the Succession of his Children: And as
it is easy to make these pretended Devils, that are concerned in these
Comedies, play what Part is desired, it may be feared, that all these Questions
were prepared, to obtain Seditious Answers. There were Sixteen or Seventeen,
that had regard to the Reformed or their Affairs. One spoke of the Count de
Laval, Grandson to d'Andelot, who changed his Religion a little after, and who
died the year following in Hungary. Another spoke of War; and inquired if the
King would make it on the Spaniards, or the Heretics. Another spoke of Chamier
and Ferrier, Men whom the Jesuits had in their Eye, because of their Credit
with the Reformed; and very likely the Jesuits would have known the means to
destroy, or to gain 'em. Another concerned the King and Roni: And apparently it
ought to have Instructed the means of destroying the one in the opinion of the
other* One that followed it, demanded, as by way of imposition, what would
happen concerning the Change of this Favorite. Immediately after it gave
Notice, who were the Heretics of the Court the most easy to be brought over to
the Roman Faith. In the sequel, he would know what was the most profitable to
the Conversion of the Heretics; That is to say, whether it were more to the
purpose to come to open force with 'em, or to keep 'em in a Fraudulent
Toleration. He would take likewise Lessons of Divinity from the Doemon, and
force it to tell him which passage in the Scripture was the most clear to prove
Purgatory, and to show the equality of the Pope's Power to that of St. Peter.
He demanded of it also, in what time the Heresy of Calvin would be extinct. He
questioned it concerning the Depravation of Passages in the Scripture by the
Heretics: And he had Reason to ask the Lights of the Prince of Darkness
concerning that, because he had prepared a Work wherein he accused the version
of Geneva, of a great number of Falsifications. He passed to Foreign Affairs;
to know what measures might be taken to Convert the King and Queen of England,
and all the Kingdom, and which way to succeed therein with most Ease: How the
Turk might be Defeated, and the Infidels Converted: Whence it came to pass,
that Geneva had been so often preserved? Then returning to the Affairs of the
Kingdom, he demanded something concerning the places of surety; concerning
Lesdiguieres and his Conversion; and of the Duration of Heresy.

The Question about the preservation of Geneva (no doubt) The P^^^^^vation of
Geneva against (...) Attempt^ of the Duke ^ Savoy.
was very Curious. The Duke of Savoy made continual Attempts on this City, and
toward* the end of the foregoing year, he missed very narrowly of becoming
Master of it. He held intelligence with Blondel, one of the Syndics of the
City, whose Treason was neither found out, nor punished till many years. But
his Men already Masters of the Wall, already entered the City, and ready to
force the Court of Guards that kept the Gates, were nevertheless Defeated.
Those who were not killed were taken Prisoners, and in the sequel were Executed
as Robbers. The Duke being desirous to gain that by force, which he had been so
near obtaining by surprise, the King intervened, and told the Duke, that he
must expect him to be his Enemy, if he pushed on the matter any farther:
Insomuch, that the Duke was obliged to defer his designs till another time.
Geneva had implored succors of the Churches of France in this business, and
had written to their Deputies General, to pray 'em to make a good Collection,
to assist 'em in the War which they thought to have against this formidable
Neighbor; and St. Germain did not fail to write concerning it throughout the
whole Kingdom. But the Interposition of the King delivered Geneva of this
Dread, and the Reformed of this Expense. Cotton the Jesuit not being able to
comprehend, how Providence so openly had favored this Heretic City, against
the Pretensions of so Catholic a Prince, was desirous that the Doemon should
unfold to him the Mysteries of the Council of God; and asked it, whence it came
that this City did never fall under the Attempts of a Neighbor much more
Powerful then she.

All, or most part of these Questions were set down in half Words: But it was
not hard to understand the meaning of every one of 'em, did a Man but never so
little understand what was the State of the Court and Religion in that time;
and that they were the Prospects and Intrigues of the Jesuits. The Jesuit was
so indiscreet, as to Write all these Questions with his own hand upon a loose
Leaf, and to put 'em in a Book which Gillot Counselor of the Parliament of
Paris had lent him in 1603. Some years after, returning the Book he forgot the
Leaf, which the President de Thou found there in Reading. The thing seemed too
extraordinary to this Wise Magistrate, not to endeavor to discover the Author
of this curious Interrogatory. It was plain enough; that the Jesuit had a part
in it, because this Writing was found in a Book that came out of his Closet,
but the suspicion turned into certainty, when this Paper was compared with his
Writing, which it was not difficult to find. The King did not Relish this
Piece of Curiosity but the Jesuit Reigned; there was no Noise to be made of it;
and the King called for the Paper to suppress it. No Body could forbear
Wondering at it, Murmuring at it, and fretting at it: Many diverted themselves
with it, and found something very Comical in the design of questioning the
Doemon, not only upon Affairs of State, but upon Religion, upon the State and
Conversion of Hearts, and to take the Lights of this Doctor for Guides in
understanding the Scripture. Others expected, that this Jesuit should have been
Mortified at least by this Adventure: But he did not much trouble himself about
it, because he was never the Worse for it at Court. The Tractableness of his
Temper, his Complaisance, his Flattering and insinuating behavior, maintained
him in a Degree of Favor, whose Cheats and Rashness ought to have thrown him
down, if the good Will of Kings were bestowed on Merit.

They who have Written the Life of Cotton the Jesuit, The Disguising this
Adventure in the Jesuits Writings.
not knowing, how to Reconcile this Adventure with all the Falsities which they
put off in Honor of this Profligate Man, bethought themselves of altering the
Recital by all ^orts of Disguises. Principally the Last of these Authors has
gone beyond the Impudence of the other: And as he has well judged that those
who should compare the manner by which he Writes the History of him, to that by
which the President of Thou relates it, would admire at this difference, and
would make no difficulty to believe this Venerable Magistrate before the
Jesuit; he endeavored to render him suspected of Passion and Infidelity upon
this occasion. But the Integrity and Exactness of this Wise Historian is so
well Established, that his Testimony in things that have passed under his Eyes,
and through his Hands, will always carry it in the Judgment of honest Men, upon
that, from the whole Order of Jesuits. That which these Authors say then, that
the Jesuit had not set down in this Writing, but that which was permitted him
by the Canons to demand of a Doemon, is altogether a pure invention to Disguise
the Truth. There are also great variety of Copies of it, which appeared in
Public. It Is true, the Jesuits themselves might sow among the people Memoirs
made at pleasure, to persuade those that will not ascend back again to the very
source, that it was a piece of Malice that was intended against their Society;
that every one mingling therein what came into his mind, thereupon arose this
multitude of Writings differing from one another. But it was impossible, that
the President de Thou, and the Counselor Gillot, Roni, and the King himself,
who had seen the Original Piece, before the thing became Public, should suffer
themselves to be Cheated by this Artifice.

The Verification of the Writing which the Jesuit caused to be made by these
who were most immediately at his Devotion, without Form of Justice, without
having any party that took Notice of it, and upon such a Writing, that he
pleased to produce to 'em, because the Original could no be found, by what his
Historian says, is a Trick that ought not to prevail against the Testimony of
those Magistrates, who had had the Original in their Hands, and who before they
spoke of it were assured by their Eyes, that it was the Jesuits Writing. It is
Remarkable, that the last Author of his Life, forgetting the Apology which he
had made for the Conduct of his Hero upon this occasion, relates, in the Order
of his History, the Answers which the Woman possessed had made him, upon some
Questions contained in the Memoir. This accident belongs to the year 1605. But
I have placed it here, as serving to make known the Character of Cotton the
Jesuit, and upon what Qualities his Favor was founded. I return now to the
Order that I had quitted.

The Duchess of Bar died the beginning of this year, of a The Death of the
Duchess of Bar.
Distemper which she thought proceeded from being with Child, and which her
Physicians understood not. She was Persecuted with Conferences to her Death. Du
Perron had acquired so much Reputation among the Catholics, by the success of
Fontainbleau, that they believed he would succeed every where accordingly. But
he had not so good an Opinion of himself as others; and he would not hazard an
Honor so well established, upon uncertain hopes. When therefore there was any
Conference ready, they never failed to break it off upon the Preliminary
Conditions. They were proposed to the Reformed so unjust or so impossible, that
they were obliged to refuse 'em: And the Bishop took an occasion from thence to
give out that the Ministers were afraid of him, and fled from him every time he
was ready to enter the List with 'em. They defended themselves against this
Reproach, by the exact Relarions of what had passed at those Meetings; and the
fruit of those Apologies was always, that the Catholics referred themselves to
the Bishop, and that the Reformed believed, that their Ministers were in the
Right. But these Relations were not Read at Rome, where the Bishops Letters
were received, as Testimonies of a perfect Victory. This was the Reason the
King was at The Progress of d^ Perron's Fortune.
no trouble, after the Death of Cardinal d'Ossat, to procure the Hat for him:
And sometime after, he made him Grand Almoner, and Archbishop of Sens. Roni
countenanced as much as he could the Fortune of this Prelate. But the Heart of
du Perron was not to be gained or obliged by Gratitude, or by Friendship. His
Fortune was his Idol. He crept before Roni while he was in Authority: But he
did nothing to serve him, when the face of his Affairs was changed.

The Spanish Cabal received this year a severe Check, and Villeroi, who was
suspected to have been one of the Number, had The Intrigues of Spain in the
Court of France.
much ado to get off. The Council of Spain had Confidents in France, and in all
the Provinces, in all the Orders of the State at Court among the King's
intimates, in the Council it self. The Queen who was pushed forward by the
Councils of Italy, and by the Italians which were in her Service, aspired to
nothing but an Alliance with Spain; because she believed it necessary to assure
the Succession of her Children. The Agents of Spain knew well how to scare her
with the Disputes, that might one day arise on this Subject, and the Attempts
that the Marchioness of Verneuil was capable of making against her Person. On
the other side, the same Agents heightened the Courage of the Marchioness, who
took for current Money the private assurances that were given her of protecting
her against the Queens Pretentions. She entered into several Conspiracies to
strengthen her self; and she made her self unsupportable to the King, by a
thousand Malicious Tricks, and to the Queen, by a thousand stinging Reparties.
Insomuch, that the King, that to mortify her, was constrained to bring both
Her, her Father, and the Count Auvergne her Brother to Justice. They had had so
many Intrigues against the good of the State, that 'twas no hard matter to
convict 'em; and that he had then enough to destroy 'em, if the King had not
had a Soul too tender to suffer the Death of a Mistress. That of the Count de
Soissons may be reckoned a Third Party; an unquiet Spirit, and who loved
Change. He thought he was the nearest to the Crown of all the Legitimate
Princes. In the times of Confusion, he would not (it may be) have given place,
either to the Queens Children, or to the Marchionesses, or to the Prince of
Conde. He would have had the places held in Dauphine, to have been taken away
from Lesdiguieres, that he might have had 'em himself. He did not like, that
that Captain who was but his Subordinate in the Province, should be stronger
there then he who was a Prince of the Blood, and had the Government of it. This
Enterprise came to the Ears of Lesdiguieres, and put him in fear, that a
Journey which the King talked of making into Provence, was intended to
dispossess him. But tho the design of this Journey was broken off, to remove
the Jealousies he had entertained, his mind however was not perfectly healed,
he began to close again with the Reformed for his security, whose Affairs had
not much touched him till then. His suspicions however, were not apparently
well founded. Since it is not credible, that the King would ruin him in
Dauphine, to put a Man in his place, who if he became powerful there, might do
him more mischief then he could.

All the Council was divided amongst these several Cabals, and by consepuence
the greater part engaged in the Intrigues of Spain, which had an influence in
all these Factions. Villeroi took the Queen's side, and as he had a strict
intelligence with Rome, by the means of Cardinal d'Ossat his Creature, it was
impossible that he should not have likewise a little with the Italians
Domestics of that Princess, and by their means with Spain which was their first
mover. 'Twas hardly questioned, after the b^siness of an Innkeeper, one of his
Officers. The Treason of one of Villeroy's Officers.
This rascally fellow sent Advice to Spain, of all that passed in the Council
of France. Insomuch, That the King's Ambassador at the Court of Spain, always
found the Spaniards informed of all that he had to say to 'em, by the Orders of
his Master. A Frenchman called Rasis, who was weary of Spain, where he had
been ill rewarded for his past Services, because that the Ruin of the League
hindered him from continuing 'em, promised the Ambassador to unfold this
Mystery to him, if he might be pardoned what was past, and be permitted to
return in safety, to end his days in his own Country. His good designs had like
to have proved abortive, because the dispatches which were Granted him on this
occasion, passed through the hands of Villeroy and his Officer: But he happily
escaped after he had told the Ambassador the Treachery of the Innkeeper: and
being arrived in France, he discovered himself to Villeroy, whom he found at a
Country House, ready to join in the King's Retinue at Fontainebleau. Villeroy,
instead of securing his Officer, forbore to speak to the King of the matter,
when he was with him. This gave time to a Courier who left Spain a few Hours
after Rasis, to arrive in times, and Caution the Innkeeper to have a care of
himself. So this miserable Wretch escaped, and he was found Drowned 20 or 30
Leagues from Paris, upon the Bank of the Marne, which he would have foarded, in
his way to Flanders. His Death seemed no less suspicious then his escape; and
many believed, that Villeroy connived at the one, and procured the other. I was
not rational to think, that a Man who had been above five and thirty years in
the Ministry of State, should not know, that the first thing he ought to have
done, was to have seized on the Officer: And the Neglect of so necessary a
Precaution, gave occasion to suspect, that the Master had some Reason to
desire, that the Servant should escape. But the King was willing to take the
sorrow that Villeroy expressed, for a Proof of his Innocence: And he accepted
of the bad Excuses of this Minister, as if they had been better. Insomuch, that
he continued in the Ministry as before; and if (perhaps) he lost something of
the King's Esteem and Condence, at least he lost nothing of his Dignity.

The End of the Eight Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of NANTS. BOOK IX.
The Argument of the 9th. Book.
THE Reformed are afraid that the King gives way too much to the Jesuits. He
Answers their Papers favorably. Gex. The Genius of La Trimouille, and his
Death. The Process of the Cardinal de Chatillon's Widow. The Pyramid pulled
down. New Factions. An Assembly at Chatelleraud: Matters which were there to be
treated on. St. Germains Letter to Marshal de Bouillon. Roni Commissioner for
the King at the Assembly. His Instructions. What Reception he had. His Speech.
Provincial Councils. Deputies General. General Assemblies. The Union renewed.
Lesdiguieres comes into it. Roni Excuses this New Oath. Breviats for the Guard
of Towns of Hostage. The Assembly suffers the places of Marshal Bouillon to be
taken. Other advantages that Roni gained of the Assembly, with which the Pope
is well contented. The Deputies of the Assembly caressed at the Court. An
Assembly of the Clergy. The Artifice to hinder the Ecclesiastics from changing
their Religion. An Edict in favor of the Clergy. Roni Duke and Peer of France.
The Marshal de Bouillon makes his Peace. The Treaty with those of Rochel in
favor of the Catholics. Priests that did not Pray to God for the King.
Gunpowder Treason. The Oath exacted of the Catholics of England. The Exercise
permitted at Charenton for the Reformed of Paris; which the Lord of the place
opposes in vain. Papers favorably Answered. The Attempt of Seguiran the Jesuit
to Preach at Rochel. A Mortification of the Jesuits. The Synod at Rochel.
General Deputies. The Question about Antichrist renewed. Deputies gained at the
Court. The Quick-sighted of the Church, and Fools of the Synod. The Question is
deferred, and Vignier ordered to Treat largely on it. The Synod Names only two
Deputies General. Affairs Treated on at the Synod. Foreign Ministers. Malwin
called to Rochel. The King refuses the Nomination of the Deputies. He permits a
General Assembly at Gergeau. Sulli suspected by the Reformed Affairs of the
Assembly. Places lost by the Reformed. Conferences and Changes of Religion. The
Assembly Complies with the Kings desire. An Assembly of the Clergy. The
Resolute Answer of the King, and his disowning a promise made in his Name by
his Attorneys in the Matter of Absolution. Cotton the Jesuit, the Dauphins
Master. A Fund for the Ministers that shall change their Religion. The Treaty
with the Morisco's Persecuted in Spain is ^roke off by the Bigots. Lesdiguieres
Marshal of France. The Kings Domestic Vexations. Diverse Sentiments on the
Alliance of Spain. Frauds to renew the Civil Wars. The Power of the Jesuits
Established at Bearn. Papers Answered. The Synod at St. Maixant. The Theater of
Antichrist. A Blow given to Seignioral Rights. The Jurisdiction of the
Chambers. A Book found at La Fleche. The Discourse of Jeannin upon Liberty of
Conscience. The Edict in favor of the Morisco's. The Escape of the Prince of
Conde. War declared against the Archduke. The Formidable Power of the King.
His D^signs. His unexpected Death.

THE Reformed had a great share in these particular 1604.
Accidents, because they looked upon all those who held Intelligence with Spain
as their Sworn Enemies, and they believed that all the Projects of that Court
designed their Ruin at the bottom; insomuch, that they were always listening to
discover the designs of that Cabal, and to hinder that it did not grow too
powerful in France, where they had, if it may be so said, no Friend but the
King. Besides, they were not so assured of him, as not to have some distrust of
his Constancy; and the little Resolution they had observed in him upon the
Account of Religion, made 'em fear that he had besides as little in Point of
Acknowledgment and Friendship. They saw that The Reformed fear that the King
gives way too much to the Jesuits.
he suffered himself to be too much possessed by the Jesuits; and they
complained sometimes, alluding to the Name of his Confessor, that he heard his
old Friends no more, since he had his Ears stopped with Cotton. They saw
likewise in him, amidst his great Qualities, great Weaknesses: And that to have
Peace at home, he was so far Patient and Compliant, that the meanest Citizen
would have hardly done so much. There was besides great Reason to fear, that to
Content the Queen, whose Intentions were no way favorable to 'em, he would
break with 'em, and suffer himself to be led to an Alliance with Spain, of
which they did not doubt but their Destruction was a necessary consequence,
These apprehensions which were but too reasonable, as it appeared under another
Reign, obliged 'em to Arm themselves every day with new precautions.

The King, who believed that these Alarms might serve for a pretext to those
who were not well affected to his Government, was very willing to dissipate 'em
by the Testimonies of the constant Will that he had to maintain the Edicts; and
whatsoever discontent he had of particulars, he favored the General Cause as
much as 'twas possible for him.

And this about the time that I speak of, he made appear by He answers their
Papers favorably.
his manner of answering the Papers which the Deputies General presented him.
They complained among other things, of certain Monuments of the late Wars,
which the Catholics preserved, as it were to render the Memory of those
Troubles eternal. Thus in the Cathedral Church of Bazas, was to be seen an
Inscription which called the Reformed Heretic Hugenots; and which imputes to
'em Profanations and Ruins. The King had often commanded the Bishop to erase
those violent Terms, but the Bishop wae not willing to obey him. They
complained again of the affronts which were done in some places to the
Ministers and their Children; of the delay of Establishing the Exercise of the
Reformed Religion in many places where it should be, according to the Edict of
1577; of the trouble that they found, when the places designed by the
Commissioners to perform that Exercise, fell by Succession, or otherwise, into
the hands of Catholics; of which they alleged an Example in Baujol^is, where
the Propriet of a Barn, that was designed 'em for their Assemblies, was upon
the point of being sold. They made likewise Complaints of the Seditious Terms
that the Catholic Preachers made use of in their Sermons, as they had done all
the Lent long at Blois, at Orleans, at Angiers; and elsewhere, at Chalons upon
Sacne, at Mortagne, at Chartres, the Judges to whom the Complaints were made
never using their endeavors to repress 'em. They spoke also of the attempts of
some Judges that would take upon themselves the Authority of proportioning upon
the Reformed the Sums of which they had occasion for the Maintenance of their
Ministers. The Kings Answers were all favorable; however they were forced to
come again more then once to desire the Abolishing of those Monuments which
preserved the Memory of the Civil Wars. Very near the same time, the
Inhabitants of the Country of Gex solicited the Gex.
Confirmation of the Regulations which they had obtained in the Matters of
Religion, since their Country came under the power of the King. I have already
observed, that they had there followed the Methods of the Edict, as in all the
rest of the Kingdom, whether for the Restoration of the Exercise of the Roman
Religion, or for maintaining the Reformed in the possession where the King had
found 'em. But to have a stronger Title then those Regulations made upon
particular Accidents, they desired something more Authentic, that they might
make 'em effectual; and they obtained it in the Month of June, by a Declaration
for that purpose.

In the mean time they prepared themselves to hold a General Assembly; and
indeed, the following Year they held it at Chatelleraud. The King was much
afrad lest some things should pass there against his Interest, because it was
said that this Assembly would Grant their Protection to the Marshal de
Bouillon. The Marshal made his Affair pass over all Europe for an Affair of
Religion, and when he writ to the King after his disgrace, he spoke more in the
Style of an Accuser that threatened, then of a Criminal that humbl'd himself.
It was dangerous in the Example, that that should be taken for a Cause of
Religion, in an Assembly of Subjects, which was held a Crime of State in the
Council of a Sovereign. Moreover, the place was suspected, because it was The
Genius of la Trimouille.
at Chatelleraud, from whence la Trimouille and du Plessis were not far
distant. For in regard the Duke had a great passion for Liberty, and Sentiments
on that Subject becoming a Hero, if he had not been Born under a Monarchy,
'twas feared that he would have endeavored to make of the Reformed Party a
kind of Commonwealth; of which the Marshal de Bouillon was accused to have
laid the Project. This likewise gave so much the more occasion to the Kings
Council to think, that they had (perhaps) already some prospects of oppressing
the Public Liberty by an Absolute Power. It Is certain at least that the
suggestions which came from Italy or Spain tended that way; and little Papers
ran among the people, that taught how to rise to the highest degree of Despotic
Authority. The Reformed did not Palate these Designs of a Power without Bounds,
because they knew well what they ought to expect from a Catholic Council, if
once they went about to set themselves above Promises and Laws. 'Twas therefore
that there were many amongst 'em that were desirous to take measures to avoid
Civil Servitude, because they saw it would be easy to fall into the Servitude
of Conscience if the first were once Established. But the Death of the Duke of
Trimouille delivered the And his Death.
King of that pain. It happened so seasonably, that it might be said to have
been procured. His Distemper began with Convulsions, which terminated in a
Languishment wherein he lingered some months; and when there seemed some
likelihood of his Cure, his Convulsions seized him again and carried him off.
He had bin invited by Roni a little before his Distemper began; and I knew some
of his Domestic Servants that were strongly persuaded that his Death was not
Natural. This Death was taken by the King for a Fortunate Hit, because the
Duke's Genius gave him a great deal of trouble. It Is a difficult matter for a
Man to behave himself before Kings; if he be Feared, he is Hated; if he be
Peaceable, he is Despised; and when some part of their favor is obtained, it is
not agreeable to a Man who has a Soul, to be more obliged to blind Compliance,
or a servile Dependence, then to his Merit.

There was this Year an Affair that made a great Noise, The Process, of the
Cardinal de Chatillon's Widow.
which was judged at the Chamber of the Edict. The Cardinal de Chatillon had
been Married ever since the year 1564. yet for all that had neither quitted his
Habit nor his Dignity* His Death happening some years after, his Widow agreed
for his Inheritance with the Admiral; and after that, having been carried away
by a Man who Robbed her of all that she had got, it came into her mind when the
Edict of Nants was published, to demand a Review of the Contracts which she had
made, and to dispute with the Heirs of the Admiral the Inheritance of her
Husband. She grounded her Suit upon the Edict, which by the Nine and Thirtieth
Article of Particulars, ordered a Toleration of Marriages such as Hers. But on
the other side, the Quality of the Person was a great Obstacle to her
pretensions. She might have succeeded better, if the Dispute had been about any
other then a Prelate; but the affront had been too heinous for the Pope to
bear, had the Marriage of a Cardinal been confirmed, Bishop and Peer of France,
who had presumed to retain after this Marriage his Revenues and his Purple.
Besides the Cardinal was the Elder Brother of the Admiral and of d'Andelot, and
his Marriage ('it is like) could not be confirmed without the Ruin of two
Families, which descended from these Lords; one of which was half Catholic, to
wit, that of d'Andelot, whose Son had embraced both the Roman Religion and the
League. Servin, Advocate-General, made a long Speech in this Cause. He spoke
not of this Marriage of the Cardinal but as of an unlawful Conjunction, and
would never grant that there had been any Solemnization of this Marriage, even
in the Forms accustomed among the Reformed. As Servin inclined very much to
their Doctrine, it may be judged that all his discourse was made on purpose to
be sent to Rome, where he was necessary to make it appear, that such a Marriage
had not been approved of. His Evidences took from the Cardinals Wise the
Quality of his Widow, deprived her of all that she could pretend to in that
Quality, and did not so much as order any Provision for support of her
Children. The Court ordered the Advocates to put off the Cause to be heard
before the Council, for other Reasons then those that appeared in the Decree;
That is to say, That nothing might be pronounced in an Affair of this Nature,
and to give place for an Accommodation. A very passionate Author, who has
inserted Servin's Pleading in his Work, says, That the Decree was agreeable to
the Evidence; but he does not relate the Terms of the Decree, whereas the
Advocate General Talon relates 'em in his Reports such as I have said. In a
word, this Affair was one of the principal Reasons of making the Nine and
Thirtieth Article of Particulars so as it is, and the opposite Interests of the
Widow and the Defendants, gave room for greater Contests since the year 1600.
The Cause of a Carthusian who had lest his Cloister before the Edict, and who
demanded a share with his Brothers; and in 1605. that of a Capuchin, whose Case
was the same, were Judged according to the Tenor of the Article. If they
deviated a little in this Widows Cause, it is easy to see that there was more
regard had to the Quality of the Persons concerned, then to the Nature of the
business.

The Duke of Rohan this year likewise received a Check at the Court. He was not
willing to live unprofitable to the World; and with a design to advance himself
therein, he made some steps which did not please the King: But that was calmed
by the submission of the Duke, who referred himself to the Discretion of his
Master. But the following 1605.
year the Reformed, and all good Frenchmen, with no small disgust beheld the
Pyramid thrown down, which was reared to The Pyramid thrown down.
Eternize in a Plate of Brass, the Decree of the Banishment of the Jesuits,
after the wicked attempt of Chatel. Those Assassins, who had the Credit to
Re-establish themselves in spite of the Decree, had yet a greater Reputation to
demolish that Monument of what they were capable to do; nor could the
Parliament, who were troubled beyond imagination to see the noblest mark of
their Zeal for the good of France destroyed, prevent it either by Oppositions
or Remonstrances. All that they obtained was, That they were not constrained
themselves to undo their own Work, and that it was Demolished without Formality
of Justice. Discourses, Writings and Verses, were on this Subject; but the
Jesuits, who had what they desired, took little notice of these slight storms,
well knowing it to be a Liberty of no consequence, which may be Granted, for
his Consolation, to an Enemy that can do no more mischief, then only evaporate
his Anger in Satyrs and Pasquills. After this, nothing but Favors were granted
to this Society, nothing but Benefices united to the Colleges, but Houses
built to Lodge their Novices more at their Ease.

In the mean time the Kingdom was full of Alarms, and the King received from
all parts Advice of the New Factions.
great designs that the Spaniards had upon several places. Several Parties of
the Malcontents got together, of which the one had for pretense the Public
Good; others designed to raise up the Nobility again, which had bin too much
humbled; others to pull down Roni, whose Fortune they compared to that which
Sejanus had done under Tiberius, and wished that his end might be like to the
downfall of that Favorite, as there had been a resemblance in the advancement
of the one and of the other, and in the abuse which as they pretended the one
in imitation of the other, made of his Masters favor. Others pretended to
Revenge the Death of Biron, whose Relations they were, or else his Creatures.
The greatest part of these Intrigues were Spun by the Marshal de Bouillon, who
thought to render himself formidable, in hopes, perhaps, to be recalled; and
who had every where such great Intelligences, that he seemed capable of putting
all Europe in Combustion He Labored above all things to engage the Reformed in
some League, by insinuating a dread in 'em from the King's having promised the
Legate to Ruin them. And he caused Propositions to be made them for
Establishing fixed Councels in all the Provinces, to Treat of the Affairs of
the Common Cause; to exclude the Kings Officers of all the Politic Debates of
their Assemblies; to draw up Models for Raising Men and Money; and to make
Alliances with Strangers for their Common Defense. But I know not how they
could impute to him any other Projects Inconsistant with these; as to design to
change the Religion; to conspire the Dismembring of the Kingdom; to desire the
Dauphinate for his share; to disturb the Succession of the Dauphin; to make a
League with the Spaniards; to make Peace between them and the United Provinces.
It is impossible to join these Designs with the other; for his part he denied
constantly ever to have had such thoughts; and it was so much the more easy
for him to justify himself in, that it was not possible to find the least
Proof against him in Writing. Some body deposed that Money brought from Spain
was distributed by the Orders of the Marshal to some private Gentlemen of
Querci, Guyenne, and Languedoc; and that they were promised at the same time,
that they should be assisted with greater Succors; but the Sum, which did not
exceed Ten or Twelve Thousand Crowns, was so little, that it could not be
thought to come from Spain, which would never have confined her Profusions to
so small a Matter. It was believed that the Marshal had drawn this Sum out of
his own Purse, to keep his Friends in hope of a more considerable Profit.

Nevertheless, every thing caused a Jealousy in a Kingdom The Assembly at
Chatelleraud.
where the Remains of so many old Factions gave occasion to fear that new ones
were forming; and the Assembly of Chattelleraud being come unlooked for in this
state of Affairs, redoubled the perplexity of the Suspicious; they well knew at
Court that great matters were there to be Debated They were to consult which
way to preserve their places of Security, of which they knew that the Council
would all at once take two Thirds away from them, by distinguishing those which
belonged to particular Lords from those which were the Kings only. The Revolt
of Gentlemen, of which already many Examples had been seen, made the
consequence to be feared; in regard that if one Person of Estate happened to
change his Religion, all his Places would be lost from the Party. Moreover, the
King talked openly of making War against the Marshal de Bouillon, and of
seizing his strong Holds; and nothing could divert him from it, but the
Consideration of his Breeves which allowed the Reformed the keeping of the
Places or Garrisons for a time, which was not yet expired. But the difficulty
was removed, in case the Places belonging to particular Persons, were not
included with those they called Places of Surety; from whence it followed, that
when ever the King should think fit, he might dispossess the Reformed of all
those Places one after another; and the Breach being thus made, it would be
easy also to take the main Places from them. Moreover, those Garrisons belonging
to privite Persons were properly those that were most likely to trouble the
King, not only by reason of their number, but also by impowring their Lords to
act sometimes against the King's Authority. It was a hardship upon the King,
not to be able to deal with them without a formal Siege, and without waging a
just War against them, even at the hazard of offending the whole Party, which
was persuaded that their Safety depended on the keeping of those Places.
Insomuch, that whenever the King expressed some displeasure to see so many
Places in the hands of the Reformed, it was only in relation to those that were
possessed by particular Persons; which were the whole Subject of Roni's
Negotiation with the Assembly of Chatelleraud. The Marshal of Bouillon had
Agents, who were not wanting to give advices upon that Subject, and to
represent how much his particular case was interwoven with the General Safety.
On the other hand, the Reformed were so far from being inclined to suffer their
Places to be taken from them, that in order to secure themselves against the
Conspiracies that were daily formed against them, they desired a Prolongation
of the Time which was allowed them for the keeping of them. Moreover, they also
pretended to keep those the King had given to some of the Reformed since the
Edict, or such as did belong to Persons, who having lately embraced their
Religion, had been assured that they should be maintained in the Possession of
their Holds or Places. So that this Affair was interwoven with diverse
Difficulties, which no body knew how to unravel.

St. Germain, one of the Deputies-General, was a Creature of the Marshals, and
held a close Correspondence with him; and the Marshal by his means held a
Communication with all the Churches. For that reason he was very desirous to
have him continued in that Employment. The thing was to be debated in the
Assembly; and therefore the King, who had only at first allowed Deputies to
reside with him, about the Affairs of the Edict for a season, resolved to make
it an Ordinary Commission, on conditition, that the Assembly should nominate
Six Persons to him, out of which he should choose Two, that he might not be
obliged to continue St. Germain, or to receive another of his Character. Before
the meeting of the Assembly, St. Germain writ St. Germain's Letter to the
Marshall de Bouillon.
to the Marshal to communicate his Sentiments to him about the present
Conjuncture: And his Letter was either Intercepted or Copied by some of those
who gave the Court an account of all that passed. There were several in every
Province who drove that Trade, some to deserve the Pensions they had, or to
obtain some, others out of a kind of simplicity, which induced them to believe
that the Court-party was always the most Innocent because the King's Name was
ever at the Head of it. By their means the Court was informed of diverse
Propositions that had been made in the Provincial Assembly, in order to be
carried into the General.

St. Germain in the said Letter pressed the Marshal to depute some body to the
Assembly. He also urged diverse Reasons, for which in his Opinion, the King
ought to be mistrusted; his Submission to the Councils that came from Rome; the
Authority he allowed the Jesuits; the great Charge he had been at for the
Election of a New Pope to his mind, after the Death of Clement the 8th. The
demolishing of the Pyramid, on the account of which so much severity had been
used, that some People having caused the said Pyramid to be Ingrav'd,
representing all the Sides and Inscriptions of it, to preserve at least the
Image of that Monument, the pulling down of which grieved all True Frenchmen;
care had been taken to discover and suppress the Plate to please the Jesuits.
Moreover St. Germain represented the mischief Roni was able to do. He added the
reasons that should oblige him to quit the General Deputation, which he could
no longer hold without exposing himself to displease the King, or the Reformed;
because that on one side he would be accused of doing too much, and on the
other of doing too little. He acquainted the Marshal that Roni was afraid of
not holding a Rank suitable to his Dignity in the Assembly, by reason that the
King refused to give him a particular Commission to preside in it. He said that
it was impossible to foresee with certainty, the Inclinations of the Deputies
that were to compose the Assembly: but however, that he would do well to write
to them, which would be of some use. He was somewhat at a loss to find a proper
Person, whom the Marshal might trust with his Deputation; and therefore advised
him to give that Commission to the Deputies of Guienue, who might accept it as
a dependency of their particular Charge; the Deputies of every Province
commonly taking upon them the management of the Affairs of the particular
Members thereof.

This expedient was likely to break the Measures the Court took to hinder
private Persons from sending Deputies in their own Name to the Assembly: For
besides Marshal de Bouillon, they were diffident of Lesdiguieres, of the Duke
of Rohan, of la Force, of Chatillon, of du Plessis, and several others.
Therefore in order to apply a proper Remedy to all these Disorders, the King
resolved to send Roni to Chatelleraud with large Instructions; Roni is sent the
King's Commissary at the Assembly. His Instructions.
they were of two kinds, the first, General; the others, Secret, in form of
Addition to the first. By the first, he was ordered to remonstrate to them,
that the Assembly was not very necessary, since the only end of it was but to
receive an Account from the Deputies-General of what they had done for three
years last past, which might be done with less noise: However, that the King
had freely granted it, in hopes that it would serve to congratulate the Peace
which the last Edict had afforded: Upon which Subject he was ordered to declare
that it had been punctually performed; that the King was resolved to maintain
it; that care had been taken that it might be done to the satisfaction of both
Parties, as it appeared by the Answer that had been made to the Petition
presented by the Catholics and Reformed, by which, all Affairs of Consequence
had been immediately regulated. He was further to say, That the King after
having given so many Testimonies of his good Will, would be very much
concerned, should they pitch upon another Protector, he having all along been
so to them, and being resolved always to continue so. That such Assemblies for
the future would become of ill Consequence, the Edicts allowing none but such
as relate to Discipline, in which no Persons were to be admitted, but such as
were to see it performed: That as to what related to Civil Government, they
were to apply themselves to the Judges; and for favors, to the King, who is
the Dispenser of them: That the reasons for holding Political Assemblies, only
about Deputies-General, did not deserve so much show nor expense: That the
Residence of Deputies at Court, was neither mentioned in the Edict, nor in the
private Articles, nor in the Breeves: That it had been granted out of
Toleration, until the Verification of the Edict: That nevertheless the King did
grant the said Residence, and did consent to a certain Form for the Election of
the said Deputies, viz. to name Six, out of which his Majesty would choose Two.
He was also ordered to endeavor, that the said Assembly might Treat of
nothing: but that Nomination; To declare, That that Assembly would serve
instead of that which the Synod of Gap had desired leave to hold at Rochel. Not
to promise any thing without the King's leave, in case they should persist in
desiring another, especially if they desired to hold any contrary to the Edict.
The King allowed him to give them assurances of his own Affection, and ordered
him to excuse the Alteration that was making at Orange, the Government of which
City was to be taken from Blacons, who was disliked by Philip of Nassau, to
whom the City belonged; but to promise them withal, that his Majesty would put
the said Place into the hands of a Person of the Reformed Religion. The King
had a great deal of reason to excuse that Alteration, because the Reformed were
extremely displeased at it, and looked upon that Affair, as being of a general
consequence for their Safety.

The Additions, after a short Preface, in which the King expressed, That
relying on the Affection and Fidelity of the Reformed, he hoped that they had
only ordered such things to their Deputies as were allowable, and not
displeasing to him; obliged him to take care that the question about Antichrist
might not be renewed; that they should receive no Letters from Marshal de
Bouillon, or from Foreign Princes; that he should hinder it at first
underhand; but that in case that would not do, he should oppose it openly, and
make use of his Authority as Governor of 1505.
the Province; That he should suffer no Deputies there from particular Persons;
for example, as from Lesdiguieres, who being dissatisfied with the Court at
that time, joined with the Party again for his own ends. He was commanded to
mention some things the King had been informed of, as if he had learnt them
there himself; to give them hopes at first that the King should prolong the
time prefixed for the keeping of the Places of Surety, without distinguishing
those that belonged to particular Persons from the others; because the King was
willing not to oblige them by halves, provided they behaved themselves as they
should do. The Brief for that prolongation was delivered to him, but he was
ordered not to produce it until he received a positive command so to do. The
King also ordered him to refuse the Assembly the Re-establishment of certain
Funds that had been retrenched, either for Marshal de Bouillon's Places, or
upon the general Settlement of the other Cities of Surety, or upon the Arrears
of certain particular Assignations. The Reason alleged for it was, That the
King had made the same alterations in the Settlements of the Cities and
Garrisons held by the Catholics, who should have had reason to complain, unless
the Reformed had been used in the same manner. Moreover, that he thought that
the Catholics being weakened, by the reducing of their Garrisons to a smaller
number of Men, the Reformed could have no reason to complain at the reducing of
the number of theirs, since they did not want so many to defend them, as when
the Garrisons of those they suspected were stronger. But they did not relish
those Reasons, because they did not think their Cities and Forces of the same
Quality with those of the Catholics. The King only kept up these, because it
was his pleasure; but there was a Treaty between him and the Reformed, which
obliged him to leave them certain Places for a time, which he was to pay the
Garrisons off; insomuch that those of the Catholics were revocable whenever he
pleased; whereas it was a breach of Treaty to meddle with those of the Reformed
before the time, for which the Cities of Surety were granted them: Nevertheless
they could obtain nothing of Roni upon that subject, because he was as
inflexible for them in point of Money, as he was to every body else. Finally,
the King ordered Roni by those Instructions to refuse to interceed for the
Marshal of Bouillon, alleging what he had already attempted in vain for his
Reconciliation: To accept the Presidentship of the Assembly in case it were
offered him: To behave himself toward du Plessis and others, according to the
Affection he should observe in them for the King's Service, and to give an
account of all Occurrences.

Those Instructions were framed upon the knowledge the Court had of all that
was to be proposed in the Assembly; there being Persons in all the Provinces
that informed the Council, as I have already observed, with all the
Propositions the particular Assemblies had Incerted in their Memoirs. But one
of the main Points was the preservation of the Places of Surety: And whereas
the Reformed grounded all the hopes of their safety on the keeping of those
Fortresses, at a time when they plainly saw the Conspiracies that were hatching
against them, the fear of losing them by surprise, kept them in perpetual
agitations. This was the posture of Affairs when Roni came to the Assembly.
Nothing can be more opposite than what most Memoirs relate about his reception
there. Some Historians of great exactness and authority say that he presided
there. The Compilers of Sulli's Memoirs say the contrary, and produce several
of their Master's Letters to the King, in which he excuses himself for not
having accepted the Presidentship, for reasons which he assures himself the
King will relish, when he shall be at liberty to give him an account of them.
They only say, that he might have presided there had he been so minded:
Nevertheless he did not so much as sit among them, by reason that not presiding
there, he could not hold a Rank suitable to the Dignity of Governor of the
Province. Others say, That both the one and the other was refused to him in a
disobliging manner; and they relate the Fact thus,

The Court, say they, being desirous to have Persons devoted to them in the
Assembly, in order to manage the Members according to their intentions, Roni
and Parabere presented themselves there to that end, pretending that no body
could refuse them to sit there, by reason of their Quality; but the Assembly
without Ceremony desired them to leave them at liberty. Parabere was absolutely
engaged in the Interest of the Court, excepting only that he would not believe
the Marshal of Bouillon guilty of the Crimes he was accused of. Therefore when
he alleged the Article made at Ste. Foy, which allowed the Governors of
Provinces to sit in the Assemblies, though they were not deputed, some answered
him plainly, That the said Article had been altered upon his account. In
effect, to secure themselves against false Brethren, and to avoid the Intrigues
and Contestations that were commonly managed to create a division in the
Assembly, the President was Elected in this, before the reading of the
Credentials, contrary to what had been practiced in all the foregoing ones.
Roni was looked upon as a Man sent on purpose to break off the Assembly
handsomely, or to bring them to some Composition by his advice. For that end he
brought Breeves and Promises, to mollify those who were to be moved that way.
But his haughty humor, or his desire to serve the Court even to the prejudice
of his own Religion, as he was wont to do, made him take another course. He
commanded the Assembly, after having named Deputy's General, to break up the
following day at Noon; and he expressed that command in a very rough manner,
without ever mentioning the Breeves he had in his Pocket. He had flattered
himself, that some Members of the Assembly would second him, and would help him
to alarm the rest. But those from whom he expected that Complaisance, having
declared to him that they would remain firm to the Assembly, and that they
would stand by their Resolutions; he was forced to alter his note, and even to
make some satisfaction to those he had offended in particular. He showed the
Breeves he had endeavored to conceal, and distributed the Pensions wherewith
the Court desired to buy the Votes of the most considerable.

These last Memoirs seem to agree best with certain Circumstances, that are
taken out of that Lord's own Memoirs. The first Speech he made to the Assembly
is to be seen in them, His Speech.
which had more of Threats than Modesty in it; the haughtiness of which
displeased every body. He far exceeded the Instructions that had been given him
in Writing; and whether he had received other Orders verbally, or that he
thought fit to do more than he was ordered, his behavior proved as harsh and
disobliging, as his instructions were wise and moderate. It is true that he
said many things that might be useful; but even Truth it self lost its force in
such a Man's Mouth. Therefore he vainly employed all his Power to dissuade the
Reformed from keeping of their Places. He endeavored to persuade that every
one being willing to keep his, the great numbers of them only served to destroy
their Forces, which by that means were too much divided. He warned them not to
trust Lesdiguieres, who would change his Religion as soon as he thought that
step necessary to preserve his Authority and his Cities, etc. in Dauphine. As
he had no such things to urge against du Plessis, whose Behavior was
untainted, and his Religion fixed, he endeavored to turn him into Ridicule,
together with his design of Fortifying Saumur; the circumference of which he
designed to enlarge to that degree, that it would require 8000 Men in Garrison.
He pressed them to Surrender Nine parts of their Places to the King, and only
to keep the Tenth, which would be the more easy to defend; after which he
forewarned them not to receive either in common or in particular, any Letters
or Deputations from Foreigners, or suspected Persons, whom he named to them;
because that in case those Persons had any Concerns, they might have sent them
in the Petition of their Provinces: And finally, in case they refused, he
threatened them with his Authority as Governor.

This Behavior probably occasioned the ill treatment those last Memoirs
mention: But when he grew more affable, the Deputies became more gentle; and
after several Negotiations, he obtained almost all what the King desired,
because he had at last satisfied both the particular Members and the whole
Assembly. He prevailed with them to desist from the thought of erecting
Provincial Councils every where, which should have been different Provincial
Councils.
from the Provincial Political Assemblies in several things; but especially in
that they should always have been fixed, and in being, whereas those Assemblies
were only upon occasion, and from time to time. Yet he had no express Orders to
hinder that new Establishment, but only to do it if he could; or otherwise to
endeavor that it might be composed of quiet people, well affected to the
State, and of a proper Quality to apply themselves there in case of necessity:
That is, they had no mind to have any Presbyters there, because they were a
sort of People the Court did not care to negotiate with, which they looked upon
to be more independent from them than the Gown or Sword men. That Affair cost
Roni but little trouble, since there needed no more to hinder that new
Institution, but to acquaint' them that the King disapproved it. Not but there
were some erected already in some Provinces, according to the Regulations made
at Ste. Foy, but they hardly did any thing; and above all, they wanted
Correspondencies one with another. Therefore in the following Reign people
said, That the Reformed had made a modest use of that Institution under this.
The Nomination of the Deputies cost him a great deal more. The Marshal de
Bouillon was very earnest to have St. Germain continued. Lesdiguieres was for
Bellujon, who was his Creature, and who under the Deputies General.
Name of Deputy*General, should have been his Spy and Confident at Court. The
same Reasons which induced these two Lords to desire Deputies in whom they
might confide, made the King refuse both. Moreover it had been proposed in some
Provinces to augment the number of the Deputies General, and to join one to the
two ordinary ones that should be chosen among the Ministers. Beraud, one of the
Ministers of Montauban, seconded that Proposition, by reason that he pretended
to that Nomination, and that he endeavored to obtain it almost publicly. But
the Court did not like that multiplication of Deputies; neither were they
willing to consent to it in favor of a Minister. Roni ordered matters so, that
they kept to the number of two; and that a Nomination of six Persons was made,
among which the King Elected La Noue and du Cross. It is true, that the
Nomination of six was only a Ceremony, since it was very well known that La
Noue and du Cross would have the King's Approbation; the one by reason of his
moderation, the other because he was deputed by the Province of Dauphine into
the Assembly; and that in refusing Bellujon whom the King disliked, he had
offered to accept a man who should have a dependency on Lesdiguieres, as being
his Vassal, and living in a Country where he had a full power.

Roni endeavored according to his Instructions to make the General Assemblies.
Reformed consent to hold no more General Assemblies, because they always
created some Jealousies in the Court. But that Proposition frightened the
Reformed, who looked upon it as being Inspired by their Enemies, and as a snare
tending to break the Union which had maintained them till then. Neither could
the Promise of allowing them Conferences and Synods there, to treat about the
Affairs of their Discipline, content them. There were other Affairs of as great
moment, which those Ecclesiastical Assemblies took no cognizance of, which
could not be neglected, without exposing the Reformed to an approaching Ruin.
So that the Court was obliged to allow them Political Assemblies, upon
condition that they should acquaint the King with the Reasons that should make
them judge it necessary; and in that case, if the King found there was any
occasion for it, he promised to give them satisfaction. The King remained
Master by that Accommodation; and in granting out of hand what might have given
occasion for an Assembly, he might easily stop the project thereof: And the
Reformed on the other hand were sensible that they should daily meet sufficient
occasions to desire leave to have them. And indeed they assembled several times
again in that Reign, and in the following; until their Division and Weakness
afforded the Court an occasion to suppress them quite. But what Roni Union
renewed
granted them upon that Subject, did not hinder the Assembly from renewing the
Union of Nantes, and to swear it anew. The Court was very much disturbed at it,
looking upon that Oath as the Project of a Republic they designed to form in
the State. The King was particularly displeased at Lesdiguieres having signed
the Lesdiguieres enters into it.
Union, after having so lately received a particular Favor from him. He had
given Crequi, his Son in Law, the command of the Guards, to make him forget the
Count of Soisson's Enterprise, and the Journey of Provence. But though he was
no great pretender to Religion, he thought his safety for that time would be
more consistent with the union of the Churches, than in separating from their
Interests.

Roni who had not been able to ward that Blow, endeavored Roni excuses that
New Oath.
to excuse it, and to extenuate the consequence thereof. He wrote to the King,
That the said Union did not proceed from any ill Intention in the Reformed, and
that nothing but the fear of the Courts endeavoring to destroy them, in case
any disunion should reign among them, had inspired them with it; That they
should have no fears, were the King immortal; but that the remembrance of the
24th of August, 1572. stuck in their Stomachs: That the Duke of Mayenne's
Proposition of only granting them an Edict of Toleration from time to time,
obliged them to think on the future, so much the rather, because that Prince's
Demand, expressed the Pretentions of the major part of the Catholickcs, and
especially of the Court of Rome: That that was the end of their Union, which
after all was nothing but a Chimera which he laughed at; that it would destroy
it self; that the Places they possessed were more chargeable to them by their
number, than of use for their safety. However the Court would have been glad to
prevail with the Reformed not to insist in desiring to continue the keeping of
them beyond the eight Years the King had granted them at Nantes. Yet at last
the Court consented to their keeping of them three years longer: And because
that did not content them, another year was added to it; so that by a Brief of
the 1o of August, the keeping of their Places was continued A Brief for the
keeping of the Hostage Cities.
to them for four Years longer. Moreover they obtained a Year more upon other
Terms, by a Brief of the same Day, which declared, That the eight Years granted
at Nantes should only be reckoned from the day of the verification of the Edict
in all the Parliaments. In the said Brief the Places belonging to private
Persons were not distinguished from the others, by reason that it would have
been difficult to obtain from every particular Person to consent to the
retrenching of his, seeing that of another preserved. But to authorize Roni,
and to make the world believe that he labored heartily for the preservation of
his Brethren, the King did as if he only granted those Favors at his
solicitation.

It was at this price, and by some promised or restored Pensions, The Assembly
suffer the Marshal of Bouillon's Places to be taken.
that the King bought leave to take possession of the Places be longing to the
Marshal of Bouillon. Roni's Intriegues were more prevailing than all the
Endeavors of the Marshal and his Friends. The Assembly refused to interest it
self for the preservation of his Places. The Argument they used for it, was,
That in some preceding Assemblies, in which the Intriegues of the Cabinet had
inclined him to thwart such particular Persons as were desirous to recommend
their Affairs to the General, he had put a stop by his Example to such
deliberations; and that he ought not to take it amiss, if he was now used
according to his own Maxims, since he had been warned of it, whilst he was
practicing them against others. The Effect of that Negotiation was, that after
the breaking up of the Assembly, the King took possession of the Places
belonging to the said Marshal, though they were Places of surety as well as the
others, none of the Reformed offering to defend them. The Marshal on his side
behaved himself like a good Politician, ordering his Men to deliver them up to
the King without compulsion; Whether it were that he thought it inconsistent
with the Innocence he boasted of, to take up Arms against his Sovereign; or
whether not judging himself strong enough to resist Royal Forces, he was
willing to prevent the ruin of his Places, which he was in hopes to have
restored to him by an Accommodation.

Besides all these Advantages, Roni prevailed with the Assembly Other
Advantages which Roni obtains of the Assembly.
not to urge the restoring of the Edict to its first extent: Insomuch that at
that time the King was not importuned with a Proposition from which the
Reformed never desisted till after the ruin of their Affairs under his Son's
Reign. Neither was any thing moved about the matter of Antichrist, by reason
that the Political Assembly referred the Affairs about Doctrine to the Synods
The Grand Machine Roni set at work to gain peoples minds, besides
Gratifications and Promises, was, that of the King's grand Designs, in which
the Protestant Princes entered upon certain Conditions, of which one was, the
preservation of the Protestant and Reformed Religions. This was sufficient to
dazzle people, who imagined that all the Promises that were made to them, would
be accomplished as faithfully as they desired it earnestly.

The Spaniards, according to their wonted Custom, made a great deal of noise at
Rome, about the King's having allowed the Reformed to keep the Places of surety
four years longer: And some of the Speculators of that Court declared, that the
King ought to have retaken them by open force, even at the hazard of renewieg
the Civil War. But the Pope dreaded the League into which the Marshal of
Bouillon endeavored to draw all the Protestants of Europe, under the King of
England, whose inclination for the Catholics were not yet known. He considered
that the Roman Religion would have been endangered by so potent a Union, if the
Protestants had received cause to arm in the heat of their first Zeal, before
the Catholic States could have formed a sufficient League to resist them:
Moreover, that the War would only serve to form closer Engagements between the
Reformed of France, and Foreign Powers, whom they stood in need of for their
preservation: Whereas in time of peace, and process of time, their ardour would
certainly cool, many of their Chiefs would die, or be divided; their Discipline
would slacken, and they would lose their Engagements and Intelligences.
Insomuch that the Pope commended the King's prudence, and approved his having
granted to the Reformed the keeping of all their Places for four years longer.
Thus Roni's Deputation to Chatelleraud proved very The Pope is very well
satisfied with it.
useful to the King; and at the same time his Negotiation was so agreeable at
Rome, that Du Perron, who was there at that time, writ to him to congratulate
his Success in the said Commission, and to let him know how much the Pope was
pleased with it.

Roni's Ambition was very singular; although he professed the Reformed
Religion, he made it his study to acquire the Pope's favor. He valued himself
upon having more Friends at Rome, The Deputies of the Assembly are caressed at
Court.
and upon his receiving more Applauses there, than among those of his own
Religion: Neither did it burden his Conscience to find that the Court of Rome
was better satisfied than his Brethren with his way of managing their Liberties
and Safeties. In the mean time the Deputies of the Assembly repaired to the
Court, where they were very well received, and where neither fair Words nor
Caresses were spared. The chief reason of that good Reception, was the secret
Assurances they gave, that the Reformed would not take Arms for the Marshal of
Bouillon; and that they would not hinder the King from taking his Places, and
of disposing of them as of Cities taken in a just War. Besides these Civilities
redounded to the advantage of Roni, whose Negotiations had been so prosperous:
And the King had no better way to express how well he was pleased with the
complaisance of that Assembly toward that Favorite, than by those marks of
his Good Will.

The Clergy assembled that Year, as well as the Reformed, and did not break up
until the following Year. The Place of the Assembly Assembly of the Clergy.
was Paris, where Villars, Archbishop of Vienna, who made a Speech to the
King, filled his Discourse with Allusions relating to the Reformed: But above
all, he made very mournful Complaints about the Condition to which the
Catholic Religion was reduced; and, he endeavored to persuade that it
labored under great oppressions. It Is the common Style of their Harangues:
They are all upon the same Tone; and it has been observed, that the Clergy in
the greatest Luster in which it has appeared these 500 Years, has still made as
bitter Complaints, as if the Roman Church had been reduced to the utmost
desolation However, the Archbishop's Complaints reduced themselves, in
requiring the Publication of the Council of Trent, the Re-establishment of the
Elections, and the abolishment of Laick Pensions. Moreover he accused the
Reformed of several Infractions of the Edict of Nants, and of several Scandals
committed against the Catholic Religion. Among the rest, he accused them of
having profaned some Churches, and of having trampled upon the Sacrament which
the Catholics adore at Milhau. The King's Answer received different
Constructions; some thought it favorable, and others disobliging: But as to
the Excesses that were laid to the Charge of the Reformed, he spoke like a
Prince who was not persuaded that there was any truth in it. He desired that it
might be proved, and then promised to do them justice. The Clergy had occasion
to renew their Complaints under the next Reign, and finally they took vengeance
on the whole Party for a pretended Outrage, the Resentment whereof, at most,
should not have extended beyond those who should have been guilty thereof.

At that time it was sincerely acknowledged, that the Edict allowed 1606.
Liberty of Conscience to all the French, whether Ecclesiastics, or Laics.
Therefore Monks and Priests were often seen to embrace the Reformed Religion.
Those Conversions were cruel Artifice to hinder the Ecclesiastics from
changing their Religion.
Mortifications to the Clergy, who looked upon the Custom of some of the
Churches in the Meridional Provinces, as Affronts to them, they preserving the
Habits of those Proselites in their Vestries as Trophies erected with the
Spoils of the Roman Religion, in honor of the Reformed. The Clergy not daring
to desire the King to hinder those Conversions, by reason that the Law by which
they were authorized, was as yet too new to be so soon violated in a Point of
that importance, bethought it self of an Expedient which might have the same
effect as a formal Defense. They made use of an Article in their Petitions, by
which supposing that the Ecclesiastics could never side with the Reformed,
unless to avoid the Canonical Punishment of their Crimes, and disorderly
Course, they desired leave to try them, before they could make profession of
the Reformed Religion. This was an infallible way to hinder the Ecclesiastics
from changing, since it was an easy matter to frame an Accusation true or false
against a suspected Person; after which they might have forced him by Menaces
and ill usage to alter his Mind, or tire him with long Imprisonments; or in
case they had been obliged to release him, load him with ignominious
Condemnations, which would have destroyed all the Fruit the Reformed hoped to
reap by such Conversions. This Article was granted to the Clergy, who made use
of it on some occasions, when they could lay hold on such as they thought
wavering in the Catholic Doctrine. But they never derived all the Advantages
they expected by it, by reason that those who were willing to quit the Roman
Religion, for the most part found Means to escape the fury of those unmerciful
Judges.

The Clergy obtained, notwithstanding, several favorable Regulations, Edict in
favor of the Clergy.
of which they composed an Edict which was long a drawing, and yet longer
before they could get the Verification thereof. That which related to Religion,
was, That the Reformed should not be allowed Burying Places, either in
Churches, or Monasteries, nor in the Churchyards belonging to the Catholics,
not even under pretense of Foundation, or Patronage: That no Temples should be
built so near Churches, that the Ecclesiastics in performing Divine Service
might receive the least disturbance or scandal thereby: That the Regents, or
Teachers, Tutors, or Schoolmasters of Villages, should be approved of by the
Curates, without prejudicing the Edict of Nantes.

Roni found his Services rewarded that Year with the Dignity of Roni Duke and
Peer of France.
Duke and Peer; and it was only to hinder the Pope from murmuring thereat, that
he made so many steps to persuade the Court of Rome that he was not overmuch
conceited with the Reformed Religion. The Marshal of Bouillon also made his
Peace, The Marshal of Bouillon makes his Peace.
when the King advanced to lay a Siege before Sedan. Sulli, that was the Name
Roni took after his new Dignity, had been a great promoter of that Siege, and
had made vast Preparations for the taking of that Place. But the Marshal's
submission broke all the Measures of that envious Person. He delivered up the
Castle of Sedan to the King, who was to restore it to him at the end of four
years; but the King only took it out of Ceremony, and returned it to the
Marshal almost as soon as he had delivered it into his hands. This
Reconciliation was made without the Duke of Sully's participation, which proved
a great Mortification to him. Whether the King designedly concealed it from
him, lest he should oppose it; or whether Velleroy, who was the manager
thereof, would have the Marshal solely obliged to him for it; at least Sully
complained, that Villeroy had sent him the King's Letter by an indirect way,
whereby he was desired to share in that Treaty; insomuch that he was ignorant
of the Project, till after it was concluded. However it is most certain, that
the Marshal was a necessary Person for the King's Design, by reason of his
credit among Foreign Protestants, who placed an entire confidence in him, and
whose Friendship the King was resolved to preserve at any rate. Therefore the
Marshal was observed the very next day after his Reconciliation, to be as far
in the King's favor and Familiarity as ever he had been.

During these Transactions, the Court continued to cause the Treaty with the
Rochelois.
Edict to be put in execution where it was necessary. The Commissioners had
reestablished the Mass at Rochel, but that Worship had been so long
interrupted there, that the People being no longer accustomed to it, the
renewing thereof was very much thwarted. The Clergy applied it self to the
King, to obtain greater Liberties. But the Court was at a great loss to Answer
their Petition, not daring to do it favorably, for fear of occasioning some
Commetion at Rochel; nor harshly, lest the Ecclesiastics should thereby lose
the hopes of returning thither. The thing was referred to an Arbitration, and
Sully was chosen Mediator. The Rochelois had some confidence in him, perhaps
because some among them received Pensions. Some Effects of that Confidence had
appeared in the Affair of the Pancarte. The demands of the Clergy were reduced
to Six Articles. Sully made them desist from the two first, which related to
their Houses and Revenues. He obtained a grant for them upon the Third, for
leave to visit the Sick in the Hospitals, and Criminals, and others in the
Prisons, and to administer Confession, and the Communion to them, on condition
that it should be performed secretly, and without Pomp; and he prevailed with
the Ecclesiastics not to accompany the Criminals to the Place of Executition.
Upon the Fourth, he persuaded the Reformed to allow that the Ecclesiastics
should assist at Burials, provided it were not in the Form of a Procession,
carrying the Cross on high; but that they should have leave to wear their
Canonical Habits in the Streets, and that the People should be hindered from
insulting, or abusing them. Upon the Fifth he advised the Catholics not to
pretend to Places, unless called to them by the usual way of Suffrages; but at
the same time, that no difficulty should be made to admit them to Arts and
Trades, and that the Catholic Journy-men should not be turned out of the City,
lest the Catholics should do the same in those Places where they were the
strongest. Upon the Sixth, By which the Catholics desired a Place of Worship,
pretending that the Commissioners had assigned them one, he gave his Opinion
for leave to build a Church there, provided the Place were neither suspicious
nor troublesome; that in that case it would be fit to prevail with them to
accept another; that upon their refusal, it would be proper to offer a Petition
to the King to obtain a Regulation, and to abstain from ways of Fact. These
Advices, which had been agreed upon by the King and the Catholics, and which
served partly as a Law, until the renewing of the Troubles, show that the grand
Maxim that was observed in the Execution of the Edict, was to leave things in
the same Condition into which the Edict had found them; and to preserve to the
Reformed Religion the Privilege of Superiority in those Places where they
enjoyed it at the time of the Edict; as the Roman Religion enjoyed it in those
Places out of which they had not been dispossessed.

One would have thought that the King's Reconciliation with the Pope, and all
that he had done since to persuade that he Priests who refuse to pray for the
King.
was a sincere Catholic, should have removed all the Scruples of the Bigots,
and brought back every body to their Duty. However there still were some
Clergymen so much disaffected to him, that they did not pray for his Person in
the public Service. Moreover, there were several Churches under the
Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Thoulouse, where they made use of Mass-Books,
in which that Prayer was omitted; and the said Books were so much in Vogue,
that three Impressions of it had been sold during the Wars; one of Lions,
another of Paris, and the third of Bourdeaux. The Parliament of Thoulouse was
obliged to remedy it that year, by a Decree which they gave on the Month of
June, whereby the use of the said Mass*Book was prohibited, and the Priests
were commanded to mention the King in the Prayers of the Mass.

But an Affair of far greater consequence occasioned a great deal Powder Plot.
more noise. The Jesuits had of late imbroil'd all Europe by their Intrigues,
and had promoted Bloody Tragedies in Sweden, Muscovy, Poland, Prussia, and
Hungary. But that which they had designed for England, was far more worthy of
them, had the Success answered their hopes. They had designed to blow up the
King and Parliament with Powder, which they had laid to that purpose under the
House where they Assemble, which was to have been fired at the King's coming
in. The said Conspiracy was discovered upon the very point of Execution, and
some Jesuits who had a hand in it, were punished, High Treason being fully
proved against them, which did not hinder their Order from placing them among
the Martyrs. The King's Complaisance for the Court of Rome, could not hinder
them from forming that horrid Conspiracy against him. Although he used his best
endeavors to persuade the Court of Rome, that he inclined to their Sentiments;
and that he expressed as much by his Public and Private Discourses; and that
there was a kind of a Secret Negotiation between the Pope and him about
Religion, which Henry the 4th was Mediator of, the Court of Rome did not
confide in him; whether they had no good Opinion of his steadiness, or whether
they thought his Complaisance was only an effect of Policy, to oblige the
Catholics of his Kingdoms to remain quiet, in hopes of a better Condition. But
he quite ruined his Reputation there by the Oath he exacted from Oath exacted
from the Catholics in England.
the Catholics, by which he made them acknowledge, that they had no dependency
on any Foreign Power; that he was Sovereign in his Kingdoms, even in
Ecclesiastical Causes. This Oath was the Discourse of Europe for several years,
and served to create Divisions among the Catholics of England, of which some
maintained it lawful, and others contrary to their Consciences. The Pope joined
with the last, which was the Party of the Jesuits. But there were some English
Priests, who neither believed the Pope nor Jesuits in that point, and who
exhorted the Catholics to take that Oath without scruple. The King himself
writ in defense of his Oath, and his Book had the success I have expressed
elsewhere.

In France the Jesuits advanced their Affairs with a wonderful facility: And
tho several Cities refused to consent to their Establishment, they
notwithstanding daily obtained new Favors. However, they could not prevail to
hinder the King that Year from granting the Reformed a Boon. By the Treaty of
the Reduction of Paris, the Exercise of their Religion was not to be allowed
them nearer than at the distance of five Leagues. It had been allowed at Ablon,
a place a little nearer than that Article mentioned. But yet the distance was
too great to permit them to go and come in a Day, especially in the Winter
time. It was very inconvenient for such as had Children to be Christened, the
Reformed at that time not allowing Baptism to be Administered out of their
Assemblies. They alleged that several Children died by the way, which might
have been Christened had the place of their Exercise been nearer: which reason
was capable to move the Catholics upon the account of their Opinion concerning
the necessity of Baptism. Moreover, Foreigners, and the Lords of the Court
complained, that it was impossible for them to pay their Duty to God, and to
the King, in one and the same Day, by reason of the great distance to which
they were obliged to go to make their Devotions; which at that time seemed more
inconvenient than ever: The Duchess of Bar's Death having deprived them of the
Advantage of Religious Worship at Court, which they had enjoyed whilst she was
a live. Therefore the Reformed desired to have a place nearer, to remedy those
inconveniences: The Reformed of Paris obtain the Exercise of their Religion to
be performed at Charenton.
And the King being desirous to favor them, of two places which they had
pitched upon, granted them one, which was the Village of Charenton, near the
Abbey of St. Maur, within two short Leagues of Paris. They obtained his Letters.
Patent for it, bearing date the 1st of August, by virtue of which they were put
in Possession thereof within a few days. The King by the same Letters reserved
to himself the Cognizance of all the Oppositions and Appellations that might be
formed upon that Subject, and forbid the Parliament and all other Judges to
meddle with it.

That Affair did not pass without difficulty; tho it met with none from those
who were most able to oppose it; viz. the Parisians, who might pretend that the
said Grant violated the Edict of their Reduction. It was the Lord of Charenton
who opposed The Lord of the Manor opposes it in vain.
it, grounding the said Opposition upon that Article of the Edict which forbids
the settling of the Religious Worship of the Reformed in Manors belonging to
Catholics, against the Will of the Lords thereof; but those Oppositions were
shifted off by transferring them to the Council. Nevertheless, the Successors
of the said Lord, have renewed them from time to time, as if they had been
concerned at the improvement of their Manor; the Village, which of it self was
one of the poorest in the Kingdom, being grown one of the most considerable and
richest, by the incredible Trade it occasioned there every Sunday. But
notwithstanding all those Oppositions, the Exercise of the Reformed Religion
has been continued there until the Revocation of the Edict. The Rabble was not
so easily suppressed as that Lord's endeavors. A Sedition in Paris.
Soon after that new Establishment, they excited a violent Sedition at St.
Anthony's Gate, which is the nearest to Charenton, against the Reformed, at
their coming back from their Temple. Tho the Magistrates immediately repaired
thither, it was not in their power to remedy it: And the consequences might
have proved of very ill consequence, had not the King come back on purpose from
Fontainbleau to Paris to give his Orders there. His Presence restored Peace and
Union into the City, and confirmed the Reformed in the possession of the favor
he had granted them.

About the same time the King received the Petitions which the Deputies General
presented to him very favorably, which were very large, and very material. The
most considerable Articles were, That the Modifications of the Edict, made by
diverse Courts and Jurisdictions, might be cut out: That it might be recorded
with the particular Articles in such places where it had not been done yet:
That the Comissioners already nominated, might be obliged to execute the Edict
in Burgundy, in Dauphine, and in other places where it had not been done yet:
That the Charges of their Journey might be allowed them, to remove all pretense
of delay: That the Ecclesiastical Lordships of the first Places of Bailiwicks
might not be exempted: That the Restriction of the second might be removed,
which had been added after the first Expedition of the Edict; and that the
Lands belonging to the Orders of Knighthood, might not be comprehended under
the Denomination of Ecclesiastical Lordships: That the Poor might be received
into Hospitals, and share in the Public Alms proportionably to the number of
the Inhabitants, and that they should not be molested upon the account of
Religion; or otherwise, That the Reformed Inhabitants of the places where the
general Gatherings should be made, might not be obliged to contribute toward
them: That in such Places where they had allowed no Churchyards to the
Reformed, they might be allowed to bury their Dead in the Old Churchyards, and
that the Ecclesiastics should not be allowed to disturb them in the same, or
to take up the Corpse, which the Official of Anger, the Bishop of Alby, and the
Cardinal of Sourdis, were accused to have done to some that had been buried
above Six, some even Eighteen Years: That a stop might be put to the Seditions
that were excited in diverse places against the Reformed, either at their coming
back from Divine Service, or when they held their Conferences or Synods: That
Officers might not be allowed to sit in their Assemblies in that Quality as
they had pretended to do it in diverse Provinces: That the Ministers might be
allowed to Visit the Sick, and such as were Condemned to Dye, and that the
Priest and other Catholics should not be allowed to divert them from their
Belief: That they might be exempted from contributing toward the Fraternities,
Casting of Bells, Reparation of Churches, and the like, conformably to the
Second of the particular Articles, which the constraints imposed by the Judges,
and the Precipitation of the Syndies rendered of no use; even forcing the
Reformed to contribute toward certain Collections made for the Capucins,
Jesuits, and other Ecclesiastics; whereupon they beseech'd his Majesty, That
whenever he should allow such Gatherings, an express Clause might be inserted
in the Grant, declaring the Reformed exempt of such Taxes, the which might
empower the Chambers of the Edict to take Cognizance of the Infractions
thereof: That the Reformed might be allowed the peaceable Possession of the
Employments they had; upon which several Examples were alleged of the
Oppositions they had met with: That they might be received into the Offices of
Receivers of the Tithes: That the Six Reformed Counselors, or at least Three
of them, might serve commonly at Paris in the Chamber of the Edict, to the end
that there might be People enough to have an eye upon the observation of the
Edicts, and that in case of Absence or Recusation, some body might constantly
remain there to take care of it: That it might not be in the Power of
Parliaments to judge the Affairs of the Reformed, unless they pleaded voluntary
before them; and that the Counselors of the Reformed Religion, who should be
accused of Misdemeanors in their Offices, might only be summoned before the
Chambers they were Members of: That no removal might be allowed from one Court
to another without a just Cause: That in such a Case the Neighboring Chamber
might judge according to the Formalities, Use, and Customs of the Places where
the Suits were depending, without obliging the Parties to appear Personally,
unless at the Charge of those that summoned them there: That the Registers of
the Parliaments of Burgundy, Provence, and others, might be obliged to send to
the Register's Office of the Courts, where the Affairs of the Reformed of their
Jurisdiction were referred, the Original of the Criminal Informations that lay
before them, by reason that in several cases the Extracts were not sufficient:
That the Reformed might not be obliged to appear in person to demand a removal,
nor to surrender themselves Prisoners, unless to the Courts where the Removal
should be desired. There were several others, some refused, or not answered,
and others of less consequence.

The King's Answer to all these Articles was as favorable and as just as could
be expected from an Equitable Prince, who desired Favorable Answers to the
Petitions.
the welfare of his Subjects. His Majesty ordered all the Modifications of the
Edict to be cut out: That it should be Registered in such Places where it had
not been done yet: That the Bailiffs, and Seneschals, or their Deputies, should
execute the Edict at the first requiring, and take a Catholic or Reformed
Assistant, according to the Religion they should be of themselves: That the
Reformed should continue the Exercise of their Religion in such places as were
allowed them by the Edict of 1577. belonging to the Ecclesiastics; but that
the Lands belonging to the Order of Maltha should have the same Privilege, for
the performing of the Exercises granted by the new Edict, as the other Lands
belonging to the Clergy: That the Poor should participate without distinction
to the benefit of Hospitals and Alms: That Places should be provided for the
Burying of the Reformed, and that no Prosecutions should be made against them
for the Burials they had hitherto made in Catholic Churchyards: That his
Majesty's Officers should prevent Popular Commotions and Injuries by Words or
Fact: That they should not be allowed to disturb the Reformed in their
Conferences and Synods, or to sit among them in the same; and that the Reformed
should admit none but Ministers and Elders there, and should treat about
nothing but the Affairs relating to their Discipline in the same; but that it
should be free for them to hold other Assemblies by the King's leave, to
Nominate Deputies-General to reside near him: That the fourth of the particular
Articles, touching Liberty to assist the Sick and Condemned, should be
observed: That the second should also be observed, which exempts from
contributing toward Fraternities: That the Clause of Exemption should be put
in favor of the Reformed in the Letters the King should grant, to make
Collections applicable to the use of the Roman Church; and that the Infractions
should only be Tried in the Chambers of the Edict, or Party Courts: That
according to the 27th Article of the Edict, a stop should be put to all the
Obstacles that were raised against the Reformed, who were provided with
Imploys: That no alteration should be made to the Order established for the
Chamber of the Edict of Paris, but that in case of illness, recusation, or
absence of the Person who was to serve in the Chamber, the Elder of the other
five should serve in his room, while those Causes should be depending: That the
Decrees of Parliament should only be put in execution against such as should
plead voluntarily before them; and that such Reformed Officers as should be
accused of Misdemeanors, should be summoned for the same only in the Chambers
of the Edict: That no transferring of Causes should be allowed to the prejudice
of the Edict: That the Registers who had Informations against the Reformed,
should send the Originals to the Chambers, unless some Catholics were guilty
of the same Crime, or concerned in the Dependencies thereof, and already
Appeach'd by Catholic Judges, who should have ordered the entering of the
Informations in their own Offices; in which case the Extract or Copies of the
same should only be sent to the Register's Offices of the said Chambers:
Finally, that the Reformed should be received to desire the Parliaments to
grant them a removal by Attorney, without being obliged to appear there in
Person.

At the very beginning of the following year, the Jesuits undertook 1607.
The Jesuit Seguiran's Enterprise to Preach at Rochel.
a thing, which in any but themselves would have beer judged worthy of a severe
punishment; whereby it is apparent, that as they feared nothing, they had found
the way to make themselves feared. Seguiran, one of the boldest of that Order,
being favored by Varenne their Protector, obtained Letters from two
Secretaries of State, without the King's knowledge, though in his Name, to those
of Rochel, commanding them to allow him to Preach in their City. The Jesuit
presented himself at the Gates, and boldly told his Name, his Profession, his
Design, and his pretended Power from the King. The Rochellois refused to let
him enter into their City, answering, That they were very well satisfied that
Jesus had no Companion, nor he any Letters from the King. The Jesuit made a
great deal of noise about their refusal; and the King, out of Policy, not to
discredit the Letters subsign'd by the Secretaries of State, or not to offend
so daring a Society, seemed to be very angry at it. He gave Seguiran other
Mortifications of the Jesuits.
Letters, and obliged Rochel to receive him for form sake; after which he
ordered him to retire quietly. The King at the very time he seemed to be angry,
whispered to his Confidents, that the Rochelois were not in the wrong. There
were also Catholics, who did not use the Jesuits better than the Rochelois had
done. Poitiers refused to allow them to establish a College there; and the
Bishop was the most Zealous Opposer thereof. The Jesuit Cotton endeavored to
lay the blame of it upon the Duke of Sully, and to make the King believe, that
he was the Person who had hindered them from entering into that Important City,
accusing him to have written against them to the Bishop. That Prelate, who was
not their Friend, cleared him from that Aspersion; and in order the better to
convince the Jesuit of Calumny, he sent the King the Letters which Sully had
written to him upon that subject. Those who have written Cotton the Jesuits
Life, or rather the Romance which they have intitl'd his Life, have mentioned
Sully's Accusation by that Jesuit, but did not think fit to mention his
Justification by the Bishop. Nothing can evidence the esteem which the
Catholics themselves, who were true Frenchmen, had of the probity of that
Sect, better than what passed between some Jesuits, and a Canon of Nostredame,
or our Lady of Paris. The Jesuits to honor their Church of La Fleche, daily
solicited the King to grant them his Heart, to put it there after his Death.
The Chapter of Nostredame pretended that it was an Ancient Privilege belonging
to that Church, to have the keeping of the Kings Hearts: Insomuch, that the
Pretension of the Jesuits met with great oppositions in those Canons, who were
unwilling to yield them so considerable an advantage. During those
Contestations, a Canon being netled at the Jesuits Impudence, asked them
Cruelly, alluding to the Name of that City, for which they desired that Honor?
which of the two they desired most earnestly to put the King's Heart in Which
signifies a Dart or Arrow.
La Fleche, or to put La Fleche into the King's Heart. They often received such
Mortifications; but the success of their designs served to comfort them for
all; and they despised the World, because they had the Chief of the Council at
their Devotion, and that the King feared them.

In the Month of February the King answered the particular Petition of the
Province of Normandy. The Reformed complained in the same of several things in
which they were disturbed, without regard to the Regulations that had already
been made on their behalf. They remonstrated particularly, that by the absence,
recusation, or illness of the Reformed Counselors who served in the Court of
the Edict, it often happened that Suits were tried, and none of the Reformed
present; whereupon they desired that one of the two others might take the room
of him that was absent. They complained of the Summons the Council granted to
people who obliged them to go to plead in suspected Parliaments: That the Lords
in whose Manors Places were allowed them for the exercise of their Religion,
disturbed them in the Possession of the said Places, to oblige the Communities
to allow them a Vicar, Substitute, or Deputy, (which they desired to be free
from by a Fine once paid:) That at Roan on Solemn Festivals they only opened
the Wicket of the Gates for them, which hindered them from assisting at Divine
Service. That very inconvenient places were allowed them for Burial; the Judges
only allowing them in Highways and Dunghils, or in Commons distant from all
Habitations, even which they refused to do, unless paid for their pains. The
King granted them upon all these Points favorable answers; he ordered that in
the absence of the Councellor in waiting, in the Court of the Edict, the Eldest
of the two others should officiate in his stead; that no farther Summons should
be granted contrary to the Edict, and that those that had occasioned the
complaint should be brought before the Council, there to be revoked unless
conformable to the Regulations: That the Lords should content themselves with
an lademnity once paid, to be referred to expert Persons by the consent of both
Parties, or Persons nominated for such an Office: That the Gates of Roan should
be kept open on solemn Days for the convenience of the Reformed, at least those
two that lead toward that place which was allowed them for Divine Service; and
that the Judges should allow convenient places for Burial, in places belonging
to the King, or Commonalties, or otherwise; that a place should be bought at
the common Cost of the Reformed and Catholics, which the Judges should be
obliged to do without Fees; and that within the Fortnight mentioned in the 28th
and 29th Articles of the Edict of Nantes.

Nothing of moment passed elsewhere, besides the National Synod Synod at Rochel.
that was held at Rochel. The Reformed had solicited to obtain it the year
before; but the King who was afraid of scandalizing the Legate, who was coming
into France to Baptize the Dauphin, in case he should allow the Reformed to
hold a Synod in that Conjuncture, they preparing again to speak about
Antichrist, refused to grant it at that time, and they were forced to have
patience, and to put off their Synod to the following year. Several things were
done, or proposed in it, which displeased the Court; and the King omitted no
means that Affairs might be determined in it to his liking. As soon as the
Synod was assembled, they deputed three of their Members to the King according
to their wonted Custom. They were ordered chiefly to obtain three things of
him. The one was to proceed to the Nomination of Two Deputies General in the
room of those that had served ever since the Assembly of Chatelleraud. 2dly.
That the time of Deputies General.
their Service might be limited to one year: And the third, That the Reformed
should only Nominate Two Persons to the King, which he should do them the
favor to accept. But the King was positive to the contrary: That the said
Nomination should not be mentioned, the two last not having been long enough
employed: That the Deputies should serve three years, in order not to allow
Political Assemblies yearly, under pretense of Nominating others: That the
Reformed should name Six Persons, to the end that he might be the better
enabled to choose such as were agreeable to him. Sulli kept the Deputies at
Paris as long as was necessary to work upon them; after which having disposed
them to what the Court desired, he dismissed them for the Synod, and gave them
Letters as written from himself, though it was really done by the King's Orders.
In one of the said Letters he endeavored to incline the Assembly not to insist
upon the Affair of the Deputies General, by reason that they should not have
time enough to think upon it, and that the number of the Members of the Synod
was inconsiderable, illness having hindered some of the Deputies from repairing
thither. By another Letter apart, though The Question about Antichrist renewed.
bearing the same date, he gave his Opinion about the Question concerning
Antichrist, which was to be renewed in the Synod. There were some Provinces the
Deputies of which had acquainted the King, that they carried Memoirs thither
upon that subject. Sully advised them not to disturb the Peace they had so much
desired, by unseasonable proceedings; assuring them that the then Pope would
use none but mild ways to gain Consciences. In which this Lord, who was no more
a Pretender to Divinity than Religion, reasoned, as if in deciding whether the
Pope was Antichrist, the Synod should have considered the then Pope's Personal
Qualifications, more than the Tyrannical Power the Roman See usurps.

But the Reformed were not ignorant that the Spirit of Popery is always the
same; That the Roman Church always thinks it self bound to persecute: That
there was a general Conspiration in Europe against the Protestants: That it was
no longer concealed: That it appeared in diverse places by a thousand
Injustices: That even the French Nation was excited against them: That the
Spaniards had Agents who endeavored to gain Priests, by their means to inspire
Animosities and Hatred in the Catholics against the Reformed, which the
Jesuits especially did almost barefaced. Therefore they did not think they
wronged the Pope, whatever his particular Maxims were, to give him a Name which
suited to the Character of his Dignity, and which is much more inherent to the Sea itself, than to the Qualifications of the Person who fills it. Therefore
the Synod did not desist from Deputies gained at Court.
their Enterprise. They received their Deputies very well at their return from
Court; but they were not moved by the Reasons they urged to persuade them,
perhaps because the Gratifications, which were Sully's best Arguments, were not
communicated to the whole Synod. There were also some Persons at Court full of
Political Considerations, which they employed to make the Reformed fearful of
offending the King; and their foresight ever extended it self to inconveniences
the others did not see. Therefore the Synod called them Ironically, the
Clear-sighted of the Clear-sighted of the Church; and Fools of the Synod.
Church; Sulli had the best Authority of any of them; yet neither his Letters,
nor those of some others, could prevail any more than the Reasons of the
Deputies. To be even with them, the Court called some of the Members of the
Synod the Fools of the Synod, because they found them thick-skull'd, and that
they thought too much on their safety. Those pretended Fools proved the
strongest; and tho Montmartin used his utmost endeavors to strengthen the
Court Party in the Assembly, his Cabal was not powerful enough to get the upper
hand there.

Nevertheless he obtained part of what he desired, concerning the Question
about Antichrist. He had such positive Orders The Question is deferred.
from the King upon that subject, and he did so well represent to them, that
they would offend him in persisting in their Resolution of Printing the Article
of Gap in all the Confessions, that the Synod durst proceed no further in it;
and so under pretense of adjourning that Affair, they laid it quite aside. They
contented themselves with promising the protection of the Churches to such as
should be troubled for having preached, confessed, or said, or written any
thing about that Matter: That is, in a word, the Doctrine was stopped, and the
Question held as decided. But Interests of State hindered it from being
incerted as an Article of Faith among the rest. This is partly what the Synod
writ about it to the Duke of Rohan, from whom they had received Letters upon
that Subject, desiring them to pleasure the King, and not to carry that matter
too far. An Impression of the Confession of Faith in which that Article was
incerted, having been sold off already, the Synod made Applications to the
King, to beg that no body might be prosecuted, either for having shared in the
Impressions, or for keeping any Copies of that precipitated Edition. The King
freely granted it, his Design being only to hinder it from ever being talked
of. In the mean time the Synod being desirous to show more clearly that they
did not disown the decided Doctrine, though they had so much complaisance for
the King, as not to make it an express Article of their Faith; desired Vignier
Vignier ordered to write at large about it.
to write at large about that matter; which he did in a manner that made a
great noise in its time.

The Affair of the Deputy's General did not end thus. La Noue and du Cross, who
had received that Quality in the Assembly at Chatelleraud, brought a Brief to
the King, dated in December, which authorized the Synod to nominate six
persons, out of which the King was to choose two; but at the same time, that
Business only excepted, forbad them to meddle with any thing but their
Discipline. The Council had thought that they should get something in
acquiescing so far, tho by that permission granted to the Synod, they seemed to
consent that the Deputies General should officiate but one Year, since La Noue
and du Cross had not exercised their Deputation much longer. But they were in
hopes that by granting this, they would deliver themselves for three years of
the fear of these General Assemblies, because the King might refuse to allow
one, under pretense that the Synod had provided for that time for the only
thing that could render it necessary. The Synod had not the power to make that
Nomination, because it exceeded the bounds of their Discipline; for which
Reason the King had given them that Brief to authorize them. The Synod having
examined it, did not find it sufficient, because it neither empowered them to
give a discharge to the Deputies, that were to lay down upon a new Nomination,
or to give Instructions to those that were to succeed them, without which the
Nomination was of no manner of use. They writ most humble Remonstrances to the
Court about it. The King received them very graciously; and the bearers of them
returned with very obliging Letters from him, and almost an entire satisfaction
upon the Subject of their Message; tho Sully by private Letters advised them
not to make use of them. It is very probable that the Deputies had revealed the
Secret of the Synod, which was not well disposed to satisfy the Court about
the nomination of Six Persons. Therefore the new Brief renewing that Article,
they would have been better pleased to have the Synod put off the Affair of the
Deputies to another time, than to see it determined in a way that should not
The Synod only names two Deputies General.
please them. Therefore the King allowed them to work about it, for fear of
vexing them by a refusal; but at the same time his Favorite writ to them, to
dissuade them from it if he could. The Synod neither believed him, nor those
who were of his Opinion, nor yet the Deputies Sully had corrupted. They
discharged La Noue and du Cross with a world of thanks and praises; after which
they nominated only two persons, although the Brief obliged them expressly to
nominate six. The Reason or Pretense of it was, That the Powers the Deputies
had brought from their Provinces, did not allow them to exceed that number. But
that to show that they did not design to offend his Majesty in refusing to
answer his Intentions in that Point, they begged of him to allow a General
Assembly to consider whether the nomination of six should be made for the
future, according to the King's Desire, and to be pleased in the mean time to
accept the two Deputies which were nominated to him by the Synod; they were
Villarnoul, and Mirande, Persons of great credit amongst the Reformed, and very
zealous for the Public Good.

Tho the Synod had positive orders to treat about nothing but Affairs treated
in the Synod.
what related to their Discipline, it did not hinder them from examining
several things relating to the advantage of their Churches, which passed under
the notion of the Instructions they were to give their Deputies, and the
Articles of their Petitions. The deliverance of several Prisoners that were
detained at Paris and elsewhere upon the account of Religion: The pursuit of
the establishment of the Churches where the free liberty of the exercise of
their Religion was either hindered or contested. The naturalization of the
Reformed Refugies of the Marquisate of Saluces: The care of restraining the
insolence of the Monks, who often made seditious Enterprises; as it happened at
Alencon, where a Capuchine had affixed injurious Libels; and at La Roche
foucault, where the White-Fryars had often insulted the Reformed: The Affair of
one Mascla, who had a great Suit depending about his Mothers Burial, which had
cost him 7 or 8000 Livers: Foreign Ministers who desired Letters of
Naturalization: The removing of Causes granted to the prejudice of the
Jurisdiction of the Courts, notwithstanding the Regulations that had been often
promised upon that Subject, were the main things the New Deputies took upon
them. Above all, the exemption of the Ministers was recommended to them, for
which Letters Patents had already been obtained, which the Court of Aids had
already verified.

The Synod allowed the Deputies of the City of Rochel to assist at their
deliberation about the Affair of the Deputies, and their Instructions, by
reason that it was a Political concern, and that Foreign Ministers.
Rochel held the Rank of a Province in the Assemblies in which they treated of
Affairs of that nature. That Synod enjoyed the same Liberty others had had in
relation to Strangers. They received Letters from Princes, and from Protestant
Universities; and some Ministers either actually assisted at the Synod, or were
invited to it by the Churches, tho no Natives of France. But Rochel gave the
Court some Discontents, by their calling one Malwin a Scotch Minister. He was a
Prisoner in England upon the account of some Words or Writings he was accused
of against King James and his Council. That Prince, to get rid of him, granted
him to the Rochelois, declaring positively, that he only gave him his Liberty
on condition that he should depart his Territories, Malwin called to Rochel.
and that he should go to exercise his Ministry in France. This was a happy
kind of Banishment, in which Malwin would have found considerable advantage.
But one Primrose, another Foreign Minister called to the Service of the Church
of Bourdeaux, revealed that Secret to the King, in order the better to obtain
leave to settle himself in that advantageous Post. He might well be positive in
the Matter, since he was the person that had been employed to carry the Letters
from Rochel to the King of England, and who had brought that Prince's answer
back again. Thus Private Interest began to divide the Party; and even the best
among them suffered themselves to be drawn into little Infidelities against the
General Cause. The King found fault with two things in the proceeding of those
of Rochel in the Case of Malwin. First, the manner, because they had called him
without the King's leave. Secondly, The person, by reason that the man who was
a Prisoner in England for an Offense against the Government, was not proper for
France, where the disposition of Affairs did not permit to tolerate Persons of
that Character; and yet less at Rochel than any where else, considering their
inclination for Liberty, which they indulged more than they ought to have done,
according to the Policy of Monarchies. Sulli writ to the Rochelois to come to
justify themselves, in case they were accused wrongfully, or to beg pardon if
they were guilty. But the Affair stopped there, without being attended with any
ill consequences.

During these Transactions, Chamier lost his time at the Court where he had
been sent by the Synod, to offer the King the Nomination of Villarnoul and
Mirande, and the Remonstrances of the Assembly upon the dependencies of that
Affair. He had been there above six Months, and yet had not been able to obtain
the honor to speak to the King. His Person was disliked, he being one of those
Fools of the Synod the King had an aversion to; one of those hard Sculs that
nothing works upon; of those hearts which neither threats or promises could
move, tho they are the strongest Machines of Courts. Neither perhaps was he
more acceptable to Cotton the Jesuit, with whom he had formerly had a
conference at Nimes; in which both of them, as it is most usual, pretended to
have the better of the other. The truth is, that the Jesuit had dazzled the
Auditors by Eloquent Digressions, which made them lose every moment the Subject
of the Dispute; and that Chamier, whose Arguments had much more solidity and
Scholarship in them, had reduced the Jesuit to save himself by that Artifice.
Those who have written the Life of that Jusuit, say enough to show us, that the
sharpness of Chamier would have put that Hero to a stand, had he not warded the
Blow by Eloquence and Discourses wide from the purpose, which he had at
command. But the Affairs Chamier came about, were yet more disagreeable The
King refuses the Nomination of the Deputies.
than his Person. The King refused to accept the Nomination that had been made
by the Synod, because it was not according to the Form prescribed in the Brief.
The Council disapproved two things alike, one of which was of necessity to be
allowed. They were obliged either to receive the Deputies the Synod presented,
which could not be done handsomely, the King having so positively declared that
he did not like that Nomination; or to allow a General Assembly, as the only
way to accommodate that Affair, which was a thing the Council never did
willingly. They would perhaps have been glad to tire Chamier's patience by
making him wait, and so oblige him to give over his Suit; but it was difficult
to send him back without some satisfaction, by reason that the Reformed having
no body at that time to mind their Affairs* they daily grew worse. La Noue and
du Cross had no longer any power, being discharged by the Synod: Villarnoul and
Mirande could not do it neither, because the King would not accept them. Thus
the Complaints made by the Reformed remained unanswered: 1608.
The Evils that required speedy remedy, received none. Therefore all things
rightly considered, the Council thought it best to allow them to call an
Assembly; but that Permission was accompanied with such Limitations, that no
considerable Advantages could be expected from it. The Matters they were to
treat of, were prescribed to them; they had not so much as the choice of the
Place A General Assembly is allowed at Gergeau.
free, and Sully was given them as a Spy. Gergeau was pitched upon for the
convenience of that Lord, that City being his, and the House he borrowed his
Name from in the Neighborhood thereof.

He was received there, not like a man who interes'd himself for the Reformed
Religion; but like one who came to negotiate Sully suspected by the Reformed.
from the King. Moreover it was greatly suspected that he designed to change
his Religion which he had given reason to believe by a very extraordinary
conduct. The King had offered him one of his Natural Daughters for his Son,
provided they would both turn Catholics: and he had obliged him to have some
conferences with Cotton the Jesuit, who since his being at Court, had shared
the Quality of Convertor with Cardinal Du Perron. Those Conferences commonly
produced the Effect they desired, being commonly accepted by such as desired
only a pretense to change. Nevertheless, whether it were a Blind contrived
between the King and Sully, or whether it were real, Sully refused to change,
but gave his Son leave to do it if he pleased. The King pressing him to oblige
his Son to do it, he refused to command it him; but declared that he left it to
his own free choice, which the King seemed not to be very well satisfied with.
I would not affirm that this were any thing but a Juggle to re-establish
Sully's Reputation among the Reformed, who looked no longer upon him as a
Member of their Party. Indeed it was not very likely that Sully should refuse
in earnest what the King proposed to him* to obtain an Alliance, which several
Princes of Europe would not have disdained. It was also as easy for him,
according to the Notions he had inspired into the King, to make a Religion to
himself reduced to certain General Articles, as to persuade another to do it,
or to believe that he might innocently authorize his Son to turn Roman
Catholic. However it were, that Refusal is mentioned to his praise in his
Memoirs; in which it is reported, that the King upbraided him with loving the
Huguenots better than him; by reason that while he refused his alliance, he was
treating about a Match between his Son and the Countess of Sa^x's Daughter,
Granddaughter to Lesdiguieres. But that Reproach looks very like a Jest. It
was very well known at Court, that neither Lesdiguieres, nor his Children were
of the number of those who were zealous for Religion; Cotton the Jesuit knew it
better than any body. And that Intriegue only served to persuade, that Sully
was not over religious: He was used in the Assembly of Gergeau like a
Catholic. Du Plessis had sent them good Memoirs upon that Subject, which were
followed.

Sulli notwithstanding proved very useful to the King in the Assembly, tho he
refused to take the Title of Envoy or Commissary Affairs of the Assembly.
there. Seven or eight considerable Articles were treated of there, which
proved difficult, and might have occasioned the sitting of the Assembly a long
while, which was a thing the King feared. The Chief related to the Places of
Surety. Some of them belonged to Catholic Lords, or were fallen into their
hands by succession, or otherwise. Those Lords put Catholic Governors in them.
The Reformed had already lost Caumont in that Places lost by the Reformed.
manner; and were upon the point of losing Montandre and Tartas in the like
manner: Besides they were afraid of losing many of their Places thus by
degrees; especially because Conversions were then in fashion, and that several
Lords expressed but little Zeal for their Religion. They had lately had the
experience of some, who after having long sought a pretense to change, had at
last taken that of an accidental Conference, which Cotton the Jesuit had
fastened upon Gigord, a Minister of some Reputation. He found him at Court, in
presence of some people that were ill disposed, and engaged him into a Dispute,
which the Jesuit and his Adherents did Conference and Changes of Religion.
not fail to report to the disadvantage of the Minister; and because it was
interrupted without being renewed, the Minister not caring to engage in those
tumultuous Disputes, in which those that talk most and loudest seem always to
be in the right, which those that were wavering among the Reformed took the
advantage of to color their Change: they pretended that he was sensible of his
weakness, and confessed himself vanquished. This was sufficient to give
Castelnau, and some others, a pretense to do what they had long resolved, and
to embrace the Roman Religion. Gigord did not remain mute upon the Subject of
that Conference which the Jesuit's Friends published: But those who had a mind
to believe that he had not maintained his Cause well, little mattered his
Justification. The same Game was so often played at Court, that the Reformed had
some reason to distrust all the Lords of their Religion, and especially such as
had Places, whom they chiefly endeavored to corrupt. Therefore Sulli seeing
that that Affair, and the others, which were of consequence, might occasion
long debate, writ to the King, that it would be convenient to put Reformed
Governors in Places of that kind, being Friends or Relations to the Lords to
whom they belonged; which would be a proper Expedient to remove all Jealousies
on both sides. As to the other Articles, he advised him either to grant part of
them, or to give them leave to incert them in the Instructions of their
Deputies. The King pitched upon the last Expedient, because he was resolved not
to treat about any thing with the Assembly; and that having only allowed it for
the nomination of the Deputies General, he would not suffer them to treat of
any thing else in it. He ordered them to break up immediately after the said
Nomination. However his Answer to Sulli was very obliging for the Reformed. He
assured them of his Protection, and acknowledged that they had deserved it by
their perseverance in his Service.

The Assembly submitted to the King's Will, and nominated Six Persons, of which
Villarnoul and Mirande were Two, and sent the said Nomination to the King with
very respectful Letters. The King expressed, that he did not like their writing
so well, as if they had sent the Nomination the Assembly had made by Deputies:
However he was plaes'd to excuse it, and to say* That he would not declare his
Choice until the Assembly was dissolved. As soon as they had obeyed him, he
chose Villarnoul and Mirande, who had been presented to him by the Synod of
Rochel; thereby showing, that his refusal of them the preceding year, did not
proceed from Aversion to their Persons only, but because he disliked the manner
of their Election.

The same year the Clergy also Assembled at Paris, and their Deputies renewed
their usual Complaints to the King against the * Concordat, and the Laick
Pensions. That which was most remarkable The Solemn Act that passes between the
Pope and the French King.
in it, was, that Fremiot, Archbishop of Bourges, who was Speaker, represented
the Church to be under a Misery capable to move Compassion; tho at the same
time the Splendour in which he appeared before the King, did not suit with his
Description of the said Desolation. Besides, a numerous Train of Bishops he was
attended by, whose Air expressed no Misery, he had Five Cardinals in his
Company; and this pompous Deputation resembled much more an excess of worldly
Prosperity, than an afflicted Church, overwhelmed with great Adversities.

The earnestness the Clergy expressed again that time, for the Publication of
the Council of Trent, was not well received. The King answered with more
Resolution than ever he had done; A resolute Answer of the Kings, disowning the
promises made in his Name by his Attournies.
and upon their alleging the Promises his Attorneys had made in his Name about
it, he made no difficulty to disown them. He complained of their having
promised it without his knowledge; and said, That that Publication would be a
step for others afterward to desire the Introduction of the Inquisition: He
made them sensible, that if Francis I. Henry II. and Charles IX. who had no
such Solemn Engagements with the Reformed, as he had, and had not received such
Services from them, had not approved that Counsel, he had much less reason to
do it, for fear of renewing the Troubles of his Kingdom. This comforted the
Reformed in some measure for the grief they received that year, in seeing the
Dauphin's Education committed to the Care of Cotton Cotton the Jesuit made
Tutor to the Dauphine.
the Jesuit; since they could oppose the assurances of the King's good Will, to
the fear of his being succeeded one day by a Prince, who being fallen in such
ill hands was not likely to prove favorable to them. The King put the Change
agreeably upon the Clergy in another Affair. That rich Body had often
solicited him to establish a Fund, out of which Pensions might be taken for
the Ministers that should change their Religion; and whereas they had but
inconsiderale Sallaries at that time, the Clergy, whose overruling Passion is
Interest, did not question, but that in bettering the Condition of those that
should change, they would invite several to immitate them. But the King being
desirous, That the said Fund should be taken out of the Pockets of the Clergy,
and not out of his Exchequer, caused the Pope to write a Brief to the Clergy,
to desire them to raise that Fund themselves. The Brief was presented to the
Assembly by the Cardinal of Joyeuse. They agreed to make a Fund Fund for such
Ministers as should change their Religion.
of 30000 Livers a year, out of which they should take Pensions for Ministers
only; and made a Rule excluding all such as had not been Ministers or
Professors, from those Recompenses; and all those who having embraced the
Reformed Religion since the 6th of August, should return to the Catholic
Church. By the said Rule, those who were to enjoy the benefit of those
Pensions, were obliged to bring in yearly Attestations of their good Behavior
to the Agents of the Clergy; the manner also of paying them the Sums that were
alloted them, was prescribed in the same. This Sum was inconsiderable, and yet
the Clergy has never made a sufficient number of Conquests to exhaust it: And
some years after it, they took out of the said Fund, the best part of which was
not used, Sallaries for certain Laick Missionaries, who troubled the Reformed
in a thousand manners; and recompenses for People, whose Trade was to solicit
the Common People to change their Religion.

During those Transactions, the Council of Spain persecuted the Moors; whether
it proceeded from the Councils own movement, or from the advice Taxis had
given. Those Wretches offered to Treaty with the Moors who were persecuted in
Spain.
submit to the King of France, if the King would take them under his
Protection. But that Prince not confiding in those People that are naturally
false and inconstant, thought fit first to send a Person among them to see what
might be expected from that Overture. He made choice of Panissaut for his
Envoy, a Gentlman of Gascony, and one of the Reformed. He repaired thither in
the Habit of a Franciscan, with an Obedience that was given him by the Guardian
of some House of that Order. He did negotiate with so much success, that some
considerable Advantage might have been expected by it, had he been suffered to
go on: But the Bigots told the King, That he inspired them with It is spoken by
the Bigots.
the Doctrine of the Reformed, which might be true, and would certainly have
been of great use, that Doctrine removing from the Mahometans the pretenses of
the Aversion which the Worship of the Roman Church has inspired in them against
Christianity. Insomuch that Panissaut might have made them Christians, and good
Frenchmen; but the Catholic Zeal thought it more reasonable that they should
remain Mahometans, than turn Huguenots. Therefore Panissaut was recalled, and
Claverie, a Gentleman of the Roman Persuasion, and of the same Country, sent in
his room; but whereas he proceeded upon other Principles, which the Moors did
not relish, his Negotiation met with no success.

Lesdiguieres obtained that year the Staff of Marshal of France. Lesdiguieres
Marshal of France.
His Services had sufficiently deserved it; but it was not granted so much in
regard to his Merit, as to make him forget the Discontents he had received from
the Court. In the mean time, the Spanish Faction was not a sleep, and lost no
opportunities to sow Divisions in all parts to excite some Troubles in France.
The Royal Family was very much imbroil'd. The King and Queen 1609.
did not agree. That Princess crossed him continually; and that The Kings
Domestic Troubles.
which was most unaccountable, she adhered with the Spaniards, whose Interests
were espoused by Five or Six Italians who served her. The Marriage of the
Dauphin with the Infanta of Spain, and that of one of the Daughters of France
with the Infant, had been proposed to her, as a means that would for ever
secure the Succession to her Offspring. In order to draw her the sooner into
that Project, they exasperated her mind by black Calumnies against the King;
they persuaded her, that he designed to be rid of her; after which the Charms
of the Marchioness of Verneuiel, and the Promises of Marriage the King had made
her, afforded reason to fear that he would raise her Children to the Throne, to
the prejudice of hers. Those Jealousies proceeded so far, that Conchini and his
Wife, dressed themselves in their own Chamber, what that Princess was to eat,
as if she had been in danger of being poisoned. Sully sometimes advised the
King to send back those pernicious Spirits into Italy, to stop the torrent of
those Disorders, and to send the Marchioness and her Brother into England, to
the end that the Queens Jealousies, and her Evil Counselors being removed, she
might be the sooner reduced to live peaceably with the King. But that Prince
neither being able to remove his Mistress, nor willing to exasperate the Queen
by taking her Confidents from her, while her Rival still remained before her
eyes, increased the Evil by his irresolution, and daily gave the Queen new
Causes of Quarrel. On the other hand, he did not relish the Marriage proposed,
the Project whereof did not agree with his designs. It was impossible for him
to seek the Alliance of a House he designed to humble. Besides, the intentions
of the Council of Spain did not look candid in that Proposition, since one of
the Conditions of it was to make War against the Protestants, which the King
was sensible tended to two things, of which Spain would receive the sole
benefit, and he the disadvantage. The one was, to break the Alliance between
the Protestants abroad, and France: The other, to renew the Civil Wars in the
Kingdom. The King liked neither; and to satisfy his Subjects as to his good
intentions, he promised that he would leave his Children such good
Instructions, that they would take care not to renew past divisions, or to
force the Reformed to look for a Foreign Protector. He designed to infuse into
them as a principal Maxim, Never to reduce their Subjects to the necessity of
wanting an Intercessor with their Prince: A Maxim equally of use to raise the
happiness of the People, and the Authority of Kings to the highest degree. It Is
a certain proof of the happiness of the People, not to stand in need of a
Mediator to obtain favors from their King: And a King is never more powerful,
than when no body shares the Honor of his Favors, and the acknowledgement of
his People.

There were also some Catholics in the Kingdom, who had a Diverse Sentiments
about the Alliance with Spain
great Aversion to those Marriages, especially the Princes, and those who
dreaded, lest a Spanish Queen might bring along with her the despotick Maxims,
of which all the Politics of that Nation was formed. They thought that the
Power of the Nobility, and the Liberty of the People, would be much better
preserved during a Foreign War, than in a time of Calm, which would afford
favorable occasions to the Council to humble those who had a little too much
Popularity and Credit: And they were sensible that the King daily aspired to
that degree of Authority, to oblige Subjects to obey without reply. But then
there were others, and particularly those, whose Souls were still inclined to
Leagues, who fancied that the Grandeur of the House of Austria, and the Triumph
of the Catholic Religion, were inseparable: That the Alliance with Spain was
necessary to make France share in both; and that it was their true Interest to
preserve themselves by a good Intelligence with that Potent House, by
abandoning all the rest of Europe to them. Insomuch, that out of a Zeal to
Religion they opposed the Glory of their Country, and omitted no means to
engage the King against the Reformed. To that end Frauds to renew the Civil War.
they daily made use of new Stratagems. They scattered Seditious Letters in the
Streets of Rochel to alarm the People, as if the King were ready to declare
War: The effect of which was, that they hastened their Fortifications, and took
measures to avoid being surpised. At the same time false Letters were cenvey'd
to the King, in which the Enterprises of the Rochelois were exagerated, to
oblige him to express some Resentment.

In the mean time the Jesuits, who made it their business to embroil Power of
the Jesuits.
all Europe, left no means unattempted to reduce Fance into its former
disorders again. Some of them trespassed upon the King's patience at Court with
a surprising boldness. Cotton the Jesuit was convicted of having revealed the
Secrets the King had confided to him; but no manner of notice was taken of it.
Gontier the Jesuit, was a Man of an impetuous, violent Spirit, who loved
nothing but Trouble and Broils. Ignatius Armand, was subtle and cunning, and so
much the more dangerous, because his Intriegues were covered with the Vail of
Modesty and Simplicity. Their Enterprises disturbed the King exceedingly, by
reason that he had much ado to suppress them. But he had prepossessed himself
that he should tame them by his kindnesses; and that at least they would
attempt nothing against his Life, while they had reason to expect new favors
from him; insomuch, that he seldom refused any thing they desired of him. He
had settled them in Bearn, notwithstanding the Opposition of the Estates, and
the Deputies of Provence, who protested that the Settled in Bearn.
said Settlement was contrary to the good of his Service, and the repose of the
Country; and showed a Decree of the Parliament of Pau, made in the year 1598.
which prohibited the receiving of them there. The Bishop of Oleron's Entreaties
prevailed over those Remonstrances; and Jesuits were sent to him with an Edict,
which ordered them only to submit to the Laws of the Country, and to the
Discipline of other Ecclesiastics; which conditions they kept no longer than
till they were strong enough to lay them aside. This year they erected a
Noviciat at Paris, and began to build their College of Clermont.

During these Transactions, the Court examined the last Petitions Petitions
answered.
of the Assembly. They granted the Abolishment of some Solemnities which the
Catholics had Established, in Commemoration of the good Successes they had had
over the Reformed: As the Festival they had decicated at Chartres, to our Lady
of the Breach, for a pretended Vision of the Blessed Virgin, who defended the
Breach against the Reformed, that had besieged that City in 1568. The
Procession of Dreux, which was performed yearly there, on the day the Duke of
Guise had won a Battle against the Prince of Conde. And that which was made at
Thoulouse, for some other event of the first Wars. It was also granted them,
that in the Disputes of Jurisdiction, the Chambers should be Judges of their
own Competency. The Judges Royal of Brittany were forbidden to exact from the
Reformed, who had any Affairs before them, a Renunciation of the benefit of the
Edict, which allowed their to Appeal from the Sentences of those Judges, to the
Chambers of the Edict, or to the Great Council. They promised that the Creation
of the Offices of Assistants of Inquisitors in all Royal Tribunals, which was
an Invention of Sullys to get Money, should not derogate from the Privileges
the Edict granted them, of taking a Reformed Adjunct in certain Cases; and they
promised that all those of the Marquisate of Saluces, who should come to settle
in France, both Reformed and Catholics, should be used as Natives.

A National Synod was held soon after at St. Maixant, in which Synod at St.
Maixant.
they hardly treated about any thing besides their Discipline. Among the rest,
maimed Soldiers were allowed by them to receive a Pension the King had founded
for their maintenance; and whereas those that enjoyed it, were obliged to wear
the figure of a Cross upon their Cloaks, they declared to them that they might
do it without wounding their Consciences. It was observed also in the said
Synod, that Sully had given such ill Assignments to the Reformed, for the
payment of the Sums the King was to pay them for the Years 1605, and 1606. that
they could hardly make any thing of them. But the principal Affair that was
treated of there, was that of Antichrist. They received the Book which Vignier
had composed upon that matter, according to the desire of the preceding Synod,
and committed it to the Examination of the Academy of Saumur, in order to have
it Printed with the Name of the Author. The said Book appeared soon after
Entitled, The Theater of Antichrist: Among the other effects it produced,
Theater of Antichrist.
it induced Gontier, a Jesuit, to Preach against the Thirty first Article of
the Confession of Faith of the Reformed; which he did before the King in so
seditious and so insolent a manner, that the King reprimanded him severely for
it: but lest the Catholics should accuse him upon that account of favoring
the Reformed, and of suffering their Writings to pass unregarded, he also
suppressed Vignier's Book.

The first Incroachment that was made upon the Royalty's Incroachment upon the
Rights of Royalty.
belonging to Reformed Lords was made that Year by a Decree from the Chamber of
the Edict of Paris. That Decree maintained against the Widow of a Lord de
Vieille-vigne, to whom those Rights belonged in a certain Parish of which she
had the Presentation, a Gentleman who usurped them for this reason only, That
he was the only Catholic Gentleman in that Parish; and that this Lady
professing the Reformed Religion, came never at Church. The Advocate General
maintained the Cause of the Catholic, and pretended that no wrong was done to
the Lady by the Sentence of which she was appealant; because she was only
deprived of her Rights, for the Time being; which preserved them to her when
she should be in a condition to reassume them. This Decree was confirmed by the
Opinions of the King's Council; and imported that the enjoyment thereof by the
Catholic, should in no wise prejudice the Lady, nor her Successors, being
qualified for the said Privileges; that is, being Roman Catholics.

The Jurisdiction of the Party Chambers was also incroach'd upon Jurisdiction
of the Chambers.
that Year, upon pretense that it was abused. Bordes, an Augustine Monk, and
Giraud a Councellor of Thoulouse, were accused of an Assassination, the
Circumstances of which were very odious. The Monk sought a shelter in the
principal Cities of the Reformed, at Tonsceins, Milhau, and Nimes; and having
embraced their Religion, he desired leave to be tried before the Party-Chamber
of Languedoc. He affirmed, that the only reason of his being persecuted at
Thoulouse, was because they had observed Sentiments in him contrary to the
Catholic Doctrine: He alleged the usual Cruelty of that Parliament, who in
abhorrence to his change of Religion, would sacrifice him without mercy. The
thing being heard before the Council of State, the King sent back the
cognizance thereof to the Parliament of Thoulouse. The Reformed complained of
that Incroachment upon their Privileges, believing themselves wronged every
way by the said Decree. In case the Monk was accused wrongfully, it was a piece
of Injustice to hinder equitable Judges from taking cognizance of it, to refer
it to implacable Enemies: And if he were guilty, they wronged the Integrity of
the Reformed Judges, to think that they would favor an execrable Assassinate,
on pretense of his having embraced their Doctrine for a Protection. But whether
the Crime were too well known, and the Hypocrisy of the Monk too notorious; or
whether the Clergy had credit enough to carry it from the Reformed, their
Complaints did not hinder the Parliament from having the Case tried before
them, and from condemning the Accused rigorously.

But a thing happened that Year at La Fleche, which comforted A Book found at
La Fleche.
them for that small Disgrace, the which gave a Luster to their Fidelity, and
showed how much the Catholics were inclined to conspire against the State. A
Book well bound and guilt was found in the House of an Inhabitant of La Fleche,
a City where the Jesuits had their chief Residence, at one Medor, who taught
some Children of Quality, whose House was situated near an Inn, which had for
Sign the Four Winds, in a Street of the same Name. Half the said Book was
written, part of it with Blood, and abundance of Subscriptions to it written in
the same manner. The Book was discovered by a Woman who gave notice of it; but
that was not a proper time to see every thing: And tho the Circumstances might
probably have given great suspicion against those that were concerned in the
Book, the Inquiries that were made about it were soon stopped.

I cannot forget neither that Jeannin, formerly passicnately in Discourse of
Jeannin about Liberty of Conscience.
love with Leagues, but a man of great sense, who was greatly concerned in
Public Affairs, being sent into Holland, where the King of France had for a
time sent Reformed Ambassadors, he proposed to the States, from the King, to
have a Toleration for the Catholics, the number of which was considerable in
their Provinces. He made a very fine Discourse to prove the Justice thereof;
and it is likely that he spoke his thoughts, since we find in his Memoirs a
Discourse like it in favor of the Reformed, under the Reign of Lewis the XIII.
He said that the Catholics had concurred with them for the service of the
State, at that very time when they were deprived both of Liberty and Religion,
the restitution of which they expected by means of the Peace: That no Servitude
was so intolerable as that of Conscience: That the Provinces had shown it by
their Example, having had recourse to Arms to free themselves from that
Slavery: That the same had been done in other parts of Europe, and even in
France: That God seemed to have allowed the happy success of that War, to show
that Religion was to be taught and persuaded by the Movements which proceed
from the Holy Ghost, not by force, or constraint: That the King having found by
experience that the means used by his Predecessors, had only served to augment
the Troubles in Religion, and in the State, endeavored to extinguish the
Animosities which arise from diversity of Religion, by Peace: That he had
derived considerable Advantages by his moderation for the Reformed Religion,
which he allowed in his Territories, and by the observation of his Edicts,
whereas before they were only granted to be violated; that having found the
benefit of that Counsel, he gave it freely to his Friends: That the United
Provinces had found the Catholics in their State, when they formed it; for
which reason they ought to suffer them there: That such Sovereigns as have not
found the Two Religious in their Country, might well refuse to admit that
which is not received there; but that it would argue no wisdom to oppose it, in
case they endangered their state by it: That the rigor of the Provinces
against the Catholics that were there, would be a dangerous Example, and would
prejudice the Reformed in such Places where they were weakest; that there would
be no danger in giving them some Liberty; since that if they had been faithful
during the War without it, they would be so much the more so, after having
obtained it again.

He afterward answered diverse Objections, which were partly the same that had
been made in France against a Toleration for the Reformed, only changing the
Names. He denied that the State of the United Provinces was grounded upon the
profession of the Reformed Religion; By reason, said he, that the Catholics
had also concurred toward the maintaining of it. He denied that it was a means
to oblige the Catholics to embrace the Doctrine of the Reformed; by reason,
said he, that constraint would rather serve to confirm them the more; that even
their Death would not entinguish their belief; that they would commit it as by
Cabal or Tradition to their Children; or that they would fall into Irreligion:
And that it was better to tolerate Superstition than Impiety. He said as to the
permission of retiring, which might have been granted them, that it would be
unjust to condemn people that had done no harm, to a kind of Exile, which made
them renounce all the delights which the love one has for ones Country includes
in it self: That they had contributed to the conquest of the Country they
should be obliged to quit: That thereby they should depopulate the State, which
would be attended with other great Inconveniences. He concluded, declaring that
he did not desire the Liberty of a Public Worship for them, but only that they
might not be prosecuted for what they did in their own Houses; and he proposed
precautions to prevent the evil that might be feared by it. That Negotiation
had the success of which we see the fruits to this day. No Edict of Liberty was
granted to the Catholics; but they were tolerated in some Provinces without
being disturbed. They have carried their Advantages in several places farther
than was designed, and no great efforts have been made to hinder it: And tho
they are maintained by no Public Law, they enjoy a Tranquillity which others
have been deprived of, tho their Sovereigns had promised it them by solemn
Edicts.

During these Translactions, the Affairs of the Moors grew worse in Spain, and
finally they were ordered to retire in a short space of time, and upon hard
conditions, which were not well kept neither. The King resolved to grant a Free
Passage through his Kingdom to such as would accept it: And in order to derive
a double Advantage by their misfortune, in strengthening his Kingdom, while
their retreat weakened Spain, he invited them by an express Edict to come to
live in France; but the Conditions of it were so little to their advantage,
that few of them resolved to tarry there. It obliged them to settle on this
side the Dordorgna, to keep them at a distance from the Frontiers of Spain; to
turn Catholics, and to persevere in the Roman Faith, on pain of death. Perhaps
a greater number of them would have preferred the sweet Climat of France to the
Scorchings of the Coasts of Asrick, had better Conditions been given them; and
as they were for the most part good Merchants, expert Tradesmen, diligent
Laborers, they would have been of great advantage to the State, by their
Industry; besides their carrying great Riches along with them, tho they had
been forced to leave the best part of them in Spain. Even in France they were
forced to pay their passage by a thousand violences and injustices that were
exercised against them. Those who were entrusted with the care of their Conduct
and Embarkment, plundered them, and reduced them to great Extremities. The
Deputies who brought their Complaints to the Court, returned back with a shadow
of satisfaction, which came to nothing: The Bigots who thought all things
lawful against Infidels, protecting those highly who prostituted the Faith of
France by their Injustices, in an occasion of that importance. Thus those
Wretches carried away nothing from Europe besides their Arts and Cunning,
together with an implacable hatred against the Christians, whom they have ever
since looked upon as People without Faith or Probity: And their Children to
this day by their Infidelities and Piracies, revenge the Injustices the
Christians did to their Families at that time, by plundering of their
Forefathers.

The King did not see that Passage; for as he was noble and just, he would
perhaps have hindered those miserable Wretches from being used so barbarously.
But an unexpected Death broke all his Measures and Designs, deprived the
Kingdom of its Deliverer, the Reformed of their Defender, and all Europe of its
Hopes. The Prince of Conde had lately married the Daughter of the late
Constable. Before that Marriage the King had hardly taken notice of her being
the most beautiful Lady of the Court; but all of a sudden he fell in love with
her, to that degree, that he could not conceal his Passion. The Prince being
jealous, and The Prince of Conde': Flight.
dreading the Power of his Rival, fled with his Wife, who was willing to avoid
the Snare that was laid for her Virtue, and got into Flanders with her, without
Attendance or Equipage. The King either transported with his Passion, which he
was no longer War declared against the Archduke.
Master of, or being willing to embrace that occasion to attack the House of
Austria, as he had long designed it, desired the Archduke, who had received
them very kindly, to send them back; and upon his refusal declared War against
him. Some of his Counselors thought that Declaration a little too rash, being
of opinion that the Prince who had neither Estate, Places of strength, nor
Creatures, could not be formidable enough to oblige the King to make so much
noise about his Flight: Besides that, without making use of that Pretense to
wage a War, a very favorable one offered it self in the overture of the
succession of Cleves to begin it, by reason of the King's alliance with some of
the Pretenders. Moreover the Preparations of War were not ready, some of the
Allies not being yet in a condition to act. But the King had his private Ends,
and his Will decided the Question.

It was high time for Spain to look to it self. Never had such The King's
Formidable Power.
great Preparatives been seen in France. The Civil Wars had almost made all the
French good Soldiers. There was an incredible number of old Officers,
signalized by a long experience. They wanted no experienced Generals; and the
King was acknowledged throughout Europe for the boldest and best Captain of his
time. The Blood boiled in the veins of the Reformed, who expected the end of
their fears, by the downfall of the House of Austria, and only desired an
occasion to revenge themselves by a just War, of the Massacres and Violences
they thought the Council of Spain had inspired to that of France. The
Catholics hoped to advance, and to set a value upon themselves by the War. The
economy and vigilance of Sully had put the King's Affairs in such an order,
that the like had never been known. The Arsenal had never been so full of Arms:
And that which was most to be wondered at, France had never had so much ready
Money, nor so many recourses for several years. They had great and powerful
Alliances: Besides that of the Unite Provinces, which had been renewed, another
had lately been concluded at Hall in Suabia, notwithstanding all the Emperor's
opposition, with about 15 Protestant Princes. These Preparations made Rome
tremble for its Religion, and Spain for its Greatness: And their Interests
appeared so much interwoven, that they seemed to run the same hazards, and to
stand in need of the same success.

The truth is, that the King's Design was not positively known: And whereas he
had not time enough to pursue the Project of it long, nothing happened whereby
one might penetrate into the secret of his Intentions. Such different Projects
were proposed to him, that it was impossible to divine his justly. Moreover, it
is very well known that tho Princes begin War upon a certain Plan, they soon
forsake it, according as Occurrences more or less favorable inspire them with
new thoughts. But there were two things that might be looked upon as certain,
or at least very probable. The one is, that Sully being his Confident, the
Project that has been incerted in his Memoirs, which he had imparted to several
people, was not altogether Chimerical: that according to that it was to be
feared, that the King had a design to found the Equilibrium of the Powers of
Europe upon the Equilibrium of the Religious: That consequently he would never
consent to the exterminating of the Protestants, therefore he was not looked
upon at Rome as a good Catholic, and they did not doubt but he had retained
from his first Religion the design of humbling that haughty See: A remainder of
Heresy, which is more odious in that Country than the most detestable Errors.
Moreover this fear was all grounded upon his having made almost all his
Alliances with Protestants: From whence it followed naturally, that in case he
should succeed in his Enterprises, none but Protestants would enjoy the benefit
of his Victories: The Damages whereof would consequently fall upon the
Catholic Religion. It is true that the Pope was offered the reunion of the
Kingdom of Naples, to the demean of the Church: But the Religion got nothing by
it, since all the Inhabitants of that Kingdom were Catholics; whereas it would
lose whatever should fall under the Power of the Protestants. The other was,
That the King designed to humble the House of Austria, and that he only engaged
diverse Powers into his Interests, by promising to enrich them with the Spoils
of Spain: Which was looked upon in the Council of that Court as a Crime less to
be forgiven than Heresy.

But while all Europe was attentive on the Revolutions that were preparing and
that all People were in suspense, between curiosity, hope, and terror, the
Scene was changed by a fatal Catastrophe. The King had had the Complaisance to
have the Queen crowned before his departure. He omitted nothing to live
peaceably with her: And whereas the War he was entering upon broke all the
Queens Measures, for the double Marriage of the Dauphin with the Infanta, and
of the eldest Daughter of France with the Infant, he was willing to remove that
Vexation by a Ceremony, which seemed material to that jealous mind, in order to
secure the Crown to her Children. Some Persons of known wisdom had endeavored
to disuade the King from that Pomp, which engaged him to Expenses no wise
suitable to the beginnings of a War, the event of which was doubtful. Moreover
Roni had prevailed to break the Project of that Ceremony; which ruined him
quite in the Queens mind, who was already animated against him for other
Reasons. But finally, the King resolved to give his Wife that satisfaction at
any rate whatever. The Ceremony of the Coronation was performed at St. Denis
with great magnificence: But while a sumptuous Entry was preparing for the
Queen, after which the King was to repair to the head of his Army which drew
near the Frontiers, and execrable Assassinate killed him in his Coach, on the
10th of May, as he was going to the Arsenal, there to give some orders relating
to his Enterprise. The Historys of the Time relate the Circumstances of his
Death at large; several Relations being ordered to be written about it, to
dissipate the Suspicions people had throughout the Kingdom, that some people at
Court were privy to the Secret of that Parricide. But no other Victims were
offered to the Shrine of that great Prince, but the Monster who had struck the
blow: And those who were most obliged to discover and prosecute the Authors of
that Crime, took no more care to revenge him, than he had done to revenge the
Death of Henry the III. his Predecessor. That which proved most honorable for
his memory, was, that all his good Subjects lamented him as their Father,
foreseeing that it would be long before any King should ascend the Throne,
deserving to be compared to him.

It is a very surprising thing, that those who labored to destroy the
Reformed, should have pitched upon the time of that great Kings death, for the
Epact of a ridiculous Enterprise, which they have imputed to the City of
Rochel. Not being certain at what time they invented that Calumny, I think I
cannot choose a more proper place to relate the Story of it, than the moment in
which they pretend the thing happened. That Potent City is accused of a design
to extend their Power farther, in making themselves Masters of Brouage. The
design, they say, was to convey two Ships filled with Soldiers, disguised like
Merchants, into the Port at break of day, who under pretense of unlading their
Merchandise, were to possess themselves of the Port-gate. It was usual for the
convenience of Trade, to open it sooner than any of the rest; and those People
were to make use of that advantage, to enter the City without hinderance. They
were to kill all such as should make any resistance; and Rochel had promised to
send them, as soon as they were Masters of the Place, a sufficient
Reinforcement to maintain themselves there. Those Ships, they say, arrived at
that appointed hour, but the little Gate was not opened all that Morning, by
reason that the Governor had received the news of the King's fatal Death in the
Night by an Express. Insomuch, that the Ships were obliged to retire. Never
Calumny against Rochel, and its Refutation.
was Calumny so ill invented; and I am at a loss which to wonder at most, the
Impudence of the Inventor, or the Credulity of Deagean who has reported it. I
appeal to all Persons of sense, whether it be not improbable, that during the
King's greatest Prosperity, at a time when he was Potent enough to prescribe
Laws to all Europe, such a City as Rochel, without Intestine Leagues, without
Foreign Intelligence, should have been capable to declare a War to him, and to
undertake Conquests upon him? I say, without Intelligence at home, or abroad;
because, that if there had been any such thing, it were impossible but that
some Tracts of it would have been found at least sufficient to ground Suspicion
upon; or that some mention of such a Treaty would have been made in some
Memoirs or other. It is also certain, that the rest of the Reformed could not
at that time have entered into so shameful a Conspiration; and that, had it
been true, Rochel would certainly have been disowned by all the Party. The King
was engaging into a War, which extremely pleased the Reformed, from the success
of which they expected, as it were, to indemnify themselves for all their
Miseries past. They imagined themselves upon the point of Triumphing over their
Ancient Enemies. They had used the utmost of their skill to put the King upon
that Enterprise. The Alliances of that Prince were partly contrived by them. It
is natural to conclude from thence, that it was very unlikely they should share
in any Designs capable to cross that of the War, which-they were so much set
upon; and that had Rochel dared to form the Project imputed to it, all the
Reformed would have abandoned it to the King's Indignation; and perhaps, would
have thought themselves obliged in honor to assist his Revenge. Those who
governed that City, sufficiently understood the Interest of the Reformed, to
expect any thing else; and it is very unlikely, that knowing it, they should
engage themselves in Enterprises of such dangerous Consequence. It seems as
unaccountable to me, that those who made Rochel form so ridiculous a Design, at
such a time, should make them abandon it, when the King's unexpected Death, and
the Confusion which followed it, might not only contribute to the Success of
it, but also to the impunity of the Enterprise. People commonly choose times of
Disorder and Trouble to take the advantage of others Misfortunes. And yet they
make Rochel pitch upon a time for an Enterprise of the utmost Impudence, where
the King they were to offend, was most in a condition to punish them for it;
and they make them desist from their Design at a time, when the misfortune of
the State would have obliged it to wink at that insolence. It must needs be
acknowledged, that this Calumny is very ill contrived. One Witness only appears
to reveal that secret, and that very Witness carries his Reproach about him. It
was a Man, as Deagean relates it in his Memoirs, who abandons his Religion, and
betrays his Country, even so far as to give Intelligences to surprise Rochel,
and those Intelligences so certain, that they could not have failed of Success,
had they been made use of. That Man, in imitation of all those who embrace the
Roman Religion out of interest, was desirous to signalize himself by an
important discovery; and he had found nothing so proper to advance himself, as
to impute scandalous, opprobrious Designs to the Rochelois; by reason that such
Accusations were very well received at Court, where they impatiently endured
the Power of that City. Let the Reader judge, whether it is possible that a
design, which must needs have been communicated to so many, which must have
been known throughout so large a City, the Preparations whereof must have been
made by degrees, and at leisure, should notwithstanding have remained so secret
for so many Years, that not one Man should have been found capable to reveal
it. The Court had Creatures in all the Councils of Rochel. There were Persons
of Honor who loved the King, whose good Intentions often frustrated the
Designs that City formed for its own lawful Preservation. And yet it is neither
those Creatures, nor those well-affected Persons, who reveal a Secret of that
consequenc. It is a Man, who changes his Religion, that gives the first
knowledge of it; and a Man, who being ready to sell his Country to make his
Fortune, might very well lay a false Accusation to its charge. Moreover, it is
a Man of no consideration, to be believed in an affair of that consequence;
Deagean, who says, That this Ruffian was concerned in that undertaking, and
that he was on board one of those Ships, would not have forgot his Quality, had
he had any Command there; and as he says nothing of it, it implies, that he was
only a private Soldier, or Seaman. I have insisted on the Refutation of this
Calumny, a little at large, for two Reasons. The First is, That the Catholics
have laid a stress upon it, as if there had been truth in it. The Second is,
That by the nature of this Accusation, it is easy to judge of several others,
by which they endeavored to animate Princes, either in particular, against
that Important City; or in general, against the whole Party of the Reformed.
They daily invented some or other, but seldom observed the Rules of likelihood
any better.

The End of the First Volume.
A CATALOGUE of the BOOKS and AUTHORS, out of which the Matter of the First
Volume of this History has been extracted.
THe History of James Augustus de * Thou. * Thuanus.
History of Mezerai. Chronological Abridgment of the same. History of Matthieu.
-- of Du Pleix. -- D' Aubigne. -- Novenaire. -- de la Paix. -- of the Progress
and Decay of Heresy. Latin History of Grammont. Memory recondite di Vittorio
Siri. Memoirs of the Duke of Nevers. -- of Du Plessis. -- of Jeannin. -- of
Villeroi. -- of Sulli. -- of the Clergy. -- of Cardinal d' Ossat, or Letters.
-- of Cardinal du Perron, or Embassies, etc. -- of Bassampierre. -- of Deagean.
-- of Du Maurier. Life of Admiral Chatillon. -- of James Augustus de Thou. --
of Henry the 4th. -- of the Duke d'Epernon. -- of the Duke de Rohan. -- of du
Plessis. -- of Lesdiguieres. -- of Francis de la None. -- of Peter du Moulin.
-- of Cotton the Jesuit, by Peter Joseph d'Orleans. -- Another of the same in
Latin, by........ Acts of the General Assemblies. Acts of the National Synods.
Conference of the Edicts of Pacification. Royal Decisions of Filleau.
Maldonat's Letters to the Duke de Monpansier. Letter of P. Paul Scarpi. French
Mercury.
I do not add the Names of those I refute, in this Place. No body can question,
but I have read those I have undertaken to Answer. Neither do I mention those I
have made use of for the first Book of this History in particular, because they
are Authors known by every body.

I say nothing of the Memoirs I have read in Manuscripts, which I have had from
private Persons. I could only mark them with the Name of their Authors, who do
not desire it.

All the Pieces and Titles, I cite in this Work, as Edicts, Declarations,
Decrees, Breefs, etc. of which I do not give a Catalogue here, because I do not
think it material; or which I do not set down among the Proofs, for fear of
disgusting the Reader by the bulk of this Work, are still, or have been in my
hands in due form; several of them Originals; the most part in Authentic
Copies, either Manuscripts, or in Print.

Those I have not in my hands at present, have been returned to those who had
communicated them to me.

A COLLECTION OF EDICTS, CONFERENCES, AND Other PIECES; To serve in order to
prove the FIRST PART of the History of the EDICT of NANTES.
EDICT of Charles IX. about the most effectual means to appease the Troubles
and Seditions in point of Religion, of the Month of January, 1561. Published in
the Parliament of Paris, on the 6th. of March of the said Year.
CHarles, by the Grace of God, King of France, to all those who these Presents
shall see, Greeting. It is sufficiently known what Troubles and Seditions have
been, and are daily kindled, multiplied and augmented in this Kingdom, by the
Malice of the Times, and the diversity of Opinions which reign in Religion; and
that whatever Remedies our Predecessors have tried to put a stop thereunto,
either by the Rigor and severity of Punishments, or by Mildness, according to
their usual and natural Benignity and Clemency; the thing has penetrated so far
into our said Kingdom, and in the minds of our Subjects of all Sexes, Estates,
Qualities and Conditions, that we have found our selves in a great perplexity
at our new coming to this Crown, to advise and resolve what means we should use
to apply good and wholesome Remedies thereunto. After long and mature
consultation about the same, with the Queen our most honored, and most beloved
Lady and Mother, our most dear and most beloved. Uncle, the King of Navar, our
Lieutenant General, representing our Person throughout all our Kingdoms and
Territories, and other Princes of our Blood, together with our Privy Council:
We caused our said Uncle to assemble in our Court of Parliament, together with
the Princes* of our Blood, the Peers of France, and other Princes and Lords of
our said Privy Council.

All which, with the Members of our said Court, after several Conferences and
deliberations, did resolve on the Edict of the Month of July last past; whereby
we did forbid, among other things, on pain of confiscation of Body and Goods,
all Public Conventicles and Assemblies with Arms: As well as all Private ones,
in which any body should preach, or administer the Sacrament in any form
contrary to the Practice observed in the Catholic Church, from the first
beginning, and ever since the propagation of the Christian Faith, received by
the Kings of France our Predecessors, by the Bishops, and Prelates, Curates
their Vicars and Deputies: Being persuaded at that time, that the prohibition
of the said Assemblies was the best way, until we could have the determination
of a General Council, to put a stop to the diversity of the said Opinions: And
by keeping our Subjects by that means in union and concord, to put an end to
the Troubles and Seditions. The which on the contrary, through the
disobedience, obstinacy, and evil Intentions of the People, the execution of
the said Edict proving difficult and dangerous, have been much more increased,
and Cruelly practiced, to our great grief and trouble, than they had been
before. Therefore in order to remedy the same, and in consideration that our
said Edict was only provisional: We have been advised to summon another
Assembly in this Place, composed of our said Uncle, the Princes of our Blood,
and the Members of our Privy Council; there to advise with a considerable
number of our Presidents, and chief Counselors of our Sovereign Courts by Us
summoned to that end, who are able to give us a faithful account of the State
and Necessities of their Provinces, in relation to the said Religion, Tumults
and Seditions; about such means as may be most proper, useful and convenient,
to appease and put an end to the said Seditions:

Which has been done: And all things having been duly and maturely digested and
deliberated in our Presence, and in that of our said Lady and Mother, by so
great and so notable an Assembly, We have by their advice and mature
deliberation said and ordained, do say and ordain what follows.

I. That all those of the New Religion, or others that have taken possession of
Temples, shall be obliged after the Publication of these Presents, to quit and
depart from the same; as well as from all Houses, Estates and Revenues
belonging to Ecclesiastics, where ever they are cituated or seated; leaving
them the full and entire possession and enjoyment of the same, to enjoy them
with the same liberty and safety they did before their being dispossessed
thereof. That they shall return and restore what they have taken of the Shrines
and Ornaments of the said Temples and Churches; and that it shall not be lawful
for those of the said New Religion to take or build any other Temples either
within or without the Cities, Towns, etc. nor to occasion the least Trouble,
Let, or Molestation to the said Ecclesiastics, in the enjoyment or gathering
of their Tithes and Revenues, and other Rights and Estates whatever, at
present, or for the future. Which we have inhibited and forbidden them to do,
and do by these Presents inhibit and forbid; as also to beat down and demolish
Crosses, Images, or the committing other seandalous and seditious acts: On pain
of death, and without the least hope of pardon or remission.

II. Likewise not to assemble in the said Cities, there to preach either
publicly or privately, either by Day or Night.

III. However, in order to keep our Subjects in peace and quietness, until it
be God Almighty's pleasure to enable us to reunite them, and put them all into
the same Fold again, which is our earnest desire, and chief intention: We have
by Provision, until the Determination of the said General Council, or New
Orders from us; Surceas'd, suspended, and superceded; do surcease, suspend, and
supercede the Inhibitions and Punishments appointed, both in the Edict of July,
and others that have preceded it, in relation to the Assemblys that shall be
made in the daytime without the said Cities, in order to their Preaching,
Praying, and performing other Exercises of their Religion.

IV. Forbidding on the same Penalties and Punishments, all Judges, Magistrates,
and other persons, however qualified or distinguished, to hinder, disturb,
molest, or fall upon those of the said New Religion, in any wise, whenever they
shall go, come and assemble without the said Cities, to exercise their said
Religion. But on the contrary, in case any persons should attempt to abuse
them, We do command our said Magistrates and Officers in order to prevent all
Troubles and Seditions, to hinder the same, and summarily, and severely to
punish all the Seditious, whatever Religion professed by them, according to the
Contents of our said precedent Edicts and Ordinances, even in that which is
made against the said seditious Persons, and for the bearing of Arms; which we
will and expect to have fulfilled in all Points, and to remain in full force
and virtue.

V. Enjoining a new, according to the same, all our said Subjects, of what
Religion, Estate, Quality and Condition soever, not to make any Assemblies
whatever in Arms, or to abuse, reproach, or provoke each other upon the account
of Religion, or to make, stir, procure, or favor the least Sedition; but on
the contrary to live and behave themselves one toward another, gently and
quietly, without making use of Pistols great or small, or other Firearms,
either in going to the said Assemblies, or elsewhere; or any other prohibited
or forbidden Weapons, excepting only Swords and Daggers for* Gentlemen, which
are the Arms they commonly wear.

VI. Moreover, forbidding the Ministers and Chiefs of those of the said
Religion, to receive any Persons in their said Assemblies, without being first
informed of their Qualities, Lives and Conversations; to the end that in case
they should be condemned for nonappearance, or Contempt upon the account of
Crimes deserving punishment, they should deliver them into the hands of our
Officers, to receive a condign Punishment.

That whenever our said Officers shall be willing to go into the said
Assemblies to assist at their Predications, and to hear what Doctrines they
teach there, they shall be received and respected according to the dignity of
their Places and Offices. And in case it be to take or apprehend any
Malefactor, that they shall obey, favor and assist them in the same, as need
shall require.

VII. That they shall make no Synods or Consistories, unless with leave, and in
presence of one of our said Officers; nor likewise any creation of Magistrates
among themselves, Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, that belonging to us only.
But that in case they shall think it necessary to constitute some Regulations
among them, for the exercise of their said Religion, they shall show them to
our said Officers, to have their approbation, provided they be things they
ought and can reasonably do; otherwise to give us notice of the same, to obtain
our leave, or to know our Intentions therein.

VIII. That they shall list no men, either to fortify and assist one another,
or to offend others; nor make any Impositions, Gatherings, and Raisings of
Money among themselves. And that as to their Charities and Alms, they shall
neither be made by Assesments or Impositions, but voluntarily.

IX. Those of the said New Religion shall be obliged to keep our Political
Laws, even those that are received in our Catholic Church, as to Holydays,
Days of rest, and Marriage; for degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity; in order
to avoid all Debates and Lawsuits that might ensue to the ruin of several of
the best Families of our Kingdom, and the dissolving of the Bonds of
Friendship, which are acquired by Marriage and Alliances among our Subjects.

X. The Ministers shall be obliged to repair before our Officers to swear the
observance of these Presents, and to promise to preach no Doctrine contrary to
the pure Word of God, according as it is contained in the Nicene Creed, and in
the Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, lest they should fill our
Subjects with new Heresies. Forbidding them most expressly, and on the Penalties
above mentioned, not to use reproachful or scoffing Expressions in their
Sermons against the Mass, and Ceremonies received and kept in our said
Catholic Church; or to go from place to place, there to preach by force,
against the will and consent of the Lords, Curates, Vicars and Churchwardens
of Parishes.

XI. In the same manner forbidding all Preachers to use in their Sermons or
Predications, injurious or reproachful Expressions against the said Ministers,
or their Sectators; by reason that such proceedings have hitherto contributed
much more to excite the people to Sedition, than to provoke them to Devotion.

XII. And all Persons, of what Estate, Quality and Condition soever, from
receiving, concealing, or harboring in their Houses, any person accused,
prosecuted, or condemned for Sedition: under the penalty of 1000 Crowns
applicable to the Poor: And in case of not being solvable, on pain of being
wipt and banished.

XIII. Furthermore it is our Will and Pleasure, that all Printers, Dispersers.
and such as sell Defamatory Libels and Satyrs, shall be Whipped for the first
fault of that kind, and lose their lives for the second.

XIV. And whereas all the effect and observance of this present Ordinance,
which is made for the preservation of the general and universal quiet of our
Kingdom, and to prevent all Troubles and Seditions, depends on the duty, care
and diligence of our Officers. We have ordained, and do ordain, that the Edicts
by us made about Residence, shall be inviolably observed, and the Offices of
such as shall be wanting therein, vacant and forfeited; and that they shall
neither be restored or kept in the same, either by Letters Patents, or
otherwise.

XV. That all Bailiffs, Seneschals, Provosts, and other our Magistrates and
Officers shall be obliged, without bidding or requiring, to repair forthwith to
the Place where they shall be informed that any Misdemeanor has been committed;
in order to inform, or cause to be informed against Delinquents and
Malefactors, and to secure their persons in order to their Trial, on pain of
forfeiting their Places, without hopes of restitution, and of all cost and
damages toward the Parties. And in the case of Sedition shall punish the
Seditious, without deferring to an Appeal according (calling to their
assistance such a number of our other Officers, or famous Advocats) as it is
ordered by our Edict of July, and in the same manner, as if it were by a Decree
from one of our Sovereign Courts.

XVI. Forbidding our dearly beloved and trusty Chancellor, and our beloved and
trusty the Masters of Request. quest in Ordinary of our Palace, keeping the
Seals of our Chanceries, to grant any Relief of Appeal; and our Courts of
Parliament to relieve them, or otherwise to hinder our said Inferior Officers
from taking cognizance of the same, in case of Sedition: By reason of the
dangerous consequence thereof, and that it is necessary to proceed with speed
against the same by exemplary Punishment.

Therefore we will and require by these Presents, our Beloved and Trusty, the
Persons holding our said Courts of Parliament, Bailiffs, Seneschals, Provosts,
or their Lieutenants, and all our other Justicers and Officers, and every one
of them, as unto them shall appertain; To cause our present Ordinances, Will
and Intention, to be read, published and registered, kept, preserved, and
inviolably observed, without any infringement; and to constrain, and cause to
be constrained; this to do and suffer, all such to whom it shall belong, and
shall want to be constrained for the same: And to proceed against the
Transgressors in the manner aforesaid. And that the said Bailiffs, Seneschals,
Provosts, and other our Officers, shall give us notice within a Month after the
Publication of these Presents, of their proceeding in the execution and
observation thereof. For such is our Pleasure. All Edicts, Ordinances,
Commands, or Prohibitions thereunto contrary notwithstanding. To which we have
in respect to the Contents of these Presents, and without prejudice to them in
others, derogated, and do derogate. In witness whereof, we have caused our Seal
to be affixed to these Presents.

Given at St. Germain en Layc, the 17th Day of January, in the Year of our
Lord, 1561: and of our Reign the Second. Thus signed by the King, being in his
Council, Bourdin,
and sealed upon a double Label with Yellow Wax.
The King's Declaration and Interpretation upon some Words and Articles, 6 and
7 contained in the present Edict of the 17th of January, 1561.
CHarles, by the Grace of God King of France, to our Trusty and well beloved
the Persons holding our Courts of Parliament, Bailiffs, Senechals, Provosts, or
their Lieutenants, and to all our other Justices and Officers, and to every one
of them, according as it may concern them, Greeting.

By our Ordinance of the 17th of January last past, joined hereunto under the
Counter Seal of our Chancery, made for the repose and Pacification of our
Subjects, and to appease and put an end to the Troubles and Seditions
occasioned in this our Kingdom, by the diversity of Opinions that reign in our
Religion: It is said among other things, [Article 6.] That whenever our
Officers shall be desirous to go into the Assemblys of those of the New
Religion, to assist at their Sermons, and to hear what Doctrine is taught
there, they shall be received in the same, and respected according to the
Dignity of their Places and Offices: And in case it be to take and apprehend
some Malefactors, they shall be obeyed, and assisted; according as it is
contained more at large, in the Article of the said Ordinance, which mentions
it.

And whereas some difficulty might arise about the Interpretation of this Word
Officers, thus couched in general, in the said Article, to know whether all our
Officers of Judicature are indifferently meant and included under the same, we
in order to make our said Ordinance as clear and intelligible as can be, and to
leave nothing dubious or difficult, have said and declared for the
interpretation thereof, do say and declare, that by the said Word Officers, and
the permission we have granted them to go into the said Assemblies, for the
Reasons contained in our said Ordinance, we only intend, as we do still intend
to give the said Power to our Ordinary Officers, to whom the cognizance of the
Policy of Civil Government belongs; as Bailiffs, Seneschals, Provosts, or their
Lieutenants, and not to those of our Sovereign Courts, nor to our other
Officers of Judicature, which we expect to live in the Faith of us, and of our
Predecessors. And the said Power shall extend no farther than when occasion
shall offer it self to inspect and remedy what is mentioned in the said
Ordinance.

Moreover, We have ordained, and do ordain, in relation to what is said
afterward [Article 7.] in the said Ordinance, That those of the New Religion
shall hold neither Synods, nor Consistories, unless by leave, or in presence of
one of our said Officers. That if their said Assemblies which they call Synods
and Consistories, are General of the whole Government and Province, they shall
not be allowed to hold them, unless by leave, or in presence of the Governor,
or our Lieutenant General of the Province, of his Lieutenant General, or others
by them appointed: And in case the said Assembly is Particular, by leave, or in
presence of one of our Magistrate Officers, who shall be elected and deputed by
the said Governor, or his said Lieutenant General. Provided always that the
said Assemblys which they call Synods and Consistories, shall only be held for
the regulation of Religion, and upon no other account. And all this by way of
Provision, until the determination of the General Council, or till new Orders
from us. Neither have we by our said Ordinance, and the present Declaration,
designed, or do design, to approve two Religions in our Kingdom, but only one,
which is that of our Holy Church, in which the Kings our Predecessors have
lived.

Therefore we will and require you, that in proceeding to the reading,
publishing, and registring of our said Ordinance, you shall at the same time,
and in like manner cause this our present Declaration and Interpretation to be
read, published, and registered, and the same inviolably to maintain, keep and
observe, without the least Infraction: For such is our Pleasure, the Contents
of our said Ordinance, and all other Edicts, Mandats, or Prohibitions thereunto
contrary notwithstanding.

Given at St. Germain en Lay, on the 14th of February, in the Year of our Lord
1561. and of our Reign the Second. Thus Signed by the King, being in his
Council; with the Queen his Mother, the Duke of Orleans, the King of Navar, the
Cardinal of Bourbon, and the Prince De la Roche Sur-Yon; the Cardinals of
Tournon, and Chatillon, You the Sieurs de St. Andre, and de Montmorency
Marshals, and de Chastillon, Admiral of France, du Mortier, and the Bishop of
Orleans, d' Avanson, and the Bishop of Valence, de Selve, de Gonnor, and
Dandelot, and several others were present. Bourdin.

First Mandamus from the King to the Court of Parliament at Paris, for the
publishing of the Edict of the Month of January.
CHarles, by the Grace of God, King of France, to our Trusty and well-beloved
the persons holding our Court of Parliament at Paris Greeting. We have seen the
Remonstrances you have sent us by our Trusty and well beloved Christopher de
Thou, President, and William Violle, Councellor in our said Court, your
Brethren, about the Ordinance we have given on the 17th. of January last past,
for the peace and tranquillity of our Subjects, and to put a stop to the
Troubles and Seditions occasioned in this Kingdom by the diversity of the
Opinions that reign in Religion. And after having caused the said Remonstrances
to be read, Article after Article, and word for word, in presence of us, and of
the Queen our most dear, and most beloved Lady and Mother, of our most dear and
most beloved Brother, the Duke of Orleans, of our most dearly beloved Uncle,
the King of N. our Lieutenant General, representing our Person throughout all
our Kingdoms and Territories, of the other Princes of our Blood, and our Privy
Council: We by their Advice, and in consideration of the great, reasonable and
necessary Causes and Occasions which have been our Motives for making the said
Ordinance, do hereby desire, command, and expressly enjoin you to proceed to the
reading, publishing, and registring of the said Ordinance, and the Declaration
by Us made, affixed to the same. And that you shall cause both the one and the
other to be received, kept, and inviolably observed, without the least
infringement: The whole by way of Provision, until the determination of the
General Council, or New Orders from us: And according as it is more at large
directed by the said Ordinance and Declaration, without any farther delay or
difficulty, not to oblige us to send you any other. or more express Command
than these Presents, which you shall take for second, third; and all other
Mandates, which you might require from us in this case; for such is our
Pleasure. What is above said, all Edicts, Ordinances, Mandates, and
Prohibitions thereunto contrary, Notwithstanding.

Given at St. Germain en Lay, the 14th Day of February, in the Year of our
Lord, 1561. and of our Reign the Second. Thus signed by the King being in his
Council. Bourdin.

The Second MANDAMVS.
CHarles, by the Grace of God, King of France, To our Trusty and well beloved
the Persons holding our Court of Parliament at Paris, Greeting. Whereas we did
heretofore send you, our Ordinance of the 17th. of Jannary last past, upon
which several good Remonstrances have been made to us by you, which we have
imparted to our Privy Council, we being there in Person: and whereas several
great and urgent Occasions have anew occurred since, and daily do occur
concerning the Tranquillity of the State of our Kingdom, which induce us more
and more to desire the reading, publishing and registring of the said
Ordinance: We have again referred the deliberation of the said Affair to our
Privy Council; in presence of our most dear and most beloved Lady and Mother,
our most dear and most beloved Uncle, the King of Navar, our
Lieutenant General, representing our Person in all our Kingdoms and
Territories, and several other Princes of our Blood, and Members of our said
Council, by the common advice of which, it has been thought fit, and resolved,
that it is more than necessary for our service, and for the peace and quietness
of our Subjects, that the reading, publishing and registring of the said
Ordinance should be performed in our said Court.

Therefore in pursuance of the said Advice, and in consideration of the
necessity of the Time, and the consequenee of the Affair, We require, command,
and expressly enjoin you, that laying aside all Delays and Difficulties, you
should cause the said Ordinance and Declaration to be read, published
registered from Point to Point, according to their Form and Tenor and the same
to receive, keep and observe: The whole provisionally until the determination
of the General-Council, and new Orders from Us. All Ordinances, Mandates, or
Prohibitions thereunto contrary, Notwithstanding.

Given at St. Germain en Lay, the 1st of March, in the Year of the Lord 1561.
and of our Reign the Second. Thus signed by the King being in his Council, with
the Queen Mother, and the King of Navar his Lieutenant General, representing
his Person in all Kingdoms* and Territories, the Cardinal of Bourbon, the
Prince of Conde, and the Prince de la Roche-sur-Yon, the Cardinals of Tournon,
and de Chatillon. You le sieur, de St. Andre Marshal of France, le sieur du
Mortier, and the Bishop of Orleans, le Sieur d' Avanson, and the Bishop of
Valence, and les Sieurs de Selve, de Gonnor, and de Cypierre, all Counselors
in the said Council, and several others were present. Bourdin.

Publication of the Edict of January, and of the Declaration, and
Interpretation of the same.
LEcta, Publicata and Registrata, audito, Procuratore Generali Regis, respectu
habito literis patentibus Rgis, primae diei hujus mensis, urgenti necessitati
temporis, and obtemperando voluntati dicti Domini Regis, absque tamen
approbatione novae Religionis: and id totum per modum provisionis, and donec
aliter per dictum Dominum Regem fuerit ordinatum.

Parisis in Parlamento Sexta die Martii Anno Domini millesimo quingentesimo
sexagesimo primo. Sic signatum, Du Tille^t.

The Edict of King Chares the IX. of the Year 1570. about the pacification of
the Troubles of this Kingdom.
CHarles, by the Grace of God, King of France, to all those present and
hereafter to come, Greeting. Considering the great Evils and Calamities
occasioned by the Troubles and Wars wherewith our Kingdom has been long, and is
still afflicted; and soreseeing the desolation that might ensue, unless by the
grace and mercy of God the said Troubles were speedily pacified. We in order to
put an end to the same, to remedy the Afflictions that proceed from thence, to
restore and make our Subjects live in Peace, Union, Quiet and Tranquillity, as
it has always been our intention. Let it be known, that after having taken the
good and prudent Advice of the Queen our most dear and most honored Lady and
Mother, of our most dear and most beloved the Duke of Anjou, our Lieutenant
General, and the Duke d' Alencon, Princes of car Blood, and other great and
notable Persons of our Privy Council; We have by their good Counsel and Advice,
and for the Causes and Reasons abovesaid, and other good and great
Considerations Us thereunto moving, by this our present Edict, perpetual, and
irrevocable, said, declared, enacted, and do ordain, will and resolve what
follows.

I. That the remembrance of all things past on both sides, from the very
beginning of, and since the Troubles happened in our said Kingdom, and on the
account of the same, shall be extinguished and laid aside, as of matters
happened that had never; and that it shall not be lawful for our
Atorney-General, neither for any Public or Private Persons, whatever at any
time, nor on any occasion soever to mention the same, or to commence any
Process, or suit thereof in any Court or Jurisdiction.

II. We forbid all our Subjects of what Estate or Quality soever, to revive the
remembrance thereof; to injure or provoke each other by Reproaches for what is
past. To dispute, contest, quarrel, wrong or offend one another in Word or
Deed, but to forbear, and live peaceably together like Brethren, Friends, and
Fellow-Citizens; on pain, for the Delinquents, of being punished as Infractors
of the Peace, and Perturbators of the Public quiet.

III. It is our Will and Pleasure that the Roman Catholic Religion shall be
restored in all parts and places of this our Kingdom and Countries under our
Obedience, where the exercise of the same has interrupted, there to be freely
and peaceably exercised, without the least trouble or hindrance, on the
Penalties above mentioned. And that all those who during the present War have
seized on Houses, Goods or Revenues belonging to Ecclesiastics, or other
Catholics, who detain and possess the same, shall surrender them the entire
possession, and peaceable enjoyment thereof, with the same freedom and safety
they enjoyed them before their being dispossessed of the same.

IV. And that there may remain no occasion of difference and contention among
our Subjects, We have and do allow those of the said Pretended Reformed
Religion, To live and inhabit in all the Cities and parts of this our Kingdom,
and Territories under our Obedience, without being urged, vexed, or molested,
or constrained to do any thing against their Conscience, in point of Religion:
Nor examined in their Houses, or places where they shall inhabit upon the said
account, provided they behave themselves according to what is contained in the
present Edict.

V. We have also given leave to all Gentlemen, and other persons, actual
Inhabitants, and others possessing in our Kingdom and Territories under our
Obedience, High Jurisdiction, or Full * Fief d' Haubert, as in An Inheritance
held immediately and in Capite of the King.
Normandy, whether in Proper, or Vse-Frint, in the whole, or in a part, to have
in such their Houses of the said High-Jurisdiction, or Fief which they shall
nominate for their Principal abode to our Bailiffs and Seneschals, every one in
his Precinct the Exercis of the Religion they call Reformed, as long as they
reside there; and in their absence their Wives or Children, whom they shall
answer for; and they shall be obliged to name the said Houses to our Bailiffs
and Seneschals, before they shall enjoy the benefit thereof: They shall also
enjoy the same in their other Houses of High Jurisdiction, or of the said Fief
de Haubert, as long as they shall be actually there, and no otherwise, the
whole as well for themselves as their Families, Subjects and others, who shall
be willing to go there.

VI. In Houses of Fief, where the said Reformed shall have no High
Jurisdiction, and Fief de Haubert, they shall only be allowed the said Exercise
of Religion for their Families: Yet in case any of their Friends should chance
to come there to the number of Ten, or some Christning happen in haste, the
Company not exceeding the said Number of Ten, they shall not be prosecuted or
troubled for the same.

VII. And to gratify our most dear and most beloved Aunt the Queen of Navar,
we have allowed her, besides what has been above granted to the said Lord's
High Justicers, over and above in every one of her Dutchys d' Albert, County's
d' Armagnac Foix and Biggore, in a House belonging to her, in which she shall
have High-Jurisdiction, which House shall be by us chosen and nominated, there
to have the said Exercise performed for all such as shall desire to assist
thereat, even in her absence.

VIII. Those of the said Religion shall also be allowed the Exercise thereof in
the following Places, viz. For the Government of the Isle of France, in the
Subburbs of Clermont and Beauvois^s, and in those of Cr^spi in Laonnois. For
the Government of Champagne and Brie, besides Vezelai which they possess at
this time, in the Subburbs of Villenece. For the Government of Burgundy, in the
Subburbs of Arnai-le-Due, and in those of Mailli la ville. For the Government
of Picardy, in the Subburbs of Mondidier, and in those of Riblemont. For the
Government of Normandy, in the Subburbs of Ponteau de Mer, and in those of
Carentan. For the Government of Lyonnois, in the Subburbs of Charlieu, and in
those of St. Geni de Laval. For the Government of Bretagne, in the Subburbs of
Becherel, and in those of Kerhez. For the Government of Dauphine, in the
Subburbs of Crest, and in those of Chorges. For the Government of Provence, in
the Subburbs of Merindol, and in those of Forcalquier. For the Government of
Languedoc, besides Aubenas, which they are in possession of, in the Subburbs of
Montaignac, for the Government of Guienne, at Bergerac, besides S. Sever which
they are also in possession of. And for that of Orleans, Le Maine, and the
Country of Chartrain, besides Sencerre which they have, in the Town of Mailli.

IX. Moreover, We have also granted them to continue the exercise of the said
Religion in all the Cities in which it shall be publicly performed on the
first Day of this present Month of August.

X. Forbidding them most expressly to make any Exercise of the said Religion,
either as to the Ministry, Regulation, Discipline, or public intiitution of
Children or others, in any Places besides those above granted and allowed.

XI. Neither shall any exercise of the said Pretended Reformed Religion be
performed, in our Court, or within two Leagues round about it.

XII. Neither do we allow the Exercise of the said Religion, within the City,
Provostship and Vicecomty of Paris, nor within Ten Leagues of the said City,
which ten Leagues we have and do limit to the following Places, viz. Senlis and
the Suburbs; Meaux and the Suburbs; Melun and the Subburbs, a League beyond
Chartres, under Mount-le-Heri, Dourdan and the Suburbs; Rembouillet Houdan and
the Suburbs; a long League beyond Melun, Vigni, Meru, S. Leu de Serens; in all
which abovesaid places we do not allow any exercise of the said Religion:
Nevertheless those of the said Religion shall not be disturbed in their Houses,
provided they behave themselves as abovesaid.

XIII. We do enjoin our Bailiffs, Seneschals or ordinary Judges, each in their
Precincts, to appoint Places for them of their own, either such as they have
heretofore acquired, or such as they shall purchase, there to bury their Dead;
and that at the time of their decease, one of the House or Family shall go to
acquaint the Captain of the Watch therewith, who shall send for the
Grave-Digger of the Parish; and order him to go with such a number of Sergeants
of the Watch as he shall think fit to allow to accompany him, and to prevent
Scandal, to remove the Corpse in the Night, and so carry it to the place
appointed for that purpose, only allowing Ten persons to accompany it: And in
such Towns as have no Captain of the Watch, the Judges of the Place shall
appoint some other Ministers of Justice.

XIV. Those of the said Religion shall not be allowed to marry, in such degrees
of Consanguinity or Affinity as are prohibited by the Laws received in this
Kingdom.

XV. All Scholars, the sick and Poor shall be received in the Universities,
Schools, Hospitals, etc, without difference or distinction upon the account of
Religion.

XVI And to the end that no question may be made of the good Intention of our
said Aunt, the Queen of Navar, of our most dear and most beloved Brother and
Cousins, the Princes of Navar and of Conde, Father and Son, we have said and
declared, do say and declare, That we hold and repute them our good Relations,
faithful Subjects and Servants.

XVII. As also all Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Officers and other Inhabitants of
the Cities, Corporations, Villages and Hamlets, and other Places of our said
Kingdom and Territories under our Obedience, who have followed and assisted
them in any part whatever, for our good loyal Subjects and Servants.

XVIII. And likewise the Duke of Deux-Ponts, and his Children, the P. of
Orange, Count Ludovic and his Brothers, Count Wolrat of Mansfeld, and other
Foreign Lords, who have aided and assisted them, for our good Neighbors,
Relations, and Friends.

XIX. And our said Aunt, as well as our said Brother and Cousin, Lords,
Gentlemen, Officers, Corporations of Cities, Communities, and others who have
aided and assisted them, their Heirs and Successors, shall remain acquitted and
discharged, as we do acquit and discharge them by these presents for all Sums
of Money by them or their Order taken and raised out of our Offices of Receipt
and Treasures, whatever Sums they may amount to, as well as out of Cities,
Communities, or from particular persons, Rents, Revenues, Plate, Sale of Goods,
both Ecclesiastical and others, Forests belonging to us or others; Fines,
Booties, Ransoms, or other kind of Sums taken by them, upon the account of the
present as well as precedent Wars: Neither shall they, or those by them
appointed for the raising of the said Sums, or those that have given and
furnished the same, be any ways troubled or called to an account for the same
either now or hereafter; and both they and the said Clarks shall be discharged
for all the Management and Administration thereof, only producing for a full
discharge, Acquittances from our said Aunt, or from our said Brother and
Cousin, or from those that shall have been appointed by them, for the
examination and passing of the same. They shall also be acquitted and
discharged for all Acts of Hostility, Levies, Marching of Soldiers, Coining,
Casting and Taking of Artilleries and Ammunitions, either out of our Magazines,
or from particular persons; making of Powder and Saltpeter; Taking, Fortifying,
Dismantling, and Demolishing of Cities and Towns; Enterprises upon the same;
Burning and Demolishing of Temples and Houses; Establishing of Courts of
Justice, Judgments and Executions by them; Voyages, Intelligences, Treaties,
Negotiations, and Contracts made with all Foreign Princes and Communities;
introducing of the said Strangers into the Cities and other parts of our
Kingdom. And generally, For all that has been done, managed, and negotiated
during and since the present, first, and second Troubles, tho neither
particularly expressed nor specified.

XX. And those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, shall depart and desist
from all Associations they have made either at home or abroad; and henceforward
shall raise no Money without our Leave, or list any Men; neither shall they
hold Congregations or Assemblies, otherwise than abovesaid, and without Arms;
all which we prohibit and forbid them, on pain of being rigorously punished, as
Contemners and Infractors of our Commands and Ordinances.

XXI. All Places, Cities, and Provinces, shall remain and enjoy the same
Privileges, Immunities, Liberties, Franchises, Jurisdictions, and Seats of
Justice, they had before the Troubles.

XXII. And to remove all Cause of Complaint for the future, we have declared
and do declare, Those of the said Religion capable to hold and exercise all
Estates, Dignities, and Public Employments, both Seignorial, and of the Cities
belonging to this Kingdom; and to be admitted and received without distinction
into all Councils, Deliberations, Assemblies, Estates, and Functions, depending
on the things abovesaid, without being any ways rejected or hindered from
enjoying the same immediately after the Publication of this present Edict.

XXIII. Neither shall the said of the Pretended Reformed Religion be
overcharged or burdened with any ordinary or extraordinary Taxes, more than
the Catholics, and according to their Estates and Substance. Moreover, in
consideration of the great Charges those of the said Religion take upon
themselves, they shall be free from all other Taxations the Cities shall impose
for the Expenses past; but they shall contribute to all such as shall be
imposed by us; as also for the future to all those of Cities, like the
Catholics.

XXIV. All Prisoners that are detained either by the Authority of Justice or
otherwise, even in the Galleys, on the account of the present Troubles, shall
be released and put at liberty on both sides, without paying any Ransom: But
yet the Ransoms that have been paid already, shall not be re-demanded or
recovered of those that have received them.

XXV. And as to the Differences that might arise upon the account of the
foresaid Sales of Lands, or other Immovables: Bonds or Mortgages given on the
account of the said Ransoms; as also, for all other Disputes belonging to the
case of Arms that might occur, the Parties concerned shall repair to our said
most Dear and most Beloved Brother the Duke of Anjou, to summon the Marshals of
France, and he shall decide and determine the same.

XXVI. We Order, and it is our Will and Pleasure, that all those of the said
Religion, as well in general as in particular, shall be restored, preserved,
maintained, and kept under our Protection and Authority, into all and every
their Estates, Rights, and Actions, Honors, estates, Places, Pensions, and
Dignities, of what quality soever they be, except the Bailiffs and Seneschals
of the long Gown, and their Lieutenant-Generals; in the room of which others
have been placed by us during the present War; to whom, Assignations shall be
given to reimburse them of the true value of their said Offices, out of the
clearest Money of our Revenue; unless they had rather be Counselors in our
Courts of Parliament, within their Precinct, or of the Great Council, at our
Choice; in which case, they shall only be reimburs'd of the Overplus of the
Value thereof, in case it fall out so; as they shall also pay the Surplus, if
their Offices were of less Value.

XXVII. The Movables that shall be found in being, not having been taken by
way of Hostility, shall be restored to the Owners, however returning the
Purchasers the Price they have been sold at by Authority of Justice, or by
other Commission, or public Order, as well belonging to Catholics, as to
those of the said Religion. And for the Performance of the same, the Detainers
of the said Movables shall be constrained to make immediate restitution
thereof without delay, all oppositions or exceptions notwithstanding; and to
return and restore them to the Owners for the Price they have cost them.

XXVIII. And as for the Fruits or Revenues of the Immoveables, every one shall
re-enter into his house, and shall reciprocally enjoy the Income of the
gathering of the present year. All Seizures or oppositions made to the contrary
during the Troubles notwithstanding. As also every one shall enjoy the Arrears
of Rent that shall not have been taken by us, or our Order, Permission, or
Ordinance from us or our Justice.

XXIX. Also the Forces and Garrisons that are or shall be in Houses, Places,
Cities, and Castles, belonging to our said Subjects of whatever Religion, shall
immediately retire out of the same, after the Publication of the present Edict,
to leave them the free and entire Possession thereof, as they enjoyed it before
their being dispossessed.

XXX. It is also our Will and Pleasure, That our Dear and Well-beloved Cousins
the Prince of Orange, and Count Ludowic of Nassau his Brother, shall be
actually restored and reestablished into all the Lands, Lordships, and
Jurisdictions they have in our said Kingdoms and Territories under our
Obedience; as also to the Principality of Orange, the Rights, Titles, Papers,
Informations, and Dependancies of the same, taken by our Lieutenant-Generals,
and other Ministers by us employed to that end; the which shall be to said
Prince of Orange, and the Count his Brother, restored in the same condition
they enjoyed them before the Troubles; and shall enjoy the same henceforward,
according to the Letters Patent, Decrees, and Declarations granted by the late
King Henry of most laudable Memory, our most Honored Lord and Father, whom God
absolve, and other Kings our Predecessors, as they did before the Troubles.

XXXI. We also Will and Require, That all Titles, Papers, Instructions, and
Informations, that have been taken, shall be restored and returned on both
sides to the true owners.

XXXII. And in order to extinguish and lay aside as much as can be the
Remembrance of all Troubles and Divisions past; we have declared and do
declare, All Sentences, Judgments, Decrees, and Proceedings, Seisures, Sales,
and Statutes, made and given against the said of the pretended Reformed
Religion, as well dead as alive, since the Death of our said most honored Lord
and Father, King Henry, on the account of the said Religion, Tumults, and
Troubles happened since, together with the Execution of the said Judgments and
Orders, from this moment Void, Revoked, and Annulled; and therefore order the
same to be razed and taken out of the Registers of our Courts both Sovereign
and Inferior, as also all Marks, Tracts, and Monuments of the said Executions,
defamatory Books and Acts against their Persons, Memories, and Posterities; and
order the whole to be razed out. And the Places that have been demolished and
razed on that account, restored to the owners thereof, to be used and disposed
of according to their pleasure.

XXXIII. And as for the Procedures made, Judgments and Decrees given, against
those of the said Religion upon other accounts than the said Religion and
Troubles; together with Prescriptions, and Feodal Seizures accruing during the
present, last, and precedent Troubles, beginning the Year 1567. they shall be
void, as never having been made, given, nor happened; neither shall the Parties
derive any advantages by them, but shall be put again into the same condition
in which they were before the same.

XXXIV. We also ordain, That those of the said Religion shall keep to the
Political Laws of our Kingdom, in observing Festivals; neither shall they
labor, or sell in open Shops on the said days; nor yet open their Shambles to
sell meat on such days in which the use of meat is prohibited by the
Roman Catholic Church.

XXXV. And to the end that Justice may be rendered and ministered to all our
Subjects, without Partiality, Hatred, or Favor, we have and do Ordain, Will,
and it is our Pleasure, That Suits and Differences moved or to be commenced
among Parties being of contrary Religion, as well in being Plaintiffs as
Defendants in any Civil or Criminal Causes whatever, shall be heard in the
first place before the Bailiffs, Seneschals, and other our ordinary Judges,
according to our Ordinances: And where Appeals shall lie in any of our Courts
of Parliament, in relation to that of Paris, which is composed of Seven
Chambers, The great Chamber, La Tournelle, and five Chambers of the Inquests,
it shall be lawful for those of the pretended Reformed Religion, if they
please, in the Causes they shall have depending in each of the said Chambers,
to demand that four, either Presidents or Counselors, may abstain from the
Judgment of their Processes, who without alleging any Cause, shall be bound in
this case to abstain, notwithstanding the Ordinance by which the Presidents and
Counselors cannot be excepted against without just Cause. And besides that,
all Refusals of Right shall be allowed them against all others Presidents and
Counselors according to the Ordinances or Statutes.

XXXVI. As for the Suits they shall have depending in the Parliament of
Thoulouse, if the Parties cannot agree about another Parliament, they shall be
returned before the Masters of Request of our Hostel, in their Court in the
Palace at Paris; who shall judge their Suits Impartially and Sovereignly,
without Appeal, as if they had been judged in our said Parliaments

XXXVII. And as to what relates to those of Roan, Dijon, Provence, Bretagne,
and Grenoble, they shall be allowed to challenge Six Presidents or Counselors
to abstain from the Judgment of their Suits, that is three out of each Chamber.
And in that of Bourdeaux four out of every Chamber.

XXXVIII. The Catholics shall also be allowed to challenge, if they think fit,
all such Members of the said Courts as have been discharged of their Offices
upon the account of Religion by the said Parliaments, ^o abstain from the
Judgment of their Suits; also peremptorily; and they shall be obliged to
abstain from the same. They shall also be allowed all usual Recusations against
all other Presidents and Counselors, according as they are of Right allowed by
the Statutes.

XXX^X. And whereas several persons have received and suffer such Injuries and
Damages in their Estates and Persons, that it will be difficult for them to
lose the remembrance thereof, so soon as it should be requisite for the
execution of our Intention, being desirous to avoid all Inconveniences that
might arise from peoples being disturbed in their Houses, until all Grudges and
Animosities are allayed, we have given in keeping to those of the said
Religion, the Cities of Rochel, Montauban, Coignac, and La Charity, in which
all such as shall be unwilling to repair so soon to their own Houses, shall be
free to retire, and to inhabit. And for the surety of the same, our said
Brother and Cousin the Princes of Navar and Conde, together with Twenty
Gentlemen of the said Religion, who shall be by us nominated, shall swear and
promise one and for the whole, for themselves, and for those of their said
Religion, to preserve the said Cities for us; and at the end of two years to
deliver them again into the hands of such a one as we shall think fit to
depute, in the same condition they now are in, without innovating or altering
any thing in the same; and that without any delay or difficulty, upon any
account or occasion whatever: At the expiration of which term, the exercise of
the said Religion shall be continued there, as while they held them. It being
nevertheless our Will and Pleasure, that in the same, all Ecclesiastics shall
freely re-enter and perform Divine Service in all Liberty, and enjoy their
Estates as well as all the Catholic Inhabitants of the said Cities; which said
Ecclesiastics and other Inhabitants, shall be taken into the Protection and
Safeguard of our said Brother and Cousin, and other Lords, to the end that they
may not be hindered from performing the said Divine Service, molested nor
disturbed in their Persons, or in the enjoyment of their Estates; but on the
contrary restored and reintegrated into the full possession of the same.
Willing moreover, that in the said four Cities our Judges shall be
reestablish'd, and the exercise of Justice restored, as it used to be before
the Troubles.

XL. It is also our Will and Pleasure, That immediately after the Publication
of this Edict made in the Two Camps, Arms shall strait be laid down every
where; the which shall only remain in our hands, and those of our most Dear and
most Beloved Brother the Duke of Anjou.

XLI. A Free Commerce and Passage shall be re-established through all Cities,
Towns, Villages, Bridges, and Passages of our said Kingdom, in the same
condition as they were before the present and last Troubles.

XLII. And in order to avoid the Violences and Transgressions that might be
committed in several of our Cities, those who shall be by us appointed for the
Execution of the present Edict, in the absence of one another, shall make the
chief Inhabitants of the said Cities of both Religions, whom they shall choose,
swear to keep and observe our said Edict; shall make them guard each other,
charging them respectively and by public Act, to answer for the Transgressions
that shall be made to the said Edict in the said City, by the Inhabitants
thereof respectively, or else to secure and deliver up the said Transgressors
into the hands of Justice.

XLIII. And to the end that our Justices and Officers, as well as all other our
Subjects, may be clearly and with all certainty informed of our Will and
Intention, and to remove all Doubts and Ambiguities and Cavillings that might
be made in relation to the precedent Edicts, We have and do declare all other
Edicts, Letters, Declarations, Modifications, Restrictions, and
Interpretations, Decrees, and Registers, as well secret as all other
Deliberations heretofore made in our Courts of Parliament, and others that
might hereafter be made to the prejudice of our said present Edict, concerning
the case of Religion, and the Troubles occasioned in this our Kingdom, to be
void and of no effect. To all which and the Derogatories therein contained, we
have by this our Edict derogated, and do derogate, and from this very time as
for then, do cancel, revoke, and annul them: Declaring expressly, That it is our
Pleasure, that this our said Edict should be sure, firm, and inviolable, kept,
and observed by our said Justices, Officers, and Subjects, without respecting
or having the least regard to whatever might be contrary and derogating to this.

XLIV. And for the greater assurance of the maintenance and observation we
desire of this, it is our Will, Command, and Pleasure, That all Governors of
our Provinces, our Lieutenant-Generals, Bailiffs, Seneschals, and other
ordinary Judges of the Cities of this our Kingdom, immediately upon receipt of
this our said Edict, shall swear, The same to keep and observe, cause to be
kept, and observed, and maintained, every one in their Precinct; as also the
Mayors. Sheriffs, Capitouls, and other Officers Annual or Temporal, as well the
present, after the reception of the said Edict, as their Successors, in taking
the Oath they are used to take when they are admitted into the said Places and
Offices; of which Oaths, public Acts shall be expedited to all such as shall
require it.

We also require our Trusty and Well-beloved, the Persons holding our Courts of
Parliament, immediately upon receipt of this present Edict, to cease all their
Proceedings; and on pain of Nullity of the Acts they should pass otherwise, to
take the like Oath, and to cause our said Edict to be Published and Registered
in our said Courts, according to the Form and Tenor thereof, purely and
plainly, without any Modifications, Restrictions, Declaration, or secret
Register; and without expecting any Mandamus or Order from us: And our
Attornies-General to require and pursue the immediate Publication thereof,
without any delay; the which we will have performed in the Two Camps and
Armies, within six Days after the said Publication made in our Court of
Parliament of Paris, in order to send back the Strangers forthwith. Injoyning
likewise our Lieutenants-General, and Governors, speedily to Publish, and to
cause this our said Edict to be published by the Bailiffs, Seneschals, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Capitouls, and other ordinary Judges of the Cities of their said
Government wherever it will be necessary: As also the same to keep, observe,
and maintain every one in his Precinct, in order to put a speedy stop to all
Acts of Hostility, and to all Impositions made, or to be made upon the account
of the said Troubles after the Publication of our present Edict. Which from the
Moment of the said Publication we declare liable to Punishment and Reparation;
viz. against such as shall use Arms, Force, and Violence, in the Transgression
and Infraction of this our present Edict, hindering the Effect, Execution, or
Enjoyment thereof, with Death without hope of Pardon or Remission. And as for
the other Infractions that shall not be made by way of Arms, Force, or
Violence, they shall be punished by other Corporal Inflictions, as Banishments,
Amend Honorable, and other Pecuniary Punishments, according to the Nature and
Exigency of the Offenses, at the Will and Pleasure of the Judges to whom we
have assigned the Cognizance thereof: Engaging their Honors and Consciences to
proceed therein with all the Justice and Equality the Cause shall require,
without respect or exception of Persons or Religion.

Therefore we command the said Persons holding our Courts of Parliament,
Chambers of our Accounts, Courts of Aids, Bailifs, Seneschals, Provosts, and
other our Justices and Officers whom it may concern, or their Lieutenants, this
our present Edict and Ordinance to cause to be Read, Published, and Registered
in their Courts and Jurisdictions, and the same to maintain, keep, and observe
in all Points, and all whom it may concern, the same fully and peaceably to
use, and to enjoy; ceasing, and causing all Troubles and Hindrances thereunto
contrary to cease For such is our pleasure. In witness whereof we have signed
these presents with our own hand; and to the same, to the end that it may be
firm and lasting for ever, we have caused our Seal to be affixed.

Given at St. Germain en Lays, in the Month of August, in the Year of our Lord,
1570. and of our Reign the Tenth. Signed* Charles.
And beneath it, by the King being in his Council. Signed De Neufville.
And on the side, Visa, and Sealed with the great Seal with green Wax, upon
Knots of red and green Silk. Read, Published, and Registered, at the request and
desire of the King's Attorney General, at Paris in Parliament on the 11th of
August 1570. Signed* Tu Tillet.

Edict of Pacification made by King Henry the 3d, in order to put an end to the
Troubles of his Kingdom, and to make all his Subjects thenceforward live in
Peace and Quietness, Union, and Concord, under his Obedience; Read and
Published in the Court of Parliament, the 8th of October, 1577.
HEnry by the Grace of God, King of France and Poland, to all present and to
come, Greeting. God. who is the Searcher of the hearts of Men, and sees the
bottom of their thoughts, shall always be Judge for us, that our Intention has
never been other than to Reign according to his Holy Commandments, and to
govern our Subjects in all uprightness and Justice; approving our self a Common
Father to all, who has no other end but their welfare and quiet. In order
thereunto, we have always used our utmost endeavors to do whatever we judged
most proper according to the occasions and times; even with a design to
establish a certain Peace in this our Kingdom, and to provide against the
Disorders and Abuses that have crept in to the same through the License of such
long Troubles; and to restore it to its Pristine Dignity and Splendour. To which
end we did convene our Estates General in our City of Blois, where several
things were treated of, and particularly upon matter of Religion; it being
proposed by some, that one of the best Remedies was, to forbid the Exercise of
all Religion besides the Catholic. However, it has not been God Almighty's
Pleasure to let us reap the fruit we desired thereby; but as it is sometimes
his pleasure to visit Kingdoms and Princes, with his Rod of Rigor for the
Offenses and Sins of Men, the Troubles were kindled a new in our Kingdom more
than ever, to our great Grief and Sorrow. And that which troubled us more, was
that the Innocent, that is, our poor People endured the greatest Hardships,
Oppression, and Injuries. All which things having considered day and night; and
experience in our majority of twenty five years, having convinced us that the
Continuation of Arms and War could not afford us the advantage we have so much
desired and endeavored; and being fully persuaded that God Almighty will
finally convert his Rigor into Mercy; and that his said Visitations are
salutary Admonishments to acknowledge him, and to return into the right way of
our Duty: After having implored his Aid and Assistance, to inspire us with
means to find the most necessary and most proper Remedies for the good of our
State: And thereupon taken the Advice of the Queen, our most Honored Lady and
Mother, of our most dearly Beloved Brother, the Duke of Anjou, of the Princes
of our Blood, and others; of the Officers of our Crown, and other Lords and
Notable Persons of our Council: We have, until it please God, by means of a
good, free, and lawful General Council, to reunite all our Subjects to our
Catholic Church, by this our present Edict perpetual and irrevocable, said,
declared, enacted, and ordained: Say, declare, enact, and ordain what follows,

I. First, That the Remembrance of all things past on either side, from the
beginning of the Troubles happened in our Kingdom to this present time, and
upon the account of the same, shall be extinguished and laid aside, as of
things that had never been. Neither shall it be lawful for our
Attornies-General, or any other Persons, public or private, at any time, or on
any occasion whatever to mention, or make any Prosecution of the same, in any
Court or Jurisdiction whatever.

II. We forbid all our Subjects of what Condition or Quality soever, to renew
the Remembrance thereof, to affront or provoke each other by Reproaches of what
is past, upon any account or pretense whatever: To dispute, contend, quarrel,
abuse, or offend one another by Word or Deed, but to forbear and live peaceably
together as Brethren, Friends, and Fellow-Citizens, on pain for the Delinquents
of being punished as Infractors of the Peace, and Disturbers of the Public
Good.

III. It is our Will and Pleasure, that the Catholic Religion shall be
restored and reestablished in all Places and Parts of this our Kingdom, and
Territories under our Obedience, where the Exercise thereof has been
interrupted, there to be freely and peaceably performed without the least
Trouble and Molestation. Forbiding most expressly all Persons of what State,
Quality, or Condition soever, on the pains abovementioned, to trouble, molest,
or disturb the Ecclesiastics in the Celebration of Divine Service, enjoyment
and gathering of their Tithes, Fruits, and Revenues of their Benefices, and all
other Rights and Immunities to them appertaining. And that all such, who during
the present and precedent Troubles have taken Possession of Churches, Houses,
Estates, and Revenues belonging to the said Ecclesiastics; and who detain and
occupy the same, shall yield them the entire Possession, and peaceable
Enjoyment thereof, with such Rights, Liberties, and Immunities, as they enjoyed
before their being dispossessed of the same.

IV. And to remove all occasion of Contentions and Differences among our
Subjects, We have allowed and do permit those of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, to live and inhabit in all the Cities and Places of this our Kingdom
and Territories under our Obedience, without being troubled, vexed, molested,
or constrained to do any thing against their Conscience, or disturbed in the
Houses and Places where they shall think ^it to inhabit, they behaving
themselves according to the Contents of this our present Edict.

V. We have also given leave to all Lords, Gentlemen, and others, as well
actual Inhabitants, as others professing the pretended Reformed Religion,
possessing in our said Kingdom, high Jurisdiction, or full Fief de Haubert, as
in Normandy, either in proper, or Use and Profit.
Vse-Fruit, in the whole, or half, or third part, to have in such their Houses
of the said High Jurisdiction, or abovesaid Fiefs, which they shall be obliged
to name to our Bailifs and Seneschals, every one in his Precinct, for their
chief Abode, the Exercise of the said Religion, as long as they shall be
resident there; and in their absence their Wives or Families which they shall
answer for. We also allow them the said Exercise in their other Houses of High
Jurisdiction, or abovesaid Fiefs of Haubert, as long as they shall be present
there; the whole as well for themselves, their Families, Subjects, as others,
who shall be desirous to go to it.

VI. In such Houses of Fief, where those of the said Religion shall not possess
the said High-Jurisdiction of Fief de Haubert; they shall only be allowed the
said Exercise for their Families. Yet, in case any of their Friends should
chance to come there to the number of Ten, or any Baptism happen in haste, the
Company not exceeding the said number of Ten, they shall not be disquieted or
prosecuted for the same. Provided also, That the said Houses are neither
situated within Cities, Towns, or Villages belonging to Catholic Lords,
High-Justicers* other than us, in which the said Catholic Lords have their
Houses. In which case those of the said Religion shall not be allowed to
perform the said Exercise in the said Cities, Towns, and Villages, without
leave and permission of the said Lords High-Justicers, and no otherwise.

VII. We also allow those of the said Religion to perform and continue the
Exercise thereof in all the Cities and Towns, where it shall be publicly
performed on the 17th day of the present Month of September. However, excepting
such Towns as belong to Catholics, possessed at present by those of the said
Religion, in which those Exercises were not performed before the last taking up
of Arms, even in the time of the former Peace.

VIII. Moreover, in every one of the Ancient Bailiwicks, Seneschalships and
Governments, holding the Place of a Bailiwick, referring directly, and without
mediation to the Courts of Parliament; we ordain, That in the Suburbs of one
City, there being several Cities in the Bailiwick, or for want of Cities, in a
Town or Village, the Exercise of the said Religion shall be allowed for all
comers.

IX. Forbidding all those of the said Religion, most expressly to perform any
Exercise thereof, either as to Ministry, Regulation, Discipline, or public
Institution of Children, and others, in this our said Kingdom and Territories
under our Obedience, in whatever relates to Religion, excepting in the places
above granted and allowed.

X As also to perform any Exercise of the said Religion in our Court and
Attendance, nor within Ten Leagues about it, nor in our Lands and Countries
beyond the Mounts, nor also in our City, Provostship, and Vice-County of Paris,
nor within Ten Leagues round about the same; the which Ten Leagues we have
limited, and do limit to the following Places, Meaux, and the Suburbs; Meulun,
and the Suburbs; a League beyond Charters, under Mont-le-hery; Dourdan, and the
Suburbs; Rambouillet, Houdan, and the Suburbs; a long League beyond Meulun,
Vigni, Meru, and S. Leu de Saraus. In all which places we do not allow any
exercise of the said Religion. Nevertheless those of the said Religion, living
in the said Lands and Countries beyond the Mounts, and in our said City,
Provostship, and Vice-County of Paris, extended as abovesaid, shall neither be
disturbed in their Houses, nor constrained to do any thing on the account of
Religion contrary to their Consciences, provided always they behave themselves
according to the Rules prescribed in our present Edict.

XI. We do enjoin all Preachers, Readers, and others, who speak in Public, not
to use any Words, Discourses, and Expressions, tending to excite the People to
Sedition; but on the contrary to content and behave themselves modestly, saying
nothing but what may tend to the Instruction and Edification of the Hearers,
and to maintain the Peace and Tranquillity by us established in our said
Kingdom, on the pains mentioned in our precedent Edicts. Commanding our
Attorneys General, and other our Officers most expressly to see the same
performed.

XII. Those of the said Religion shall no wise be constrained, neither shall
they remain bound upon the account of the Abjurations, Promises, and Oaths,
heretofore made or taken by them or security by them given upon the account of
the said Religion; and shall never be molested or troubled for the same in any
kind whatever.

XIII. They shall be obliged to keep and observe the Festivals established in
the Catholic Apostolic, and Roman Church: Neither shall they be allowed on
such days to Labor, Work, Sell, or expose Goods to sale in open Shop: Neither
shall the Shambles be opened on such days, in which the use of Flesh is
forbidden.

XIV. No Books shall be allowed to be sold in our Kingdom, Countries,
Territories, and Lordship under our Obedience, without being first examined by
our Officers residing there; and such as are written in Relation to the said
pretended Reformed Religion, by the Chambers hereafter by us ordained in every
Parliament, to judge of the Causes and Differences of those of the said
Religion. Prohibiting most expressly the Impression, Publication, and Sale of
all Defamatory Books, Libels, and Writings, on the pains contained in our
Ordinances: ^njoyning all our Judes and Officers to have an eye upon the same.

XV. We also order, That no Difference or Distinction shall be made upon the
account of Religion: To receive Scholars to be instructed in the Universities,
Colleges, and Schools: And the Sick and Poor into the Hospitals, etc. and
public Alms.

XVI. Those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, shall be obliged to
observe the Laws of the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church, received in this
our Kingdom, in respect to Marriages contracted, or to be contracted, as to the
Degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity, to avoid the Debates and Suits that
might be thereby occasioned, to the ruin of most of the best Families of the
same, and the dissolution of the Bonds of Friendship that are acquired by
Marriage, and alliance among our Subjects.

XVII. Those of the said Religion shall be obliged to pay the Rights of
Entrance, as is usual for the Places and Offices they shall be admitted into,
without being obliged to assist at any Ceremonies contrary to their said
Religion. And being called to their Oath, they shall only be obliged to hold up
their Hand to swear, and promise to God that they will speak the Truth, without
being bound to take a dispensation of the Oath by them taken, in passing the
Contracts and Bonds.

XIX. It is also our Will and Pleasure, that all those of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, and others who have been engaged in their Party, of what
Degree, Quality or Condition soever, shall be bound and constrained by all due
and reasonable Ways, and under the Penalties contained in our precedent Edicts
made upon this Subject, to pay and acquit the Tithes due to Curates and other
Ecclesiastics, and to all others to whom they may belong, according to the Use
and Custom of Places.

XIX. And in order the better to reunite the Wills of our Subjects, which is
our Intention, and to remove all cause of complaint for the future, we do
declare all those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, and others our
aforesaid Subjects that have been engaged in their Party, Capable to hold and
exercise all Estates, Dignities, Offices, and Public Employments whatever,
Royalties and Lordships, and such as belong to the Cities of our said Kingdoms,
Countries, Territories and Lordships under our Obedience, and to be admitted
and received into the same without distinction, and without being obliged to
take any Oath, or lie under any Obligation, but well and faithfully to
discharge their Employments, Dignities, Places and Offices, and to observe the
Ordinances. And when any vacancie of the Employments, Places, and Offices
within our disposal shall happen, they shall be by us reimplac'd without
distinction of Religion, by able persons, as we shall think proper for the good
of our Service. We also allow those of the said Religion to be admitted and
received in all Councils, Deliberations, Assemblies and Functions depending on
the abovesaid things, and that they shall neither be rejected, or debarred the
enjoyment thereof on the account of the said Religion.

XX. We also order, that for the interring of the Dead of those of the said
Religion, within all the Cities and places of this Realm, our Officers and
Magistrates shall speedily provide a convenient Place in every place for that
end. The which we enjoin our said Officers to do; and to take care that no
Scandals may be committed at the said Burials.

XXI. And to the end that Justice may be done and ministered to all our
Subjects, without partiality, hatred or favor, which is one of the principal
means to maintain them in peace and concord; We have and do ordain, that in
every one of our Courts of Parliament of Paris, Roan, Dijon and Rennes, there
shall be a Chamber established, composed for that of the Parliament of Paris,
of a President and 16 Counselors: For that of Roan of a President and twelve
Counselors, and for those of Dijon, and Rennes, of one President, and ten
Counselors: Which said Presidents and Counselors shall be selected and taken
by us out of the number of those of the said Courts.

XXII. And as for the Courts of Parliament of Bourdeaux, Grenoble and Aix, a
Chamber shall also be established in every one of them, composed of two
Presidents, the one a Catholic, and the other of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, and 12 Counselors, of which eight shall be Catholics, and the other
four of the said Religion. Which Catholic Presidents and Counselors shall be
by us selected, and nominated out of the number of the Presidents and
Counselors of the said Courts. And as to those of the said Religion, such
shall be employed, as shall be found at this very time in possession of the
said Offices in the said Courts. And in such places where their number shall
not be sufficient, we shall erect other Offices, as much as shall be necessary
to accomplish the aforesaid number, with the same Salleries, Honors,
Authorities and Prerogatives as the others of our said Courts, for persons of
the said Religion.

XXIII. A Chamber shall also be established for the Jurisdiction of our Court
of Parliament of Thoulouse, composed as the others of two Presidents, the one a
Catholic, and the other of the said Religion; and of twelve Counselors, eight
Catholics, and the other four of the said Religion. Which Catholics shall be
by us chosen out of our other Courts of Parliament, and out of the Great
Council: And as for those of the said Religion, such shall be employed there as
shall be found still at this present time provided with Offices in the said
Parliament of Thoulouse, besides which a sufficient number shall be created to
supply the said Chamber, as is above said, for the others. Which Chamber being
thus composed, shall by us be sent into the City of -- And as for that of
Dauphine, it shall sit six Months in our City of Grenoble, and the other six
Months in such another City as we shall hereafter order.

XXIV. The said Chambers composed as abovesaid, and established in all our said
Parliaments, shall take cognizance, and judge sovereignly, and definitively, by
Decree, exclusively to all others, of Suits and Differences moved or to be
moved: In which Suits those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, and others
that have been engaged in their Party, shall be Principals, or Warrantees,
either Plaintiffs or Defendants in all Causes, Civil or Criminal, whether the
said Processes be by Writ, or Verbal Appeals, in case the said Parties like it
so, and one of them requires it before any Plea in the Cause, in respect to
Suits to be commenced.

XXV. It is also our Pleasure by way of Care and Circumspection, until we have
otherwise ordained it, that in all Processes moved, or to be moved, in which
those of the said Religion shall stand as Plaintiffs or Defendants, Principals
or Warrantees in Civil Causes, in which our Officers of Presidial Seats have
power to judge Sovereignly and definitively; they shall be allowed to demand
that two of those of the Chamber, where the said Cause is to be tried, shall
abstain from the Judgment of the same: Who without alleging any cause, shall
be obliged to abstain in this case: Notwithstanding the Ordinance by which the
Judges cannot be excepted against without a just cause, besides their still
retaining the Refusals of Right against the others. And in Criminal matters in
which they also judge Sovereignly, the accused of the said Religion shall be
allowed to demand, that three of the Judges may abstain from the Judgment of
their process, without showing cause. And the Provosts of the Marshals of
France, Vice-Bailiffs, Vice-Seneschals, Lieutenants of the Short Robe, and
other Officers of the like Quality shall judge according to the Ordinances and
Rules heretofore given in respect to Vagabonds. And as for Householders charged
and accused of Provostal or Criminal cases, if they be of the said Religion,
they shall be allowed to demand that three of the Presidial Judges, before whom
the said Cases are to be tried by the Statutes, may abstain from the Judgment
of their Process: And they shall be obliged to abstain from the same without
showing cause; except when in the Chamber of the said Presidial Seats, where
the said Processes are to be judged, there be to the number of Two in Civil
Cases, and Three in Criminal matters of the said Religion: In which Case it
shall not be allowed to refuse without showing cause. But yet we do not mean
that the said Presidial Tribunals, Provosts Marshals, Vice-Bailiffs, and
Vice-Seneschals, by virtue hereof should take cognizance of the Troubles past.

XXVI. It is farther our Will and Pleasure, that our most Dearly Beloved
Brother the King of Navar, our most Dearly Beloved Cousin the Prince of Conde,
as well as all other Lords, Knights, Gentlemen and others, of what Quality and
Condition soever of the said Religion, and others that have been engaged in
their Party, shall be restored, and effectually preserved in the possession of
their Governments, Places, Estates, and Royal Offices, which they enjoyed
before the 24th of August, 1572. the said to hold and to use in the said form
and manner, as other Governors and Officers of this our same Kingdom, without
being obliged to take new Letters Patents; all Decrees and Judgments given
against them, and Letters Patent obtained by others for the said Employments
notwithstanding. As also that they shall re-enter inpossession of all and
singular their Estates, Rights, Names, Dues and Actions, all Judgments and
Sentences given upon the account of the said Troubles notwithstanding. The
which Decrees, Judgments, Letters Patent, and all that may have followed, we
have to that end declared, and do declare null, and of no effect and value.

XXVII. Not intending however that those of the said Religion, and others that
have been engaged in their Party, who have resigned their Employments and
Offices by virtue of our Letters Patent, or of the Late King our most honored
Lord and Brother, whom God absolve, should recover the same, and re-enter into
the possession thereof; reserving to them however, all Actions against the
Possessors and Titularies of the said Offices, for the payment of the price
agreed on between them, upon the account of the said Resignations. And as for
those who have been constrained by particular persons by Fact and Force to
resign their said Employments and Offices, we do permit them and their Heirs to
sue for the same by Law, in a civil manner, both against those that have used
the said Force, and against their Heirs and Successors.

XXVIII. And as for those of the said Religion, and others who have been
engaged in their Party, and had the grant of the said Offices before the 24th
of August, 1572. and were not yet received into the same: It is our will and
pleasure that they be received into the said Employments, and that all
necessary Patents be expedited them to that End.

XXIX. It is also our will and pleasure, That in case any Commanderships of the
Order of St. John of Jerusalem, belonging to those of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, and others who have been engaged in their Party, shall be
found seized by Authority of Justice, or otherwise, barely upon the account and
pretense of the Troubles, and they any wise dispossessed of the same, they
shall be immediately restored to the said Commanders, and they again put into
the same possessions of the said Commanderships, as they were before the 24th
of August, 1572.

XXX. The Outcries, and Public Sales of Inheritances, against which a Decree
is prosecuted, shall be performed in, and at the usual hours and places, if
possible, according to our Ordinances, or in the Public Marketplaces, in case
there be a Market in the place where the said Heritages lie: And in case there
be none, it shall be done in the next Marketplace belonging to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, where the Judgment is to be passed. And the Paper of
Notice shall be affixed to the Post of the said Marketplaces, and at the
Entrance of the Auditory of the said place. And in so doing the said
Publications shall be good and valuable, and they shall proceed to the
Interposition of a Decree, without regard to the Nullities that might be
alleged in that respect.

XXXI. The Acquisitions of Churchlands made by those of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, and others who have been engaged in their Party, without our
Authority, shall be void, and of no effect: And therefore we ordain, and it is
our will and pleasure, that the said Ecclesiastics shall be restored without
delay, and confirmed into the real and actual possession and enjoyment of the
Estates thus alienated, without being obliged to pay back the Price of the said
Sales: The said Contracts of Sale notwithstanding. The which to that end we
have cancelled and revoked as null, saving a Redress to the Purchasers, against
such as it may concern. And in order to the Reimbursement of the Purchasers of
the said Lands, for the Money by them really and truly disburs'd, we will grant
our Letters Patent for leave to those of the said Religion, to impose and equal
upon themselves the Sums to which the said Sales may amount, without the
Purchasers being allowed to pretend any Action of Damage or Interest, for want
of enjoyment, but shall rest satisfied with the reimbursement of the Money laid
out by them, for the price of the said Acquisitions, abating upon the said
price, the Fruits gathered and received by them, in case the said Sale be
adjudg'd to have been made at an unreasonable and too low Rate.

XXXII. All Disinheritations, or Privations, either by way of disposing among
Living Persons, or by Wills, barely out of hatred, or upon the account of
Religion, shall not be allowed, neither for the time past, nor for the future,
among our Subjects. Yet notwithstanding all Military Wills made during the said
present and precedent Troubles on either side, shall be valid, and shall hold
according to the Disposition of Right.

XXXIII. The Disorders and Excesses committed on the 24th of August. and the
following Days in consequence of the said Day, in our good City of Paris, and
other Cities and parts of our said Kingdom, were done to our great regret and
displeasure. And therefore as a singular Demonstration of out goodness and
kindness toward our Subjects, we do declare the Widows and Children of those
that were killed on the said Days, in any part of our said Kingdom, free from
contributing toward the Impositions that shall be laid for the Ban and
Arriereban, if their Husbands or Fathers were Nobles: Or if their said Husbands
or Fathers were not Gentlemen, and consequently liable to pay the A heavy Tax
upon such as are not Gentle men.
Taille; We for the same Considerations discharge the said Widows and Children
of all Tailles and Impositions, the whole, for and during the term of six Years
next coming: Forbidding all our Officers, every one in his Precinct, to
comprehend them in the same, contrary to our present Will and Intention.

XXXIV. We likewise declare all Sentences, Judgments, Decrees, Proceedings,
Seizures, Sales and Orders made and given against those of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, whether alive or dead, since the Death of the late King
Henry, our most honored Lord and Father, upon the account of the said
Religion; Tumults, and Troubles happened since, together with the execution of
the said Judgments and Sentences from this very time to be razed, void and
null, as we do hereby raze, revoke and annul the same. And order the same to be
razed and taken out of the Registers of the Registries of the Courts, as well
Sovereign as Inferior: As also our pleasure is, that all Marks, Signs and
Monuments of the said Executions, Books and Acts, defamatory to their Persons,
Memories and Posterities, should be removed and defaced. And that all Places
where Demolishments or Raisings have been made on that account, shall be
restored, such as they are, to the true owners thereof, to enjoy the same, and
dispose of them as they shall think fit. And we have generally cancelled,
revoked and annulled all Proceedings and Informations made for any Enterprises,
pretended Crimes of Leze Majesty, or others; the said Proceedings, Decrees and
Judgments containing Reunion, Incorporation, and Confiscation notwithstanding,
willing that those of the said Religion, and others who have been engaged in
their Party, should be restored to the real and actual possession of all and
every their Estates.

XXXV. And whereas by virtue of our aforesaid Deciaration, all Decrees and
Judgments given against the late Sieur de Chatillon, Admiral of France, and the
execution of the same, remain void and of no effect, as things never done nor
happened: We in consequence of the said Declaration, Order that all the said
Decrees, Judgments, Proceedings, and Acts made against the said Sieur de
Chatillon, be rac'd, and taken out of the Register of the Registries as well of
our Courts of Parliament, as of all other Jurisdictions: And that the memory of
the said Admiral shall be untainted; and that his Children shall remain in full
possession of their Honors and Estates, in that respect, notwithstanding the
said Decrees, importing reunion and incorporation of the said Estates, to the
demean of our Crown, of which we will cause a larger and more particular
Declaration to be given to the said Children, if necessary.

XXXVI. We will have the same done in relation to the Sieurs de Montgommery,
Montbrun, Briquemaut, and Cavaignes.

XXXVII. We forbid the making of any Processions, either for the Death of our
late Cousin the Prince of Conde, or for what happened on St. Bartholomew's Day,
1572. and all other Acts that might refresh the memory of the Troubles.

XXXVIII. All Proceedings made, Judgments and Decrees given against those of
the said Religion bearing Arms, either absent from our said Kingdom, or retired
into any Cities and Countries of the same, held by them, but not upon the
account of Religion and the Troubles; together with all Nonsuits, Prescriptions
as well Legal, Conventional, as Customary; all Feodal Seisures accrued during
the present or precedent Troubles, shall be esteemed as not performed,
happened, nor granted, and as such we have and do declare them to be; have and
do annihilate them, without any redress to the Parties, but they shall be
restored to the same condition in which they were before, notwithstanding the
said Decrees, and the execution thereof; and the possession of the same, shall
be restored to them as they had it on the said 24th of August, 1572. What is
above written shall also hold good for others who have been engaged in the
Party of those of the said Religion, since the last taking up of Arms, or that
have absented from our said Kingdom upon the account of the Troubles, and for
the Minor Children of those of the Quality abovesaid, who died during the said
Troubles. Restoring the Parties to the same Condition in which they were
before, without paying Charges, or being obliged to consign the Fines.

XXXIX. All Prisoners that are detained, whether by Authority of Justice, or
otherwise, even upon the Galleys, on the account of the present or precedent
Troubles, shall be freed and set at liberty on both sides, without paying any
Ransom. Cancelling and anulling all past Obligations on that subject,
discharging the securities thereof; inhibiting and forbiding most expressly all
such, in whose keeping the said Prisoners are, to use any force or violence
against them, to abuse or misuse them any wise in their Persons, on pain of
being severely punished and chastis'd. However not meaning that the Ransoms
that have already been disburs'd and paid by those who were Prisoners of War
only, should be redemanded of those that have received them. And as to what
relates to the Differences concerning the said Ransoms of those that have been
made Prisoners on both sides during the said Troubles, the Cognizance and
Judgment thereof is reserved, as we do reserve it to us, and to our Person,
forbidding the Parties to sue for the same any where but before us: And all our
Officers and Magistrates to take the least cognizance thereof.

XL. And as to what has been done or taken, without hostility, or in an hostile
manner, contrary to the public or particular Regulations of the Chiefs, and of
the Communalties and Provinces that had a Command; it shall be lawful to fue
for it, according to the common Practice of the Law.

XLI. It is also our Will and Pleasure, that all Crimes and Offenses committed
between persons of the same Party in times of Troubles, Truces and Suspensions
of Arms, shall be punished, unless in Actions commanded by the Chiefs of either
part, according to the Necessity, Law, and Order of War: And as for all
Raisings and Exactions of Money, bearing of Arms, and other Warlike Exploits,
done by private Authority, and without being warranted so to do; the persons
having so done, shall be prosecuted according to Law.

XLII. The Goods that shall be found in being, and that shall have been taken
by way of hostility, shall be restored to the Right Owners, in case they be,
and are found to be at the time of the publication of the present Edict, in the
possession of those that have taken them, or of their Heirs, without paying any
thing for the Restitution thereof. And where the said Goods shall have been
sold or alienated by Authority of Justice, or by Commission or Public Order,
belonging either to Catholics, or to those of the said Religion, they shall
have leave to redeem them, returning the price thereof to the purchasers;
declaring that what was committed at Paris and elsewhere, on the 24th of
August, 1572. and the following Days in consequence of that, was no Act of
Hostility.

XLIII. As to what relates to the Fruits of the Immoveables, every one shall
retake possession of his Houses and Estates, and shall reciprocally enjoy the
fruits or products of the present Year, that shall not have been taken or
gathered on the 17th Day of this present Month of September. Even the
Ecclesiastics. All Seizures and hindrances made to the contrary, during the
said present and precedent Troubles notwithstanding: As also every one shall
enjoy the Arrears of the Rents that shall not have been taken by us, or by our
Orders and permissions, or by order of Justice, or by command of our said
Brother and Cousin, the King of Navar, and Prince of Conde, or by others
authorized by them.

XLIV. All Titles, Papers, Listructions, and Informations that have been taken,
shall be returned on both sides, to the right owners, although the said Papers, or
the Castles and Houses in which they were kept, have been taken and seized,
either by our special Commissions, or by order of the Governors, and
Lieutenants-General of our Provinces, or by the authority of the Chiefs of the
other Party, or under any pretense whatever.

XLV. Those of the said Religion shall not be overcharged for the future, nor
oppressed with any ordinary or extraordinary Charges, more than the Catholics,
and according to the proportion of their Estates and Substance; and it shall be
lawful for such as shall think themselves overburthen'd, to seek for a Redress
before the Judges to whom those Matters shall be referred. And all our Subjects
of what Religion or Quality soever, shall be indifferently discharged of the
Charges that have been imposed on both sides, on those who were absent, and did
not enjoy their Estates by reason of the Troubles, but still without
restitution of the Fruits that shall have been employed for the payment of the
said Charges.

XLVI. Neither shall those of the said Religion, and others who have been
engaged in their Party, nor the Catholics, who inhabited in the Cities and
places by them detained and occupy'd, and who have paid Contritributions to
them, be liable to be sued for the payment of the Taxes, Subsidies, Grants,
Increases, Assesments, Wastes, Reparations, and other Impositions and Subsidies
accruing and imposed since the 24th of August, 1572. until now, either by our
Orders, or by the advice and deliberations of the Governors and Estates of the
Provinces, Courts of Parliament, and others, which we have and do discharge
them of, commanding the Treasurers of France, Generals of our Revenues,
Receivers General and Particular, their Clerks and Deputies, and other
Intendants and Commissioners of our said Revenues, neither to sue, molest or
disquiet them for the same, directly or indirectly, in any wise whatever.

XLVII. The Forces and Garrisons that are or shall be in Houses, Places, Cities
and Castles belonging to our Subjects, shall march out of them immediately
after the publication of the present Edict, and leave the free and absolute
enjoyment thereof to the true owners, as they enjoyed them formerly;
notwithstanding all the pretensions of right that might be alleged by those
that detain them; which pretensions they shall be free to prosecute according
to the Common Course of Law, after having quitted the said possession, which we
will have effected, especially in respect to the Benefices the Titularies shall
have been dispossessed of.

XLVIII. Free Commerce and Passage shall be restored through all the Cities,
Towns, Villages, Bridges and Passages of our Kingdom, Countries, Lands and
Lordships under our command and protection, both by Sea and Land, Rivers and
Fresh-waters, as they were before the present and precedent Troubles; and all
new Tolls and Subsidies imposed by any Authority but our own, during the said
Troubles, shall be removed.

XLIX. All Places, Cities and Provinces of our said Kingdom, Territories, Lands
and Lordships under our Obedience, shall use and enjoy the same Privileges,
Immunities, Liberties, Franchises, Fairs, Markets, Jurisdictions and Seats of
Justice, as they did before the present and precedent Troubles, all Letters to
the contrary, and the removing of any of the said Tribunals notwithstanding;
provided those things have only been done upon the account of the Troubles, the
which Tribunals shall be restored and re established into the Cities and Places
where they were before.

L. In such Cities as have been dismantled, during the passed and present
Troubles, it shall be lawful for the Inhabitants to rebuild and repair the
Ruins and Dismantlings of the same with our leave, at their own cost and
charges.

LI. Such of the said pretended Reformed Religion, and others who have been
engaged in their Party, which had taken to Farm before the present Troubles,
any Registries, or other Demean and Rights to us belonging, which they have not
been able to enjoy, by reason of the said Troubles, shall remain discharged, as
we do hereby discharge them of what they have not received of the said Farms,
since the 24th of August 1572. as also of what they have paid without fraud in
places not belonging to the Receipt of our Revenues; all Obligations passed by
them upon the same notwithstanding.

LII. And to the end that no body may doubt of the good Intention of our said
Brother the King of Navar, and of our said Cousin, the Prince of Conde; We have
said and declared, do say and declare, that we hold and repute them our good
Kinsmen, faithful Subjects and Servants.

LIII. As also all the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Officers, and other
Inhabitants of Cities, Corporations, Villages and other places of our said
Kingdom and Countries under our command, who have followed, succored and
favored them in any part whatever for our good and loyal Subjects, declaring
all Decrees, Informations, and proceedings made and given against them upon the
account of the said Troubles, void and of no effect, as things never done nor
happened; willing the same to be razed out of the Registers of the Chief
Clerk's Offices, both of our Courts of Parliament, and other Jurisdictions,
where they have been recorded.

LIVE. We also declare, that we hold and repute our Cousin Duke John Cazimir for
our good Neighbor, Kinsman and Friend.

LV. We do also acquit and discharge our said Brother and Cousin the King of
Navar, and Prince of Conde, as well as all the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen,
Officers, Corporations of Cities and Communities, and all others that have
abetted and succored them, their Heirs and Successors, for all Sums taken and
raised by them or their Orders, out of our Offices of Receipt and Revenues, to
whatever sum or sums they may amount, as well as out of Cities, Corporations,
and from particular persons, Rents, Revenues, Plate, Sales of Estates, Goods,
both Ecclesiastical and others: Forests belonging to us or others: Fines,
Booties, Ransoms, or other Sums taken by them, upon the account of the present
and precedent Troubles; and that neither they, nor any that have been employed
by them for the raising of the said Sums, or that have given and furnished them
by their Ordinances, shall any wise be liable to be called to an account for
the same, either at present, or for the future: And that both they and their
Clerks shall remain acquitted for all the management and Administration of the
said Sums, only producing for a full Discharge within four Months after the
publication of our present Edict, given in our Court of Parliament at Paris,
acquittances duly expedited by our said Brother and Cousin the King of Navar,
and Prince of Conde, or by such as shall have been by them committed for the
audit and closing of their Accounts, or from the Corporations of the Cities
that have been employed and entrusted during the said Troubles. They shall also
remain acquitted and discharged for all Acts of Hostility, Levies, and marching
of Soldiers, Coining and Rating of Species made according to the order of the
said Chiefs, Casting and taking of Artillery and Stores, both out of our
Magazine, and from particular persons; making of Powder and Saltpeter; taking,
fortifying, dismantling and demolishing of Cities, Castles, Towns; Enterprises
upon the same, Burning and demolishing of Churches and Houses, establishing of
Courts of Justice, Judgments and Executions of the same, either in Civil or
Criminal Causes, Civil Government and Regulations made among themselves,
Voyages, Intelligences, Negotiations, Treaties and Contracts made with all
Foreign Princes and Communities, introducing of the said Strangers into the
Cities and other parts of this our Kingdom, and generally for all that has been
done, managed and negotiated during the present or past troubles, since the
Death of our late Lord and Father, by those of the pretended Reformed Religion,
and others that have been engaged in their Party, although it be not
particularly expressed and specified.

LVI. And those of the said Religion, and others that have adhered to them,
shall give over, and desist from this time forward, from all Practices, Leagues
and Intelligences they hold out of our said Kingdom; as also all other our
Subjects that might have held any. And all Leagues, Associations, Fellowships
contracted, or to be contracted, under any pretense whatever, to the prejudice
of our present Edict, shall be cancelled and annul'd, as we do cancel and annul
them, forbidding our Subjects most expressly to make any Assessments, or raise
Money without our leave, Fortifications, listing of men, Congregations, and
Assemblies, other than such as are allowed them by our said present Edict, and
without Arms: Which we do prohibit and forbid them on pain of severe
punishment, as contemners and infracters of our Commands and Orders.

LVII. All Prizes taken both by Sea and Land, by virtue of the Licenses and
Warrants given, which have been judged by the Judges of the Admiralty, and
other Commissioners deputed to that end by those of the said Religion, shall
remain dormant under the benefit of our present Edict, for which no prosecution
shall be made, neither shall the Captains, their Securities, and the said
Judges, Officers and others, be called to an account for the same, nor molested
in any kind whatever: All Letters of Mark and Seisures depending, and not
judged, notwithstanding; of which we will have them absolutely discharged and
released.

LVIII. It is also our will and pleasure, That the Children of such as have
retired out of our said Kingdom, since the Death of the late King Henry, our
most honored Lord and Father, upon the account of Religion and the Troubles
although the said Children are born out of our said Kingdom, shall be acknowledged
as true Natives of France, and actual Inhabitants thereof; and such we have and
do declare them to be, without their being obliged to take any Letters of
Naturalization, or other provisions from us besides the present Edict: All
Ordinances thereunto contrary notwithstanding, the which we have and do
derogate from.

LIX. We also order, that immediately after the publication of this our Edict,
all Forces and Armies both by Sea and Land, shall disband and retire. Those of
the said Religion, and such as have been engaged in their Party, shall be
obliged to remove all Garrisons out of the Cities, Places, Castles and Houses
they are possessed of, belonging either to us, to the Clergy, or other private
persons; to quit, restore, and surrender them in full liberty, as they were in
full peace before the present and precedent Troubles. Nevertheless, whereas
several private persons have received and suffered during the Troubles, so many
Injuries and Damages in their Estates and Persons, that it will be difficult
for them to lose the remembrance thereof so soon as it should be requisite for
the execution of our Intentions; we being desirous to avoid all inconveniences
that might arise from thence, until the Heart-burnings and Animosities are
allayed, have thought fit to give in keeping to those of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, for the time and Term of six years, the Cities following,
viz. In Languedoc, those of Montpelier and Aiguesmortes: In Dauphine, Nyons and
Serre, City and Castle: In Provence, Seine, La Grandtour, and the Circuit
thereof: In Gulenne, Perigueux, La Reolle, and the Mas of Verdun; which Cities
our said Brother and Cousin the King of Navar, and Prince of Conde, and twenty
Gentlemen of the said Religion, or others that have been engaged in their
Party, who shall be by us nominated; Besides such as shall be committed for the
Guard of the said Cities and Castles, shall swear and promise, one and for the
whole, for themselves, and for those of the said Religion, and others of their
Party, well and faithfully for us to keep them; and at the expiration of the
aforesaid Term of Six Years, to reckon from the day and date of the present
Edict, to redeliver them into the hands of such as shall be by us deputed, in
the same condition they now are in, without the least Innovation or Alteration,
and without the least delay or difficulty, upon any pretense whatever; at the
end of which Term, the exercise of the said Religion shall be continued there,
as while in their Possession: Nevertheless it is our Will and Pleasure, That in
them all Clergymen shall freely return, perform Divine Service in all Liberty,
and enjoy their Estates; and likewise all the Catholic Inhabitants of the said
Cities. The which Clergymen and other Inhabitants, our said Brother and
Cousin, and other Lords, together with the Governors of the said Cities and
Garrisons, shall take into their Protection and Safeguard, to the end that they
may not be disturbed in the said Divine Service, molested nor disquieted in
their Persons, and in the enjoyment of their Estates; but on the contrary,
restored and re-established into the full Possession of the same: Willing
moreover, that our Judges shall be also reestablished into the said Cities,
and the exercise of Justice restored, as it used to be before.

LX. Forbidding strictly all our Subjects, of what Quality or Condition soever,
to form any Enterprises or private Conspiracies to surprise the said Cities
given in keeping to those of the said Religion, or to take or seize any other
Cities, Castles, and Places of our said Kingdom, and Territories thereunto
belonging, on pain of being punished and chastis'd as Infractors of the Peace,
and Disturbers of the Public Quiet.

LXI. No Governors or Garrisons shall be put by us into the Cities at present in
Possession of those of the said Religion, which are to be quitted by them,
unless they have always had such, and even in the Reign of the late King Henry
our said Lord and Father. Likewise, desiring to ease our Subjects in all our
Cities, as much as in us lies, it is our Will and Pleasure, That the Governors,
Captains, and Soldiers, that have been put in Garrison there, shall be removed
out of the same, excepting out of such as are Frontiers of our said Kingdom,
which are fit to be kept there for the Defense and Safety thereof. Neither
shall any other Garrisons be kept in the Cities, Castles, Houses, and Estates,
belonging particularly to our Subjects, than such as used to be kept there in
time of Peace.

LXII. And to the end that our Justices, Officers, and other our Subjects, may
be clearly, and with all certainty, informed of our Will and Intention; and to
remove all Ambiguities and Doubts that might arise on the account of the
precedent Edicts, by reason of the diversity of the same, we have and do hereby
declare all other Precedent Edicts, secret Articles, Letters, Declarations,
Modifications, Requisitions, Restrictions, Interpretations, Decrees, Registers,
as well such as are secret, as other Deliberations by us made in our Courts of
Parliament, and elsewhere, concerning the Case of Religion, and the Troubles
happened in our said Kingdom, to be void, and of no effect and value: To which,
and to the derogatories therein contained, we have by this our Edict derogated,
and do derogate, and from this time as well as then, cancel, revoke, and annual
the same; declaring expressly, That this our Edict shall be firm and inviolable,
kept and observed by our said Justicers and Officers, as well as by our other
Subjects, without minding or regarding whatever may be contrary or derogating
to the same.

LXIII. And for the better Assurance of the maintaining and observation we
desire to have of the same, it is our Will and Pleasure, That all our
Governors, and Lieutenant-Generals of our Provinces, Bailiffs, Seneschals, and
other common Judges of the Cities of this our said Kingdom, immediately upon
receipt of this our said Edict, shall swear to cause it to be observed in their
several Precincts; as also the Mayors, Sheriffs, Capitouls, Consuls, and Jurats
of Cities, Annual or Perpetual. Enjoining also our said Bailiffs, Seneschals,
or their Lieutenants, or other Judges, to swear the chief Inhabitants of the
said Cities, of either Religion, to the keeping and maintaining of the present
Edict, immediately after the Publication of the same, putting all the
Inhabitants of the said Cities under our Protection and Safeguard, to guard
each other; charging them respectively and by Public Acts, to be responsible
for the opposition that shall be made to our said Edict in the said Cities by
the Inhabitants thereof, or to represent and deliver the said Opposers into the
hands of Justice.

LXIV. We also charge our Trusty and Well-beloved the Members of our Courts of
Parliament, immediately upon receipt of the present Edict, to forbear all manner
of Proceedings, on pain of Nullity of the Acts they should otherwise pass, and
to take the Oath abovementioned; to cause our said Edict to be Published and
Recorded in our said Courts, according to the Form and Tenor thereof, purely
and barely, without using any other Modifications, Restrictions, Declarations,
or secret Registers, and without staying for any other Order or Command from
us; and our Attorneys-General from them to require and prosecute forthwith,
without the least delay, the said Proclamation. Likewise enjoining the said
Governors and Lieutenants-General of our said Provinces, to cause it
immediately to be published in their several Districts, through all the places
in which it is usual in those cases: To cause it to be kept and observed,
without tarrying for the publication of out said Courts of Parliament, to the
end that no persons may plead ignorance. And that all Acts of Hostility,
Raisings of Money, Payments and Contributions due, and drawing on, Takings,
Demolishings, Fortifying of Cities, Places, and Castles, may the sooner cease
on both sides. Declaring all such raisings of Money, Fortifications,
Demolishings, Contributions, Takings, and Forcing of Goods, and other Acts of
Hostility, that shall be made or done after the said Publication and
Verification, made by the said Governors and Lieutenants-General of our said
Provinces, liable to Restitution, Punishment, and Reparation. To wit, against
such as shall make use of Arms, Force, and Violence, to oppose our said Edict,
hindering the Effect and Execution thereof, with Death, without hopes of Pardon
or Remission. And as for other Oppositions, that shall be made without Arms,
Force, or Violence, they shall be punished with other Corporal Inflictions, as
Banishments, and the like; according to the Nature and Exigency of the Offense,
which shall be left to the Arbitration and Moderation of the Judges, to which
we refer the taking the Cognizance thereof. In this place, charging their
Honors and Consciences to proceed therein with the Justice and Equality that
is requisite, without any regard to the difference of Persons or Religion.

Therefore we charge and require the said Persons holding our said Courts of
Parliament, Chambers of Accounts, or Exchequers, Courts of Aids, Bailiffs,
Seneschals, Provosts, and others our Justices and Officers whom it may concern,
or their Deputies to cause our present Edict and Ordinance to be Read,
Published, and Recorded in their Courts and Jurisdictions, and the same to
maintain, keep, and observe in every particular, to the end that all those that
are concern may fully and peaceably enjoy and use the Contents thereof;
ceasing, and causing all Troubles and Hindrances to the contrary to cease. For
such is our Will and Pleasure. In witness whereof we have signed these Presents
with our own hand; and to the end that it may be firm and lasting for ever, we
have caused our Seal to be affixed to the same.

Given at Poictiers in the Month of September, in the Year of our Lord, 1577.
and of our Reign the Fourth. Signed Henry.

And Lower, by the King be being in his Council. Signed De Neufville.

And on the side, Visa.

And Sealed upon Knots of red and green Silk, with green Wax, with the Broad
Seal. Read, Published, and Recorded, Heard, the same being required and
approved of by the King's Attorney General, at Paris in Parliament on the 8th
of October, in the year 1577. Signed De Hivez.

Read likewise, Published and Recorded in the Chamber of Accounts, or
Exchequer, heard, the same being required and approved by the King's
Attorney General in the same, on the 11th of October, 1577. Signed, Danes.

Read and Published by Sound of Trumpet, and Public Cry through the Streets of
the City of Paris, Places, and Parts appointed for Cries and Publication, by me
Paquier Rossignol, his Majesty's Crier in the City, Provostship, and Vice
County of Paris; accompanied by Michel Noiret, Sworn Trumpeter to the said Lord
in the said Places, and four other Trumpeters, on the 8th of October, 1577.
Signed, Rossignol.

Secret Articles of the 17th of September, 1577.
I. HIS Majesty to gratify the King of Navar, shall allow him, besides what is
granted by the General Articles to the Sieurs high Justicers of the said
Religion, to cause Divine Service to be performed for all such as shall be
willing to assist at it, although he be absent himself, in the Houses belonging to
him in the following places; viz. in the Duchy of Vendemois, in the City of
M^ntoire.

II. His said Majesty shall likewise allow the Prince of Conde to have the said
exercise performed in his house of la Ferte, upon the River Loire and Anguien,
tho absent from thence himself.

III. Upon the Article which mentions Baliwicks, has been declared and granted
what follows. First, That under the Denomination of Ancient Bailiwicks, his
Majesty means such as were held under the Reign of the late King Henry, for
Bailiwicks, Seneschalships, and Governments, referring directly, and without
Mediation to the Courts of Parliament.

Secondly, That in Bailiwicks, and Seneschalships, in which those of the said
Religion possess at this present two Cities or Towns, belonging to his said
Majesty, or to Catholic Lords, High Justicers, in which they are allowed to
continue the Exercise, of their Religion, no other Place shall be provided for
them to perform the said Exercise in, as in the other Bailiwicks of this
Kingdom.

Thirdly, That his Majesty shall only provide two Cities in the Government of
Piccardy, in the Suburbs of which, those of the said Religion shall be allowed
the exercise of their said Religion, for all the Bailiwicks, Seneschalships,
and Governments belonging thereunto; and in default of Cities, they shall be
allowed two convenient Towns or Villages.

Fourthly, In consideration of the large Extent of the Seneschalships of
Provence and Poictou, those of the said Religion are allowed another City in
every one of them, in the Suburbs of which, or in default of a City, a
convenient Town or Village, they shall have the exercise of the said Religion,
besides those that shall be allowed them by the said Article.

IV. It has also been agreed, That no place shall be allowed by virtue of the
said Article, on the Territories belonging in proper to the Queen Mother to his
Majesty, for the public Exercise of the said Religion: Nevertheless, such
Gentlemen as have high Judicatures, or Fiefs de Haubert in the said
Territories, shall be free to enjoy and make use of the permission that shall
be allowed them by the Edict, as elsewhere.

V. Neither shall any place be provided in the Bailiwick of Beaujolois,
belonging to the Duke of Montpencier; but the said High Justicers shall enjoy
the Privilege of the Edict there as elsewhere.

VI. A place shall be appointed for all the Isles of Marennes, and another for
the Isle of Oleron, in which two places those of the said Religion shall be
allowed the exercise thereof, for all such Inhabitants of the two Isles, as
shall desire to assist at it.

VII. Provision shall also be made for the County of Messin, and others that
are under the King's Protection, as it was done by the secret Articles made
with the Edict of the Year 1570.

VIII. As for the Marriage of Priests and Religious Persons that have been
contracted heretofore, his Majesty for diverse good Reasons and Considerations
him thereunto moving, will not allow them to be prosecuted or troubled for the
same; upon which subject silence shall be imposed to his said Attorney-Generals
and other Officers. His Majesty declaring however, that the Children proceeding
from the said Marriages, shall only succeed to the Movables, Acquisitions, and
Purchased Estates of their Fathers and Mothers; not willing that the said
Professed Religious Persons should be capable of a direct or collateral
Succession. Neither will his Majesty allow, that those of the said Religion
having heretofore contracted Marriages in the third or fourth degree, should be
molested for the same, or the Validity thereof called to question, nor likewise
the Succession taken from, or disputed against the Children born or to be born,
descending from the said Marriages: And in order to judge of the Validity of
the said Marriages made and contracted by those of the said Religion, and to
decide whether they are lawful or not, if the person of the said Religion is
Defendant, in that case the Judges Royal shall take cognizance of the Fact of
the said Marriage; and he being Plaintiff, and the Defendant a Catholic, the
Cognizance thereof shall belong to the Official and Ecclesiastical Judge; for
which Letters-Patent shall be granted by his said Majesty, to be verified in
his Courts of Parliament.

IX. And as to Marriages already treated of, either of second or others, among
those of the said Religion, those that shall have contracted Marriages in such
a degree, in that kind applying themselves to his Majesty, such Letters-Patent
shall be granted them, as shall be necessary to hinder them or their Children
from being prosecuted or molested for the same.

X. Upon what has been granted by the General Articles, That in each of the
Parliaments of Paris, Roa^, Dijon, and Rennes, a Chamber shall be established,
composed of a President and a certain number of Counselors, taken and chosen
out of the said Courts; it has been thought fit and agreed upon, in order to
remove all cause of Jealousy from those of the said Religion, and therein to
gratify the most humble Petition they have made to his Majesty about it; That
the Presidents and Counselors shall be chosen by his said Majesty upon the
Register of the Officers of the said Parliaments, among the most equitable,
most peaceable, and most moderate; the List whereof shall be communicated to
the Deputies of the said King of Navarre, and to those of the said Religion who
shall be near his Majesty, before their being ordained to serve in the said
Chambers; and that in case they shall suspect any of them, it shall be lawful
for them to acquaint his Majesty therewith, who shall choose others in their
stead.

XI. The same shall be observed in the Election of the Catholic Officers that
are to serve in the Chambers, that shall be established in the Countries of
Guienne, Languedoc, Dauphine, and Provence.

XII. As to what relates to the Election of those of the said Religion, for the
Offices of Presidents, and Counselors that shall be erected by the said Edict
to serve in the said Chambers, it has been agreed, That it shall be made by his
Majesty upon the Attestation of the said King of Navarre, for the first time,
and without taking any Money for the same; and that upon any Vacation, his said
Majesty shall provide other capable persons in their room, being of the said
Religion.

XIII. And whereas those of the said Religion have alleged several reasons for
which they suspect those of the Court of Parliament of Roan, which made them
very solicitous to have a Chamber established there, as in the Parliaments of
Bourdeaux, Thoulouse, and Dauphine; in order not to make that Parliament differ
from those of Paris, Dijon, and Rennes, it has been granted to those of the
said Religion, having any Suits depending in the said Parliament, in case they
will not receive those of the Chamber that shall be erected there for Judges,
to apply themselves to his said Majesty, and Letters of Transferation shall be
allowed them by him, in the Chamber of the Parliament of Paris, ordained for
the Administration of Justice to those of the said Religion, or to the Great
Council, for Processes moved, or to be moved, before any Plea in the Cause;
bringing good and due Attestations along with them, of their being of the said
pretended Reformed Religion.

XIV. His said Majesty also wills and means, That the said Chambers, composed
and established in the said Parliaments, for the distribution of Justice to
those of the said Religion, shall be reunited and incorporated in the said
Parliaments, when need shall require; and when the Causes which have moved his
said Majesty to establish them shall cease, and shall no longer subsist among
his subjects.

XV. To those ends, the Presidents and Counselors who shall be invested with
the Offices newly created into the said Chambers, shall be named Presidents and
Counselors of the Courts of Parliament, each in that into which they shall be
established, and reckoned in the number of the Presidents and Counselors of
the said Courts; and shall enjoy the same Salaries, Authorities, Prerogatives
as the Presidents and Counselors of the other Courts.

XVI. The Examination of which Presidents and Counselors newly chosen, shall
be made by his Majesty's Privy Council or by the said Chambers, each one within
its Precinct, when there shall be a sufficient Number of them; and yet the
accustomed Oath shall be taken by them in the Courts where the said Chambers
shall be established; except those of the said Chamber of Languedoc, who shall
take it before the Lord Chancellor, or in the said Chamber when it shall be
established.

XVII. In the said Chamber of Languedoc, there shall be two Substitutes of his
Majesty's Attorney and Advocate. The Attorney's shall be a Catholic, and the
other of the aforesaid Religion, who shall have sufficient Salaries from his
said Majesty.

XVIII. There shall also be two Committees of the Parliament of Thoulouse; the
one Civil, the other Criminal, which the Registers shall be responsible for.

XIX. Moreover some Messengers shall be appointed, who shall be taken out of
the said Court, or elsewhere, according to the King's pleasure, as many as
shall be necessary for the Service of the said Chamber.

XX. The Session of which shall be appointed by his Majesty, and removed to
such Cities and Parts of the said Country of Languedoc, as his said Majesty
shall think fit, for the convenience of his Subjects.

XXI. Whereas those of the said Religion have made complaints, that from the
Publication of the Edict made in the year 1572. to the day of the Publication
of this that shall be now, there have been several Prescriptions, Nonsuits, or
Judgments, given against those of the said Religion, in places where the Suits
have neither been heard, nor defended; and that tho they have desired a removal
to the Party-Chambers, it has been denied them: It is granted them, that in
case they can give sufficient proof of the same, they shall be received in
their first Condition again.

XXII. Likewise upon the Remonstrances that have been made by the King of
Navar, and the Prince of Conde, that they are sued by several of those, who
during the Troubles, have bought Temporal Estates belonging to the Church,
requesting that no Actions may be allowed the Purchasers against them, or any
of those, who by their Command have made the Contracts of the said Sales. It is
granted to them in his said Majesty's Name, that all necessary Letters Patent,
to discharge and indemnify them for the said Sales, shall be particularly
expedited for them; on condition that the money shall be reimburs'd, as it is
specified in the General Articles of the Edict.

XXIII. His Majesty shall promise and swear to observe and maintain the Edict
that shall be made upon the said General Articles, and to let those of the said
Religion, and others that have been engaged in their Party, enjoy the benefit
of the same: He shall also oblige the Queen his Mother, and the Duke of Anjou
his Brother, to promise and swear to keep and observe the said Edict.

XXIV. The same shall be done by the King of Navar, and the Prince of Conde.

XXV. All which Promises and Oaths shall be made in writing, signed by the
Hands, and sealed with the Arms of those that shall make them, the which shall
be reciprocally put and delivered into the hands of his Majesty, and of the
said King of Navar, or such as shall be by them deputed to receive them.

XXVI. The said King of Navar shall be allowed, after the Conclusion of the
Peace, to send to the Queen of England, and to Duke John Casimir, to acquaint
them therewith, and Passes and Convoys shall be given by his Majesty to those
that shall be sent thither by the King of Navar.

XXVII. All such of the said Religion as are still in possession of Benifices,
shall be obliged to resign them within the space of Six Months to Catholics;
and those who have promises of Pensions upon the said Benefices, dated before
the 24th of August, 1572. shall be henceforward paid for the same, and the
payment of the said Pensions continued; and those who owe the said Pensions,
shall be obliged to pay the Arrears, in case any are due, provided they have
actually enjoyed the Fruits of the said Benefices, excepting the Arrears due in
the time of the Troubles.

XXVIII. And as for those who are not of the said Religion, yet have followed
them during the time of the Troubles, they shall re-enter into the same
Possession and Enjoyment of their Benefices, as they had before the 24th of
August, 1572. And those who by private Authority, without order, or gift from
his Majesty, have enjoyed and received the Fruits of the said Benefices
belonging to the abovementioned, shall be obliged to return it to them, and to
resettle them into the same.

XXIX. Upon the Request of those of the said Religion, and others, who have
been engaged in their Party, to annihilate all the Bonds, Notes, and Promises
made by them, together with all Judgments given upon the same against them,
upon the account of the Employments, Places, and Offices resigned unto them
before the last Troubles, or since; for which they have not been able to obtain
Letters Patents, by reason of the said Troubles, the which said Employments and
Offices have in the mean while been granted to others; they also requesting the
reimbursement of the Money paid by them for the same, either into his Majesty's
Exchequer, or to the Resigners. It has been declared, That upon their giving
his Majesty an account of the particulars of the Cases in question, his said
Majesty will remedy the same, and cause Justice to be done unto them.

XXX. The Officers of Justice shall also decide the particular Debate and
Request of the Parties, about the Annihilation desired by those of the said
Religion, and others who have been engaged in their Party of the Leases, made
by them of their Estates and Inheritances, since the said 24th of August, in
order to re-enter into the Premises, returning the Fines by them received.

XXXI. His Majesty's Officers in the City of Rochel, the Mayor, Sheriffs,
Consuls, Common Council, and other Inhabitants of the said City shall be
continued and maintained in their Ancient Rights and Privileges; and shall
neither be prosecuted, molested, or troubled for their Orders, Decrees,
Imprisonments, both within and without the City, the Execution of their
Judgments afterward, as well upon the account of some pretended Enterprises
attempted against the said City, in December 1573. as by a Ship, called the
Swallow, and the Execution of the Judgments given against those that were on
Board of her, or for any other Acts whatever, of all which they shall be
absolutely discharged. They shall have no other Governor but the Seneschal,
neither shall any Garrison be put into the said City and Government.

Neither shall any be put into the Cities and Places belonging to the
Government of Languedoc, except such as had Garrisons in the time of the late
King Henry.

XXXII. His Majesty shall confirm the Declaration granted by the late King to
the Inhabitants of Pamiers, professing the said Religion, for the Annihilation
of the Decrees given for some Excesses committed in the said City, in the Month
of June, 1566. and the said Declaration shall be presented to that end to his
said Majesty.

XXXIII. The keeping of Eight hundred men, to be paid by his said Majesty, has
been granted to the said King of Navar, and others of the said Religion, to put
into the Cities that are allowed them for their safety; in which his said
Majesty shall not be allowed to put any Governor, or other Garrison. And he
shall also Charge the Governors and Lieutenant-Generals of his Provinces, that
whenever they shall pass through the same to visit them, they shall avoid all
occasion of dispute with those of the said Religion.

XXXIV. The said King of Navarre shall present unto his said Majesty, those he
shall design to employ for the guarding of the said Cities, the which shall be
employed there accordingly by him: And in case any of the said persons so
employed, should behave themselves insolently there, and abuse their said
Office, not observing the said Edict of Pacification, the said King of Navarre
shall be obliged to turn them out, and to present others to his said Majesty,
to be put in their place.

XXXV. The City of St. John d' Angeli shall be left to the Prince of Conde for
his Abode, during the Time and Term of Six Years, until he may effectually
enjoy his Government of Picardy, in which his Majesty will have him continued.

XXXVI. The said Prince shall promise unto his said Majesty, well and
faithfully to keep the said City of St. John; and at the end of the time
abovesaid, the same to redeliver, together with the Castle, into the hands of
the person deputed by his Majesty to that end, in the same condition it now is,
without any innovation or alteration, and without the least delay or
difficulty, upon any account whatever. Moreover, it is his Majesty's Will and
Pleasure, That all the Ecclesiastics shall freely return into the said City,
perform Divine Service freely, and enjoy their Estates, together with all the
Catholic Inhabitants; and the said Prince shall take all the said
Ecclesiastics and other Inhabitants under his Protection and Safeguard, to the
end that they may not be hindered from performing the said Divine Service,
molested or troubled in their Persons, or in the enjoyment of their Estates,
but on the contrary, restored to the full possession of the same.

XXXVII. The said Prince of Conde shall present and nominate unto his said
Majesty, the Person to whom he shall trust the keeping of the said City, to the
end that Letters-Patent may be granted him for the same by his said Majesty, as
it has been done heretofore.

XXXVIII. For the Guard and Safety of the said City, shall be allowed to the
said Prince 50 men, maintained at his Majesty's Charge, besides the Dividend
the said King of Navarre shall allow him out of the 800 men that are left to
him for the Guard of the other Cities; his said Majesty willing that the 850
men allowed as aforesaid to the said King of Navarre, and Prince of Conde,
shall be employed for the Garrison of the said Cities, as it has been agreed;
and that they shall be employed no where else, without express Command from his
said Majesty, to avoid oppressing of his people, and to remove all cause of
Jealousy from among his Subjects: His said Majesty also meaning, that the said
850 men shall be disbanded at the expiration of the Term allowed, and the time
of the Restitution of the said Cities.

XXXIX. By the General Articles, the City of Montpellier is left in keeping to
those of the said Religion, for the Retreat and Safety of those of the County
of Languedoc; but his said Majesty means it, in case the said City be still in
the hands and in the power of those of the said Religion, on the day these
Articles shall be granted and signed in this City of Bergerac, and not
otherwise; in which case, instead of the said City, his Majesty shall allow
them another, of those that are at present within their Power in the said
Country of Languedoc, at their Choice.

XL. His said Majesty shall write to his Ambassadors, to require and desire for
all his Subjects of whatever Religion they be, That they may not be troubled as
to their Constience, nor be liable to the Inquisition, in going and coming,
Negotiating and Trading throughout all Spain, Italy, and other Foreign
Countries, Allies, and Confederates of this Crown, provided they do not offend
the Civil Government.

XLI. All Pieces of Ordinance belonging to his said Majesty, that have been
taken during the present or precedent Troubles, shall be immediately restored,
and put into his said Majesty's Magazines; except such as are in the Cities
given for Surety, which shall remain in them; an Inventory being made of the
same, in order to their being restored at the Expiration of the aforesaid Term
of Six Years.

XLII. Whereas, if all that has been done against the Regulations on both
sides, were indifferently excepted out of the General Pardon, there is no man
in the Army but might be prosecuted and troubled, which might occasion new
Troubles; it has been thought fit to grant, that none but execrable Crimes
shall be excepted out of the said General Pardon; viz. Ravishments of Women,
Incendiaries, Murders, Robberies committed treacherously, and out of private
Revenge, against the Laws of War, Infraction of Passports and Safeguards,
together with Murders and Plunders without Command; out of consideration to
those of the said Religion, and others who have been engaged in the Party of
the King of Navarre, or the Prince of Conde, grounded upon particular occasions
that have obliged them to command and order it.

XLIII. It shall be ordained, That whatever shall be taken on either side by
way of Hostility or otherwise, upon any acconnt whatever, proceeding from the
present Troubles, from and upon the 17th. of the present month, on which the
Articles have been granted, agreed upon, and signed, in this City of Bergerac,
shall be liable to Restitution and Civil Reparation.

XLIV. As for the City of Avignon, and Venaissin County, his Majesty desiring
that the Inhabitants thereof may share and enjoy the fruit of the Peace he
hopes to settle in his Kingdom by the assistance of God, both out of
consideration to our Holy Father the Pope, and because the said City and County
have always been under the Protection of the Kings his Predecessors, and that
it is a thing very material toward the establishing of the said Peace in the
adjacent Provinces; his said Majesty will entreat his said Holiness to allow
the Subjects of this Kingdom, who have Estates in the said City of Avignon, and
County, as also to the Subjects of the said City and County, who are of the
said Religion, to be restored and reestablish'd into the entire and peaceable
Enjoyments of their Estates, which they have been deprived of upon the account
of the Troubles past, and of the said Religion, without their being liable to
be troubled in the said Possession upon the said account. Which being done,
those who occupy and detain at present in the said Country, Cities, and Places,
belonging either to his Holiness, or his Subjects, shall be obliged to deliver
them forthwith, and without delay, into the hands of such as shall be nominated
by his said Holiniess for that purpose: For the effecting of which the King of
Navar, and the Prince of Conde shall dispatch a Gentleman on purpose to those
that are detainers of the said places, to signify the same unto them, and to
require and order them to obey; which in case they refuse to do, the said King
of Navar, and Prince of Conde, do promise both in their Names, and in the Names
of those of the said Religion, and others, who have been engaged in their
Party, neither to Aid, Comfort, or Assist them. His Majesty also promises, That
in case after the Restitution and delivery of the said Places in the hands of
such as shall be ordered by his said Holiness, any of his Majesty's Subjects
having Estates in the said Cities and County, or of his Holiness's Subjects
professing the said Religion, should be disturbed in the enjoyment of their
said Estates upon the account of the said Religion, he will grant them Letters
of Mart and Reprisal upon the Estates that are possessed by the Subjects of the
said City and County of Avign^n, in the Countries under his Obedience, which
Letters shall be directed to that end to the Judges to whom of Right the
Cognizance of such things appertains.

XLV. The Sums that are necessary to be raised for the payment of what is due
to the * Reisters, both for the present and precedent Troubles, shall be
imposed equally upon all his Majesty's Subjects. And whereas those of the said
Religion pretend that the main part of the Money destined for the payment of
the said Reisters for the precedent Troubles was raised before the 24th of
August, 1572. and was taken from them and remitted, and that his Majesty might
by surprise have made a Gift of the said Money to some particular Persons; It
is his Majesty's Pleasure, that those who have had the said Money on any
account, and under any pretense, shall be obliged by lawful and reasonable
means to restore the same: And that whatever Receivers, and others, who have
still Money of that kind in their hands, shall also be obliged to deliver it
forthwith into the hands of his Majesty's Receivers-General, and that by
Imprisoning of them if necessary: Upon the account of which his said Majesty
has, and does discharge those of the said Religion, of all Obligations and
Promises made and given by them upon that account, both to his said Majesty,
the Reisters, and all others.

XLVI. The said King of Navar, and those of the said Religion having made
Application to his said Majesty for the payment of the Reisters due to the said
John Casimir, his Colonels and Rent-masters: His said Majesty has declared,
That he will endeavor to do it as soon as ever the necessity of his Affairs
will permit him.

XLVII. And as to the Six hundred thousand Livers which those of the said
Religion say were allowed them * Germain Horse.
by the last Peace, to impose upon, and raise among themselves, in order to pay
some Sum due by them; It has been granted them, That in case they can produce
the said permission, and make it appear, that nothing has been raised by them
by Virtue thereof, and that the Sums for which it had been granted are still
due, the said permission shall be confirmed by his said Majesty.

XLVIII. The Prince of Orange shall be restored to all the Lands,
Jurisdictions, and Lordships he has in this said Kingdom and Territories, under
his said Majesty's Obedience. In like manner shall be restored to him all
Titles, Instructions, and other Papers concerning his Principality of Orange;
in case any have been taken and removed by the Governors, and
Lieutenants-General, and others his said Majesty's Officers, if what is
aabovesaid has not been done already.

The present Articles have been made and granted by express Command from the
King, in his Majesty's Name, and by his pleasure, by the Duke of Montpensier,
and the Sieurs de Biron, Descars, S. Sulpice, de la Mothe-Fenelon, by virtue of
the power given unto them by his said Majesty, to conclude and agree about the
pacification of the Troubles of this Kingdom on the one part. And by the King
of Navar, the Prince of Conde, and the Deputies of those of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, the said King of Navar, Prince of Conde, and Deputies
answering for all those of the Provinces of this Kingdom, Countries,
Territories and Lordships under the obedience of his said Majesty, who profess
the said Religion, and others who have been engaged in their Party on the other
Part.

In Witness whereof the said Articles have been signed with their own hands, in
the City of Bergerac, the 17th Day of September, 1577. Thus signed in the
Original, Henry de Bourbon, Lewis de Bourbon, Biron, Descars, S. Sulpiae, de la
Mothe-Fenelon, La Noue, L. Dufaur, Chancellor to the King of Navar; S. Genis
Chauvin, Dufaur, Clausone Deputy of Languedoc, Morin Deputy of Guyenne,
Scorbion Deputy of Montauban, Payan Deputy of Languedoc, and according to his
power Thore for the Isle of France, De Signo Deputy of Dauphine, Durand Deputy
of Guienne, Guyet and St. Beignon for Rochel, Courtois, Deputy of Vendomois,
Roux, Deputy of Provence, T. Davaux for La Rovergue. Thus signed, compared de
Neufville, and is written, extracted from the Registers of Parliament. Signed.
De Pontac.

Compared with the Manuscript which is in the King's Library by Me. Counselor
and Secretary of the King, House and Crown of France, and of its Exchequer, of
the Ancient College. Signed. Gone.

The Articles of the Conference made at Nerac by the Queen Mother, with the
King of Navar, and the Deputies of the Pretended Reformed Religion.
IN order to facilitate the last Edict of pacification made in the month of
September, 1577. and to clear and resolve the Difficulties that have
interposed, and that might still retard the good Effect of the said Edict; It
has been resolved at the Request, Supplication and Articles presented by those
of the said pretended Reformed Religion, and agreed upon as follows, in the
Conference held at Nerac, in this present Month of February, 1579. between the
Queen Mother, assisted by some Princes and Lords of the King's Privy Council,
and the King of Navar, also assisted by the Deputy of the Prince of Conde,
Lords and Gentlemen, and the Deputies of those of the pretended Reformed
Religion.

I. That the High Justicers, or those that hold full Fief d' Haubert, either in
Proper, or Vse-Fruit, in the whole, Moietie, or third, shall be allowed to
continue the Exercise of the said pretended Reformed Religion, in the places by
them named for their principal abode, although they and their Wives are absent
from the same, provided part of their Families remain in the said places, and
though the Right of Justice, or full Fief d' Haubert, be in Controversy, yet
the Exercise of the said Religion shall be continued there, provided the above*
said persons are still in actual possession of the said Justice. And as for the
Public Exercise of the said pretended Reformed Religion, in the places
ordained by the King, in case any of ihe said places prove inconvenient, they
petitioning the King to have it removed elsewhere, his Majesty shall provide
them another that shall be convenient for them.

II. That according to certain Letters-Patent granted by the King, given at
Paris on the 13th of Nov. 1677. conformably to the eleventh Article of what was
agreed on at Bergerac on the 16th of September of the said year, 1577. which
through inadvertency had been omitted in the last Edict of pacification: those
of the said pretended Reformed Religion are allowed to buy, build, or construct
places to perform the said Exercise of Religion, in the Suburbs of Cities, or
in Towns and Villages that are or shall be allowed them in every Baliwick and
Seneschalship, or Government, and in the places where the Exercise of the said
Religion is allowed them by the Edict. And such as shall be found in the said
places, that have been built by them, shall be restored to them in the same
condition they now are.

III. Those of the said pretended Reformed Religion are allowed to assemble
before the Judge Royal, and by his Authority to equal and raise among
themselves such sums as shall be thought necessary to be employed for the
maintenance of those who are employed to perform the Exercises of their said
Religion, of which an account shall be given to the said Judge-Royal for him to
keep.

IV. That according to the 20th Article of the Edict of pacification, the
Judges and Magistrates of Cities shall forthwith provide convenient places for
the interment of the Dead, of those of the said pretended Reformed Religion.
And the said Officers and others are forbidden to ask any thing for the
Transportation of the said Corpse, on pain of Extortion.

V. And to prevent all Differences that might arise between the Courts of
Parliament, and the Chambers of the said Courts ordained by the said Edict, the
King shall speedily make a good and large Regulation between the said Courts of
Parliament, and the said Chambers: Insomuch that those of the said pretended
Reformed Religion shall fully enjoy the benefit of the said Edict: The
establishment of the Chamber of Languedoc shall also speedily be performed in
pursuance of the said Edict. And in case at any time hereafter the Number of
Judges should not be sufficient in the same, by reason of the afflu^ncy of
Causes, those of the said Religion shall apply themselves to his said Majesty,
who will make sufficient provision for it. As to what relates to the King's
Council, the secret Articles of the Year 1577, shall be observed, both as to
what relates to the Chamber of Languedoc, and that of Guienne. Nevertheless,
the said King's Council shall be continued in their Places, without being
liable to revocation, unless in the cases of the Ordinance, although they bear
the Title of Substitutes, of Advocates and Attorneys-General in the said Courts
of Parliament. The Committes of the Registers Civil and Criminal in the said
Chamber, shall exercise their places by the King's Commission, and shall be
called Committes of the * Registry In French Gr^ffe.
Civil and Criminal, and therefore shall not be liable to be turned out, or to
be revoked by the said Registers of Parliament, and that they shall be bound to
yield the emolument or profit of the said Registries to the said Registers; and
the said Committies shall receive Salaries from the said Registers, according
as it shall be thought fit, and agreed upon by the said Chambers. And as for
the Messengers, besides those that shall be taken out of the said Parliament,
who shall be Catholics, two more shall be erected in every Chamber, who shall
be of the said Religion. And the said Messengers shall be directed by the said
Chambers, both as to the execution of their Places, their District, and the
Fees they shall take. In the Cities where the said Chambers shall be erected,
there shall also be two Offices of Sergeants, to be kept by those of the said
Religion. And as to Attorneys, the Attorneys of the said Parliament shall be
allowed to plead in the said Chambers. And in case their number should not be
sufficient, the King shall create some without paying of Fees, who shall be
nominated by the said Chambers, in such a number as they shall think fit,
provided it does not exceed ten; of which they shall send a Roll, according to
which their Patents shall be made and sealed. The Expeditions of the
Chanceries, or Seal-Offices shall be made in presence of two Counselors of the
said Chambers, of which the one shall be a Catholic, and the other one of the
aforesaid Religion: In the absence of one of the Masters of Requests belonging
to the King's Hostel, one of the Notaries and Secretaries of the said Courts of
Parliament shall reside in the places where the said Chambers shall be
established, or one of the Secretaries in ordinary of the Chancery, to sign the
Expeditions of the said Chancery. And it has been agreed that the Chamber of
Languedoc shall be settled in the City of L'Isle in Albigeois.

VI. As to the Decrees given in the Court of Parliaments since the said Edict,
in which Courts the Parties have not proceeded voluntarily, that is, have
alleged and propounded ends declinatory; or that have been denounced through
default, both in matters civil and criminal, notwithstanding which the said
Parties have been constrained to go forward, they shall be deemed and reputed
as those that have been given before the Edict, and revoked by the same. The
same is ordained for the presidial Judgments given since the Edict, and for the
Cases abolished by the said Edict, and by the present Conference. And as for
the Decrees given against those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, who
have proceeded voluntarily, without proposing ends Declinatory, the said
Decrees shall remain in force. Yet nevertheless without prejudice to the
execution of the same, they shall be allowed, if they think fit, to take some
course by way of Civil Request before the said Chambers. And until the said
Chambers and their Chanceries are established, Verbal Appeals, and those in
Writing interposed by those of the said Religion, before Judges, Registers or
Committees, Executors of Judgments and Decrees, shall have the same effect as
if they had been sued out by Letters-Patent. And as for Processes not yet
determined, depending in the said Courts of Parliament, of the Quality*
abovesaid, they shall be returned, whatever condition they are in, into the
said Chambers to which they have their reference, if required by one of the
Parties, and according to the Edict, within four Months, in such Provinces
where the Chambers are established, after the Registring of these present
Articles: And as for the other Provinces in which they are not yet established,
four Months after the establishment thereof, before the Registers of the said
Courts of Parliament, and that for Suits that are ready for trial. And as for
such as shall be discontinu'd, and are not in a state to be judged, the
abovementioned of the pretended Reformed Religion shall be obliged to make the
said Declaration, at the first intimation and signification that shall be made
unto them of the pursuit; and the said term being expired, they shall no more
be admitted to demand the said Returns. And as for the Suits removed either in
the Courts of Parliament, Great Council, or elsewhere, those of the said
Religion giving a particular account of the said Suits, provision shall be made
for the same.

VII. All Sovereign Courts, and others within this Kingdom, are prohibited and
forbidden, (before the installation or seting of the said Chambers) to take
cognizance of, and to judge the Processes either Civil or Criminal of those of
the said Religion, and others who have been engaged in their Party, the
cognizance whereof by the last Edict of Peace is referred to the said Chambers.
The Prohibitions contained in the 26th Article of the said Edict of
pacification about the cognizance of matters relating to the Troubles until
now, shall also be reiterated: And generally all Judgments and Decrees given
contrary, and to the prejudice of the Edict, shall be annihilated and revoked,
together with all that has followed thereupon.

VIII. That henceforward in all Instructions other than Informations of
criminal processes in the Seneschalships of Thoulouse, Carcassonne, Rovergue,
Lauragais, Beziers, Montpellier and Nimes, the Magistrate, or Commissary
deputed for the said Instruction, if he be a Catholic, shall be obliged to
take an Associate of the said pretended Reformed Religion, which the Parties
shall approve of: And in case they cannot agree about it, the abovenam'd
Magistrate or Commissary, shak take one of the said Religion out of the Office;
as in like manner if the said Magistrate or Commissary be of the said Religion,
he shall be obliged in the form abovesaid, to take a Catholic Assistant. And
when any occasion of Criminal Trial shall occur before tbe Provost Marshals, or
their Lieutenantsagainst any one of the said Religion, being an Householder, who
shall be charged and accused of any public Crime, the said Provosts, or their
Lieutenants, if they be Catholics, shall be bound, to call to the hearing of
such a matter an Assistant of the said Religion: The which Associate shall
assist also at the Judgment of the Competency, or Validity of the Indictment,
as well as at the Definitive Judgment of the process. The Validity of which
Indictment, shall only be judged at the nearest presidial Seat or Tribunal, in
an Assembly, before the principal Officers of the said Tribunal, who shall be
found there, on pain of Nullity.

IX. In putting the said Edict of pacification in execution, the Seats of
Justice shall be reestablished at Montauban, Montpellier, Nimes, and in all
other places where they used to be before the Troubles.

X. The Mint shall be reestablished in the City of Montpellier, as it used to
be before the Troubles.

XI. The King in order to remove all occasion of Dissentions that might create
the least Division among his Subjects, ordains that whatever has happened since
the publication of the said last Edict, until now, against, and to the
prejudice of the said Edict, on either side, shall remain extinguished and be
forgotten as if no such thing had been. And that no body shall be prosecuted
upon the account of the Assembly of Soldiers, made in Cities, or in the open
Fields, establishment and maintaining of Garrisons, Enterprises and Seizures of
Cities, Places, Castles and Houses, Murders, Imprisonments, Ransoms, or any
other Excess; neither for destroying of Churches, Houses, and Buildings
belonging to Ecclesiastics and others; of all which, the said Subjects on both
sides shall be and remain acquitted and discharged: Neither shall his Majesty's
Attorney General, or any other persons public or private, at any time, or on
any occasion, be allowed to make any prosecutions of the same in any Court of
Jurisdiction, nor in any wise whatever. The whole in the same form and manner
as it is expressed by the 55th Article of the last Edict of Pacification;
excepting Ravishments of Women, etc. Incendiaries, Robberies, Murders
committed treacherously, and with premeditation, and not by way of Hostility,
upon the account of private revenge, and other Crimes and Misdemeanors
reserved by the last Edict of pacification, which shall be prosecuted according
to Law, and punished according to the nature of the same. And as to what
relates to the Money that has been taken, either out of his Majesty's
Exchequers, or out of Cities and Commonalties, and from other private persons;
and the Sums that have been imposed and raised of any kind whatever, and
howsoever raised by those of the said Religion, and other who have been engaged
in their Party since the said Edict of pacification, they are and shall remain
absolutely discharged for the same, without their being any wise liable to be
prosecuted upon the said account; nor those who shall have ordered it,
Corporations of Cities and Communalties, nor yet their Clerks. Nevertheless
those of the said Religion shall be obliged to assemble with the Corporations
of those Cities; to make a true estimate among them, on the last Day of April
next at farthest, both of their Receipts and Expenses: The which Estimate they
shall be obliged to sign, and jointly to affirm, and to deliver the same within
the said time of two Months, into the hands of those that are appointed to
execute the said Edict of Pacification in Languedoc, to the end that upon the
said Estimate the Chamber of accounts may pass into receipt, and allow in
expense what shall be contained in the said Estimate, and no more. And in order
to check the insolence of several, and to prevent those Evils for the future,
the King declares that hereafter he will no more grant any Pardons for the
abovesaid, or the like Transgressions of the Edict: And forbids his Chancellor
or Lord Keeper to seal any such, and his Judges to have the least regard for
the same. And in case any of those to whom this Pardon is granted, should
relapse into the same Fault, they shall not only be punished for the new Fault,
but shall also be deprived of the fruit and benefit which is granted them by
this Article.

XII. That all the processes and causes concerning the case of the said
Troubles that have been returned by the Commissioners, Executors of the
preceding Edict of pacification, before the presidial Judges, or other Judges,
shall be returned in the State they now stand to the said Chambers of the
Edict. The King not intending that any of his Subjects should be prosecuted for
what has been done since the last Troubles, according to the 55th Article of
the said last Edict: And in case any of the said processes should already be
judged, the Parties shall be allowed to apply themselves for redress, by the
ways of Right to the said Chambers of the Edict.

XIII. Whereas at the beginning of the 42d Article of the said last Edict of
pacification, in several Common Impressions that have been made of the same,
these Words are found: And that shall have been taken by way of hostility, by
way of affirmation; although it should be conceived negatively, and in this
manner: And that shall not have been taken by way of hostility: As it is
written in the Original agreed on, and signed at Bergerac on the 17th of
September, 1577. It is ordained, that it shall be corrected by the said
Original; And all Judges are enjoined to judge conformably to this present
Correction.

XIV. That all Assesments, Impositions, Gatherings, raising of Money and new
Subsidies, by whomsoever, and on any account whatever, unless by the King's
express Commission, shall cease, and that none shall be made otherwise
hereafter, on the Penalties mentioned in the Ordinances.

XV. The General Assemblies of Cities and Corporations, shall be made according
to the Ancient Customs, and such Inhabitants as used to come to the same, shall
be summoned thither, without distinction of Religion, according to the last
Edict of pacification, Article 19.

XVI. That the Edict of pacification, and what has been resolved in this
Conference, shall be executed in every Article, according to its Form and
Tenor, and that the said Execution thereof shall begin on the 1st Day of March
next coming at farthest, and shall be continued in Guyenne without interruption
on either side. And as for Languedoc, the said Execution or Performance shall
begin on the 1st Day of April next coming at farthest: But that in the mean
time all Prisoners of War shall be put at liberty without paying any Ransom:
And all Acts of Hostility, and other Transgressions of the Edict in general
shall cease, according to the Commissions that have been issued out to that
end, which shall be sent every where in the Governments of Guyenne, Languedoc,
and other Provinces when it shall be necessary.

XVII. It has also been agreed by the said Lady Queen, Mother to his Majesty,
the King of Navar, and all the above-mentiond, that all the Cities and Places
kept by those of the said Religion, shall be restored in the Governments of
Guyenne, and Languedoc, at the time declared by the preceding Article: And the
Edict of pacification shall be put entirely in execution in the same, as also,
and by the same means, in the other Cities where the Catholics are more
numerous, neither Parties being allowed to put Garrisons into them: And thus the
Inhabitants of the same, of both Religions shall remain under the special
safeguard of the King our Sovereign Lord, it being forbidden on pain of Death,
to wrong them, or to undertake any thing against the Liberty and Safety of the
said Cities. Nevertheless, for surety of what is above written, and for an
assurance of the execution of the said Edict, the King leaves and gives in
keeping to the said King of Navar the following Cities; In the Government of
Guyenne, Bazas, Puymerol and Figeac, until the last Day of August next ensuing,
and no longer: And in the Government of Languedoc, Ravel, Briateste, Aleth,
Santei, Agreve, Baiz sur Baiz, Baignols, Alletz, Lunel, Sommieres, Aymargues
and Gignac, until the first Day of October also next ensuing, and no longer: On
condition, and no otherwise, that they shall make no Fortifications there, nor
demolish Churches and other places, nor act any thing else contrary to the
Edict.

XVIII. That the Ecclesiastics, and other Catholic Inhabitants shall be
received again into the said Cities without any difficulty, and shall fully
enjoy all their Estates, and the Fruits, or the Revenues of the same: That they
shall perform Divine Service in the same, according to the use of the Catholic
Church: That Justice shall also be freely administered there; That the King's
Money as well ordinary as extraordinary, shall be raised and received there:
And that the Edict shall be entirely kept and observed there. And the same
shall be done, according to the said Edict, in relation to those of the said
pretended Reformed Religion, in the other Cities where the Catholics are more
in number. It is also resolved, That the Magistrates and Officers of the
Cities, shall take care to see it performed, on pain of being suspended of
their Officers for the first times, and on forfeit of them for the second.

XIX. That the said Cities during the time heretofore declared, shall be
governed by Persons of Integrity, Lovers of the Peace and Public Good, who
shall be nominated by the King of Navar, and approved by the said Lady, Queen
Mother to the King; who shall engage, and be bound with Six in the chief, and
Four in the other of the said Towns, the same well to preserve in their
Obedience to the King, and to cause the Edict to be well maintained, and what
has been now resolved between the said Lady Queen Mother to the King, and the
said King of Navar, to maintain all the Inhabitants thereof in Safety,
according to the said Edict, and namely to restore the said Cities, viz. those
of the Government of Guyenne on the First day of September next coming; and
those of the Government of Languedoc, on the First day of October also next
coming, into the Hands of the Person the King shall be pleased to Depute to go
to the said Cities, to see them forthwith-restor'd in the Condition set down in
the said Edict of Pacification, without putting any Governor, or Garrison into
the same, and without removing the Ammunitions and Artillery that is in the
said Cities, belonging either to the King, or to the Communalties of the said
Cities.

XX. The said King of Navar has also remitted the Mur de Barais, to the said
Lady Queen, who upon his Nomination has agreed to Trust the keeping thereof to
Monsieur d'Arpajon, to have it in Charge until the said First day of August
next. At which time the said Monsieur d'Arpagon shall be obliged to Surrender
it into the hands of the Commissary, who shall repair to the other Cities, to
leave them in the Condition mentioned by the Edict, as the other Fourteen
Cities aforementioned.

XXI. And to avoid all manner of Burthening and Oppressing of the Inhabitants
of the said Cities, and Adjacent Parts, the said Lady has and does promise to
the said King of Navar, and to the said of the pretended Reformed Religion to
furnish Thirty six thousand Livers Tournois, which shall be delivered into the
hands of those the sail King of Navar shall nominate at the beginning of every
one of the said Months, pro Rata, and by equal Portions, according to the
Division they shall make of it.

XXII. And therefore it has been expressly resolved, That the said of the
pretended Reformed Religion; those who shall Command in the said Cities, and
those who shall be committed for the Guard thereof, shall not be allowed to
Quarter in the Houses of Catholics, as least as few as possible can be,
neither shall they raise, or exact any thing from the Inhabitants thereof, or
others, nor from the Adjacent Places, under any color and pretense whatsoever,
without the Kings leave. The Consuls of the said Cities shall be obliged during
the said Term of Six Months to furnish the Candles for the Guard, and the Wood
for Corpse de Guard; which cannot amount to much, considering the Summer season:
Allowing them however ^at the first Sessions to impose and raise upon the
Diocesses and Seneschalships, the Sums to which the said Candles and Wood shall
amount, without consequence. And as for the Garrisons lying at present in the
Cities of the said Country of Languedoc, held by those of the said Religion,
they are allowed to raise, if it has not been done already, what is barely
necessary for their Maintenance until the last day of March next, and no more.
In order to which, they shall give the Commissaries who are now going to put an
end to all Acts of Hostility, the true estimate of what the Payment of the said
Garrisons will amount to. And the said Estimate shall be drawn without Fraud,
upon the old Roles: In which shall not be included in the upper Country of
Languedoc, Dornhe, S. Germa, Pechaudie, Pierreficte, Carlus, Frigerolles,
Myeules, and Postrims, which shall be speedily dismantled and quitted. And to
that end, those who detain them, shall forthwith deliver them into the hands of
those who are sent to cause the Acts of Hostility to cease, if they design to
enjoy the benefit of the General Pardon, granted to those who have been
Infractors of the Edict of Pacification, since the Publication thereof. And in
case they do not obey what is abovesaid, they shall be deprived of the benefit
of the said Pardon, and punished like Disturbers of the Common Peace, without
hope of any Favor. And a Nomination shall also be made to the Executors of the
Edict, both in Guienne, and in Lower Languedoc, of the Cities, Towns, and
Castles, it will be fit to dismantle, according to the Advice of the
Inhabitants of the Country of both Religions; and what the King shall
afterward be pleased to order upon the said Advice, without including the
Places belonging to private Lords. And as for the Upper Languedoc, according as
abovesaid, the said Executors shall consult, whether there are any Places of
those that are possessed by the Catholics, requisite, and fit to be
dismantled, according as abovesaid, to the Advice of those of the Country of
both Religions; and also according to what the King shall be pleased to order
about it.

XXIII. And for a good, firm, true, and sincere Assurance of what is
abovementioned, the said King of Navar, together with the Prince of Conde, and
Twenty of the Principal Gentlemen of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, such
as the Queen Mother shall be pleased to nominate, together with the Deputies
that are here, in the Name of the Provinces that have sent them; besides those
who are to Command in the said Cities, that are left in their hands for the
said Six Months, shall promise and swear upon their Faith and Honor, and
engage their Estates, to cause all the Garrisons to march out of the said
Fourteen Cities, and Citadels thereof, and to deliver the said Cities and
Citadels, without delay, excuse, evasion, or any other pretense whatever, on
the abovesaid 1st days of September and October next coming, into the hands of
the abovesaid Commissary, to leave them in the Condition specified by the said
Edict of Pacification, as is aforesaid.

XXIV. It has been resolved, That in case any Attempt should be made on either
side, to the prejudice of the last Edict of Pacification, and of all that is
abovesaid, The Complaint and Prosecution thereof shall be made before the
King's Governors and Lieutenants-General, and by way of Justice in the Courts
of Parliament, or Chambers Established, in regard of both, according to the
Edict. And what shall be ordained by them, shall forthwith be put in execution,
at farthest, within a Month after it, by the diligence of the King's Council,
in relation to the Judgments that shall intervene, without using any
Connivence or Dissimulation. And the said Governors and Lieutenants-General are
expressly ordered, together with the Bailiffs and Seneschals, to further, give
Aid and Comfort, and to employ all the King's Forces for the execution of what
shall have been advised and ordered for the reparation of the said Attempt.
Thus the Attempts on either side shall neither be taken, or reputed as
Infractions of the Edict in respect to the King, and the King of Navar, the
General of the Catholics, and the General of those of the said Religion. It
being his Majesty's true and firm Intention, at the request of the said King of
Navar* to have them immediately redressed, and the Guilty severely and
exemplarily punished.

XXV. And to that end, the Gentlemen and Inhabitants of the Towns, of both
Religions, shall be obliged to accompany the Governors, and the King's
Lieutenants-General, to aid them with their Persons and Means, if necessary and
required so to do, in order forthwith to repair the said Attempts. The said
Governors and Lieutenants-General, together with the Bailiffs and Seneschals,
shall be obliged to apply themselves about it, without delay or excuse, and to
use their utmost Endeavors and Diligence for the Reparation of the said
Attempts, and to punish the Guilty according to the Pains specified in the
Edict. Moreover, it has been resolved, That such as shall make any Attempts
upon Cities, Places, or Castles, or that shall Abet, Assist, or Favor them, or
give them Counsel, or that shall commit any Attempt against, and to the
prejudice of the Edict, and all that is abovesaid: Also such as shall refuse to
obey, or shall oppose themselves, or by others, directly or indirectly, the
Effect and Execution of the said Edict of Pacification, and of all that is
abovesaid, are from this moment declared guilty of High Treason, both they and
their Posterity, Infamous, and for ever incapable of enjoying any Honors,
Employments, Dignities, and Successions; and liable to all the Punishments
inflicted by the Law against those that are guilty of High Treason in the
highest degree: His Majesty declaring moreover, That he will grant no Pardon
for it; forbidding his Secretaries to sign them, and his Chancellor, or
Lord Keeper to pass them: And the Courts of Parliament to respect them for the
future, whatever express or reiterated Commands they might receive about it.

XXVI. It has also been resolved, That the Lords deputed for the Execution of
the said Edict of Pacification, together with the Secret Articles made at the
time of the said last Edict of Pacification, and of all that is abovesaid,
proceeding to the said Execution, shall restore the Houses and Castles of the
said King of Navar, as they pass along the Seneschalships, where the said
Castles and Houses of the said King of Navar are Situate; which shall be left
without Garrisons on either part, and put into the Condition mentioned by the
Edict of Pacification, and according to the Ancient Privileges.

XXVII. That all that is above specified, and what is contained in the last
Edict of Pacification, shall be inviolably kept and observed on both sides,
under the Penalties set down in the said Edict. That the Courts of Parliament,
and Chambers ordained for Justice, according to this said Edict; the Chambers
of Accounts, Courts of Aids, Bailiffs, Seneschals, Provosts, and all other
Officers, to whom it may concern, shall cause to Register the Letters-Patent,
that shall be issued out for all that is abovesaid, and the Contents thereof to
follow, keep, and observe in every particular, according to their Form and
Tenor. And the Governors and Lietenants-General of all the Provinces of this
Kingdom shall be enjoined, in the mean time, forthwith to publish, every one
within his District, the said Letters-Patent, to the end that no body may
pretend to plead ignorance, and the Contents of the same also inviolably to
keep and observe, under the Penalties specified by the said last Edict of
Pacification, and others here above declared.

Done at Nerac on the last day of February, 1579. Thus Signed Katherine. Henry.
Bouchart, Deputy from the Prince of Conde, Biron, Joyeuse, Jansac, Pybrac, de
la Mothe Fenelon, Clairmont, Duranti, Turrenne, Guitry, Du Faur, Chancellor to
the King of Navar; Scorbiac, deputed by the Generality of Bourdeaux; Yolet, and
de Vaux, Deputies for Rovergue.
The King having seen, and maturely considered word by word, the entire
Contents of these present Articles, agree on in the Conference which the Queen
his Mother has held at Nerac* with the King of Navar, and the Deputies of those
of the pretended Reformed Religion, who were assembled there, to facilitate the
Execution of the last Edict of Pacification: The said Articles agreed on, and
signed on both sides at the said place of Nerac, on the last day of the Month
of February last past: His Majesty has approved, confirmed and ratified the
same; wills and requires that they shall be put in execution according to their
Form and Tenor, and to that end that the Letters-Patent, and all necessary
Dispatches of the same shall be forthwith made and sent.

Done at Paris on the 14th Day of March, 1519. Signed, Henry.
And lower, De Neufville.



The King's Edict about the Pacification of the Troubles, containing a
Confirmation, Amplification, and Declaration, as well of the precedent Edicts
made upon the same Subjecct, even in the Year 1577. as of the Articles agreed
on at the Conference held at Nerac, published at Paris in Parliament, on the
26th of January, 1577.
HEnry by the Grace of God King of France and Poland, to all those present, and
hereafter to come, Greeting.

Notwithstanding that since the Agreement and publication of our Edict of
pacification, made in the year 1577. we have used our utmost endeavors for the
putting of the same in execution, and to oblige our Subjects to follow and
observe it, even so far as to put the Queen our most honored Lady and Mother,
to the trouble of repairing to the principal Provinces of our Kingdom, to
remedy and provide against, according to her usual prudence, the Difficulties
and Obstacles which deprived our said Subjects of the benefit of our said
Edict, whereupon followed the Articles of the Conferance at Nerac, between the
said Lady accompanied with some of the principal Princes of our Blood, and
Lords of our Privy Council; and our most Dear and most Beloved Brother the King
of Navar, assisted by the Deputies of our Subjects, who profess the pretended
Reformed Religion. Yet not having been able, to our great regret, to avoid the
Troubles, being renewed in our Kingdom, we have endeavored and used all the
most proper and most agreeable means we have been able to devise, to extinguish
them, and to deliver our said Subjects from the evils of War; having to that
end by our Letters Patent impow'd our most Dear and most Beloved only Brother,
the Duke of Anjou, to cause our said Edict of pacification to be entirely
executed, together with the Articles of the said Conference of Nerac: Who being
since, according to our Intention, gone into our Country and Duchy of Guyenne,
and there having, upon the said Subject, conferred at large with our said
Brother the King of Navar, and the Deputies of our said Subjects of the said
pretended Reformed Religion there convened and assembled* The Articles annexed
to these Presents under the Counter Seal of our Chancery, were there proposed:
Which said Articles being sent to us by our said Brother, we having examined
and considered the same, out of a singular desire to banish out of our Kingdom,
the Impieties, Extortions, and other Accidents occasioned by the said Troubles;
to re-establish the Honor and Service of God, make way for Justice, and to
relieve our poor people: Have out of our own Inclination, full Power and
Authority Royal, approved and ratified the said Articles: The same do approve
and ratify by these Presents signed by our own Hand: And it is our will and
pleasure that the same shall be followed, kept, executed, and inviolably
observed, according to their Form and Tenor in the same manner as our said
Edict of pacification.

Therefore we command and require our Trusty and well-beloved the Persons
holding our Courts of Parliament, Chambers of our Accounts, Courts of our Aids,
Bailiffs, Seneschals, Provosts, and other our Justices and Officers to whom it
may concern, or their Lieutenants, to cause the said Articles hereunto, as
aforesaid, annexed, to be read, published, registered, kept, executed, and
inviolably observed in the same manner as our said Edict of Pacification, and
the Articles granted in the said Conference of Nerac, making all those that are
concerned, fully and peaceably enjoy and receive the benefit of what is
contained therein, putting a stop to all Troubles and Impediments to the
contrary. For such is our pleasure; and to the end that it may be firm and
lasting for ever, we have caused our Seal to be affixed to these Presents.

Given at Blois in the Month of December, in the Year of our Lord, 1580. and of
our Reign the 7th. Signed. Henry.
And upon the Fold, by the King, Pinart.

And sealed upon Knots of Red and Green Silk, with the Great Seal, and Green
Wax. And it is also written upon the Fold of the said Letters, Visa.

Articles propounded, and set forth in the Assembly and Conference held at
Flex, near the City of Sainte-Foy, between the Duke of Anjou the King's only
Brother, by virtue of the power given unto him by his Majesty, and the King of
Navar, assisted by the Deputies of those of the pretended Reformed Religion, he
answering for all the King's Subjects of the said Religion, to be presented to
his Majesty, to be by him, if such be his pleasure, granted and approved. And
in so doing to put an end to the Troubles and Disorders happened in this Kindom
since the last Edict of Pacification made in the Month of September, 1577. and
the Conference held at Nerac on the last day of February, 1579. and to restore
the King's Subjects in Peace and Union under his Obedience, and so to provide
by a good and speedy execution, that henceforward nothing may happen among them
to the prejudice of the said Pacification.
Article I. THAT the said last Edict of Pacification, and secret and particular
Articles granted with the same; together with the Articles of the aforesaid
Conference held at Nerac, shall be really, and in effect, observed and put in
execution* in all and every particular; which shall hold and stand good, not
only for the things happened during the preceding Troubles, but also for such
as shall or have happened from the time of the said Conference, until now; and
that all the King's Subjects of both Religions, shall enjoy the benefit of the
Declarations, Grants, Discharges, and General Pardons contained in the said
Articles, Edicts and Conferences, for what has been done and committed, taken
and raised on either side, during the present Troubles, and upon the account
thereof, as they should have done for what had happened during the precedent
Troubles, excepting what is expressly derogated by the present Articles.

II. The Articles of the said Edict concerning the re*establishment of the
Catholic Apostolic and Roman Religion, for the celebration of Divine Service,
in such places where it has been discontinu'd, together with the enjoyment and
gathering of the Tithes, Fruits, and Ecclesiastical Revenues, shall be entirely
executed, followed and observed, and those who shall transgress the same, shall
be rigorously punished.

III. In putting the 1st, 2d, and 11th Articles of the Edict in execution, the
King's Attorneys General shall be enjoined, as well as their Substitutes in
Bayliwicks, Seneschalships, and other Royal Jurisdictions, to inform against,
and make prosecution in the King's Name against all such who shall move
Seditions, etc. and in public shall utter Scandalous Expressions or any wise
transgress the said Edicts, Articles and Conferences, in order to have them
punished according to the Penalties inflicted by the same: The which being
omitted, the said Attorneys and Substitutes shall be responsible for the said
Infractions, in their own particular Names, and deprived of their Places,
without ever being restored or reestablished to the same. And the Bishops and
other Ecclesiastics, shall be required to keep and to oblige the Preachers
instituted by them, to keep and observe the Contents of the said Articles; and
his Majesty commands the same most expressly to all others who speak in public,
on the Penalties contained in the Edict.

IV. In consequence of the 4th, 9th, and 13th Articles of the said Edict, all
those of the said pretended Reformed Religion of what condition or quality
soeverare allowed to be and safely to inhabit in all the Cities and pars of
this Kingdom, without being disturbed or prosecuted upon the account of the
said Religion, under any pretense whatever, they behaving themselves according
as it is ordered by the aforesaid Articles of the said Edict. They shall not be
obliged to hang and adorn the Front of their Houses on the Festival Days on
which it is ordered; but only shall suffer them to be hung and adorned by the
Authority of the Officers who belong to those places. Neither shall they be
obliged to contribute toward the Charges for the Reparations of Churches, or
to admit Exhortations when sick, or at the point of Death, either by
Condemnation of Justice, or otherwise, from any but those of the said Religion.

V. The 1st Article of the Conference shall hold and remain in force, although the
King's Atorny-General be a Party against the High-Justicers, who were in actual
possession of the said Justice, at the time of the publication of the said
Edict.

VI. In executing the 8 Article of the said Edict, those of the said Religion
shall nominate unto the King four or five places in every Bayliwick or
Seneschalship of the Quality mentioned by the Edict, to the end that being
informed of the convenience or inconvenience thereof, his Majesty may choose one
of them there to establish the Exercise of their said Religion, or they not
proving convenient, to provide another for them within a month after the said
Nomination, which shall be as convenient for them as can be, and according to
the Tenor of the Edict.

VII. And as to the Burying places of those of the said Religion, the Officers
belonging to those parts, shall be obliged within a Fortnight after their being
required so to do, to provide them convenient places for the said Interments,
without delays, on the penalty of Five Hundred Crowns, in their proper and
private Names.

VIII. Letters Patent shall be passed, directed to the Courts of Parliament for
the registring and observing of the secret and particular Articles made with
the said Edict. And as for Marriages, and the Differences that shall arise upon
the same, the Judges Ecclesiastical and Royal, together with the aforesaid
Chambers, shall take cognizance of the same respectively, according to the said
Articles.

IX. The Taxes and Impositions that shall be laid upon those of the said
Religion, according as it is expressed in the 3d Article of the said
Conference, shall be executed, all Oppositions or Appeals whatever,
notwithstanding.

X. Those of the said Religion shall be allowed the Exercise thereof, in the
Cities and places in which it was performed on the 17th of September, 1577.
according to the 7th Article of the said Edict.

XI. The King shall send a Chamber of Justice in the County and Duchy of
Guyenne, consisting of two Presidents, 14 Counselors, a King's Attorney and
Advocate, persons of worth, lovers of peace, of Integrity and proper Abilities,
which shall be chosen by his Majesty, and taken out of the Parliaments of this
Kingdom and Great Council, the List of which shall be communicated to the King
of Navar, to the end that any of them being suspected Persons, it may be lawful
to acquaint his Majesty therewith, who shall elect others in their room. The
said Presidents and Counselors thus ordained, shall take cognizance of, and
judge all Causes, Processes, Differences and Transgressions of the Edict of
Pacification, the Cognizance and Jurisdiction of which, has been by the said
Edict referred to the Chamber composed by the same: They shall serve two whole
Years in the said Country, and shall remove their place and Sessions through
the Seneschalships of the same every six Months, in order to purge the
Provinces, and to administer Justice to every one upon the spot. Nevertheless
it has been agreed, that by the establishment of the said Chamber, those of the
said pretended reformed Religion shall not be deprived of the privilege and
benefit which is granted them by the said Edict, by the establishment of the
Tripartite Chamber, ordained by the same. The Presidents and Counselors of
which being of the said Religion, shall remain united and incorporate in the
Court of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, according to their erection, there to
serve, to hold a Rank, and sit from the very day they have been received there,
and shall enjoy all the Honors, Authorities, Preheminences, Rights, Profits
and Prerogatives, as the other Presidents and Counselors of the said Court.
And as for the Provinces of Languedoc and Dauphine, the Chambers that have been
appointed for them by the Edict, shall be established and constituted there
according, as it is specified in the same, and by the Articles of the said
Conference of Nerac. And the next sitting of that of Languedoc shall be in the
City of -- -- -- And that of Dauphine shall be established, according to what
has been heretofore ordained.

XII. The said Presidents, Counselors and Officers of the said Chamber shall
be obliged to repair forthwith to the places appointed for their Sessions,
there to exercise their Office, on pain of losing their said Offices, and to
serve actually, and reside in the said Chambers, without departing or absenting
from thence without leave, registered from the said Chambers, which shall be
judge in the Assembly, upon the Causes of the Ordinance. And the said Catholic
Presidents, Counselors and Officers shall be continued there as long as can
be, and as the King shall judge it necessary for his Service, and for the
Public Good: And in licensing the one, others shall be put in their places
before their departure.

XIII. All Sovereign and other Courts of this Kingdom are forbidden to take
cognizance, and judge Processes, either civil or criminal, in which those of
the said Religion are concerned, until the Day on which the said Chambers shall
sit, or afterward, on pain of nullity, Charges, Damages, and interest of the
Parties, unless they shall proceed voluntarily in the said Courts, according to
the 26 Article of the said Edict, and the 6th and 7th of the said Conference.

XIV. The King shall provide valuable assignations to furnish toward the
charges of Justice of the said Chambers, and shall reimburse himself upon the
Estates of the Condemned.

XV. The King shall as soon as possible can be, make a Regulation between the
said Courts of Parliament, and the said Chambers, according to the Edict, and
the 5th Article of the said Conference, and consult some Presidents and
Counselors of the said Parliaments and Chambers about it. Which said
Regulation shall be kept and observed, without regard to those that have
preceded it.

XVI. Neither shall the said Courts of Parliament, or other Sovereign and
Inferior Courts, take cognizance of what shall be depending and introduced into
the said Chambers, which they ought to determine according to the Edict, on
pain of nullity of the Proceedings.

XVII. In such Chambers where there shall be Judges of both Religions, the
proportion of Judges and Judgments shall be observed according to their
establishment, unless the Parties consent to the contrary.

XVIII. The Recusations or Refusals proposed against the Presidents and
Counselors of the said Chambers of Guyenne, and Languedoc, and Dauphine, shall
be allowed to the number of six, to which number the Parties shall be
restrained, otherwise they shall go forward without any regard to the said
Refusals.

XIX. The Presidents and Counselors of the said Chambers shall hold no private
Councils out of their Assembly; in which also the Propositions, Deliberations
and Resolutions relating to the Public Good shall be made, as well as those
relating to the particular State and Policy of the said Cities where the said
Chambers shall be.

XX. All the Judges to whom the Execution of Decrees and other Commissions of
the said Chambers shall be directed, together with all Messengers and
Sergeants, shall be obliged to put them in execution. And the said Messengers
and Sergeants shall serve all Warrants throughout the Kingdom, without
requiring Placet, Visa, nor Pareatis, on pain of being suspended, and of paying
the lost Damages and Interests of the Parties, of which the Cognizance shall
appertain to the said Chambers.

21. No Evocation or removal of Causes, the trial of which is referred to the
said Chambers, shall be allowed, unless in the case of the Ordinances, the
return whereof shall be made to the nearest Chamber established according to
the Edict. And upon the Revocation of the Removal, and the annihilation of the
Proceedings made upon the same, Justice shall be done by the King, at the
request of the Parties: and the issues of Suits of the said Chambers shall be
tried in the next Chamber, observing the proportion and form of the said
Chambers whence the Processes proceed.

XXII. The Subaltern Officers of the Provinces of Guyenne, Languedoc and
Dauphine, the reception of which belongs to the Courts of Parliament, if they
be of the said pretended Reformed Religion, may be examined and received in the
Chamber of the Edict, and none but the King's Attorneys General, and those
placed in the said Offices, shall be allowed to oppose and make themselves
Parties against their reception: And upon the refusal of the said Parliaments,
the Officers shall take the said Oaths in the said Chambers.

XXIII. Such of the said Religion as have resigned their Places and Offices out
of fear of the Troubles, since the 24th of August, 1572. to whom by reason
thereof, some Promises have been made: The said Promises being verified by
them, Provision shall be made for them by Law according to reason.

XXIV. The 46th Article of the said Edict shall be entirely executed, and shall
be of force for the discharge of Arrears and Contributions, and all other Sums
imposed during the Troubles.

XXV. All Deliberations made in the Courts of Parliament, Letters,
Remonstrances, and other things contrary to the said Edict of Pacification and
Conference, shall be razed out of the Registers.

XXVI. The Processes of Vagabonds shall be tried by Presidial Judges, Provost,
Marshal, and Vice-Seneschals, according to the 25d Article of the said Edict,
and the 8th of the said Conference. And as for the Householders in the Provinces
of Guienne, Languedoc and Dauphine, the Substitutes of the King's Attorneys
General in the said Chambers shall at the request of the said Householders,
cause the Inditements and Informrtions made against them, to be brought into
the same, to know and determine whether the Cases are liable to Provost Courts,
or not, that afterward according to the nature of the Crimes, they may be
returned by the said Chambers, to be tried by the ordinary Judges, or by the
Provostal Judges, as they shall find it reasonable. And the said Presidial
Judges, Provosts Marshal, and Vice-Seneschals shall be obliged to respect* obey
and fulfill the Commands they shall receive from the said Chambers, as they use
to do those of the said Parliaments, on pain of forfeiture of their Places.

XXVII. The Ruins and dismantlings of all Cities that have been demolished
during the Troubles, may be by the King's leave rebuilt and repaired by the
Inhabitants, at their own charge and expense, according to the Fiftieth Article
of the Edict.

XXVIII. The like Discharges and Pardons shall be granted in respect to the
things done and happened on both sides since the said Conference until now, as
are contained in the said Edict, in the 55th Article, all Proceedings,
Sentences and Decrees, and whatever has followed thereupon notwithstanding,
which shall be declared null, and os no effect, as things never happened,
derogating in respect to that to what is contained in the 25th Article of the
said Conference; the which notwithstanding shall remain in full force and
virtue for the future. In which Pardons shall be included the taking of Bazaz
and Langon: The first taken during the War in the Year 1576, and the other
after the said Conference of Nerac, and what has insued thereupon, all
Judgments and Decrees to the contrary notwithstanding.

XXIX. After the publications of the said Edict, in that part where the said
Duke of Anjou shall be, all Forces and Armies on both sides shall separate and
retire; and after their being retired, that is, after the French Forces are
disbanded and dismissed, and the Foreigners gone out of the Government of
Guienne in order to march out of the Kingdom: After the Cities hereafter
mentioned shall be delivered into the hands of the said Duke of Anjou, the said
King of Navar, and those of the said Religion, and others who have been engaged
in their Party, shall be obliged to deliver into the hands of the said Duke of
Anjou the Cities of Mande, Cahors, Monsegus, S. Million, and Mont aigu: Which
Mont-aigu shall be dismantled as soon as it is delivered to the said Duke of
Anjou.

XXX. Immediately after the delivery of the said Cities, the said Duke of Anjou
shall cause to be delivered unto the said King of Navar, the Houses, Cities and
Castles belonging unto him, which he shall leave in the condition ordained by
the Edict, and the Articles of the said Conference.

XXXI. And the King shall at the same time order the City and Castle de la
Reolle to be delivered into the hands of the said Duke of Anjou, who shall be
responsible to his said Majesty for the same, and shall give it in keeping to
the Vice-com^e of Turenne who shall enter into such Obligations, and make such
promises as the said Duke of Anjou shall require to return, and re-deliver it
into his hands in order to his restoring it to his Majesty, in case within two
months after the said publication, the Cities yielded in the said Conference,
seated in Guyenne, should not be delivered by those of the said Religion, in
the condition mentioned by the Articles of the said Conference: In respect to
which Cities at present, still in possession of those of the said Religion, and
left to them by the said Conference, the said King of Navar, and those of the
said Religion, shall promise the said Duke of Anjou, who will engage his word
to the King for it, to march the Garrisons out of them, and to restore them in
the condition they ought to be by the said Edict and Conference, viz. Those of
the Country of Guienne within the said Two Months after the publication of the
said present Articles made in those parts where the said Duke of Anjou shall
be, and those of Languedoc, within three Months after the said publication made
by the Governor, or Lieutenant General of the Province, without any Delays,
Putoffs, or Difficulties, upon any account or pretense whatever. And as to the
Liberty and Guard of the said Cities, they shall observe what is enjoined them
by the said Article of the said Conference. And they shall do the same for
those that have been given them in keeping for their surety by the said Edict,
and they shall nominate unto his Majesty persons whose Manners, Qualifications,
and Conditions are answerable to what is required by the Edict, to command in
the same, and they shall be obliged and bound to leave and to restore them in
the condition mentioned by the said Edict, immediately after the expiration of
the remainder of the term of time that was granted them by the same, according
to the form, and under the Penalties therein contained.

XXXII. All other Cities, Places, Castles and Houses belonging to the King, and
to Ecclesiastics, Lords, and Gentlemen, and other his Majesty's Subjects of
both Religions; together with their Titles, Papers, Instructions, and other
things whatever, shall be restored in the condition ordained by the Edict and
Articles of the Conference, into the hands of the owners thereof, immediately
after the said publication of the said present Articles, to leave them the free
enjoyment and possession thereof, as they had it before their being
dispossessed, on the penalties contained in the said Edict and Articles,
notwithstanding the right of propriety were disputed. And shall clear the said
Cities, Places and Castles of all Garrisons, to which end the Articles of the
Edict and Conference concerning the Governments and Garrisons of the Forts and
Castles of the Provinces, Cities and Castles shall be executed according to
their Form and Tenor.

XXXIII. For the effecting of which, the said Duke of Anjou has promised to
remain into the said Country of Guyenne, during the said time of two months, to
execute and cause the said Edict and Articles to be put in execution, according
to the power given unto him by his said Majesty, the which shall be published
to that end, and a Council of capable and fit persons established about his
person.

XXXIV. The 48th Article of the said Edict concerning the liberty of Commerce,
and the abolishing of all New Tolls and Subsidies imposed by any Authority but
the King's, shall be observed and effected: And in consideration of the Abuses
and Infractions made to the Edict since the publication thereof, in relation to
the Salt of Pecquaiz, Prohibitions shall be made to all persons, of what
quality or condition soever, directly to hinder the Draggage of Salt of
Pecquaiz, to impose, exact, or raise any Subsidies, either upon Marches, upon
the River Rone, or elsewhere, in any place or kind soever, without express
leave from his Majesty, on pain of Death.

XXXV. All pieces of Ordnance belonging to his Majesty, that have been taken
during the present and precedent Troubles, shall be restored immediately,
according to the 43d of the secret Articles.

XXXVI. The 30th Article of the said Edict, concerning Prisoners and Ransoms,
shall be followed and observed in relation to those who have been made
Prisoners since the renewing of the War, and have not been yet delivered.

XXXVII. The King of Navar and Prince of Conde shall effectually enjoy their
Governments, according to what is specified by the said Edict, and secret
Articles.

XXXVIII. The raising of 600000 Livers, which was granted and allowed by the
said Articles, shall be continued, according to the Commissions that have been
issued out since by virtue thereof, to which his Majesty shall be entreated to
add the Sums of 45000 Livers, furnished and advanced by the Sieur de la Noue.

XXXIX. The 22d, 23d, and 24th of the Secret Articles agreed on at Bergerac,
concerning the Oaths and Promises to be made by the King, the Queen his Mother,
the Duke of Anjou his Brother, the King of Navar, and the Prince of Conde,
shall be reiterated and accomplished.

XL. The Princes of the Blood, Officers of the Crown, Governors and Lieutenants
General, Bailiffs, Seneschals of the Provinces, and principal Magistrates of
this Kingdom, shall swear and promise to cause the said Edicts, and present
Articles, to be kept and observed, to employ themselves, and use their
endeavors, every one in their Station, for the punishing of the Infractors.

XLI. The Courts of Parliament in bodies shall take the same Oath, which shall
be reiterated at every new entry, which shall be made once a year on the
Festival of St. Martin, at which they shall cause the said Edict to be read and
republish'd.

XLII. The Seneschals and Officers of the Seneschalships and presidial
Tribunals, shall also take the same Oath in a body, and shall reiterate it, and
cause the said Edict to be read and published again on every First Day of
Jurisdiction after Epiphany or Twelfth Day.

XLIII. The Provosts, Majors, Jurors, Consuls, Capitouls and Sheriffs of
Cities, shall take the like Oath in a public place, to which they shall summon
the principal Inhabitants of both Religions, and shall reiterate the same at
every new Election of the said Offices.

XLIV. All the above mentioned, and all other Subjects whatever of this
Kingdom, of what Quality soever, shall depart from, and renounce all Leagues,
Associations, Fraternities and Intelligences, both within and without the
Kingdom: And shall swear to make none hereafter, or adhere to any* nor
otherwise to transgress, directly, or indirectly, the said Edict, Articles and
Conferences, on the Penalties therein mentioned.

XLV. All Officers Royal, and others, Majors, Jurats, Capitouls, Consuls and
Sheriffs, shall answer in their own and private Names, for all the Infractions
that shall be made of the said Edict, for want of punishing of the Infractors,
both in a Civil and Corporal manner, according to the nature of the Offense.

XLVI. And for the remainder of what is contained and ordained by the said
Edicts, Conferences, and Articles, it shall be executed and observed in every
particular, according to its Form and Tenor.

Done at Flex, near Sancte Foy, the 26th Day of November, 1580. Thus signed by
the Duke of Anjou the King's Brother, with his own hand, Francis.

And by the King of Navar's own hand, Henry.

XLVII. Since the signing of the Articles at Flex, on the 26th of the last
Month, it has been agreed between the said Duke of Anjou, and the King of
Navar, and those of the pretended Reformed Religion, that instead of the City
and Castle of La Reolle, mentioned in the 31st of the said Articles, the Cities
of Figeac, in Quercy, and Monsegur in Bazadois, shall be left to the King of
Navar, and those of the said Religion, for the surety of their Persons; and
shall keep them during the time that is remaining of six years granted by the
Edict of Peace, on the same account as the other Cities have been left to them.
And for the surety of the said Cities, the King shall maintain for the said
King of Navar, two Companies of Foot, each consisting of fifty men, over and
above the number of the other Garrisons, granted by the Secret Articles. And
good and valuable assignations shall be given for the maintenance of the said
Garrisons, and the said City and Castles of La Reolle restored in the same
condition as the other Cities not given in guard. The whole according to the
King's pleasure.

Dene at Coutras on the 16th Day of December, 1580. Thus signed with the own
hand of the Duke of Anjou, Brother to the King. Francis.

And the said own hand of the King of Navar. Henry.

The King having seen, and maturely considered word by word the entire Contents
in these present Articles, proposed in the Conference held between the Duke of
Anjou his only Brother, at Flex and Coutrax, the King of Navar, and the
Deputies of those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, who were assembled
there to facilitate the execution of the last Edict of Pacification, the said
Articles agreed on and signed on both sides in the said places of Flex and
Courtras, his Majesty has approved, confirmed, and ratified them, wills and
requires them to be observed and executed according to their Form and Tenor,
and that the Patents and Dispatches that are necessary be immediately made and
sent.

Done at Blois the 25th Day of December, 1580. Thus Signed, Henry.

And underneath, Pinart.

Read, Published, and Registered, Heard by, and thereunto Consenting, the King's
Attorny-General in consequence of the other Letters concerning the Case of the
Pacification of the Troubles of this Kingdom, heretofore Published and
Registered at Paris in Parliament, the 26th day of January, in the year 1581.
Thus Signed, Du Tillet.

The King's Edict about the Pacification of the Troubles of this Kingdom. Given
at Nantes, in the Month of April, 1598. and Published in Parliament the 15th of
February, 1599. Together with the Particular Articles intervened upon the same,
also verified in Parliament.
HENRY by the Grace of God, King of France and Navar, to all those present, and
others to come, Greeting. Among those infinite Graces, it has pleased Almighty
God to impart unto us, the greatest and most remarkable is, To have given us
the Constancy, Virtue, and Force, not to sink under the horrible Troubles,
Confusions, and Disorders, which were on foot at our coming to the Crown of
this Kingdom, which was divided into so many Parts and Factions, that that
which was the most lawful, was almost the least; and yet, nevertheless, to have
born up so stiffly against that Storm, as in the end to have overcome it, and to
be now entered into the Haven of Safety and Repose of this State. The absolute
Glory whereof be ascribed to him* alone, and to us the Favor and Obligation,
in that he was pleased to make use of our Labor for the performance of so good
a Work, in which it has been visible to the whole World, that we have over and
above the discharge of our Duty and Power, done something further, which
perhaps at another time would not have been so agreeable to our Dignity, which
we have not been scrupulous to expose to that end, since we have so often and
so freely exposed our own Life for the same. And in this great Concurrency of
such Weighty, and such Perilous Affairs, which could not be composed at one and
the same time, We have been obliged to follow this order, first, to undertake
such as could not be determined otherwise than by Force, and to defer and
suspend for a time such as were, and could be treated by Reason and Justice.
Such as the General Differences among our good Subjects, and the Particular
Grievances of the soundest part of the State, which in our Opinion will be more
easily cured after having removed the principal Cause thereof, which was the
Continuation of the Civil War. Which having, by the Grace of God, succesfully
ended, and Arms, and Hostilities being quite laid aside throughout our Kingdom;
We hope for as favorable a Success in the other Affairs that still remain
uncompos'd, and that thereby we shall obtain the Establishment of a good Peace,
and quiet Repose, which has ever been the aim of all our Wishes and Intentions,
and the only Prize we look for, after so many Toils and Hardships wherein we
have passed the course of our Life. Among those Affairs we were obliged to
delay, one of the chief has been the Complaints we have received from several
of our Catholic Provinces and Cities, in that the Exercise of the Catholic
Religion was not universally reestablished there, according to the Edicts
heretofore made for the Pacification of the Troubles upon the account of
Religion. As also the Supplications and Remonstraces that have been made to us
by our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, both upon the unperformance
of what is granted them by the said Edicts, and their desire of having some
Additions made thereunto for the Exercise of their said Religion, the Liberty
of their Consciences, and the Surety of their Persons and Fortunes; pretending
just Causes of new and greater Apprehensions, by reason of the last Troubles
and Commotions, the chief Pretense and Foundation of which was their Ruin. All
which, not to overcharge our selves with too much business at one instant; as
also because the Terror of Arms does not suit with establishing of Laws, tho
never so good, we have still deferred from time to time to make provision for,
and take care of. But now, since it has pleased God to give a beginning to our
enjoying of some Repose and Tranquillity, We esteem that we cannot employ it
better, than in applying our selves to what may concern the Glory of his Holy
Name and Service, and in procuring his being adored and prayed unto by all our
Subjects: And that since it is not his pleasure as yet, to grant that it may be
done in one and the same Form of Religion, it may be done at least with one and
the same Intention, and with such Rules, that it may occasion no Troubles or
Tumults among them: And that both we, and all this Kingdom, may always deserve
the Glorious Title of Most Christian, which has been so long, and so deservedly
acquired: And by the same means to remove the Cause of the Grievances and
Troubles which might arise hereafter upon the point of Religion, which has
always been the most prevailing and most dangerous of all others; Therefore
observing, that this Affair is of very great Importance, and worthy of weighty
Consideration, after a resolving of all the Petitions and Complaints of our
Catholic Subjects; and having also permitted our said Subjects of the said
pretended Reformed Religion, to Assemble by Deputies to draw theirs, and to put
all their Remonstrances together, and having conferred several times with them
upon this Subject, and reviewed the precedent Edicts; We have thought fit at
this time, upon the whole, to give our said Subjects a Universal, Clear,
Intelligible, and Absolute Law, by which they shall be limited and governed in
all differences that have heretofore happened* among them upon that Subject, or
that may hereafter happen, whereby both Parties may remain satisfied, according
as the nature of the time can allow it. We being entered into this Deliberation
for no other end, but the Zeal we have for the Service of God, in order that
henceforward it may be performed by all our said Subjects, and to establish a
firm and perpetual Peace among them. Wherein we implore, and expect from his
Divine Goodness the same Protection and Favor, which he has ever visibly
conferred upon this Kingdom, from the first Erection thereof, and during the
many Ages it has continued; and that he would bestow the Grace upon our said
Subjects, truly to apprehend, that in the Observation of this our Ordinance
(next to their Duty toward God, and toward all Men) consists the main
foundation of their Union, Concord, Tranquillity, and Quiet, and the
Restoration of this State to its Pristine Splendour, Wealth, and Power. As we
on our part do promise to have it exactly performed without permitting it to be
any wise transgressed. For these reasons having by the Advice of the Princes of
our Blood, other Princes and Officers of our Crown, and other Great and Notable
Persons of our Council of State about us, maturely and diligently weighed and
considered the whole business; We have by this Edict perpetual and irrevocable,
denounced, declared, and ordained, and do denounce, declare, and ordain,

I. First, That the Remembrance of all things passed on both sides, from the
beginning of March 1585. until our coming to the Crown, and during the other
precedent Troubles, or upon the account thereof, shall remain extinguished and
rased out, as matters that never had happened. And it shall not be lawful for
our Attorneys-General, or other Persons whatever, public or private, at any
time, or upon any occasion soever, to make mention of, or to Commence any
Process or Suit thereupon in any Courts or Jurisdictions whatsoever.

II. We forbid all our Subjects of what Estate or Quality soever theybe, To
renew the Remembrance thereof; To assail, urge, injure, or provoke one another
by way of Reproach of what is past, upon any cause or pretense whatever; To
Dispute, Contest, Quarrel, or Outrage, or Offend each other about it by Word or
Deed; but to contain themselves, and live peaceably together as Brethren,
Friends, and Fellow-Citizens; on pain for the Delinquents, of being punished as
Infractors of the Peace, and Disturbers of the public Quiet.

III. We ordain, That the Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion shall be
reestablished and restored in all Places and Parts of this our Kingdom and
Countries under our Obedience, where the Exercise thereof has been interrupted,
there to be peaceably and freely put in practice without any hinderance or
disturbance. Forbidding most expressly all Persons of what Estate, Quality, or
Condition soever, on the Penalties abovementioned, To trouble, molest, or
disturb the Ecclesiastics in the Celebration of Divine Service, the enjoying
and taking of Tithes, the Fruits and Revenues of their Benefices, with all
other Rights and Immunities appertaining unto them; and that all those, who
during the Troubles, have seized the Churches, Houses, Goods, and Revenues
belonging to the said Ecclesiastics, detain and possess them, shall surrender
unto them the entire Possession, and peaceable Enjoyment thereof, with such
Titles, Liberties, and Security, as they enjoyed before their being
dispossessed of the same. Also expressly forbidding those of the said Pretended
Reformed Religion, to Preach or perform any other Exercise of the said Religion
in the Churches* Houses, and Habitations of the said Ecclesiastics.

IV. It shall remain at the choice of the said Ecclesiastics to buy the Houses
and Buildings erected in profane Places, whereof they were dispossessed during
the Troubles, or else to constrain the Possessors of the said Buildings to buy
the Ground, the whole according to the Estimation that shall be made thereof by
experienced Men, agreed upon by the Parties; and in case they should not agree,
the Judges of the Place shall appoint some, reserving ever to the said
Possessors their recourse against whomsoever it shall belong. And where the
said Ecclesiastics shall constrain the Possessors to purchase the Ground, the
Money it shall be valued at, shall not be put into their hands, but shall
remain in the hands of the said Possessors, to be improved at the rate of 5 per
Cent. until it be employed for the benefit of the Church, which shall be done
within the space of a year. And the said Term being passed, in case the
Purchaser will no longer continue the said Rent, he shall be discharged
thereof, consigning the said Money into the hands of salvable Persons, by
Authority and Order of Justice. And as for Sacred Places, Information thereof
shall be given by the Commissaries, who shall be ordained for the Execution of
the present Edict, in order to our taking a course for the same.

V. Nevertheless, no Grounds and Places employed for the Reparations and
Fortifications of Cities, and other Places within our Kingdom, or the materials
therein used, shall be claimed, or recovered by the said Ecclesiastics, or
other Persons, public or private, until the said Reparations and
Fortifications are demolished by our Ordinances.

VI. And to remove all occasions of Contention and Trouble from among our
Subjects, we have and do permit those of the said Pretended Reformed Religion,
to live and reside in all the Cities and Places within this our Kingdom and
Countries under our Obedience, without being examined, molested, troubled, or
constrained to do any thing in matter of Religion against their Conscience; or
examined in their Houses, or Places where they shall Inhabit; in all other
things behaving themselves according to what is specified in our present Edict.

VII. We have also permitted all Lords, Gentlemen, and other Persons, as well
Inhabitants as others, who make Profession of the Pretended Reformed Religion,
enjoying within our Kingdom and Countries under our Obedience, High
Jurisdiction, or full Fief d'Haubert, (as * An Inheritance held directly in
Capite of the King.
in Normandy) either in Proper, in the Vse-fruit thereof, in the whole, or
Moiety, or for a third Part, To have in such their Houses of the said High
Jurisdiction, or Fiefs abovesaid, which they shall be obliged to nominate
before to our Bailiffs and Seneschals, every one within his Limits, for their
principal Abode, the Exercise of the said Religion, while they reside there;
and in their Absence their Wives or Families, or part thereof. And tho the
Right of Jurisdiction, or full Fief d'Haubert be in Controversy; nevertheless
the Exercise of the said Religion shall be allowed there, provided the
abovesaid be in actual Possession of the said High Jurisdiction, although our
Attorney General be a Party. We also allow them to perform the said Exercise in
their other Houses of High Jurisdiction, or abovesaid Fief d'Haubert, while
they are there present, and no otherwise; both for themselves, their Families,
Subjects, and others, who shall desire to repair thither.

VIII. In Houses of Fiefs, where those of the said Religion shall not have the
said High Jurisdiction or Fief d'Haubert, they shall only be allowed the said
Exercise for their Families. Nevertheless, we do not mean, that in case other
Persons should chance to come in, to the number of Thirty, besides their
Family, either upon the account of Baptism, Visitation of their Friends, or
otherwise, they should be troubled for the same: Provided also the said Houses
are neither within Cities, Towns or Villages, belonging to Catholic Lords,
High-Justicers, besides our self, wherein the said Catholic Lords have their
Mansions. In which case those of the said Religion shall not be allowed to
perform their said Exercise in the said Cities, Towns or Villages, except by
permission and leave of the said Lords High-Justicers, and no otherwise.

IX. We also permit those of the said Religion, to perform and continue the
Exercise thereof in all the Cities and Places under our Obedience, where it was
established, and by them publicly performed at sundry and diverse times in the
Year 1596. and in the Year 1597. until the end of August, all Decrees and
Judgments to the contrary notwithstanding.

X. The said Exercise in like manner shall be established and Restored in all
Cities and Places where it has or should have been established by the Edict of
Pacification, made in the Year Seventy Seven, Particular Articles and
Conferences of Nerac and Flex: Neither shall the said Establishment be
obstructed in the Parts and Places within the Demean granted by the said Edict,
Articles and Conferences, for Places of Bayliwikes, or that shall be granted
hereafter, though they have been since alienated to Catholic Persons, or
hereafter shall be. And yet we do not intend that the said Exercise shall be
Reestablished in the Parts and Places of the said Demean, which have been
heretofore possessed by those of the the said pretended Reformed Religion, in
which it had been allowed out of respect to their persons, or upon the account
of the Privileges of the Fiefs, in case the said Fiefs be at present possessed
by persons of the said Catholic, Apostolic Religion.

XI. Moreover, in every one of the Ancient Bayliwikes, Seneschalships and
Governments, holding the Place of a Bayliwike, having direct reference, without
mediation to the Courts of Parliament, We ordain, That in the Suburbs of a
City, besides those that have been granted them by the said Edict, Particular
Articles and Conferences: And where there are no Cities, in a Borough or
Village, the Exercise of the said pretended Reformed Religion shall be
publicly performed for all such as will repair thither; although the said
Exercise were already established in diverse places of the said Bayliwikes,
Seneschalships and Governments; excepting out of the said place of Bayliwike
newly granted by the present Edict, the Cities in which there are Archbishops
or Bishops; in which case those of the said Pretended Reformed Religion shall
be allowed to demand, and to nominate for the said Place of the said Exercise,
the Boroughs and Villages near the said Cities. Excepted also Places and
Lordships belonging to Ecclesiastics, in which we do not allow the said second
Place of Bayliwike to be established, we having by special grace and favor
excepted them. Under the name of Ancient Bayliwikes, we mean such as were in
the Times of the late King Henry our most honored Lord and Fatherin-law, held
for Bayliwikes, Seneschalships and Governments, having immediate reference to
our said Courts.

XII. We do not mean by this present Edict to derogate from the Edicts and
Agreements heretofore made for the reducing of some Princes, Lords, Gentlemen,
and Catholic Cities under our Obedience, in what relates to the Exercise of
the said Religion; the which Edicts and Agreements shall be maintained and
observed for this respect, according as shall be specified by the Instructions
of the Commissioners that shall be appointed for the execution of this present
Edict.

XIII. We expressly forbid all those of the said Religion to perform any
Exercise thereof, either as to the Ministry, Government, Discipline, or Public
Instruction of Children, and others, in this our Kingdom and Countries under
our Obedience, in what relates to Religion, in any places, but those that are
allowed and granted by the Edict.

XIV. As also to perform any Exercise of the said Religion in our Court or
Attendance, nor likewise in our Lands and Territories beyond the Mounts, nor
yet in our City of Paris, nor within five Leagues of the said City.
Nevertheless, those of the said Religion who live in the said Lands and
Territories beyond the Mounts, and in our said City, and within five Leagues
round about it, shall not be examined in their Houses, nor constrained to do
any thing in respect of their Religion against their Conscience, behaving
themselves, in other matters, according as it is specified in our present Edict.

XV. Neither shall the Public Exercise of the said Religion be performed in
the Armies, unless in the Quarters of the Chief Officers who profess the same;
nevertheless it shall not be done in the Quarter where we lodge.

XVI. According to the Second Article of the Conference at Nerac, We give leave
to those of the same Religion to build Places for the exercise thereof, in the
Cities and Places where it is allowed them; and those they have built
heretofore, shall be restored to them, or the Ground thereof, in the Condition
it is at present, even in those places where the said Exercise is not allowed
them, unless they have been converted into other Buildings. In which case the
Possessors of the said Buildings shall give them other places of the same Price
and Value they were of, before their building upon them, or the true estimation
of them by the judgment of experienced men; always reserving to the said Owners
and Possessors a remedy against whomsoever it shall concern.

XVII. We forbid all Preachers, and Lecturers, and others who speak in public,
to use any Words, Speeches, or Discourse, that may tend to excite the People to
Sedition; but on the contrary we have, and do injoin them, to contain and
behave themselves modestly, and to utter nothing but what may tend to the
instruction and edification of the Auditors; and to maintain the Peace and
Tranquillity by us established in our said Kingdom, on the Penalties specified
in the precedent Edicts. Injoining most expressly our Attorneys General* and
their Substitutes, to inform out of their Office against such as shall
transgress the same, on pain of answering for it in their proper and peculiar
Persons, and Forfeitures of their Offices.

XVIII. We also forbid all our Subjects, of what Quality and Condition soever,
to take away by force or induction, against the Will of their Parents, the
Children of those of the said Religion, to Baptize, or confirm them in the
Catholic, Apostolic Roman Church: The same Prohibitions are made to those of
the said pretended Reformed Religion, the whole on pain of exemplary Punishment.

XIX. Those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, shall be no wise
constrained, nor remain bound by reason of the Abjurations, Promises and Oaths
they have heretofore made, or Cautions by them given, upon the account of the
said Religion, neither shall they be any-wise troubled or molested for the same.

XX. They shall also be bound to observe all Festivals ordained in the
Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church; neither shall they work, or sell, in
open Shops, on the said days; neither shall Handicrafts* men work out of their
Shops, or in close Houses, or Chambers, on the said Festival days, and other
prohibited days, in any Profession, the noise whereof may be heard without by
Neighbors, or persons passing along: which nevertheless shall only be sought
after by Officers of Justice.

XXI. The Books touching the said pretended Reformed Religion, shall neither be
printed nor sold publicly, unless in such Cities and Places in which the
Public Exercise of the said Religion is allowed. And as for other Books which
shall be printed in other places, they shall be seen and examined, both by our
Officers and Divines, as it is specefy'd by our Ordinances. We forbid most
expressly the Impression, publication, and sale of all Defamatory Books, Libels
and Pamphlets, under the Penalties contained in our Ordinances: Injoining all
our Judges and Officers to keep a strict hand over it.

XXII. We ordain that no difference or distinction shall be made on the account
of the said Religion, for the receiving of Scholars to be instructed in
Universities, Colleges and Schools, and the Sick and Poor in Hospitals and
Public Alms.

XXIII. Those of the said pretended Reformed Religion shall be obliged to keep
the Laws of the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church, received in this our
Kingdom, in respect to Marriages contracted, or to be contracted as to the
degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity.

XXIV. Those of the said Religion shall also pay the Fees of Entrance, as is
customary, for the Places and Offices they shall be provided with, without
being obliged to assist at any Ceremonies contrary to their said Religion: And
being called to their Oath, they shall only be obliged to hold up their hand,
swear, and promise to God, that they will speak the truth: Neither shall they
be obliged to take a dispensation for the Oath by them taken, at the passing of
the Contracts and Obligations.

XXV. It is our Will and Pleasure, that all those of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, and others who have been engaged in their Party, of what
State, Quality, or Condition soever, shall be obliged and constrained by fair
and reasonable means, and under the Penalties contained in the Edicts upon that
subject, to pay and acquit the Tithes of Curates, and other Ecclesiastics, and
to all other to whom they shall belong, according to the use and custom of the
places.

XXVI. The Disinheritations, or Privations, either by disposing among the
Living, or by way of Testament, made only out of hatred, or upon the account of
Religion, shall neither be valable for the time past, or time to come, among
our Subjects.

XXVII. In order the better to reunite the Wills of our Subjects, according to
our Intention, and to remove all Complaints for the future. We do declare all
those who do, or shall profess the said pretended Reformed Religion, capable of
holding or performing all Estates, Dignities, Offices, and public Places
whatever, either Royal, Signorial, or of the Cities of our Kingdom, Countries,
Territories and Lordships, under our Obedience, all Oaths to the contrary
notwithstanding, and to be indifferently received into the same; and our Courts
of Parliament and other Judges shall only make inquiry, and inform themselves
about the Life and Conversation, Religion and honest Conversation of those who
are, or shall be provided with Offices, as well of the one, as of the other
Religion, without exacting any other Oath from them, but well and faithfully to
serve the King in the discharge of their Offices, and to observe the
Ordinances, as it has been observed at all times. And in case any Vacancy shall
happen of the said Estates, Places and Offices, as for those that shall be in
our gift, they shall be disposed of indifferently, and without distinction, to
capable Persons, as things that concern the union of our subjects. We intend
also that those of the said pretended Reformed Religion shall be admitted and
received into all Councils, Deliberations, Assemblies and Functions depending
on the abovesaid Matters; and that they shall not be ejected or hindered from
enjoying them upon the account of the said Religion.

XXVIII. We order for interring of the Dead of those of the said Religion,
within all the Cities and parts of our Kingdom, that in each place, a
convenient place shall be provided for them forthwith by our Officers and
Magistrates, and by the Commissioners who shall be by us deputed for the
putting of this present Edict in execution. And such Churchyards as they had
heretofore, which they have been deprived of by reason of the Troubles, shall
be restored to them, except they be at present built upon, in which case others
shall be provided for them at free cost.

XXIX. We most expressly enjoin our Officers to take care that no Scandal be
committed at the said Interments; and they shall be bound within a Fortnight
after request made, to provide commodious places for the said Burials of those
of the said Religion, without the least protraction, or delays, under penalty
of 500 Crowns, to be sess'd on their proper Names and Persons. The said
Officers and others are also forbidden to exact any thing for the conveyance of
the said Dead Bodies on pain of Extortion.

XXX. To the end that Justice may be done and ministered to our Subjects without
partiality, hatred, or favor, which is one of the principal means to keep
peace and concord among them, we have and do ordain that a Chamber shall be
established in our Court of Parliament of Paris, consisting of a President and
16 Counselors of the said Parliament, the which shall be called and entitled,
The Chamber of the Edict, which shall not only judge the Causes and Processes
of those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, within the Jurisdiction of
the said Court, but also those of the Jurisdiction of the Parliaments of
Normandy and Britany, according to the Jurisdiction hereafter conferred upon it
by this present Edict, and that until a Chamber be established in each of the
said Parliaments, to minister Justice upon the place. We also ordain that the
four Offices of Counselors in our said Parliament of Paris, remaining of the
last election by us made, shall be forthwith bestowed on four of those of the
said pretended Reformed Religion, fitly qualified, and capable to serve in the
said Parliament, who shall be distributed, viz. The first shall be received
into the Chamber of the Edict, and the other three in order as they shall be
received into three of the Chambers of the Inquests. Moreover the two first
Offices of * Laiz Counselors, that shall become vacant by Death, shall also be
given to two of those of the said pretended Reformed Religion; and the persons
thus received, shall be distributed into the two other Chambers of Inquests.

XXXI. Besides the Chamber heretofore established at Castres, for the
Jurisdiction of our Court of Parliament of Thoulouse, which shall be continued
in the state it now stands; we have for the same considerations ordained, and
do ordain, that in each of our Courts of Parliament of Grenoble and Bourdeaux,
shall also be established a Chamber, consisting of two Presidents, the one
Catholic, and the other of the said pretended Reformed Religion; and of twelve
Counselors, six of which shall be Catholics, and the other six of the said
Religion; which Catholic Presidents and Counselors shall be by us selected
and chosen out of the body of our said Courts. And as to those of the said
Religion, a new Creation shall be made of a President and six Counselors for
the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and of a President and three Counselors for that
of Grenoble, the which with the three Counselors of the said Religion, that
are at present of the said Parliament, shall be employed in the said Chamber of
Dauphine. And the said Offices of new creation, shall be allowed the same
Salleries, Honors, Authorities, and Preheminencies as the others of the said
Courts. And the said Sessions of the said Chamber of Bourdeaux shall be held at
Bourdeaux, or at Nerac, and that of Dauphine at Grenoble.

XXXII. The said Chamber of * The word signifies Legacies.
Dauphine shall determine the Causes of those of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, of the Jurisdiction of our Parliament of Provence, without being
obliged to take Letters of Summons, or other Citations, any where but in our
Chancery of Dauphine: Neither shall those of the said Religion of Normandy or
Britany be obliged to take out Summons, or other Citations any where but in our
Chancery of Paris.

XXXIII. Our Subjects of the said Religion of the Parliament of Burgundy, shall
have the choice and election to plead in the Chamber ordained in the Parliament
of Paris, or in that of Dauphine, neither shall they be obliged to take out
Letters of Summons, or any other Citations, but in the said Chanceries of
Paris, and of Dauphine, according to their own choice.

XXXIV. All the said Chambers composed as abovesaid, shall determine and judge
in sovereignty by Sentence Definitive, by Decrees excluding all others of Suits
and Differences moved and to be moved; in which those of the said pretended
Reformed Religion are concerned as Principals, or Warranties, either as
Plaintiffs, or Defendants, in all matters, as well Civil as Criminal, whether
the said Processes be by Writ, or Verbal Appeal, if the said Parties like it
so, and one of them requires it, before any Plea in the Cause, in relation to
Suits to be moved: always excepting all matters of Benefices, and the
Possessors of Tithes not enfeoff'd, Ecclesiastical Patronages, and Causes
wherein the Demean of the Church shall be concerned, which shall all be tried
and judged in the Courts of Parliament; and the said Chambers of the Edict
shall not be allowed to take cognizance of the same. It is also our Will and
Pleasure, that in order to judge and decide Criminal Causes, that shall happen
among the said Ecclesiastics, and those of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, if the Ecclesistick is Defendant, the Judgment of the Criminal Cause
shall belong to our Sovereign Courts, exclusively to the said Chambers; and the
Ecclesiastic being Plaintiff, and he of the said Religion Defendant, the
Cognizance and Judgment of the Criminal Cause shall belong by Appeal, and in
last reference, to the said Established Chambers. The said Chambers also in
Vacation-times shall determine of Matters referred by the Edicts and Ordinances
to the Chambers established in times of Vacation, each one in their
Jurisdiction.

XXXV. The Chambers of Grenoble shall from this present be united and
incorporated to the Body of the said Court of Parliament, and the Presidents
and Councillors of the said pretended Reformed Religion, entitled Presidents
and Counselors of the said Court, and held in the number and rank of them. To
this end they shall be first disposed of in the other Chambers, and then called
and drawn out of them, to be employed, and to serve in that which we institute
anew; yet they shall assist, and have a Voice and Session in all the
Deliberations that shall be made when the Chambers are assembled, and shall
enjoy the same Sallaries, Authorities and Preheminencies, as the oath
Presidents and Counselors do.

XXXVI. It is also our Will and Pleasure, that the said Chambers of Castres and
Bourdeaux shall be reunited, and incorporated into the said Parliaments, in the
same manner as the others, when it shall be needful, and the Causes that have
moved us to establish them shall cease, and subsist no longer among our
Subjects: And therefore the Presidents and Counselors of the said Chambers,
being of the same Religion, shall be called and held for Presidents and
Counselors of the said Courts.

XXXVII. There shall be also newly created and erected in the Chamber ordained
for the Parliament of Bourdeaux, two Substitutes of our Attorney and Advocate
General, of which the Attorney's Substitutes shall be a Catholic, and the
other of the said Religion, who shall be invested with the said Offices, with
competent Pensions.

XXXVIII. All the said Substitutes shall take no other quality than that of
Substitutes; and when the Chambers ordained for the Parliaments of Bourdeaux
and Thoulouse shall be united and incorporated into the said Parliaments, the
said Substitutes shall be provided with Counselors Places in the same.

XXXIX. The Expeditions of the Chancery of the Chamber of Bourdeaux shall be
performed in the presence of two Counselors of the said Chamber, of which the
one shall be a Catholic, and the other of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, in the absence of one of the Masters of Request of our Hotell, or
Household; And one of the Notaries and Secretaries of the said Court of
Parliament of Bourdeaux, shall reside in the place where the said Chamber shall
be established, or else one of the Secretaries in ordinary of the Chancery, to
sign the Expeditions of the said Chancery.

XL. We will and command, That in the said Chamber of Bourdeaux there be two
Committees of the Register of the said Parliament, the one Civil, the other
Criminal, who shall officiate by our Commissions, and shall be called
Committees of the Registry Civil and Criminal; and therefore shall neither be
displaced nor revoked by the said Registers, or chief Clerks of Parliament: yet
they shall be obliged to yield the Profit of the said Registries to the said
Register; the wh^h Committees shall receive Salaries from the said Registers,
according as it shall be thought ^t, and ordered by the said Chamber. Moreover,
Catholic Messengers shall be appointed there, who shall be taken out of the
said Court, or elsewhere, according to our Pleasure; besides which, two new
ones shall be erected, being of the said Religion, without their paying any
Fees: All the said Messengers shall be governed by the said Chamber both as to
the execution, and precinct of their Office, as well as the Fees they shall
receive. A Commission shall also be dispatched for a Paymaster of Salaries, and
a Receiver of the Fines levied by the Chamber, who shall be chosen by us, in
case the said Chamber be established in any place but the said City; and the
Commission heretofore granted to the Play Master of the Salaries of the Chamber
of Castres, shall remain in full force, and the Commission of Receiver of the
Fines levied by the said Chamber shall be annexed to the said Office.

XLI. Sufficient Assignations shall be provided for the Pensions or Sallaries
of the Officers of the Chambers ordained by this Edict.

XLII. The Presidents, Counselors, and other Catholic Officers of the said
Chambers, shall be continued as long as possible may be, and as we shall find
it most expedient for our Service, and the good of our Subjects: And in
dismissing some, others shall be appointed in their room, before their
departure; and they shall not, during the time of their waiting, absent
themselves, or depart from the said Chambers, without their leave, which shall
be judged by the Proceedings of the Ordinance.

XLIII. The said Chambers shall be established within six Months, during which,
(if the Establishment continue so long a settling) the Suits moved, or to be
moved, in which those of the said Religion shall be Parties, within the
Jurisdiction of our Parliaments of Paris, Roan, Dijon, and Rennes, shall be
removed, or summoned to the Chamber at present established at Paris, by virtue
of the Edict of the Year 1577. or else to the great Council, at the Election
and Choice of those of the said Religion, if they require it: Those that are of
the Parliament of Bourdeaux, into the Chamber of Castres, or to the said Great
Council, at their choice: And those that are of Provence, to the Parliament of
Grenoble. And in case the said Chambers be not established within three months
after the Presentation there made of this our present Edict, such of our
Parliaments as shall have made refusal thereof, shall be prohibited to take
cognizance, or judge the Causes of those of the said Religion.

XLIV. Suits not yet determined, depending in the said Courts of Parliament,
and Grand Council, of the nature abovesaid, shall be returned, in what state
soever they stand, into the said Chambers, each Cause to its Court of
Reference, in case one of the Parties of the said Religion requires it, within
four months after the establishment thereof; and as for such as shall be
discontinu'd, and are not in a state to come to trial, the abovementioned of
the said Religion shall be obliged to make a Declaration at the first
intimation and signification they shall receive of the pursuit; and the said
Term being expired, they shall no longer be received to demand the said Returns.

XLV. The said Chambers of Grenoble and Bourdeaux, as well as that of Chartres,
shall observe the Style and Forms of the Parliaments, within the Jurisdictions
of which they shall be established, and shall judge in equal numbers both of
the one, and other Religion, unless the Parties agree to the contrary.

XLVI. All the Judges, to whom the Executions, Decrees, Commissions of the said
Chambers, and Letters, obtained out of their Chanceries, shall be directed; as
also all Messengers and Sergeants shall be bound to put them in execution; and
the Messengers and Sergeants shall also be obliged to serve all their Warrants
in all parts of the Kingdom, without demanding Placet, Visa, nor Pareatis, on
pein of suspension of their Places, and paying the Damages, Charges and
Interests of the Parties: the Censure whereof shall belong to the said Chambers.

XLVII. No removal of Causes shall be allowed, the trial of which is referred
to the said Chambers, unless in the case of the Ordinances, the return whereof
shall be made to the nearest Chamber established according to our Edict: And
the Issues of Suits of the said Chambers shall be tried in the next Chamber,
observing the proportion and Forms of the said Chamber, from whence the
Processes shall proceed, except for the Chambers of the Edict in our Parliament
of Paris; where the said Party Suits shall be disposed of in the said Chamber,
by Judges that shall be by us nominated by our particular Letters to this end,
unless the Parties had rather attend the Renovation of the said Chamber. And if
it should happen that one and the same Suit should pass through all the Party
Chambers, the issue thereof shall be returned to the said Chamber of Paris.

XLVIII. Refusals proposed against the Presidents and Counselors of the
Party-Chambers shall be allowed to the number of six, to which number the
Parties shall be restrained, otherwise they shall go forward without any regard
to the said Refusals.

XLIX. The Examination of Presidents and Counselors newly erected in the said
Party Cambers shall be performed by our Privy Council, or by the said Chambers,
each one within its Precinct, when their number shall be sufficient:
Nevertheless, the usual Oath shall by them be taken in the Courts where the
said Chamber shall be established, and upon their refusal, in our Privy
Council; except those of the Chamber of Languedoc, who shall take their Oath
before our Chancellor, or in the said Chamber.

L. We will and ordain, That the reception of our Officers of the said
Religion, shall be judged in the said Party Chambers by the plurality of
Voices; as it is usual in other Judgments, it not being requisite that the
Voices should surpass two thirds, according to the Ordinance, the which in this
respect is abrogated.

LI. All Propositions, Deliberations and Resolutions, relating to the Public
Peace, and for the particular Estate and Policy of the Cities, where the
Party-Chambers shall reside, shall be made in the said Chambers.

LII. The Article of the Jurisdiction of the said Chambers, ordained by the
present Edict, shall be followed and observed according to its Form and Tenor,
even in what relates to the Execution, Omission, or Infraction of our Edicts,
when those of the said Religion shall be Parties.

LIII. The Subaltern Officers Royal, or others, the reception of which belongs
to our Courts of Parliament, if they be of the said pretended Reformed Religion
may be examined and received in the said Chambers: viz. Those of the
Jurisdiction of the Parliaments of Paris, Normandy and Britany, in the said
Chambers of Paris; those of Dauphine and Provence, in the Chamber of Grenoble;
those of Burgundy, in the said Chamber of Paris, or of Dauphine, at their
choice; those of the Jurisdiction of Thoulouse, in the Chamber of Castres; and
those of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, in the Chamber of Guienne; and no other
to oppose their receptions, or make themselves Parties, but our Attorneys.
General, and their Substitutes, and those placed in the said Offices.
Nevertheless the accustomed Oath shall by them be taken in the Courts of
Parliament, which shall not be allowed to take cognizance of their reception;
and upon the refusal of the said Parliament, the said Officers shall take the
Oath in the said Chambers; which being thus taken, they shall be obliged to
present the Act of their reception, by a Messenger or Notary to the Registers
of the said Courts of Parliament, and to leave a compared Copy thereof, with
the said Registers; who are enjoined to register the said Acts, on pain of
paying all the Charges, Damages and Interests of the Parties; and in case the
Registers should refuse to do it; it shall be sufficient for the said Officers
to bring back the Act of the said Summons, drawn by the said Messengers, or
Notaries, and to cause the same to be recorded in the Registers of their said
Jurisdictions, there to be viewed when need shall require, on pain of nullity
of their Proceedings and Judgments. And as for those Officers, whose reception
is not to be made in our said Parliaments; in case those by whom it ought to be
made, should refuse to proceed to the said Examination and Reception, the said
Officers shall repair to the said Chambers, where care shall be taken for their
said reception.

LIVE. The Officers of the said pretended Reformed Religion, who shall be chosen
hereafter, to serve in the Body of our said Court of Parliament, Grand Council,
Chambers of Accounts, Courts of Aids, and in the Offices of the
Treasurer-General of France, and other Officers of the Exchequers, shall be
examined and received in the places where it was usually performed; and in case
of refusal, or denial of Justice, they shall be constituted in our Privy
Council.

LV. The reception of our Officers made in the Chamber established heretofore
at Castres, shall remain in force, all Decrees and Ordinances thereunto
contrary notwithstanding. The reception of our Judges, Counselors, and other
Officers of the said Religion, made in our Privy-Councel, or by Commissioners
by us nominated upon the refusal of our Courts of Parliament, of Aids, and
Chambers of Account, shall also be as valid, as if they had been made in the
said Courts and Chambers, and by other Judges, to whom those Receptions
appertain. And their Salleries shall be allowed by the Chambers of Accounts,
without difficulty: and if any have been dismissed, they shall be
reestablished without any farther Mandamus than this present Edict; and the
said Officers shall not be obliged to show any other reception; all Decrees
given to the contrary notwithstanding; the which shall remain void, and of no
effect.

LVI. Until means be procured to defray the Expenses of Justice of our said
Chambers out of the Moneys of Fines and Con^iscations, we will assign a
valuable and sufficient Fund to discharge the said Expenses, which Money shall
be returned out of the Estates of the persons condemned.

LVII. The Presidents and Counselors of the said Pretended Reformed Religion,
heretofore received into our Courts of Parliament of Dauphine, and in the
Chamber of the Edict incorporated into the same shall continue and hold their
Place and Order there, Viz. The Presidents as they did and do enjoy them at
present; and the Counselors according to the Decrees and Patents they have
obtained about it in our Privy Council.

LVIII. We declare all Sentences, Judgments, Decrees, Proceedings, Seizures,
Sales, and Orders made and given against those of the said pretended Reformed
Religion, whether dead, or alive, since the Death of the late King Heury the
2d. our most honored Lord and Father-in-Law, by reason of the said Religion,
Tumults and Troubles happened since, together with the execution of the said
Judgments and Decrees from this present, cancelled, revoked, and nullified, and
the same do cancel, revoke and nullify. We order the same to be razed and
wiped out of the Records of the Registers of Courts as well Sovereign as
Inferior. As it is likewise our pleasure, that all Marks. Tracts and Monuments
of the said Executions, Books and Acts defamatory to their Persons, Memory and
Posterity, shall be removed and defaced: And that the places in which have been
made upon that account, Demolishments or Razings, shall be restored to the
Owners in such a condition as they are, the same to enjoy and to dispose of as
they shall think fit. And we have generally revoked, cancelled and nullifi'd
all Proceedings and Informations made for any Enterprises whatever, Pretended
Crimes of Leze-Majesty and others. Notwithstanding which Proceedings, Decrees
and Judgments, comprehending reunion, incorporation, and confiscation, it is
our pleasure that those of the said Religion, and others who have been engaged
in their Party, and their Heirs, shall re-enter into the real and actual
possession of all and every their Estates.

LIX. All Proceedings made, Judgments and Decrees given during the Troubles,
against those of the said Religion, who have born Arms, or withdrawn themselves
out of our Realm or within the same, into Cities and Countries held by them
upon another account than that of Religion and the Troubles, together with all
Nonsuits, Prescriptions, either Legal, Conventional, or Customary, and Feodal
Seizures, befallen during the Troubles, or by lawful Impediments proceeding
from them, the cognizance whereof shall remain in our Judges, shall be este^m'd
as not performed, granted, or happened; and such we have and do declare them to
be, and have and do annihilate them; for all which the said Parties shall have
no redress: but they shall be restored to the same state in which they were
before, the said Decrees and Execution thereof notwithstanding; and the
possession they had formerly, shall be restored to them in this respect. What
is above mentioned shall also take place, in relation to others who have been
engaged in the Party of those of the said Religion, or that have absented
themselves out of our Kingdom, by reason of the Troubles. And as for the
Children under Age of those of the Quality abovesaid, who dyed during the
Troubles, we restore the Parties to the same Estate in which they were before,
without refunding the Charges, or being bound to consign the Fines or
Amerciaments; but yet we do not mean that Judgments given by Presidial or other
Inferior Judges, against those of the said Religion, or those who have been
engaged in their Party, should remain void, if given by Judges, holding
Sessions in Cities held by them, to which they had a free access.

LX. The Decrees given in our Courts of Parliament, in matters, the Cognizance
whereof belongs to the Chambers ordained by the Edict in the year 1577. and the
Articles of Nerac and Flex, in which Courts the Parties have not proceeded
voluntarily, that is, they have alleged and proposed ends declinatory, or that
have been given by default or Exclusion, either in matters Civil or Criminal,
notwithstanding which ends, the said Parties have been constrained to go
forward, shall likewise be annihilated, and of no value. And as for the Decrees
given against those of the said Religion, who have proceeded voluntarily,
without proposing declinatory Ends, the said Decrees shall remain in force; yet
nevertheless without prejudice to the Execution thereof, they shall be allowed,
if they think good, to take some course by Civil Request, before the Chambers
ordained by the present Edict; and the time run on, mentioned by the
Ordinances, shall be no prejudice to them; and until the said Chambers, and
their Chanceries are established, the Verbal Appeals, or those by Writ brought
in by those of the said Religion, before the Judges, Registers, or Committees,
Executors of Decrees and Judgments, shall take the same Effect, as if they had
been sued out by Letters Patent.

LXI. In all Inquiries that shall be made upon any occasion whatsoever, in
Civil Matters, if the Inquisitor or Commissary is a Catholic, the Parties
shall be obliged to agree about an Associate; and in case they cannot agree
about one, the said Inquisitor or Commissary shall take one out of the Office,
being of the said pretended Reformed Religion; and the same shall be practiced
when the Commissary or Inquisitor shall be of the said Religion, for a
Catholic Adjunct.

LXII. We Will and Ordain, That our Judges shall determine the Validity of
Testaments, in which those of the said Religion shall be concerned, if they
require it; and the Appeals of the said Judgments may be sued out by those of
the said Religion, notwithstanding all Customs contrary thereunto, even those
of Brittany.

LXIII. To prevent all differences that might happen between our Courts of
Parliament, and the Chambers of the said Courts, ordained by our present Edict;
We will set down an ample and plain Order between the said Courts and Chambers,
by which those of the said pretended Reformed Religion shall fully enjoy the
benefit of the said Edict: Which Order shall be verified in our Courts of
Parliament, which shall be kept and observed, without having a respect to those
that have been made before.

LXIV. We prohibit and forbid all our Sovereign Courts, and others of this
Kingdom, to take Cognizance, and judge the Processes, Civil and Criminal, of
those of the said Religion, the Trial whereof, by our Edict, is referred to the
said Chambers, provided the return be demanded, as it is specified by the 40
Articles abovewriten.

LXV. Our Will also is by way of Provision, until we have otherwise ordained
it, that in all Suits moved, or to be moved, in which those of the said
Religion shall stand as Plaintiffs, or Defendants, principal Parties, or
Warrantees in Civil Causes, in which our Officers and Presidial Tribunals, have
power to Judge definitively, they be permitted to demand that two of the
Chamber, where the Cause is to be tried, abstain from the Judgment of them, who
without alleging any cause, shall be bound in this case to abstain,
notwithstanding the Ordinance by which the Judges cannot be excepted against
without just cause; there remaining to them besides refusals of Right against
the others. And in Criminal Cases in which the said Presidial Judges, and other
Subaltern or Inferior Judges Royal, judge definitively, the Persons impeached
being of the said Religion, shall also be allowed to challenge three of the
Judges peremptorily. The Provosts of the Marshals of France, Vice-Bailiffs,
Vice-Seneschals, Lieutenants of the Short Robe, and other Officers of the like
Quality, shall also judge according to the Ordinance and Rules heretofore given
in relation to Vagabonds. And as for Householders charged and impeached with any
Provostal or Public Crime, if they be of the said Religion, they shall also be
allowed to demand that three of the said Judges, who may take Cognizance
thereof, abstain from the Judgment of their Causes, which the said Judges shall
be obliged to do, without any expression of Cause, except when in the Assembly
where the said Causes shall be judged, there happen to be to the number of two
in Civil matters, and three in Criminal Cases of those of the said Religion, in
which Case they shall not be allowed to challenge peremptorily, without showing
cause; the which shall be common and reciprocal to Catholics in manner and
form abovementioned in respect to the Refusal of Judges, where those of the
said pretended Reformed Religion shall exceed the others in number
Nevertheless, we do not mean that the said Presidial Tribunals,
Provosts-Marshals, Vice-Bailiffs, Vice-Seneschals, and others, who judge
definitively, should by virtue of what is abovesaid, take Cognizance of the
Troubles past. And as for Crimes and Excesses committed upon other occasions,
than that of the Troubles past, from the beginning of March 1585. to the end of
the year 1597. in case they do take Cognizance of them: It is our Will that
Appeals may be had from their Judgments before the Chambers ordained by the
present Edict; as shall in the like manner be practiced for Catholic
Accomplices, where some of those of the pretended Reformed Religion shall be
Parties.

LXVI. We also will and ordain, That henceforward in all Instructions, except
Informations of Criminal Causes, in the Seneschalships of Thoulouse,
Carcassonne, Rovergue, Loragais, Beziers, Montpelier, and Nimes, the
Magistrate, or Commissary, deputed for the said Instruction, if he be a
Catholic, shall be bound to take an Associate of the pretended Reformed
Religion, which the Parties shall agree about; and in case they cannot agree,
one of the said Religion shall be taken out of the Office, by the aforesaid
Magistrate, or Commissary: As in like manner, If the Magistrate, or Commissary,
be of the said Religion, he shall be obliged in the manner and form aforesaid
to take a Catholic Assistant.

LXVII. When any Householder of the said Religion, being charged and accused of
any public Crime, shall be tried before the Provosts Marshals, or their
Lieutenants, the said Provosts, or their Lieutenants, being Catholics shall be
obliged to call to the Proceedings of such a matter an Assistant of the said
Religion; who shall also assist at the Trial of the competency of the
Indictment, and at the Judgment definitive of the matter; which Competency
shall only be tried at the next Presidial Tribunal, in open Assembly, by the
chief Officers of the said Court, being actually there on pain of Nullity,
unless the Persons accused, desire to have the said Competency tried in the
Chambers ordained by the present Edict. In which case in respect to the
Householders of the Provinces of Guyenne, Languedoc, Provence, and Dauphine, the
Substitutes of our Attornys-General in the said Chambers, shall at the request
of the said Householders, cause the said Charges and Informations against them,
to be brought before them, to know, and determine, whether the Causes are
liable to Provosts-Courts or not, in order, according to the nature of the
Crimes, to be returned by the said Chambers to the Ordinary Judge, or else to
be tried by the Provostal Judges, according as they shall judge it reasonable,
and suitable to the Contents of this our present Edict: And all the said
Presidial-Judges, Provosts-Marshals, Vice-Bailiffs, Vice-Seneschals, and
others, who judge definitively, shall be obliged respectively to obey and
observe the Commands they shall receive from the said Chambers, as they use to
respect the Orders of the said Parliaments, on forfeiture of their Places.

LXVIII. The Publications of Sale, and Seizures, Outcries, and Vendition of
Inheritances by the * Spear, in pursuance of a Decree, shall be performed at
the usual Places and Houses, if possible, according to our Ordinances, or else
in public Marketplaces, in case there be any Marketplaces in the Place where
the said Inheritances are seated; and where there are none, it shall be done in
the next Marketplace within the Precinct of the Session where the Adjudication
is to be made, and the Paper of notice shall be fastened on a Post in the said
Market; and at the entrance of the Auditories, or Sessions House of the said
Place, and in so doing, the said Publications shall be good and valid, and they
shall proceed to the passing of the Order for the Sale of the Goods, without
minding the Nulities that might be alleged in that respect.

LXIX. All Titles, Papers, Instruments, and Informations, that have been taken,
shall be restored on both sides to the owners, although the said Papers, or the
Castles, or Houses, in which they were kept, were taken and seized, either by
Special Commissions from the late King, our most honored Lord and
Father-in-Law; or from Us, or by the Command of the Governors and
Lieutenants-General of our Provinces, or by the Authority of the Chiefs of the
other side, or under any other pretense whatever.

LXX. The Children of such as have withdrawn themselves out of our Kingdom,
since the Death of the late King Henry II. our most honored Lord and
Father-in-Law, on the account of Religion, and the Troubles, tho the said
Children be born out of this Kingdom, shall be held for true Frenchmen and
Natives, and as such we have, and do declare them to be, without their being
obliged to take Letters of Naturalization, or other Warrants from us, but the
present Edicts: All Ordinances thereunto contrary notwithstanding; to which we
have and do derogate, upon condition, that the said Children born in Foreign
Countries, shall be obliged within Ten Years after the said Publication of these
presents, to come and Reside in this Kingdom.

LXXI. Those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, and others, who have been
engaged in their Party, who shall have taken to Farm before the Troubles any
Offices, or other Demeans, Customs, Foreign Impositions, or other Duties to us
belonging, the which they have not been able to enjoy, by reason of the
Troubles, shall remain discharged, as we do hereby discharge them of what they
have not received of the said Farms, or what they have paid without fraud, any
where out of our Exchequer. All Obligations entered into by them upon this
account, notwithstanding.

LXXII. All Places, Cities, and Provinces of our Kingdom, Countries, Lands, and
Lordships under our Obedience, shall have and enjoy the same Privileges,
Immunities, Liberties, Franchises, Fairs, Markets, Jurisdictions, and Seats of
Justice, as they did before the Troubles, begun in the Month of March 1585. And
others preceding, all Letters Patents thereunto contrary, and the Translation
of some of the said Seats notwithstanding; provided it was only done upon the
account of the Troubles; which Seats shall be reestablished in the Cities and
Places where they were before.

LXXIII. In case there be yet any Prisoners detained by Authority of Justice,
or otherwise, even in the Galleys, by reason of the Troubles, or of the said
Religion, they shall be set at Liberty.

LXXIV. Those of the said Religion shall not hereafter be surcharged or
oppressed with any ordinary or extraodinary Imposition, more than the
Catholics, and according to the proportion of their Estates and Substance; and
the Parties that think themselves overburthen'd, may have recourse, and shall
be redressed by the Judges appointed for that Subject: And all our Subjects,
whether Catholics, or of the said pretended Reformed Religion, shall be
equally discharged of all Charges that have been imposed on both sides during
the Troubles, on those that were of a contrary Party, and not consenting; as
also of Debts created and not paid, Expenses made without their Approbation;
but yet there shall be no returns made of the Fruits that shall have been
employed for the payment of the said Charges.

LXXV. Neither do we allow that those of the said Religion, and others, who
have been engaged in their Party; nor the Catholics, who dwell in the Cities,
Towns, and Places, held and detained by them, and who have contributed to them,
should be prosecuted for the payment of Taxes, Aids, Grants, Increase,
Assesments, Wastes* and Reparations, and other Impositions and Subsidies due,
and imposed during the Troubles happened before, and since our coming to the
Crown, either by Edicts, Orders from the late Kings our Predecessors, or by
Advice and Deliberation of the Governors and Estates of the Provinces, Courts
of Parliament, and others, whereof we have and do discharge them; forbiding our
Treasurers-General of France, and of our Exchequers, Receivers-General and
Particular, their Clerks, Intermedlers, and other Intendants and Commissaries
of our Exchequer, to prosecute, molest, or trouble them for the same directly
or indirectly, in any way whatever.

LXXVI. All Commanders, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Officers, Corporations of
Cities, Towns, and Commonalties, and all others, who have aided and assisted
them, their Widows, Heirs, and Successors, shall be acquitted and discharged of
all Sums that have been taken and raised by them, or their Orders, as well
belonging to the Crown, to whatever Sums they may amount, as out of Cities,
Towns, and Commonalties, and from particular Persons, Rents, Revenues, Plate,
Sale of Movables belonging to Ecclesiastics, and others, High Forests
belonging to the Demeasne, or to other Persons, Fines, Booties, Ransoms, or
Sums of other natures by them taken, by reason of the Troubles begun in March
1585. and other precedent Troubles, until our coming to the Crown; for which
neither they, nor those by them employed for the raising of the said Sums, or
such as have given or furnished them by their Order, shall be any wise
prosecuted either for the time being, or to come; and both they and their
Committees, or Clarks shall remain acquitted and discharged for all the
Management and Administration of the said Money, bringing in for a full
discharge, within four Months after the Publication of the present Edict made
in our Court of Parliament of Paris, Acquittances duly expedited by the Chiefs
of the said Religion, or from those who were employed by them for the Audit and
clearing of Accounts, or from the Commonalties of Cities, which had Authority
and Command during the said Troubles. They shall in like manner remain
acquitted and discharged of all Acts of Hostility, Levies, and Conduct of
Soldiers, Coining and Rating of Money, done by order of the said Chiefs;
Casting and Taking of Artillery and Munitions, Making of Powder and Saltpeter;
the Taking, Fortifying, Difmantling, and Demolishing of Cities, Castles, Towns,
and Villages, Enterprises upon the same; the Burning and Demolishing of
Churches and Houses, Establishing of Courts of Justice, Judgments and
Executions from the same, whether in matters Civil or Criminal, of any Policy
or Government established among them, of Voyages and Intelligences,
Negotiations, Treaties, and Contracts made with all Foreign Princes, and
Commonalties, and the Introduction of the said Foreigners into the Cities, and
other Places of our Kingdom, and generally of all that has been done, or
negotiated during the said Troubles, since the Death of the late King Henry II.
our most honored Lord and Brother-in-Law, by those of the said Religion, and
others, who have been engaged in their Party, tho it be not particularly
specified nor expressed.

LXXVII. Those of the said Religion shall also be discharged for all General
and Provincial Assemblies, made and held by them, both at Nantes, and elsewhere
since, until this present time; likewise for the Councils by them Established
and Ordained in the Provinces, Deliberations, Ordinances, and Regulations made
by the said Assemblies, and Councils, Establishment and Augmentation of
Garrisons, Assembling of Soldiers, Raising and Taking of Money either from the
Receivers-General, or from particular Persons, Collectors of Parishes, or
others, in any kind whatever; seizing of Salt, Continuation or new Erection of
Impositions, and Tolls, and Receipts of the same, even at Royan, and upon the
Rivers Charante, Garonne, Rone, and Dordogne, equiping of Ships and Sea Fights,
and all Accidents and Excesses occasioned by obliging People to pay the said
Impositions, Tolls, and other Moneys, Fortifications of Cities, Castles, and
Places, Impositions of Money, and Labor, Receipts of the said Money, turning
out of our Receivers and Farmers, and other Officers, establishing of others in
their Room, and for all Unions, Dispatches, and Negotiations, made either
within or without the Kingdom: And generally for all that has been done
deliberated, written, and ordained by the said Assemblies and Councils, for
which neither those who have given their Advice, Signed, Executed, and caused
the said Ordinances, Regulations, and Deliberations to be signed and executed,
shall neither be prosecuted or troubled, nor their Widows, Heirs, or
Successors, either at present, or for the future, although the Particulars are not
specified here. And upon the whole, perpetual silence shall be imposed to our
Attorneys-General and their Substitutes, and to all such as could have any
pretense to it in any kind, or manner whatever; all Sentences, Judgments,
Informations, and Proceedings to the contrary notwithstanding.

LXXVIII. Moreover we Approve, Confirm, and Authorize the Accounts that have
been heard, allowed, and examined by the Deputies of the said Assembly. And
order the same, together with the Acquittances and Fragments that have been
returned by the Accountants, to be carried into our Chamber of Accounts at
Paris, within three Months after the Publication of the present Edict, and
delivered into the hands of our Attorney General, to be delivered to the Keeper
of the Books and Registers of our Chamber, there to be viewed as often as shall
be necessary; neither shall the said Accounts be examined anew, or the
Accountants be obliged to appear, or to correct any thing, unless in the case
of Omissions of Receipts, or false Acquittances: Imposing silence to our
Attorney General, to whatever else might be thought defective, or the
Formalities omitted. Forbidding those that keep our Courts of Accounts, either
at Paris, or in other Provinces where they are established, to take any
cognizance thereof in any kind whatever.

LXXIX. As for the Accounts that have not been delivered yet, they shall be
heard, passed, and examind' by Commissioners appointed by us, who shall without
difficulty pass, and allow all the Accounts paid by the said Accountants, by
virtue of the Ordinances of the said Assembly, or others, who were in Power.

LXXX. All Collectors, Receivers, Farmers, and others, shall be well and duly
discharged for all the Sums by them paid to the Committees of the said
Assembly, whatever nature they were of, until the last day of this Month. We
order the whole to be passed and allowed in the Accounts that shall be given
thereof in our Chambers of Accounts, merely by virtue of the Acquittances they
shall bring along with them; and in case any should be expedited or delivered
hereafter, they shall be void; and those who shall accept or diliver them,
shall be Fined as Falsificators. And in case any of the Accounts already
delivered should be blotted, or razed, and excepted against, we do in that
respect remove the said Scruples, and allow the said Accounts to be good, by
virtue of these Presents, and there shall be no need for all that is abovesaid
of any particular Letters, nor any thing else, for all which the Extract of the
present Article will suffice.

LXXXI. The Governors, Captains, Consuls, and other Persons employed for the
Collection of the Money to pay the Garrisons of the Places held by those of the
said Religion, to whom our Receivers and Collectors of Parishes shall have
furnished by way of Loan upon their Notes and Bonds, either by force, or to
obey the Commands made to them by the Treasurers-General, such Sums of Money as
were necessary to pay off the said Garrisons to the value of what was specified
in the settlement we caused to be made in the beginning of the Year 1596; and
the Additions that have been since by us granted, are hereby acquitted and
discharged of what has been paid for the abovesaid use, although it is not
expressly mentioned in the said Notes and Bonds, the which shall be restored to
them as annihilated. And in order thereunto, the Treasurers-General in every
Generality, shall order the particular Receivers of our A heavy Imposition.
Tailles to give the said Collectors their Acquittances, and the Receivers
General their Acquittances to the said particular Receivers: For the discharge
of which Receivers General, the Sums they shall have accounted for, as above
said, shall be endors'd upon the Orders given to the Treasurer of the
Exchequer, signed by the Treasurers General of the extraordinary expenses of
our Wars, for the payment of the said Garrisons. And in case the said Orders do
not amount to as much as is specified by our said settlement of the Year 1596.
and the Additions, it is our pleasure in order to supply the same, that new
orders shall be given for as much as may be wanting for the discharge of our
Accomptants, and the restitution of the said Promises and Bonds, to the end
that nothing may be required hereafter from those that have given them; and
that all necessary Letters of Inforcement and Ratification for the discharge of
the said Accomptants be issued out by virtue of this present Article.

LXXXII. And therefore those of the said Religion shall give over and desist,
from this very time, all Practices, Negotiations and Intelligences, both at
home and abroad; and the said Assemblies and Councils established in the
Provinces shall straight break up; and all Leagues and Associations made or to
be made, under any pretense whatever, to the prejudice of our present Edict,
shall be cancelled and annulled, as we do hereby cancel and annul them;
forbidding all our Subjects most expressly henceforward to make any Assesments
and raisings of Money, without our leave, Fortifications, Listings of Men,
Congregations and Assemblies, besides those that are allowed them by the
present Edicts, and without Arms; which we do prohibit and forbid them on pain
of rigorous punishments, and as contemners and infracters of our Commands and
Ordinances.

LXXXIII. All Prizes taken at Sea, during the Troubles, by virtue of the
permissions given, and all such as have been taken by Land, upon those of the
contrary Party, which have been judged by the Judges and Commissioners of the
Admiralty, or by the Chiefs of those of the said Religion, or their Council,
shall lie dormant under the benefit of our present Edicts, and no manner of
prosecution shall be made for the same; neither shall the Captains and others
who have taken the said Prises, and the said Judges, Officers, their Widows and
Heirs be any wise prosecuted or molested upon that account; notwithstanding all
Decrees of our Privy Council and Parliaments, and all Letters of Marque, and
Seizures depending and engaged, for all which we do release and discharge them.

LXXXIV. Neither shall those of the said Religion be called to an account for
their having heretofore, and even since the troubles, opposed and hindered the
execution of the Decrees and Judgments given for the re-establishment of the
Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion, in diverse places of this Kingdom.

LXXXV. As for what has been taken or done during the Troubles, otherwise than
by way of Hostility, or by Hostility contrary to the Public or particular
Regulations of the Chiefs, or of the Commonalties of the Provinces who were
empowered, they shall be prosecuted according to Law.

LXXXVI. Nevertheless, whereas if what has been done against the Regulations on
both sides were indifferently excepted from the General Pardon granted by this
our present Edict, and liable to be prosecuted, there are few men in the
Armies, who might not be put to trouble, which might occasion a renovation of
Troubles; it is our will and pleasure that none but execrable Crimes should be
excepted out of the said General Pardon: Viz. Ravishments, Incendiaries,
Murders and Robberies committed with a design and premeditation, not in the
way of Hostility, but out of private ends and revenge against the Law of Arms;
infraction of Passports and Safeguards, together with Murders and Plunderings
without Orders, in relation to those of the said Religion, and others who have
followed the Party of the Chiefs that had Authority over them, grounded upon
particular occasions that may have moved them to command or order it.

LXXXVII. We also order, That the Crimes and Offenses against persons of the
same Party shall be punished, unless in Acts commanded by the Chiefs of either
side, according to the Necessity, Law and Orders of War. And as for the
raisings and exactions of Money, Bearing of Arms, and other Exploits of War
committed by Private Authority, and without command, they shall be prosecuted
according to Law.

LXXXVIII. The Ruins and Demolishments that have been made in Cities and Towns
during the Troubles, may be rebuilt and repaired, with our leave, by the
Inhabitants at their proper cost and charges, and the Letters Patents allowed
heretofore to that end shall remain in force.

LXXXIX. It is our will and pleasure, and positive Command, That all the Lords,
Knights, Gentlemen and others, of what Quality soever, of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, and others who have been engaged in their Party, shall
re-enter, and be effectually restored to the enjoyment of all and every their
Estates, Titles, Names, Reasons and Actions, notwithstanding the Judgments
given against them during the Troubles, and by reason thereof; which Decrees,
Seizures, Judgments, and all that followed thereupon, we have declared to that
end, and do declare null, and of no effect and value.

XC. The Acquisitions which those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, and
others who have been engaged in their Party, have made by other Authority than
that of the late Kings our Predecessors, about the Immoveables belonging to the
Church, shall be void and of no effect; and therefore we order, and it is our
will and pleasure that the Ecclesiastics shall be restored immediately, and
without delay, and shall be preserved in the possession, and real and actual
enjoyments of the Estates thus alienated, and without being obliged to return
the price of the said Sales; the said Contracts of Sale notwithstanding, the
which therefore we have and do revoke: Nevertheless, allowing the Purchasers
their recourse at Law against the Chiefs, by whose Authority the said Estates
should have been sold. However for the reimbursment of the Sums by them really
and without fraud disburs'd, we will grant our Letters Patent to those of the
said Religion, to impose and equal upon themselves the Sums to which the said
Sales will amount; and the said Purchasers shall have no Actions against them
for Damages and Interests for want of enjoyment, but shall rest satisfied with
the restitution of the Money by them disburs'd for the said Acquisitions;
including upon the said Price the Fruits by them received, in case the said
sales are found to be made at a low unjust Price.

XCI. And to the end that our Justicers, Officers and other Subjects, may be
clearly and with certainty acquainted with our Intentions; and to remove all
ambiguities and doubts that might arise upon the account of the precedent
Edicts, by reason of the diversity thereof; we have and do declare all other
preceding Edicts, secret Articles, Letters, Declarations, Modifications,
Ratifications, Interpretations, Decrees and Registers, as well secret, as other
Deliberations heretofore by us, or by the Kings our Predecessors made in our
Courts of Parliament, or elsewhere, relating to the case of the said Religion,
and the troubles happened in our said Kingdom, to be null and of no effect; to
all which, and the Derogatories therein contained, we have by this our Edict
derogated and do derogate from this time forward, as well as for that time, do
cancel, revoke and annul them: Declaring expressly, that we will have this our
Edict to be firm and inviolable, kept and observed as well by our said
Justicers, Officers, as by other Subjects, without any regard to any thing that
might be contrary, or derogating to it.

XCII. And for the better assurance of the maintenance and observance we desire
to have thereof, we will and ordain, and it is our pleasure, that all the
Governors and Lieutenants General of our Provinces, Bailiffs, Seneschals, and
other Judges in ordinary of the Cities of this our Kingdom, immediately after
the receipts of this our Edict, shall swear to have it kept and observed, every
one in their several Precincts; as also the Mayors, Sheriffs, Capitouls,
Consuls, and Jurats of Cities, annual and perpetual: enjoining also our said
Bailiffs, Seneschals, or their Lieutenants and other Judges, to make the
principal Inhabitants of the said Cities of both Religions swear to observe and
maintain the same, immediately after the publication thereof. Putting all those
of the Cities under our protection, and under the guard of one another;
charging them respectively, and by public Acts, to answer at the Civil Law for
the transgressions that shall be made of this our said Edicts in the said
Cities by the Inhabitants thereof, or to represent and deliver the said
Infractors into the hands of Justice.

We command our Trusty and Well Beloved the Persons holding our Courts of
Parliament, Chambers of Accounts, and Courts of Aids, immediately upon receipt
of the present Edict, to put a stop to all their proceedings, on pain of
nullity of all the Acts they should pass, and to take the Oath abovementioned;
and this our Edict to publish and register in our said Courts, according to the
form and tenor thereof, exactly as it is, without any Modification,
Restrictions, secret Registers, or Declarations, and without expecting any
farther order or command from us; and our Attorneys General to require and
prosecute the said immediate Publication thereof.

We also order our said persons holding our said Courts of Parliament, Chambers
of our Accounts, and Courts of Aids, Bailiffs, Seneschals, Provosts, and others
our Justicers and Officers to whom it may belong, and to their Lieutenants, to
cause this our present Edict and Ordinance to be read, published and registered
in their Courts and Jurisdictions, and the same to maintain, keep and observe
in every particular; and to make all such whom it may concern, enjoy and use
the benefit thereof; putting a stop to all Troubles and Hindrances thereunto
contrary. For such is our pleasure. For witness whereof we have signed these
Presents with our own hand; and to the same, in order to its being firm and
lasting for ever, we have caused our Seal to be affixed.

Given at Nantes in the Month of April, in the Year of our Lord 1598. and of
our Reign the Ninth. Signed, Henry.

And underneath, By the King being in his Council, Forget.

And on the side, Visa.

And sealed with the Great Seal of Green Wax, upon Knots of Red and Green Silk.
Read, published and registered, heard, with the approbation of the King's
Attorney General at Paris in Parliament, on the 25th of February, 1599. Signed,
Voysin.

Read, published and registered in the Chamber of Accounts, heard and approved
by the King's-Attorney General, on the last day of March, 1599. Signed, De la
Fontaine.

Read, published and registered, heard and approved by the King's Attorney
General at Paris, in the Court of Aids, the 30th of April, 1599. Signed,
Bernard.

Particular Articles, extracted from the General ones, that have been granted
by the King to those of the Pretended Reformed Religion the which His Majesty
would not have comprehended into the said General Articles, nor in the Edict
that has been made and drawn upon the same given at Nantes in the Month of
April last; and yet nevertherless His Majesty has granted that they shall be
fully accomplished and observed, in the same manner as the Contents of the said
Edict. To which end they shall be Registered in his Courts of Parliament, and
elsewhere, where it shall be necessary; and all necessary Declarations and
Letters Patent to that end shall be forthwith expedited.
I. THe 6th Article of the said Edict, about Liberty of Conscience, and leave
for all his Majesty's Subjects to live and inhabit in this Kingdom, and
Countries under his Obedience, shall remain in force, and shall be observed
according to the Form and Tenor thereof: Even for Ministers and Teachers, and
all others that are, or shall turn of the said Religion, whether actual
Inhabitants or others, behaving themselves in all other things conformably to
what is specified by the said Edict.

II. Those of the said Religion shall not be obliged to contribute toward the
Reparations, and Building of Churches, Chapels, Parsonages, nor toward the
buying of Sacerdotal Ornaments, Lights, Casting of Bells, Holy Bread, Rights of
Fraternity, and other like things, unless obliged thereunto by Foundations,
Gifts, or other Dispositions made by them or their Predecessors.

3. Neither shall they be obliged to hang and adorn the Front of their Houses
on Festival-days, on which it is ordered; but only to suffer them to be hung
and adorned by the Authority of the Magistrates, without contributing any thing
toward it.

IV. Neither shall those of the said Religion be obliged to receive
Exhortations, being Sick, or near Death, either by Condemnation of Justice, or
otherwise, from any but those of the said Religion; and their Ministers shall
be allowed to Visit and Comfort them without any disturbance: And as for such
as shall be condemned by Justice, it shall also be lawful for the said
Ministers to visit and prepare them for Death, without making Public Prayers,
unless in such Places as are allowed by the said Edict for the said Public
Exercise.

V. It shall be lawful for those of the said Religion, to perform the Public
Exercise thereof at Pimpoul; and for Diepe in the Suburb du Paulet; and the
said Places of Pimpoul and du Paulet, shall be ordained for Places of
Baliwicks. The said Exercise shall be continued at Sancerre, as it is at
present. The said free and public Exercise shall also be reestablished in the
City of Montagnac in Languedoc.

VI. In respect to the Article which relates to Bailiwicks, it has been
declared and granted, as follows. First, For the Establishing of the Exercise
of the said Religion, in the two Places granted in every Baliwick,
Seneschalship, and Government, those of the said Religion shall nominate Two
Cities, in the Suburbs of which the said Exercise shall be established by the
Commissioners that shall be deputed by his Majesty for the Execution of the
Edict. And in case the said Commissioners should not approve of them, those of
the said Religion shall nominate two or three Towns or Villages in the
Neighborhood of the said Cities, for every one of them, out of which the said
Commissioners shall choose one. And if through Hostility, Contagion, or any
other lawful Impediment, it cannot be continued in the said Places, others
shall be allowed while the said Impediment shall continue. Secondly, That only
two Cities shall be provided in the Government of Piccardy, into the Suburbs of
which, those of the said Religion shall be allowed the Exercise thereof for all
the Bailiwicks, Seneschalships, and Governments depending of the same; and
where it shall not be thought fit to establish it in the said Cities, they
shall be allowed two convenient Towns or Villages. Thirdly, By reason of the
great Extent of the Seneschalship of Provence, and Bailiwicks of Viennois, his
Majesty does grant a third Place in each of the said Bailiwicks and
Seneschalships, the Choice and Nomination of which shall be made as abovesaid,
there to establish the Exercise of the said Religion, besides the other Places
in which it is already established.

VII. What has been granted by the said Article for the Exercise of the said
Religion in Bailiwicks, shall also serve for the Territories which did belong
to the Late Queen Mother-in-Law to his Majesty, and for the Bailiwick of
Beaujolois.

VIII. Besides the Two Places granted for the Exercise of the said Religion, by
the Particular Articles of the year 1577. in the Isles of Marrennes and Oleron,
two more shall be allowed them, for the convenience of the said Inhabitants;
viz. one for all the Isles of Marennes, and another for the Isle of Oleron.

IX. The Letters Patent granted by his Majesty, for the Exercise of the said
Religion in the City of Mentz shall remain in full Force and Virtue.

X. It is his Majesty's Will and Pleasure, That the 27th Article of his Edict,
relating to the Admission of those of the said pretended Reformed Religion into
Offices and Dignities, shall be observed and maintained according to its Form
and Tenor, the Edicts and Agreements heretofore made for the Reduction of some
Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Catholic Cities notwithstanding; the which
shall not be in force to the prejudice of those of the said Religion, only in
what relates to the Exercise thereof. And the said Exercise shall be regulated
according as it is specified by the following Articles, according to which
shall be drawn the Instructions of the Commissioners that shall be deputed by
his Majesty for the Execution of his Edict, according as it is ordained by the
same.

XI. According to the Edict made by his Majesty for the Reduction of the Duke
of Guise, the Exercise of the said pretended Reformed Religion shall neither be
allowed, nor established in the Cities and Suburbs of Rheims, Rocroy, St
Disier, Guise, Joinville, Fimes, and Moncornet in the Ardennes.

XII. Neither shall it be allowed in the other Placs adjacent to the said
Cities, and Places forbidden by the Edict of the year 1577.

XIII. And to remove the Ambiguity that might arise upon the word Adjacent, his
Majesty declares, that he means the Places that are within the Circuit of a
League of the said Cities, being the Precinct, or Liberties thereof, in which
places the Exercise of the said Religion shall not be allowed, unless it were
permitted by the Edict of 1577.

XIV. And forasmuch as by the same, the said Exercise was allowed generally in
the Fiefs possessed by those of the said Religion, without any exception of the
said Leagues Circuit; his Majesty declares, That the said allowance shall
remain in force, even for Fiefs within the said Circuit, possessed by those of
the said Religion, as it is specified by his Edict, given at Nantes.

XV. Likewise according to the Edict made for the Reduction of the Marshal de
la Chartres, in each of the Bailiwicks of Orleans and Bourges, shall only be
ordained one Place of Bailiwick for the Exercise of the said Religion, the
which however may be continued in such places where the Continuation thereof is
allowed by the said Edict of Nantes.

XVI. The Concession of Preaching in Fiefs, shall also extend to the said
Bailiwicks, in the manner specified by the said Edict of Nantes.

XVII. The Edict made for the Reduction of the Marshal of Bois-Dauphin shall
also be observed; and the said Exercise shall not be allowed in the Cities,
Suburbs, and Places brought over by him to his Majesty's Service; and as for
the Circuit, or Liberties thereof, the Edict of 77. shall be observed there,
even in the Houses of Fiefs, according as it is specified by the Edict of
Nantes.

XVIII. No Exercise of the said Religion shall be allowed in the City, Suburbs,
and Castle of Morlais, according to the Edicts made for the Reduction of the
said City, and the Edict of 77. shall be observed for the Precinct thereof
according to the Edict of Nantes.

XIX. In Consequence of the Edict for the Reduction of Quinpercorantin, no
Exercise of the said Religion shall be allowed in all the Bishopric of
Cornouaille.

XX. Also according to the Edict made for the Reduction of Beauvais, the
Exercise of the said Religion shall not be allowed in the said City of
Beauvais, nor within three Leagues round about it. Nevertheless the
establishing thereof shall be allowed in the remainder of the Extent of the
Bailiwick, in the Places allowed of by the Edict of 77. Even in Houses of
Fiefs, according to the Edict of Nantes.

XXI. And whereas the Edict made for the Reduction of the late Admiral de
Villars, is only Provisional, and until the King's farther Pleasure, It is his
Majesty's Will and Pleasure, the said Edict notwithstanding, that his Edict of
Nantes shall remain in force for the Cities and Jurisdictions reduced to his
Majesty's Obedience by the said Admiral, as well as for the other parts of his
Kingdom.

XXII. By the Edict made for the Reduction of the Duke of Joyeuse, the Exercise
of the said Religion shall not be allowed in the City or Suburbs of Thoulouse,
nor within four Leagues about it, nor nearer than the Cities of Villemur,
Carmain, and the Isle of Jourdan.

XXIII. Neither shall it be restored into the Cities of Alet, Fiat, Auriac, and
Mont^squiou: Nevertheless, in case any of the said Religion in the said City
should be desirous to have a place for the Exercise thereof, the Commissioners
that shall be deputed by his Majesty for the Execution of his Edict, shall
assign them for every one of the said Cities a convenient Place and of easy
Access, within a League of the said Cities.

XXIV. It shall be lawful to establish the said Exercise, according as it is
specified by the said Edict of Nantes, within the Jurisdiction of the Court of
Parliament of Thoulouse, excepted always in such Bayliwicks, Seneschalships,
and other Precincts, of which the principal Seats shall have been restored to
his Majesty's Obedience by the said Duke of Joycuse, in which the Edict of 77
shall take place. Nevertheless his Majesty means that the said Exercise shall
be continued in such places of the said Bayliwicks and Seneschalships, where it
was performed at the time of the said Reduction; and that the Concession
thereof in Houses of Fiefs shall remain in Force in the said Bayliwicks and
Seneschalships, according as it is specified by the said Edict.

XXV. The Edict made for the Reduction of the City of Dijon shall be observed,
according to which no other Exercise of Religion shall be allowed in the said
City than that of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Church, nor yet within the
Suburbs thereof, nor within four Leagues round about it.

XXVI. The Edict made for the Reduction of the Duke of Mayenne, shall in like
manner be observed; according to which the Exercise of the Pretended Reformed
Religion shall not be allowed in the City of Chalons, nor within two Leagues
round about Soissons during the term of six Years, to begin from the month of
January 1596. after which the Edict of Nantes shall be observed there, as in
the other parts of the Kingdom.

XXVII. It shall be lawful for those of the said Religion, of what Quality
soever, to inhabit, and to have free Egress and Regress into the City of Lions,
and other Towns and Places of the Government of Lyonnois, all Prohibitions made
to the contrary by the Syndics, and Sheriffs of the said City of Lions, tho
confirmed by his Majesty, notwithstanding.

XXVIII. Only one place of Bayliwick shall be allowed for the Exercise of the
said Religion in the whole Seneschalship of Poitiers, besides those where it is
already established; and as to the Fiefs, the Edict of Nantes shall be
observed. The said Exercise shall also be continued in the City of Chauvigny:
But it shall not be restored in the Cities of Again and Perigueux, although it was
allowed by the Edict of 77.

XXIX. Only two places of Bayliwicks shall be allowed for the Exercise of the
said Religion in all the Government of Picardy, as abovesaid, neither shall the
said two places be allowed within the Precincts of the Bayliwicks and
Governments reserved by the Edicts made for the Reduction of Amiens, P^ronne
and Abbeville. Nevertheless the said Exercise shall be allowed in Houses of
Fiefs throughout the whole Government of Picardy, according to what is
specified by the said Edict of Nantes.

XXX. The Exercise of the said Religion shall not be allowed in the Cities and
Suburbs of Sens; and only one place of Bayliwick shall be granted in the whole
Precinct of the Bayliwick, but still without prejudice to the Permission
granted for Houses of Fiefs, which shall remain in Force according to the Edict
of Nantes.

XXXI. Neither shall the said Exercise be allowed in the City nor Suburbs of
Nantes, nor any place of Bayliwicks be granted for the said Exercise within
three Leagues round about the said City: Nevertheless it shall be allowed in
Houses of Fiefs, according to the said Edict of Nantes.

XXXII. It is his said Majesty's Will and Pleasure, that his said Edict of
Nantes shall be observed from this very time, in what relates to the Exercise
of the said Religion, in such places where by the Edicts and Agreements made
for the Reduction of some Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Catholic Cities, it
was prohibited only provisionally, and until it was otherwise ordained. And as
for such where the said Prohibition is limited to a certain time, that time
being expired it shall be no longer in Force.

XXXIII. A Place shall be allowed to those of the said Religion for the City,
Provostship, and Vice-Comty of Paris, within five Leagues at farthest from the
said City, in which they shall be allowed the Exercise of the said Religion.

XXXIV. In all such places where the Exercise of the said Religion shall be
performed publicly, it shall be lawful to assemble the People, even by the
sound of Bells, and to perform all Acts and Functions belonging either to the
Exercise of the said Religion, or to the Regulation of their Discipline, as to
hold Consistories, Conferences, and Provincial and National Synods by his
Majesty's leave.

XXXV. The Ministers, Elders, and Deacons of the said Religion, shall not be
obliged to appear as Witnesses, and to answer in Justice, for things that shall
have been revealed in their Consistories, in the case of Censures, unless it
were about Matters relating to the King's Person, or toward the Preservation
of the State.

XXXVI. Such of the said Religion as live in the Country shall be allowed to
assist at the Exercise thereof in the Cities and Suburbs, and other places
where it shall be publicly established.

XXXVII. Those of the said Religion shall not be allowed to keep public
Schools, unless in such Towns and Places where the public Exercise thereof is
allowed: And the Patents that have been granted them heretofore for the
erecting and maintaining of Colleges, shall be Verified if necessary, and shall
remain in full Force and Vigor.

XXXVIII. It shall be lawful for Fathers professing the said Religion, to
provide such Educators for their Children as they shall think fit, and to
substitute one, or several by Will, or other Declaration passed before a
Notary, or written or signed by their own Hands, the Laws received in this
Kingdom, Ordinances and Customs of Places remaining in full Force and Virtue,
as to the Gifts and Provisions of Tutors and Guardians.

XXXIX. As for the Marriage of Priests, and other Religious Persons, that have
been heretofore contracted, his Majesty, for diverse good Considerations, will
not allow their being prosecuted or molested for the same; upon which Subject
silence shall be imposed to his Attorneys General and other Officers.
Nevertheless his Majesty declares, That the Children proceeding from the said
Marriages shall only succeed to the Personal Estates, and Acquisitions made by
their Fathers and Mothers, and in default of the said Children, the nearest
Relations at Law: And the Wills, Gifts, and other Dispositions made, or to be
made, by Persons of the said Quality, of the said Personal Estates and
Acquisitions by them made, are hereby declared Good and Lawful. Nevertheless
his said Majesty will not allow that the said Persons having been admitted into
Religious Orders, should be capable of any direct or colateral Succession; but
only shall be allowed to take such Estates as shall be left them by Will, or
Gift, or other Dispositions, still excepting those of the said Direct and
Colateral Successions: And as to those who shall have taken Religious Orders
before the Age mentioned by the Ordinances of Orleans or Blois, shall be
followed and observed, in what relates to the said Succession, the Tenor of the
said Ordinances, every one for the time they have been in Force.

XL. Neither will his said Majesty allow those of the said Religion, who have
heretofore, or shall hereafter contract Marriages in the third or fourth
Degree, to be prosecuted or molested for the same; neither shall the Validity
of the said Marriages be questioned, nor the Succession taken from, or disputed
against the Children, born, or to be born of the same: And as to the Marriages
that might already be contracted in the second Degree, or from the second to
the third, between those of the said Religion, the said Persons applying
themselves to his said Majesty, such Letters Patent as shall be necessary shall
be granted them, to the end that they may neither be prosecuted nor molested
for the same, nor the Succession disputed with their Children.

XLI. The Validity and Lawfulness of the said Marriages thus made and
contracted, shall be Judged, the Defendant being of the said Religion, before
the Judge Royal; but in case of his being Plaintiff, and the Defendant a
Catholic, the Cognizance thereof shall belong to the Official and
Ecclesiastical Judge; and both Parties being of the said Religion, the Case
shall be tried before the Judges Royal: His Majesty willing that the said
Marriages, and the Differences arising from the same, should be judged
respectively by the Judges Ecclesiastical and Royal, and by the Chambers
established by his Edicts.

XLII. The Gifts and Legacies made, or to be made, whether by Will, in case of
death, or among the living, for the maintenance of Ministers, Doctors,
Scholars, and Poor of the said pretended Reformed Religion, and upon other
pious Accounts, shall be of full force and power, all Judgments and Decrees to
the contraty notwithstanding; but yet without prejudice to his Majesty's
Rights, and others, in case the said Legacies and gifts should fall into
^ortmain: And all necessary Actions and Prosecutions for the recovery of the
said Legacies. Pious Gifts, and other Rights of all kinds, shall be allowed to
be made by Attorney in the name of the Body and Community of those of the said
Religion who shall be concerned; and in case it happens that any of the said
Gifts and Legacies have been heretofore disposed of, otherwise than is
specified by the said Article, no other restitution shall be demanded, but what
shall be found in being.

XLIII. His said Majesty permits those of the said Religion to assemble before
the Judge Royal, and by his Authority to equal and raise among themselves such
Sums as shall be judged necessary to be employed toward the Charges of their
Synods, and for the maintenance of those who are employed for the exercise of
their said Religion, of which the true estimate shall be given to the said
Judge Royal, to be kept by him: The Copy of which shall be sent every six
months by the said Judges Royal to his Majesty, or to his Chancellor, and the
said Taxes and Impositions shall be liable to execution, all Oppositions or
Appeals to the contrary notwithstanding.

XLIV. The Ministers of the said Religion shall be exempted from Watching, and
from Quartering of Soldiers; assessing and collecting of Tailles, or Subsidies;
as also from Wardships and Guardianships, and Commissions for the keeping of
Estates seized by Authority of Justice.

XLV. Those of the said Religion shall be neither prosecuted nor disturbed for
the Burials heretofore made by them in the Churchyards of the said Catholics,
in any place or City whatever, and his Majesty shall order his Officers to take
care of the same. As to the City of Paris, over and above the two Churchyards,
those of the same Religion possess there already, viz. that of Trinity, and
that of St. Germans, a third convenient place shall be allowed them for the
said Interments in the Suburbs of St. Honor, or St. Denis.

XLVI. The Catholic Presidents and Counselors that shall serve in the Chamber
ordained in the Parliament of Paris, shall be chosen by his Majesty upon the
Roll of the Officers of the Parliament.

XLVII. The Counselors of the said pretended Reformed Religion, who shall
serve in the said Chamber, shall assist, if they think fit, at such Processes
as shall be decided by Commissioners, and shall have a deliberative voice in
the same, but shall have no share of the Consigned Money, unless they ought to
assist at them by the order and prerogative of their reception.

XLVIII. The Senior President of the Party-Chambers shall preside at the
Audience, and in his absence the second; and the distribution of Suits shall be
made by the two Presidents jointly, or alternately, monthly, or weekly.

XLIX. A vacation of Offices happening, in possession of, or to be possessed by
those of the said Religion in the said Chambers of the Edict, they shall be
given to capable Persons, having Attestations from the Synod, or Assembly, to
which they do belong, of their being of the said Religion and Persons of
Integrity.

L. The Pardon granted to those of the said pretended Reformed Religion by the
74th Article of the said Edict, shall stand good for the taking of the Money
belonging to the Crown, either by breaking of Coffers, or otherwise, even in
respect to that as was raised upon the River Charante, though assigned to
particular persons.

LI. The 49th of the Secret Articles, made in the Year 1577. concerning the
City and Archbishopric of Avignon, and County thereof, together with the
Treaty made at Nimes, shall be observed according to their Form and Tenor; and
no Letters of Mart shall be granted by virtue of the said Articles and Treaty,
unless by Letters-Patent from the King under the Great Seal. Nevertheless, such
as shall be desirous to obtain the same, shall be allowed, by virtue of this
present Article, without any other Commission, to make their application to the
Judges Royal, who shall examine the Transgressions, Denial of Justice, and
Iniquity of the Judgments, proposed by those who shall be desirous to obtain
the said Letters, and shall send the same, together with their Opinions, sealed
up close, to his Majesty, in order to his ordering the said matter according to
reason.

LII. His Majesty grants and wills, that Nicholas Grimoult shall be
reestablish'd and maintained in the Title and Possession of the Offices of
Ancient Lieutenant General Civil, and Lieutenant General Criminal, in the
Bailywike of Aleneon, notwithstanding the Resignation by him made to John
Marguerite, his Reception, and the Patent obtained by William Barnard of the
Office of Lieutenant General, Civil and Criminal, in the tribunal of Exmes: The
Decrees given against the said Marguerit, Resignee during the Troubles in the
Privy Council, in the Year 1586, 1587, and 1588. by which Nicholas Barbier is
settled in the Rights and Prerogatives of Ancient Lieutenant General in the said
Bailywike, and the said Bernard in the Office of Lieutenant at Exmes, the which
his Majesty has nullify'd, and all others hereunto contrary. Moreover, his
Majesty, for certain good Considerations, has granted and ordained, That the
said Grimoult shall within the space of three months re-imburse the said
Barbier of the Money by him furnished or disburs'd for the said Office of
Lieutenant General, Civil and Criminal, in the Vice-county of Alencon, and 50
Crowns for the Charges: And the said Re-imbursement being made, or the said
Barbier refusing, or delaying to receive it; his Majesty forbids the said
Barbier, as also the said Bernard, after the signification of this present
Article, any more to exercise the said Offices, on pein of the Crime of
Falsity, and sends the said Grimoult to the enjoyment of the said Offices and
Rights thereunto belonging: And in so doing, the Processes which were depending
between the said Grimoult, Barbier and Bernard, in his Majesty's Privy Council,
shall remain determined, and lie dormant, his said Majesty forbidding the
Parliaments, and all others to take cognizance thereof, and the said Parties to
make any prosecutions for the same. Moreover, his said Majesty has taken upon
himself to reimburse the said Bernard of the Sum of a thousand Crowns paid for
the said Office, and 60 Crowns for the Mark of Gold and Charges: Having to that
end already ordered a good and sufficient assignation, the recovery of which
shall be made at the Suit and Charge of the said Grimoult.

LIII. His said Majesty shall write to his Ambassadors to obtain for all his
Subjects, even for those of the said pretended Reformed Religion, that they may
not be disturbed as to their Consciences, nor subject to the Inquisition, going
or coming, sojourning and trading throughout all Foreign Countries, in Alliance
and Confederacy with this Crown, provided they do not offend the Civil
Government of the Countries where they shall be.

LIVE. His Majesty forbids any prosecution for the gathering and receiving of
the Impositions that have been levied at Royan, by virtue of the Contract made
with the Sieur de Candelay, and others, made in continuation of the same;
making the said Contract valid, and approving it for the time it has been in
force in the whole extent of it, until the 8th of May next coming.

LV. The Excesses committed against Armand Courtiers, in the City of Millant,
in the Year 1587. and John Reins, and Peter Seigneuret; together with the
Proceedings made among them by the Consuls of the said Millant, shall remain
abolished, and shall lie dormant by the Benefice of the Edict; and it shall not
be lawful for their Widows and Heirs, nor his Majesty's Attornies-General,
their Substitutes, or other Persons whatever, to mention the same, or to make
any inquiry or prosecution about it: Notwithstanding, and without regard to the
Decree given in the Chamber of Castres on the 10th of March last, the which
shall remain null, and without effect, together with all Proceedings and
Informations made on either side.

LVI. All Prosecutions, Proceedings, Sentences, Judgments and Decrees, given
either against the late Sieur de La Noue, or against his Son Odet de la Noue,
since their detention and imprisonment in Flanders happened in the Month of
May, 1580. and November, 1584. and during their continual Occupation in the
Wars and Service of his Majesty, shall remain anihilated and nullify'd, and
whatever has followed in consequence thereof: And the said De la Noue shall be
admitted to make their defense, and shall be restored to the same condition
they were in before the said Judgments and Decrees; without their being obliged
to refund Costs, nor to consign the Fines, in case they had incurred any;
neither shall it be allowed to allege Nonsuits or Prescription against them,
during the said time.

Done by the King, being in his Council at Nantes, the 2d of May, 1598. Signed,
Henry.
And lower, Forget.
And Sealed with the Great Seal of Yellow Wax.
HEnry, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navar,
To our Trusty and Well-beloved the Persons holding our Court of Parliament at
Paris, Greeting.
In the Month of April last past, we caused our Letters of Edict to be
expedited, for the establishment of a good Order and Repose among our Catholic
Subjects, and those of the said pretended Reformed Religion: And we have
moreover granted to those of the said Religion certain secret and particular
Articles, which we will have to be of equal force and virtue, and to be
observed and accomplished in the same manner as our said Edict. To this end, We
will, and most expressly order and command you by these Presents, To cause the
said Articles, signed by our hand, joined hereunto under the Counter-seal of
our Chancery, to be registered in the Registers of our said Court; and the
Contents thereof to keep, maintain and observe from point to point, like unto
our said Edict: Ceasing, and cau^ing all Troubles and Impediments thereunto
contrary, to cease. For such is our Pleasure.

Given at Nantes, the 2d day of May, in the Year of Our Lord, 1598. And of our
Reign the Ninth. Signed by the King, Forget.
And sealed upon single Labels of Yellow Wax.
Brief granted by Henry the Great, to his Subjects of the Pretended Reformed
Religion on the 30th of April, 1589.
THis present 3d of April, 1598. The King being at Nantes, and being willing to
gratify his Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, and to help them to
supply many great Expenses they are obliged to undergo, has ordained, That for
the future, to begin from the first day of this present month, shall be put
into the hands of Mr. de Vierse, commissioned by his Majesty to that end, by
the Treasurers of his Exchequer, every one in his year, Rescriptions to the Sum
of 45000 Crowns to be employed in certain secret Affairs relating to them,
which his Majesty does neither think fit to specify, or declare: The which Sum
of 45000 Crowns shall be assigned upon the general Receipts as follows; viz.
Paris 6000 Crowns; Roan 6000 Crowns; Caen 3000 Crowns; Orleans 4000 Crowns;
Tours 4000 Crowns; Poitiers 8000 Crowns; Limoges 6000 Crowns; Bordeaux 8000
Crowns. The whole together amounting to the aforesaid Sum of 45000 Crowns;
payable at the four Quarters of the said Year out of the first and clearest
Money of the said General Receipts; out of which nothing shall be retrenched,
or put of, upon any account whatever. For which Sum of 45000 Crowns, he shall
cause Acquittances to be delivered into the hands of the Treasurer of his
Exchequer for his discharge, in giving the said Rescriptions entire for the
said Sum of 45000 Crowns, upon the said Generalities, at the beginning of every
year. And where for the convenience of the abovesaid, it shall be required to
cause part of the said Assignations to be paid in particular Receipts
established: The Treasurers-General of France, and Receivers-General of the
said Generalities shall be ordered to do it in deduction of the said
Rescriptions of the said Treasurers of the Exchequer; the which shall be
afterward delivered by the said Sieur de Vierse, to such as shall be nominated
by those of the said Religion at the beginning of the year for the receipt and
laying out of the Money to be received by virtue thereof; of which they shall
be obliged to bring a particular account to the said Sieur de Vierse at the end
of the year, with the Acquittance of the Parties, to inform his Majesty with
the laying out of the said Money: For which neither the said Sieur de Vierse,
nor those that shall be employed by those of the said Religion shall be obliged
to give any account in any of the Chambers: For all which, and whatever may
depend thereon, his Majesty has commanded all necessary Letters-Patent to be
expedited by virtue of this present Brief, signed by his own hand, and
countersign'd by us, Counselor in his Council of State, and Secretary of his
Commands.

Signed, Henry.
And lower, De Neufville.

THis last day of April. 1598, the King being at Nantes, and being very
desirous to afford all manner of Satisfaction to his Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, upon the Petitions and Requests he has received from them,
about such things as they think necessary for the Liberty of their Consciences,
and for the Security of their Persons, Fortunes and Estates. And his Majesty
being convinced of their Fidelity, and sincere Affection for his Service; as
also for diverse other Important Considerations relating to the Quiet and
Welfare of this State, him thereunto moving; his said Majesty, besides what is
contained in the Edict he has lately resolved to make, and is to be published
for the Regulation of what relates to them, has granted and promised them, that
all the Places, Towns and Castles they held until the end of August last past,
in which Garrisons are to be kept, by the Settlement that shall be made about
it, and signed by his Majesty, shall remain in their keeping under the
Authority and Obedience of his said Majesty for the term of eight Years, to
begin from the day of the Publication of the said Edict. And as for the others
which they hold, in which there is to be no Garrisons, there shall be no
Alteration or Innovation made. Nevertheless his said Majesty does not mean that
the Cities and Castles of Vendome and Pontorson should be comprised in the
number of the said Places left in keeping to those of the said Religion.
Neither shall the City, Castle and Citadel of Aubenay be comprised in the said
number, which his Majesty will dispose of at his own pleasure, and tho it were
into the hands of one of the said Religion, it shall be no President for the
future, like the other Cities that are granted unto them. And as for Chauvigny,
it shall be restored to the Bishop of Poitiers Lord of the said Place, and the
new Fortifications made there rased and demolished. And for the maintaining of
the Garrisons that shall be kept into the said Towns, Places and Castles, his
said Majesty has granted them the Sum of 180000 Crowns, without including those
of the Province of Dauphine into the said number, for which other provision
shall be made besides the said sum of 180000 Crowns yearly. And his said
Majesty promises and assures them, that he will give them good and valuable
Assignations for the same upon the clearest part of his Revenue, in such Places
where the said Garrisons shall be established. And in case the said Revenues
should not be sufficient, the remainder shall be paid them out of the nearest
places of Receipt; neither shall the said Revenues be employed to any other
use, until the said Sum is entirely furnished and acquitted. Moreover his said
Majesty has promised and granted them, that he will call, at the making and
establishing of the Settlements of the said Garrisons, some Persons of the said
Religion, to take their Advice, and hear their Remonstrances about it; which
shall be done, as much as possible can be, to their Satisfaction. And in case,
during the said term of eight Years, there should happen any Necessity to alter
any thing about the said Settlement; whether it shall be thought fit by his
Majesty, or at their request, it shall be done in the said manner, as it shall
be resolved upon the first time. And as to the Garrisons of Dauphine, his
Majesty shall take the advice of the Sieur de Lesdiguieres about the Settlement
thereof. And in case of Vacancies of some Governors and Captains of the said
Places, his Majesty also promises and grants to them, That he will put none
into their room, but such as shall be of the said Pretended Reformed Religion,
having Attestations fromt the Assembly where they reside, of their being of the
said Religion, and Persons of Integrity. And it shall be sufficient for the
Person who shall be invested of the same, upon the Breef that shall have been
expedited about it, before his receiving his Letters-Patent, to produce the
Attestation of the said Assembly as abovesaid; the which those of the said
Assembly shall be obliged to give him speedily without delays; or in case of
refusal, shall acquaint his Majesty with the reasons them thereunto moving. And
the said term of eight Years being expired, although he shall then be acquitted of
his Promise in relation to the said Cities: Nevertheless he has moreover
granted and promised them, that in case he shall think fit, after the said time
to keep Garrisons in the same, or to leave a Governor to command there, he will
not dispossess the Person then being in Possession of the same, to put another
in his room. He also declares, That it is his Intention, both during the said
eight Years, as well as after it, to gratify those of the said Religion, and
to give them a share of the Employments, Governments, and other Honors, he
shall have to dispose of, Indifferently and without any Exception, according to
the Quality and Merit of the Persons, as among his other Catholic Subjects:
Yet nevertheless without being obliged for the future, particularly to bestow
the Cities and Places thus committed to them there into Command, to Persons of
the said Religion. Moreover his said Majesty has also granted unto them, That
those that have been employed by those of the said Religion for the keeping of
the Stores, Ammunition, Powder, and Cannons of the said Cities, and such as
shall be left in keeping to them shall be continued in the said Employments,
taking Commissions from the Master of the Ordnance, and Commissary General of
the Provisions. Which Commissions shall be expedited Gratis, they delivering
unto them a particular account of the said Magazines, Ammunition, Powder and
Cannon, signed in due form; yet they shall not be allowed to pretend to any
Immunities or Privileges upon the account of the said Commissions. Nevertheless
they shall be employed upon the Settlement that shall be made about the said
Garrisons, and shall receive their Sallaries out of the Sums above granted by
his Majesty, for the maintenance of their Garrisons, for which his Majesty's
other Revenues shall no-wise be charged. And whereas those of the said
Religion, have entreated his Majesty to acquaint them with what he has been
pleased to order about the Exercise of the same in the City of Mets, by reason
that it is not sufficiently explained, and comprised in his Edict and secret
Articles; his Majesty declares, That he has ordered Letters-Patent to be drawn,
by which it is declared, That the Temple heretofore built in the said City by
the Inhabitants thereof, shall be restored unto them, to make use of the
Materials, and to dispose of them as they shall think fit; but they shall not
be allowed to preach in it, nor perform any Exercise of their Religion:
Nevertheless a convenient Place shall be provided for them within the Enclosure
of the said City, where they shall be allowed to perform the said Exercise
publicly, without any necessity of expressing it by his Edict. His Majesty
also grants, that notwithstanding the Prohibition made of the Exercise of the
said Religion at the Court, and Dependence thereof; the Dukes, Peers of France,
Officers of the Crown, Marquesses, Counts, Governors and Lieutenants General,
Marshals de Camp, and Captains of his said Majesty's Guards, who shall be in
his Attendance, shall not be molested for what they shall do within their
Houses, provided it be only for their own particular Families, their Doors
being shut, without singing of Psalms with a loud Voice, or doing any thing
that might discover it to be a Public Exercise of the said Religion; and in
case his said Majesty shall remain above three Days in any Town or Place where
the said Exercise is allowed, the said time being expired, the said Exercise
shall be continued as before his arrival. His said Majesty also declares, That
by reason of the present State of his Affairs, he has not been able at present
to include the Countries on the other side of the Mounts Bresse and Barcelona,
in the Permission by him granted for the Exercise of the said Pretended
Reformed Religion. Nevertheless his Majesty promises, That when his said
Countries shall be reduced under his Obedience, he will use his Subjects
inhabiting in the same, in relation to Religion, and other Points granted by
his Edict, like his other Subjects, notwithstanding what is contained in the
said Edicts; and in the mean time they shall be maintained in the same
condition they are in at present. His Majesty also grants, That those of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, that are to be provided with Offices of Presidents
and Counselors created to serve in the Chambers, ordained anew by his Edict,
shall be invested with the said Offices Gratis, and without paying any Fees for
the first time, upon the Roll that shall be presented to his Majesty by the
Deputies of the Assembly of Chatelleraud; as also the Substitutes of the
Attorneys and Advocates General erected by the said Edict in the Chamber of
Bordeaux: And in case of an Incorporation of the said Chamber of Bordeaux, and
that of Thoulouse, into the said Parliaments, the said Substitutes shall be
provided with Counselors places in the same also Gratis. His Majesty will also
bestow on Monsieur Francis Pitou the Office of Substitute to the Attorney
General in the Court of Parliament of Paris; and to that end a new Erection
shall be made of the said Office; and after the Decease of the said Poitou, it
shall be given to a Person of the said Pretended Reformed Religion. And in case
of Vacation by Death of two Offices of Masters of Request of the King's Hostel,
his Majesty shall bestow them on Persons of the said Pretended Reformed
Religion, such as his Majesty shall judge fit and capable for the good of his
Service; they paying the usual Price of the Sale of the said Offices. And in
the mean time two Masters of Request shall be appointed in every Quarter to
make report of the Petitions of those of the said Religion. Moreover his
Majesty permits the Deputies of the said Religion assembled in the said City of
Chatelleraud, to remain in a body to the number of Ten in the City of Saumur,
to prosecute the Execution of his Edict, until his said Edict is verified in
his Court of Parliament of Paris; notwithstanding their being enjoined by the
said Edicts to separate immediately: Yet nevertheless without their being
allowed to make any new Demands in the name of the said Assembly, or to meddle
with any thing besides the said Execution, Deputation, and dispatch of the
Commissionaries who shall be ordained to that end. And his Majesty has given
them his Faith and Word for all that is above-written by this present Breef,
which he has been pleased to Sign with his own Hand, and to have it
Counter-sign'd by Us his Secretaries of State, Willing the said Breef to be of
the same Force and Value to them, as if the Contents thereof were included in
an Edict verified in his Courts of Parliament; those of the said Religion being
satisfied out of consideration for the good of his Service, and the State of
his Affairs, not to press him to put this Ordinance in any other more
Authentic Form, being so Confident of his Majesty's Word and Goodness, that
they assure themselves, that he will make them enjoy the same fully: Having to
that end ordered all necessary Expeditions and Dispatches for the Execution of
what is above-written, to be forthwith expedited.

Thus Signed, Henry.
And lower, Forget.

The End of the first Volume.
Books now in the Press, and going to it, Printed for John Dunton at the Raven
in the Poultrey.
THe second Volume of the History of the Famous Edict of Nantes, containing an
account of all the Persecutions, etc. that have been in France since its first
publication to this present time; faithfully extracted from the public and
private Memoirs that could possibly be procured. Printed first by the Authority
of the States of Holland and West-Frezeland, and now Translated into English
with Her Majesty's Royal Privilege.

The Genuine Remains of that Learned Prelate, Dr. Thomas Barlow, late Lord
Bishop of Lincoln; containing various Points, Theological, Philosophical,
Historical, etc. in Letters to several Persons of Honor and Quality. To which
is added the Resolution of many abstruse Points in Divinity, with great Variety
of other Subjects; written by his Lordship; and published by Sir Peter Pet,
Knight.

Mr. William Leybourn's New Mathematical Tractates in Folio, Entitled,
Pleasure with Profit, (lately proposed by way of Subscription) having met with
good Encouragement, are now put to several Presses, and will be ready to be
delivered to Subscribers the next Term: In this Work will be inserted, (above
what was first proposed) a New System of Algebra, according to the last
Improvements and Discoveries that have been made in that Art: As also several
great Curiosities in Cryptography, Horometria, etc. which Additions will
inhance each Book to 16 s. in Quires to those that do not Subscribe, and those
that do are desired to send in their first Payment, ( viz. 6 s. before the 26th
instant) after which no Subscriptions will be taken in.

Lately Published
LIturgia Tigurina: Or the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments, and other Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies usually practiced and
solemnly performed in all the Churches and Chapels of the City and Canton of
Zurick in Switzerland, and in some other adjacent Countries, as by their Canons
and Ecclesiastical Laws they are appointed, and as by the Supreme Power of the
Right Honorable the Senate of Zurick they are authorized, with the Orders of
that Church. Published with the Approbation of several Bishops. Printed for
John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.

AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE TO THE First Volume.
A.
ABsolution of the King: the pope rigorous, Page 136. desired by the King, 166.
the Pope's high pretensions, 167 Accommodation of Religion proposed, 10 Alva
Duke of, his bloody advice, 38 Alenson Duke of, Protector of the Reformed, 44.
he retires from Court, 45 Alliance with Spain, Sentiments thereupon, 440
Amboise, the Enterprise, what it was, 23, 359 Amience, 139. surpised, 224. and
the effects of it, 235 d'Amours Chaplain to Henry IV. 74 Amiral de Chastillon
in great favor with the Queen, 32. accused for the death of Guise, 34. impeacht
for the same, 36. attackt by Calumnies, 38. reconciled with the Guises, 39 he
reestablishes his Party, 40. the Catholics resolve to destroy him by treachery,
40. wounded. 42 d'Andelot, his Courage, 18. dies, 40 St. Andre President,
signal for his Cruelties, 21. assassinated, Page 22 Annexes, their ancient use,
38. what they are, 306 Antichrist, the Pope so called by du Plessis, 309. the
Question about Antichrist discussed in the Synod of Gap, 455. so inserted in
the Confession of Faith, 457. Question renewed about Antichrist, 427 Appeals of
the Orders, 423 Armand Jesuit, ordered to come to Paris, 454 Army, the King's
disbands of it self, 60 Artifices of the Queen dazzle the Admiral, 32, 39.
incredible Artifices of the Court, 41. of the Catholics to gain the King, 106.
continued to shake the King's Conscience, 112. Artifices to hinder the Deputies
from seeing the King, 129. and to hinder him from satisfying 'em, 131. of the
Court to corrupt the Ministers, 134. to per suade the Reformed to deliver up
the Prince of Conde, 176. Artifices of the Court to gain the Reformed, 303.
Artifices of Perron against du Plessis, 405. Artifices of the Catholics to
incense the King against the Reformed, 443. to hinder the Ecclesiastics from
changing their Religion, 414 to renew the Civil War, Page 440 Assembly at
Melun, 72. at Gergeau, 433. at Milhau, 44. at St. Foy, 133, 145, 157. permitted
by the King, 424. at Loudun, 205. commanded to separate, 209. the Effects of
it, 210, 211. removed to Vendosme, 218. returns to Saumur, 224 Assembly General
at Saumur, 162, 164, etc. removed to Chastelleraud, 230, again assembled, 423
Assembly another permitted at St. Foy, 133. A General Assembly at St. Foy, 434.
Complaints there made. 436, etc. which remained a long time in the hands of the
Council, 442 Assembly General at Chastelleraud, 230. they beg the Intercession
of England, and the United Provinces, 239. alarmed by the King's march into
Britany, 268. Complaints of the alterations made in the Edict, 238. particular
Complaints exhibited, 340 Assembly General at Chastelleraud, 477. redoubles the
Suspicions of the Court, 482. Affairs to be there handled, ib. suffers
Bouillon's places to be taken from him, 411 Assemblies Politic, du Plessis
Sentiments of 'em, 78, 456, 410 Assemblies at Paris, 17, 16 Assemblies of the
Clergy at Paris, 436. at Mantes, 79. at Chartres, 102. favors the third Party,
103, 412 Aubespine, Inventer of the Gag, his lamentable death, 15 Aubigne, 411
B.
BAilliage, second place in the Balliage allowed for free exercise, Page 219.
places of Bailliage freed from being places of exercise, 421. a second place in
each Bayliwick no new thing, 275. the second place denied, 452 Baptism forced,
254 Bar Duchess of, Vide Madame. Battle of Dreux, 34. Moncontour, 40. Arques,
61. Courtras, 50. Yvri, 74. of which they lose the fruit. St. Quintin, 16
Battus the Fraternity of 'em, 441 Bearn, a Revolution there, 35. they introduce
the Reformed Religion into the Country of Gex, 415 Bellujon, 409 Beraud a
famous Minister, and one of the Deputies of the Assembly at Chatelleraud, 326
Berquin Lewis, 9. Bettier's warmth, 323. rebuked by the King, 324 Beza accused
for the death of Guise, 34. called Father by the King, 415 Biron Marshal, 76,
432. he demands the Sovereignty of Perigord, 55. concerned in Conspiracies,
432. his death, 444 Bishops of France favor the Reformation, 8 Book setting
forth the Grievances of the Reformed, 243, etc. Reflections upon this Book,
264. a Book found at la Fleche, 444 Books sought for in Booksellers houses,
252, 437 Bordes a Monk, accused of Assassination, 443 Bonillon Duke of, his
Character, 143. 145. presses the War' against Spain, 181. sent to Queen
Elizabeth, ibid. opposes the Queen of Englands Mediation, ibid. he will not
trust the Kings generosity, 200. Duke of Bouillon, 226. raises Soldiers for
the King, 234. exasperated, 265. His Disgrace, 444. His intreagues against the
Court, 481. his Places taken from him, 411. he makes his Peace, 516. King
afraid the Protestants would take him for their Protector, 477 Bourbon, Antony
King of Navarr, his Inconstancy, 31. dies of a wound, 34 du Bourg, a Counselor
of Parliament condemned to be Burnt, 22. Breaches of the Edict, 452 Brevet for
keeping the Hostage Cities, 411. Brevet brought to the King for the nomination
of Deputies, 429. Breef from the Pope to the Clergy, presented by Cardinal
Joyeuse, 437. Brevet for 45000 Crowns for payment of Ministers, 528. for the
Reformed to continue their places four years longer, 411. another of the same
day for a year more, ibid. Brisonet, his Inconstancy, 8. Brochard Baron, 432.
433. Bull of Gregory XV. 79 Bulls obtained to support the War against the
Heretics, 40 Burying places rigorous upon 'em in reference to the Reformed.
111. Difficulties concerning 'em, 277. the affair of Burying places referred to
Commissioners, 345. 421.
C.
CAball, of which the Reformed are rendered suspected, 200 Cabrieres Affairs
there, 14 Caheirs, or Papers delivered in by the Reformed, 340. answered, 342.
answered, 428. presented to the King, 434. answered, 435. much larger at Sre
Foy, 436. full of complaints, ibid. and 437. etc. Calumnies cast upon the
Reformed 355. Calumny against Rochel refuted, 455. Calvin, 11 du Frene Canaye,
404 Capuchin, his Tricks upon the Birth of the Dauphin, 431 Capuchins conspire
against the Life of Hen IV. 314. a Mission of Capuchins sent into Piemont, by
the Duke of Savoy, 314 Cardinal de Chatillon marrys and despises the Popes
Censures, 35. his end, ibid. the Process of his Widow, etc. 478. -- de Joyeuse,
206. justifies the King to the Pope, 333 -- de Soudis, 438 -- of Vendome, 100
Casaubon, 404 Catherine de Medicis, vid. Katherine. Catholics, their
persidiousness at Court, 46. Catholic Nobles, 56. Catholic Lords, their
various affections, 59. Catholic Royalists, their different dispositions to a
Peace in Religion, 69. their Infidelity, 71. their Passion, 76. their Affronts
put upon the Reformed, 128. their suggestions to the King, 183 Cavils of the
Proctor General, 161 Cayer, a famous Minister, 113. Chambers Burning, 21
Chambers suppressed 18 Chambers half one, half the other, or Mi^^^^^, 281. at
Guien, 329. Articles concerning 'em, 438 Chambers of the Edict, 327. at Roven,
328 Chamier, a famous Minister, 229, 456 Chancellor de l' Hospital, 44
Charenton, the Reformed of Paris obtain the exercise of their Religion there,
420 Charles I. of England his Character, 452 Charges or Employments, 283.
Articles concerning 'em, 440 Charles IX. 28. his profound dissimulation, 44.
his death, 44. Charpenter, his character, 42 Chartres, Bishop of 118 Chartreux,
See Conspiracy. Chastillon See Amiral. Death of his Grandchild, 430 Cardinal
Chastillions Widow, her Suite, 478 Chauvel, a famous Minister, 456 Children,
131, 254 Churchyards, see Sepultures. Clear-sighted and fools of that Synod,
428 Clement VIII. Pope, his false Moderaration, 460 Clergy, their proposuions
to the King, 104 Clergy, their great Credit, 14. their Propositions, 104. their
Intreagues, 203. oppose the Verification of the Edict, 323. their obstinacy,
327. their Maxim about the Question of the Regale, 393. they raise difficulties
about the Conference between du Plessis and Perron, 397. the Clergy make their
Remonstrances, 390. they obtain several favorable Regulations, 415. their
demands reduced to six Articles in the business of the Rochellois, 417.
solicit a Fund for payment of Pensions to Ministers changing their Religion,
437. refuse a Conference about the Kings Conversion, 118. a kind Article
granted 'em, 415. Clerk John burnt at Metz, 8 Coligni's, their Power, 19. 20
Colleges of the Protestants, their Estalishment obstructed, 255. not permited
to admit Regents and Scholars, 437 Colleges Protestant Immunities demanded
for 'em, 435 Colloquie, or Classis, 306 Colloquie of Poyssie, 30 Commissioners
appointed to draw up an Edict, 109 -- The Kings, at the Assembly of Laudun,
217. 218, 221 -- For execution of the Edict, 345. 417. their Exactness, 419 --
For the Conference at Fontain Bleau, appointed by the King, 401. altered by the
King, 403 Commelet the Jesuit, his Impudence, 319 Conde, Prince of Conde
Imprisoned, 28. acquitted, 29. pressed by the Queen to take Arms in her defense,
32. makes new complaints, 38. he betakes himself again to Arms, 39. an attempt
to surprise him which he escapes, 40. killed at Bassac near Jarnac, ibid.
Prince of Conde (Son) runs a great Risco, 42. he escapes into Germany, 44.
refuses to acknowledge the States, 47. his death, 50. and his Wife accused for
the Fact, ibid. Prince of Conde (Son) born, 50. in the hands of Trimanille,
110. out of the hands of the Reformed, 159, etc. -- his flight into Flanders.
447 Conde Princess, 174. etc. Condemned, and sick, the Reformed forbid to
comfort 'em, 252 Conference, at Nerac, 47. 131, 111. at Poissy, 30. at Flex,
48. ibid. at St. Bris, 50 Between Villeroy and de Plessis fruitless, 107.
between du Plessis and Perron granted, 397. almost broke off, 403. quite broken
of 409. the sequel of it 410 Conference formal, 109 Conference in show, 117
Conferences set, 118 With Cotton the Jesuit, 434. 445 Conference engaged to
maintain the Doctrine of the Reformed Religion, 119 Conferences in reference to
the Kings Sister, 316 Conferences of the Reformed forced, Conspiracies of
Barriere, against the Life of the King, 135. of Chastell and the Jesuits, vid.
H. IV. Capuchins and Chartreux, 314. of M. Biron, 444. Powder Plot 448. General
against the Reformed, 41. of the Spaniards against the Queen of Navarr, 37.
against the Chiefs of the Protestants, 48 Conversion of the King, 119
Conversions Alamode, 435 Cotton Jesuit ordered to come to Paris 454. 455, 463.
wounded, 464. he propounds questions to the Divil. ibid. made the Kings
Confessor, 464. his Question about the Preservation of Geneva from the D. of
Savoy, 465. he blames the D. of Sully, 425. made Tutour to the Dauphine, 437.
Confessor to the King, 464. Council General created, 150 Croakers, dissipated,
154 Croisade designed against the Reformed, 432 Cruelties in France against the
Protestants, 15. 16, 20. Cruelty of the Court, 24. of Monluc and des Adrets,
33. committed at Rome, 171.
D.
DAnet, Bishop of Lavaur, present at the Council of Trent, 12 Dauphin, his
Birth, 431. la Riviere*s Prediction upon it, 431 Declaration, project of a
Declaration for procuring the Peace of the Protestants, 75. rejected, 77. given
at Germans, 159. infavour of the Protestants, 100, two Declaratious put forth,
99 Demoniac pretended, 346. the Issue of it, 374. etc. Deputies of the Church
on their way to Nantes, etc. 125. of the Assembly Saumur attended the King,
180. their discontents, 182. ordered to meet the King at Chartres, 128.
Deputies general, 425. amused at Court, 154. difficulties in their Institution,
426. frequent Deputies permitted at Court, and frequent changes in the manner
of naming 'em, 427. present Papers and Complaints to the King, 476. the
augmentation of their Number not liked, 409. Deputies from Chastelleraud
caressed at Court, 413. demanded of the King by the Syof Rochel, 427. gained at
Court, 428
E.
EDict of Chasteaubriant, 12. 19 Edict of Amboise, 34 Of Toleration. Of
January, 32. confirmed, 33. restored without restriction, 39 Edict of Peace,
35. Another for revocation of the former. Another which deprives the Reformed
of their Emploments, 40 In favor of those that desired to live at Peace, 39.
pretended only, ibid. Of 1577. or of Poitiers, 47. 76, 77. verified in the
Parliament of Rouen, 219. the difficulties upon it favorably taken off, 420
Edict of Union against the Rformed, 50. Of Nantes, 80. cavils about the
verification of it, ibid. At Traverci, 202 Of Nantes concluded, 269. the
difficulties that arose upon every Article, 270. the several demands that
occasioned the delays of it, 271. etc. secret and particular Heads added to it,
292. collateral promises by private Patents to strengthen it, 293. etc.
sentiments of the Reformed upon it, 303. why the Reformed were contented with
the Edict, 307. difficulties about the verification of it, 321, verified and
Registr'd, 329. Questions upon the Nature of the new Edict, 363. the Benefit of
it, ib. the Justice of it, 369. Grants nothing to the Reformed, etc. 372. what
is granted by it does no body harm, 374. it ought to be irrevocable, 375. the
Edict of Nantes a Treaty, 381. objections against the Edict answered, 396. the
execution of it. 417 In favor of the D. of Manenne, 203. Edict for Bearne
touching Religion, 337. Obtained by the Clergy, 415 In favor of the Moors, 446
Edicts severe against Lutherans, 12 Confirming the Treaty of Amboise, 36 For
reducing the Leaguers, intended, but goes not forward, 130. etc. Elizabeth
Queen of England desires an Article in favor of the Reformed, 181. Her death,
450. Enterprise of Monceaux, 39 Epernon Duke of quits the Army, 60 Etampes
Duchess of favors the Reformation, and Embraces it, 9 Etrees Gabriele, 166
Evocations eluded, 259 Exercises of Religion hindered, 250. the Limits of 'em,
420. public exercise of Religion obstructed, 247 Places for free exercise of
Religion, 305
F.
FActions, the two great Factions of France, their Original, 18. France divided
into three Factions, 43. Council of France divided into two Factions 45.
Factions reigning in the League, Kings party, 69. Factions new in France, 481
New Factions in France, 481 Ferrier, a famous Minister, 455, 456. his
Character, ibid. teaches the Pope to be Antichrist, 455 Fevre, a Protestant
Minister, 8 Fleche, the Quibble about it concerning the King's heart, 425
Formularie refused by the King, 119. another sent in the King's Name to the
Pope, 120 Foreigners called into France, 34. and the English let into Havre de
Grace, ibid. Foreign Ministers admitted into the City of Rochel, 431 Francis I.
inclined to favor the Reformation, 9. enraged against the Protestants, 12.
refuses to read Calvin's Dedication, 11. publishes an Edict against the
Lutherans, 12. his death, 13 Francis II. 20. the state of the Court in his
time, ibid. his sudden death, 28
G.
GAbriela d'Estrees, Henry IV's Mistress, 166 Gagg invented, 15 Garrisons of the
Reformed retrenched, 213. the Consequences, 214, 286, 287. the payment of 'em,
290. Garrisons or places which the Reformed had in their keeping, 298. lost by
the Reformed, 4^5 Geneva, the Ministers of Geneva pay their Respects to Henry
IV. 414. the King's Civility to the City, 415 Gex, state of the Country of Gex,
415, 416. the Country of Gex solicits the confirmation of their Regulations,
etc. 477 Gigord, a Minister of some Repute, scandalized by Cotton, 435 Giraud,
a Counselor of Toulouse, accused of Assassination, 443 Gonzier, a Jesuit, his
impudent Preaching before the King, 442 Governors of places reformed upon the
Frontiers of Italy, 416 Gratification, 371 Gratifications and Promises, 412
Guise Duke of, his resentment against the Admiral, 34. killed at the Siege of
Orleance, ib. Guise Duke of, the Son; his boldness, 49, 50, 51. forces the King
from Paris, 50. his death, and that of the Cardinals, 51
H.
HArangues of the Clergy, 321. their Character, ibid. their common style, 412
Harangue of the Reformed Deputies at Folembray, 201. Harangues of the Deputies,
321 Havre de Grace retaken from the English, 36 Henry VIII. of England; 9 Henry
II. of France persecutes the Protestants, 13. protests against removal of the
Council back to Trent, 13. his death, 19 Henry of Valois elected King of
Poland. He returns into France, 44. he makes peace with the King of Navarre,
46. he renews the War against the King of Navarre, 49. he swears a second time
to the Edict of Union, 51. extremity of his affairs, ibid. he makes a Truce
with the Reformed, 52. lays Siege to Paris, ib. assassin'd, ibid. Henry of
Bourbon King of Navarre, runs a great Riseo, 42. he retires from Court, and his
good Omen, 45. he disclaims what he had done for fear of death. He receives the
Addresses of the States, 47. he upbraids Henry III. 49. his Appeal against
Sixtus Quintus, ibid. meets with great difficulties, 54. his uncertainty, 58.
his resolutions upon the Conditions proposed by the Catholics, 59. offended at
the Proposals for another Protector, 66. he writes a Letter with his own hand
upon the same Subject, 67. his dissimulation, 115. his conversion, 119. wounded
in the mouth by Chastell, 156. his Sentiments of the Assemblies, 158. his
Proctors unfaithful, 169. Articles of Penitence, 170. complained of by the
Reformed, 171. his coldness to the Reformed, 183. his Wishes, 186. his
Perplexities and Distress, 226, 227. he alters his Language to the Reformed,
upon the taking of Amience, 265. his remarkable words, 322. Another remarkable
Saying of his, 326. his Expedition into Savoy, 414. he calls Beza Father, 415.
his Civilities to Geneva, ibid. his exchange for the Marquisate of Saluces,
ibid. his favorable and equitable mind toward the Reformed, 442. his Severity
to the City of Rochel, 445. offended about the business of Antichrist, 458. he
strives to hinder the Article about Antichrist, but cannot, 459. he answers the
Papers of the Reformed favorably, 476. he talks openly of making War against
Marshal de Bouillon, 482. he deals doubly with the Jesuits, 424. he refuses the
Nomination of Deputies, 433. his domestic vexations, 439. his formidable power,
448. his designs in his latter end conjectured at, 449. he causes the Queen to
be crowned, 450. his mild Answers to the Reformed, 476. assassinated, ibid.
Huguenots, the derivati^^ ^f the word, 25.
I.
JAmes Stuart King of Scotland, his weakness, 449. he would not suffer mourning
for Queen Elizabeth, 450. his Character, 451. his Book of the Power of Kings,
ibid. Jane Queen of Navarre, Conspiracy against her, 37. dies poisoned, 42
Jannin advises the King of the third Party. 103 Jannin Minister of State, his
discourse about Liberty of Conscience, 444 Jesuits settled at Paris, 30. they
creep into favor, 140. their establishment solicited, 313. their boldness and
credit, ibid. Reasons why the King favored 'em, 315 Jesuits recalled into
France, 453. the Conditions of their Re^oration, 462. Satyrs against it, 463.
they advance their Affairs in France, 417. solicit the King that his heart may
be buried at la Fleche, 425. their power settled in Bearn, 441. favored highly
in France, 481. the chief of the Council devoted to 'em, and feared by the
King, 425 Images, abominable Superstitions toward 'em, 21 Infidelities, 31, 45,
48, 252, 418, 452. Injuries, 214 248. unpunished, 436 Injustices, 31. 36, 37,
119, 140, 175, 200, etc. 256. Inquisition, attempt to bring it into France, 27
Inscriptions prejudicial to the Huguenots, 476 Instructions of the King, the
different prospect of 'em, 108. vain Ceremonies of 'em, 117. of the Prectors
contrary, 168. new ones given by the King to his Commissioners, 238 Interests
various at Court, 18. political to shake the Kings Conscience, 112 Interests of
the Prince of Conti and Count of Soisons, 177 Intreagues strangely carried on
in France, 235. of Spain in the Court of France 469 Jurisdiction of the Party
Chambers encroach'd upon, 443 Seigneural Jurisdiction damanded in Episcopal
Cities, 437 Justice denied, ibid.
K.
KAtherine de Medicis, 17, 20. her double dealing, 29 Kings may treat with
their Subjects, 384
L.
LEague Triple between the Pope, King of Spain and Guises, against the
Protestants, 33. at Toulouse against the Protestants, 36. Guisian League, 46
Leagues against the Reformed, 442 Leguers boldness, 50 Legate in France renews
the fears of the Reformed, 213 Lesdiguieres, his Character, 143. his letter to
the Assembly of Saumur, 227. his Religion, 308. recommends Cotton the Jesuit to
the King, 454. enters into the Union of Nantes, 413. made a Marshall of France,
438. his Fears, 470 Letter of St. Germans to the D. of Bouillon, 402. of du
Plessis to the the King, 125 Letters from Q. Elizabeth, in behalf of the D. of
Bouillon, 445. from the Synod of Rochel to the D. of Rohan, 429 Liberty of
Habitation denied the Reformed, 256 Lorrain Cardinal of, his Inconstancy, 31.
he goes to the Council of Trent, 34
M.
MAdam the Kings Sister, her Marriage solicited, 315. her Constancy, 316. the
King severe to her 317. the Pope's scruples upon the Match, ibid. married
without a dispensation, 318. advantages the Reformed got by her perseverance,
320 her Death, 468 Malwin, a Foraign Minister called to Rochel, 431 Marriage of
Hen. IV. the dissolution of it carried on 349. etc* Of Cardinal de Chatillon,
35 Of Ecclesiastics. Marie Brosiere, 346 Marie Stuart, Q. of France and
Scotland, 20 Marsac Lewis, Martyred, 15 Mass re-establishd in the Country of
Gex, 419 Massacre at Vassi, 32. at Sens, 34. of St. Bartholomew, 42. at
Chastaigneray, 175 Maxim of the Catholic Court, 71. of the French Court, 71
Mayenne Duke of, escapes and relieves the Leaguers, 51. pursues the King, 61.
his Justice, 324 Meaux and other Towns reduced, 138 Melancton invited into
France, 9. Mercoeur Duke of, his pretentions, 155. he Treats with the Reformed,
237 Merindal, vid. Cabrieres. Metz. Ministers Protestant, 113 Ministers
excluded from the general Deputation. Ministers of Geneva. 414 Ministers
Foraign, 431 Mirande, 433. 436 Mission Dragoons. 314 Mistrusts from the Kings
change, 122 Montgomerie, his Death, 44 Monks hate the King, 313, embrace the
Reformed Religion, 414 Montmorancy Constable, huddles up a Peace at Cateau, 18.
his Death, 39 Montholon, his Sentiments of Religion, 70 Morvillier Bishop of
Orleans, 45 Moors hardly used in Spain, 446 Mouchards, 21 Moulin a famous
Minister. 316
N.
KIng of Navar, vid. Antony K. of Navar Negotiations, three Important ones with
the Pope, 311. etc. Nobility Catholic, their various Affections, 59 de la Nove
Fracis, 72. 429, 433. 409 Nuncio Popes, 99
O.
D'O. Marquis of, his character, 56. his saying, 141. 147 Occasion of this
History, 5 Oath required of the Reformed. Oath of Union renewed, 124.
Precautions against the Order of the Holy Ghost, and of the Coronation, 132. of
the Consecration, 139. difference touching an Oath referred by a Reformed to a
Catholic, 350. exacted from the Catholics of England, 419 Observations
General upon the Edict of Nantes, 354 Orange Prince of, assassin'd, 48
Government of Orange taken from Blasons, 404 d'Ossat, his Testimony of the
Reformed, 157. Commissioner for the Kings Absolution, 167. appeases the Pope,
220. he justifies the King to the Pope, 333. d'Ossat, 434 Outrageous Affront
committid against the Consecrated Host, 414
P.
PAncarte what, 445 Parabere a Reformed Lord, 406 Parliament of Paris
Counselors of it suspected for their Religion, 19 Parliament of Paris joins
with the Clergy to oppose the verification of the Edict, 224. disgusted at
throwing down the Pyramid, 401 Parliament of Aix, 250 Of Bourdeaux; 249. 257 Of
Bretagne, 350 Of Grenoble, 439 Parliaments their Rigor, 438* of Toulouse, 418
-- of Tholose and Bourdeaux, 437. they uphold the Jesuits, 313. of Tours, 79.
102 Patriarch threatened to be created in France* 155 Peace at Amboise; 34. at
Chartres, 39. Peace with the Reformed a third time 43. Peace as soon broke as
made, 46. Peace for five years, such as it was, 48 Peace proposed between the
two Crowns. Peace of Religion; a new project of Peace for the Protestants, 75
Du Perron, Author of the 3d. Party, 102. ambitious and unfaithful, 103 Perron,
113. Bishop of Eureux, ibid. Commessioner for the Kings absolution, 167.
accepts du Plessis challenge, 397. his foul play to Plessis, 399. juggles with
Plessis, 405. his advantages over du Plessis, 407 Progress of his fortune, 469.
a Cardinals Hat procured for him, ibid. Petition particular from the Province
of Normandy, 425 Petitions of the Reformed favorably received by the King,
421. Petitions answered, 441 Philip II. K. of Spain, 21 Piles, one of the
Valiantest of the Protestant Army, 111 Placards. 11 Places belonging to the
Reformed disputed, 401 Platform and Design of this History, 5 du Plessis
Mornai, his saying to H. IV. 75 du Plessis Mornai, 76, 77. his ^^sire in the
Kings behalf, 119. his Character, 145. he procures the sitting of the Assembly
at Saumur, 162. useful to the King, 224. Presides at Saumur, 230 he writes the
King a long Letter concerning his change, 125. he writes a Treatise of the
Eucharist, 309. consequences of it, ibid. etc. it makes a great noise, 394.
Mortified by the King for writing it, 395, he challenges his Accusers, 397.
fowl play showed him, 399, a snare laid for him, 401. more fowl play offered
him, 403. condemned in nine Passages, 407. he falls sick, 409 Politics, a
Faction in France, their nicknames given 'em by the Synod of Rochel, 428 Pope
Gregory XIV. his Bull of Excommunication 79 The Pope makes overtures of
Reconciliation with the King, 157. his cunning dealing with the King, 185.
complains of the verification of the Edict, 15, 77, 200. Poor to participate,
without distinction, of the benefit of Hospitals and Alms, 423 Powder Plot, 418
Power Arbitrary, a Project against it, 23 Pragmatic, 106 du Prat Cardinal, 11
Prayers for the King, ordered by the National Synod, 146 Preachers seditious,
436, 476 Precedence disputed by the Parliament of Toulouse. 340 Priests refuse
to pray for the King, 418 Preparations for the King's change, 116 Primrose, a
Foreign Minister, 432 Princes of the Blood, their Characters and Interests, 55
Processions, 12 Project of an Edict, 130. not had by the Reformed, 133
Protector, 61, 145 Psalms, sung publicly, 17. prohibited, and the Psalm-Book
burnt by the Hangman, 252 Publication of the Council of Trent, 336, 337.
resolutely denied by the King, 437 Pyramid* erected, 156. thrown down, 480
Q.
Quarters, see Annexes.
R.
REflections general and particular, upon the Conference of du Plessis, etc.
408 Reflections upon the Complaints of the Reformed, 354 Reformation, Interests
that opposed it, 4, 5. the beginning, causes, and progress of it, 7. the
entrance of it into France, ibid. received at Meaux and Bearn, 8. Progrss of it
in Germany, 9. progress of it. 19 Reformed not long quiet in France, 37. New
occasions of Jealousy, 38. progress of their Churches, 48. they enter into a
third War, 40. their hopes of Henry III. 54. Reformed their interests after the
death of Henry of Valois, 56. and their Suspicions, 57. flatter themselves
about the King's instruction, 59. they propose choosing a new Protector, 61.
what they understood by Protector, 63. their jealousies, and the grounds of
them, 65. their dispositions in regard to a peace, 72. reasonableness of their
demands, 76. excluded from employments, 110. afraid of the King's
reconciliation with the Pope, 137. Acts of Injustice done 'em, 140, etc.
declared capable of offices, 160. testimony concerning their past and present
services, 168 Reformed, why accused not to love Monarchy, 23. reported to be
quite out of Favor with the King, and why, 200. new Suspicions and Subjects of
Complaint, 206. their patience, 212. a a continuation of their requests, 213.
the Reformed excused, 231. they serve the King before Amience, 233. put off
with new delays, 265. they forbear insisting upon several Articles of the
Edict, 326. in a condition to treat with the King, 386. their negligence, and
their prejudices, 418. particular complaints by them made, 441. they desire
they may not give themselves the name of pretended Reformed, 461. a Boon
granted to the Reformed, 419. strive to discover the designs of the Cabal, 475.
they fear the King gives too much way to the Jesuits, ibid. disgusted at
pulling down the Pyramid, 480 Refugees, 431 Reiters defeated, 50 Religion, what
sort of variety in Religion Policy ought not to tolerate, 367. Religion
reformed the nature of it, 368 Rights of Conscience, 377 Rights Seigniral in
Manors encroach'd upon, 443 Rigors of the Catholics as to the burying of the
Protestants, 111 Rochel besieged, 43 Rohan Duke of, the Foundations of his
Fortune laid, 453. displeased by the Court, 480 Rome Court of, the Ignorance of
it in Religion, 136. laughs at the misfortunes of France, ibid. the designs of
it upon England, 429 Roni, his jealousies, 214. his advancement discontents the
Court, 344. his dignities, 345. Roni, 431. received into Rochel, 445. made
Governor of Poictou, 450. sent into England, ib. sent the King's Commissioner
to the Assembly at Chastelleraud, 403. his Instructions, 403, etc. his Speech
to the Assembly, 407. he excuses the Consequences of the Union of Nantes, 410.
he obtains other advantages of the Assembly of Chastelleraud, 412.
congratulated for his Negotiation by Perron, in the Pope's name, 413. his
Ambition very singular, ibid. made Duke and Peer of France, 415. he abuses his
Authority without Fear or Wit, 444 des Rosieres his Inconstancy, 43 Rotan, a
suspected Minister, 113 Roussel, a Protestant Minister, 8
S.
SAvoy Duke of, his persecution in Piedmont, 314. and in the Marquisate of
Saluces, ibid. his Character, 434. his continual Attempts upon Geneva, 465
Scaliger Joseph, 460 Schism in England, 9 Schombergh Count, Commissioner to the
Assembly of Saumur, 227, 228. he treats with the Assembly, 236 Sedan besieged,
416 Sedition at Paris, 31. at Rochel, 445, 428 Seditious terms complained of by
the Reformed, 476 Seguiran Jesuit, his attempt to preach at Rochel, 424
Sepultures disputes about 'em, 340 Sieges of Rochel and Sancerre, 43 Siege of
Paris, 74. relieved, 75 Soissons Count, 159, 470 Sorbonne lets fly against the
King, 73 Sovereigns, their chief obligation the preservation of their Subjects,
379. may treat with their Subjects, 384 Spaninards press the Destruction of all
the Reformed in Spain, 446. with a prospect to divert the Kings Forces by a
Civil War, 447 State of the Forces of the Leaguers and the Kings Party, 68
State of France, 204 States General demanded, 45. conclude to destroy the
Protestants, 46 St. Germans Letter to the D. of Bouil lon, 402 St. Marie du
Mont, charges du Plessis with false Accusations, 396 Subjects their
Preservation the chief Obligation of Sovereigns, 379 Succession of England, 429
Successors bound to observe the Treaties of their Predecessors, 396 Sulli,
Rom's Title after his new Dignity, 416. chosen Mediator between the Rochelois
and the Clergy, 416. 417. blamed by Cotton the Jesuit, 425. suspected by the
Reformed, 434. and why, ibid. Superstition to extremity, 21 Synod at Paris, 11.
at Bourges, 10 Synod first Protestant National at Paris, 429. National at
Rochel held by the Protestants, 41 Synod at Rochel. 426. renew the Question
about Antichrist, 429. Affairs treated on there, 431. breaks up and sends
respectful Letters to the K. 436 Synod of St. Foy, 47 -- at St. Maxiant, 442.
treats of the business of Antichrist, ibid. At Saumur, 215 Synods at Gap, 455.
Question about Antichrist their discust, ibid. other matters of the same Synod,
461. at Montauban, 146. etc. at Monpelier, 304, Synod at Rochel, 426 Synod of
Gnap, justifies Antichrist to be Antichrist, 456. they admit foreign
Ministers, and receive Letters from the Palatinate, etc. 461
T.
TAxis the Spanish Ambassadors, 446, 447. 448. Third Party and its designs, 102
de Thou President, 226, 227, 234, 235, 299 Tithes confirmed to the Roman
Clergy, 35 Toledo Cardinal, 136 Tournon Cardinal opposes Melanchton's coming
into France, 9. he signalizes his Zeal against the Reformation, 10 removed from
the Government, 14 Treatise of the Eucharist, 309 Treaty's to the prejudice of
the Reformed, 138 Treaty express, or Tacit between Master and slave, Sovereign
and Subject, 380 Treaty with the Rochellois, 216. with the Moors persecuted in
Spain. 438 Trent the Council there, 12, 13, translated to Bologna, but removed
back to Trent. 13. remov d a third time by Pius IV. 34. and end put to it, 36
Trimoville Claudius Allies himself with the Prince of Conde, 50 Trimoville,
143, 144. suspected by the King, 178. stands upon his Guard, 200. his motives
for War, 226. raises Soldiers for the King, 234 exasperated, 265. Trimoville
incurs the Kings hatred, but the esteem of his party, 299. made a Peer of
France, 351. his Genius 477. his death, 478. his Death, 478 Trissvirat, the
rise of it, 29 Truce for six Months granted the Reformed. 45. Truce with the
League to the Kings prejudice, 137 Turenne raises a Foraign Army, 105. Marrys
the Heiress of Sedan, ibid. made Marshall of France, ibid.
V.
VAlentinois Duchess exasperates the K. against the Protestants, 13 La Varenne,
123. a principal Prop of the Jesuits, 454 Vernueil Marquis, 470 Marchioness of
Vernueil, 439 Marchioness of Vernueil brought to Justice, 470 Vignier, his Book
called the Theater of Antichrist, 442 Villarnoul, 433, 436 Villeroi, supposed
to be a Pensioner to the D. of Guise, 49 Villeroi gives the King advice of the
Third Party, 103 Villeroi, his Conferrence with du Plessis fruitless, 107.
Caballs against Roni 344. suspected to correspond with Spain, 469. Suspected to
be of the Spanish Caballs, 469, 471. Treason of one of his Officers, 471
Violences against the Reformed, 429, 437, 244, 248 Union of the Reformed
renewed with the Kings approbation, 133. Union of Nantes renewed, 410 Vulson
sent to Court, 208
W.
WAr every where in France, 43 Wars about Religion most cruel, 366 War with
Savoy, and the success of it, 414, 415 Writings about the point for taking up
Arms for Religion, 73
Y.
YEar of Placarts and Libells, 11
A TABLE Of the Edicts, which serve as Proofs to the Part of this History.
THe Edict of Charles IX. upon the most proper means to appease the Troubles
and Seditions arising upon matters of Religion, Jan. 1567. 457 Edict of Charles
IX. of the year ^57, about the Pacification of the Troubles in the Kingdom* 466
The Kings Declaration, and Interpretation of some words and Articles VI. and
VII. continued in the present Edict of Jan. 17. 1561. 462 Edict of Pacification
made by Hen. III. for putting an end to the Troubles of his Kingdom, and to the
end that all his Subjects from that time forward might live in Peace, Union and
Concord under his Obedience. Read and published in the Court of Parliament,
October. 8. 1577. 477 Private Articles of September. 17. 1577. The Articles of the
Conference at Nerac, between the Queen Mother and the K. of Navar, and the
Deputies of the pretended Reformed Religion. 594 The Kings Edict upon the
Pacification of the Troubles, containing Confirmation, Amplification and
Declaration as well as of the proceeding Edicts upon the said matter, in the
Year 1577, as of the Articles agreed upon at the Conference at Nerac; published
at Paris in Parliament, Jan. 26. 1579. 515 The Kings Edict upon the
Pacification of the Trouble of the Kingdom, given at Nantes, April 1598, with
the particular Articles intervening upon it, etc. 526 Particular Articles,
extracted from the General, which the King granted to those of the pretended
Reformed Religion; which the King would not have comprised in the General
Edicts; nor in the Edict which was made and framed upon those, given at Nantes
in April last, etc. 553 A Breviat granted by Hen. the Great, to his Subjects of
the pretended Reformed Religion, April 30. 1598. 563
FINIS.
MARIE R.

WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc. To all Our loving Subjects,
of what Degree, Condition and Quality soever, within our Kingdoms and
Domiminions, Greeting. Whereas our Trusty and Well-beloved John Dunton, Citizen
and Stationer of London, has represented unto Us, That he is Printing an
English Translation out of French, of the Edict of Nantes, in Four Volumes; and
that, in regard of the great Costs and Charges it has already been and will be
to him, he has humbly besought Us to grant him our Royal License for the sole
Printing and Publishing thereof; We are graciously pleased to gratify him
therein, and accordingly we do therefore hereby grant unto him the said, John
Dunton, Our Royal License for the sole Printing and Publishing of the said Book
for the Term of Fourteen Years from the Date hereof; strictly charging,
prohibiting and forbiding all Our Subjects to Reprint the said Book in whole or
in part, or to imprint, buy, vend, utter or distribute any Copies or
Exemplaries of the same, or any part thereof, Reprinted beyond the Seas, within
the said Term, without the Consent and Approbation of him the said John Dunton
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns first had and obtained, as they and
every of them offending herein will answer the contrary at their Peril; whereof
the Master, Wardens and Company of Stationers of Our City of London, the
Commissioners and Officers of Our Customs, and all other Our Officers and
Ministers whom it may concern, are to take Notice, that due Obedience may be
given to Our pleasure herein signified.

Given at our Court at White Hall, the 30th. day of June 1693. in the Fifth
Year of Our Reign. By Her MAJESTY'S Command. J. TRENCHARD.

The SECOND VOLUME OF THE HISTORY Of the Famous Edict of Nantes: CONTAINING AN
ACCOUNT OF ALL THE PERSECUTIONS, That have been in FRANCE During the Reign of
Lewis the XIII. Faithfully Extracted from all the Public and Private Memoirs,
that could possibly be procured.

Printed first in French, by the Authority of the States of Holland and
West-Friezland. And now Translated into English.

With Her Majesty's Royal Privilege.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN DUNTON, at the Raven in the Poultrey. MDCXCIV.

THE PREFACE OF THE Second Part.
WE left the Reformed at the end of our First Part in a tolerable condition,
and in a tranquillity which settled it self by degrees, under the Protection of
their King. After the hardships of War, Infidelitys, and Massacres, they began
to relish the sweets of Peace with assurance, by the love of a Prince who had
not forgot their Services: They thought themselves secure against the Malice of
their Enemies, and were under no apprehensions for their Consciences or Lives.
If they retained the least doubts or suspicions they only proceeded from a
Prudence which considered the future, and consequently obliged them under a
King who was favorable toward them, to take measures against the designs of
another, who might perhaps not entertain the same kindness for them. This was
the Aim of their Assemblies, both General and Particular, of their Councils, of
their Synods, of their Associations, Petitions and Demands: All this C^hirs.
was lawfu. They had had so many dismal proofs of the Maxims of the Church of
Rome, in respect to those that are declared Heretics by them, that they had no
reason to confide too much on the appearences of the Peace that Church had
granted them. They were not ignorant that the Popes had only consented to it,
because the Catholic Religion did lose considerably by the War; and that the
Court of Rome, finds its account much better in the intrigues of the Cabinet,
and in the arificies of a fraudulent Policy, than in Military Expeditions,
which they do not understand. So that the Reformed, who had learned to be wise
by an experience of fourscore years, could not, without relapsing into that
ancient simplicity which had done their Forefathers so much harm, and which
their very Enemies had often upbraided them with in an insulting manner,
neglect to take precautions, to secure themselves against the secret snares
which the Church of Rome can set, with so much Art, and prepare at such a
Distance. Tho the King sometimes gave them causes of distrust, yet he was not
averse to their Pretentions; and had he lived as long as his Constitution and
Vigor, seemed to promise, he might have put them in a condition which would
have obliged the Catholics to cultivate a Peace, which they could not have
broken without exposing themselves to sustain at least part of the damages of
such a Breach. It is true that he was stopped sometimes by a political
consideration, when the Jesuits and the Catholics of their Party had filled
his Head with the dread of a Cabal, ever ready to break out; ever disposed to
receive malcontents, and to asist them; ever Mistress of the Government, by
reason, that by the number of the places of surety, and by the credit of the
Lords who entered into that Union, it was strong enough whenever Factions
should be formed in the Kingdom, to incline the Balance to that Party they
should side with. Moreover they told that Prince that it did not consist with
his interest to suffer a Confederacy of part of his Subjects amongst
themselves, for their own preservation, as if it had been against his
Authority, and that it had formed a state within his Kingdom, having Cities of
their own, Laws, Interests, and Politics contrary to the common good of the
Kingdom. The King who was haughty, passionate and jealous of his Grandeur,
easily suffered himself to be deluded by those shadows; and at those times let
fall words which gave cause to believe that he thought the Reformed too great,
and too formidable already to grant them any new favors. But then those little
heats were as soon allaid, as they were assumed. His resentments were only
lightnings, the matter whereof was as soon consumed as it had taken Fire; there
neither remained the least track of the heat or smoke of it. All his anger was
evaporated by a Frown and a threatening Word. He thought himself sufficiently
revenged when he had expressed that it was in his Power to take his revenge
when ever he pleased.

Those who are well acquainted with the Character of that Prince, know that
this was his real temper; which cannot be looked upon as a Weakness; since the
principle of it was Noble and worthy of a true Hero. He loved his Subjects, and
Domestic quiet. His love of quiet made him angry, when ever he was possessed
with the thoughts that any body designed to disturb it: But his love to his
Sujects extinguished that Fire, as soon as he reflected on the necessity that
obliged the Reformd to provide for their safety. Those that have collected the
words which his anger inspired him with, while his Mind was possessed with some
suspicion, ought at the same time to have observed that those little flashes
were the effect of his Temper, the heat of which often dictated words to him,
which he should have been very sorry any body should have drawn Consequences
from. His Menial Servants were never surpised at them, because they daily
found that he was easily appeased again, without being courted to it; and that
he often made the first steps of reconciliation toward those that had given
him a pretense of anger, particularly when they were Friends he had a good
opinion of. His temper was very different toward the Enemies of the State:
Without exclaiming against them in words, tho he was sometimes guilty of it,
even when Prudence required the contrary, he persisted in the desire and design
of bringing them to Reason. This shows that he was not naturally inclined to
refuse the Reformed such lawful means as were necessary for their safety. Only
he did not design to leave the Cities of surety perpetually in their Power:
Neither had they any thoughts of keeping them for ever. Perhaps some Lords
might have particular designs upon that Subject; but the Reformed in general
only insisted upon the keeping of them, upon the account that the King being
mortal as well as other men, he might chance to Dye at a time when the Minority
of his Successor might create great Troubles to them. So that if they could
have kept them until the Danger of a Minority had been past, they would more
easily have been inclined to restore them to the King, since they would have
been no longer necessary to them. But the very Word of Minority was sufficient
to frighten them: and their fear was not so ill grounded as to be esteemed
unworthy of Persons of Wit and Courage. The weakness of Francis the II. and the
Minority of Charles the IX. had been so fatal to them by the Authority Catherin
de Medicis had thereby Usurped to the prejudice of the Princes of the Blood,
which she exercised in a very odious manner, That they had a great deal of
Reason to dread falling again into the same misfortunes, under the Regency of a
Princes of the same Name, and during the Minority or Weakness of a New King,
whose Capacity was not known.

Thus it is apparent that the Reformed, that fear being excepted, saw
themselves in a state of Peace and Prosperity, the perfect settlement of which
was the only thing they could desire in order to be happy: and had the King
lived but twelve years longer, That time would have been sufficient to remove
part of their scruples. They would have seen a Dauphin of twenty years of Age,
capable to Reign himself, bred up to all the Maxims and Designs of the King his
Father accustomed to see two Religions among the French. Thy would have seen
the Edict confirmed by Possession, civil and intestin Peace fostered by custom
between those of different Religions; the Catholics disposed by degrees to see
them enjoy certain liberties; in a word the prejudices that had excited so many
animosities and Wars against the Reformed, dissipated by habit and repose,
which would have allayed the Passions and heart-burnings on all sides. But all
was altered of a sudden, by the Kings unexpected Death, and that fatal
Catastrophe happening at a a time when the ancient Difidencies and Jealousies
were not absolutely stifled, added new ones. So that we shall now behold the
Reformed entering under that new Reign, in a doubtful condition, which having
held them long in Cruel agitations and incertainties, threw them at last into a
deplorable Ruin: Partly, as when a Ship tossed by the Winds and Billows, which
drive it against the Rocks, having nothing but the courage and skill of her
Mariners to defend her against that violence, finally sinks on a sudden,
notwithstanding their resistance and industry, by the redoubling of the Storm.
Therefore we may consider them in this part of the History, as well as in the
first, in three different conditions. The first was a preparative to their
approaching ruin, which all the circumstances of Affairs gave them presages of*
The History relates the reasons they had to be afraid; the divisions of the
State and Court, and the secret machinations by which their Oppression was
contriving by degrees. The second was an open declaration of a design to
destroy them, which proceeded already from the project to the Execution, by the
speediest, tho the most odious means, Fraud and Violence. The History shows us
in this point their Disunion, Weakness and Decay. The third was a state of
Constraint and Serui^ude, in which the Oppressed durst not complain; and found
themselves reduced by their Weakness to look upon it as a favor, That they
were only cavill'd with, instead of being totally ex irpated by Fire and Sword.
The History also acquaints us how that from the time of their being disarmed
and reduced to the mercy of their Enemies, if any stop was put to their final
destruction, it was only in regard that the then state of Affairs both at home
and abroad did not permit them to reduce so many thousands of People to the
utmost extremity; who were able to defend their Lives. Thus the Reformed
returned by degrees into the same condition, in which their Fathers had been
formerly, when they were exposed to Racks, and other Outrages. In the first
Part of this Work we behold them passing from Oppression to War, and from War
to Quiet and Prosperity: In the second Part we find the Scene altered again,
they fall a new from Prosperity into the Miseries of War; and finally, from War
into an Oppression, which Policy only hindered their Enemies from pushing to
extremity.

Their Enemies have not been wanting to accuse them of having abused that
degree of Happiness and Power, in which they were at the King's Death, and of
having occasioned their own Ruin by Factions, and continual Enterprises. But
nothing can be grosser, or more unjust than that Imposture. It is true that
they endeavored to secure themselves when they beheld their good Prince in the
Grave. The jealousies they had entertained before that fatal accident, which
had been combated by the kindness he often expressed to them, revived a new,
when the reason they had to lay them aside was remov*d by his Death: and they
found themselves reduced at that time to that doubtful floating condition,
which they had endeavored to prevent, while they could rely on the favor of
an equitable Prince. Those things seemed to them more considerable and pressing
when they appeared nearer at hand: and they found themselves still liable to be
attacked on so many sides that they judged it absolutely necessary to provide
for their safety by speedy and effectual means. Therefore the wisest and most
moderate among them, who were used on all other occasions to recommend Peace
and Obedience above all things, joined in that design. And indeed the thing
spoke of it self, and that so loud that the dullest and most stupid might
apprehend it. A Minority, an Italian Regent, old Members of the Leagues, or
Jesuits that were absolute in the Council; a revengeful Queen, who thought
herself offended, and was governed by foreigners, for whom the Reformed had no
great consideration; a great number of Factious, either old ones, the seeds of
which were not yet stifled; or new ones that daily formed themselves; an
invincible ascendant which the Court of Spain, that aimed at nothing but the
renewing of the Wars about Religion, had gained over France; and several other
reasons obliged that Party, which had been so often deceived, to stand upon
their Guard; and to take proper measures to secure themselves, at least until
time had dissipated those allarms. To pretend that it was a Crime for the
Reformed, that had suffered so much, and were assaulted by a thousand lawful
terrors, to renew their Union, to hold assemblies, and to present Petitions, is
undoubtly a ^yrannick absurdity: As if a Wretch should be impeached as a
Criminal against the State, for having cried out for help, seeing himself in
danger of falling into a Precipice, or for having taken hold of the first thing
he could light on, to break the violence of his fall. And if it be alleged
that at least after having taken measures with the Court for their safety, they
ought to have laid a side their fears; troubling themselves with nothing but to
serve God according to their Conscience, and to obey the King according to
their Duty: I answer that it would have been very reasonable and perhaps very
easy so to do, had not the Court, in the very instant they granted them any
favors, taken away more from them with one hand, than they gave with the
other. They were comforted with ^words, while they were tormented by Effects.
The Clergy granted nothing to the King without a consideration. The first
Article of their demands always contained something in favor of the Catholic
Religion; which never failed of being interpreted against the Reformed
Religion, as if the one could not have been preserved without the ruin of the
other. The Court and Clergy persisted in this way of proceeding, until the
Civil Wars broke out: and the success of the Artiefices that were used to amuse
the Reformed having encouraged their Enemies, they proceeded so far as to laugh
at them publicly, and to Violate the most solemn Promises without shame. This
may be seen at large in that part of the History that relates the disgrace of
the Duke of Sulli, the Illusions practiced at the Assembly of Saumur, the
Divisions sown among the Reformed, the Resolutions of the States, the Marriage
accomplished between France and Spain, and all the other Transactions that
justly create Jealousies. So that the same Law of Nature which teaches Man to
secure himself behin'd Walls and Ramparts, when he suspects an Enemy, against
whom he only designs to stand upon the Defencive; that Law, I say, without
doubt Authorized the Reformed, to whom the faithlessness of their Enemies was
so well known, to secure themselves against the suspicious proceedings of a
Court that had sworn their Ruin. I do not speak, in this place, of their Union
with the Prince of Conde: because that War was of a different nature from the
Rest. Religion had little or nothing to do in it; Interests of State were the
true Motives of it. The Reformed cannot be taxed with it, but the accusation
must fall with more violence upon the Catholics. The last occasioned it; the
first only joined with them, but too late, if we consult prudent Policy only:
by reason that it was no longer time to prevent the Marriages, which was the
pretense used for taking Arms. But that delay only proceeded from that most of
the Provinces and Churches did not think themselves concerned in that Business:
So that it was not properly an affair of the whole Party; but of some Lords,
who were followed by their Creatures.

Therefore there is nothing in this first degree of the fall of the Reformed,
which they can be justly upbraided for: But they seem to be less excusable in
the second, in which they are seen actually in Arms against their Prince. We
are to resolve two questions, the better to understand the matter. The first is
general, and relates to Right, viz. Whether there are occasions on which
Subjects may lawfully take Arms against a Sovereign. The second is Particular,
and relates to the act, viz. Whether allowing that there may be such occasions,
the case of the Reformed was of that nature, and they had sufficient Reasons to
Arm. The General Question is of too great a discusion, to be examined in a
Preface, in which I do not design to enlarge. Therefore I shall only make eight
or nine Observations, which may give some light to that matter. 1. I will
observe that the thing which imbroils the said Question, is that it is perhaps
never handled without Passion, or Interest. Those that have given a large
extent to the Rights of the People, have often been animated by an Interest of
Party: And those that have put no bounds to the Power of Kings are to be
suspected either of having been paid for so doing, or of having had particular
reasons which obliged them to flatter Princes, in order to obtain some Favors
from them. When ever there have been diverse Parties in a State, it has been
observable that the Weakest was ever the most fawning; and that in order to get
the Prince on their side, they extended the Rights of sovereign Power as much
as in them lay. This mischief began in the first Ages of Christianity. The
Emperors were so severe against the poor Christians, who were represented as
Enemies to the State, that those poor Persecuted Wretches were reduced to
strain the Point, to persuade them that their Religion was not opposite to
Sovereign Power. Passages of Scripture, Testimonys and Examples of the Old and
New Testament were promiscuously employed with all the Art of interested
Eloquence, which transferred the Rights of the Judaic Kings to all the Princes
of the World, without the least consideration. After Constantine had raised
Christianity up to the Empire by his Conversion, the Clergy out of interest
retained the Maxims, which they had maintained till then out of necessity: And
whereas they laid a great stress through Ambition and Avarice, on those
Passages which direct Princes to be Fathers and Benefactors to the Church, he
was obliged to continue to them, as it were, by way of re^al^ation for the
temporal advantages he extorted from them, the au^hority wherewi^h he had
invested their Predecessors. Thus those ancient Prela^es who thereby acquired
such Treasures to the Church, according to the common Phrase, laid the
Foundation of their Successors Policy; who in order to obtain great
Privileges, high Dignities, rich Gifts, and great Revenues have always been
ready to confirm to them, as it were in exchange for their Favor, the Right of
Oppressing the People, and to trample upon the most lawful Privileges of
Liberty. Those who are any wise conversant with History must needs know that
for several Ages complaisance toward the Prelates, and munificence toward the
Church were sufficient to sanctify all the Actions of Sovereigns, and even of
Persons of an inferior Rank, when they were Rich and Potent.

2. The Policy of the Popes has also contributed considerably toward the
Oppression of the People. They have given Princes a helping hand to ruin their
Subjects, whenever Sovereigns have condescended to submit to the Authority of
the Roman See. This is the way by which that See has indemnified Princes for
the independence it has extorted from them. By sacrificing the interest of the
people to them, they have recompensed them for what they have usurped over
Crowned Heads. This is the Reason that those that are the greatest assertors of
Sovereign Power in relation to Subjects, are those that are most zealous to
maintain that the Popes are the only Judges of the Differences that happen
between the State and the Prince; that they only can make it lawful for
Subjects to take Arms, and free mankind from all the Bonds of subjection.
Therefore the Catholics who were engaged in the Holy League would never
condemn it, nor treat with Henry the IV. as Rebels who sued for Pardon. The
Popes had Authorized their Fatal Conspiracy against their lawful King; whom
they had declared a relapsed Excommunicated Heretic: From whence we may
conclude that to judge of the Liberties of Subjects we must never consult Popes
nor their Adherents, who in order to make Kings their Subjects, assist Kings to
make their Subjects Slaves.

3. Should the Suffrages of all those that have spoken of this matter be told,
I do not doubt but the people would lose their Cause by the Plurality of
Voices: but if we weigh opinions, and allow the recusation of partial Judges,
the number of the Votaries for Arbitrary Power, will diminish more than one
half. If we retrench the decisive Voice of Ambitious, self interested Writers,
and Pensioners: of those that flatter by profession, or out of policy: of those
that have been forced to allow all to Sovereigns, to gain their favor by the
sacrifice of public Liberty, and of all those that have had other reasons for
what they have said upon that Subject, besides those that are drawn from the
nature of things: there will not perhaps remain so many Votaries of Arbitrary
Power as people commonly imagine. And if the rights of the people find as few
adherants, it is not to be wondered at. There is nothing to be got by asserting
that cause: and the danger is eminent. Pensions and Favors are not disposed of
by the people: and the services of that kind are often attended with a
miserable Life, or a shameful Death. To love liberty in a state where it begins
to decay; To assert it when it is tumbling; To speak for it when its
Privileges are violated by the strongest; is called Sedition and disturbing of
the public Peace, and judged worthy of the severest torments. Therefore it is
no wonder that liberty seldom meets Protectors, since those that love it, and
would preserve their Rights are accounted Criminal.

4. We may conclude from thence that this question is neither to be decided by
any consideration of number, nor yet by the quality of Assertors, among which
there are few that are free from the marks of a lawful recusation. The best way
to decide it were to consult Nature, and the things themselves: and to see what
natural Right, of which the Principles are common to all the World, allows to
be to each party. In following this maxim it will be soon discovered that the
Original of Societies, and States is very different, and that it is impossible
to imagine a source of that Civil Union, applicable to all the Empires that
have been formed in the World. But in the diversity of the motives that have
induced men to errect those Societies, or of the forms they have given them, we
will observe three things, the truth of which is undeniable. The first is that
mutual preservation was the end of those Unions; and that none of them were
ever made with an intention to give any one a power of destroying, and abusing
the rest at pleasure and with out cause. If any would except from this Rule the
States that have been formed by the violence of the strongest, which has
constrained the weakest to obey, it is evident that the said power of
commanding others is a usurpation, which gives no right to him that assumes it;
and of which the effect ceases with the cause. I mean that as soon as the
Oppressor loses the force which he abuses, or the oppressed recover their
former vigor, Liberty resumes its former rights, and Usurpation loses its
Conquests. That Right is so certain, that it is the foundation of that which
annuls all forced contracts, and allows us to break them, as soon as we are
free of the constraint that forced us to accept them. It is in vain to reply
that God presides at the Birth and Preservation of States; and that when he has
allon'd them to be establish^d by Force, those that are involved in them must
respect their Slavery as a Divine Ordinance, the yoke of which they ought to
bear with patience. I answer, that God indeed is the Author of Order and
Equity, and that consequently those forms of Government in which we find Order
and Equity are undoubtedly the Work of his Providence: but that he has never
revealed that he approved Disorder and Injustice; and that consequently we
cannot look upon a Government, that is founded on Fury and Rapine, as ordained
and instituted by God. Thus the mutual preservation, Order and Welfare of
Societies ought to be accounted the first end of those that have formed thein,
and even of God by whom they are anthoriz'd.

The second, which is also an undeniable Truth, is that public Faith ought to
be the Soul of all Governments, and that as there must of necessity be a bond
to unite the parts that compose a Body of what nature soever, Phisical or
Moral, nothing but Public Faith can make the Bond of those Societies. It is
presupos'd, by all those that unite their interests for their common defense.
Each Member using his particular endeavors expects that the others should
concur with him for the Common Good. So that nothing can be more contrary to or
more pernicious in Societies, than the violation of Public Faith. It breaks
the most sacred ties of Civil Bodies; and, as it were takes away, their very
Being. Therefore every individual comprised in one of those Bodies, has a right
to require of the other Members to keep their promise, and to contribute on
their part without Fraud and Treachery, what they owe toward their mutual
preservation.

The Third, which is likewise evident, is, that in all the relations that are
among Men, there must be something reciprocal of Course. There are none in
which the Obligations can be proved all on one side. Therefore we must look on
those that are observed between the Head and the Members, as on all others. The
Head must owe something to the Members, as well as the Members to the Head. The
Duty of these is very different, according as the precautions people have taken
in submitting themselves to a certain Power, are more or less favorable for
liberty. But there are two certain and invariable Characters in all the Forms a
State can take. The one is, that even in those, in which Liberty has the
greatest privileges, the Duty of Subjects is of a great extent, and obliges
them to submit to whatever may be advantageous for the Common Good: Nay, even
in cases in which particular losses are recompensed by the advantages of the
general. The other is that even in those in which Liberty has the narrowest
bounds, Subjection can never extend so far as to oblige men to suffer
themselves to be destroyed out of Duty or Conscience. Those must needs have a
strange depravation of mind who can conceive that when people did submit to
one, or many, it could be on condition that their Rulers should be allowed to
destroy them right or wrong, merely by Virtue of Sovereign Power. Even those
who surrender on Discretion, do it only in hopes of being preserved by the
clemency of the Conqueror, or at least to purchase the Redemption of the whole
Body at the cost of some few unfortunate Members. The Duty of Sovereigns
receives the same variation as that of their Subjects, according to the
limitations that were given to both at the first formation of the State. But it
has two Characters which answer those of the submission of the People. The one
is that how narrow soever the Bounds of Supreme Power may be, yet still it is
of a vast extent, and might be styled in some respect Infinite, in relation to
the public good, to which it must always have a relation: The other is, that
even in those States in which it is most extended, it never dispences the
Sovereign from watching for the preservation of his Subjects; nor from
sincerely applyng to that end the power he is entrusted with. It is contrary to
nature to think that destruction without a cause, upon the bare account of a
Power given to the Sovereign, can be the Right of supreme Authority. God who
might do it, if he thought fit, claims no such right over mankind. He never
destroys without a just Cause; and only to show his Sovereign Power. Therefore
there is no reason to believe that he au horizes men to exert a right over
others which he is not willing to assume himself.

5. It follows from those Truths that when a Prince endeavors, without a
lawful cause to destroy his people whom he is obliged to preserve; when he
publicly violates his Faith, which is the Seal of the mutual obligations of
his people toward him, and of his toward his people; when he makes use even
of their Patience and Submission, to ruin them the more easily; when he pursues
them with open Force, and that disdaining to observe the very formalities of
Justice, to destroy them with some shadow of Reason, he makes use of Fire and
Sword in all places, to reduce all his Subjects to his Will and Discretion: It
follows, I say, that granting those conditions, the resistance of Subjects is
not Criminal. They never have a right to attack: But after having used all the
Submissions and Remonstrances required in such Cases, after all that Prudence
can advise, to avoid falling into the utmost extremities, there are neither
Divine Laws, nor Humane Reasons, to take away from them the Right of defending
themselves. It is a Right that is born with all Men, which nothing can ever
deprive them of.

6. Example being of a decisive force in Political Questions, it is most
Certain that there is no Subject upon which so many can be alleged, as that of
the Resistance of Subjects to their Sovereign, when he visibly endeavors to
oppress them. We meet a world of them both in Ancient and Modern History. It is
the source of diverse Revolutions, which have from time to time changed the face
of the World. And even in those States in which Princes have pretended to the
highest degree of Power, the People being oppressed have often put a stop to
the said oppressions by Vigorous oppositions, which otherwise would have been
carried farther; and this Maxim, that Public preservation is a lawful reason
for People to defend themselves, is so certain and so well known, that even in
Seditions and Civil Wars in which the Ring Leaders have other ends, they never
fail to place Public Good at the Head of their Motives; to persuade the World
by that specions Tittle that their Cause is Innocent, and to engage such into
their Party as would be averse to it otherwise out of the scruples of a Tender
Conscience.

7. If any should allege that it is impossible to decide to whom it belongs to
judge in what degree of oppression it is lawful to lay a side Patience; and
that whatever we fix upon in that case, we must needs expose our selves, as
well as all the Authors that have Written about it, to inexplicable
difficulties: I answer that the Reason why those Writers are at such a loss, is
that they endeavor to find out subtle studied solutions to an absurd
Objection. No man can judge so well, as he whose Life's in Jeopardy, whither he
be in danger of losing it, by suffering the Agressor to have his Will. It would
be a cruel absurdity, to say that a Man being set upon on the Highway by a
Company of Armed Men, who have drawn him into that Peril under a fair pretense,
may not lawfully resist them, without having first consulted an able Lawyer, or
obtained leave of my Lord Chief Justice. On such occasions Nature pleads her
self, and supplies the want of a Doctor, or a Magistrate. So likewise supposing
the case of an evident Oppression, in which every one beholds the Chains that
are preparing for him; in which not only the Estates and Privileges of some
particular Persons are concerned, without minding other Rights of less
Consequence; but in which the whole State suffers, or at least a considerable
part thereof, which is not to be dispis'd; in which the most natural and most
precious part of Liberty, is at stake; in which there is reason to fear that
the Patience of the Oppressed may authorize the progress of Oppression: In such
a case, I say, no body can judge better of the necessity of making a defense,
than those who see and feel the progress of the slavery that is imposed upon
them.

8. If any body exclaims against these and the preceding Maxims, as being
attended with pernicious Consequences; as favoring Rebellion, as containing
pretenses and excuses which the Factious and Disturbers of the Public Peace
may make an ill use of; I answer, first, that it is a misfortune annexed to
several Truths; that they are liable to great inconveniences: but yet that
they are not thereby deprived of the Right of Truth, by reason that those
inconveniences do not proceed from the Nature of those Truths, but from the
Corruption of the Heart of Man, which extracts a Poison out of the most
profitable things. Thus the very Weapons of the Law are made use of to create
disputes, tho made to suppress them: which abuse does not hinder those Laws
from being Just and Necessary. Thus Casuists daily discover things in Theory,
which tho very True are neverteless attended with ill Consequences in the
Practice: which I mean of the most rigid, as well as of those that are accused
of slackness. The most indispensible Duties of Religion and Morality are so
many Arguments of Despair to Weak Souls, when represented to them in their
whole extent, with the absolute necessity thereof, attended with all their
Circumstances and Consequences. Yet those inconveniences do not deprive those
Duties of their natural Justice, and do not discharge Men of the obligation
they lay under, of submitting to them. To love our Neighbor is an
indispensible Duty. The command of loving him as our selves receives no
exceptions. It is the Epitomy of Natural Justice: It is the Summary of one half
of the Divine Law. It is the Center from which, all the Precepts of Charity
proceed as so many Lines, which is the greatest of all Virtues. Yet by the
state to which sin has reduced the heart of Men, it happens very often that he
who applies himself to that important Duty exposes himself to a thousand
dangers. Charity is only a Law to himself; and while he observes it
scrupulously, the Wicked take the advantage of it, to be the better able to
annoy him. There is no greater inconvenient than to give way to the Oppression
of the Innocent. That inconvenient is met with in the fundamental precept of
Charity: but yet the truth thereof is not therefore the less evident; nor the
Duty less necessary. This shows that the inconveniences that attend a Doctrine
do not always hinder it from being True.

Secondly, I answer, that the opposite Maxim, which abandons the Liberty of the
Subject to the discretion of Sovereigns, and allows nothing to the People but
Submission and Patience, is attended with as many inconevniencies as the other.
I confess that it would be liable to none, if we could be certain of two
things; the one always to have a good, virtuous, Prince, a True Father of his
Country; The other that having such a one, he would harken to and employ none
but true Patriots, Persons without Interest, Ambition, or Disguise, by whom he
might be well served and council'd. We may indeed, and often do see the first;
but the second is very rare; or to say better, impossible. It is easy to
determine the Fate of those People whose Fortune, Life, and Liberty pass
through the hands of those who cannot be great without oppressing them, or
Enrich themselves without their Ruin.

I say in the third place, that both sides being attended with inconveniences;
those are evidently less considerable which attend the maxim which allows
people when they are oppressed, to resist oppresion, than those that attend
that which makes it a Crime for them to oppose their own destruction. The
reason of it is that the People are commonly very ill served, very easily
divided, tired, and blinded; whereas Princes have all the advantage on their
side: That the people never perceive the evil until it is committed, when it
is too late to remedy it; whereas Princes aim at a great distance, and take
their measures, before their Subjects are aware of them: That the People often
betray each other, and sacrifice Public Interest to particular advantages:
Whereas Princes raise Soldiers among those very People, to attack them, and
money to corrupt them. So that it often comes to pass that the Maxim which
authoris^^ them to defend their Lives and Liberties becomes for them a truth in
speculation only. It also happens often that finding the Prince ready in all
points, and provided beforehand with all things necessary for his Enterprise,
the People forfeit the remainder of their Liberty, when they bethink themselves
of taking Arms to defend it. In those cases their Resistance is called
Rebellion: and the Yoke that is imposed upon them, is stilled a Just punishment
for their Revolt. Moreover the Resistance of Subjects ought never to extend to
the Life of the Sovereign. No Circumstances, nor Authority tho from the Pope
can justify an attempt of that Nature. It is the Prerogative of Supreme Power,
to fix something that is Sacred in those in whom it resides, which ought to
secure their Lives against all enterprises. Whatever Power People reserve to
themselves, to hinder the person they acknowledge for their Sovereign from
incroaching upon their Privileges, they can preserve no Right of Life and
Death over him. They are so many Tribuns of the People whose person is
inviolable, and even their faults, when they commit any, do not deface that
character of Majesty which sets them above all others, and exempts them from
Corporal Punishment. Resistance therefore can go no farther on the People's
side, than to reduce them to those Bounds to which their Authority is limited
by the Laws; or at most to deprive them of a Power which they apply to awrong
and unlawful use; when instead of employing it for the Protection of their
Subjects, they employ it to their ruin. Finally the maxim which Authorizes the
Resistance of Subjects against the unjust violences of their Sovereign being
only allowable in this one case, the Consequences thereof are not so dangerous
as they seem to be: by reason that Subjects very seldom form designs against
the Authority of Princes, unless Princes abuse it to the utmost extremity. We
commonly find, that whatever precautions have been used at the founding of a
Monarchy, yet he who is invested with the Regal Authority will by degrees usurp
some part of the Liberty the People have reserved to themselves: but there are
few examples of Peoples incroaching upon the Prerogatives of their Sovereigns.
The Prince and People may be compared to the man. and the Horse of the Fable
which was invented to explain this matter in a popular manner. As the Horse can
never pretend to free himself of the Bitt and Saddle, having once submitted to
it; the people are obliged forever to wear the Yoke, they have freely imposed
upon themselves: But whereas man by degrees extends the power he has received
from the Horse, beyond the ends for which it was given him, and applies it
wholly to his own advantage, forcing him not only to Hunt, and to serve him in
the Wars, but also to carry burdens for his service; to draw the Plough, and
to turn diverse machines: So the Prince inscensibly and as it were undesignedly
extends the bounds of his power, in so much that by degrees the protection he
owes his people, which is the source of his Power, ceases to be the principal
end thereof, and becomes an inlet of Slavery. Let all the States of Europe be
examined, and you will not find one in which the Authority of the Sovereign is
lessened from what it was at the beginning: but you will find many in which the
liberty of the people is very much decayed. It is the Fate of Monarchies: the
longer they last, the more the Prince incroaches upon his Subjects. Tho his
policy should hinder him from doing it; Time would do it for him, especially in
Hereditary States. The long Chain of Succession creates a greater veneration
for the Royal Family, and accustoms Subjects to suffer their small Usurpations
without murmuring. History affords us sufficient proofs of this Truth, almost
in all the States of the World. From whence it follows that Subjects freely
leaving their Rights in suspense, and never endeavoring to defend them until
they are violated in the most essential parts, the maxim which authorizes their
resistance against the Enterprises of their Sovereigns is not of so pernieious
a consquence as some imagine. Subjects do so seldom put it in practice, to the
prejudice of a lawful authority, that no body ought to be frighted at it: And
it is so easy for Princes to hinder it from being prejudicial to them, that
they can blame none but themselves, when it produces an ill effect. It Is but to
be proud of commanding free People, who obey out of Gratitude and Love; to keep
their Promises; to maintain the Laws, and to enrich their Subjects: To Govern
their State with Equity, instead of endeavoring to enlarge their Frontiers, or
their Authority by unjust means. It is not impossible to meet with Princes of
that Character. France has produced some Kings who have signalized themselves
by that admirable Policy. Such may be found elsewhere, and if example could
prevail with all Sovereigns to Reign thus, I could easily name some who might
serve them for a Model.

9. The passages of Scripture which some oppose to this maxim are manifestly
wrested; and cannot serve for the use they are applied to, without being taken
in a difficint sense from that which is natural to them. All the Arguments that
are grounded upon those principles are defferent in one of these three cases;
either they compare things that ought not to be compared; or they make Laws for
Societies, of that which only contains Moral Rules among private persons; or
else they contain precepts which presupose that those among whom there are
Relations of Command and Obedience, do remain, at least pretty near, within the
mutual bounds of their Duty. It is not to be imagined that God designed by his
word to destroy the Rights of natural Justice, which are only grounded upon his
own Justice: His Will admits of no Contradiction. Therefore as there is a
Natural Right which authorizes Men to defend their Lives, when assailed, at
least to ward the Blows designed by the Destroyer; and to disarm him of the
Weapon he abuses: It is not to be believed that the precepts of Patience,
Refigna^ion, and Charity, that are so freequent throughout the Holy Scriptures,
can receive an explication that anihilates a Right so Just and so Universally
acknowledged. Truths never contradict themselves. So that when they seem
anywise to contradict each other, they must be understood in such a sense as
may reconcile them. Neither would it be difficult to find the medium in which
they agree, if it did not happen as I have already said, that by reason of the
dispositions of the minds and hearts of Men, those things which are
speculatively Innocent and True, become pernicious, or impossible in the
Practice.

From all these considerations, which the briefness of a Preface does not allow
me to enlarge any farther upon, we may infer this conclusion, that tho it were
always to be wished that people might never take up Arms, and that it is even
often necessary to exceed in Patience and Submission, yet nevertheless, there
may be occasions in which oppression is so evident; in which the good of the
State is so openly assailed, in which the most Holy Rights of Justice and
Liberty are violated with so little Caution, that the defense of the Oppres^^d
cannot be looked upon as unlawful; nor can they be justly blaimed for taking
Arms for their Preservation. Nothing but Sophistry and Clamor can be opposed
to the Truth of this maxim: and I am verily persuaded that those who oppose it,
would be the first to put it in practice if being assailed, they could have
hopes to preserve themselves by resistance. Profit, Ambition, Hope, may induce
men to speak otherwise than Nature, when there is nothing present, or sensible
to give their words the Lie: But Nature resumes her Rights, and silences
Interest, and Passion, when an urgent accasion obliges man to remember the
first of his privileges, which is Self-Preservation. If it could be said that
the Soul is naturally Christian; by reason that notwithstanding her being
prejudiced by the Opinion of the Plurality of Gods, which was inspired into her
by Education, and is become familiar to her by example and custom, yet as soon
as the danger presses, and brings man to himself again, she only remembers one
God; we may also say that she is naturally instructed with the Right of
repelling Violence and Injustice; since that notwithstanding the Clouds
wherewith diverse Interests obstruct the lights she has received from Nature
upon that Subject, yet one pressing danger is sufficient to make her forget all
the foreign considerations she had been prejudiced by, and to bring her back
again to the use of the right she her self thought to have abandoned.

It now remains to know, whether the Reformed were in that condition which
authorizes the taking up of Arms. But that is a case that will plainly appear
by the reading of this History. It will discover an open Conspiracy against
them, which after many ill effects for the space of about Forty Years, to
reckon from the Reign of Francis the 2d had been rather deffer'd by the
kindness of Henry the 4th, than stifled by the Authority of his Edicts. You
will see it renewed as soon as that Prince was put in his Grave; prosecuted
during the space of Ten Years by thousand secret Artifices of the Court of
Rome, concealed and covered by all the Veils of a profound dissimulation, which
however could not hinder them from discovering some glimpses of the means that
were put in practice, in order to their Ruin. You will see the King attacking,
while his Subjects send Deputies to obtain his favor; Threatening while they
Entreat; Arming while they Implore his Mercy, amidst a thousand Terrors, by
submissions and entreaties; executing while they hesitate and are deliberating;
taking of Places the keeping of which is still allowed them for some years;
turning out their Governors, violating his own Briefs; while they to avoid the
reproach of taking Arms with too much precipitation, differ to put themselves
in a posture of Defense, which in a word ruins them half before the War is
declared against them. If to all this you add a world of infidelities committed
by the Council of that Prince; the constant practice of the Roman Church, in
what relates to Treaties made with Heretics; Henry the 3d's Declaration, the
Maxims of which had been inspired to that King by the Jesuits who had had the
care of his Education: that surprisiing Declaration by which Henry the 3d. had
acquainted the World that the Reformed ought never to trust to his Word, when
ever he made a Peace with them, because he would never do it, unless it were in
order to take his time better, and to renew the War again with advantage: If, I
say, we add all this, and several other considerations that may be drawn out of
History, it will appear clearly that the Reformed were more than convinced that
their Enemies designed to exterminate them: That they kept barely upon the
defensive; That they were forced to take Arms, but too late for their
preservation; That they tarried until the Catholics proceeded from craft to
threatenings, and from threatenings to effects, before they lost their patience;
That a Peace was only granted to deceive them; That they did not break it,
neither the first, or second time, whatever their Enemies say: and in a word
that they only defended themselves weakly, and as it were in going back against
a manifest Aggression. Their King had at that time, evidently renounced the
Title of common Father of his Country, as well as Henry the 3d. and by
en^ndeavouring to destroy a numerous and very potent part of his Subjects, he
had given them a Just occasion to defend themselves. The Chatholicks would
never have had so much Patience, had they foreseen at as great a distance that
a Prince designed, I will not say to destroy their Religion, and their main
Privileges; but only to retrench one of their most useless Ceremonies, and, as
I may say, to extinguish one of the Tapers of their Alters.

I will not insist on the secret design of the Court of France to deprive the
People in General and without distinction of Religion, of the remainder of
their Liberty; The Potent Cities of their Revenues, Privileges, Exemptions and
Franchises; The Nobility of their Luster and Credit; The Parliaments of their
Power and Majesty. This design was covered with the pretense of Religion, while
the Reformed had Citys in their Power. However the Court expressed it self so
clearly about the Case of Rochel, that no body could pretend to be Ignorant of
the reasons they had to declare a War. That City was under Subjection without
being a Slave. It was in France partly what the Imperial City's are in Germany.
The King Commanded in it; but the Authority of that command was limited by
Laws. The King had been persuaded not to content himself with that limited
Power. What they desired of the Rochilois was only to renounce acquired
advantages, which had been confirmed, and as it were consecrated, by Treaties,
by Services, by Edicts, by all that is most holy and most inviolable in humane
Right. Therefore that City was ruined, only because they were unwilling to
submit to slavery. So that the War that was waged against it, tho useful
according to a certain Policy which allows everything Just that succeeds, was
nevertheless at the bottom the most manifest oppression that ever was heard of,
as well as that of the Principality of Bearn. But I should be too Prolix if I
should urge all that could be said to prove that the resistance of that Place,
and of all the Reformed was not unlawful.

As for the third degree in which this History represents the Reformed, I have
no long remarks to make upon it. The Decay of their Religion appears in it in a
thousand ways. Their Enemies begin to quarrel with them upon the least Trifles.
Annexes, Synods, Books, Projects of reunion, the Rights of Temples, and several
other Articles become continual occasions of Debates and Disputes. Offices, and
Trades, the exemption of Ministers, the Rights of professing their Religion,
the Liberty of abiding in all parts of the Kingdom, become the subject of a
thousand Contestations. The Respect ^^e to the mysteries of the Roman Religion,
according to their pretentions expose the Reformed to a thousand Troubles: To
all the enterprises of the Clergy, to the violence of their Harangues, and of
their Petitions, and to the progress of their designs against them, whereby it
is easy to judge that their Ruin was Sworn. ^he Death of the Cardinal, soon
after followed by the ^ing, by a Minority; by a weak and wavering Regency; by
reason of the Ministry of a Stranger, not well settled yet, proved the true
reason of their being allowed some years Respite.

THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of Nantes. VOL. II.
BOOK I.
A Summary of the Contents of the First Book.
The Court is surprised at the Death of the King. Precautions used to prevent
Disorder. The Regency is given to the Queen. The condition of the Reformed; who
are dieaded and are afraid themselves. False measures taken by the Duke of
Sully. He is advised to look to himself. He is kindly entertaind at Court. The
Marshal Duke of Bouillon serves the Queen. The Edicts confirmed by a
Declaration. Remarkable Expressions. The free Exercise of Religion confirmed at
Charenton. The Reformed deceived by those Artifices, think themselves secure.
New reasons of Diffidence which awaken them. The Vengeance of the King's Death
is neglected. Impudence of Aubigni, and Cotton the Jesuits. The Court avoids
penetrating into the Causes of the King's Death. Prisoners released. Suspicions
of the most speculative. The double Alliance with Spain is resolved upon. The
Marshal of Bouillon endeavors to gain the Prince of Conde to side with the
Reformed again; Petition or Remonstrances.
but in va^n, * Cahiers answered. Disgrace of the Duke of Sully, who is removed
from the Treasury and from the Government of the Bastille. He writes to the
Queen. A General Assembly allowed for Chatelleraud, but put of to Saumur, by a
new Brief. The Marshal de Bouillon gained by the Queen. Instructions for
Provincial Assemblies. Excuse of the demands that seemed to be new. Farther
Instructions. The Assembly of Saumur, and the quality of their Deputies. In
what manner those of Bearn assisted at it. Defective Deputations tolerated.
The Marshal of Bouillons inconstancy. about the Presidentship, of which the
reasons are unknown. Du Plessis is Elected President, and excuses himself in
vain. Discontent of the Marshall Duke, who reconciles himself in outward
appearence with the Duke of Sully, and takes the part of Senevieres: the
Assembly does the same. The Court dissembles, and the Marshal slackens. An Oath
of Union: another Oath against underhand dealings, both ill kept. The Duke of
Sully's case is examined; who makes a long discourse to explain it. The
Assembly is of opinion that their Religion is concerned in that Affair. An
Anonymous answer to the Dukes discourse. The like writings in vogue during the
Session of that Assembly. A satirical Letter; which divides the Reformed into
three Orders; Malicious, Zealous and Judicious. Qualifications of the Queen.
True Charrcters of the Reformed. From whence the reports that the Assembly
designed to make a War did proceed. Artifices of the ancient Enemies of the
Reformed. Several Catholic Cities Arm themselves. A Sedition at Orleans. Du
Plessis reinforces the Garrison of Saumur, with the Kings leave. Commissioners
of the King at the Assembly, who draw the general Petition.
Cahier. The Commissioners declare that they have no Power to Treat. The
Assembly sends Deputies to the Court, and draw Five Cahiers. The Court will
have the Principality of Bearn to Treat seperately. Union in appearance in the
Assembly; where discord breaks out at last. The Power of the Deputies who carry
the Cahier, is limited. The Deputies are well received at Court, where they are
slatter'd at first, and deceived afterward; Finally, the Court proceeds even
to threats, and they are commanded to retire. Letters are sent by them. The
Assembly expects the return of the King's Commissioners; and excuse themselves
from nominating six Deputies, in which they persist after having heard Bullion.
Artifices to destroy the steadiness of the Assembly; of which some Members
suffer themselves to be corrupted. Dangerous Councils imputed to the Marshal of
Bouillon. Bellujon is censured by the Assembly. A Letter from the Court
authorizing the inferior Number against the Plurality of Voices. Bullion seems
to accept a medium; but retracts all of a sudden, by a strange advice of the
Marshal Duke, Wise advice of Du Ples^is who wards the blow. The Assembly
nominates Commissioners. Vexations of the Marshal about the success of his
enterprise. Nomination of the Deputies General.

THE whole Kingdom was sencibly afflicted at 1610.
the Kings Death: at least all those who were The Court is surprised at the
death of the King.
sollicitous for the welfare of France, and were not as yet infected with the
Maxims imputed to the Jesuits, were wounded with the same Stab that sent him
out of the World. Even those that had been desirons of his Death, and that have
been suspected of having occasioned it, or at least of having been accomplicies
in it, were at first astonished as well as the rest, and found them selves
Invovl'd in Troubles they had not foreseen, or for the preventing of which they
had not as yet taken sufficient measures. Although the Tragical end of that Prince
had been long a hatching, yet they had not provided against all the
inconveniences that were likely to attend a Death so sudden. Their thoughts
being wholly bent on the success of their Enterprise, they had not considered
the Consequences. Passion commonly occasions those Rash inconsiderate Attempts.
It hinders men from perceiving the effects of the satisfaction it has in view,
while it imploies them wholly in the pursuit of it. And it is no sooner
obtained, but the pleasure of the enjoyment thereof is interrupted by the sight
of the inconveniences that had not been considered: And the mind astonished at
the difficulties which Passion had concealed from it, discovers too late the
insufficiency of the Precautions it had taken to prevent them. So that those
who expected the greatest advantage by the King's Death, found themselves at
first at a loss about the Seditions his Death was likely to excite in the
Kingdom. The late King's Party was great and Formidable: and had it been
influenced by some Chief of consideration, it would not have been difficult to
punish the Enemies of that Prince, for the joy they received by his Death.
Moreover there were still Seeds remaining of the former Factions; which had
they been revived by the present occasion, might have reduced the Court to
great exstreams, and perhaps to have been the Victim of those Disorders.
Therefore they were obliged to use a great deal of Caution, and to endeavor by
all manner of suppleness to oblige those who were capable to cause a
disturbance to remain inquiet.

The Court met with very favorable dispositions to that Precautions used to
prevent disorder.
end. There was no Union among the great ones. Jealousy would not permit them
to choose a Chief to command over them. The Prince of Conde who could best
pretend to it, was then at Milan; and before he could come back from a Place so
distant, and resolve upon what Party he had best to take, it was very likely
that all things would be settled and fixed. Moreover, there are always too many
Persons who only follow Kings because they are the fountain of Favors and
Rewards: And consequently who easily turn their inclinations and services on
another side, when Providence places the distribution of Gifts into other
Hands. The Court made an advantageous use of this disposition of minds. They
deceived the most formidable, by seeming to place a great Confidence in them;
and employed them to hinder the Commotions of the People, which perhaps would
have gone far had any body undertaken to make an ill use of the general
agitation. They engaged, all those whose Fortune was not settled, and who were
desirous to ingratiate themselves with those that could advance them, to their
Party by hopes of reward.

After those things had been taken care of which were most The Regency is given
to the Queen.
urgent, the Court proceeded to the Affair of the Regency. The Queen obtained
it with so much ease, That no body opposed it; All the Orders or Degrees of the
State striving to out do each other to express most devotion and respect
toward her. The next task was to secure the Reformed, whom they looked upon to
be the most difficult to be managed. They The Condition of the Reformed.
had lost all in losing the King: with whom we may say, that they had seen two
Qualities expire, without which they could not expect that any would maintain
them. The one was the affection he certainly had for them, by reason of the
Service he had received from them in his greatest Exigency, and because he
looked upon them as Friends that were worthy of his Confidence, and necessary
toward the success of his enterprises. The other was Public Faith and
sincerity, which he valued himself upon, beyond all other Princes, which made
him so exact an observer of his Word, that People commonly found more favor in
the performance, than he had made them hope for by his Promise. Instead of that
they found themselves at the mercy of a Council that was ill affected toward
them, in which their ancient Enemies were the strongest, and in which a Cabal
Reigned, of which all the designs tended to the ruin of the Protestants. Who
are dreaded and yet are afraid.
Moreover they were sencible that Italian Policy, which is chiefly grounded on
Fraud and Treachery, would soon get the upper hand of the Court, and that
Promises would only serve as a mask to surprise the credulity of the People.
Therefore the Court looked upon the Reformed, as those that were best able to
do a great deal of harm in those places where they were the strongest, incase
they would make use of their advantages. But those who lived in places where
the smallness of their number exposed them to be insulted upon, took measures
which put the Court to a greater loss yet; because they might persuade those
who lived in distant Provinces, that the Reformed could expect no good from the
Government. Insomuch that many of those who found themselves too weak to make a
defense, retired in diverse places where they expected to find their safety: as
if there had been cause to fear a second St. Bartholomew at the first Sedition.

This Terror not only disturbed the minds of the People: False Measures taken
by the Duke of Sully.
it also turned the Duke of Sully's brains, who made a false step, which served
for a spetious pretense to ruin him. As he was a going to the Louvre upon the
news of the King's Death; meeting with some Lords by the way, whom he invited
to serve the young King and the Queen faithfully, they answering him that it
was a thing they were resolved to make others promise, he immediately went
back, and shut himself up in the Bastille. Then took up all the Bread he could
meet with at the Bakers, and caused it to be carried into the Castle, as if he
had been affaid of being starved there; and was resolved to take in Provisions
to sustain a Siege. It is evident that grief and surprise deprived him of his
usual Prudence and Courage: but at the same time it is most certain that any
other Man would have been as much at a loss, had he been in his place. He had
reason to fear not only that his places were in danger of being taken from him,
but also of being called to an account for what he had got during the time of
his being in Favor, which was considerable enough to create a jealousy: So
much the rather too because he had kept all the Kings favors to himself, and
had imparted his good Fortune to nobody. Whatever side, he turned himself on,
he beheld none but Enemies, the Reformed accused him of Coldness and Neglect.
The Bigots beheld his Credit with Trouble, because he was an Heretic. He had
displeased all the Courtiers by his abrupt uncivil behavior. The Queen hated
him, because he had often taken the late Kings part against her, and that the
Italians that were in her service had egged her on against him. All these
reflections crouding at once into his mind, it is not to be wondered at if he
found himself astonished: especially because he had not a Genious to take
proper Resolutions and expedients of a sudden: he required retirement and a
little meditation to think, after which he commonly chose pretty well.

His Terrors were also increased, by some secret advices He is advised to look
to himself.
he received to look to himself. As it had been in his power to buy Spies,
while he had the direction of the Treasury, he was informed that as soon as the
King's Death was known at Court, the Queen and her Confidents let fall some
words, which threatened him Personally. He was also informed that a secret
Council had been held at the Nuncios, in which he had been mentioned; and that
it behoved him to think of his safety. A Princess whom he had engaged in his
interest by causing her Pensions to be paid with ease, sent him the same
advice. All this being considered, a little Terror was excusable, and another
perhaps would have He is well received at Court.
been guilty of the same weakness. But he did not maintain the first step he
had made: he went to Court the very next day upon some words of Civility that
were brought to him from the Queen, where that Princess received him very well;
and the King who was too young, and of too easy a disposition, not to follow
his Mothers instructions in all things, ^ooked kindly upon him Those Civilities
blinded him, and whereas he had formerly given the Queen, and those she ^ov'd
great causes of discontent, which he had a mind to re^rieve, he fell into
another extreme, and offered his Services to them in terms which favored a
little of lowness. He had soon after cause enough given him to repent it, and
to discover that they only entertained him kindly at first to laugh at him.
Some have been of opinion that he was obliged for the good treatment he
received at first to the ready. Money he had in the Bastille, which they had a
mind to get out of his hands: for fear that in case they should have disobliged
him, he might have used it to his own advantage, and perhaps to Arm the
Reformed in his behalf.

The Marshal de Bouillon, who made himself feared by his Credit, was the
soonest gained of any. He did not so much as tarry till he was courted to it,
he offered himself; and made advances to the Queens Favorites, which many
people thought below him. But there was also a necessity of satisfying the
Reformed: and as it behooved the Queen, in order to maintain her Authority, not
to take possession of the Regency by broils, she applied herself earnestly
about it, after she was once certain of it. She met no great difficulty in it.
The Reformed ever possessed with the same genius, desired nothing but their
Bellys full of Preaching: and the only way to obtain every thing from them, was
but to promise them the observation of the Edicts. Therefore upon the very
first propositions made by their Deputies General, the Court granted them a
confirmation of the Edict of Nantes, in all the Points and Articles of it,
together with that of all the other Articles, Regulations, and Decrees, granted
and given upon A Declaration which confirms the Edict.
the interpretation or upon the execution of that solemn Law. The Declaration
thereof was expedited on the 29th of May, and verified within a few days after.
They would not have made so much haste about it, but that they were afraid of
giving those People that were alarmed a specious pretense of taking measures
together for their defense. Moreover the said Declaration, was couched in terms
fit to remove the jealousies and suspicions of the most Difident, insomuch,
that if expressions had not a very different sense in the Edicts of Kings, from
the Common acceptance, it was sufficient to persuade the Reformed, that they
should have at least as much quiet under the Government of the Son, as under
the Protection of the Father. But they soon discovered that those Magnificent
promises were only agreeable Illusions.

We may judge of the style of the Declaration by four principal things that
were set out in it. The first was, that Remarkable Expressions.
all the King's Subjects, both Catholics and those of the P. R. Religion
endeavored by a laudable emulation to out do one another in expressing their
Obedience, and in Actions and Deportments which might testify their Fidelity.
This praise perhaps was a little too great for an Obedience of a Fortnight's
standing: but the Commonality is often taken that way. They are engaged to give
what is required of them by supposing it to be given already. People are
engaged in honor, and are disposed to render themselves worthy of the Praise
which flatters them, by giving it to them before they have deserved it. The
second was that experience had taught Lewis the 13th's Predecessors that Fury
and the Violence of Arms had not only been inefectual, to bring those back to
the Roman Church that had quitted it; but that it had rather proved
disadvantageous to them: which had obliged them to apply themselves to
mildness, by granting the free exercise of the P. R. Religion. The third was
that the Edict of Nantes had established a firm Peace among the Subjects of
both Religions, which had never been interrupted since. The fourth was that the
Edict of Nantes being Perpetual and Irrevocable, had no need of being confirmed
by any Declaration. It was natural to judge by this Clause that this last Edict
was only given to explain the sense and force of the words, Perpetual and
Irrevocable, and that i^ determined the signification of it in the most natural
and plainest sense that could be given in the Common dialect.

We easily believe what we wish; besides, it is natural to believe that others
look upon those things as truths which appear to us certain, and undeniable.
Therefore as the Reformed looked upon those four Points as evident truths, and
did passionately desire that every body might look upon them as such, they
easily believed that the Court had the same thoughts. The major part of them
suffered themselves to be blinded by it, and imagined that a King who did
declare so plainly that his hands were tied by the Edict, of which he became
Garantee and Executor in the King his Father's room, would never do any thing
against those irrevocable and perpetual dispositions. Moreover, the Court in
order the better The free exercise of Religion confirmed at Charenton.
to heighten the sincerity which they designed to make a show of, published a
Brief that same day which confirmed the favor the Reformed had received four
years before from the late King, by permitting them to perform the exercise of
their Religion in the Town of Charenton. And to omit nothing that might
contribute to deceive the simple, Persons were appointed to insinuate among the
People that nothing wa^ so proper and so necessary in order to revenge the
King's Death which the public Voice imputed plainly to foreign Intreagues, as
a good understanding and Peace between the Catholics and the Reformed. Persons
of that Character were not wanting to intrude among the Curious and Idle sort
of People, who met together to discourse about public Affairs: and they never
failed to say that it were better to perish than to leave that cruel death
unpunished. Those words moved the Reformed to the very bottom of their Hearts;
because they imagined that all those that were obliged to revenge it, were
induced to it by the Principles of Affection which moved them. By those
Artifices those People were brought back again, who fled at first out of The
Reformed being deceived by those Artifices fall into a s^nd Opinion of safety.
fear; and all the rest were deluded into an assurance of safety, and never
perceived their Error till it was too late to remedy it.

The Clergy harrangu'd the King and Queen that year; but they only mentioned
their own affairs. At least it did not appear that they asked any thing against
the Reformed, whose jealousies they were unwilling to renew. Nevertheless they
perceived through all those affectations, that evil designs were hatching
against them, and that it New Reasons of diffidence which awaken them.
behooved them to seek out better Sureties than the bare promises of the Court.
They were soon informed that a private Council was held there, in which none
but Italians, or Jesuits, or old Leaguers, or Biggots were admitted; that
nothing was talked of there but the Marriage of the 1610.
King, and of his eldest Sister, with the Infanta, and Infant of Spain: The
breaking of ancient Alliances; the removing of the Reformed from all affairs of
State: The Annihilation of Edicts: all which things were supposed to be linked
together, the one leading of necessity to the other. Notice was taken of the
abusive answer of Villeroy to Sully, in a Council at which the Queen was
present, and in which they were treating about Expedients for the safety of the
State. The last opposed the putting of a Garrison in Lions, where it was no
longer necessary, by reason that by the Conquest of Bresse, the said City was
no longer a Frontier; to which Villeroy replied that it was nevertheless
necessary to keep Forces there because it was in the Neighborhood of
Lesdiguieres and of the Huguenots, who were as much to be feared as the
Spaniards. The Reformed also observed with grief that all the Kings designs
were buried with him; and that the Council hardly minded the affairs of Cleve
and of Juliers for Honor and for form sake. The whole project of that War was
altered, and the third part of the Forces the King had designed for it, were
not sent thither. The Command of the said Army was given to the Marshal de la
Chatre, tho it had been promised to the Marshal de Bouillon: which alteration
was made at the solicitation of the Pope's Nuncio, who was afraid the said War
might prove advantageous to the Protestants; and that the Reformed being
Commanded by a General of their own Religion, would be too severe toward the
Catholics. For the same Reason, most of the Forces that were raised by
Lesdiguieres in Dauphine in order to be joined with the Duke of Savoy, were
disbanded. All the hopes that had been conceived of seeing the Kings Death
revenged vanished in a short time: Since that far from going about it with that
Vigor that was expected, it was observed that even those who were obliged in
duty to prosecute it, took care to stifle what ever might be capable to
discover the mystery of that Parricide.

There were so many Instances of the coldness the Court had expressed to
revenge the Death of that Prince* that it almost formed a demonstration of a
desire to the contrary. There seemed to be a great deal of constraint and study
in their Mourning; and whereas they affected the contrary of all the Maxims of
the late King, people presumed that they were not much concerned at the Death
of a Prince who had put so long a constraint upon their inclinations. It was
daily observed by some words that fell from those who should have been most
concerned at that loss, that they did not look upon that accident as a great
misfortune: and the remembrance of the domestic vexations the King had been so
much troubled with in his latter years, gave great cause to suspect that those
who had occasioned them, had but little regret at his Death. The speculative
added to this, that after the fatal Blow, so little care was taken to secure
the Murderer, that he might have made his escape during the Tumult, had he but
dropped his Knife: but they were in some measure forced to seize him, because he
held the fatal Instrument of his Crime in his hand. Some Persons a Horseback
appearing at that moment, only to cry out that the villain ought to be killed,
they were suffered to escape without examining whether they went, from whence
they came; tho it was easy to Judge that their advice only tended by his Death
to remove the means to penetrate into the secret of the Enterprise: as it
happened by the Imprudence of those that slew the Murderer of Henry the 3d
upon the Spot. After the Murderer was seized, he was so ill guarded, that it
looked as if they desired to favor his Escape. All people were allowed to
speak to him; and notwithstanding the Horror his Crime ought to have inspired
in every body, he was discoursed with by Persons who expressed no great
Astonishment. Even in Prison he was allowed to speak with suspected People;
neither was any care taken to oblige a Friar to explain himself, who after a
long and free conversation with him, had the boldness to exhort him, at his
going not to accuse persons of Worth. The Jesuit Aubigni being named by the
Criminal as a Person to whom Impudence of the Jesuit Aubigni.
he had confessed himself, came of with barely saying to Servin Advocate
General, that God had given him the Grace to forget whatever was revealed to
him in confession Those of his Order have had the Impudence to say, after the
Death of that great Man, that Aubigni had never made that Answer, and that it
was invented by Servin who was a declared Enemy to their Society, to cast a
suspicion upon them of having contributed to the Death of the King. And indeed
they could not avoid that just suspicion, which w^nt farther yet in the minds
of those who had a little penetration: And more credit was given to the
Testimony of a Magistrate of known probity than to the Apology of that Cabal of
Villuins, wose darling virtue is Imposture. Moreover what Servin reported
against Aubigni, was confirmed by the Common Doctrine of the Society upon the
subject of Confession, and by the usual excuse of the Confessors who follow
their Maxims. Cotton the Jesuit and several others, And of Cotton.
bragged of the same Gift, to forget what was revealed to them in Confession by
their Penitents: and the same Jesuit had had the confidence to make very
remarkable answers to the late King upon that subject. The King had been warned
of that horrible Maxim of the Jesuits, that tho it were about the Kings Death,
yet the Person to whom it were revealed in Confession, ought to conceal it with
an inviolable secrecy. Cotton being questioned by the King himself about this
Doctrine, maintained it to be good and truly Christian; and after having
refused the objections that were made upon the Consequences of those Maxims, by
diverse illusive* Precautions, he made a shift to evade the most Terrible, by a
wretched excuse. The King asked him how he would behave himself in case any
body should reveal to him a Conspiracy against his Life, finding no possibility
to di^wade* the Wretch from doing it by his Exhortations, or advice? he
answered, that he would interpose his Body between the King and the blow, to
save him* at the expense of his own Life. But such strokes depending on certain
moments, which offer themselves without being foreseen, and in which it may
happen that the Confessor neither ought or can be near his Prince, It is easy
to judge that this ridiculous good will of the Jesuit, could never secure the
Kings Life against the enterprises of a Murderer. However the King was forced
to receive this false appearance of Fidelity, because there was none more solid
to be hoped for; besides that the King not daring to offend that perfidious
Society, for fear of proving the experience of those dangerous Maxims on
himself, was reduced to seem satisfied with those vain excuses.

They added to all the Reflections I have already alleged, that during the
course of the Information, the Commissioners They avoid penetrating into the
Causes of the Kings Death.
refused to receive such Evidences as might have served to discover the bottom
of that Mystery of Iniquity. A certain Woman who had served the Marchioness de
Verneuil, and who revealed strange things, was silenced, although Queen
Marguerite, who did not want Judgment, looked upon her deposition as not being
despicable. Even afterward when the said business was brought into question
again, the Testimony of the said Woman was rejected anew, by charging her with
a thousand reproaches; and lest a time might come in which she would be more
favorably hearkened unto, she was Condemned as a Calumniator to end her days
between four Walls. The whole care of those before whom the Paricide was
examind, was to make him pass for an Hipocondriack; and to make him tell such
motives of his enterprise, as might persuade the World that he had undertaken
it of his own accord. For Instance, that it was because the King had not
reduced the Reformed to Embrace the Catholic Religion, as he might have done.
Secondly, because he was persuaded that the Reformed had designed a Masacre
against all the Catholics the preceding year, on Christmas Day. Thirdly, that
he had done it on the account of the great Crimes his Conscience was burdened
with, for which he could hope no Pardon, unless it were by some great Action
that might prove advantageous to the Catholic Religion. Although he pretended
that these thoughts were altogether his own, it was not hard to see that they
were more likely to proceed from the Inspiration of others; and the very proofs
of the weakness of his mind, his Visions, his disquiets, seemd to many a strong
argument, that he had only lent his hand to the Designs of Persons who had
better heads than he. These thoughts entered chiefly into the minds of those
who had heard of that horrid Chamber of Meditation, of which strange things
were reported, and in which it is said that the Jesuits instructed their
Penitents in a very extraordinary manner; but yet very fit to make strong
Impressions upon weak minds. From whence it was concluded that such a Man as
this Paricide, had been a fit subject to suffer himself to be guided by such
Illusions.

The Country of the Criminal was another Source of Prisoners released.
conjectures: and all the others were corroborated by the Reflections that
might be made upon the releasing of several Persons who were Prisoners at the
time of the Kings Death, and who had been taken up upon the appearances of a
Conspiracy that was on foot, after the finding, at La Fleche, the Book I have
mentioned else where. None but two or three unfortunate Poitevins were
Executed, and perhaps not so much upon the account of their being the most
Guilty, or that their Enterprise was the most Important, as because it was
necessary to persuade the vulgar, that the others would have been punished
also, had they been found Guilty as well as these. Perhaps also the better to
stifle the remembrance of a Conspiracy in which none but Catholics were
concerned, they thought fit to Execute those Wretches, because there was a
Protestant among them; In order to persuade the World that this Conspiracy to
the prosecution of which a stop was put, and of which the King's Death might be
the sequel, was not a work of the Catholics. But nothing confirmed these
thoughts more than the reports of the King's Death, which for some time had
been spread through Europe. The News of that very Murder was reported the same
day on which it was committed, in places so distant from Paris, and with such
circumstances, as were impossible to be known without Divine Revelation, or
without having known the thing Originally. It was very natural from thence to
conclude, that there were places in which the King's Death was spoken of, as a
thing that was expected; and consequently that there was a Conspiracy by which
that Death was prepared: and that those that were concerned in it, endeavored
to conceal the secret of it, by making him pass for the Author of the
Enterprise, who had only been the Executioner.

In a word, It was thought, that those who Governed, designed to conceal the
true Motives of that Death from Suspicions of the most Speculative
the People, and not to dive too far into the secret of it, for fear of
discovering Persons of so high a Rank, and who were so nearly related to the
King, that it would be dangerous to attack them; especially in a State where
the least pretense might have filled all with Factions and Disturbances.
Nevertheless, these considerations did not secure those Persons from being
exposed to the secret Judgments of those who had a diffident disposition; and
the misery that has attended their latter years, has been looked upon by some,
as a punishment for their neglect of discovering the Authors of a Crime which a
thousand reasons obliged them to Revenge. However the Reformed were sencibly
grieved to see nothing but the Blood of so unworthy a Victim spilt upon the
Ashes of that Hero. This difference indeed has been observed between the Death
of Henry the 4th and that of his Predecessor, that this was absolutely
forgotten: whereas Henry the 4th's occasioned Civil Wars, and that it was not
the fault of his good Subjects if it was not more exactly inquired into. It was
particularly the passionate desire of the Reformed; who seeing how much the
memory of their Protector was neglected, concluded that the Court had as little
inclination to maintain what he had done, as to Revenge his Person.

All this convinced them that they had more reason than ever to dread surprises
and violences: and their The double Alliance with Spain resolved upon.
Terrors increased when they heard that the double Alliance with Spain, which
they had been so much afraid of, was finally resolved upon. In the mean time
the Marshal de Bouillon being desirous to deserve the Queen's favor, and to
improve the times, and the alterations that were happened in affairs, stoopt
even to please her Confidents; and condescended to sell his Place of first
Gentleman of the King's Chamber to Conchini, who was afterward Marquess and
Marshal d'Ancre: a Man unworthy of that Rank, whether we consider his Birth,
Personal Qualifications, or his Services. The Marshal obtained great advantages
by it, as to his Interest; but his Credit prov`d never the greater for it; and
Conchini was not of a Nature to be engaged out of Gratitude. The Queen behaved
herself kindly toward him, in order to use him as a Tool to ruin the Reformed;
and the complaisance he had for her, contributed considerably toward the Ruin
of their Affairs. But whereas that Lord had commonly more than one prospect, he
did not absolutely confide on those appearances. Therefore he endeavored The
Marshal de Bouillon endeavors to gain the Prince of Condc.
to strengthen himself and his Party by a considerable Conquest. The Prince of
Conde who had nothing more to fear at Court after the King's Death, had been
recalled there. At his first arrival he consulted the most considerable of the
Reformed: and particularly, before he would appear there, he resolved to confer
with the Duke of Sully, as if he had designed to regulate himself according to
his advice. It appeared by the sequel that he had not relished it: and he
expressed but little regar'd for him on diverse occasions. But the Marshal de
Bouillon who had a better Genius, and greater designs than the Duke of Sully,
fancied that it might be possible to persuade the Prince to return to the
Communion of the Reformed Religion; that having been bred among them in his
tenderest years, and having before his Eyes the example of his Father, and of
his Grandfather, whose Names had been made so famous by the Wars of Religion,
it would be easy to recall him to their Union. He urged very powerful Reasons
to him upon that Subject. He represented to him what might prove the
Consequences of a Minority, which was a Source of Civil Wars. He described to
him the Power of the Reformed, which having a Prince at their Head was
sufficient to dispose of the Regency. He alleged the Example of the two last
Princes of Conde; and endeavored to show him that Reformation ought to be
Heriditary to their Family, and that it was in some measure inseparable from
their Glory. He represented to him that in a Conjuncture of Affairs when the
Government was weak, the Court at odds, and the remainder of the Kingdom
divided, he might be strong enough with the Reformed to obtain the first
Authority himself. He seemed moreover to give him a glimpse that Time might
occasion such a turn of Affairs, as would allow him to think on greater things.
But whether the Prince did not think affairs disposed to so easy a success; or
whether his Education had inspired him with Irresolution and Timerousness; or
whether those who had been entrusted with the Government of his Youth had given
him an aversion for a Religion which had contributed so much toward the Glory
of his House; or finally, whether he thought it more suitable with his designs
to remain a Catholic, because he did not think it impossible to secure the
Reformed on his side without embracing their Doctrine, and to engage them to
join with the Malecontented Catholics under him, he did not relish those
propositions, and he took other measures to advance himself.

The Deputy's General obtained some favorable Answers to Petitions Answered.
the Cahiers they presented: particularly upon the Subject of the Sufficiency
or Power of the Chamber of Grenoble; and upon some disputes of the Chamber of
Accounts of Provence against the Reformed, to hinder them from removing their
Causes to that Chamber Mipartie, in w^tch the Judges were part Catholics and
part Protestants
Party-Chamber. Moreover they obtained Decrees and Commissions upon that
Subject in the Month of February of the following Year. The King also promised
to write to the Duke of Savoy, to oblige him to grant to the Reformed of the
Marquisat of Saluces, who had been constrained to remove from thence upon the
account of Religion, leave to go and come, there to receive the fruits of the
Estates they had left behind them, or to dispose of them as they should think
fit. And whereas the Reformed complained, that the Estates of Dauphine made
them contribute toward the Gifts they made to Monks and Nuns, either by way of
Pension, or to Build, or repair their Convents, or Churches: and that they
refused even to receive or Register the oppositions of the Reformed: the King
setting aside what was past, forbid the Estates to Comprehend the Reformed for
the future in the like Impositions; and to make them amends for not ordering
the Restitution of the Sums they had been obliged to pay till then, he granted
1800 Livers which should be raised upon such Lands of the said Country as were
Liable to Contributions toward the charges of the Journey the Deputys of that
Province had sent to Court to solicit that affair.

But the most Important Affair of the Year was the disgrace Disgrace of the
Duke of Sully.
of the Duke of Sully, who lost his Super Intendency of the Finances, and the
Government of the Bastille. Never did people argue more upon the Causes of an
Event, than they did upon this fall: and the Reformed themselves looked upon it
as a specimen of the Evil that was designed to them. The Court of Rome had
murmer'd so long to see the Finances in the Power of a Protestant, that it is
very likely that Religion had a share in the reasons for which they were taken
from them. But on the other hand it was as clear as Day that the ancient
discontents of the Queen, of Conchini, of his Wife, and of some others were the
principal Motives of it. His Zeal for reducing the House of Austria had made
him Odious to all Passionate Catholics, or to those that entered into the
Intreagues of Spain. His unsociable humor had created him Enemies among all
degrees of People: and even during the time of his Favor, a letter had been
written to him without a Name, but yet pretty well Penned, to exhort him to be
more Complaisant and more Liberal. The Count of Soissons hated him for the ill
Services he had often done him by taking the King's part against him. The
Prince of Conde was disgusted by him; and upon that account had followed the
advice of the Marshal de Bouillon his Enemy. Sillery Villeroy, and Jeannin, who
were the three Heads of the Council that governed all the rest, had conceived
of old a hatred of Ambition against him; because he had a greater share than
all of them, both in Affairs, and in the Kings favor. Moreover he deprived
them of the Pleasure to which Men of their Quality are most sencible, not
allowing them the least Authority in the management of the Finances, which he
had the Sole disposal of without imparting it to any body: so that they could
neither enrich themselves nor their Creatures. Being thus assailed on all
sides, and seconded by none, it was impossible for him to defend himself
against the Revenge, Ambition, and Avidity of so many Enemies. Nothing spoke in
favor of him at Court but his Fidelity, his Labors and Long Services: but
those are but little regarded there, unless one has better Recommendations; and
that Merit be seconded with Flattery, and Complaisance.

Therefore after having maintained himself in his Places for Who is removed
from the Exchequer and from the Government of the Bastille.
the space of six Months, he received an order from the Queen to resign the
Finances, and the Government of the Bastille. But that which proved most
offensive to him, was that they were taken from him in an insulting manner;
persuading him that he had desired to be discharged of them, and to receive a
Recompense instead thereof. The Pretense on which the Court gave this Turn to
his Disgrace, was that when he offered his Services to the Queen, he at the
same time offered his Person and Places to her in terms that were very positive
and full of exageration. But tho it was only meant as a Compliment, the Queen
took it in the Verbal Sense, and seemed to have understood that in Earnest,
which Sully had only said to express his Devotion the better to 1611.
that Princess. So that the Command he received to resign his Places, was penned
in such a manner, that it seemed to be a favor he had desired; the remainder
of his Employments were confirmed to him; and he was allowed a recompense of
300000 Livers for those that were taken from him. This was accompanied with
Expressions and Testimonies of his Majesty's being very well satisfied with his
Services. The Queen writ every where to give an Account of this Removal, and of
the Reasons that had induced her to it: so that she prepossessed peoples minds,
which so bold an attempt, at the beginning of a Regency, might have been
capable to shake, had Sully spoken first.

The Duke seeing himself deprived of the high Credit he He writes to the Queen.
had possessed at Court during the Life of his good Master; and dreading
perhaps that this first stroke was but a specimen of what they designed against
him, resolved no longer to appear in a Place where he had so many Enemies, and
in which he could make but a very melancholy Figure for the future. Therefore
he removed to Sully within a Weeks time, and from thence, in order to be
revenged of those that had injured him, Persons who little valued that
Vengeance, or rather to acquaint all Europe with the injustice that had been
done to him, he writ an Apology in the form of a Letter, to the Queen. It was
very strong and bold. He disowned the pretenses that were used to divest him;
and constantly refused the profer'd Recompenses. He declared that he would have
been less offended, if the morossness and untractableness of his Humor had
been alleged as the cause of his disgrace, instead of a pretense which turned
him into Ridicule; and which under the appearance of an Approbation of his
Services, deprived him of his Employments, as if he had been unworthy, or
incapable of them. He expressed his Services in it, in Terms that looked
somewhat like a Reproach: and demonstrated that he had saved upwards of two
Millions by his management. It is certain at least that he had acquitted the
King'sdebts, cleared his Demesne, and Revenues, and put his Exchequer in a
better condition than ever it had been. So that he might speak the more boldly,
because he had no Enemies that could be so impudent as to deny it. Some Replys
were dispersed against him; but at the bottom those who had thrown him down
thought they might content themselves with his fall, and so left him the
Consolation of not disputing with him about the truth of his Services.

Nevertheless that affair was canvas'd again in a General General Assembly
allowed for Chastelleraud.
Assembly which the Reformed held that year at Saumur; and had not their
Divisions hindered them from taking good Resolutions, or from putting those in
Execution which they had taken, the Court would have been very much at a loss.
The Deputys General had followed the King to Rheims, where he was gone to be
Crowned, and had obtained a Brief of the 10th of October of the preceding year,
which allowed the holding an Assembly at Chatelleraud on the 15th of May
following. But the said Brief obliged the Deputies only to Treat about the
Nomination of those that were to succeed Mirande, and Villarnoul, and forbad
them to meddle with any thing else. To say the truth that prohibition was a
mere illusion: since that the Nomination of new Deputies implying of course, as
Henry the IVth had explained it at the Synod of Rochel, in 1607, the care of
receiving the account of the Deputation of those that had preceeded them; and
that of Writing new Instructions for those that did succeed, and to prescribe
them those things which they were to solicit at Court, it was allowable under
that Pretense to speak of all the Complaints that were to be incerted in the
Petitions or Addresses.
Cahiers of the Provinces; and of all such things as the Deputies might be
ordered to ask of the King for the Common safety. Therefore all things relating
to Religion had all along been debated in Assemblies of that Nature; and they
used to draw Cahiers there to which that Assembly received an answer before
their breaking up.

When the Breef was granted for Chatelleraud, the Duke of Sully still enjoyed
his employments: but when the Time for the meeting of the Assembly drew at
hand, the Court began to fear that the said exasperated Lord would render
himself Master of the Assembly, incase they were allowed to sit in a Town of
his Government, and therefore they thought fit to remove it to another place.
Therefore the King ordered Removed ^^ Saumur by a new Brief.
the Deputies by a new Breef of the 2d of May to repair to Saumur, as a Place
more agreeable and more convenient. This alteration made all of a sudden,
without so much as harkning to the Remonstrances of the Deputies General,
seemed very strange to the Deputies; and so much the rather, because it proved
the consequence of the Marshal de Bouillon's arrival at Court. In effect this
new order was given soon after his having spoken with the Queen. This Princess
who was desirous to make use of him to divide the Reformed, dazzel'd him by the
marks of her Confidence; and asked his advice in things she had resolved before
hand; as if she tarried for his opinion to determine her self. It proved no
hard task to make him consent to the transferring of the Assembly, by reason
that he being at odds with the Duke of Sully, dreaded a concurrence in a place
where the said Duke was the strongest. His proceedings in the sequel made some
believe that he himself had inspired the thoughts of that Alteration.

Nevertheless, he had expressed very good intentions at The Marshal de Bouillon
is gained by the Queen.
first: And when the Assembly was resolved upon, he had obliged du Plessis to
draw Instructions to be sent into the Provinces, to serve as an overture to
form the Petitions or Addresses.
Cahiers of the Provincial Assemblies. The Marshal de Lesdiguieres was of the
opinion of Marshal de Bouillon; and both employed Bellujon, to incline du
Plessis to it. He consented, and having communicated the Memoirs he had drawn
to them, he found them of his opinion: So that most of the Provinces then
conformed to it. Inst^uctions for the Provincial Assembly.


He spoke about the Quality of those that were to be deputed by every Province;
and proposed the sending of Persons of Quality and Sufficiency; That they
should desire the Lords, and the Persons of most Authority to appear there;
That it would be proper to deliberate whether they could relinquish something
of the last settlements in the next Assembly, by reason of the Conjuncture of
the times; That the Deputies should, be allowed by their Instructions a power
to acquiess to what ever they should think useful and advantageous for the
Churches, when proposed by others; That it should be left to their discretion
to remain assembled all or part; until the Assembly had received satisfaction;
That the demands of the Provinces should be modest, lest they should be accused
of taking an advantage of the Public Calamities, to make a quarrel; That they
should all be grounded as much as possible, either expressly, or by good
consequences upon the Edicts and Concessions; That the weakest Provinces should
not be jealous of the strength of the others, and that they should look upon
the Power of these as their security. This Article was one of the most
necessary, because there were already, as I have observed elsewhere, Seeds of
Division in the diversity of Opinions of the Reformed according to the places
where they did inhabit. Those who lived in the Provinces where they were the
weakest, were afraid of offending the Court, and had commonly great
complaisances for it, which they knew very well how to abuse. They imagined
that as they were not in a condition to make a defense they would revenge upon
them all the Vexations they should receive from the Provinces where the
Reformed were most formidable. The others on the contrary believed with reason,
as experience has showed it since, that provided the Reformed were made
formidable in those places where they were the strongest, their Power would
serve as a Buckler against the weakness of the others; and that while they had
good Places, and good Garrisons in the Southern Provinces, the Court would be
sure not to molest those that were at their discrection in the adjacent
Provinces. After this proceeding to more particular propositions, he was of
opinion to desire the Re-establishment of the Edict of Nantes in all Points,
such as it was agreed upon with them, and consigned into their hands: as also
that the Breef of the Places of Surety should be reestablished in the same
manner; That the places lost upon the account of the Governor's changing their
Religion, or otherwise should be restored; That the keeping of all the said
places should be continued at least for Ten Years longer; That the sum promised
to maintain the Garrisons there, one half of which had been retrenched should
be reestablished; That the Payments should be made quarterly, without
Deduction, in the very Places: That Measures should be taken to prevent the
Abuses that might be committed in providing for vacant Governments, to the
prejudice of the Churches; That they might be allowed to Fortify such places
as time had decayed. He added that they should complain, that upon the pretense
of those places which the Reformed had in possession, they were excluded from
all other Employments, and Dignities, as if they could have deserved nothing by
their Services, beyond what they had; That they should desire that the
resignations of the Governments of those places, should not be received without
the approbation of the Churches; The same as to the places of Counselors and
Presidents of the Chambers; That a free liberty should be allowed for the
composition, ^mpression, Sale and distribution of all the Books that should
treat about the Reformed Doctrine.

He observed at the end of those Articles, that the Catholics Excuses of the
demands that seemed to be new.
would have no reason to wonder at their making new demands, since it was a
thing that had been done by every body since the Kings Death; That the
Catholics of Bearn and the Jesuits had done the same; That the Reformed having
lost their main Security, by the Death of a King who could protect them against
Violent Councils, were excusable in taking new precautions; That nevertheless,
those they desired were for the most part relateing to the Concessions of that
Prince.

In the next place, he proposed to desire, that the Places that had been
allowed for the Exercise of their Religion, Continuation of the Instructions.
for certain Towns, in places that were too distant, should be removed nearer,
to the end that they might be the better secured against the Insolence of the
People, by the facility of making their application to the Magistrates; That
the Article relating to Churchyards, which exposed them to so many
Barbarities, should be reformed; their Corpse being often taken out of the Grave
again, long after their Interment, That such Preachers and Confessors, as
taught that those who hold any Communication with the Reformed, serve and
assist them, are Damned, might be punished as Seditious Persons, and infractors
of the Edicts: That two places of Masters of Request might be given to the
Reformed, the first time Gratis; and a Notary's Place in every Royal Tribunal,
or at least in every place of Surety, paying a moderate Fine for the same; That
the Jesuits should not be allowed to reside in the places of Surety; That some
Towns might be allowed to them at an easy rate, in such Provinces where they
had none, and where there was a great number of Reformed; That they might be
allowed to hold a General Assembly every other Year; That the Deputys General,
two in number, nominated by the Assembly, might reside at Court at the King's
Charge; That the Provincial Deputies might apply themselves to the General
without being obliged to make their application to the Governors and
Lieutenants General of the Provinces.

The Provincial Assemblies having partly followed du Plessis Memoirs in their
Instructions, the Deputies repaired from all Assembly of Saumur and the Quality
of the Deputies.
Parts to Saumur, where they met to the number of Seventy Persons, among which
there were Thirty out of the Body of the Nobility, including those that had
been desired to assist at the said Assembly without an express Deputation; as
the Dukes of Bouillon, of Sully, and several others. The Dukes of Rohan and of
Soubise were there as Deputies for the Province of Britain; The Count of
Panjas and la Force for the lower Guyenne: Chattillon Grandson to the Admiral,
for the lower Languedock: The Marquess of Servieres for the upper Guyenne.
Lesdigueres had sent Bellujon thither, to manage his Interests; and whereas he
was not as yet certain whither he could confide in the Court, he was willing to
remain in the Union of the rest of the Reformed. Rochel which held the Rank of
a Province, had four Deputies there; and the Principality of Bearn had as many,
but there was something very singular in relation to that Princpality, which
kept at a distance upon the account of their Privileges. As there had been a
necessity to make a particular Edict to regulate the Reformed Religion there,
they pretended that the Edict of Nantes was not made for them. For which reason
they joined with the other Provinces, rather as a Confederate Province, than as
a Member of the same Body; lest in case the Union were strickter, that which
might happen to those that were regulated by the Edict of Nantes would extend
to How those of Bearn assist at it.
them, and prejudice their particular Privileges. The Court had carefully
managed that overture of division even ^n Henry the Fourth's time, and since
his Death they looked upon it as an occasion to begin the ruin of the Party;
because they might allege to the rest of the Reformed, while they oppressed
their Brethren of Bearn, that whereas that Province was not a Member of their
Body, and did not live under the same Laws, they had no reason to complain of
the alterations that were designed there. The sequel will show ^ow the Court
made use of that Expedient to overwhelm the Reformed, who had been amused by
the illusion of a Royal Promise. But now it will suffice to say, that the
Council would not allow the Complaints of that Province to be incerted in the
General Petition or Address.
Cahier, and that they were obliged to make a particular Petition

There were also 20 Ministers deputed in the said Assembly, and 16 Elders: and
whereas this had a resemblance to the States General, which the Reformed seemed
to imitate, by these three different orders of Deputies, that Consideration,
and several others as trivial and as vain, were used to persuade the Queen, and
particularly the King, a Prince who was jealous of his Authority, even in his
tenderest Years, tho in his riper years he never had the power to preserve it,
that it was a kind of Republic, and State within the State, which the Reformed
designed to erect to maintain themselves. Moreover it was observed in that
Assembly that the Deputies of some Provinces had signed their Credentials
themselves, and had signed them alone, whither it were that fear had hindered
Toleration for defective Deputations.
the Heads of the Provincial Assemblys from putting their names to it; or
whither Division had already produced that effect in the Provinces adjacent to
the Court; or finaly, whither not having been able, or not having dared to form
Particular Assemblies, they had been forced to an unusual way of proceeding to
make that Deputation. However the Assembly having heard their reasons, laid
aside Forms, and acknowledged them lawful Deputies of their Provinces.

But there happened a misfortune at the very Overture of Inconstancy of the
Marshal de Bouillon about Presidentship.
the Assembly which neither time, nor the urgency of Affairs could ever repair.
The Marshal de Bouillon had often declared to diverse persons, and had told du
Plessis by the Duchess de la Trimouille his Sister-in-Law, That in order to
avoid Discord and Jealousy, it was necessary not to give the Presidentship to
a Lord of the greatest Quality. This seemed to proceed from a very good
intention; by reason that he being the most likely person to obtain that
honor, upon the account of his Age, of his Experience, and of his Qualility,
he seemed to renounce to an acquired Right for fear of creating jealousies
among those who had not near his Merit, or Quality: He never seemed to alter
his sentiment, until his first advice had been approved of by all those who
appeared in the Assembly. Du Plessis had had time enough to communicate it to
all the Deputies, because the Marshal came to Saumur a day after all the rest.
They had so much consideration for him, that they deferred the Overture of the
Assembly, till his arrival. Without doubt they did very well to express that
respect for him, since he affected on so many occasions during the whole
Session, to take offense at their resolutions, that it was easy to see that he
had a mind to quarrel with them; and that he would certainly have taken a
pretense to do it, upon their not doing him the honor to tarry a day for him.
He had said nothing till he came within two or three Leagues of Saumur, by
which any body could judge that he had altered his mind about the
Presidentship. But then he began to express that he had another prospect, and
that he was so far from desiring that the great Lords should be excluded from
that honor, that he pretended that it could not be given to any body but
himself, without injustice. He expressed himself publicly about it at Saumur;
and carried the thing so far, that he desired the Presidentship as a thing that
was due to him; intimating that he would look upon a refusal as a sencible
affront.

The Assembly endeavored to divine the reason of that Of which the reasons are
unknown.
alteration; but they could do it no otherwise than by uncertain conjectures:
some looked upon it as an effect of the Flattery of some Deputies, who had
persuaded him that he was in some respect born President of the General
Assemblies; and that he should wrong himself to suffer any other to be
nominated in his Presence. Others imagined that the reason of his first
sentiments proceeded from a design to hinder the Assembly which was then
summoned at Chatelleraud, from honoring the Duke of Sully, Governor of that
Province with the Presidentship; but that the orders being changed as to the
place, by transferring of the Assembly to Saumur, where the Duke of Sully had
no more interest than he, he judged that the said precaution was no longer
necessary. Others thought that this new advice came from the Court, and that he
had promised the Queen Services which he would be better able to perform being
President, than having but one Vote to give, as a Member of the Assembly. Du
Plessis used his utmost endeavor to obtain that satisfaction for him, and the
Election of a President was deferi'd upon that very account, until the
Afternoon, tho it was usual to name him before the Sermon of the Overture. But
neither the reasons of du Plessis, and the example of his Province, nor yet the
threatenings of the Marshal Du Plessis is elected President.
who protested that he would retire, incase they refu^^ him the* Presidentship,
could prevail, nor hinder Ten Provinces out of Sixteen from electing du Plessis
President. None but six gave their Votes for the Marshal. Chamier Minister of
Montelimar was nominated Associate to du Plessis; and Des bordes Merci^n, Son
to that Merci^r so famous for his Learning in the Hebrew Tongue, was elected
Secretary. The He excuses himself in vain.
Marshal expressed his discontent by so many marks, that du Plessis thought
himself obliged to make excuses not to accept the honor that was done him; and
to go out of the Assembly to let them deliberate about his excuses. But he was
unanimously desired to accept the Place that was given him by the Plurality of
Voices. Without doubt there entered some jealousy in that Nominatio^: And
whereas there were Provinces whose Deputies would not have yielded to the
Marshal of Bouillon, it is very likely that they chose rather to give the first
Rank to a Man, who could not pretend to it, unless it were by his Merit and
Probity, than to the Marshal, who thought it due to his Quality. Moreover,
Sully who looked upon him as his Enemy, and who had great concer^^ to propose,
undoubtedly prevailed with his Friends not to do him the affront, to elect a
Man President whom he had reason to dread every thing from.

The Marshal being highly exasperated at this slight, threatened Discontent of
the Marshal Duke.
highly to resent it, and to retire from Saumur the very next day.
Nevertheless, the Night appeased part of his anger; and he was persuaded out of
some considerations not to make so much haste. Du Plessis gave him the best
reasons he could think on; and protested to him, that he had never sought after
the honor that was done him, either directly, or indirectly; made sincible
remonstrances to him about the liberty that ought to be allowed to the Churches
on those occasions; alleviated the offense by all the Turns he could give to
it, and particularly by the deference he expressed for him, during all the
Session But tho the Marshal seemed satisfied with those Civilities, he showed
in the sequel that he had not forgot his threatenings Who seems to be reconciled
to the Duke of Sully.
to be revenged. Nevertheless, a Reconciliation was made between him and Sully;
and after they had told one another whatever they had to say, they concluded by
reciprocal Protestations of Friendship. After this the Marshals mind seemed to
be moved again by the spirit of Concord, and to aim at the Public good, as
well as the rest of the Assembly. His advices were great and bold in diverse
occasions: especially in the Case of the Baron de Senevieres, Governor of
Chatillon upon Indre. That Gentleman had lately embraced the Reformed Religion:
which had excited the Catholics of the Town to the utmost fury against him.
They took up Arms against him, and resolved to demolish all the fortifications
of the Castle; and in order to hinder Senevieres from living there, to ruin all
the Places in which he could have inhabited conveniently. The Marshal of
Bouillon made an Ordinance upon that Subject, ^o appease the Inhabitants. But
what he did to satisfy them And Interresses himself for Senevieres.
only served to exasperate them the more: so that Senevieres was reduced to
great extremes, had not the Assembly undertaken his defense.

And indeed it behoved them not to neglect an affair of The Assembly does the
same.
that Consequence. It was a new place which Senevieres did but into the hands
of the Reformed: and it was their interest to maintain those that embraced
their Religion, to the end that such as should be inclined to do it for the
future, might not be ^iswaded from it out of fear of losing their Employments.
Moreover, the most Important Privilege of the Edict, was that, which declared
the Reformed capable of all sorts of Employments: and it was a visible
derogation of that Privilege, to consent that a Man who was in possession of
an employment while he was a Catholic, should be depri^^ed of the same for
changing his Religion: Since that being either Catholic or Reformed he was
equally quallified for it. But besides the interest of Senevieres, and that of
the general Cause, there was yet another which obliged the Assembly to concern
themselves in that Affair. There was a report of another Governor who was
hindered of declaring himself, out of fear of being turned out of his
Government the next day. All this determined the Assembly to take Senevieres
cause in hand: and by the advice of the Marshal de Bouillon himself, who sent
one of his attendants, to inquire about the excesses committed by the
Catholics, they deputed the Baron of Senas to the Court, with positive
Instructions; resolving not to treat about any thing with the King's
Commissioners which were expected at Saumur, until they had obtained
satisfaction for that disorder.

But this Resolution produced but little effect. The The Court evades and the
Marshal falls of
Court evaded the Petitions of the Assembly by an illusory Commission, which
was given to Friar a Master of Requests, a Man often employed in Affairs in
which the simple were to be amused. This Commissioner maintained Senevieres in
the Government, and in the Possession of the Castle, but it was upon very hard
Conditions, which leaving him the Title of Governor, nevertheless deprived him
of the Authority of it. Among other Clauses he obliged him to keep the
Drawbridge ever down; and to keep but five Servants about him: which exposed
him to all the enterprises of the Catholics. The Marshal de Bouillon after
having seen the King's Commissioners, refused to speak any further for
Senevieres; neither did he suffer himself to be moved by the Remonstrances of
the Assembly. As for the Governor who seemed to be disposed to embrace the
Reformed Religion, he was exhorted to make his Declaration speedily; and the
Assembly promised to use their utmost endeavors to protect him.

The Affair of Senevieres was treated of on the very first The Oath of Union.
day of the Assembly. The next day they renewed the Oath of Union, which had
been taken on other occasions of the like nature; and a Draught was made of it,
which only contained two points: The one was Obedience to the King; and the
other Concor'd and no Self-Interest among the Reformed, for their Common
Preservation under the Protection of the King, and within the bounds of their
Allegiance. And yet this Oath was so ill observed, that even during the Session
of the Assembly, Discord and Interest were like to ruin all. Nevertheless all
the Deputies took it without the least scruple; Another Oath against under hard
dealing both ill kept.
and the Duke of Sully, who had formerly opposed those Renovations of Union,
was not one of the least diligent to enter into it; because he was sencible
that the Common Cause would secure his. They took another Oath, which obliged
all the Members not to make Brigues to obtain the Nomination of Deputies
General, or to be employed in the Deputations that should be sent to the Court.
This Oath was as ill kept as the first; and those Brigues were made almost
publicly. In the next place Commissioners were named to draw the Petitions
Cahiers of the Complaints and demands they should have occasion to make; and
an order was made that all such as should have any secret or important Affairs
to propose, should declare the same to the Moderators, before they mentioned
them to the Assembly.

The Duke of Sully's Affair was treated of at Large: He They examine the Affair
of the Duke of Sully, who makes a long discourse to explain it.
made a long Remonstrance to the Assembly: He answered the Complaints of those
who had found fault with his giving his Demission without having first
consulted the advice of the Provinces: And he alleged for his Reasons, that he
had been pressed too much to have time to consult them; Besides that the Queen
had given notice of it her self, in causing the News of his destitution to be
written every where. That he did not dare to complain, for fear of offending the
Court in saying the truth. That he had not consented to his fall out of choice,
but obedience; and that he had been forced to do it in some measure. That
nevertheless he had done nothing as yet in relation to the recompense he might
pretend; not having taken any resolution about it yet, so that it was still
time enough to take advice: and he desired it upon four things: First, Whether
he should leave all things as they were? that is never more to mention a
restablishment, or recompense. Secondly, Whether supposing that he should speak
about it again, he should desire only to be reestablished in his Places? And,
Thirdly, Whether all hopes of being restored to them being taken away, he
should accept the Recompense that was offered to him. From thence he took
occasion to make the fourth Question, viz. Whether in case he should accept a
Recompense, he should receive one of Honor and Safety, or of Profit and
Convenience: that is, whether he should desire a Marshal's Staff, or a new
Government; which he called Honor and Safety? or whether he should accept the
300000 Livers; which he called Profit and Convenience? After this he desired
the Assembly above all things to consider whether his affair was General, and
related to the Observation of the Edict, or whither it was particular to
himself. In the next place he endeavored to excuse the Queen, tho she was the
real cause of his disgrace. He also added a recital of the Services he had done
the State; of which he alleged for proofs, of one side the satisfaction the
King had expressed to him about it; and on the other the Comparison of the
State of Affairs, when the Administration of it was committed to his care, and
when it was taken from him. His remonstrance would have been very moving, if to
all this he could have joined some marks of his Services to his Religion, and
to the Churches of France, while it was in his power to do it.

The Assembly declared that the Duke of Sully's Affair The Assembly is of
opinion that this Affair concerns their Religion.
concerned all the Churches; since that considering his great and known
Services, no reason could be given for his fall but his Religion. They
concluded that he ought to accept no other recompense for his Services but of
Honor and safety. They promised to order the Deputies General to join with him
in the prosecution of that affair. They desired both him and his Son not to lay
down the remainder of their Places: and they promised to assist him by all
lawful means, in case he should be unlawfully prosecuted; which they would
incert in the Instructions of the Deputies General. This Protection was due to
the Duke by the Churches, if it be true that his affection for them transported
him beyond the bounds of Prudence and Respect, in the Council where Villeroy
proposed to put a Garrison of Switzers into Lions, contrary to his advice, as I
have heretofore related it. Things went so far between those two Lords, and
Villeroy spoke of Sully and of the Reformed in terms which expressed so much
contempt, and inveterate aversion, that it is said, that Sully answered him
that he would find a way to hinder him from sacrificing them to the Policy of
Spain: and that he even threatened to strike him, which added a potent Reason to
those which the Cabal of Spain had already to remove that surly superintendent
out of the Treasury, and to ruin his Credit. The Remonstrance he had made to
the Assembly, being designed for the Public, as well as for them, the Copys he
dispersed of it occasioned the Answer of an unknown Person, Entitled
Advertisement given by an Overseer of Charenton to the Assembly of Saumur.

It was properly a Satyr against the Duke, which under Anonymous Answer to the
Duke's discourse.
the Notion of remonstrating what answer ought to be made to his four
Questions, turned him into Ridicule in a very scornful manner. The Author in
the first place told them that it was not necessary to exhort the Duke to keep
the Places he had left, because he was sufficiently inclined to do it of
himself. That they should advise him to stick to his first proposition, viz. To
leave things in the State in which they were, without endeavoring either to be
restored, or to receive a recompense; and to egg on his Generosity in that
point. That they should remonstrate to him that it would be vain to attempt the
second, viz. To be restored; since his Place was taken, and in the possession
of a Man as easy of Access, and as Civil, as Sully had been difficult and
Surly: It was Schomberg, who was as lavish, as Sully had been rigorously
sparing. That as to the Third, about the recompense that was offered him, they
should persuade him to submit to the King who would have him to accept it. That
upon the Fourth, which related to the nature of the Recompense, he ought to
declare himself about it. That what was befallen him, ought to be looked upon
as one of those Eclipses of Fortune, which are so frequent; and which only
relating to himself, did no wise concern the Reformed Religion in general. That
Kings were common Fathers to all their Subjects, and use them all alike. That
the Assembly would be to blame to Insist too much in that affair, and to take
the Duke's part: That both the Catholics and Protestants would would find
fault with it, as well as with the Oath of Union which they exacted from the
Nobility: and he compared that Engagement, en passant, to the League which had
been abhorred by every body. He reflected upon the Duke, who was one of the
first that signed the said Union, of which he had formerly condemned the
Example in the Leaguers. He made a distinction between Places that were
Hereditary and such as were properly only Commissions; and maintained that when
ever Kings gave Places of that kind, they retained the liberty of disposing of
them at pleasure: which was the Duke of Sully's case; The superintendence not
being an Office, but a Commission. In order to destroy the Vanity he drew from
his Services, he reflected upon the Riches he had got: and because they knew
that he was in dread of his Person, he assured him possitively that the Court
had no secret design against him: but told him indirectly that they were not so
much afraid of him, but that they might undertake it openly, when ever they
had a mind to it. The whole concluded by a smart sensure on the Assembly for
meddling with affairs of that Nature, which were out of their Province; and by
an Exhortation to them, to keep within the The like Writings in Vogue during
the Sessions of the Assembly.
bounds of Humility and Modesty, as well as of Duty.

Works of this kind were very much in Vogue during the Session of the Assembly.
Several Satyrs were published against the Reformed Religion, and against those
that had been employed during the Life of the Late King. The Catholics seemed
inclined to be revenged on the Catholicon, which had discovered the Ridicule of
the Designs and Actions of the League so agreably. Pamphlets came out daily in
imitation of it; Harangues, Discourses, Pictures, Tapstry work, etc. We may
place in that number a Letter published under A Satyical Letter which divides
the Reformed into three Orders.
the name of a Reformed, Printed with the Publishers Name to it, which spoke
very ill of the Assembly of Saumur. The Author divided the Reformed into three
orders; of which he called one the Malicious the other, Zealous, and the Third,
Judicious. The Malicious according to his Notion, were either Ambitious, or
Self-Interested; and desired Malicious.
nothing but War, as the readiest way to rise or grow Rich. He ascribed Nine or
Ten Reasons to them which they made ^se of, to persuade the others to be of
their Sentiments. First, The consideration of the Minority, which emboldded
their Enemies to attempt every thing. Secondly, The Conspiracy of the Pope, the
Jesuits, and the Clergy against the Reformation. Thirdly, The hatred of several
Members of the Council against them. Fourthly, The Queen's easy Temper, which
might easily be workt upon in order to their Ruin. Fifthly, The dread that all
these things ^ight easily form a Party to Exterminate them, before their being
in a Condition to make a defense. Sixthly, Their being refused Justice in
diverse Places, and upon diverse Points. Seventhly, The Places and Governments
that were taken from some of them without the ^ast pretense. Eighthly, The
Practices and Intreagues that were used to Corrupt their best Heads. Ninthly,
The Pensions that were offered to some of them to betray the secrets of their
Brethren. Tenthly, Finally, the divisions, and diffidences that were sown among
them to weaken them, which they were persuaded proceeded from the Court. It is
apparent by this that the Person who had written this Pamphlet was very well
acquainted with their affairs, since he explained so openly the Reasons the
Reformed had to be afraid; and perhaps taught them some which they only
suspected: as Practices and Pensions.

The Zealous, according to this Author, were naturally Jealous, and their Maxim
was, that diffidence is the Mother Zealous.
of Safety. The Writer mixing Railery, with serious Reflections in this place,
made them say that Huguenot, and Jealous, were Relatives, and were the
Consequence of each other, as Monk and Shaved. This disposition of their minds,
continued he, rendered them the sport of the Malicious, who met in them fit
Instruments ready to serve their Ambition and Avarice. The Judicious, according
to him, Judicious.
were only those who looked upon Civil War as the worst of all Evils, and who
in order to avoid it, kept within the bounds of obedience. He endeavored after
that to refute the Reasons of Fear, which he had alleged: But his Arguments
were not strong enough to destroy them: And whereas the only remedy he proposed
against the Conspiration of the Jesuits and of the Clergy, was the sincerity
and promises of the Council; the Authority of the Parliaments, and notable
Societies, and the good will of the Queen, we may say that he confirmed those
Reasons, instead of refuting them; since the main reason that alarmed the
Reformed, was that they found little Sincerity in the Council, little Justice
in the Parliaments; and waving her Intentions, little solidity in the Mind of
the Regent. She was Turbulent, Character of the Queen.
Revengeful, Ambitious, could not contain her self: and those who did not love
her, said, that she had all the ill Qualifications of Catherin de Medicis; but
none of her great and Royal Inclination. She was like her in being prepossessed
in favor of Astrology; and the advice of the best Politicians could not
prevail over the Observations of Fabroni, who drew Figures of the State of
Heaven, upon all things of Importance that related to that Princess. The Truth
is, that whether accidentally, or otherwise, he succeeded in diverse of his
Predictions, which the event proved to be as just, as could be. That of the
Kings illness, which stopped him by the way, going from Paris, to give orders
about the defense of the Coasts of his Kingdom, against the Descent threatened
by the English, proved exactly according to the Prediction of the said
Astrologer: and that of another fit of Sickness which the said Prince had at
Lions some years after it, proved no less exact. So that the Queen had as much
Faith in his Predictions, as if they had been so many Oracles. This Credulity
ruined all her affairs: and the same thing happened to her which commonly
happens to all those who are Governed by the like Maxims; that is, she could
neither obtain the advantages that were promised to her by the Stars, nor avoid
the misfortues she was threatened with. At least we may find by the comparing of
the Lives of those two Queens, that the one was much happier than the other.
Catherin who had so often exposed the State within an Inch or two of Ruin, to
retain the pleasure of Commanding, nevertheless maintained ^er Credit almost to
the last moment of her Life: But Mary soon lost her Authority, and received a
Cruel Punishment for her Intreagues toward the latter end of her Days. The
first found all her Council in her own head, and wanted no body to guide or
direct her: The last was too much governed by her Passions and her Confidents.
Nevertheless the Author I am speaking of, enlarged very much upon her praise,
and represented her as a Princess that had never had an equal. That was the
Style of those days; and sordid flatteries became so much in vogue, that even
those who banished her from the Government, raised her up to the Skies, by
their Elogy's. She had wherewithal to comfort her self even in her Exile, if
she took any delight ^^ Panegyricks: the only good her Enemies allowed her. The
Author concluded with upbraiding the Reformed, for ^e haughtiness he found in
their behavior. He accused ^em of demanding favors, in the same tone as
Spaniards ^sk for Alms; That is with a drawn Sword, and haug^y Air, as if they
had required the payment of a just ^ebt: and he would persuade them that they
had no just ^retence either of fear or jealousy.

It would have been easy to have made a more judicious distribution of the
Reformed, by dividing them into (...) Character of the Reformed.
three; viz. The Lords of eminent Quality, who made use of the others for their
particular ends: The Persons of Integrity, who were sencible that no good could
be expected from a Council governed by the Jesuits; and who for that reason,
endeavored by all lawful means to secure themselves against Perfidious,
Implacable Enemies: and the Timorous, who were either naturally weak and
indifferent, or softened and made tractable by the Artifices of the Court. The
first and last, occasioned all the Evil: Those made use of the Zeal of the
second, to make themselves considerable at Court; and these abandoned the
others as soon as the Court offered them a shadow of quiet.

I will observe in this place before I proceed any farther, From whence the
reports proceeded that the Assembly designed to make War.
the Cause of those Writings against the Assembly. No means were omitted to
oreate jealousies in the Catholics about it, as soon as the Reformed had
obtained leave to hold it. It was reported that they designed to make excessive
demands; and to take up Arms to compel the Court to grant them. The Memoirs
sent into the Provinces, to serve as a project for the Instructions of the
Deputies which the particular Assemblies did send into the General; of which
the Court had an account by their Pensionaries, did not a little contribute
toward the confirmation of those common reports The demands which some of the
Provincial Assemblies added to those of the said Memoirs, likewise contributed
considerably toward it. Those who had seen the Assembly of Milhau, recalled it
to mind upon this. They said that of five things that had been proposed in it,
there only remained two unobtain'd, viz. Two Places of surety in every Province
in which the Reformed had none; and that the Tithes of the Reformed might be
employed for the payment of their Ministers. They magnified the Consequences of
the Union the Assembly was to swear; saying that thereby, the Reformed would
oblige themselves to maintain each other in all the Governments; and in all the
Offices the late King had given them; even in all the Cities, Towns, or Forts,
etc.
Places they held, besides those that were set down in the Breef of the Places
of Surety. And whereas it was not likely that the Court would comply with all
those things, they concluded that the Reformed were going to take measures in
order to make a War. But that which is most to be wondered at, is that there
were some among the Reformed who seconded those extravagant reports. The
Marshal of Bouillon was one of them; and some accused him of having told some
Catholic Citizens and others at his going from Saumur, the Assembly being
broke up that they had a Peace at last; but that it had been obtained with a
great deal of pain and trouble. Nevertheless, all the rest of the Assembly
protested that they had never mentioned the least thing tending to a War,
during the whole Session. This reproach was made to the said Lord with a great
deal of sharpness by the Dukes of Rohan and of ^ully, who fell out publicly
with him. It is very likely that he had no other design in spreading this
report, but to per^ade the Queen that he had done her great Services; and that
he was of great use to her to keep the Reformed within the bounds of their
duty. However this made deep impressions upon the People; and notwithstanding
the ^rotestation of Sixty Persons, who affirmed that the Assembly had not had
the least thoughts of War, the Court at that ^ery time alleged the said
pretended design of a Civil War as a Crime against the Reformed, and did since
renew ^e said accusation against them, as if it had been plainly ^erify'd.

The ancient Enemies of the Reformed who did at that Artiffices of the ancient
Enemies of the Reform^d.
^ery time take all their measures in order to destroy them, ^conded that
report as much as in them lay, and they made people take such extraordinary
Precautions in diverse pla^es against this Chimerical War, that they created
real sus^icions in the Reformed, who could not imagine the reason of those
panick fears. Whether the Court really entered into those fears, or whether
they seemed to credit them out of policy, in order to remove Persons from
thence which were troublesome to them, they took that pretense to send the Duke
d' Epernon to his Governments, and the Prince of Conde into Guyenne. Moreover
they cunningly caused it to be reported that the Prinee would go through St.
John d' Angeli, in order to bury the Prince his Father, who by reason of the
Lawsuits in which his Widow had been involved upon the account of his Death,
had not as yet received the last Duties. That City was one of the most
considerable of those that were in the hands of the Reformed. The Prince was
born and had been bred there by the Reformed, until the time they restored him
to Henry the IV. So that his Name was still held in great veneration in the
said City; and there was a great deal of reason to fear his Credit, in case he
should attempt any thing there. The Governor who was the Duke of Rohan, and
his Lieutenant La Roche Beaucour, were both absent at that time, being Deputed
into the Assembly: so that there was no Person of Authority in the City, to
oppose the Princes designs. Therefore the Assembly thought fit to send La Roche
Beaucour thither, under pretense to receive the Prince, and to hinder him from
burying his Father with the Roman Ceremonies; until he received new orders from
them upon that Subject: but the true motive of it was to prevent the Prince's
attempting some greater thing by the by. Thus the same pretense served at once,
for the one to lay the snare, and for the other to prevent it. If the Prince
had any design, that diligence prevented it for that time, and saved the Place,
but they lost La Roche Beaucour, who had like soon after to have delivered it
into the Queen's Power.

There also appeared marks of a great dread in other places. Several Catholic
Citys take up Arms.
Some Catholic Cities in Poitou and in Limousin put themselves in a posture of
defense, as if they had been afraid of a surprise: other Towns did the same
upon the River Loire. Even Chartres tho at a great distance from the Assembly,
and almost at the very Gates of Paris, took up Arms, and placed Corpse de Guard
at their Gates. Things proceeded farther yet at Orleans: An unknown Person, or
one at least whom they would not suffer to be known, gave some advices there
which tended to a Masacre of the Reformed. He frightened them with the designs
of the Assembly, and told them that the Reformed had appeared in Troops about
the Walls of the City, with a design to make themselves Masters of it. Those
Insinuations maliciously sown among the People, excited a violent Sedition.
Some of the Citizens proved so simple as to cry out to Arms: They made
Baricado's in the avenues: They used as many precautions as if Orleans had
already been blocked up by the Enemy: The Magistrates searched the Houses of
the Reformed for Arms, which they were informed had been laid up there. This
exactness saved them from the fury of the People; by reason that they found
neither Arms nor Am^^ition, nor the least signs of any such enterprise among
them. After the Sedition was stopped in this manner, an enquiry was made after
the Authors of it, and one of the Inhabitants who first cried out to Arms was
put in Prison. But he was transferred to Paris, where he died in Prison before
his Trial in a very suspicious manner. It was reported that he died out of
fear, thinking that it was impossible to avoid the punishment he had deserved.
But the Reformed who did penetrate into the secret design of those ^ovements,
and who were sensible what their ancient Enemies the Jesuits were capable of,
suspected that he was ^ut to death, in order to remove a Witness of their
secret ^ntreagues.

The Duke of Sully made a journey from Saumur to Chatelle^aud, at that time
which the ill-intention'd also laid hold of; and all those things gave them an
occasion to call to mind the year 1562, and 1567. in which the Reformed seized
several Places, to hinder the Court, whose designs they had ^otice of from
surprising them, they not being in a po^ture of defense. The Assembly being
informed of these Transactions, and not thinking themselves safe, ordered du
Plessis to raise 150 Men, to reinforce the Garrison of Saumur: and they were so
unwilling to offend the King, that they writ to him to beg his leave for their
raising of the said Men. Du Plessis Fortifies the Garrison of Saumur, after
having asked the King's leave for it.
All these circumstances being put together, may show that the Assembly had not
the least thoughts of making War: by reason that if they had had any such
design, those agitations of the Catholics would have afforded them a plausible
pretense to declare it. But had they done so, it would certainly have been
said, that the discovery of their design had given the Catholics cause to take
such precautions as they did: whereas it cannot be denied, with the least
appearance of Equity, that the Reformed remaining quiet notwithstanding all
these Seditions and taking up of Arms, the Catholics were the Aggressors.
Their design was to make the Reformed commit some oversight, either to upbraid
them with it, or to take an occasion from thence to exert more plausible
Injustices against them for the future. But tho their design did not succeed,
yet they endeavored to represent the false reports which had served as a
pretense to their allarms as real truths; and did publicly declare that the
divisions which were formed in the Assembly hindered them from making War: a
thing which excepting the discourse of such as had a mind to please the Court,
never had the least ground, besides the desire the Jesuits or their adherents
had that it should prove true.

During these transactions, Boissise and Bullion were deputed Commissioners
from the King to the Assembly.
by the Court to the Assembly: They arrived at Saumur some times after the
overture; and were at first visited by six Members of the Assembly, by whom
they were sent to Compliment them as soon as they had notice of their arrival.
Two days after it they came to the Assembly, and delivered the Letters from the
King and Queen, which excepting some terms of good will, only were Credentials.
After the said Letters had been read with the usual marks of Respect; they
assured the Assembly that his Majesty would perform what ever had been promised
to them for the time past, and that whatever might seem doubtful or ambigious
should be interpreted favorably; after which they exhorted them to proceed
with speed to the Nomination of six Persons, out of which the King was to choose
two to reside near him, and ^here to perform the general Deputation. Du Plessis
answered in the Name of the Assembly; returned thanks to ^he Commissioners, and
promised a perpetual Obedience. After which they passed from Compliments to
deliberations: and during 12 or 14 Days they held Conferences with the King's
Commissioners, who came sometimes to the Assembly, and sometimes received the
Deputies at their Lodgings, to hear their propositions. Several of them were of
great consequence, which I will give an abstract ^f elsewhere. But I must
observe in this place, that the ^ssembly having declared at first, that they
would do nothing until they had obtained satisfaction about the affair ^f
Senevieres, the King's Commissioners delivered Letters to ^^em upon that
Subject; with a Copy of the Decree of the Council, which empowered Friar,
Master of Requests, to take ^^formations of the said business upon the Place,
to try the ^uilty, and to give a definitive Sentence, with the neighboring
President, or Court of Judicature.

The Assembly expecting a better issue of this Commission ^^an it proved, were
satisfied and applied themselves to form ^^e General Petition, or Address.
Cahier, in order to communicate it to the ^ommissioners. They thought they had
been fully im^ower'd to treat and to conclude with them: but they ^ere not sent
for that. Their Orders were to frustate, ^^nd to discover the intentions of the
Assembly, to im^rove conjunctures, and particularly to oblige the Deputies ^o
break up as soon as possible. They performed their Commission punctually, and
improved occasions like skilful Politicians. As soon as Lusignan, Aubigni, and
some others had communicated the chief demands of the Assembly to them, they
answered that the alterations made to the Edict, were inconsiderable, and that
the most considerable among the Reformed had given their consent to it; That
during a Minority the Queen could not reverse alterations that had been made
with so much precaution; and that tho she should do it, it would be impossible
to obtain the verification of it. Their answers upon the other Articles were in
the same style: and they began anew to press the nomination of the Deputies
General; The preparation of the Cahier, which the two Deputies the King should
choose, were to be entrusted with; and the breaking up of the Assembly, which
having only been allowed of for the election of the Deputies General; and now
occasioning Jealousies and difidencies every where, ought to break up as soon
as they had performed what they were empowered to do.

They repeated the same things in the Assembly. They disputed upon several
Articles. They offered moreover to confer with the Commissioners of the
Assembly upon all the Articles of the Cahier, if they thought it fit, as if
they had been empowered to come to any agreement: and in general they did not
seem to find any thing unjust or excessive in the demands of the Assembly. But
however as those Contestations were contrary to their main design, viz. To
oblige the Assembly to break up as soon as could be, they resolved to declare
that they were not empowered to grant their demands. Therefore coming into the
Assembly the next day, they renewed the assurances they had already given of
the King and Queen's good intentions, and remonstrated that it would be more
suitable to the Authority and Dignity of their Majesty's; and to the particular
advantage of the Reformed to address themselves to the King to obtain a
favorable answer; pomising on their parts to testify their Obedience, and to
use their endeavors to obtain what they desired, by reason that they were
sensible that the preservation of the Reformed was necessary toward the good
of the State. This discourse ended by the usual conclusion of nominating six
Persons to the King, and to break up the Assembly.

Their design was to render all the Resolutions of the Assembly inefectual, and
to oblige them to break up without The Assembly sends Deputies to the Court.
any satisfaction, as it really happened: and it would ^ave been done all of a
sudden, had the nomination of the ^^x Deputies and the Cahier of the demands
been sent at the ^^me time: But the Assembly only followed the advice of ^^e
King's Commissioners in part: They sent their Petition, or Address
Cahier (...) the Court, but they designed to deferr the nomination of ^^e six
Deputies, until they had received an answer to their ^omplaints and demands.
The design of the Court was ^^ite different; and they would not give their
answer till ^e nomination had been made, in order to dissolve the ^ssembly by
authority, in case they would not be satisfied ^^th such answers as should be
given them. So they ^ade their Cahier, and divided it into five Chapters, or
dife^^t Cahiers. The First was the General Cahier, which con^n'd And makes Five
Cahiers.
57 Articles. The Second was a Collection of particular Demands and Complaints.
The Third contained the prticulars of the private Articles of the Demands made
by (...) Provinces, out of which the matter of the general Ar^les had been
taken, and particularly of that which de^anded the re-establishment of the
Edict in its first extent. ^^e Fourth was a Memoir of the Churches, which did
^mplain that the exercise of their Religion was settled in ^tant places, and
desired to have them transferred in near^ and more convenient places. The Fifth
only related (...) the Places of Surety, of which the condition was set ^^rth
at large.

They would fain have joined the Affairs of the Principa^y The Court will have
the Country of Bearn to Treat seperately.
of Bearn to those of the other Provinces. But the ^ourt proved inflexible upon
that Subject. They would ^ver suffer the Deputies to meddle with it: and those
of ^^arn was obliged to solicit their Affairs separately. The ^^sembly was
desirous to set down one Article in their be^^lf in their General Petition.
Cahier; by which they humbly ^^gg'd of the King to cause the Edict of 1599 to
be main^^in'd in Bearn, and to do the Deputies of the Country Justice upon
their Complaints. This Petition was written in the Name of the united Churches
of France and Bearn, to the end that it might appear that tho the Kingdom and
that Principality had different Rights, in relation to the Political
Government, yet there was something common among them which united their
Interests, viz. the Cause of Religion, and Liberty of Conscience. They added in
the said Instructions that the Assembly would not be satisfied, unless the
Deputies of Bearn were contented. The reason which obliged the Assembly to
speak thus, was that the Deputies of Bearn gave clear proofs that the Edict of
1599 was daily violated by the Catholics; and that the Clergy almost openly
declared their design to reasume their former Power and Authority in the said
Province. But they were obliged to comply with the Court in this point; and to
divide, though much against their will, the Churches of Bearn from those of the
other Provinces, in the prosecution of their Affairs.

While they were employed about the Cahier, there still Apparent Union in the
Assembly.
appeared Union in the Assembly. The Marshal de Bouillon who together with
Lesdiguieres and du Plessis had drawn the Memoirs on which the Provinces had
formed their Instructions, to the contents of which the Articles of the Cahier
were limited, maintained and seconded them as much as any body; and gave
reasons to show the Justice and necessity of the most Considerable, which
removed all the difficulties others expected to meet in them. The Duke of Sully
did not lose that opportunity to show that he preferred the Common Cause before
his own. He made a new Discourse to the Assembly, in which he declared that he
did not desire that the General Cause of the Churches should be engaged for his
Interest, and desired them to alter the Articles that related to him. They
returned him thanks for his good Intentions, and left the Articles as they
were. But when the time came to elect the Deputies to carry the Petitions or
Addresses.
Cahiers and Letters of the Assembly to the King, they all broke out of a
sudden into Brigues and Factions. So that they had Contestations even upon the
manner of naming them; every one being desirous to promote that which seemed
most favorable In which disc^rd breaks out at last.
to his designs. Some proposed to refer the Election to Chance, in which
Interest cannot prevail: But finally, they resolved to make the said nomination
by Provinces, and to submit to the Plurality of Voices. Thus the Deputation
fell to the Barons de la Case and de Courtomer, To Ferrier Minister of Nimes,
and to Mirande and Armet of the The Commons.
third Estate. Their Instructions differed but little from the Cahiers that
were delivered to them: They were only allowed to submit to a small number of
Offices of Sergeants and Notaries, which the Assembly desired for the Reformed
in every Baillywicke. The King's Commissioners had made a great business of
that Article; as if the multiplication of Places and Offices had been very
prejudicial to the State: but those reasons were never found very weighty, when
the Court wanted Money: and the number of Offices has perhaps been increas*d
one half since that time. The difficulty therefore did not proceed from the
fear of overburthening the People: The Court has but little regard to that
consideration; but they had no mind to oblige the Reformed, and public good
was alleged to them as a plausible reason for a refusal.

But the Chief Article of the Instructions was that The Power of the Deputies
that carry the Cahier is limited.
which limited the Power of the Deputies. The Assembly only allowed them to
Confer upon the Articles of the Cahier, in order to explain them, and to show
the Justice and Necessity of them: But they did not allow them to conclude any
thing; and they referred the taking of their last Resolution, till they had
received an account of the intentions of the Court. The Reasons they urged for
putting such Limitations to the power of their Deputies, was that the King's
Commissioners not having had a fuller power, and not having been Authorized by
the Court to proceed to the least conclusion, it was not reasonable for the
Assembly to give their Deputies a greater Power. But the principal reason of
several Members of the Assembly was, that they saw Persons in that Deputation
who had it by the Interest of the Marshal de Bouillon: for which reason they
supposed that they would be governed by him. His behavior had confirmed the
suspicions that were conceived at the Overture of the Assembly, of his having
Engagements and Correspondencies with the Queen: and consequently that by
putting the Power of Concluding into the hands of Persons that were his
Creatures, they would be exposed to the Mercy of that Princess and of her
Council. The Marshal de Bouillon opposed those restrictions as much as in him
lay: and the thing being resolved upon contrary to his Sentiment, he expressed
great dissatisfaction at it. The Deputies also murmured at the small Confidence
that was reposed in them: and they declared at their return, that had not their
Power been limited so much, they would have brought more satisfaction to the
Assembly: as if the Stubborness of the Court had only proceeded from their
being offended at that defect. Those Reflections after the Evil are very common
in the World. People fancy always that other means would have proved more
effectual, because those that have been used have not succeeded: and to cry had
such or such a thing been done, is the Universal Remedy the Vulgar applys to
Affairs which can no longer admit of any.

The Deputies were kindly received at Court: Commissioners The Deputies are
well received at Court, where they are flattered:
were appointed to treat with them, and they were promised a quick dispatch;
and that their Cahier would be returned to them with favorable Answers. They
did not fail to flatter the Assembly with those good hopes; but they vanished
in a few Days. As soon as the Court was satisfied that there were seeds of
Division in the Assembly, which they might easily improve to their advantage,
they changed their behavior; and after several Conferences, the Deputies were
told by the Chancellor that the Petition, Address, Demand, etc.
Cahier was answered; that the Places of Surety were allowed them for five
years longer: That 15000 Crowns more was granted them for the Sallery of their
Ministers, and some other Articles which might pass for something. But the And
afterward deceived.
Chancellor gave them to understand that all the rest was favorably answered;
yet that the Cahier should not be returned to them, no not so much as
Communicated to them, nor the Breefs delivered into their hands, before the
Nomination of the Deputies General. This answer neither satisfying them nor the
Assembly, they were ordered to make earnest solicitations, that the said
answers which were represented to them to be so favorable might be
Communicated to them; and to promise that the Assembly would Nominate the
Deputies General as soon as they had seen those Answers, which they might rely
upon in case the said Answers were as advantageous as they reported. But they
were yet less hearkened unto in those Remonstrances than they had been in the
preceding. Particularly when they expressed that the Assembly was not
satisfied with the substance of the Breef for the keeping of the Places, or
Cities of Surety, because it prejudiced that which they had obtained in 1605,
which confirmed to them the keeping of all the Places they were possessed of:
whereas the new Breef was written in terms which made them lose part of them.
But they were very much surprised when a Contestation was formed upon the Breef
of 1605, as if the Court had not believed it true: or that by some new
Interpretation they had found the secret to pervert the sense of it. That
affront fell upon the Duke of Sully, who had been the Negociator of that
Affair, and the bearer of the Breefs to the Assembly of Chatelleraud: as if
what ever side the thing were taken, it had been certain that he had abused the
King's Name, or had deceived his Brethren.

But however this disavowal of a Piece to which the late King's Name was
prefixed, appeared so bold, that all Persons of Sense judged thereby that the
Court had evil Intentions; and that they were so well acquainted with the
Foible of the Reformed, that they were not afraid to offend them. A positive
threatening was added to that answer, to send them an Order to retire in a very
short time, And proceed to Threats.
unless they obeyed willingly. Nevertheless they tarried still until they had
received new orders from the Assembly about that, and about the affairs of
Bearn, which the Court would not allow them to meddle with. But they
endeavored in vain to make new solicitations in the Council. Letters were
delivered to them on the last of July for The Court gives them Letters and
Commands them to retire.
the Assembly, and they were commanded to retire. The truth is, that in order
to soften that Order, they were told that Bullion who was come back from Saumur
with his Colleague, about the same time the Deputies of the Assembly came away
from thence, would go back thither with the Cahier and answer. The Deputies
being arrived, gave the Assembly an account of their Journey; and delivered the
Letters they had received. The substance of them answered the Verbal answer the
Deputies had received. They mentioned the King's having received the Cahier as
a great Instance of kindness, considering the reasons he had not to receive it.
Those Reasons were that the Custom was to receive them from the Deputies
General after the dissolution of the Assembly; whereas the King had been
pleased to receive this from particular Deputies, while the Assembly was in
being and even before their having nomnaited their Deputies General. The same
Letters pressed the Assembly, since they had nothing more to do, to proceed to
the Nomination of six Persons, and to break up immediately.

Ferrier, whom his Colleagues pitched upon to be their The Assembly tarrys for
the return of the Kings Commissioners.
Speaker, making his report of their Negotiation to the Assembly, did it in
such a way as gave great suspicions of Treachery; and they were sufficiently
confirmed since by the sequel of his Life. In the mean time the Assembly was
unwilling to Nominate the six Persons out of which And gives Reasons not to
choose six Deputies.
the Court was to choose two, before they had heard what Bullion had to say.
They were in hopes of waving that Nomination, as being contrary to the first
Liberty of General Assemblies; as being introduced into the Assembly of
^hatelleraud, for private Reasons relating to the Marshal of ^ouillon, who was
out of favor at Court at that time; those Confidents and Creatures the King
would not ad^it to reside near him; as being afterward made at ^ergeau out of
complaisance to the King who would have (...) so. But they were of opinion that
those two singular ^xamples ought not to serve as Presidents: Moreover ^^l the
Provinces had Instructions which required the re^^oring of the Election of the
Deputies General upon the ^ormer Foot; and that the Assembly should only
No^inate two, which the King should be entreated to ap^rove of.

Bullion being come, insisted upon the same things that In which they persist
after having heard Bullion.
were contained in the King's Letters, which the Deputies ^ad remonstrated. He
alleged the Examples of Chatelle^aud and Gergeau: He added that he had the
Petition written in one Column and the Answer in the other.
Cahier with ^he answers; that they ought to content themselves with what they
should find upon the said Petition written in one Column and the Answer in the
other.
Cahier; and that the Court having done whatever they could do, would grant
nothing more. The Assembly being sencible that this pro^eeding was not barely
upon the account of formality ^s Bullion endeavored to persuade them, refused
^o acquiess without deliberation. And after having taken ^he Votes by
Provinces, they remained in the resolution to ^ollow the Instructions which the
Deputies had received; ^ot to name above two Deputies General; and not to ^reak
up without having first received satisfaction; and ^o make most humble
remonstrancies to the Queen upon ^he whole. They acquainted Bullion with this
Resolution by express Deputies; and soon after they delivered their
Remonstrances into his hands, and desired him to send them to the Queen. He
promised to do it; and did: but this show of good will, was only a Cloak to
Arti^^ces ^^ undermine the steadiness of the Assembly*
cover other designs.

When he was sent back to Saumur he was ordered to take the Marshal de
Bouillon's advice in all things, and to submit to it; either because they were
already sure of him* or because they designed to bring him quite over to them
by this shadow of Confidence, Bullion's chief endeavou^ were to persuade that
the Cahier was answered in such a manner as would satisfy the most difficult:
and he swor^ it in terms little suitable to his Age and Quality. He sometimes
declared, that if what he said was not true, he would be Damned Eternally. The
Reason which obliged him to make those horrible Oaths, was that the secret of
the Answers made to the Cahier, had been ill kept. Several Persons were
informed by very good hands that they were limited to a very inconsiderable
matter. But whereas those extraordinary expressions did not blind every body,
they set another Machine at work which proved more effectual. La Varenne, who
had made his Fortune under the late King, by his Capacity in the Intreagues of
Debauches, had been sent to Saumur without a Character, but with a secret
Commission to Corrupt as many Persons as he could, in order to incline them to
follow the Sentiments of the Court. This Man who knew how to promise and how to
give, and who had learned among Women, not to give over at the first Denial;
and to overcome the first shame that hindered them from yielding to his
promises, employed his Time and his Pains effectually here. He bartered for
Votes almost publicly, and went from Door to Door to display the means of
Corruption he was entrusted with.

He prevailed with some; he shook others, and the Oaths Of which some Members
suffer themselves to be Corrupted.
of Bullion coming to the assistance of the Presents and Promises of La
Varenne, a small number of Deputies devoted themselves to the Court. Men must
sometimes have a fit Reason to tell, when People wonder at their behavior;
although it be not the Reason which moves them. They must have a plausible Motive,
to conceal the real Motive they are ashamed of. People would blush to confess
that they do Act for Money; but those never fear reproaches, who only fail
through an excess of Credulity. The execrable Oaths of a Considerable Man are a
fair pretense to suffer ^es self to be deceived, in order to deceive others.
There so were others who tho incencible to bribes, suffered them^ves to be
deluded into the Snares of those powerful ^ffirmations, and condemned the
Constancy of the Majori^ who would see the Answers, before they would proceed
(...) any thing else. Nevertheless, all this could not amount (...) high as to
make so strong a party as the Court desired. ^he Number of the Obstinate
surpassed that of the Com^aisant above one half. Insomuch that all things being
decided in those Assemblies by the Plurality of Votes, the ^ourt was certain to
lose her Cause.

The Marshal de Bouillon found an Expedient for it: at Dangerous Councelimputed
to the Marshal of Bouillon.
^ast it is imputed to him; and the effects showed it clear^ enough. It was to
send for another Letter from the ^ourt, more positive than the preceding; to
order the ^ssembly expressly to Nominate six Persons to the King; (...) accept
the Answers given to the Cahier, and to break ^; which declaring such to be
Rebels who should re^se to obey without reply, should Authorize the inferior
^umber to remain at Saumur, to make the said Nomination, ^d to accept the
Articles. The substance of that Letter was drawn at the Marshal de Bouillon's
House; who ^ad made his boast for some days that 30 of the De^uties would obey
the Order of the Court: and who, in ^se the others should retire, being
unwilling to have a ^are in that Complaisance, were resolved to remain, to o^ey
the Queen in all things. The said Letter was sent to the Court by Bellujon, who
tarried two days after the Courier to whom Bullion had given the Remonstrances
of (...) Assembly. They thought thereby to conceal the Mi^y: ^ut it was easily
unridled. Bellujon took a false pret^ to go into Berry, to see some Relations
of his Wi^ in order to obtain leave from the Assembly to absent ^self for some
days. Within half a days Journey from ^mur, he took Post for Paris. He was
Convicted of t^ deceit at his return; and caught in a Lie in two Reasons he
endeavored to give for his Journey: and finally he was so hard put to it, that
he had no way to clear himself, but by confessing that he had done it by the
Marshal de Bouillon's order. It was easy to judge that the Sentiments of
Lesdiguieres were known to the Marshal and to Bullion, since they so freely
made use of Bellujon who belonged Bellujon is censured by the Assembly.
to him, for such enterprises. The Assembly censured Bellujon severely for this
Conduct; and entered the said Censure among their other Resolutions. They
declared that his Deportment had rendered him unworthy to assist for the future
in such Assemblies; that nevertheless as he had a procuration from
Lesdiguieres, they remitted the Judgment of it to him. Besides the Journey I
have mentioned, he had given the Assembly other Causes to treat him with Rigor.
He had some differences with the Church of Villemur, a Place of which
Lesdiguieres had given him the Government: and the said Church having made
grave and considerable Complaints against him, he had spoken of the Assembly
with a scorn which amounted to Insolence. But the Marshal de Bouillon, being
exasperated to find all his designs frustrated by the Prudence or Courage of
the Assembly, took Bellujon's part; and after having been refused twice or
thrice, he prevailed so far by Reasons, by Prayers, and by Threatenings, that
the said Affair was once more put to the Vote of Nine Provinces, and that the
Censure was reversed by a Tumultuous Deliberation.

In the mean time the Letter being brought by the Courier A Letter from the
Court Authorizing the inferior number against the greater.
who followed Bellujon close, it was thought fit to see what effect it would
produce upon Peoples minds; and to communicate it to some of the chief Members
before they delivered it to the Assembly. They were sencible that it might
chance to succeed quite differently from what the Court desired. The Assemblies
of the Reformed had preserved such marks of greatness in them till then, that
even those to whom they were odious, were obliged to have regards for them. It
was dangerous to hazard a thing which might as well exasperate them as oblige
them to break up. When Acts of Note are practiced against ^ersons that have
just Jealousies, they often drive them ^o despair, instead of surprising them;
and the sight of ^ods to scourge them, often gives them a cause to take up Arms
for their defense. The Marshal de Bouillon took upon him to deliver the said
Letter, and showed it to La Force, and to Du Plessis. He declared before it was
read that he thought it very reasonable, and the arguments very good. After
which they were greatly surpised to find that Terrible Clause in it which
Authorized the Inferior Number against the Greater. La Force and Du Plessis
^poke vigorously to the Duke upon that Subject, and ^how'd him that the said
Letter was an Inlet for Division, of which it would be impossible to cure the
^vil; which would occasion the ruin of the Churches; which neither Persecution
nor Civil Wars had been able to destroy. But they only gained the Liberty by it
^o Communicate to whom they pleased, what they could remember of the substance
of the said Letter. Abun^ance of People repaird immediately to Du Plessis, to
^ear from him those strange particulars, and to take proper measures to prevent
that misfortune.

Bullion in order either to dissipate the heat of those Bullion seems to accept
of a Temp^r.
^rst movements; or to seem averse to Actions which ^ight offend so many
Persons; or to have time to play the Machine that was set at work more
securely, declared that ^e was sencible of the Inconveniences that would
attend the said Letter; and in order to avoid them proposed a Conference with
Du Plessis, about the means he should judge most proper in order thereunto.
There was some likely^ood that the Conference would produce some effect, ^y
reason that Bullion and Du Plessis agreed about some things, viz. That the
Assembly should Nominate six Persons to the King; That the Deputies General
which should ^e Elected should be satisfied about the Cahier; That incase they
were not satisfied with the Answers already given, he should obtain
satisfaction for the Assembly upon five or six Articles, before their
Dissolution; and this he engaged to do, tho he had no orders about it: That he
would not press the Deputies to break up so soon after the aforesaid
Nomination; and that he would receive all their Protestations about the Number
of Six, to the end that what they should do at that time, might not serve as a
President for the future. But while Du Plessis was preparing to give the
Assembly an account of the said Conference, Bullion sent to him to acquaint him
that he revoked his Word; That he would perform his Office; go into the
Assembly and cause the Queen's Letter to be read.

Whereas he alleged no other Reason for that alteration, But he retracts all
of a sudden by a strange advice of the Marshal Duke.
but an Idle Rumor of their designing to take the advantage of his promises,
every body concluded that this was Inspired to him by the Marshal de Bouillon:
and they were fully convinced of it, when they were informed that he had
assembled all his Creatures that very evening at his House, and had prevailed
with them all to rise, at the first Overture that should be given them by the
opposite Party, upon the proposition Bullion was to make, and to make a Scisme
against the Assembly. This News filled the minds of all those that loved Union,
with despair and grief; and their first thoughts were to retire, to avoid being
Witnesses of that Scandal, which neither their Courage or Prudence could
prevent. But after having heard Du Wise Council of Du Plessis.
Plessis, they followed his advice, which was to obey the Orders which Bullion
would signify to them, whatever prejudice they might sustain by it: To the end
that by this means the fire of Division which had been kindled in their Bosom,
might be sinother'd there; and that those who had had the malice to prepare the
Scisme, might not have the satisfaction to see it break out scandalously. This
Resolution was held secret, by reason that they were unwilling to allow the
Marshal de Bouillon's party time to prevent the effect of it. There were 55
Persons of this mind. Among which were the Dukes de Rohan, and Sully, Soubise,
La Force, and many Gentlemen, But particularly all the Ministers, excepting
Ferrier, who had taken of his Mask.

The event showed that they were in the right to recommend Who wards the blow.
Secrecy. Bullion presented the Queens Letter to the Assembly the next day;
and after the Reading of it, desired them earnestly to obey it. Du Plessis
being prepared for that proposition, did not take the Votes to put the thing in
deliberation, as the Marshal de Bouillon's Friends did expect: but answered in
few words; and observing to Bullion how prejudicial it was to the State, to sow
Divisions among the Reformed, he assured him nevertheless that the Assembly
would obey. This unexpected answer, keeping every body within the bounds of
Duty and Silence, Bullion who was unwilling to lose the Fruit of his Project,
and who thought that the prevention of the said disorder which had been
prepared with so much art would reflect upon him, reiterated without necessity
that they must obey. Three or four of the Conspirators, and among the rest
Berticheres and Villemade offered to speak, and declared that they were of the
small number mentioned in the Letter. But Du Plessis stopped them by his
Authority; and in few words made them such powerful Remonstrances, and so much
to the purpose, that many of the same Party, who thought that the Queen only
desired that they should obey, and who found every body inclined to do it,
cried out to those hot heads to refrain. After having thus prevented the
Tumult, Du Plessis who had only spoken in his own Name, being confident that he
should not be contradicted, resolved to take the Votes of the Assembly as was
usual: but lest they should think that he was afraid of having been too
forward in his promise, he declared he only took the Votes for form sake; being
very well satisfied that what he had said would be approved of by every body.
In effect Obedience was concluded upon; only two or three Creatures of the
Court cavil'd about some Circumstances. The Duke of Sully though naturally as
wavering in his opinion, as his Fortune was uncertain, and moreover a little
unresolved in his own affairs, proved notwithstanding steady in this, and
seconded the Presidents advice with good Reasons; which he did the more
willingly, by reason that he thought he did serve the King and the Assembly by
it. The Assembly Nominates Commissioners.


Thus they resolved to proceed by Commissioners in what Bullion had proposed.
The Assembly named eight, of which the Marshal de Bouillon was the first. But
this project came to nothing, by reason that he refused that Commission under
pretense of being Ill. This was looked upon to be an evasion, by reason that
while he excused himself upon that account, from meddling with the affairs of
the Assembly, he had Conferences with Bulloin La Varenne and others, which
after having lasted part of the day, sometimes took up part of the night. It is
certain at least that he was so much enraged at the success of this enterprise,
Vexation of the Marshal at the success of his enterprise.
that he uttered very hard words against some of his adherents, for having
suffered themselves so easily to be silenced: he upbraided them with it as a
want of Courage. Nevertheless the evil, if there was any, did not proceed from
them. The Marshal had no reason to accuse any body but himself, and Bullion.
They had only taken measures to make a Scisme, in case the Assembly should
resolve to continue their Session to provide for the safety of the Churches, or
should break up without doing any thing: but they had taken none in case they
should obey; because they did not expect it.

On the 5th of December they proceeded to the Nomination Nomination of the
Deputies General.
of Six Persons, whose Names were to be presented to the King: which was done
with more ease than was expected, by reason of the Brigues and other
difficulties they were surrounded with. It had been proposed to exclude from
the said Nomination all such as had any Relation, or Dependencies on the Court,
either upon the account of Pensions, Places in the Magistracy, or Governments,
which obliged them to keep measures there. They had unanimously Voted the
exclusion of the Pensioners, but they had not been able to agree upon the rest,
by reason that among those who had such employments, there were several Persons
qualified for the Deputation, both by their being acquainted with affairs, and
by their Zeal for the Common Cause. Therefore the said difficulty was not as
yet removed; and moreover the Marshal de Bouillon spared nothing to make the
Deputation fall upon some Persons he might confide in. He had no mind the
Deputation should be made on the appointed day; and he fell out into a great
passion against some of his Party, who had not persisted in that sentiment as
firmly as they should have done. Yet notwithstanding all this, Mombrun,
Rouvray, and Berteville, were Nominated for the Nobility: and Maniald,
Boisseuil and La Milletiere for the Third Estate. This Nomination displeased
the Marshal and Bullion to that degree, that they used their utmost efforts to
alter it. They offered Maniald and Boisseuil 2000 Pistols, or a Place of
Councellor in a Parliament, provided they would refuse the Nomination; by
reason that Armet who was at the Duke's devotion, and who had most Voices next
to them, must have had the Place of him that would have refused it. But they
could not prevail: and the Nomination remained as it had been made by the
Majority of the Assembly, and approved of by the Reformed as the best and most
faithful. The Court chose Rouvray and La Milletiere out of those Six: and the
Assembly was soon acquainted therewith.

The End of the First Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of Nantes. VOL. II. BOOK II.
A Summary of the Contents of the Second Book
The Answers to the Cahiers satisfy no body. Nevertheles^ they resolve to
break up: although nothing considerable ha^ been done in the Assembly. Artifices
to disgust Chamie^ Ferrier retires. Why the Court will not seem to have
occasioned those Divisions. Regulations drawn by the Assembly. Provincial
Councils: Their Functions. Regulation of Union. The Marshal de Bouillon will
not allow the Ministers to make a separate Body in those Councils. Substance of
the General Cahier, and of the Answers that were made to it. Articles in favor
of Bearn. Mutual reproaches of the Members of the Assembly. Books that make a
noise. Niceness of the Doctrine concerning the Authority of Kings. Du Plessis
Book. Number of 666 Justness of the Application. Sedition at Paris. Return of
the Deputies in their Provinces. Commissioners in diverse places where they are
recus'd. Synod at Blois: which the Commissioners are alarmed at. They write to
Court about it. Assembly at Castle Jealoux, which occasions a kind of League of
the Catholics. Mortifications received by the Jesuits. Commissioners in the
Country of Gex. The Reformed side with the House of Guise in a quarrel. Death
of the Lord de Vatan. A Minister is granted him, ^o assist at his Death: but
they will not allow Psalms to ^e sung by him. Deputys of the Provinces at Paris
sent ^ack outragiously. Declaration of the 24 of April. The Deputies General
form an Opposition to the Inrollment of ^t: which is notwithstanding performed.
National Synod at Privas. Censure of the Divisions of Saumur. Union signed and
sworn. Particular Divisions. Deportments of Ferrier. Grave accusations against
him in the Synod; which Censures him severely. Nimes sends Deputies to preserve
him, ^ut in vain: and the Synod aggravates. Complaints of the Synod of Blois. A
formal disavowal of the Declaration of the 24 of April. Applications of the
Synod for the Reconciliation of the Grandees. Breefs of Augmentation of the
Money granted for the Sallery of Ministers. Alteration made in the State of the
Reformed in the Country of Gex. The Synod endeavors to hinder the abuse that
is made of that augmentation: and renews the Demands of the Assembly of Saumur.
Reasons of the Repugnancy so often expressed about the Denomination of
Pretended Reformed Religion. Complaints concerning the Commissioners.
Resolution no longer to send particular Deputies to Court. Force of the
Reformed in the County of Avignon. Gratifications. New declaration upon the
preceding one, which is not satisfactory. Cahiers answered Encroachments of
the Parliaments upon the Jurisdiction of the Chambers. Severity of the Chamber
of the Edict. Removal of the Corpse of a Gentleman of the Reformed Religion out
of the Ground, by the Order of a Commissioner. Favor granted to the Reformed
of Tierache. Division of the Duke de Rohan, and the Marshal de Bouillon; and
the Issue of it. Abuse of the Duty which inclines to Obedience. The Court
improves the Doctrine of Patience. Ministers Pensioners. Enterprise upon St.
Johnd' Angely. The Duke of Rohan prevents it: and persists notwithstanding it
was done by order from the Court. The Queen is offended; and all things seem to
incline to a War.

BVllion being no longer able to delay the delivery of the Answered Cahier to
the Assembly, since The Answers to the Cahier satifies no body.
he had so often promised to do it, as soon as the Queen should be satisfied
about the Nomination of the Deputies General, kept his Word, and allowed the
Deputies to continue their Session for some days longer, in order to examine
it. None of them seemed favorable; and they were conceived in Equivocal and
Captious Terms, which allowed the Court a great deal of liberty to wave that by
way of Interpretation, which seemed most plausible in those promises. Even
those who had been so earnest in forming the Scisme, which the prudence of the
others had prevented from breaking out, were as much surprised as the rest, and
expressed a great deal of discontent. Some of them exclaimed highly against
that deceit, and upbraided Bullion severely for the Oaths he had sworn to amuse
them. But there was no remedy; and Bullion had what he desired, and therefore
did not care for their reproaches. Nothing comforts people so easily of an
accusation of Perjury, as the happy success of the Artifice which deserves it.
One of the Reasons urged to give a pretense to the Scisme that was preparing,
was, that the on^ thing in debate was a piece of formality; that it was
in^erent whether the Assembly received satisfaction before (...) after the
Nomination of the Deputies General, provided was given them effectually; that
the Court looking upon (...) said Nomination before the dilivery of the Answer
as a ^nt of Honor, it was reasonable to comply with the ^g's desire; that is
was a respect due by Subjects to their ^eraign, not to dispute with him upon a
point of Deco^m about his Authority, especially when it was no wise their
prejudice. But the illusion of that reason was soon scover'd, when they found
the scope of the favor they ^d flattered themselves with. It was visible that
the Court ^ng unwilling to do any thing beyond the little they did ^nt, had
only insisted upon that pretended formality, to ^id being obliged, at the
earnest solicitation of the As^bly, to give them any real testimonies of good
will.

They would fain have used some endeavors to obtain Nevertheless they resolve
to break up.
^ething more: but when they thought on the means to ^ct it, they found none of
which they durst promise ^mselves a happy success. The Brief which did Autho^e
the Assembly, allowing it only in order to Nominate (...) Deputies General, it
might have been styled unlawful ^er the said Nomination, if they had refused to
break up. ^eral of those that had the best intentions were weary contending as
they had been obliged to do, in order prevent Brigues contrary to the common
good. Others ^e afraid of drawing the indignation of the Court up^ them, incase
they should resist their Orders with a Vi^r, which would be styled Rebellion.
They were all ^dent of those that had been so ready to divide from (...) rest
of the Assembly, and notwithstanding some of them ^m'd discontented at
Bullion's deceit, there was no reason (...) expect that they would unite
themselves to the good ^ty again, incase any resolutions should be taken. They
^d as well promised to make a Scisme upon the subject of (...) answers, incase
the Assembly were disatisfied with them, as upon the time, and manner of
deliberating about ^^ So that they agreed unanimously to break up; To lea^^ the
prosecution of a more favorable Answer to the Deputies General; and to see
whether the Queen, being satisfied with their submission to her Will, would not
be more easily inclined to allow the Reformed greater favors.

Thus an Assembly composed of the most eminent Persons Though nothing had been
done worthy of the Assembly.
among the Reformed both for Quality, and Capacity, which in so proper a
Conjuncture ought to have taken such measures for the safety of the Churches,
as could never have been violated by their Enemies, broke ^^ without doing any
thing. The Nomination of Deputies General was all that was done during a
Session of fo^^ Months: and the public affairs remained in the same condition
after such long deliberations as they were before the meeting of the Assembly.
Moreover it did more ha^^ than good, by reason that the facility of sowing
Divisions among the Reformed discovered their weakness; and taught the Court
the way to destroy them. The Autho^ of the said Division were so much ashamed
of it, th^^ they used their utmost endeavors to avoid that reproach. The very
Court had no mind it should be imputed to the^^ Artifices: Therefore endeavors
were used to lay the bla^^ of it upon private Interest, which had occasioned
great hea^^ And indeed, as there were many Persons who had demand to make
either immediately to the Assembly, or by ^^^ Assembly to the Court, it is very
probable that Bulli^^ and those that served him on that occasion, took the
advantage of those personal affairs, in order to succeed ^^ their principal
design. So that this proved one of the me^^ which corrupted those who thereby
expected to find mo^^ favor at Court. As many endeavors were used to brea^
the measures of those that were firm and inflexible, as to gain those whose
Souls were sencible to promises and ^^ Artifices to disgust Chamier.
hopes. Chamier was one of those steady Pillars, which nothing was capable to
s^ake. He had the first Voice in t^^ Assembly, as being Assistance to the
President; and where^ he was skilled in Affairs, the Conclusion depen^^d partly
on the turn he gave them. A particular grie^^nce was put upon him, in order to
disgust him of Assem^^es, in which he had too much Authority. The Consi^^ry of
Montelimar, where he was Minister, took the ad^^ntage of his absence, and of
his Deputation to give his ^^ce to another. This was done without consulting
him, ^^d without hearing him; by some Intrigue or other, in ^^ich it is very
likely that Lesdigneres had a hand, since (...) was done in his Province,
before his eyes, and in a place ^^ere he had the power to do what he pleased.
And to ag^^vate the Injury, the Consistory sent to search his House, and ^^bled
all his Library with a great deal of Violence, un^ pretense of taking some
Papers which did belong to (...) Church. The behavior of the Consistory had
some^g so offensive in it, and there appeared so much con^^pt in it against
Chamier, that he was extremely offended ^t, and the more because his interest
was concerned in ^s well as his honor. His Family, his Estate, and his
maintance were at Montelimar, and he could not remove (...) thence without
disadvantage: He was not a of humor ^^ose patiently: but at the same time he
would not have ^e any thing for his own Interest, to the prejudice of (...)
common Cause; and he preferred Religion to Interest. (...) thought it a great
piece of injustice that his own Church ^ld endeavor to ruin him; that in order
thereunto (...) took the advantage of his abscence, to prevent the ^n of his
Brethren. He complained of it to the Assem^^^ as of an affront in which they
were concerned; and ^v'd to remove from Saumur to mind his own Affairs. (...)
was directly what the Court aimed at, in order to ^^ken the Party they were
afraid of, by removing so Ferrier retires.
^^d a head. Ferrier had already shown the good exam^^ of preferring private
affairs to the General. He had (...) the Assembly under pretense of his Son and
Mother^^^w's being Ill. Had Chamier done the same, every body would have found
reasons to imitate them; and the Assembly would have been dissipated
insencibly. But they sto^ Chamier by doing him Justice. The Assembly maintain^
him in the Ministry of Montelimar; and in order to remove the pretense the
Consistory had taken, they orde^^^ the Ministers of the adjacent places to
Preach for him Alternately in his abscence. The Synods confirmed the sai^
Regulation afterward; and Chamier served the Church ^^ Montelimar, until he
was Transferred to Montauban, the^ to serve the Church and the Academy.

But those particular affairs were not the real cause of the Why the Court was
unwilling to appear the Cause of those Divisions.
Evil: they only served as an occasion to corrupt some ^^ the Deputies, and to
digust others. It may perhaps se^^ strange that the Court should be unwilling
to appear ^^^ Cause of a Division, they had procured with so much ca^^ and
which was so useful to them; but two reasons may ^^ given for it. The one that
giving so many assurances of the^^ good Will to the Reformed, they were
unwilling to belly the^^ by seeming to endeavor to disunite them. The other
that (...) the Catholics did not approve the ruining of the Reformed* some
because they looked upon their union as the best defe^^ of the State against
foreign Intrigues: others becau^^ they were of opinion that the Public Liberty
was joy^^^ to the preservation of the Reformed, whose Union was (...) powerful
Fence against Arbitrary Power, of which th^^ perceived that the Policy of the
Jesuits was laying t^^ Foundation. The main design of the Court of Spain ^^^
either to engage France to ruin the Reformed, or to oppr^^^ the People, which
had never known what slavery was (...) then. In all probability the Court of
France was like (...) engage it self into irreconcilable difficulties, if they
^tred once into Wars of Religion with the Reformed, ^^ engaged themselves by
the Usurpation of an unbound^^ Power against People that were fond of their
Priviledg^^ and accustomed to reverence their King's like Fathers, because they
used them like their Children. For that rea^^^ there were many Catholics, who
would have been ve^^ sorry to see the Reformed driven out of the Kingdom. Even
^n the Council, those who had had a share in the late King's desings, and had
relished his Maxims had the same senti^entiments: and expected no good from the
disunion of ^he Reformed. Some of the Members of the present King's Council
have likewise had the same sentiments, particular^y those who observed the
course of Affairs, during the Reign of Lewis the XIII. This opinion has induced
a zea^ous Catholic Historian, who has written the History of those Transactions
in a style full of Gall and Violence, to Con^ess that the fall of the Reformed
would occasion that of the State, and that the ruin of their Sect, would
destroy those very Catholics that had occasioned it. This shows that the very
designs of the Court not being approved by all the French, they had no reason
to own themselves the Au^hors of a Division which was looked upon by so many to
^e contrary to the good of the Kingdom. This is the reason for which in some
relations about what passed in the Assembly of Saumur, all the
misunderstandings which ren^e^'d it useless to the Reformed, are imputed to the
particular affairs of the Members of it, as if the Intrigues of the Court had
had no share in it.

All these troubles did not hinder the Assembly from Regulations drawn by the
Assembly.
drawing very fine Regulations, which would have been sufficient to render the
Reformed Invincible, had it been as easy ^o put them sincerely in execution,
as to resolve upon them. Such were those which related to the preservation of
the Places of Suerty; but particularly those that were resolved upon for the
establishing of Councils in every Province. The first Project of it was formed
in the Assembly of Ste. Foy: and that of Chatelleraud resumed the said design
some years after it. But the continuation of the War, and afterward the long
Negotiation of the Edict, from which the Reformed expected more surety than
from their own regulations, hindered them from pursuing the Project of Saint
Foy. and the Intrigues of Roni at Chatelleraud also hindered them from taking
any resolutions upon that Subject. But the King's Death having altered the
state of Affairs, the Assembly of Saumur thought themselves obliged to renew
their ancient precautions, which the power of the Jesuits, and the Artifices of
those that were ill inclined made more necessary than ever. Therefore they
voted a Council in every Province composed of Gentlemen, Ministers, Commons.
and Members of the third Estate, who should be chosen by the Provincial
Provincial Councils.
Assembly, and should be continued, or changed once in two years, in the whole
or in part, according as the Assembly should think fit. The number of the
Persons of which it was to be composed was not limited. They allowed the said
Council a power to nominate the Persons and Places, where the advices that
should be given them should be directed; and to advertise the Churches when it
should be fit to convene a Provincial Assembly. In order thereunto they settled
the form of deputing to those particular Assemblies, and of receiving the Votes
there (...) they excluded from it all such as had no express Deptutations: They
allowed the King's Officers and Magistrates to assist at the same, provided
they were deputed according to the form prescribed; on condition that thy
should make no distinct Body in the Assembly; and that they should side either
with the Nobility, or with the Third Estate, according to their quality: The
Presidentship of those Assemblies was alloted to the Gentry: and finally they
fixed to five at most, and to three at least, the number of the Deputies every
particular Assembly should send to the General.

Proceeding in the next place to the Functions of the Provincial Their
Functions.
Councils, they charged them to send whatever advice they should receive to
those to whom it should be necessary to Communicate them, either within, or out
of the Province: and in order to facilitate the said Communication, they
ordained a Fund for the Charges; and that the Contiguous Provinces should take
measures together before their breaking up, to advise each other with more
speed. They authorized the Council that should receive the advice, incase they
were not able to perform it, to call such persons ^o their assistance as should
be able to assist them, according to the nature of the thing proposed. In some
Important Cases they allowed the Council to require at least three adjacent
Provinces, such as they should think fit, to assist them with their advice; and
they ordered the Provinces so required to send one, or many Deputies in the
place appointed to them, to deliberate about the means to prosecute such
affairs as should intervene in such a Province, as if it were their own. And
supposing they could obtain no satisfaction, it was left to their Prudence to
give the Provinces notice of it, and to invite them to join in order to make
the said prosecution more effectually. They grounded that order upon the duty
of the General Union, of the Churches, which were obliged to interest
themselves in their mutual affairs; to the end that those that were abused, and
consequently more inclined to violent resolutions should be hindered by the
Prudence of the others from proceeding to ^xtremities, or seconded by them, in
order to obtain justice the sooner.

They ordered the said Councils moreover to mind the con^ition of the Places of
Suerty; to depute persons of capacity to ^isit the said places, and to take a
review of the Garrisons; to be certain of the Religion of the Soldiers; who,
by reason that it was necessary to reinforce the said Cities with men, could
not be Inhabitants either of the said Cities or Suburbs. They exhorted the
Governors to approve it, and in order to ^dress the abuses committed in time
past, as to the number and ^ayment of the Soldiers, to be pleased to allow the
regulations added by them: viz. That the Governor should receive the third
part of the sum appointed for the Garrison, free from all Charges; and that he
should give an Acquittance for the remaining two, to the person that should be
nominated by the Council of the Province, who should pay the soldiers with it,
and all other Charges relating to the Place and Garrison; which were afterward
specified: That an estimate should be made of the real sum to which the
extarordinary Charges might mount, to reserve a Fund for it; which should not
exceed the third or forth part of the two thirds retained upon the whole sum;
That the Person employed in order thereunto should give an account of his
administration in the Council, in presence of the Governor; That incase the
King should grant any sums for the Reparations and Fortifications of the said
places, the Governors should order how they should be employed, but that the
Council should inspect the same, and should have the direction of the disposal
thereof, making of Proclamations, Adjudications, etc. and that incase a Fund
were necessary for the said Reparation, the direction thereof should be given
to a person which should be nominated by the Council, who should give an
account of it, in the Governors presence; That without prejudice to the
Officers appointed by the King, the Governors should inspect the Magazines, in
order to keep the Corn, Wines, Provisions, Powder, and Matches, and other
Ammunition liable to corruption in a good Condition.

They empowered the same Councils to determine all Quarrels, Regulations of Union.
Lawsuits, and Animosities that might arise among the Reformed, of what quality
soever; To cause the settlements granted by the King, to be observed, incase
any of the Governors of the said places should dye: To maintain a good
Correspondence with the Neighboring Provinces, by sending Deputies into their
mutual Assemblies; and as to a General Correspondence, they were charged to
maintain it with the General Assembly, when in being, and to apply themselves
to the Deputys General after their Dissolution. Moreover in order to preserve
Union among all the Churches, it was agreed upon, that once a year at a certain
time and place, there should repair a Deputy of every Council, as privately as
possible could be, and in such a conjuncture of affairs as it should be thought
of most use: and the chief reason of that enterview, which was only to last for
a few days, was to give each other a mutual account of the state of their
Provinces, and to renew the Sentiment of their Common Interests. The General
Assembly at their breaking up was to nominate the Council which should appoint
^e time and place for the first Enterview.

The Marshal Duke de Bouillon approved the said Regulation The Marshal de
Bouillon will not allow the Ministers to make a separate order or Body in those
Councils.
as well as the rest, and signed it: but he protested against the Ministers,
whom he would not allow to make a ^ody a part: and he writ the said
Protestation when signed it. La ^otte Grimout, Counselor in the Parliament of
Rouen, was ^e only person who imitated him. His motive for it was, (...)
particular grudge, for having received a Censure from the Assembly, to which he
did not doubt but the Ministers, a ^rt of people a little inclined to censure,
had contributed considerably. But the Marshal's Motive was his being abandoned
by the Ministers, who formerly used to follow ^s advice almost Implicitly. Some
of them had said some ^ings in their Sermons which he took to be designed
against him: and notwithstanding du Plessis remonstrated to ^m, even after the
Dissolution of the Assembly, That the ^d Protestation was not only useless, but
of ill consequence, (...) still persisted in it, and threatened that the thing
should ^t remain so. The truth is that he excepted some Ministers, who by
reason of their mildness and capacity, seemed (...) him to deserve a Rank in
the Assemblys. This perhaps ^as an effect of Resentment; but that Resentment
was so ^ell suited to the Maxims of the Court, where the Ministers and Elders
etc.
Con^toriats had been so long reputed the persons who were to be ^ar'd in
Assemblies, That it looked as if he had a mind to ^e angry on purpose to please
them. Neverthless, he kept his word; and whereas he always appeared zealous
(...) other things for his Religion, this did not forfeit his Credit (...) the
least in the Provinces; of which some afterward forbad the Ministers to assist
at Political Assemblies, and to Petitions and Addresses. Substance of the
General Cahier and of the answer made to it.
preach against the Sentiments of private persons.

Before I make an end of what relates to the said Assembly, (...) is necessary
to give some account of the substance of their * Cahiers, and of the answers
that were made to them; since they occasioned those fatal divisions. I will
only give an abstract of them, by reason that they are set forth at large, at
the end of this Volume. They contained 57 Articles, of which the three first
demanded the re-establishment of the Edict; and of its particular Articles, in
their first form; and the verification of them in the Sovereign Courts. The
King refused these three Articles directly, being willing, as he said, to
conform to the resolutions of the King his Father, which he called Good and
Holy, and who had explained himself upon that Subject, in the year 1602 The
fourth demanded Commissioners, of which one should be of the Reformed Religion,
and nominated by the Reformed of the Province to which he was to be sent, and
the other a Catholic: unless the Reformed had rather leave the execution of
the Edict, to the Baylifs or Seneshals of the places, which should be obliged
to take a Reformed Associate. The King granted it for such places in which the
Edict was not put in execution, according as the Parliaments had verified it.
The fifth demanded for the Reformed Communities, which did possess some Fief,
or some Judicature of the quality mentioned by the seventh Article of the
Edict, the right of performing the exercise of the Reformed Religion there: and
the King referred them to the observation of the Article of the Edict without
any Alteration. The sixth demanded that the exercise of their said Religion
performed in 1577, and 1597, however it had been established, even by Power, of
Fief, although the Fief were since possessed by a Catholic, even by an
Ecclesiastic, should notwithstanding be continued there The King without
deciding whether the Articles 9 and 10 of the Edict were favorable, or
contrary to the said pretention referred them, to the observation and
maintenance of the same. The seventh remonstrating that the exercise of the
said Religion ought to be reestablished in certain places, by Virtue of the
10th Article of the Edict of Nantes, where it could not be performed without
exposing the Reformed to the danger of a Tumlt, by reason of the long
discontinuation thereof, demanded that the right of it might be transferred to
other places of the Province which the Synod sold appoint. The King answered
that the Commissioners should inquire, both as to the right of performing the
said exercise in those places, and the reasons of the interruption thereof;
after which it should be regulated: which made the Reformed sencible that it
would go against them, by reason that the Possession of the same having been
interrupted for reasons which the Court would approve of, they would not think
it fit to restore them.

The 8th renewed the Petition, that the Reformed might not Cahiers answered.
^e obliged to qualify their Religion themselves in Public Acts, with the
Title of Pretended Reformed. The King refused it; and referred them to the
Answer made to the Cahiers of the Reformed in 1609, by the late King. The ^^h
required that the Ministers might have the same exemption as the
Ecclesiastics. The King referred them to ^^e Exemption granted by the late
King in 1604, by Letters Patent, which only freed them from the A Land Tax, etc.
Taille* in that related to their Goods and Pensions. The 10th, grounded upon
the 16 Article of the Edict, demanded the restitution of ^^e places that did
formerly belong to the Reformed, without obliging them to justify their
Possession by Titles. The King referred it to his Commissioners, who should
^^use a restitution to be made of those usurped Places, provided the Reformed
could prove that they had lost their Titles or Writings. In the 11th they
desired an exemplary punishment of such Preachers, Confessors, and other
Ecclesiastics as did forbid the Catholics to hold any Communication with the
Reformed; as to serve them, to nourish their Children, to undertake their
Affairs: and who declared that all those who frequented them would be Damned.
In case they could not be seized, the Article required their Superiors should
be responsible for the same, and that the Attorneys General and their
Substitutes should ^e enjoined to see it performed, The answer instead of the
punishment required, forbad only, according to the 17th Article of the Edict,
Seditious Sermons and Discourses, and made a very mild Exhortation to
Preachers, to aim only in their Sermons to preserve public Peace, and
Tranquillity. The 12th complained of the multiplicity of Festivals; and desired
that the Commissioners might retrench some of them, in such places where it
should be desired; That neither they nor the Curates might be allowed to become
Parties in the examinations of the Contraventions of the same; nor the
Provosts, Warders, or other Officers to prosecute the same, nor even Sergeants
without a positive order from the Judge of the place. The answer spoke nothing
as to the restriction of the number; and confirmed the 20th Article of the
Edict. The 13th related properly to the Affair of the Duke de Sully, and of the
Catholics that embraced the Reformed Religion, demanding the observation of
the 27th Article of the Edict concerning Employments; and the re-establishment
of such from whom any had been taken without observing the usual forms: That is
without having convicted them of any fault by which they could forfeit the
same. The ancient Jurisprudence of the Kingdom allowed no other reason to take
away a place from a Man, unless he desired to be discharged himself for some
known reason. The answer said in a word that the Article of the Edict should be
observed: leaving a just cause to believe by that briefness, that the King
would allow no re-establishment of that Nature. The four following related to
Churchyards and Burials, and demanded the confirmation of the Possession of
the places which they had enjoyed since the verification of the Edict; the
delivery of some convenient places in those parts where they had none; leave to
perform their Burials in the day time, even in such places where they were
obliged by the Treaty to perform them at inconvenient hours; and good
regulations to prevent Seditions and Tumults, in such places where the Gentry
and other Reformed had right of Burial in the Chapels of their Predecessors.
The answers preserved to the Reformed the possesion of the Churchyards, which
had been delivered to them by the Commissioners; ordered others to be delivered
to them, according to the answer to the Cahier of 1602, referred to the
Commissioners to consider in what places their Burials might be allowed in the
day time, without fear of a Sedition; and refusing to allow the Reformed to be
Buried in the Churches, by reason that it was contrary to the Canons,
prejudicial to the Catholic Religion, and capable to give a Scandal and
Discontent to those that professed it, it only allowed that the Commissioners
being upon the place, should seek expedients to preserve to the Successors of
the Reformed, the Rights which belonged to them as Patrons.

The 18th which demanded leave to establish little Schools in all Cities and
Towns of the Kingdom, received Cahirs answered.
only leave, by the answer, to have one Schoolmaster in the Towns, in the
Suburbs of which the exercise of the Reformed Religion was allowed; there to
teach reading and Writing only; forbidding them to teach new Doctrines; That
is, as it has been explained since, even to make Children repeat their
Catechisms; and to receive above twelve of the Neighborhood in any Place. The
19th required the same Privileges for the Accademies of Saumur and of
Montauban, as were enjoyed by the other Accademies of the Kingdom: and the
Answer putting the Change upon them, allowed them to establish Colleges in such
Places where the Exercise of their Religion was allowed, and gave those
Colleges the same Privileges of the other Colleges, received and approved of in
the Kingdom. This signified nothing, by reason that the Immunities of simple
Colleges erected by the Wills of private Persons are nothing. The 20th tended
to obtain that the Catholic Counselors, who were to serve in the Chambers of
the Edict, might be chosen with the Deputies of the Churches, ^o the end that
none might enter there but persons of Equity and Moderation; and that the same
might remain there at least three years without being changed: but by the
Answer the King looked upon that choice as a right which only belonged to him,
and which he would keep. The 21st which desi^'d two places of Counselors, to
equal the Chamber of Neraci to that of Castres, was waved by the Answer; under
pretense that there were too many Officers, or places in the Kingdom already:
and in order* to answer the inconvenience of recusations, which sometimes
reduced the number of the Judges below that which was required by the
Ordinances, the King allowed the said Chamber to judge to the number of Eight,
as it was practiced in some Parliaments. The 22th complained that in most
Causes the Catholic Judges were divided in the Chambers of Guyenne and of
Languedock; which they imputed to the Passion of the Parliaments, who having
the liberty to nominate to the King the Counselors of their Courts which were
to serve in the said Chambers, always named the most passionate: Wherefore they
desired that the number of those Counselors might be filled up in part with
some Counselors of the Grand Council, and part of those of the said
Parliaments, which the King should choose himself upon the List. The King
refused to alter the method of forming those Chambers; and promised to take
care as to the choice of those that should serve in them, to the satisfaction
of the Reformed. The three following petitioned the Creation of some Offices,
especially in Dauphine: and by the Answers the King said that Patents had been
given for some, and that he could not grant the others; for which he gave a
remarkable reason, viz. That he had promised to make no new Creation in that
Province.

The 26th contained complaints for that the Parliament Cahiers answered.
from which the Causes of the Reformed were removed to the Chambers of the
Edict or Party-Chambers, gave Decrees against the Sergeants who within their
Precincts did Execute the Decrees of the Chambers, into which those causes were
removed; and desired that since the Sergeants being frighted by the said
Decrees, refused to put the said Sentences in Execution, his Majesty would be
pleased to Create two Royal Offices of Sergeants in every Bayliwick, to be
given to the Reformed; and the following petitioned the same thing for two
Offices of Notaries. The King refused those new Creations; and pretended to
remedy the said Grievances by commanding those who had such Offices, to make,
or receive all the Acts as should be demanded or offered to them by the
Reformed. Three other Articles related to the Validity of the Certificates
given by the ministers; The regulations of the Judges; and the time of
descriptions, of which the Chamber of the Edict of Normandy refused to deduct a
certain number of years, of which the Edicts allowed the deduction in favor of
the Reformed: and upon those Articles the King granted nothing new, or at least
of any moment. The 31st demanded ^e revocation of a Clause which took away the
right of transferring Causes into the Chambers of the Edict, from those who had
not made an open profession of the Reformed Religion six Months before their
requiring the said removal; and this demand related particularly to
Ecclesiastics, who after having changed their Religion, remained opposed to
the hatred of the Parliaments, who were very ^ere against men of that
Character. The answer was very ^^tile; and in refusing to alter any thing about
the Clause ^^ six Months, the King promised that he would take care ^^ the
Causes of the Ecclesiastics, if they made their applications to him. The
Reformed were very sencible that ^^ meaning of this was, that after having
changed their religion the Ecclesiastics would be used worse in the Council
than in the Parliaments. The 32d desired a right of transferration for the
Reformed, Heirs to those that had ready proceeded before the Parliaments; and
for those ^o should have their right by Yielding up a Title or Right to a
Creditor, etc.
Cession, or otherwise. The King refused it to the Cessionaries, by reason that
it ^^ght be done fraudulently: but he granted it to Heirs, ^^serving at the
same time that the said Concession was a ^our. It is true: but it was so slight
a one, that it was ^^rdly worth observing; the occasion of using it, not
occurring perhaps once in 50 years. The 33d demanded ^^ Foreign Inhabitants, or
Traders in the Kingdom, the ^^e Priviliges as were enjoyed by the other
Reformed, and particularly that of transferring of Causes. The King by ^s
answer reserved to himself to do them Justice, incase they appealed to him. The
34th desired that the Privilege to take a Reformed Assistant or Associate in
all criminal Causes, in which the Reformed were concerned might be extended to
all the Provinces; and not only observed for some which were specified in the
66th Article of the Edict. The King granted it for the instruction only; but he
would not allow the Associate a deliberative Vote in the Judgment of the
Process. The 35th desired that the Judgment of the By whom the Cause ought to
be tried.
Competence in Criminal Cases.
Provotal Cases, which by the 67th Article of the Edict was referred to the
nearest Courts of Justice.
Presidial Seats, within the jurisdiction of some Parliaments, might be
transferred to the Chambers of the Edict, as in the others. The reason of this
demand was evident. The jurisdiction of the Provost being quick and without
appeal, the Reformed were ever in danger of perishing by the sentences of those
Judges, when a Presidial in which the Catholics were the strongest was Master
of the said Competence. Nevertheless, the King refused to alter any thing about
it.

The 36th related to the Education of Children, whose Cahiers answered.
Fathers had not named Guardians at their Death; and desired that they might be
put under the tuition of persons that should breed them up in the Religion of
their Fathers* The Answer referred it to the General Law of the Kingdom; That
is at the Election of Tutors or Guardians, chosen by the Relations, and thus
exposed the Children of the danger of falling into the hands of Catholic
Guardians, whenever the nearest, or most considerable Relations, which are
commonly pitched upon by the rest, should be Catholics. The 37th desired that
the resignations of Presidents or Counselors which had been promoted at the
nomination of the Church, might not be received unless by the same nomination.
The King reserved to himself the choice and nomination of the persons. The 38th
tended to prevent the injustices that were done to the Reformed, who had
Estates in the County of Avignon, and desired that leave might be given to the
Officers there residing to give Reprisals, after the Solemnities that were
required, to the Reformed to whom Justice had been denied: Notwithstanding what
was ordained upon that Subject by the 51st of the particular Articles. The King
would have them to apply themselves to him to obtain Letters of Reprisals; only
allowing the Officers to draw Verbal Processes of the State of the Case. This
engaged the poor Reformed into infinite expense and delays. The 39th required
the Confirmation and Execution of the Briefs granted to the Churches in 1598,
and since: upon which the King ordained that they should be represented; as if
his Council had been ignorant of the Contents. The 40th renewed the demand of
two Places of Masters of Requests, promised to the Reformed: and the King waved
it by the usual evasion, that care should be taken about it, when any Vacancies
should happen by death. The two following demanded the augmentation of the sum
promised for the Sallary of the Ministers; and of new assignments for the
payment of the Arrears. The King promised to consider of what might be proper
to gratify them; but he refused them new assignations for the old Arrears,
under pretense that it was a general disease, and that all those that had been
assigned at the same time had suffered the same loss, without receiving any
Re-implacement.

The 14 following Articles related to the Places of Surety. Cahiers answered.
The 43d demanded that the Guard of all those which the Reformed held, might be
left them for ten whole Years, to begin from the Day the last Brief would
expire; and that in the New Brief, the Court should specify those that were
contained in the Settlements drawn in 1598: Those that were comprehended with
the others under the Denomination of Cities or Towns annexed to others.
Marriage, and those that belonged to private persons, in which Garrisons had
been kept. The Answers was cruel upon that Article. It reduced the places of
Surety to those that were expressed in the Brief of the 14th of May 1598, and
declared that those that were called of Marriage, were not comprehended amongst
the places of Surety. It only allowed as a Favor, that no innovations should
be made: but it refused them the keeping of all the other Towns, Castles. etc.
Places; and only left them such as were really places of Surety but for Five
Years. Thus two thirds of the Places in which they held Garrisons were taken
from them by one dash of a Pen. The 44th desired that no Innovations might be
made in the Places they held, in which there was no Garrison established by the
settlments; and that incase any had been made, they should be redressed. The
King granted that Article; and ordered his Commissioners to redress the said
Innovations, according to the instructions they should receive. The 45th
desired the restitution of several Places, among which they named Caumont,
Tartas, le Mont de Marsan and Montandre. The King absolutely refused the first
and last, and promised to put Reformed Garrisons in the other Two. The 46, 47,
and 48, desired good Assignments upon the clearest part of the Receipts, for
the full sum of 540000 Livers, which had been promised to them by the Brief of
the last of April 1598; That the Sums which had been deducted out of it, for
the settlement of the Pensions that were given to private persons, might be
returned to the Mass again; That the Arrears might be paid, and such Sums as
were not paid in re-implac'd. The King refused it all, excepting only the
Assignment upon the clearest part of the Receipts, which is such cases is
always granted, and never performed: But he paid the Reformed with Reasons
instead of better Money; and told them that the retrenchment they complained
of, had been made under the Reign of the Late King, at a time when retrenching
the Garrisons of the Catholic Citys, he had been obliged to do the like to the
Reformed, lest the Catholics should complain. But in order to excuse himself
from re-implacing of the Arrears and Sums unpaid, he added a reason which
favored more of a Test than a serious Answer. He said that there was no reason
to desire it, since the Places for the preservation of which the said Sums were
designed, had been as well kept as if the said Sums had been paid. According to
this Notion, a Debtor might very well excuse himself from paying the Arrears of
his Debts, by reason that his delaying to pay them had not reduced his
Creditors to Starve.

The 49th desired the King would be pleased to use his Cahiers Answered.
Interest with the Prince of Orange to put a Reformed Governor into the Castle
of Orange, according to the late King's promise to the Assembly of
Chatelleraud. The King who did not pretend to the Right which his Successor has
usurped over the said Principality, declared that he had restored the said
Principality to the Prince of Orange to whom it did belong; and that he had
obliged him to make a Declaration, in favor of the Reformed of the said City,
which they were satisfied with. Upon which pretense he tacitly refused the
Mediation promised by the late King. As to the 50th which spoke of the
Resignation of Governments, which could not be done without the approbation of
the Churches of the Province: and of the Nomination of of a new Governor by
the Deputies General, in such Places where the Government should become vacant
by Death, the King referred them to the Brief of 1598, and to the Articles of
the Edict, both General and Secret, which he said had always been observed.
Upon the 51st, which desired that the Captains and Lieutenants of the Garrisons
might not be chosen without the approbation of the Governors: the King
answered that he would do what he thought best for the advantage of his
Service. The 52d, desired the Liberty to perform the Exercise of the Reformed
Religion in all those Places, and that no body might be allowed to dispute that
right. Upon which the King ordered the observation of the Edict of Nantes in
General Terms. The 53d, desired that the Jesuits might not be allowed to have
Colleges, Seminaries, or Houses in the places of Surety; nor to Preach, Teach,
Confess, or Reside in the same: and that throughout the Kingdom they should be
reduced to the terms prescribed by the Edict of their re-establishment. The
King's answer engaged him to nothing, he said that the Jesuits not being
allowed to settle a College without his leave, he would take care, that the
Reformed should have no reason to complain. The Jesuits had too much power at
Court to suffer the King to make a more positive answer upon that Article. The
54th desired the prevention of accidents that might be occasioned by the
Processions, which the Catholics affected to make in the Churches and Chapels
of the Castles in which the Reformed had but weak Garrisons; and did propose
some expedients in order thereunto. The King referred them to what should be
ordained by his Commissioners, after having taken the advice of the Governors
of the Provinces, or Lieutenants General. The 55th spoke of the necessary means
to maintain or repair the Garrisons, and to secure them; desiring to that end
the execution of the Answer made to the Cahiers of the Assembly of Gergeau. The
King allowed the reparations of the said places at the Charge of the
Inhabitants; and that they should apply themselves to the Council to obtain
leave to impose such sums as should be necessary: promising only some
assistance in case of an urgent necessity. The 56th desired that the Artilery,
Arms and other Ammunitions of War which were in the said places, might be left
there, and not transported elsewhere; that what had been already removed might
be returned to them; and that they might have their share of the Distribution
of Arms and Amunitions, which was made yearly to the other Towns of the
Kingdom. The Answer on the contrary, ordered an account to be brought in of the
Artillery and Amunitions that were in the said places, in order to dispose of
them, promising only to leave so much as was necessary for the Defense of the
said places. The 57th desired that the General Assemblies might be held every
other year; that the Deputies General might officiate but two years; and that
the Assemblies might only be obliged to Nominate two, that should be approved
of by the King. The answer was that he would allow such Assemblies when he
thought fit: and that they should Nominate six Persons.

There were some other Articles at the end of all those ^ating to the Churches
of Bearn, as I have said heretofore: Articles in favor of Bearn.
but the King's answer to them was, That the Late ^^g never having approved the
Union of the Churches of ^^at Principality with those of France, he could not
allow it neither: but he promised to receive the particular ^^titions of that
Province. Finaly, the Assembly broke ^^, tho disatisfi'd with those Answers;
and the Deputies repaired to their respective homes laying the blame of the ill
success of their good intentions upon one another. Those ^ho did side with the
Marshal de Bouillon blamed the obstinacy of the contrary Party, imputing all
the fault to that; ^^d the others upbraided these with having taught their
Mutual reproaches of the Members of the Assembly.
enemies how to ruin the Churches, by breaking the Union ^^signedly, and by a
manifest Conspiracy. Most of the Reformed were very much disatisfied with the
answers made to their Petitions or Addresses.
Cahiers: and seeing that instead of granting them ^^y new favors upon their
Complaints, at a time when they had just reasons of diffidence, their
Privileges and Su^^ties were incroach'd upon more than ever, they applied ^^e
Fable of the Camel to themselves, who complaining that nature had been unkind
to him, in not giving him Defensive ^^rms, as to the Lion, Elephant, and Bull;
obtained no ^^her fruit of his Complaints but to have his Ears ^orten'd. So the
Assembly having expected from the King's ^ood Will some favor suitable to the
time, had only obtained illusive answers; in which Injustice was joined to
Contempt.

During the Session of the Assembly there appeared diverse Books which make a
noise.
Books which made a Noise. Mayerne published one which was not proper to gain
the Queens heart. He maintained in ^t that neither Women nor Children ought
ever to be admitted to the Government. This was conformable to the Ancient
^ight of the Monarchy, which attributed the Regency to the nearest Princes of
the Blood during Minorities. But an expample or two to the contrary had removed
the Princes from that Employment: and they were too poor or too weak at that
time, to resume their Rank. The said Book w^ condemned; and the Author Fled.
Gourmandier had al^ Niceness of the Doctrine concrning the Authority of Kings.
printed a Treatise about the Right of Kings: But it wa^ prohibited as well as
the other, and all the Copies that cou^ be met with seized. The pretense used
for the said Prohibition, was that the Author had mixed diverse Maxims (...) his
Religion in the said Book, which the Court did not approve. But in general the
true reason of it was, that the Authority of Kings is a very nice Point, which
cannot (...) treated of without offending them; in so much that King had rather
that nothing should be said about it, than ev^ to speak advantageously of it.
Moreover the Doctrine (...) the Reformed is commonly divided into two Parts
upon the Subject, which offend two sorts of People. The one allo^ King's a
perfect Independency in relation to the Pope; a^ the same authority over the
Clergy, as over the rest of the Subjects. The other makes King's liable to
observe Equity and Justice; The Fundamental Laws of the State, the Oaths and
Edicts; and proposes the preservation of the Subjects to them as the Universal
Rule of their Soverai^ Power. So that it is impossible for their Doctrine to
(...) well received among Catholic Princes. The first part e^ animates all the
Roman Cabal against them: and the seco^ all the Slaves of the Court. The Clergy
never scruples (...) Sacrifice public Liberty to their own Grandeur: and P^ces
little value the Popes Enterprises, provided they e^ an Arbitrary Power over
their People. Moreover the^ was a particular reason for the Condemnation of the
(...) Book. The Doctrine of the Jesuits upon that Subject w^ detested by all
the Kingdom; and the condemnation (...) Bellarmin's Book was actually
prosecuted in the Parliame^^ of Paris. It was sufficient for those subtle
Politicians to se^ themselves dishonored by Decrees from the Soveraig^ Courts:
they did not seem to be very sensible to those (...) fronts, because they had
been used to them, and were ha^ den'd in them, from the very beginning of their
Socie^* But they could not have endured that while they were tre^* Enemies to
Sovereign Power, the Reformed should be al^ed to be the Defenders of it.
Therefore they obtained (...) Condemnation of the said Book, to involve it in
the ^e Censure with those of their Doctors.

But the Book which made most noise upon that Subject, Books of Du Plessis.
^s that which du Plessis published during the Session of the ^embly in which
he did preside, and which he had intitul^d ^e Mystery of Iniquity. It was not
so much the dignity of (...) Subject, and the reputation of the Author which
made the ^k to be taken notice of, as a Cut which was fixed at the head (...)
the Work, which did revenge du Plessis highly for the af^nt he had received at
Fontainbleau. The Pride of Paul (...) 5th, who filled the Holy See of Rome at
that time, and (...) Flatteries of his Creatures did afford him a large Field
^stile him Antichrist. The first Leaf of the Book repre^ted a Tower of Babe^,
of a prodigious Architecture, ^ch appeared to the Spectators a subject of
Admiration, (...) it was only sustained by some pieces of Timber, which ^re set
on fire. Two Latin Verses advised the Spectators (...) to admire that vast
Building which would tumble ^wn, as soon as ever the fire had consumed those
feeble ^porters. In the next place you saw the Effigies of Paul (...) 5th
accompanied with Inscriptions so haughty and (...) Impious, That it would have
been impos^e to give the Reformed a better hold, tho it had been ^he
disignedly. Whatever Flateries can be attributed to Temporal Prince; whatever
Holy Writ has spoken with Number of 666. Paulo 5 Vice-deo,
V. 5. L. 50 V. 5. V. 5. I. 1. C. 100. D. 500. 666


Justness of the Calculation.
^st Emphasis of Jesus Christ himself, was applied to that ^pe; and underneath
the Figure there was a Motto, ^ich gave him the Title of Vice-God. This was
copied ^m a Picture made in Italy, to adorn a Triumphal Arch ^s'd in honor of
that new Pope. But that which was ^ost remarkable was that the name of Paul the
5th, joined that of Vice-God in Latin, in the case which belongs to ^e
Inscriptions, filled up very justly the famous number (...) 666, which all the
Christians according to the testimony of St. John in the Apocalipse, look upon
to be the number of Antichrist. Joining the value of the Numeral Letter of that
name, according to the use of the Latins made (...) that mistical number.

Du Plessis triumphed upon that important discovery. 'T^ said that he had been
informed that the Queen designed (...) recall him to Court, and to employ him
again; and tha^ his Friends had advised him, either to defer or to suppre^ the
Edition of this Book, which would not fail to invol^ him into new Troubles. But
he preferred the advantage of (...) Religion to that of his Fortune at Court.
The Reform'^ who were great admirers of those kind of observation^ did not fail
to draw certain presages from thence of the decay of the Roman See, which
manifested its Antichristanity by such evident Characters. To say the tr^ that
number was made out there so naturally, that it neither required learning, nor
stretching to find it o^* There was no need to invent a new Ortography, or bar^
rous Names, nor ambiguous Words: and the Title of Vi^ God, which made the
greatest part of that number, w^ so well adapted to the Authority which
Antechrist was^ pretend, according to the predictions of Scripture, That seemed
to require no other information upon that Subje^* Those who had treated about
it before, had never imagined any thing so just: and those who have spoken
(...) it since have invented nothing farther. There was no (...) cessity to
look for that fatal number either in the Greek^ Hebrew; nor to make use of a
Calculation unknown to t^ Vulgar, and not in use in the Language in which the
application of it was made. All this was found in the Language and in the
manner of Calculating of the Latin which the Catholics call that of the
Church: which see^ to be necessary in this Question, which relates, according^
the Catholics themselves, to a man who is to possess (...) Roman See. So that
it is no wonder that du Plessis should value himself upon that happy Discovery;
and that t^ Reformed looked upon it as a real Triumph of their Doctrine* The
Catholics was strangly moved at the said Book; the Po^ made great complaints
about it; The Sorbonne censured it; and some private persons undertook to
refute it. Among the rest one de Brai St. Germain endeavored to excuse the
Pope, and laid the blame of the excess of the Elogys and the Impiety of the
Applications upon the sordid flatteries of the Courtiers. But he made himself
ridiculous ^y endeavoring to apply the same number to du Plessis: which he did
by turning his name as many ways as he could imagine. The Catholics have
followed that method until our Days, from the time of the Reformation, ^s if
that Number were the less applicable to their Church, when by a thousand
violent efforts they find the way to apply it to another Subject. Antichrist
himself, according ^o the very notion of their own Doctors, might make use of
that secret, to prove that he is not the person meant by the Apocalypse,
because that name has been applied for example, to Paul the 5th, with justness
enough. That method has nevertheless proved useful to them: In turning by those
forced applications the mystery of that Number into a railliry, they have
evaded the serious applications that might be made of it to the Sea of Rome.

Before I resume the sequel of what the return of the Sedition at Paris.
Deputies in the Provinces did produce, it will not be a^^iss to speak a word
or two of a Sedition which the Catholics excited at Paris against the
Reformed. Part of the Churchyard called Trinity was allowed them. A person of
^he Reformed Religion caused his Child's Corpse to be carried ^hither in open
day. Two Marshals men accompanied it to secure it. But their presence did not
hinder an Apprentice from abusing and flinging of Stones at the Reformed who
followed the Corpse: and his Master in imitation of it did the same. The
Marshals men endeavoring to suppress the said Violence, increased the evil
instead of appeasing it. The Mob fell upon them as well as upon the Reformed.
Several of them were wounded, and among the rest one of the Officers. As the
Court was yet uncertain of the success of the Affairs of Saumur, they thought
fit not to leave the said Sedition unpunished. Those who had begun it were
seized. The Apprentice was condemned to the Whipping Post, and his Master to
stand by. They appealed to the Parliament, which confirmed the said Sentence,
and it was executed.

The Deputies of the Provinces being come home, Provincial Return of the
Deputies into their Provinces.
Assemblies were called to hear their Proceedings. This report of new
Assemblies made the Court fear that the discontents given to that of Saumur
might be attended with worse consequences than was expected. New expedients
were sought after; and they followed the advice of the Marshal de Bouillon,
which was to send away the Commissioners the King had promised with all speed;
who under pretense of performing the answers to the Cahier, might easily
disipate the said Assemblies. Lest the Reformed Commissioners should cross that
design, the Marshal named all Commissioners in diver^ places where they are not
received.
those that were at his Devotion in every Province. This was done with so
little secrecy, that several Provinces refused to receive them. The Lower
Guyenne gave the example of that refusal; and several others followed it; tho
the Wisest were of opinion that it would be the best war to let them perform
their Office without any hindrance. It will be easy to judge of what the
Commissioners were to do in every Province, by the manner of proceeding of
those that were deputed for Berry. They arrived at Blois at the time the Synod
was assembling there; and whereas Synod at Blois which the Commissioners are
alarmed at.
they were not acquainted with the nature of those Assemblies, they were
suppri'd to see it composed of 50 persons; and cited them to appear before
them. Twelve Deputies were sent to them, having the Moderator and his Associate
at the Head of them. The Commissioners endeavored to persuade them that their
Assembly savored of a Cabal; and in order to remove all ill thoughts from
them, they made a large Discourse to them about the Queens good intentions. The
answer of the Reformed was a little cold at first. They said that they had been
told the same at Saumur; That the Deputies General writ the same thing to them;
and that there was no necessity to Cite the Assembly, only to tell them that,
They refused to acknowledge the Commissioners very civily, covering the said
refusal with an entreaty that they would be pleased not to meddle with their
Affairs, nor with the complaints that had already been prensented to them: and
whereas the Commissioners did not disist notwithstanding their civility, the
Assembly sent them notice soon after it, That they appealed from their
proceedings. The Commissioners on the other hand, acquainted They writ to Court
about it.
the Court with their opinion of the said Assembly. They said that they had
refused to acknowledge them in the quality of Commissioners; and that the
Number of the Nobles was not so great as it used to be; That their Deputies
went to and fro toward Saumur; That small nocturnal Assemblies were formed
there under pretense of Treats; That they continued their Session,
notwithstanding they had forbidden it; That they hindered them, with scorn from
executing their Commission; That Vignier, Moderator, had declared that the
Reformed would not accept the ^nswer made to the Cahiers of the General
Assembly; That they had new demands to make still; That they would resume in
the National Synod which was to be held the following year at Privas, or at
Rochel, what had been interrupted at Saumur; and that upon the order the
Commissioners had given him to Disolve the Assembly, he had answered that he
would complain about it throughout the Kingdom. The Truth is that he explained
himself the next day; and declared that he only meant the custom of acquainting
the Churches with all that passed. Nevertheless, the Commissioners allowed them
to continue the said Assembly, provided they meddled with nothing but the
affairs of their Discipline: but they would not allow the report of what had
been done at Saumur to be made otherwise than in their presence. The manner in
which they wrote at Court was a little envenomed, but yet they owned that the
Deputies had expressed a great deal of willingness and quickness in taking the
Oath of Allegiance to the King and Queen. By allowing the continuation of the
Assembly, with the restriction I have mentioned, they hindered them from making
a Provincial Council, according to the resolution of the General Assembly: and
they were seconded in that by the Consistory of Orleans, whose Deputy Memin and
Hervet Doctor in Physic opposed the said Establishment with great heat,
threatening even to acquaint the Magistrates with it. Moreover, the said Hervet
writ a Libel against that design, which was not relished by the Court. These
were the effects of the Divisions of Saumur, which were followed with the like
discord in diverse parts of the Kingdom.

As Assemblies of this kind were made in all Parts, in Assembly at
Castel-Jaloux which causes a kind of League of the Catholics.
which they renewed the Oath of Union, one of the same kind was held at
Castel-Jaloux, which gave an occasion to the Catholics of Guyenne also to form
a kind of Union among them, which savored very much of a League. The
Commissioners I have been speaking of mentioned the said Union of the
Catholics in their Letters to the Queen; and in order to aleviate the reproach
which that novelty deserved, they compared the Union of the Reformed to the
League it self. Nevertheless, there was this difference between them, That
there was no Conspiracy against the Catholics, which could oblige them to make
a Confederacy to defend themselves: whereas the Reformed saw one throughout
Europe, of which they felt dismal effects in diverse parts. That was sufficient
to oblige them to stand upon their guard in France. The Protestants in Germany
were abused in all places by the Catholics. For which reason the Princes were
assembled at Rotenburg, in order to apply themselves to their mutual
preservation. Even in France they saw themselves exposed to bear the burden of
every thing. The Jesuits had a violent desire to settle themselves at Troyes a
rich City of Champagne, very Populous, and of a great Trade; and omitted
nothing that Impudence, Deceit, and Malice are capable to invent in order to
succeed in it. Nevertheless, they met so much opposition in their design, that
they were constrained to give it over: But the Reformed suffered for it. The
Jesuits feigned that ^ir only design in endeavoring to settle in the said City
^s to hinder Heresy from introducing it self there. The ^y in order to remove
that pretense obliged it self never (...) suffer the Reformed to settle there:
which resolution ^y have observed scrupulously.

This was not the only Mortification that Society received at Mortifications
received by the Jesuits
^t time. The Sorbonne divided their Censures between the ^orm'd and the
Catholics. As they had condemned the ^ok of du Plessis, they also censured
some propositions which (...) Jesuits had advanced concerning Ignatius their
Founder, (...) declared them Impious. One of their Robe censured (...) Censure;
and having no better reason to allege, he ^ntain'd that it was good for
nothing but to rejoice Cha^ton and the Huguenots. They had a great Process with
(...) University, for the overture of their College. Mar^ere a famous Advocate
stunned them by a thundering Plea: (...) whereas the Parliament was not oppressed
by a Superior ^hority at that time, they gave a Decree in favor of the
^versity. But the Jesuits had the cunning to publish a ^ter without a Name,
which they feigned to be written them, which comforted them for their Disgrace,
putting ^m in hopes of a time that would prove more favoura^ to them.

Among the Commissioners that were sent into the Pro^es, Commissioners in the
Country of Gex.
le Masuier and Villarnoul had the district of Burgundy, (...) which the
Country of Gex is a dependency. They did (...) meet with the same opposition in
that Country, as had ^n made else where to those that had the same Commis^.
Therefore we find several ordinances of theirs of the (...) of that year, and
the beginning of the following, con^ing the exercise of the Reformed Religion
in that little ^liwick: and the Rule of their Judgments was the Edict Nantes,
which they looked upon as a Common Law to those who lived under the King's
Obedience. Moreover, ^e of the said Ordinances were given at the request of
(...) Bishop of Geneva, and of the Catholics of that Canton, who desired that
the said Law might be observed in favo^ of them. It was much for them at that
time, to enjoy the privileges of the Edict: but time has given them more
boldness; and they have finally oppressed in that Country, those by whom their
Fathers had formerly thought themselves very happy to be Tolerated. An Essay
of it appeared the following year.

Perhaps the Reader will not be displeased to be informed The Reformed in a
quarrel take the part of the House of Guise.
by a small affair of the Court, how much the Reformed were disposed to forget
the hatred and violences past incase they had been any wise encouraged to do it
by* better Treatment. The Count de Soissons, Son to a younger Brother of the
Princes of Conde, who had been the Head of the Reformed, had a quarrel with the
Duke of Guise* The Court sided with them as it is usual: but the Cou^ was
abandoned almost by all the Reformed: and the Duke de Bouillon, de Rohan, de
Sully, la Noue, Gouvernet, eve^ the Grand-Sons of the Admiral Chatillon, and
seven others offered their service to the Duke of Guise. The was a very public
Proof that they would not call him (...) an account for the Blood and Pains,
which his Father ar^ Grandfather had cost them. 1612.


The following year was spent in little Disputes, whi^ without proceeding to an
open War showed nevertheless that there were great Animosities; and that one
side ha^ ill designs, and the others jealousies and diffidences. A^ the very
beginning there happened an affair which pa^ Death of the Lord de Vatan.*
without noise, tho it might have proved of ill consequen^ at another time. The
Lord of Vatan, a little Town i^ Berry which was of some defense, and in which
he held (...) Garrison, was accused of favoring the Sale of Prohibited Salt in
that Province, and to make Money of it himself. The Court ordered Informations
to be brought in against him and that Gentleman thinking to terrify those that
did it, committed some Violences, which obliged the Court to put their orders
in execution. The Rebellion of that Lord not being suppressed by the first
endeavors that were used to reduce him to his Duty, Forces were sent ^inst
him; he was besieged in his own House, and forced (...) surrender upon
Discretion; and being sent Prisoner to (...) Conciergerie, he was condemned to
Dye by the Parliament of Paris. He had flattered himself that the Reformed ^uld
Interess themselves for the preservation of his ^wn: but no body stirred for
him; and the Town was ^en within sight of the Reformed, who did not offer in
(...) least to defend it. Not but that there were People who ^aded the
consequence of it; and who were of opinion (...) they ought never to suffer the
loss of any place of that ^d, whatever pretenses were used to attack it; by
rea^ that if plausible pretenses were sufficient, the Court ^s too Ingenious
not to find new ones daily, and to at^ them one after another. But the
Gentleman's case was ^orreign to those in which Religion was concerned, That ^y
did not think it reasonable to make a general affair ^t; nor to give their
Enemies a reason to reproach them (...) they made use of the Cities that were
committed to ^r Guard, for the security of their Conscience and ^es to protect
those that were Violators of the Laws of (...) State. The Judges allowed the
Baron de Vatan, after They allow him a Minister to prepare him to Dye: but they
hinder him from singing Psalms.
(...) had received his Sentence to send for a Minister in Pri^ to prepare him
to Dye. The Reformed either Prisoners, ^uch as repaird thither to accompany him
had a mind to (...) some Verses of Psalms. But the Catholic Prisoners (...)
others who came there out of Curiosity opposed it directly: and Fuzil Curate of
the Parish of St. Bartholomew, ^o came there in hopes of an occasion to perform
some ^on worthy of his Zeal, was one of the most earnest, (...) boldest. Their
pretense was that the Edict allowed to ^fort the Prisoners, but not to perform
the exercise of (...) Reformed Religion in Prisons upon that account: much
(...) in that place which was the Chapel of the Conciergerie. ^e Reformed
obeyed; and the Tumult ceased.

But at the beginning of the same year, there were Deputy of Eight Provinces at
Court, which did meet together in order Deputies of the Provinces at Paris.
to send thither, to resume the Affairs in the same condition in which the
General Assembly had left them; and to Soli^* His Majesty to add something more
favorable, and more e^press to the answers he had made to their Cahier. The
Deputy General received them as if they had spoken in the Na^ of all the
Churches, because they were Deputed by (...) many Provinces, which were those
in which the Reformed were the strongest. The Court did not use them so. The^
were resolved to Condemn the Provincial Assemblys that h^ Deputed them, as
Unlawful Assemblys: and therefore the^ were obliged to send them back again
without seeing, o^ hearing them. But the fear of exasperating the said
Provinces by that Affront, made them finally resolve to h^ them, after some
difficulties. Moreover they entered in some Negotiation with them; and the
Queen being desire^ to have Du Plessis advice upon their Demands by an Expreshe
sent to him it inclined People to believe that that aff^ would have a happy
Issue. The Marshal de Bouillon hindered i^ and took it as an Affront to him and
his that more should (...) granted at the Solicitation of the Deputies of those
Unlaw^ Assemblys, than the Assembly of Saumur had been able to o^tain. The
Court which had no Inclination to favor the ^form'd easily complied with the
Marshal Duke; and taking for pretense that those Deputys of diverse Assemblys
not allow^ of, could not be looked upon otherwise than as private Persons who
assumed the name of the General, they were sent ba^ Sent back Outragiousty.
without an Answer. Moreover the Court added Contume^ to Severity; discharging
them in Writing in very offens^ Terms, which reflected at once on their
Commission at their Persons.

In the mean time they endeavored to prevent the en^ which they foresaw that
rigor might occasion; but the way they took for it proved more Injurious than
the Evil^ self; and incuring one Wound made another more considerable, and more
dangerous. Among all the Resolutions o^ ^e Assembly of Saumur, there was none
troubled the ^ourt more than that of Establishing Provincial Councils. ^he
Truth is that difficultys were met with in diverse pla^s for the Execution of
that Regulation, and the same dis^r'd which had troubled the General Assembly,
imbroyl'd ^e particular ones: so that it made the Enterprise miscarry (...)
some Provinces. But that Establishment was made in o^ers; and neither Brigues,
nor Craft could hinder it, The ^ourt had no mind to proceed openly to the
suppressing of ^e said Assemblys for fear of exposing their Authority, by a
resolution they might not be able to perform: But on the ^her hand this new
form of Assemblys, which fastened the ^nion of the Churches with new Links,
which the Coun^ designed to break at any rate, was the more Odious to the
^ouncil, by reason that it was advantageous to the Party they ^d a mind to
Ruin. For that reason they be thought them^ves of a Wile, which without
prohibiting them directly ^ade them pass Indirectly for Unlawful: and that
design was ^ver'd with the pretense of securing those against the proceedings
of Justice as had assisted in the Assemblies of which the ^eputies had been
sent back by the Court with contumely. The ^ng gave a Declaration on the 24th
of April, which beginning Decleration of the 24th of April.
^th the design he had had to pursue for the preservation (...) the State the
means which the Late King had used, to ^ake it pass from an extreme desolation
to a perfect Splen^r, by degrees took notice of the answers given to the ^hiers
of the Assembly of Saumur, and of the sending of ^ommissioners into the
Provinces. Those two things were ^opos'd in it as great proofs of the good
Intentions of the ^ourt, and as proper Expedients to remove all the Jealousies
^d Fears, which had given the Reformed a pretense to hold ^me Assemblys without
leave, and which had created jealou^es in others. Those Assemblies were only
spoken of by the by: ^ey were only styled Extraordinary; and they were only
imputed to some of the Reformed; They said that they were only con^en'd in some
Provinces; The King declared that he was very ^ell satisfied with the good
Will, Zeal and Loyalty of the Generality: Nevertheless he altered his tone all
of a sudden; and calling that a Crime, which he had just before expressed in
such mild Terms, he granted the Remission and Forgiveness of the fault
Committed by those who had occasioned the said Assemblys and had been concerned
in the same, forbiding his Attorneys General and their Substitutes to make any
Inquiry after, or prosecution for the same. So far there only appeared
aprelude, of which the Mystery was concealed: but finally the last Article of
the Declaration revealed it, prohibiting all Assemblys of that nature for the
future, declaring them to be Interdicted by the 28 Article of the Edict, by the
Ordinance of the 16th. of March 1606, and by the Answer given to the Cahiers in
the Month of August of the said Year. Nevertheless the King allowed the
Reformed still a full Liberty to hold Consistorys, Conferrences, Provincial and
National Synods, on condition that none but Ministers and Elders should be
admitted in the same, and that they should only treat of their Doctrine and
Ecclesiastical Discipline, on pain of forfeiting the Right of holding such
Assemblies. The Moderators were to be responceable for it: and the Cognizance
of the infractions was referred to the first Master of Requests being upon the
place.

The Deputies General being informed that the said Deelation The Deputies
General oppose the Inrolement.
was sent to the Parliament, in order to be Registered, formed an opposition
against it by a Petition, which contained an express disavowal of having
required it; protesting that they looked upon it as injurious and prejudicial
to the Reformed, and that in the name of the General they refused to make use
of it. This opposition, and the proceedings of the said Deputies at Court, in
order to put a stop to the said Declaration, stopped the Parliament for some
days. But whereas the Count had only given that Pardon, to the end, that
supposing the said Assembly to be Criminal, they might have a pretense to
suppress them for the future, proceeded on: and the said Declaration was
verified on the 25 of May in the Parliament of Paris, and in other places
sooner, or later, according to the force of their Intrigues. Moreover the Court
found out some Reformed who desired ^e Inrolment of it, under pretense that
having been engaged Which is notwithstanding performed.
imprudently in the said Assemblys, without knowing whether they were lawful or
no, they stood in need of a Pardon for their Security. They were Creatures of
Mar^al de Bouillon, who had only assisted in them, in order (...) cross the
Resolutions of the rest, or to give informations ^f what passed there. But yet
the refusal of it was looked upon as general, since it was made by the Deputies
General, who did represent all the Churches. So that the Inrolment of the said
Declaration had something very singular (...) it. It granted a Pardon to
persons who desired none; and to whom it was only granted, in order to make
them declare themselves guilty by accepting of it. It was a very ^ew sort of
kindness to pardon people against their W^lls, ^ho desired no Pardon; and
notwithstanding their opposition to make a Law of a Remission against which the
persons concerned did protest, before the publication of it.

The Inrolment was made the very next day after the National Synod of Privas.
^verture of the National Synod, which was begun that year (...) Privas on the
24th of May: as if the Court expecting that the Synod would make some new
Protestation against the Declaration, had designed to put it past retracting,
when they ^ould make remonstrances about it. It is certain at least ^at this
Synod resented it highly; as I will relate (...) after having mentioned some
other important Acts which preceded it. This is one of the Synods that entered
^rthest into Political Affairs. They examined the Conduct ^f those that had
created a Scisme at Saumur, and that ^nited themselves to prefer the smaller
number to the Plurality of Voices, according to the Queens Letter. They
Censures about the Divisions of Saumur.
^ronounc'd a general Censure against those that were concerned in that
Conspiracy. They declared that the concor'd (...) often Sworn, had been
violated by that Artifice; and that the Divisions of the Assembly had given the
King's Council an occasion to wave their just demands. Therefore they renewed
the Union, which was signed and Sworn by all the Deputies; who promised to get
it signed and sworn by all the Churches of their Provinces. The Instrument that
was Union Signed and Sworn.
drawn of it contained a promise to Live and Dye in the profession of their
Confession of Faith and Discipline, under the Authority and for the Service of
the King and Queen Regent, the Empire of God remaining whole. It was in order
to contribute to that Union that a last and definitive division of the Kingdom
was made into 16 Provinces, in which Bearn was Comprehended. Till then the
number had not always been the same: which had sometimes occasioned disputes in
the Deputations to the National Synods, and General Assemblies.

In the next place the Synod took Cognizance of some divisions Private
Divisions.
which occasioned mischief and scandal in several places. There were places
where the Governor and Minister did not agree: The one being of the number of
the Complaisant, and the other of the Zealous. In other places the Ministers
could not agree among themselves; which created Parties in their Churches,
which the Court knew very well how to improve. Even at Montauban, Benoit and
Beraud had continual disputes. Beraud was the most passionate of the two: he
had more Vigor and Impatience, and was capable in case of necessity to quit the
Pen to draw a Sword: which in time drew mortifying affairs upon him. Bencit had
more weakness: but his Cause was the best; and the Synod of the Province had
adjuged it more than once in his favor. Nevertheless, the National Synod
obliged him to yield to his Competitor; and sent him to serve in the
Neighborhood: but in order to comfort him for that disgrace, they gave him
very honorable Testimonials. The Synod thought themselves obliged to perform
this Act of Authority, for the preservation of Montauban, which might have been
in danger'd by the continuation of a dispute which had already lasted many
years.

Ferrier was not forgotten in that Synod. It was upon his account they made an
Act which excluded the Professors of Theology out of the Political Assemblies.
But they proceeded farther yet against him, and tried him in a very mortifying
manner. He had of late thrown of his Mask with so ^ttle prudence, that he
seemed to have lost his Senses. The ^arty he had taken at Saumur had rendered
him odious in his Province, and to one part of his Church. He was sensible that
^ey would prosecute him in the National Synod: and that ^f the Lower Languedock
was so prejudiced against him, that ^e was afraid of a shameful Censure. But
the means he used to prevent it, only served to render it inevitable. He ^ade
several suspicious journeys to Court, without the participation of his Church.
The Ministers of Paris who ^ok'd upon him as a dangerous man, used their utmost
endeavors to reclaim him. They thought to flatter his ambition by offering him
a place in their Church, which wanted a Minister: and there was a great deal of
reason to believe that having by his ill Conduct reduced himself to the
necessity of quiting the Church of Nimes, his vocation in the service of the
Church of Paris would make him amends for that disgrace, and would be a fair
pretense for him to quit ^s Province with honor. Besides they were less afraid
of ^m at Paris than at Nimes. He would have had learned, vigorous Colleagues
there, to have an eye over his actions, who would perhaps have prevented his
total ruin. He accepted the offers ^at were made to him at first; and even
received the reproaches that were made to him for his past faults with great
marks ^f Repentance. He confessed all; he condemned himself; ^e wept; but after
having promised never to abandon his Profession, and to exert it at Paris; he
retracted it un^and somely: and whether it were that he had promised to ^o
things for the service of the Court, which this new vocation would disable him
from performing; or whether he thought he had credit enough by his friends
means, to main^imself at Nimes in spite of his Province; or whether ^e were
absolutely possessed by the Jesuits, and only acted ^y their inspirations, he
left Paris without a pretense; and without taking his leave of the Ministers
there, from whom ^e had received so civil and honorable a Treatment.

All this was taken into consideration at Privas; a^ du Moulin who gave an
account there of what had (...) Grave accusations against him in the Synod.
at Paris, where Ferrier had discovered a mind equa^ haughty, fickle and
without Faith, represented, his conduct to be very irregular. Diverse
accusations were added to (...) relating to his life past, which was examined
rigorously They upbraided him for having neglected his prosession of Theology;
for having Preached Doctrines that we^ not Orthodox; for having taken upon him
the management of Money, and applied a very considerable Su^ of it to his own
use unlawfully; for having himself forged or consented to the forging of
certain. Letters which h^ engaged him into shameful affairs, and dishonorable
d^guises. They censured, him severely upon all these Articles; Which censures
him grievously.
but besides the Verbal Censure, the Synod Injoyn^ him to write to the Church
of Paris to make the satisfaction; forbad him to appear in Political Assembl^
for the space of six years; and ordered him to e^ his Ministry out of the
Province of Languedoc.

Ferrier was too haughty to obey; and tho he did n^ Nimes deputes to preserve
him.
expect so ill a treatment, he was not disheartened. He h^ Friends at Nimes, and
his Faction was increased by a^ those who were at the devotion of the Court. By
tho^ means he prevailed with the Church and City of Ni^ to send Deputies to the
Synod on his behalf. They chose them among the Councelors of the Presidial, the
Body (...) the City and the Ministers. The Synod gave them hearing; and they
omitted nothing to prevail upon the^ and to obtain the Revocation of their
Judgment: but a^ in vain. Moreover the Synod expressed their displeasure at so
considerable a Deputation, to favor a Man who betrayed the Common Cause. The
Ministers who were joined in it, were censured for their complaisance: an^ the
Memoirs they had brought in order to his justification were called calumnious.
But whereas they were sensible that Ferrier would not stop there; and that the
Magistracy being of his side he would keep his Minestry, o^ which they had not
suspended the Functions, they deolar'd him aggravating the matter, that he was
actually suspended And the Synod aggravates.
from that moment, unless he obeyed. Never the^s as they had no mind to
exasperate him, the Synod ^ving thought fit to send Chamier to the Academy of
^nta^ban, which desired him for their Professor in Divini^ they sent Ferrier to
Montelimar in his room. But ^s Indulgence of the Synod did not succeed
according their expectation.

The said Synod also received the Complaints of that Complaints of the Synod of
Blois.
Blois, against those who had hindered them by their positions from forming a
Provincial Council, according the resolution taken at Saumur: and in order to
ap^ proper remedies to an affair of so ill an example, ^y deputed three
Ministers and two Elders, whom they ^rg'd to examine that affair to the bottom,
and to ^ceed to suspention, and even to depose the Guil^

But the greatest affair that was treated there, was that ^he Declaration of
the 24th of April which the Synod ^own'd solemly by an Act that was Signed by
the Mo^ator, his Associate and the Secretaries, which was sent (...) all the
Churches, and even Printed in order to send ^pies of it throughout Europe. The
Synod pretended ^t there was a fl^w in the Pardon granted by that ^claration;
since there had been no crime committed to ^der it necessary, that the
Assemblies that had been ^d since that of Saumur were lawful; that the like ^d
often been held during the Reign of Henry the 4th ^hout ^his ever complaining
against them; That when^r a permission was given to hold a General Assem^, it
included leave to hold particular ones either be^e the General, to Nominate the
Deputies that were to ^st at it; or after it to give them an account of their
^nsactions there. This was particularly grounded on the ^y form of the fatal
Letter, the Queen had written the Assembly of Saumur, which commanding the
Deputies to break up, ordered them at the same time to carry assurances of the
King's good Intentions into their Provinces: which had induced the general
Assembly to summon particular ones, to acquaint them with those goo^
dispositions. They added that the Council was not ignorant ^^ the resolution of
holding those particular Assemblies since the Commissioners that were sent into
div^ places, had received Orders to repair thither, if poss^ before the
Overture: That the King had sent some P^*sons of Quality to assist at them in
his Name, in so^ Provinces: That the King's Lieutenants, Magistrates,
Counselors and Presidents, had sent for* some of the Deputies of those
Assemblies to speak to them, and to know the Intentions: That the very
Commissioners nominated (...) the King had assisted at some of them: That their
Ca^i^ had been received in the Council, and that they had trea^ed about the
Answers that were to be made to the^ from whence the Synod infer*d that the
said Assemblies w^ neither Criminal nor Clandestine. They complained the the
Reformed were blackened by that Tacit reproach: T^ it revivd former hatreds,
making them odious both (...) home and abroad by those oblique accusations:
which were contrary to the peace of the State. Therefore the seconded the
entreaties which the Deputies General h^ made, and the Petition they had
presented to the Parliament of Paris; and did protest that the Reformed h^
neither required nor sought after those Letters, not dee^*ing themselves guilty
in any respect, and being ready (...) expose themselves to all manner of
torments rather the to suffer their Loyalty to be tainted by that spot. The
protested that they would make no manner of use of t^ pretended Pardon; and
that they disowned all the proceedings, avowals, and approbations the said
Declaration might take the advantage of, as being contrary to the approved
fidelity, in which they promised to persevere, a^ to maintain it with their
Fortunes, Lives and Honor* This Act was dated the 2d. of June: and the Synod
charged the Churches of those places where there were ^hambers of the Edict, to
make Remonstrances to the ^ounsellors who had suffered the Inrollment of the
said ^eclaration to be made without a vigorous opposition: ^d the Churches of
Cities in which there were Parliaments, were also ordered to present the
protestations of ^e Synod to them.

They also writ to the Marshals de Bouillon and de Les^iguieres, Cares of the
Synods for the reconciliation of the Grandees.
to desire them to assist the Deputies General, in order to obtain the
revocation of that injurious Pardon and moreover because the Synod dreaded the
consequences of the Division that had broke out at Saumur; ^ey employed their
utmost cares to reconcile Peoples ^inds. They charged the Deputies General to
employ themselves about it, and gave them for Associates Du Moulin, Durant and
de Lisle Grolot, a man of great mer^ and credit. They wrote to all those who
were any ^i^e concerned in those disorders, and made very lively ^d very
pressing exhortations to them; and declaring themselves positively for those
who had insisted for most sure^^, they entreated the Marshal de Bouillon and de
Lesdi^^ieres to join themselves again to the Dukes of Rohan ^^d de Sully, to La
Force, Soubise and Du Plessis, and the ^^st of those that were Zealous; to
forget all that was ^^st, and all the diversity of sentiments and of opini^^s;
to lay aside all animosities fomented by their common enemies; to reunite
themselves to the Churches in ^^eir Remonstrances, in order to obtain
favorable an^wers, at least upon their most important demands. They ^rit at
the same time to Chatillon, to the Duke de Rohan, (...) Parabere, and to others
upon the same subject, to ex^ort them to a Reconciliation, and to make a
Sacrifice (...) their Resentments to the good of the Churches. The ^utches de
La Trimouille was not forgotten. She had begun to apply her self to that Work:
The Synod writ (...) her to continue; and to breed her Children in good
^entiments of the Reformed Religion. The said Letters were carried by diverse
Persons, who were able to second them but by reason that the Division had
passed from the great ones to the inferior sort, the Synod also made strong
exhortations to private Persons to reunite themselves; and conjured them in a
very moving manner not to abandon the Common Cause. Neither did they forget to
threaten the obstinate with Ecclesiastical Censures, or to denote the
Vengeances and Judgments of God against them: and they charged all the
Ministers to endeavor to restore concord in their Flocks. Brief of
augmentation of the Sums allowed to the Reformed.


The Deputies General had brought the Synod a Brief of 15000 Crowns which the
King granted for an augmention to the Sallaries of the Ministers. It was dated
on the first of October last past; and contained only what related to the
augmentation: Another had been granted before, to confirm that of 45000 Crowns
of which the King promised to continue the payment; declaring that he knew what
considerations had obliged the King his Father to give that Sum to the
Reformed, to be imployd about their secret affairs. Therefore the King allowed
the Reformed the same Liberty to dispose of that Sum, which had been granted to
them by the Briefs of the late King. But the King did not design to do the same
thing in relation to the Brief of augmentation, which the Court undertook to
distribute themselves. Insomuch that the said grant which looked like a favor,
was in reality a dangerous Snare. All those who were self-interested were fired
with the hopes of obtaining more from the Court out of that Sum than they
expected to get from the Synod, in which the Distributions were made with more
Husbandry and Equity. So that it was easy for the Court to make that serve to
corrupt the Reformed, which seemed to be given to oblige them. Some private
Persons had already made their Addresses to the King, in the short time that
was past since the Date of the Brief in order to obtain some gratification out
of that new Sum. Even some Communities had been taken by that Charm, and the
City of Bergerac had obtained 15000 Livers that way, under pretense of erecting
a College.

Moreover it occasioned a great Alteration that year Alterations made to the
state of the Reformed in the County of Gex.
in the State of Religion in the Bayliwick of Gex, I have related in another
place the condition of the Reformed there, when that Country was surrendered to
the King by the Duke of Savoy. It is the Natural Obligation of Princes to leave
all things in the condition in which they find them, when they fall into their
hands; at least as to what relates to those Rights which subjection cannot
deprive Men of; such as are those of Conscience, and of Privileges acquired by
a long Possession in favor of Liberty. For which reason Henry the IV. had made
no alterations there; contenting himself with restoring the free exercise of
the Catholic Religion there, until means could be found to reconcile the two
Parties about the possession of Estates and Buildings. But Lewis the XIII. his
Successor would no longer keep the same measures. The Commissioners which he
had sent into Burgundy, of which that Bayliwick was a dependency, took at once
from the Reformed both the Ecclesiastical Revenues, and the Houses, which had
formerly been employed for the Roman Church. In order to make them some amends
for that loss, the King allowed them 1200 Crowns for the Salery of their
Ministers; and took the said Sum out of the 15000 which he allowed the Reformed
more than the late King had granted them, in recompense of their Tithes. To
this he added leave to build Temples: but he gave no fund toward it. He only
ordered two very illusive things; the one was that they should take materials
from the demolished Convents to employ them toward these new Buildings: the
other, that the Catholics should pay the reparations and amendments of their
Churches; and that the said Money should be applied toward the Constructions
of the said Temples: This was the way to Involve the Reformed into continual
Law Suits, to recompense them for the Estates that were taken from them:
besides it reduced the Salary of the Ministers to a very inconsiderable thing,
since they were only allowed 1200 Crowns, tho there were 12 Ministers at that
time in the said Bayliwick. Insomuch that taking out of the said grant the
indispensible Charges which every Church was obliged to be at yearly, there did
not remain enough to allow each Minister a Pension of a 100 Crowns. But that
which was most remarkable was that the King indemnisied the Churches of Gex at
the cost of the other Churches of his Kingdom; taking out of what he had
promised to some, wherewith to make the others subsist.

The National Synod having part of these things before The Synod, endeavors to
prevent the abuse that is made of the said augmentation.
their eyes, and foreseeing the rest, endeavored to remedy the same. Therefore
they charged the Deputies General on the one hand humbly to beseech his Majesty
to leave the receipt and distribution of the said Sum to the Reformed, as the
King his Father had allowed them the Care and Management of that which he had
granted them; and on the other they ordered them to oppose the endeavors of
those who should make their applications to the Court, in order to obtain some
Pension out of the said Sum, to the prejudice of the right of the Synods and of
the common good. The Town of Bergerac was highly censured for having taken that
way to obtain the Sum that was granted them; and the Synod enjoined them to
desist from that pretention, and not to pretend any thing out of that Sum,
unless by the approbation and Will of the Assembly. It proved somewhat
difficult at first to make them obey; but finally, the Synod having sent
express Deputies thither, to remonstrate the consequences of the thing to them,
they submitted to the discretion of the Synod; and 1200 Livers were granted
them soon after it for their College.

The same Synod renewed all the demands the Assembly Andrenews the demands of
the Assembly of Saumur.
of Saumur had already made; and declaring that they were not satisfied with
the Answers to the Cahiers of the said Assembly, they formed others just like
them, and charged, the Deputies General to endeavor to obtain more favorable
answers than the preeceeding. But no Article was so earnestly recommended to
them, as that which desired that the Reformed might not be obliged to call
their Religion themselves Pretended Reformed. The Synod charged them to desire
in the name of all the Reformed, that they would sooner undergo a thousand
Racks than to give their Religion that Reasons of the Repugnancy so often
expressed against the Names of Pretended Reformed Religion.
^ious Title. As many Persons may be surprised without doubt to see the same
Article pressed so often with so much ^^nestness, and perhaps may not at first
perceive the con^^uence of it, I will give you a short account of the Reasons
which obliged the Reformed to insist so much upon that latter. Therefore I will
observe once for all, that the word Petended is equivocal. It often signifies
the undecided and doubtful state of a thing in contestation, upon which nothing
^s been determined as yet to bind the Parties: The Judges like use of it as of
an indifferent term, when before the de^ion they speak of the things which are
pretended by one of the Parties, and disputed by the other: and sometimes also
the Instruments that are common to both, the parties like use of it in speaking
of their Rights, without being a^id of doing themselves any prejudice. In a
word, Pretended is relative to Pretention, and in that sense implys ^^ thing
suspicious, or offensive. But it is yet more usually ^en in a signification
almost equivalent to the Terms of ^se and Unlawful: and whereas the first sense
is in some ^as^re reserved for the Bar, the second is of a common use ^ery
where else. So that there are words to which the word pretended cannot be
joined without giving it an in^ious sense. You cannot apply a pretended Merit,
or pretended Virtue to any body without offense: and in that ^e a pretended
Scholar, signifies an ignorant Person. ^is use of it draws another after it,
viz. That the word petended becomes Ironical in several occasions, and gives
offensive air of reproach and railery to discourse. Therefore the Reformed
being sencible what was meant, when ^ey were called Pretended Reformed, took it
for an affront. ^^ be obliged to give themselves that equivocal Name; as if
they had approved the opinion which the Catholics had of their Religion and of
their Doctrine.

The Deputies General were also minded to complain of the Complaints concerning
the Commissioners.
Illusive Journey of the Commissioners. It was apparent that the Court had not
sent them to better the condition of the Reformed. Their main Function had only
been to disolve the particular Assemblies, and to hinder the establishment of
the Provincial Councils. Besides which, they had hardly give any decisive
Ordinances; and they had left all the affairs undecided either by divisions or
removals to the Council Their chief expeditions were only to give some
Churchyards and far from doing the Reformed Justice upon their Complaints they
had made their condition worse in some places than ^^ was before. They gave the
Deputies General Instruction^ and Memoirs to second those Remonstrances. The
affair^ o^ the Churches of the Bayliwick of Gex were comprehended in them; and
the Deputies General were charg^ to desire that the Sum which the King allowed
them out o^ the 15000 Crowns of augmentation might be assigned to the^ upon
other Funds, and that something more might be allowed to them to build their
Temples.

The success of the Solicitations which the Deputies o^ Resolution no longer to
send particular Deputations to the Court
the particular Assemblies had made at Court, had been ^^ unfortunate, that in
order no longer to offend the Court which took no delight in being troubled
with Deputies the Synod resolved for the future to employ the Deputies General
to the end that their representations being delivered to the King by Persons
that were agreeable to him, they might obtain more favorable answers. Therefore
they charged them with a large Cahier, and with the Solicitation of such things
as they should have demanded at another time by a particular Deputation.

It is observable that the number of the Reformed was so Force of the Reformed
in the County of Avignon.
considerable at that time in the County of Avignon, that they esteemed
themselves strong enough to form a Province a part. They desired three things
of the Synod: To be received in the communion of the Churches of France: To
make a particular Province, without being mixed with those that were adjacent;
and to be assisted with some Sums ^^ Money to make the said Establishment. The
Synod ^nted them the first Article; referred the second to a political
Assembly; and excused themselves upon the third. ^t but that the Synod had some
Money good out of the preceding years: but they designed it for other uses.
They ^^ok several Sums out of it to gratify private persons. Among the rest,
Thomson Minister of La Chataigneraye, had a Gratification.
^ompence given him of three hundred Livers for the Book ^^ which he had given
the Title of The Chase of the Roman ^ast: and Vignier had a gratification of
two thousand Livers for the Theater of Antichrist, which he had written by
^^mmand of the National Synod of Rochel. This may ^ve to show that the Synod
had not altered their Sentiments ^ut the matter of Antichrist.

Soon after the breaking up of the Synod, the Court being New Declarations upon
the preceding.
^ss'd on several sides to revoke the Declaration which ^ made so much noise;
and being moreover disturbed a^t the troubles that were forming in Saintonge
and at Ro^l, which might be attended with ill consequences, put ^^ a new
Declaration, which under pretense of removing Scandal which the preceding had
occasioned, did notwithstanding confirm it. It suppo'd that the preceding had
^y been granted at the request of some particular Per^s, who were afraid of
being prosecuted for having assisted Assemblies which had been held without
leave, and for ha^g been guilty of some suspicious actions, as Listing of ^n:
which had given them some disquiet, by reason that ^^e of them had been
informed against in the Chambers ^he Edict: But whereas some People looked upon
that ^don not so much as a remedy for the fears of those who wisely think they
stood in need of it; as a desire to lay a ^mish upon the general, the King was
willing to remove all ^nner of pretense from the disaffected, and to satisfy
the ^d Subjects, who joined the Zeal of their Religion to ^ir obedience, and
only desired to enjoy the benifit of the Edicts in Peace. He said that the
number of those was much the greatest; and comprehended those in it who ha^
most power to help to maintain public Tranquillity. Therefore he declared by
way of Esclaircissement upon the Declation of the 24th of April, That he was
very well satisfied with the Reformed in general, and that for that reason he
did forget the faults of particular persons, which should no wise reflect upon
them for the future, provided that the^ kept within the bounds of their
Allegiance, and of the observation of the Edicts.

This new Declaration was dated Jully the 11th. It wa^ Which gives no
satisfaction.
drawn in Terms which at the bottom signified nothing and which showing that
the first had been published upon certain informations made on purpose, to
serve for a pretense to the Act of Grace they had a mind to give, reduce it to
a particular Pardon; in which the generality seemed no^ to be concerned. But at
the bottom the King not na^ing those he was satisfied with, nor those of whom
he conplain'd, it remained still uncertain and undecided to whom the said
Pardon did belong; which many, and even the greate^ number of those that had
assisted in the Assemblies would not accept of: and consequently they had as
much reason to complain of the second Declaration as of the first Moreover the
Assemblies remained still under condemnation as unlawful; and consequently
prohibited for the future Therefore that expedient proved inefectual; and lest
the Evil might go farther, they were forced once more to tak^ it in hand again.

I have observed that the Synod had endeavored to groun^ Cahiers answered.
the right of Particular Assemblies, upon the Court's having received their
Cahiers, and given favorable answers to the same. The truth is nevertheless,
as I have said it elsewhere that the Deputies were dismissed in a kind of
insulting manner; and that they had not the satisfaction to bring back those
answers. They were made to the Cahiers as presented by the Deputies General,
without looking upon the^ coming from particular Provinces. Three Petitions or
Addresses.
Cahiers were ^us answered on the 17th of April. The first contained several
Articles extracted out of the Cahier of Saumur. There ^as one among the rest
relating to little Schools, whereby ^e King was desired to remove the
restriction of the number mentioned in the Answer to the 18th Article of the
Cahier ^^ Saumur; and that the said Article should no wise prejudice the
concession of the Edict, which allowed Reformed Scholars to be received
without distinction into the public Colleges. There was another which desired
that the Reformed Associates, which were deprived of a deliberative ^oice by
the Answer to the 34th, might have it in Judgments; in those places where the
Reformed were the strongest, they ^ow'd it without contestation to the
Catholic Associates. ^^e King did grant the last: and as to the preceding he
rever^d the restriction in relation to such places in which the Exer^e of the
Reformed Religion was allowed in the Subburbs; pro^ed they were Children
belonging to the Town or Subburbs: ^^d he allow'ed the said Schools in the Town
it self: but he only ^ow'd the Children of the places adjacent to be sent to
School ^he Suburbs: and he also confirmed the privilege of sending children to
public Colleges, as it was allowed by the Edict.

The second relating to the Administration of Justice was answered the same
day; and among other things the King confirmed the preceding Settlements, which
rendered the chambers of the Edict Judges of their own Jurisdiction and power:
but he added a word to it, which opened a way to ^^ve the said Concession,
reducing it to the Settlements made and observed. So that under color of
granting all, he granted nothing, since the Reformed had no need of a new ^^w
for such places in which the old ones were observed: ^t only to put them in
force again in those where they ^^re not observed. The King also granted that
the Reformed ^ould not be liable to be Sequestrators of the Ecclesiasti^
Estates seized upon for the Tithes; but it was his pleasure that incase they
should accept it voluntarily, they ^ould be subject to the ordinary
jurisdiction, and should ^t pretend a removal to the Chambers.

The third which related to the Affairs of Dauphine, which were commonly
treated of apart, was also answered the same day; and among several other
Articles, the King particularly granted these; That the Grounds given to serve
for Churchyards should be freed from paying of Tailles, and Rents due to the
King; or that incase they should Lay in the Royalty of any other Lord they
should have the same discharge, the said Lords being indemnifi'd at the charge
of the Communities, injoyning the exemption: That the number of the Judges
allowed of required to judge according to the Ordinances, not being found in
the Chamber of Grenoble, the Parties might of Right, and without having
recourse to the King, or to the great Council, apply themselves to the next
Chamber; as it was already allowed in Case the Judges were divided in their
Opinions: That the Reformed Associate who should be taken by the Catholic
Judge, to assist at the Information of Criminal Causes, should also be taken
for Assessor with a deliberative Voice in the Judgment, That the Parliament
should not be allowed to give a Injunction.
Pareatis, nor to give a Decree in Causes depending in the Chamber, against
persons who publicly professed the Reformed Religion. That the King should
create a Reformed Secretary and a Messenger, to be officiated by such persons
(...) should be nominated by the Churches of the Province, with the same
Sallarys and Prerogatives as others who had the same Offices: That the Parties
who had reason to compla^ of the Ordinances made by the Commissioners, which
the late King had deputed for the Verification of the Country Debts, might
appeal from their Judgment in three Months time to the Party-Chamber.

It appears by those Cahiers that the Chambers had daily Enterprises of the
Parliaments upon the Jurisdiction of the Chambers.
new disputes with the Parliaments, concerning their Jurisdiction and Power: So
that those Judges allowed to the Reformed, to exempt them from putting their
Affairs and Lives into the hands of other suspected or partial Judges, for the
most part only served to engage them into disputes of Jurisdiction, which
almost distracted them. The Parliaments could not accustom themselves to that
dismembring of their own Jurisdiction, which deprived them of the major part of
Af^rs. Therefore upon the least ground they retained the ^uses of the Reformed,
and refused their appeals. At Paris man pretending to have a right of sight
upon a certain ^ace, the Possessors opposs'd it; and after the appeal of ^e
Sentence of the first Judge, the Defendants resolved ^t to submit the Cause to
the Chamber of the Edict. The ^use was Civil, if ever any was so; since the
thing debate was only a little Right pretended upon the ^ound of a Community:
but whereas the owners of the ^d Ground were Monks, the Parliament retained the
Cause, ^etending that it was an Ecclesiastical Cause. Another ^an being
condemned for some pretended Irreverence, by the Inferior Judge, to keep and be
at the charge of a burn^g Lamp in a Church, was like wise refused the removal
he desired, under pretense that it was a Cause that was excep^d: So that it was
sufficient in order to deprive a Reformed ^f the Privilege of a removal granted
by the Edict, for ^e Subaltern Judge to condemned him to any thing in which the
Church of Rome was concerned: by this Wile ^ey gave the Parliaments a pretense
to retain the Causes of Appeal. In other places the Parliaments obliged the
Messengers, who were to execute any Decrees made by the ^hamber established
within their Precinct, to take Letters of ^junction; as not acknowledging that
the said Chambers ^ad an Authority to cause their Judgments to be observed
independantly from the Parliaments. This was the reason for which the Chamber
of Grenoble desired the aforesaid ^ettlement.

Nevertheless, the Chambers of the Edict still retained Severity of the
Chambers of the Edict.
^me notwithstanding these pretenses; and then they were ^s severe in their
Judgments as the Parliaments. The Chamber of Paris gave one that year in the
Month of April, upon a very singular Case. A Curate, in resigning ^is Cure, had
retained a Pension upon his Revenue; and in order not to be liable to the
Consequences of such Agreements, when sufficient precautions have not been
taken to Authorize them, he had caused his contract to be approved of at the
Court of Rome. His said Pension was constantly paid him while he was a
Catholic: but as soon as he had embraced the Reformed Religion, the Assignee
would no longer pay it. The said Cause was brought before the Chamber of the
Edict, I know not why, since it was at least as much Ecclesiastical, as the
others I have mentioned: And they declared the Pensionary incapable of enjoying
the said Revenue, by reason of his change of Religion. The Proselite really
acted contrary to the Disipline of the Reformed, which obliged all those of his
Character, when they embraced the Reformed Religion, to renounce their
Benefices, and to preserve none of the Revenues of the same, directly, or
indirectly. But the Chamber of the Edict did not judge according to the said
Discipline: they only considered the Religion of the Parties.

As I have heretofore observed that the Reformed complained, -- The Corpse of a
Reformed Gentleman taken out of the ground again, by the order of a
Commissioner.
that the Commissioners sent into the Provinces had made their condition worse
than it was in some places, it will not be amiss to give another proof of it.
The Commisioners who had the District of Burgundy, and who made the
alterations, I have already mentioned in the Country of Gex, did a thing in the
Parish of Chalemant, a dependency of the Diocese of Nevers, which the Reformed
were very much concerned at, by reason of the Consequence of it. A Reformed
Gentleman whose Family pretended to have a right of Burial in the Parochial
Church, had been buried there. The Bishop complained to the Commissioners about
it, as of a great attempt; and desired the Corpse to be removed, in order to
reconcile the Church which was profaned by the Burial of an Heretic. Genicourt
Master of Requests, the Catholic Commisioner, caused the said Corpse to be
taken out of the Ground, and to be transported to the place which was allowed
to the Reformed for their Burials. The Reformed Commissioner was absent at that
time, whither it were that he had no mind to have a hand in that extraordinary
proceeding, or whither being one of those complaisant persons nominated by the
Duke Bouillon, he absented himself on purpose, not to be ob^d to do an Act of
Courage, by opposing that novelty. ^l this was done with a great deal of
Ceremony, and great ^rmality: which only served to make the more noise, and
give a greater lusture to the Bishop's triumph. But the ^rse part of it was the
example. It was no novelty to (...) a Corpse taken out of the Ground, either by
the violence the Clergy, or by the ordinance of some Country Judge: ^t the
thing was done here by a man who had the ^ality of Commissioner for the
Execution of the Edict; that his Example had the force of a Law, and might
authorize all the other Judges to do the like. Moreover was apparent that the
Instructions of those new Commissioners were very different from those which
Henry the (...) had given to the Commissioners in 1600. Those had ^ders to
explain the difficulties which might Intervene in the execution of the Edict,
in favor of the Reformed: at these new Commissioners, by a different method
were ^ly rigorous Judges against the Reformed, and all their fa^ur was bestowed
on the Catholics.

The Reformed Inhabitants of la Tierache, in the Bayliwick Favors granted to
the Reformed of la Tierache.
Soissons, were treated a little more favorably. They ^mplain'd that they were
obliged to repair to very distant ^ces, in order to perform the public
exercise of their ^ligion, in so much that they were in danger of falling to
the hands of the Spanish Garrisons, who treated them Heretics. This obliged
them to present a Petition to the ^ng, to obtain leave to Assemble in a nearer
and safer ^ace. They proposed Gerci, where the Fief did not allow them to meet
above thirty at a time; by reason that the Lord ^ereof had only mean and low
Justice there, the high Justice ^longing to the King. They obtained as a
special favor, ^thout consequence or example, the Power of Assembling ^ere, as
they might have done at a Lord high Justicer: on con^tion that incase the House
of Greci should fall into the hands (...) a Catholic, the said exercise should
cease there: or that a Reformed Gentleman coming to possess a House (...) the
Quality required by the Edict in the Neighbourho^ thereof, it should be
transferred there; and the B^ granted in favor of Gerci should remain void. It
(...) dated April the 28th, and was Registr'd, at Laon. It ^pears by this Brief
that the Court had not as yet bethoug^ it self of the Cavils they have raised
of late years again the Lords Justicers; That there was no doubt of their ^ving
the privilege to receive at the exercises of Religi^ that were performed at
their houses all those who repai^ thither, whether Vassals, Inhabitants or
others; That (...) said exercise might be established in Fiefs or Justices ne^
acquired, which the Lords were not in Possession of at (...) time of the Edict
of Nantes; and it might also be conclud^ that it was not thought certain, that
in case a Fief in which (...) said exercise of the Reformed Religion was
established sho^ fall into the hands of a Catholic, the said exercise was to
(...) by Right: since that in order to hinder its being continued (...) Gerci
in such a Case, it was thought necessary to express p^sitively that it should
not be allowed.

But after all these Particulars, it is necessary to relate^ more general
Affair, which having lasted until the follo^ing year, without any bodies being
able to put a stop (...) Division of the Duke de Rohan and the Marshal de
Bouillon, and the sequel.
it, had like to have reduced the whole Kingdom to Con^fusion. The Division
which broke out at Saumur, havi^ made a particular breach between the Dukes de
Ro^ and de Bouillon, the last not being able to conceal his j^lousie at the
growing Credit of the other, and the D^ de Rohan imputing the ill success of
the Affairs of the Assem*bly to the Duke de Bouillon. The Duke de Rohan had
(...) greatest number of the Reformed on his side; but (...) quality of those
who adhered to the Marshal de Bouill^ rendered his Party considerable, the more
by reason t^ he was favored by the Court, which made use of him (...) keep up
a Division among the Reformed. Many had sided w^ him for sordid self-interested
reasons, which the possessi^ or hope of a Pension inclined to great
complaisances* ^ ^e were others whose simplicity and credulity engaged them
^cently to take the same Party, by reason that they looked ^n it as the most
lawful and safest for their Conscience. (...) grand reason the others made use
of to dazzle them, (...) the specious name of Peace, and the incumbent duty of
^ying the higher powers, not only upon the account of anger, (...) also for
Conscience sake. The Court kept men in pay to ^ach that Gospel; and while they
made barefaced enter^es, and did secretly prepare machines which were ne^ary in
order to oppress the Reformed, they endeavored ^ersuade them by those they had
corrupted, that they ^e obliged not to oppose them.

^t is almost incredible how many people were caught Abuse the Deputies which
enjoin obedience.
those Snares; imagining that that Apostolic Doctrine ^y allowed honest people
Sighs and Patience: and that they ^ate it who take measures to prevent the
Injustices, Vio^ces, and Treacheries of those who are in Authority. (...) this
is the way by which the freest Natives suffer them^es to be made Slaves; and
that Sovereigns, improving ^r credulity, easily impose upon them. It is an
Illusion ^ch reigns among men, in all the relations they have to^her: that
notwithstanding they are grounded upon ^ain mutual duties, which maintain or
destroy each o^r reciprocally, the one imagine that tho they violate that ^t of
the duty which they are obliged to, the others are ne^theless obliged to
observe that part which relates to them ^ligiously. It is particulary the
opinion of those who ^d the Rank of Superiors; who when they take the least ^e
to afford their Inferiors either the Protection, or Justice ^t is due to them,
pretend that they are nevertheless ^ig'd to pay them Submission and Obedience;
and how ^n soever that pretention may be, yet there are always ^ople who rack
their Wit; to find out specious reasons (...) maintain it; and Tender
Consciences that are persuaded (...) those reasons: particularly when those who
design (...) make an ill use of those maxims, join some appearance (...)
advantage to those reasons, it is difficult to believe what an Empire they get
over simple Souls. They fa^ that the Cause of their Benefactors becomes the
Cause (...) God; That all the measures taken for self preservation becom^ so
many Crimes; That oppressed Subjects can have no (...) dress but the hopes of a
better time. And that God (...) reward their simplicity, when they suffer
themselves to b^ destroyed by virtue of Passive-Obedience.

Therefore the Court took great care to persuade all the The Court makes use of
the Doctrine of Patience.
they found inclined that way that it is an Evangelical Doctrine: and to give
ademonstrative force by small gratifications to those reasons wherewith they
did second it. Whereupon I can not forbear admiring the confidence which
Politicians often repose in the simplicity of other men, to whom they endeavor
to persuade, that Religion and Conscience obli^ them to submit to those that
oppress them, and to the F^ters which they design to give them, by preaching
Patience to them: partly as if Thieves, in order to dispo^ Travellors to suffer
themselves to be stripped without resistance, should allege the lesson of the
Gospel to them, which exhorts those who are stripped of their Coat, to deliver
their Cloak also. However this Doctrine being cried up in all parts, and
innocently received by the Simple, and others making use of it to cover their
designs; served powerfully to foment Division among the Reformed; the o^
condemning the foresight of the others, and these reciprocally complaining of
their ignorance and weakness which engaged them to betray the Common Cause
unawars. Such Ministers as they could draw into those submissive peaceable
sentiments were very kindly used: but they met but few of them; and the Court
found more advantage to tre^ with the Nobility, with Governors of Places, and
other Officers: by reason that the services they could do them, in betraying
their Party, were of far more consequence* Nevertheless, I will add in this
place, since I am upon that Subject, in order not to resume it, that when the
Reformed were deprived of their Garrisons and Soldiers, the Court still kept,
particularly in the Meridional ^vinces, some Ministers in Pay, who preached up
Passive^edience in Consistorys, Assemblies and Synods, and Ministers Pentioners.
^n in familiar conversations; and who always gave a (...) gloss to the Actions
of the Court. Those Ministers ^sioners proved for the most part Rogues, which
was ^er or later discovered, either by their revolt, or by ^andalous life. But
that which is most to be wondered ^is that there were sometimes very honestmen,
who loved ^r Religion, and looked upon it as true Gospel, who ^ertheless,
received pensions without scruple; because they ^k'd upon them rather as
recompenses of their affection (...) the Public Peace, than as engagements to
act against (...) Interest of the Churches. To say the truth, in those ^es
where the rash and boiling temper of the People ^ht easily incline them to Rash
and Seditious enterprises, ^as necessary that their Ministers should be Wise,
Pru^t, and Moderate, in order to inspire the same senti^ts to their Flocks by
their Discourse and example: (...) it would have been much better to have done
it upon (...) account of the Justice of the thing, without receiving (...)
least gratifications from the Court, than to take those ^icious recompenses,
which might call their Innocence (...) Integrity in question. Du Moulin had
often been ^pted by persons sent to him from the Court, who ^'d him great
Pensions without exacting any thing from ^, but barely to incline people to
Peace and Obedience. (...) always answered that it was a Duty he would ever
per^: but that he would have the honor to do it of (...) own accord out of
Conscience; and not as being ^'d to it. So that he never accepted any thing
that (...) offered him. It were to be wished that all those who ^e exposed to
the same Temptations, had withstood them (...) the same Courage.

While the Court caused Peace and Patience to be preached Wiles and Injustices
of the Court.
^ng the Reformed, they did not fail at the same time to ^e them put those
Lessons in Practice. They almost ^lickly violated the Faith of the Briefs, and
promises they had amused them with. They removed some Governors of Places,
corrupted others; and bartered with (...) to get them out of their hands.
Besides those places (...) which the Assembly had desired the restitution by
their (...) hiers, Rambures had suffered Aiguemortes to be taken: B^sur Mer had
been sold for ready Money; and as so^ as ever the Court got it into their
hands* they c^ it to be Demolished: They did treat with Candela^ buy the
Government of Rosay of him. They used all (...) of means to sow Divisions in
Rochel, and to o^ the Election of a Mayor, Devoted to the Court. (...)
Catholics of Saints were ordered to Arm themsel^ upon some pretense or other;
which occasioned g^ Alarms among the Reformed. Finally, the use the C^ made of
the 45000 Livers of augmentation they (...) granted for the Sallary of the
Ministers, showed p^ly that they designed to ruin the Reformed, Since (...)
only granted them favors to divide them; and (...) favors which were to be
employed for their advant^ became by the cunning of their Enemies snares to
supp^ them.

Among the other places which the Court had a (...) Enterprise upon St. John
d'Angely.
to get out of their hands, they had an eye upon St. J^ d'Angely, and they
endeavored to under mine the Du^ Rohan's Party there. La Rochebeaucour his
Lieutenant, when he expected to become Governor in Chief of that (...) portant
City, or whither he thought himself s^ enough there no longer to have any
dependence on (...) Governor, suffered himself to be managed by the Co^ He
had caused a Mayor to be Elected the preceding y^ who was at his Devotion; and
in order to strength his Authority, he undertook to maintain him in that P^
tho he was sensible that the Duke of Rohan would (...) offended at it. The said
Duke was come to Paris, where^ was very well received by the Queen; and that
Prin^ in order to slip the time of the Election of a new Mayor* ^press'd a
great deal of kindness to him during the fou^ ^t as he tarried there. But the
Duke being acquainted (...) the design that was on foot to continue the ancient
(...) or, and the great Brigues la Rochebeaucour made in order ^eunto; he
concluded that the Marshal de Bouillon had ^d him that trick, to dispossess him
of one of the most ^siderable Cities of Surety. Whereupon he left ^is at a time
when it was least expected; and the ^er to conceal the motive of his sudden
departure, (...) gave out that he had received Letters that his Brother (...)
Soubize lay a Dying. He went to his Brother in^d, but it was only to consult
with him about the ^ns to secure St. John d'Angely, and to get such a Mayor ^e
could confide in. That City was one of those that (...) a Rightat that time to
create their own Mayor, who ^rwards received the Kings approbation: and it
be^ed the Person who was to Command there to have (...) disputes with the said
Magistrate, who had a very ^t authority. As he was the Master of the Polity
(...) the Inhabitants were at his Command; and when (...) was beloved by the
people, it was in his power to ^ke them take Arms or to lay them down; which
^ht put a Governor at a great loss* who had only a ^ll Garrison at his
Command, which was not capa^ to hold out against the Inhabitations of a great
^y.

Therefore the Duke having taken his measures with The Duke of Rohan prevents
it.
(...) Brother, with the Nobility of the Neighborhood, (...) some Inhabitants
of St. John, he repaired thither be^e the Election was performed. The Queen
finding her ^erprise broken by the Dukes presence, resolved to take (...)
advantage of his Journey, to execute a design she (...) contrived with la
Rochebeaucour* She wrote to the Of^rs and to the Town House* that in order to
prevent the (...) effects of the Election of a new Mayor, she desired that
(...) old one might be continued. The Duke of Rohan, who had ^n'd his point,
refused to submit to those orders. He opposed (...) Continuation of the Mayor
in writing* and declared bodly that the People had abused the Queens Authority
(...) obtain the said Letter. That affair was somewhat Ni^ notwithstanding
orders from the Court to the contrary.
and as some thought the Duke had imbroil'd himself (...) little too rashly in
it, others also were of opinion the the Queen had exposed herself too much, and
that (...) had been ill advised. St. John was a free City, a City (...) Surety,
jealous of her Privileges, and in a Province in whi^ the Reformed were the
strongest. Therefore this undertaki^ to alter the accustomed form of the
Election of a Majo^ to use Authority in order thereunto, under pretense of
(...) discord which did not as yet appear, gave cause to suspe^ that the Court
had a design upon the Privileges of (...) Inhabitants, which were violated
without necessity; (...) upon the surety of the place, which they endeavored
(...) commit into the hands of suspected persons; or perhap^ upon both.

Nevertheless, the thing was very much resented (...) The Queen is offended,
and things seem to incline to a War.
Court; and the Queen being informed of the Duke of Rohan's opposition, caused
his Lady, his Daughters, and (...) his Family to be Secured. She put a
Gentleman into the Bastille, who was sent by the Duke to justify his Action:
She caused the Duke to be proclaimed a Rebe^ and ordered an Army to march
against him. She w^ to Authorize the* said enterprise her self by her Presence*
and because it was necessary to prevail with the rest (...) the Reformed to
suffer the said Duke's Ruin, and the lo^ of St. John without opposition, she
was to make a sole^ Declaration that she had no design against any body b^ the
Duke and his Adherents; to confirm the Edicts suffer all such to live in Peace
who did not engage i^ those Troubles; The Queen was to take the Marshal^ de
Bouillon and Lesdiguieres to Command under her in that Expedition: and as if
the Court had bee^ as ready to act as to order, orders were strait dispatched
to the Officers that were to Command in the said Army, to keep themselves ready
to mar^^* Manifestos were published on both sides. The Dukes up* ^aided the
Court with all their Wiles; and endeavored (...) prove that the consequence of
that affair was general. ^at which appeared in the Queens name, endeavored
(...) create suspicions about the Duke of Rohan's intentions, ^d to justify
the Court, to persuade that their only aim ^as against that Rebel, and that she
designed to maintain ^e Edicts: and finally, it invited the Catholics and
Re^m'd to serve the King in that occasion.

The End of the Second Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of Nantes. VOL. II. BOOK III.
A Summary of the Contents of the Third Book.
Appearence of Accommodation: under which the troubles* continue. Endavours are
used to engage Du Plessis in them who remains in quiet. Assembly of the Circle
at Rochel, Project of Reconciliation among the great ones. Sedition at Rochel:
Its Original and Violence. Negotiation for the accommodation. High Pretentions
of the Duke de Rohan. The Queen agrees to them, preserving* some appearences
for herself. The Duke being exasperated with new Injuries* will* no longer be*
satisfied with them. The Assembly meets at Rochel: and gives the Deputies
General new Articles. Resolutions taken (...) Court: but ill executed. New
Declaration. Remarks upon those frequent Edicts. The Circle assembles again.
Rochel withdraws from the rest of the Deputies; which puts an end to the
Troubles. Verbal promises to tolerate Provincial Councils. Declaration of the
Marriages resolved upon with Spain* Which offends the French: but particularly
the Reformed* Ferrier forsakes the Ministry: Is received Counselor (...)
Nimes: Is Excommunicated. Sedition against him* Diligence of the Consuls to
save Ferrier: Writings (...) both sides. Appologies of Ferrier: and his end.
Reconciliation of the Duke de Rohan and Marshal de Bouillon. Enterpise of the
Sheriffs of Saumur. Equity of the Chamber of the Edict of Paris. Rights of the
Bishop of Mompellier upon the University. Discontents of the Princes. The Duke
de Rohan joins with them. Polity of the Marshal de Bouillon. Retreat and
Manifesto of the Princes. Their Precipitation is blamed. The Peace is made. The
Prince of Conde is injured at Poitiers. Towns of Surely opened to the King.
National Synod. Letters from the King of England. Council of the Lower Guyenne.
Mutual subordination of the Assemblies. Brief of leave for a General Assembly.
Letters from the Lords. Pecuniary affairs. The Ministers are exempted from
paying the Taylles. Places of Surety. Berger a Reformed Counselor in the
Parliament of Paris, turns Catholic. Reformed of Gex. Churches not settled as
yet. Condition of the Reformed in the County of Avignon. Liberalities of the
Synod. Colleges. Bearn. Metz. Oath of Union. Letters to the King and Queen. The
Queen prepares to assemble the States. Declaration of the King's Majority.
Overtures of the States. The Clergy and Nobility unite themselves against the
Third Estate. Reformed in the States. Indepency of Kings* whose Cause is
betrayed by the Clergy: and by the Court it self. Passion of the Clergy.
Harrangue of Cardinal du Perron. Why Heretics are tolerated. Distinctions of
the Cardinal. His Conclusion. Reflections. The Third Estate persists. Character
of Miron, Speaker of the Commons.
President of the Chamber of that ^^der. The Court silences the third Estate.
Illusive Decree of the Clergy, and their shameful Prevarication. Inequality of
the Prince of Conde. Perseverance of the Clergy in that Doctrine. Sedition at
Milhau. Harangue of the Bishop of Lucon. Sedition at Belestat. Cahier of the
Clergy. Sequel of the Cahier. Articles proposed directly against the Reformed:
Sequel of the said Articles. Conclusion of the Cahier.

THERE was a great deal of reason to believe, that things would have gone
farther, considering Apperance of accommodation.
the proceedings of the Court: The rather because the Duke of Rohan seemed
nowise daunted, at the storm that was pre^ng against him. The Election of the
Mayor was ^de according to his desire: la Rochebeaucour was forced yield; and
found himself almost reduced to pay the ^t of the service he designed to do the
Queen. The ^ke gave the Offices of the City and of the Garrison ^ersons he
could confide in, and the Deputy Governor's ^e to Hautefontaine, who was at his
Devotion. Never^less, the Sequel did nowise answer those high beginnings: ^y
fell to Remonstrances and Negociations; and The^s Senechal of Query, a wise and
moderate man was (...) to the Duke, in order to persuade him to keep with^he
bounds of Duty. Du Plessis also undertook that af^; and the Duke having
preferred the advice of that old ^n, equally Prudent and Honest, to the desires
of a young ^bility, which would incline him to a War, yielded to (...)
Exhortations of Themines. An accommodation was ^de in which in apperance the
Queen had the satisfacti^ she desired; and the Duke in reallity. The old Mayor
^s continued for some days: after which a new order ^s sent, allowing the
Inhabitants to proceed to the Ele^on of another. This procured the liberty of
those per^s Under which the Troubles continue.
the Court had a little inconsiderately imprisoned: ^t the evil was not cured
by that Remedy. The Duke de ^han refused to go out of St. John, to let la
Rochebeaucour command there in his absence: and he had a great m^ while he was
seconded by the Zealous of the Province to rid himself of that man in whom he
could not conside: So that there happened new disputes, which kept the
Jealousies on foot, and which renewed the threatning^ of a War. Endeavors used
to involve du Plessis in the same.


Endeavors were used to involve du Plessis in the same; insinuating to him
that the Queen, sending Force toward St. John, might improve that occasion to
take Saumur from him. That advice might equally proceed, either from those who
were desirous of a War, and who were ^^ hopes to engage all the Provinces into
it, incase they ^o^^^ oblige du Plessis to take suretys, as being full of
Jealousy* for himself: or from those who being acquainted with the jalousies
of the Marshal de Bouillon, did not question but ^^ would improve all
occasions, to humble du Plessis* by ta^ from him a place of the consequence of
Saumur. It was no ha^ matter to incline the Queen to do him that injury; either
because he had taken the part of the Zealous in the l^^^ Assembly, or because
the Book he had lately published (...) incensed the Catholics against him. The
Nuncio used ^^ utmost endeavors in order thereunto and he was second^ by the
Marshal de Bouillon, who represented du Plessis as ^ Man without whose advice
the Duke de Rohan did nothing. Nevertheless, Du Plessis, being persuaded that
the Court was not in a condition to attack the whole Party by Who remain in
quiet.
main force, and consequently that they would not venture to take Saumur from
him by open War, refused to follow the Council of those who advised him to
fortify the said City a^ his Garrison: and even when he saw the Forces of
Boisda^ lodged almost under the very Walls of Saumur, he per^ in his design
only to arm himself with Innocence. He obtained what he desired thereby. The
Court discovered, the he had no thoughts of War, since he had slipped so fair ^^
occasion to declare it; and that far from taking the advantage of it, as
another would have done, had he been ^^ his room, he had not so much as
expressed the least ^tion of being attacked in Forms. The Queen caused
Boisdauphin to retire; and made use of du Plessis council, ^ut an end to those
Troubles.

^n the mean time the differences between the Duke of Assembly of the Circle at
Rochel.
^an and de la Rochebeaucour daily grew worse and more ^siderable: The Duke
being resolved to turn him out any rate, and the Queen on the contrary thinking
her (...) obliged to maintain him in his Post, as a man she ^ld confide in, and
whom the Duke designed to turn (...) only because he had too great a dependency
on the ^r^. Insomuch that she still returned to threatening from ^e to time: and
that the Duke took measures to pre^t the effect thereof. It proved no hard task
so to do, ^reason that the Public Protection la Rochebeaucour re^ed from the
Queen made him to be suspected: and ^eas several people were of opinion that
the King's Authority was nowise concerned in that dispute, they con^ed
naturally that the Queen had secret reasons, to take (...) part of a Subaltern
so highly against his Superior Of^. For which reason the Province of Saintonge
easily ^er'd themselves to be persuaded that the generality was concerned in
that Affair, and that their Surety was viola^ by the attempt that was made upon
the best place ^^in their Precinct. Therefore they made use of the Ar^e that
had been drawn at Saumur, which Authorized (...) Province that should be
attacked to assemble Depu^ out of the Councils of the five adjacent Provinces,
to ^berate about such remedies as should be most proper ^e applied to the Evil
it was threatened with. Those ^d of Assemblies were commonly called the Circle;
^er because that name was taken from the form of (...) Government in Germany,
divided into Provinces that (...) called Circles: or because the Province that
was attacked ^ven'd those that surrounded it. They invited Rochel ^ch made a
Province a part, the Lower Guyenne, Poitou, ^o^, Bretagne, to send two Deputies
a piece at Rochel on (...) 20th of September out of their Council, to consult
about (...) Affairs of Saintonge, and of St. John d'Angely. The Court was
acquainted with it; and in order to hinder t^ of Rochel to receive the said
Assembly into their City, (...) to suffer them to do any thing which might
prove of consequence, they took precautions which increased the E^ and which
had like to carry things to the utmost extremities.

But before we relate them, it will not be amiss to (...) Prospect of
Reconciliation among the great ones.
down in this place that the Commissioners of the Nation Synod of Privas for
the Reconciliation of the Lords, (...) were divided at Saumur, applied
themselves about the Commission, as soon as they arrived at Paris. They (...)
great difficulties at first: by reason that the Marshal de Bouillon and de
Lesdiguieres refused to harken to it, but up^ such conditions as would not have
been approved of by (...) rest. But finally, they agreed upon the substance and
for a Writing, which was signed by those two Lords, and ^ Chatillon: Whether it
were that the Marshall de Bouillon had already a prospect of other Intrigues
with the discontented Princes, for the success of which it was nece^ the
Reformed should be united; or whither he thought (...) had done enough to be
revenged of the refusal of (...) Presidentship at Saumur; or finally, whether
it were (...) he had a mind to show that he had a respect for a Synod which
represented all the Churches; He entered again (...) to the Union of the
Churches: and tho it seemed not (...) material for the affairs of St. John
d'Angely, yet it b^ the Queens measures. She could no longer pretend to (...)
those two Lords along with her against the Duke of R^ since they were
reconciled to him, and had signed Treaty of Reconciliation and Concord. The
Comm^oners deputed two among them, viz. Rouvray one of (...) Deputies General,
and Durand one of the Ministers of ^ris, to carry the Writing which those three
Lords (...) signed, into the Provinces to be signed by the rest. du P^ was
easily prevailed upon to sign it: but when they c^ to the Duke de Rohan at St.
John d'Angely, they found (...) harder task; and had not du Plessis gone to him
on p^ ^ about it, he would hardly have done it. The five ^vinces were sent for;
the appointed day was at hand; (...) it was to be feared that incase the
Assembly were held; (...) would relapse into greater and worse fewds than ^re.
Du Plessis caused it to be adjourned until the 20th (...) October: and having
employed that time to negotiate (...) accommodation at Court, he got it to be
put of for a ^th longer by the Mediation of the Deputies ^eral.

Rochel had had its share of the Troubles; and about Sedition at Rochel.
(...) same time that the Duke of Rohan convened the five ^vinces, there broke
out a Sedition there, the conse^nces of which were to be feared. The Queen had
endeavored to interpose her Authority in the Election (...) the Mayor of that
City, and to make her self Mi^s of it, as she had endeavored to do at St.
John. The ^nity of Mayor of Rochel was very considerable: he (...) Governor of
it by his place; and had almost an ab^te Power there, both as to the Military
and Civil Government. So that incase the Court could have gained (...) one
point, of having the Election of the Mayor at ^r disposal, they might easily
have secured that place ^hout besieging it. But the City having the power to ^e
their Chief themselves, carefully preserved that ^riviledge, and would nowise
suffer the Brigues of the ^urt to incroach upon that important liberty. There^e
the Queen succeeded yet less in it than at St. John: (...) the last Mayor was
Elected according to the usual ^, notwithstanding all her endeavors to the
contrary. (...) tho the said City preserved their Rights, they remembered still
that the Queen had endeavored to Invade ^m; which appeared in the affair I am
going to relate. (...) Coudray, Counselor in the Parliament of Paris, was
(...) one of the Sheriffs of Rochel; but he was suspected of Its origina. ^.
^ing with the Court. His behavior in the Election of the Mayor had increased
those jealousies: and it was thought ^t he had been the bearer of the Queens
orders, which tended to Violate the usual forms. He came to R^ every year in
the Vacations, under pretense of his D^ mestick Affairs: but it was thought
that the Co^ gave him secret orders. He came some days (...) year sooner than
he used to do; and tho he ne^ used to come before the Parliament was broken up;
he ca^^ to Rochel before it that time. He had brought di^ Commissions relating
to Justice, even in such places (...) were not under the jurisdiction of the
Parliament Insomuch that in order to Authorize him in such places (...) which
the jurisdiction of that Court did not extend, (...) Queen had made him
intendent of Justice, and that (...) the Title of his Commission. But lest the
Gates of R^ should be shut against him, the Court had not given (...) the
quality of Intendent of the Polity; by reason that (...) Rochelois, who were
sole Masters of their City, would not h^ allowed him to take that Title, far
from suffering him (...) exert the authority of it. He made no use of that
pretended Intendence of Justice he was invested with, and declared that he
would not take the advantage of it: wh^ persuaded them that the said Commission
covered other (...) signs; that it only served to Authorize him, as bearer of
Royal Commission; and that it was left to his discre^ to use it or not,
according as he should think ^it. He (...) covered only a Credential Letter for
Rochel, which gave (...) assuranoes of her Majesty's good Intention. But it
(...) thought that he was only sent to divide Rochel, if he co^ from the rest
of the Churches: which design had a do^ prospect; the one to oppress the Duke
de Rohan, who co^ not defend himself unless Rochel assisted him: the other
(...) deprive Rochel of the advantage of the General Un^ when ever it should be
attacked in particular. Moreover it was thought that he brought Instructions to
dissipated Assembly, which it was very well known at Court t^ Duke de Rohan was
meditating. They knew that it (...) become General, incase the Deputys of the
Circles sho^ think fit for the common good to invite the Dep^ ^ the other
Provinces at it: and they were sencible that (...) Duke would use his utmost
endeavors, to renew all (...) propositions of that of Saumur there. Du Coudray
was (...) accused of writing to the Queen, in terms which seemed (...)
intimate that the Inhabitants of Rochel were not well ^in'd. He seldom
conversed with any of the Inhabitants, (...) such as the rest had no good
opinion of: and the first (...) visited him at his arrival, was one Le Vacher,
a man ^y much suspected, and not beloved by the people; especially since that
in a certain dispute with the Citizens, (...) had the insolence to threaten
them that he would (...) them to Paris with a Rope about their Necks: which
(...) them a great deal of reason to believe that he relied (...) the favor of
the Court: since otherwise it would ^e been a ridiculous threathing* in the
mouth of a pri^ Inhabitant of Rochel.

These reasons whether true, or likely to mistrust him, ex^ And its violence.
so furious a Sedition against him, that the Magistrates ^t not at first appear
before the Mutiniers, to oppose ^r Violence. They took up Arms; made
Barricado's ^he avenues; and Du Coudray was forced to lie concealed ^fear. This
began on the 5th. of September: but the first (...) being stopped of it self, the
Sedition broke out again ^he 12th. with such terrible threatenings against those
(...) were suspected, that Du Coudray desired to go out of (...) Town for his
safety; whither he really thought him^n danger, or whether he had a mind to
take an occasion (...) thence to aggravate the Relations and Complaints, he
(...) accused of sending to Court against Rochel. In order to love him from
thence the Mayor accompanied with some ^ldiers attended him to the City Gates:
Yet tho* the ^yor was very much respected by the Rochelois, the Peo^ being in a
rage forgot their respect on that occasion; (...) upon him and his Men, and
pursued Du Coudray with ^s and injurious Words. The Mayor was slightly wound^
but Du Coudray received no hurt: and when that ob^ of the Peoples jealousies
and rage was removed, they easily

sily returned to their former Duty. A large account (...) the said Sedition
was sent to the Council, lest Du Coudray should represent it yet in a more
odious manner. All (...) motives of the People were represented in it, as well
as (...) the progress of their violence: but Du Coudray was repu^ the occasion
of the evil; and the whole ended with pro^ses of Fidelity and obedience.

This affair being ended, Rochel consented to receive the Negotiations for an
accommodation.
Assembly, tho they were unresolved about it at first: (...) they only began
their Session there on the 20th. of November, by reason that powerful
endeavors were used (...) two Months time to find out the means to come to an
(...) commodation. Du Plessis obliged the Duke de Rohan to (...) his
propositions. He made them like a man that ^ea^ nothing, and who thought
himself capable to inspire (...) into others: and to say the truth, it cannot
be denied (...) he imposed Laws upon the Court, if we reflect on (...) manner
in which those troubles were ended. He demanded more advantageous Conditions
than those the Assembly of Saumur had obtained: and for his own particular he
(...) sir'd the removal of La Rochebeaucour and of Foucaud, wh^ he did not
like; to have the disposition of the Comp^ High pretentions of the Duke de
Rohan.
of the first; To Nominate a Deputy General himself; (...) his and his
Brothers, and his Friends Pensions should be restored, together with the
arrears that had been stopped; (...) that all manner of proceedings should cease
against such (...) had been prosecuted upon his account. Those pretenti^ were
so high, that there was no likelihood to expect t^ the Queen would condescend
to them. Great difficul^ arose upon it: and while the Council was deliberati^
bout them, there arose new ones. A Messenger ha^ subpaened Hautefontaine to
appear in the Parliament of Bordeaux, was very ill used at St. John d' Angely,
where the ^signs of the Court advanced as little by proceedings of ^stice, as
by threatenings of War. On the other hand, Saujon Gentleman of Saintonge, who
had been sent by the Duke (...) to the upper Guyenne, to try what succors he
might exp^ ^ those provinces, and to maintain Rambures in the Government of
Aiguemortes against Berticheres, whom the Re^'d were jealous of, was stopped at
Rouergue, and used like (...) Prisoner of State. So that people were
exasperated on (...) sides.

Nevertheless, the Court not finding it self in a Condition The Queen consents
to it, only preserving some appearences for her self.
sustain by effects the height of their first threatenings, ^mis'd the Duke all
that he had desired. The truth is (...) the Queen was not displeas`d at the
removal of La Rochebeaucour, by reason that the Government of Chatelleraud
(...) vacant at that time, she bestowed it upon him. She only ^'d in order to
save appearances that the Duke de Rohan ^ld receive him for eight or ten days
in St. John; as if the ^en having had the power to maintain him, had only
re^uish'd it in order to promote a peace, without being any (...) obliged to
it. But whereas the Generality of the Reformed began to be heated, she was also
obliged to grant them (...) of those things which had been refused to the
Assembly Saumur. I have said that the National Synod had renewed (...) demands
of it, and that they had charged the Deputies General with a Cahier in which
they were contained. Some those Articles were favorably answerd'. The Reformed
^e allowed not to style their Religion Pretended Reformed. (...) Court promised
the Ministers the same exemptions ^he Ecclesiastics of the Roman Church
enjoyed. The ^ods were restored to their former Liberty which had been ^tle
incroach'd upon by the last Declarations. They pro^d to redress the grievances
of the Provinces; and to give (...) Reformed satisfaction for the Towns of
Aiguemortes, Essone, (...) Mas d' Agenois. They promised to revoke all the
Expe^ons, Letters, Acts, Decrees, that had been given since the ^mbly of Saumur
against the Reformed. But that which was ^st considerable, was the toleration
of Provincial Coun^ The Queen had expressed a great repugnancy toward (...)
but whether it were that she was afraid they would keep ^m up against her will,
or because she had a mind to that the Reformed a favor to blind them, she
finally consented to that Settlement, but with a Clause, which mi^^^ occasion
some dispute, but yet could not be refused; wh^^ was that they should use that
privilege as modestly (...) they had done in the Late King's time.

But when the Duke de Rohan received an account of t^^ The Duke bei^^
exasperated by new in^uries refuses ^^ accept them.
promises of the Queen, he was in the first transports of (...) anger, for the
violence committed against Saujon. So ^^^ he refused even to answer the Reasons
that were alle^ to him, to oblige him to receive those good offers. (...)
threatened the utmost severities incase that Gentleman (...) ceiv'd the least
ill treatment; and protested that he wo^ hearken to no reason until he had
received satisfaction upon that Article. Thus all those promises, which the Q^
The Assembly meets at Rochel
made perhaps less to keep them than to dissipate the (...) which was to repair
at Rochel, proved ineffect^^^ and the Deputies met there on the appointed day.
T^^ Court found no other expedient, to prevent their tak^ any vexatious
Resolutions, that to send Rouvray thither, (...) to prevail with Du Plessis to
assist at it. They could (...) prevail with the Assembly not to meddle with
such Af^ as might create most occasion of vexation: and mor^o^ the Assembly
used them almost like suspected Per^ The reason of those suspicions was that
they distrusted (...) Queens promises; and that they partly discovered her
In^tions through the fair words wherewith she designed to am^ the World. What
ever Rouvray could say to justify (...) sincerity of her promises proved
ineffectual: the Assem^ refused absolutely to break up until they beheld the
e^ of it: and all that could be obtained from them was th^^ they would break
up, without leaving any marks of the having made any deliberations; on
condition that (...) Deputies should meet at the same place again on the 2^ of
December, to see whether the said promises were p^^formed; And charge the
Deputies General with new Articles.
and to confer about it without holding the so^^ of an Assembly. Nevertheless,
in order to make them co^^ply to this, Rouvray promised to add* some new
A^^^cles to those which the Synod had drawn: and among ^ they desired that
whenever there should be a vacancy of Government of any place of Surety, the
Churches ^ld have the liberty to Nominate three Persons to the ^g, out of which
he should choose one; That what had (...) retrenched out of the Sum promised for
the payment ^^e Garrisons should be restored; That the form promised the Edict
of Nantes, should be given to the Chamber of Edict of Paris; That the Reformed
should be allowed Nominate the Person that should Collect the Sums that ^ld be
given to them for the maintenance of their Garri^ and of their Ministers; and
some others of that kind. (...) little Assembly seemed to exceed the bounds of
their ^er; since that according to the Intention of the Regu^n of Saumur, they
ought not to have exceeded the (...) of St. John d' Angely, upon the account of
which they (...) been convened. But the relation of that affair to all ^rest,
and the jealousies occasioned by little things in ^^ch a mystery was suspected,
made them pass over ^e reflections. And Rouvray could obtain nothing with
those Conditions.

^ouvray having made his report to the Court, the Resolution taken at Court.
^en found that bare words would not satisfy Per^ so well resolved: but she
thought her Authority too ^^h concerned in the continuation of that Assembly,
to any thing at their request. Therefore a Council was (...) on purpose upon
that Subject, in which it was resolved ^o nothing that might seem to be granted
in favor that Assembly, which was looked upon as unlawful; (...) forbid
Provincial Councils for the future; To an^ the other Articles nevertheless
according to the ^en's promise; not as being proposed by that Assem^ which was
reputed unlawful, but as contained in a ^tion presented by the Deputies General
before Rouvray's ^hey; To publish a new Declaration, confirming the ^cts, and
granting a general Pardon for all those that ^ld remain within the bounds of
the^ All^giance. The (...) Resolution ended by the project of sending the
Marshals of France to perform their Circuit or Progress in th^^^ respective
Provinces according as it had been practiced a^ciently, Chevauchee.
and according to the obligation of their said Off^^^ accompanied with Officers
of Justice and Forces, to check a^^ punish the Guilty, and to aid and assist
the Good. T^^^ was a threatening resolution, which signified properly th^^ they
would oblige the Duke de Rohan to obey by fo^^^ of Arms; and punish him like a
Rebel, if they could ca^^^ him. Those Circuits or Progresses which were sorm^^^
part of the Civil Government of the Kingdom, and whi^^ were ordained to protect
the weakest against the strong^^^ and to encourage the oppressed to complain,
finding themselves assisted by Law and by the King's forces against (...) might
of the oppressors, had been of no longer continua^^^ than Liberty. They had
been suspended for a long time and considering the behavior of the Court, and
the P^^gress of Arbitrary Power, it was easy to Judge that th^^ would not be
reestablished; or that they would not (...) in order to administer Justice.
The Marshal de B^^illon was to be one of them, that it might not seem to (...)
an affair of Religion: The Marshal de Brisac was to (...) joined to him in that
Progress: and the Forces were to (...) divided as well as the Generals. But
finally whether (...) were to Cost a Province or two, they were resolved (...)
force the Duke of Rohan to obey: and his resistance (...) imputed to the
mildness of the means that had been ^^till then in order to reduce him.

Nothing of all this was put in execution, but the D^claration But ill
performed.
that was published within a week after it, wh^^^ was the third that appeared
that year. It first enlar^^^ upon the endeavors the King had used to maintain
P^^^^ among his Subjects, according to the Maxim of the (...) King, who having
granted the Edict of Nantes in ord^^ New Declaration.
to remove all the fears and jealousies of the Reformed (...) relation to the
Liberty of their Persons, of their Consci^^ces, of their Honors, and of their
Families, had happ^^^ governed his People in peace by the observation of that ^
of the secret Articles, Breefs, and Settlements made consequence thereof. The
King added that his endea^^s had not hindered his Subjects in general, and even
(...) Reformed, from entertaining jealousies of each other; ^^ch had induced
them to augment their Forces, to make ^^ision of Arms, to hold Councils and
Assemblies: which ^ather imputed to an ill grounded fear, than to ill ^, having
ever found the generality of the Reformed (...) affected to his Service. He
said that the best way to ^^edy that evil, and to avoid the consequences
thereof, (...) to observe the Edicts inviolably: in order whereunto ^order'd
the Edict of Nantes, that of the 22d. of May ^o. The private Articles, the
Decrees, the Regulations (...) other Letters expedited in consequence thereof,
for the ^rpretation of the execution of the Edict, to be read and ^lish'd anew
in the Parliaments. After which he abo^d all Decrees, Acts. or Proceedings, and
Expeditions ^de against the Reformed under any pretense whatever; (...) imposed
a perpetual silence to his Attorneys General, ^r Substitutes and all others
upon that Subject; by rea^ that he was of opinion that the infractions
committed (...) the Reformed, only proceeded from slight jealousies, and (...)
from ill will: and that he was in hopes that for the fu^e they would keep
within the bounds of the Edict. Fi^y, he forbad all manner of Communication of
Assem^s, the establishing and holding of Provincial Councils, ^ing of men, and
all actions directly or indirectly contra^ to the Edicts, on pain of being
punished as disturbers of (...) public peace.

This Declaration was published on the 15th. of De^ber. Remarks upon those
frequent Edists.
The Spirit and Style of the others appeared visibly (...) it, which only
tended to represent the Reformed as peo^ that were ever ready to take up Arms.
Nothing could (...) of more use to the Court, than always to give them the ^me
even of the injustices that were committed anst them. The project of their Ruin
was built upon ^t Foundation; and the minds of the People had been prepared so
well upon that Subject, by that Policy, (...) even some of the Reformed blamed
the suspicions and (...) cast of their Brethren. It is from thence that the
excl^ors have drawn all the Common Places of their Invecti^ Nothing can be more
specious in appearence, to convi^ the Reformed of having ever had a Turbulent
Facti^ inclination, than to produce Pardons upon Pardons gran^ to them: and to
see the prohibition of persevering in the enterprises daily renewed against
them; However the ju^fication of their Conduct will appear, by the Remonstr^ces
of the Parliaments, and by the Manisestos of the ^, who reproached the Queen
directly with the inobse^tion of the Edicts. But before ^ proceed to that, we
(...) observe that the Reformed were sensible of the Policy those Deelarations;
and that they were loath to rec^ them, by reason that they knew that they
concem'd themselves by submitting to them. Therefore the Deputies the Circle
being come to Rochel on the 25th. of (...) The Circle Assembles again.
Month, according as it had been resolved at their separati^ made great
difficulties upon the State in which affairs (...) to them. They were neither
pleased with the Dec^on; nor yet with the Answers made to the Deputies Gen^
because they did not find those answers in Writing altoge^ conformable to those
they had received a month before (...) Rouvray in the Queen's Name. The
prohibition of ^vincial Councils troubled them more than all the rest: (...)
the more the Court seemed adverse to allow them, the (...) they esteemed them
necessary for their safety. In^ Rochel seperates from the rest.
that the Deputies General were obliged to use their (...) endeavors to
appease them, and Du Plessis to do the like; which proving ineffectual, the
City of Rochel was obligd separate from the rest of the Deputies, and to
declare (...) they thought there was no further necessity for the co^nuation of
the Assembly. But the Duke of Rohan (...) come thither, in order to make them
alter their re^tions by his presence, they were like to come to blo^ and to
oblige the Body of the City to retract. The ^ prevented it, by securing the
Cantons that could make (...) the strongest. Thus to avoid making War with the
^, the Reformed were upon the point of waging it ^st one another, and to spare
their ancient Enemies trouble to ruin them. It is observable that the May^nd
President of Rochel were lately come from the Court, ^re they had been to give
an account of the preceding ^tion: and that the good Treatment they had re^d
there, had disposed them to follow mild Councils. for Du Plessis, the Court
rewarded him some years (...) it for his good intentions; by taking Saumur from
by an unworthy Treachery: and they begun with him, ^rder to distinguish him
from the rest.

The Assembly being therefore no longer able to subsist Which puts an end to
the troubles.
(...) Rochel, and that City declaring positively that they were ^ied with the
Queens proceedings, the Duke of Rohan (...) dreaded that example might be
followed by o^s; and that he might be forsaken as soon as ever his (...) was
attacked; that those reproaches might be renewed ^st him which had been made at
Saumar; that he only ^d at trouble and disorder, to make himself head of the
^y, that Duke, I say, submitted like the rest, and sent a ^tleman to the Queen,
to express his regret to her for ^ng offended her. The Queen received his
Submissions; what she had promised was performed. La Rochebeau^ entered into
St. Johnd' Angely, for form sake; and the ^en removed him from thence within a
sew days to give (...) the Government of Chatelleraud. However the Queen ^isted
in the resolution not to tolerate Provincial Coun^ but after having been
solicited by the Deputies Ge^l, and by diverse Envoys from the particular
Provinces; Plessis having also solicited very earnestly for it, and ^onstrated
what inconveniences might arise from it, in^ the Provinces, to whom those
Council seemed to be ^lutely necessary, should refuse to dissolve them, the ^en
promised Verbally to tolerate them, provided the ^rches made a modest use of
the said Institution: which the Deputies General acquainted the Churches with
her Name. Thus one and the same thing was forbidd^ by a public Law and allowed
of by a secret ^mise: Verbal promise to tolerate Provincial Councils.
insomuch that it was easy for the Queen to (...) the advantage of the Law
when ever she pleased, and forget her Promise..

However those troubles did not end until the beginni^ Declaration of the
Marriages resolved upon with Spain.
of the year 1613. But before we leave this, it will (...) proper to observe
that the Seeds of the Civil Wars wh^ were soon, after kindled in the Kingdom
were sown in (...) The Queen declared publicly that the Marriage of (...) King
with the Infanta of Spain, and of the Infant of S^ with the King's eldest
Sister were agreed upon. She (...) the 25th of March to make the said
Declaration, a day ^dicated to the Solemnity which the Catholics call the
^nun^iation. Three days of rejoicing were made upon (...) account, in which a
prodigious dissipation was made of (...) remainder of Sully's Husbandry. The
Duke of May^ was sent into Spain, to Sign the Articles between the K^ and the
Infanta; and at his return he brought back (...) him the Duke de Pastrana, to
Sign those of the (...) and of the King's eldest Sister. That affair offended
(...) Prince of Conde, and the Count de Soissons to a high ^, because it had
not been communicated to them. T^ retired from Court upon that pretense: but
their anger (...) not last long; and their consent, their signature, and the
return were bought with some gratifications. The (...) What offends the true
French men.
prudent among the French, likewise were displeased, to (...) those Marriages
concluded so soon after Henry the (...) Death, who had expressed so much
repugnancy towa^ them; and that those sums should be expended in Tu^ments and
Balls which had been laid up for greater desig^. That they should serve to pay
the vain Pomps which (...) pressed the joy of an alliance with their greatest
Enemi^ That what he had designed, to make War against them, break the Fetters
they designed to Impose upon Eu^ should serve to show publicly that they
renounced the rious projects; and that France should shamefully adhere (...)
the progress of a House which aimed at the Universal ^narchy.

But no body was more concerned at it than the Reformed, ^reason, that besides
the general reasons in which they ^eed with the rest to disapprove the said
Marriages, they (...) particular ones which only related to themselves. They
(...) as well as every body else that Spain had a great as^dant in the Council
of France; and that not having been (...) to oppress Europe by the ruin of that
Kingdom, they ^eavour'd to succeed in it, by joining the interests of State to
theirs, under pretense of Alliance and Friend^. They saw that Spain did
precipitate an affair which (...) not ripe yet, in marrying of Children before
the Age which Nature renders them capable of it: which alone (...) sufficient
to give violent suspicions of some hidden de^. They could not foresee whether
Marriages of this ^ure, being only promises which may always be re^ted, might
not prove a trick of Spain, which had for^ly played the like; and who would
break that Pro^ as soon as they should want the Alliance of another ^ce. The
Negociators, which were the Pope and the ^t Duke, were suspected by them, as
persons that de^'d their ruin. The Duke de Mayenne chosen among any others for
the Embassy of Spain, he whose Name (...) seemed to revive the League, created
a thousand suspi^ in them. Finally, they knew that at the first propo^n that
had been made of those Marriages, an Article (...) been inserted in it relating
to them: and that the Ca^icks exspected to sanctify those Marriages by the
de^ction of Heresy. Those thoughts had run in the minds ^ose who had inspired
the desire of War into the Duke (...) Rohan: but whereas the cause of the
difidence remained (...) after the accommodation of that affair, and the separa^
of the Assembly of Rochel, peoples minds were still ^y to take fire, when the
Princes expressed new dis^ents.

The noise that was made at Rochel to hinder the continuation 1613.
of the Assembly, was soon appeased: But there Ferrier abandons the Ministry.
happened an affair at Nimes which did not end so easily. Ferrier who had been
deprived of the profession of Theology, and of the Ministry he had exerted at
Nimes, by the National Synod, not being satisfied with the Church of Montelimar
where he was sent; resolved to try whether the Court would assist him in order
to be restored or give him some recompense for what he had lost by his
complaisance for them. He obtained a Counselors place in the Presidial of
Nimes: and after having received his Patents for it, he resolved to officiate
it himself. The Ministers of Paris and others used their utmost endeavors to
put that fancy out of his head, as soon as they knew it. Moreover they obtained
a promise from him that he would obey the Synod: but he broke it; and to add
treachery to desertion, he abandoned his Religion, and yet professed it still
outward^y. And it is thought that he lived in that shameful dissimulation long
before he quited his Ministry. His Church upbraided him for it, and he partly
confessed it, as will appear by the Sequel.

As soon as he came to Nimes, in order to be received in Is received Counselor
at Nimes.
his new Office, the Consistory having notice of it, endeavored to oppose it;
and being assisted by the Consuls and Consular Council, they desired the
Presidial to defer the reception of Ferrier, because there were reasons to
hinder it, which they would give his Majesty an account of, by most humble
remonstrances. Ferrier had foreseen those difficulties; not doubting but the
City and Church would look upon his enterprise as a Bravado. And indeed he had
only chosen that employment to brave his Enemies: and whereas they knew him to
be a giddy headed haughty revengeful Man, they were sencible that he would
prove insupportable to those who had contributed toward his disgrace, being in
possession of a place of Justice. But as the same reasons which made others
fear him, made him the more desirous of it, he had taken precautions against
those oppositions before his departure from Paris. He had brought such positive
and such pressing Letters from the Court, that the Presidial either thought, or
feigned, that they could not defer his reception. So that he was received
notwithstanding the oppositions of the Consistory: but whereas he had rejected
the remonstrances of that Company upon his enterprise, they excommunicated him
after several proceedings, being assisted by the advice of some Ministers, and
of some Elders of the neighboring Churches, as Deputies from the Synod of the
Province to strengthen them. The Excommunication was pronounced on the 14th.
And is Excommunicated.
of July. Notwithstanding which Ferrier in order to brave the Consistory with
more haughtiness, caused himself to be conducted to the Palace by the Provost
and his Men. He was attacked at his coming back, first by the Children, who
threw gourds and railed at him; by degrees some of the Common People joined
with them without Arms. Ferrier finding himself pressed, retired in a Magistrates
house: but a Catholic Counselor who was with him, passed through the Crowd
without receiving the least affront, or injury, by word or deed. Soon after
which some body crying out of the House in which Ferrier had retired himself,
that some of them would be hanged, that threatening exasperated the People
instead of frightning them. However they had so much consideration in their
fury as not to confound others with Ferrier; and to show that they only aimed
at him, those mutineers quited the house in which he was, and attacked and
forced his, after his Servants had defended it a long time with Stones. The
Ministers who came thither in order to appease the tumult, received some Stones
from the House, which incensed the Rabble to the utmost extremity: So that
without respecting either the Consuls, Judges, or Ministers they broke down the
doors, plundered and burnt all the goods, and omitted nothing that an enraged
multitude is capable of doing. However it was observed that a Franciscan, and
some Priests passing through the crowd, in the height of the Sedition received
no manner of outrage. Finally, the first Consul appeased the people, and in
order to cool that first heat, a Minister made a Prayer upon the place, to b^g
of Almighty God to calm their hearts. The Prayer was hearkened unto with as much
Tranquillity, as if the auditors thoughts had all been calm.

In the mean time the Consuls placed Guards at the Gates* Diligence of the
Consuls to save Ferrier.
and in diverse parts of the City, and took precautions, as if they had been
fearful of a surprise. Their design was to cause the Gates to be opened in the
night, under pretense of discovering what was done without, in order to let
Ferrier get out of the City with the Soldiers undiscovered. The better to
cover their design, they gave out that they had received certain intelligence
that there was a design on foot against the City, and that their Enemies
designed to take the advantage of that popular rising to put it in execution.
However they durst not venture to put him out the first day, lest the people
being hot still should perceive it: and the next day they could not, by reason
that the word happened to be given double at the Gate where they designed to
pass, without knowing how it came about. But on the 17th. they got him out, and
they found some of the Constables Gens^ arms who expected him, in order to
Guard him. A Corpse de Guard was placed in his House for the security of his
Wise who was ready to Lie In: but she also left the City within 8 or 10 days
time by her Husbands order, who had a mind to have an occasion to insist in his
Complaints, on the circumstance of his Wives condition, to aggravate the
Violence of the People. he took his time so well in order thereunto that she
was delivered between Nimes and Baucaire which are but three Leagues distant
from each other; falling in Labor by the way. During these Transactions the
People had destroyed a Country House which did belong to Ferrier; had fell`d
the Trees, rooted the Vines, and committed other disorders: and the Judges
having Imprisoned some of the Seditious to frighten the rest, they were rescued
with violence: but yet at the same time the Mutineers were careful not to let
other Prisoners escape.

Ferrier being safe, the said War dwindled to writings (...) both sides; both
Parties being desirous to avoid the Writing on both sides.
^^^proach of it. The Reformed accused Ferrier of a sordid ^, which made him
detain the Sallary of the Workmen that worked for him: and they pretended that
the ^^ildren of those illpaid Workmen had begun the Sediti^^. They upbraided
him with having taken Pensions from ^^nry the 4th, and from Lewis the 13th to
betray his Bre^^en, and to reveal their Secrets: that he had been wa^^ing in
his Religion; sometimes promising the Catholics (...) change; and then again
promising the Reformed to per^^ere: That he had told some persons that he had
preached (...) Doctrine of Jesus Christ for 16 years, without believ^^g in him:
That he had spoken of the Incarnation of the (...) of God, in such horrid
Terms, that Paper could not ^ar them: That ever since the death of Henry the
4th his ^^nner of preaching had been Seditious; that the Catho^^^ks and
Reformed had made equal complaints against him (...) the Duke de Ventadour, who
had been obliged to re^^mand him: That he had endeavored to draw his Col^gues
into a Sedition: That he had proposed means to ^n the Churches: That he had
supposed Calumnious Let^^rs under other peoples names: Ill administr'd such
things (...) he had been entrusted with: Converted the Money of ^e Accademy and
of the Church to his own use, which ^d been proved against him in the Synod of
Privas; and (...) general that his Life and Conversation was neither suita^e to
the Catholic or Reformed Doctrine.

He denied part of those accusations: but he excused the Appollogies of Ferrier.
^st, as if he had had reasons to do it. He called the be^^ying of their
Secrets, which the Reformed upbraided him ^th as a piece of Treachery, Fidelity
to the King: What ^^ey called Pensions to betray them, a recompense for his ^od
Services: Those Sermons as they styled Seditious, free ^d sincere Discourses,
in which he spoke his mind conscien^usly about the then State Affairs. He
acknowledged that (...) had Preached Doctrines contrary to those of the
Reformed; but he said that they were new lights which he had discovered in
Catholic Books, which had opened his eyes abo^^ many errors of his own
Religion. This was found in the Appologies which either himself or the Jesuits
did Pri^* However, this Sedition had no other consequence than (...)
Transferring of the Presidial of Nimes to Beaucarie. It w^^ ordained so by a
Decree from the Council, which ga^ this reason for it, that they could no
longer sit at Ni^ there to administer Justice without danger. But the (...)
having satisfied the Court by a speedy obedience; a^ other considerable Cities,
which looked upon the cons^quence of that Affair to be general, having joined
their entreaties to theirs in order to obtain the revocation of the Decree,
they obtained it easily. Ferrier being cruely mortifi^^ by the ill success of
his Enterprises, and irreconcilable wi^^ the Reformed that abhorred him,
comforted himself with the love of the Catholics, who looked upon him still to
be^ some use. He lived a long while after that miserable Catastrophe; and the
Court where he was favored by t^^ And his end.
Jesuits, honored him at last with a place of Counsellor^ State. There is a
Pamphlet of his in which he makes t^^ Elogy of Cardinal de Richelieu, whose
Ministry afforded (...) Theme to a thousand Satyrs. He never was so firm^
Catholic, but that he still gave the Reformed hopes of joining with them
again. But whereas there was no fortune to ^ expected in their Service,
especially after the decay (...) their Affairs, he persisted to the end in the
Roman Religi^ which answered his Ambition and Vanity.

The Duke de Rohan who had only made an agreeme^ Reconcilement of the Duke de
Rohan and the Marshal de Bouillon.
with the Court by Force had preserved some resentme^ against those who had put
that Violence upon him: and the Commissioners of the Synod had not been able to
pre^ with him to enter into the Reconciliation which the other great ones had
signed. The end of those Broils giving people time to breath, the Negociations
of that Accomodatio^ were resumed: but with some difficulty at first, by reason
that there was some coldness between the Duke and ^ Plessis, who was very
useful to prevail upon people. The ^d coldness proceeded from that du Plessis
had broken all ^e Dukes measures at Rochel by his Credit and Prudence. ^owever
as they had a great respect for each other, they ^ere easily reconciled. They
met in a House belonging to ^e Dukes Mother, where after some discourse they
remained ^ry well satis'fid with each other. Moreover the Duke ^omis'd to live
civily with the Marshal de Bouillon when (...) should go for Paris; and whereas
the reasons which made ^m take that resolution were grounded upon the Public
^od, and the Service of the Churches, the Marshal reli^ed them as well as he,
and promised the same thing. But ^t jealousy did not allow them to enterain
any real friend^p or confidence in each other.

The Sheriffs of Saumur made an attempt that year, which Attempts of the
Sheriffs of Saumur.
^ow'd that du Plessis moderation exposed him more than ^y other to the
attempts of his Enemies. They suffered ^emselves to be persuaded to call a
Jesuit into their City, (...) Preach there during the Octave, which the
Catholics call ^pus Christi. The thing was of consequence had it succeeded, ^d
the example would have been great had du Plessis suffered it (...) incline the
Governors of the other places of surety to (...) the same. Therefore: the
Jesuits of la Fleche had thought fit (...) begin with Saumur, and had made an
agreement with the ^fficers, and the body of the City to send them a Preacher.
^e Sheriffs and the others had much ado to desist from ^at Pretention, although
du Plessis gave them to under^nd that having besides the usual Priests, three
sorts of ^onks in the City, they had no occasion for a Jesuit; and ^at he
showed them that those of that Robe were exclu^d out of the Cities of Surety,
by the Answers to the * Petitions or Addresses.
(...) Cahiers. They expected to obtain his consent by Civility ^d Entreaties:
but finally, he being positive not to grant it (...) them, and they not to
disist from their enterprise, he ^as obliged to obtain an order from above. The
Queen ^anted it according to her promises, and to the desire of (...) Plessis;
and she caused the Jesuit to be countermanded ^erself.

The Chamber of the Edict of Paris reversed a sentence 1614.
of the Judge of Orleans that year, who had adjudged a Legacy Equity of the
Chamber of the Edict of Paris.
given by a Lady of Quality for the maintenance of the Ministers and Poor of
that City, to the Hospitals of the said City and of Remorantin. The like
proceedings happened often: The Inferior Judges commonly expressed a great deal
of Passion in the affairs of the Edict; and made no difficulty to violate the
clearest dispositions of it by their judgments. But the Chambers were more
equitable: and whereas none but chosen Judges were employed there still, whose
Righteousness and Moderation were know, they often reformed what the Inferior
Judges had judged amiss. But that very year the King granted a^ Edict to the
Bishop of Mompellier, which the Reformed Rights of the Bishop of Mompellier
upon the University.
thought they had reason to complain of. He gave o^ confirmed to the Bishop the
right of making Regulations, for the Government, or Reformation of the
University; To take an Oath from all such as were admitted into their Body, or
that enjoyed any of their Offices; and generally to authorize their Acts. This
under pretense of doing a^ act of Justice, was a Cruel incroachment upon the
Reformed of that City, who were much more powerful than the Catholics, and who
pretended that the said Right belonged lawfully to the Body of the City, over
whom the Bishops would usurp it. The subjecting of them to the Authority of the
Bishop, was the more grevious to them by reason that he was an undertaking
malicious person, who spent, all his time in contriving to trouble others for
his own advantage. His name was Fenouillet: and he was indebted for his
advancement to the Duke of Sully. The said Lord had obtained the Bishopwrick of
Poitiers for him from Henry the 4th, and that of Mompellier becoming vacant
about the same time, he got him translated to it. But tho Fenouillet was
indebted to a Reformed Lord for his Dignity, it did not hinder him from doing a
thousand mischiefs to the others; nor to declare himself upon occasion one of
their most inveterate Persecutors. He did not want Eloquence: and when Lewis
the 13th Besieged Mompellier (...) 1622, he harrangud that Prince in so violent
a manner, ^at the Inhabitants of the said City would have had reason (...)
expect the utmost Extremities, if they had not been ^le to defend themselves.
This Edict was made about ^o years before it was verified, by reason that the
oppositions of the City made the Court judge that affair to be (...)
consequence; and that the State was so imbroil'd, that it ^ould have been a
rashness to have exasperated the Reformed. ^hey might have given a potent
re-enforcement by their ^nion, to those that were disatisfied with the Regency.

The Princes were very much disatisfied with it; and ^th much reason. The
extraordinary favor of the Discontents of the Princes.
^arquiss d' Ancre, an Italian of little merit, esteemed of ^scure Birth, and
who could not so much as speak French, ^ent so far that every body murmured at
it; the Prin^s having no share in the Affairs, and that Stranger alone ^verning
according to his pleasure. The Prince of Conde, ^e Count de Soissons, the Dukes
de Longueville, and de Vendome, (...) Mayenne and de Nevers, and some others
united themselves against the Favorite: Some were induced to it upon ^e
account of Pride or Interest, others upon the account (...) Amors, or
Intrigues. The Marshal de Bouillon was ^e hotest of all of them; and he was the
Mediator of the ^e Union. He had entertained hopes to advance him^f in the
affairs of the State, and to gain the favor of that ^incess by his
Complaisance. But after that Princess had ob^'d the Service she expected from
him, he was neglected ^e the rest: Whither it were that she observed that he
had ^t so much power over the Reformed as he pretended, or ^at she was
displeased that after having engaged herself, rely^g upon his Credit, to refuse
several things to the Assembly (...) Saumur, she had been obliged to grant the
same things at ^ers times, one after another; whereby she had lost the ^it of
her Favors, by reason that they were granted by ^ce and out of season. So that
the Marshal only succeed (...) in losing part of the confidence the Reformed
did repose in him, and drew powerful Enemies upon him. ^der to remedy that
loss, he disposed the Princes to (...) their resentments: and whereas he was
used to put (...) Name of the Reformed at the Head of all his Proposition he
did not fail to offer them all their Forces. The (...) of Rohan was a great
obstacle for him. Their Reconciliati^ had not stifled their mutual difidencies.
He could do (...) thing without him, by reason that he had a great Pow^ in
Saintonge, in lower Guyenne, and in Poitou, three considerable Provinces. The
Marshal de Bouillon was af^ that incase he should enter into the Union he would
gro^ too Powerful: but yet the Prince of Conde invited him (...) it. He found
him very willing to join with him, by reason of the last discontents he had
received from the Q^ Moreover, the Princes putting the Inexecution of the Edi^
among the reasons of their retreat, and obliging themsel^ to obtain a
reparation of the same, it was a strong m^ to engage him into their party, by
reason that it see^ to be very advantageous to the Churches.

Therefore he seemed to harken to it, and sent Haute^taine The Duke of Rohan
enters into it.
his Confident at the Conference where the Pri^ treated of a Peace. This being
joined to the Artific^ the Duke de Bouillon made the Queen so jealous of (...)
that she resolved to take his Place of Colonel of the ^zers from him, which she
presented to Bassompierre, (...) finest Gentleman of the Court, and who was
most in (...) favor at that time. The Duke freely resigned his pl^ and took a
recompense for it, which he thought b^ than to expose himself to lose it,
without the least advantage, by refusing it: besides his Sallary was not very
(...) paid. The Marshal de Bouillon had had the cunning to conceal the share he
had in the discontents of the Princes fr^ his Confidents; and in order to make
all the suspicious of (...) Court full upon Duke de Rohan, he had only
mentioned it (...) Artifices of the Marshal de Bouillon.
his Friends. So that the Marshal de Bouillon seemed to have (...) share in
those Intrigues, although he was the head of them: (...) he behaved himself so
prudently that he became the Medi^ them. The Queen being deceived by that
Policy, or ^ming so to be, employed him to quench those rising Flames: (...) he
had the Art to deserve the thanks of both sides in (...) Affair which he had
promoted himself. The Duke of Rohan was of no other use to him than to make the
Queen ^ad the Princes the more, in order to oblige her to grant (...) better
Conditions; and to make the Princes accept accommodation the sooner, lest they
should be too much ^g'd to that Rival of his Glory, incase he should pro^d to a
Declaration of War.

The Princes withdrew to Mezieres, a place blonging Retreat and Manifesto of
the Princes.
(...) the Duke de Nevers, near Sedan, which was very ^veniently seated, either
to receive foreign Suc^rs, incase they could obtain any, or to fly out of (...)
Kingdom incase they were reduced to that necessity. (...) Duke de Vendome was
not able to follow the rest, (...) reason that he was stopped at Paris as soon as
their ^eat had been known: but having soon after made (...) Escape he repaired
into Bretagne of which he had the Government, in order to make the people take
Arms there. ^y published a kind of Manifesto in all their Names, in (...) form
of a Letter from the Prince of Conde to the Queen* (...) complained in it of
all the Disorders that were observed ^ll the parts of the State; and above all
things of the execution of the Edicts of Peace granted to the Reformed, (...)
had conceived just jealousies about it, The whole was ^uc'd to desire an
Assembly of the Estates General, as (...) only means to restore France to a
perfect Tranquilty. (...) writ to the Parliament of Paris to the same purpose.
(...) answer was sent him in the Queens name, in which the ^rt endeavored to
throw the blame of the disorders of ^ch the Regency was accused upon the
Princes themselves. ^y justified the Queen particularly upon the subject of
(...) Edicts, saying that she had used her utmost endeavors (...) the
observation of them: but that whenever she re^'d to use any severity against
the Reformed, which as ^y pretended abused their Privileges, those who
endeavored to incline them to a Rebellion represented all her actions (...)
them as Cruelties and Injustices; and that whenever she ha^ been indulgent to
their demands, the same Persons h^ blown into the Ears of the Catholics, that
she favored their progress by the impunity of their enterprises.

The Wiser sort were of opinion that the retreat of the Their precipitation is
blamed.
Princes had been too much precipiated; and that having made a false stepped at
first, they would obtain no great advantage of their ill-contriv'd Union. They
had neither Money, Soldiers nor strong holds and all their hopes b^ (...)
built on Immaginary Succors, or uncertain Events, we (...) say that they were
very Ill grounded. Not but that (...) Duke of Rohan did whatever he could on
his side (...) make a show of his Power, and to render himself considerable to
the United Princes. He prevailed with the Provincial Council of the Lower
Guyenne to Conve^ an Assembley at Tonneins of three Deputys of every o^ of the
other Councils, and the Letters of it were dispatched toward the end of March.
The day on whi^ they appointed the Assembly to meet, was the same t^ had been
taken to hold a National Synod in the same Pla^ Insomuch that had those two
Assemblys concurred in (...) same Resolutions, it might be said that the
Reformed (...) never taken such general ones. We will observe (...) where why
it did not succeed. I will only say that (...) Princes only making use of the
Duke de Rohan's go^ Will, to render themselves the more formidable to (...)
Queen, they concluded a Peace in the presence of ^tefontane A Peace is made.
his Envoy, to whom they daily gave a thousa^ Assurances that they had no
thoughts of it. The Sum^ of Money that were offered them, made their Swo^ drop
out of their Hands. They obtained the usual (...) of Grace: and the greatest
thing they got was a prom^ to Assemble the Estates. Amboise was delivered up
(...) the Prince of Conde as a Place of Surety. The other profited by it
according to their Quality. The o^ Duke of Rohan paid the Scot, and got nothing
but t^ Queens Indignation by it. The Duke de Vendome held ^ut longer than the
rest; and the Queen was foro'd to ^o into Bretagne to reduce him to Reason.

This Treaty being concluded at Ste. Menehould on the Injury done to the Prince
of Conde at Poitiers.
^ 5th, of May, was forth with put in Execution: but the Peace which was but
just concluded had like to have been broken by an affront the Prince of Conde
received at Poi^ers. He was disatisfy'd with the Bishop to whom he ^nt some
smart Letters by a Gentleman of his Retinue. The said Gentleman was ill used,
by the consent, and perhaps at the Instigations of the Bishop. The Prince being
informed therewith in a Journey of which no body knew the Secret, resolved
inconsiderately to go to Poitiers to revenge that affront. Whereas he was only
Armed with his Quality at that time, and not very well attended, ^e was not
much in a Condition to be feared; and therefore the Inhabitants shut their
Gates against him, and refused him Entrance. This seemed to be done by the
Bishop's Credit: but it was thought that he had received secret orders from the
Queen about it. Moreover some Persons some which were Engaged in the Princes
Interests were turned out of the City: whereupon he did whatever lay in his
Power to Assemble his Friends and to lay a kind of Siege before that Insolent
City. But he could hardly Assemble Men enough to annoy the Inhabitants a
little, whom he hindered from going to and fro by keeping of some Passages. He
neither had time enough nor means to renew his Correspondence which the Peace
had broken: and the Queen being gone from Paris with her Forces, the fear of
her marching against him obliged him to remove from before Poitiers. He was
forced to submit that affair to Justice, and to suffer Commissioners to be
nominated to examine it: and the Bishop was sent for to Court as it were to be
reprimanded for his proceedings. It was not so much to punish him, as to put
him in safety: and the Queen having brought the King Cities of Surety opened to
the King.
to Poitiers, improved that occasion to put her Creatures in the Chief
Employments there, in order to secure that City to herself. The Reformed
resolved in that Progress to show the King that he was as much Master of the
places of Surety, as of all the other Cities of his Kingdom. He was received
with his Forces in all those where he came. Moreover, he was invited to come
through such as he seemd to avoid on purpose, left it might create some
jealousy.

Soon after the Treaty of the Princes, the Reformed held National Synod. The
King of England's. Letters.
a National Synod at Tonneins. Several affairs were handled in it, which
neither related to their Doctrine, nor Discipline. They received Letters from
the King of England, who embraced all occasions to concern himself with
Divinity, as much as he neglected to mind the general affairs of Europe. The
Subject of his Letters was a dispute between Tilenus and du Moulin, who accused
each other of Error, about the Mystery of the hypostatick Union. Besides,
Tilenus had Sentiments that were not very Orthodox, about the concurrence of
Grace with humane Will. The Marshal de Bouillon who did esteem him, and who had
called him to Sedan, to give a reputation to the College he had founded there,
declared himself publicly his Protector; which gave a great deal of discontent
to the Churches. That affair occasioned several Conferrences, after which
Tilenus was finally abandoned, and left the Churches of France in quiet, until
he took upon him to write against the Assembly of Rochel, during the Civil
Wars. As soon as the Synod received the King of England*s Letter, they resolved
to open it: but before they read it, they resolved, lest their keeping a
correspondence with a foreign Prince might offend the Court, to send a Copy of
it to Rouvray, one of the Deputies General, who remained with the King while la
Miletierre was come to Tonneins* to the end he should show it to the Ministers
incase it should create any jealousy in them: and they protested at the same
time that incase the said Letter did mention any thing but what related to
Religion, they would not treat about it without express leave from the King. It
was a medium which seemed to reconcile the diverse pretentions of the Court and
of the Synod: The Court would not allow the Reformed to keep any Communication
^ith Foreigners: and the Synod thought that they ought to ^ave the freedom of
that Correspondence, in things which ^lated to their Doctrine. Therefore they
thought that ^ey should satisfy the Court by keeping within those bounds, ^d
by tying their own hands in affairs of another nature.

The Council of the Lower Guyenne was obliged to give Council of the Lower
Guyenne.
^e Synod an account of the Convocation they had made, which I have spoken of.
That way of proceeding was not ^proved of every where, because it exceeded the
bounds (...) the regulation made at Saumur; That the Province had ^t a
sufficient grievance, to have recourse to that remedy; That even in that case
it would have been sufficient to invite the Deputies of five adjacent
Provinces; and ^ally, That since a General Assembly was expected, which ^e
Deputies General endeavored to obtain leave for the ^d Convocation could not
be looked upon as necessary. They ^ledg'd reasons for it, which freed them from
a Censure. The Church of Pujols, in the precinct of the Assembly of Again, which
is part of that Province, had refused to submit to ^e resolutions of that
Council. Complaints were made ^f it in the said Assembly, where after having
heard the ^arties, they had censured the disobedience of the said church; tho
they justified pretty well that their intentions ^ere good. The said Church
appealed to the Synod, which confirmed the Judgment of the Assembly. The reason
^f it was that the resolution having been taken by the plurality of Voices,
they broke the Union in refusing to sub^it to it, and made an inlet for
Divisions. Moreover it (...) observable by this affair, as well as by several
others, ^at tho the Power of Political and Ecclesiastical Assemblies Mutual
Subordination of the Assemblies.
was bounded in certain things, the one being to meddle with Civil Government
and Safety, the other with Discipline and Doctrine, nevertheless, there was a
kind of mutual Subordination between them, by virtue whereof ^he one sometimes
reformed the regulations of the other, or took Cognizance of their Judgments by
way of Appeal* That was very proper to maintain Union between those two
Tribunals, and might have contributed considerably toward the preservation of
the Churches, if it could have been observed without Ambition or Jealousy.

The Deputies General had obtained leave to hold a General Brief of leave for a
General Assembly.
Aessmbly: but the Brief obliged them to assemble at a time and in a place
which did not please them. The place was Grenoble, very distant from all the
Provinces, and moreover in the Power of Lesdiguieres, and of a Parliament which
would not allow the Deputies the liberty of their Suffrages. The time was the
15th of July, too short a time to allow the Provinces Leisure to nominate their
Deputies and to prepare their Instructions. Moreover, the Brief contained
modifications that were too strict, and allowed the Assembly nothing but to
nominate Deputies General. The Synod ordered those that performed that function
at that time, to obtain a more convenient Place, and freer, (...) longer time,
during which Provincial Assemblies might be held, to give an account of the
proceedings of the Synod and a more favorable Brief, giving the Assembly a
large Permission. The Synod, only obtained an alteration as to the time. The
Assembly was put of until the 25th of August: but the Queen declared that she
could neither change the Place, nor the form of the Brief. The Conjuncture of
the time, the King being near upon entering into his 14th year, and
consequently to be declared Major* might have given the Assembly an occasion to
treat about great things. The Estates that were promised, were to me^ shortly:
which also was an inducement for the Reformed to look about them, But those
very reasons also induced the Court not to allow their Assembly all sort of
Liberty. Nevertheless, the place displeasing them, they chose rather not to
meet than to do it in the Capital City of a Province, in which the Parliament
and Governor might equaly disturb them. We will see what happened about it the
following year, in which the alterations of Affairs made them earnestly desire
the same place, which they had so much rejected.

An account was given to the Synod of the means that had been used to reconcile
the Lords; and Letters Letters from the Lords. Pecuniary Affairs.
were delivered to them from the Dukes de Rohan, de Sully and from du Plessis,
which desired the Members of the Synod to acquaint the Provinces with their
good intentions, and with their zeal for the Service of the Churches. Bergerac
disowned in that Synod the Brief of 1500 Livers, which the King had given them
to take upon the 15000 Crowns of Augmentation; and after the Church and City
had declared in writing, that they renounced all manner of means to obtain the
said Sum, unless it were by the good Will of the Synod, the Assembly granted
them 1200 Livers. This husbandry seemed to be very necessary, by reason that
the Funds were wanting every where for the payment of the Ministers: and those
who had treated with the late King upon that Subject, had taken their measures
^o ill, that most of them having no Sallary besides what they had out of the
said Donations were reduced to great ^reights: which rendered them incapable of
performing their Ministry, susceptible to the inspirations of the Court which
endeavored to corrup them, or despicable for their Poverty. The Sum granted by
Lewis the 13th added but little to their Sallary; besides they had occasion ^or
it, for so many things that the Ministers had not the advantage of it. The King
applied part of it himself to what he pleased; and he had had much ado to free
that ^m of the penny per Liver which he had taken out of it ^or the Sallary of
the Deputies General. The rest was di^tributed part to the Accademys and
Colleges, part in Gratifications and Recompenses, and part for Deputations and
private Affairs. The Lower Guyenne proposed in order to remedy that Evil to beg
of the King wherewith to pay ^he Ministers entirely. The Synod harkened to that
proposition; but they thought fit to refer it to a General Assembly.

Among the things that were promised in order to disolve the Assembly of
Rochel, the Court had put the Reformed in hopes of an Exemption of Taxes.
Tailles for the Ministers: and the Declaration of it had been drawn
accordingly. Exemption of Tailles for the Ministers.
But the Courts of Aids, made great difficulties about it; and it had not been
verified; so that it had only proved an illusion till then. The Synod ordered
the Deputies General to press the Registring of it; and the Deputies of the
Churches to carry the said demand to the mixed Assemblies of their Provinces;
and those particular Assemblies to give them to their Deputies to be moved in
the General Assembly.

They spoke of the Innovations that were introduced in the nomination of the
Governors of the places of Surety, and in the reception of the Reformed in the
places that were Places of Surety.
allowed to them. They were obliged before their said reception to (...) an
attestation of the Assembly within the extent of which the Government of a
Place became vacant: But the Court did not observe it, in order to have the
sole authority of those Nominations. The Synod made a very severe order upon
that Subject against those who accepted Goverments or other Employments that
way: and referred the Complaints of the fact to the Political Assemblies. They
also ordered the Consistories to hinder the Governors of places from protecting
any persons accused of things which deserved Punishment, lest those Cities
given for the Surety of their Religion should serve to protect Criminals.

One of the six Reformed Counselors in the Parliament of Paris, called Berger,
was lately turned Catholic. H^ change made a breach in the number of the
Officers of th^^ Berger a Reformed Counselor at Paris turns Roman Catholic.
quality promised by the Edict: and the Reformed pretended that Berger ought no
longer to enjoy the said employment which belonged to them, since he had
changed his Religion. But Berger had made his bargain before he changed his
Religion that he should not lose his Place; and it was the interest of the
Catholics not to turn out such as embraced their Communion. lest the fear of
that disadvantage should discourage others who might also be inclined to do the
same. The Synod ordered the Deputies General to endeavor to repair that
breach; and to acquaint the Assembly with it incase they could not succeed in
it. But their diligence proved inefectual; and the Reformed never received full
satisfaction upon that Subject.

The discharge granted by the King of the Penny per Liver Reformed of Gex.
out of the Money he had granted the Reformed, authorized the Synod to desire
him also to discharge them of the 3600 Livers adjudged to the Churches of the
Country of Gex. The reason was that the said Sum was taken out of a Grant ^n
which that Country had not been considered, by reason that it was not under the
Kings Dominion at the time of the Edict; and that at time when the said
augmentation was granted, it had a Fund settled by the late King's
Commissioners, for the maintenance of its Ministers. Moreover, the said Sum was
distributed by order from the Council; which did not forget to do it in such a
manner that divisions might ^rise about it. The Synod of Bargundy, of which
that Bayliwick was a dependency, had adjudg'd 60 Livers out of the Money
designed for that Cantoon, for a College they designed to errect at Gex: and
the Assembly had acqui^ss'd to it. But the Inhabitants of the City being
offended that so little was granted them, applied themselves to ^e Council in
which they obtained a Decree which adjudg'd them 250 Livers. This was
dangerous, both as to the example, which authorized the Malcontents to appeal
^om the Judgments given in the Ecclesiastical Assemblies ^o the Council: and
for the Consequence which submited ^^e distribution which the Synods made of
the said Grants ^o the review of the Council: which was directly contrary ^o
the Brief of 1598, which allowed the Reformed to dispose of them without giving
any account of it. Therefore the Synod took the thing to heart; and censured
the Reformed of the City sensibly; and threatened to proceed further against
them, incase they did not submit with obedience to their Synods.

We may gather from the Synod that there were Churches Churches n^^t as e^
settled.
grounded on the disposition of the Edicts, of which the settlement was
nevertheless not as yet made, by reason of the oppositions of the Catholics;
whither it were upon the account of the Poverty of those that were to compose
them, or upon the account of the negligence of those that were to employ
themselves about it. There were some of this kind in Auvergne: and that of
Issoire was of that number. They had long pursued their affairs inefectually at
Court: but the Synod being informed with their deplorable Condition, ordered
the Deputies General to second their Petitions, and to recommend them in their
Name.

The Reformed of the County of Avignon, who two years Condition of the Reformed
in the County of Avignon.
before thought themselves strong enough to form a Province by themselves had
strangly altered their Condition since. They had been persecuted with so much
violence that their Condition was worthy of Commiseration: and the Synod which
knew no other remedy, was forced to beg of the King to turn their Mediator, to
obtain some ease for them.

The Synod made other liberal gifts to some particular persons, Liberality's of
the Synod.
Rivet had 600 Livers for some Works, and Gigord Professor in Theology at
Mompellier, who had had a dispute at Court some years before with Cotton the
Jesuit, had 1850. The same Synod appointed places in every Province, in order
to establish Colleges, of which some have subsisted (...) Colleges.
our days; and tho they were sensible, considering the small Fund they had to
dispose of, that there were too many Accademies in the Kingdom, by reason that
the^ were too chargeable, yet they preserved them for fear of prejudicing those
places out of which they should remove them. They gave the Churches of Bearn
power to convene a National Synod in their Turn, on condition that the^ Bearn.
should submit to the Decisions of those that should be held in the Kingdom,
and that they should make their appeal^ there. We have already seen by what
happened in the Assembly of Saumur, that the Court would not allow the
Political Union of that Province with the rest of the Churches of the Kingdom.
But the said Province it self dreaded to be United too much with them in the
exercise of their Discipline, for fear of injuring the privileges which the
Churches enjoyed there independently from the Edict of Nantes, and by ^e of
more ancient Titles. Particularly they were said lest in submitting the
Churches of the Country to ^e decisions a of Synod held elsewhere, it might
serve as pretense against the Right they pretended, that the General and
Particular Cases of their Inhabitants could not (...) taken out of the hands of
their natural Judges; viz. (...) Council, and their Estates. There was
something like ^^ents.
^s relating to the City of Mets; the Church of which ^ly maintained a
Communion of Doctrine with the others: ^t kept at a distance as to the rest,
for ^ear of prejudicing the Rights they enjoyed before the Edict; from the very
^e they submitted under the Protection of France.

The Oath of Union was renewed in that Assembly with Oath of Union.
(...) usual Protestations of Obedience and Fidelity to the ^ng, The Empire of
God remaining whole; and every deputy promised to get it ratified in his
Province. Finally, Letters to the King and Queen.
^e Synod writ to the King and Queen, about the things ^ey ordered the Deputies
to solicit. This difference was ^serv'd in the said Letters that the same
things that were ^ention'd in the King's Letter, were some what more enlarged
^on in the Queen's. Among the Complaints they made them, there was one in
particular, concerning an excess committed at Guise against the person of a
Reformed; which the Lieutenant General was accused of having had a and in;
either by exciting the Authors of it directly, or (...) conniving at them. They
demanded Justice about it, (...) the end that the punishment of those that were
guilty (...) it, might put a stop to those Violences, and show that ^e Reformed
had a share in the King's protection as well (...) the rest. They gave reasons
in the same Letters for ^e refusal that was made by the Churches to accept
Grenoble for the place of their General Assembly; and in order (...) obtain a
more convenient place, they alleged the example of the late King, who always
had a regard to the Petitions of the Reformed, as to the nomination of a place
for ^e like Convocations; but that Negotiation was interrupted by Affairs of
more Consequence.

The Queen who had promised to assemble the Es^ General only thought on means
to amuse every body The Queen prepares to Assemble the Estates General.
until the King's Majority. The affairs that occurred (...) the Treaty of
Menehould, Ste. happened as apropos for her, (...) if she had contrived them
her self. But she had yet a noth^^^ design in her Head, which was of greater
con^^quence. She was very sensible that the Princes had desired an Assembly of
the States in order to mortify her ^^ the suppression of her Creatures: and
that the whole Kingdom was in expectation to see what the said Assembly wo^
produce, which had been formerly the remedy of the peoples Grievances, and the
defense of their Liberties. ^^ she had observed by the success of the last
States that (...) was not impossible to make a different use of it; and (...)
oppress by means of the States, those who expected protection and assistance by
them. In order whereunto she (...) what Pius the 4th had done with the Councils
which (...) Predecessors stood so much in awe of. He made use (...) them to
break the bonds which those Assemblies w^ used to give to the authority of his
See; and to reform th^^ Princes that had a mind to reform him. Thus the Que^^
took measures to make the States serve to maintain (...) Power, and to color
the oppression of the people. Therefore she resolved to make the Declaration of
the King Majority, before the Overture of the State: not doub^^ but tho she
thereby lost the Regency, it would be (...) for her to preserve the Authority
of it. The King was (...) easy, so young, and so well disposed by the
Educatio^ and by the discourse of his Confessor, and others whom (...) Queen
had put about him, to be Governed by her, that the^^ was no likelihood she
should Reign less absolutely und^^ her Sons name for the future, than she had
done (...) then. The only way to maintain her Power was to mak^ that Prince
speak; whose Will ought to be more respect^^ being declared Major, than when it
seemed inspired (...) him by his Mothers directions. The Overture of the States
being appointed on the 15th October at Paris, the Queen carried the King to the
Par^ent Declaration the King's Majoritty.
on the 2d of the said month, to take the Act of Majority, and to verify the
Declaration of the pre^^ing day; who after having praised Almighty God for
(...) prosperity he had granted to the State, and re^ed the Queen thanks for
her prudent conduct during Regency, contained four or five Articles, certainly
^thy to be the first Laws of a Prince, who was to ma^^ his State for the future
himself, and to trust no longer ^^e vi^ilency of others. The first confirmed
the Edict of ^tes, and all the Articles, Regulations and Decrees that been
granted to the Reformed, touching its Interpreta^ and Execution. The second
condemned all Correspon^^^cies, Leagues and Associations at home and abroad;
(...) Deputations made to Foreign Princes whither ^nds, or Foes, without leave,
under any pretense what^. The third depending on that forbad all those who
^iv'd Sallarys, Pay, or Pensions from the King, to re^e any from any other
Prince or Lord, and to beat Arms ^ollow any body but the King, on pain of
losing their ^^oyments, Sallarys and Pensions. The fourth renewed all
Ordinances against Duels; without any hopes of Mercy. (...) last did the same
against Blasphemies, and ordered the ^ent Ordinances to be published a new. In
order to Judge ^^e Justice and necessity of the third Article, we must observe
there were several persons in the King's Pay, who ap^^d themselves nevertheless
to the service of certain Lords, ^m they looked upon as their Patrons, whose
Will was a ^eraign Law to them. In the progress the Court had ^y made it was
observed that two Lords followed the ^g, who had each of them 500 Horse to
attend them. ^as glorious for the King to Command such potent ^^^jects: but it
was uncertain whether such Subjects would ^ays obey: and Policy could not
permit the King to pay ^^nds and Creatures to his Subjects to act against him.

On the day the Queen had appointed, the Deputies (...) the Provinces repaired
to Paris and made the Overture (...) Overture of the States.
the States. There had been great Brigues in the Provinces (...) obtain the
nomination of persons that were at the devoti^^ of those who designed to profit
by that Assembly. The Que^^ had used her utmost endeavors to have them
favourabl^* The Prince of Conde had omitted no means to get (...) strongest
Party there: and whereas the Public Good (...) his Interest seemed to be
linked together, he had east found such as did embrace his Party, although he had
(...) wherewith to make gratification like the Queen. He w^^ particularly
seconded by the The Commons.
third Estate, which comm^^ly is the only one that keeps to the right Cause: by
reas^^ that being the first on which the weight of oppression ligh^ they are
also the first that oppose the progress of Slaver* The Prince had much ado to
resolve to come to Court ^^ter the mortification he had received. His weakness
had (...) of the Queens Power; and he was afraid that coming (...) Court after
an Affront for which he had received so (...) satisfaction, he would make but a
melancholy figure th^^* But the Queen would have him there, by reason that
othe^wise whatever she should cause to be ordained without (...) should want
weight and effect; and that on the first o^^^sion he should have to create new
Troubles, she should (...) obliged to begin a new. She was resolved to ruin
(...) Power by the means of the Estates, in order to break (...) his measures
for the future.

She would have met with no success in that enterprise (...) The Clergy and
Nobility unite against the third Estaete.
there been any Faith in the Clergy, or Vigor in the Nob^lity. But the Clergy
spoiled all according to their usual ^^stom, and betrayed the King and Kingdom
for their parti^^lar interest. The Court engaged them on their side, (...)
Complaisance and benefits: and they engaged the Nobili^^ on theirs; and those
two bodies being joined oppressed (...) third Estate. There are natural seeds of
discord am^ those diverse orders of the Kingdom: The two first are (...)
burdened with the Charge of the State, and little valu^ ^^e grievances of the
third which bears them all: and the ^hird on the contrary having ever
Complaints and Re^onstrances to make against the two others, who seldom ^are
their Blood and Labor, and are very Liberal at their ^ost. The Clergy having
began by Masses, Processions and ^^e Communion, to which they invited the other
two, re^^lv'd to secure the Nobility, and to dispose them to join ^ith them, to
act together. They applied themselves about (...) by Deputations in form, and
by particular Intrigues. The ^^rongest machine they set at work, even
publicly, was in^^rest. They represented to the Nobility of what use Benefi^es
were for the Children of Noble Families. They per^^aded them that those two
Orders made properly but one ^ody, since the Clergy was for the most part
composed of ^entlemen dedicated to the Church, who possessed the Re^enues of
it: and that therefore the Nobility ought to be ^^ited to an Order, of which
they partak'd the Riches and ^ignity so advantageously. In reallity, Benefices
are the ^^source of the Nobility, which being ruined in the King's ^^rvice,
have no better way to maintain, or to raise their ^ortunes, than to make
Ecclesiastics of their younger ^ons, and Nuns of their Daughters, while they
only keep the ^^dest to preserve the Name and Luster of their Families.

There were some Reformed among the Deputies of the No^^lity: Reformed in the
States.
but they were not strong enough to oppose the Catho^^cks. Besides what ever
came from them was suspected by ^e ignorant Nobility and one of the reasons
which prejudiced ^e rights of the Crown most, and the Prince of Conde, was that
Independency of Kings.
^^ose who maintained them most were Heretics. Peoples minds ^eing disposed
thus, The third Estate began to treat the que^ion of the Independency of Kings,
and of the safety of their ^ersons, against the enterprises and pretentions of
the Court ^f Rome. It was none of their fault that it was not passed ^^to a
fundamental Law of the State that they were subject (...) no Power directly,
nor indirectly; and that there was no ^ase or pretense to authorize any body to
declare their for^^iture of the Crown, and to dispense their Subjects from
their Allegiance. The murder of the two last Kings had made a deep impression
in the hearts of the King's best Subjects, and the Third Estate was desirous to
stifle the remainder of the League by that Law, by showing their maxims to be
false, and contrary to the principle of Monarchy, It was still fresh in Peoples
minds, how those maxims had like to have torn the Kingdom into piece, and to
deprive the lawful Heir of the Crown under pretense of Religion, and of the
Excommunication pronounced against him by the Popes.

It seems wonderful in our days that a proposition so specious Whose Cause is
betra'yd by the Clergy and by the Court it self.
in it self, and so advantageous to Kings could be rejected. And yet it
certainly was; and that which is most surprising is that the King's authority
was used to reject it. The truth is that it was no novelty at that time: the
Court had partly done the same two years before. The Monks had undertaken to
make Kings stoop under the Popes feet. The Clergy of the Sorbonne was
inclinable to that Seditious Theology. Regal Authority was the sport of their
Disputes and most people were wretchedly misled into that opinion. I do not
wonder that they refused to allow the Reformed at that time to have the honor
to defend their Sovereign, and that those Books were suppressed which they
wrote upon that Subject: but yet methinks they should have, had a little more
regard for the Catholics who maintained the same Cause. Nevertheless the Court
handsomely acquiess'd to its own disadvantage. Richet only defender of the
King's Rights, and of the Liberties of the Gallick Church, and who maintained
the propositions which the Clergy has lately defined, was oppressed by Duval,
another Doctor seconded by the Monks: and the Court interposing in that
Dispute, he was obliged to part with his place of Syndis of the University, to
suffer the Condemnation of his Books, without saying any thing, and to suffer
his Brethren, and even the King himself whose Interests he did defend, to treat
him as an Heretic. But whereas the Reformed had a great share in that Dispute
which was renewed in the States, I think it will be necessary for their Honor,
to relate somewhat at large how that affair passed.

The Clergy fell out into an Excess of Passion against ^e Authors of that
proposition. They made as much Passion of the Clergy.
noise as if they had designed to take away their vast Revenues, or to set the
Reformed Religion upon the Throne. They drew the Nobility into their
Sentiments: and having put Cardinal Du Perron at the head of a solemn
Deputation which they sent to the Third Estate, he opposed ^e good Intentions
of that Body with all his might. The Harangue of Cardinal du Perron.
did Cardinal made a long studied discourse upon that ^atter, to render the
said proposition odious: and he maintained the Interests of the Courts of Rome
with so much confidence, that he seemed only to make use of the Grandeur to
which the favor of Kings had raised him, to destroy them, and to make them
subject to a Foreign Power. The turn he took to make an Impression upon the
minds of ^e Catholics, was to represent that Doctrine as a branch of Heresy,
in order to create jealousies about its Original. ^e maintained with a boldness
suitable to a more odious ^ame, that before Calvin the whole Church, and even
the Gallick Church did believe that when a King did violate the ^ath he had
taken to God and to his Subjects, to live and ^ye a Catholic; and not only
turned Arian or Mohammedan, ^ut even proceeded so far as to War against Jesus
Christ, ^at is, to force the Consciences of his Subjects, and to oblige ^em to
follow a false Religion, he might be declared deprived of his Rights, and his
Subjects could be absolved in ^onscience and at the Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Tribunal, (...) the Allegiance which they had sworn to him: and
that it belonged to the Pope or Council to make that Declaration. ^e maintained
that this Sentiment exposed no body to the Anathema, and did not deprive those
who held it of the ^ommunion of the Church He declared more than once that ^e
Oath which the King of England had exacted from the Catholics, was the Patron
of the Doctrine of the Third Estate, which at the bottom was the substance of
that Oath. ^e alleged several inconveniences which might arise from the
enterprise of that House; for Instance that it would be a Snare for
Consciences, to make people read as an Article of Faith taken out of the word
of God, a Doctrine the contrary of which had been and was still held by all the
rest of the Catholic Church; That it was dangerous that Laymen should
undertake to decide matters of Faith, without being guided by a Council, or
some other Ecclesiastical Judgment; That it might create a Schism, to declare a
Doctrine Impious, which was approved by the other Catholics, which they did
separate from by that Declaration; That under pretense of securing the Life and
Grandeur of Princes, they would be exposed more than ever by the troubles which
a Schism causes. He had the boldness to say, that the Murder of Kings could be
prevented no otherwise than by the fear of Eternal Punishment; and that nothing
but Ecclesiastical Judgments can give a real Terror of Punishments. He seconded
all this with Examples, and Testimonies set out with a great deal of Pomp;
displaying as he used to do the most fabulous and most false Reports: and he
endeavou'd to prove by subtle artificial answers, the Examples and Testimonies
to the contrary.

He also endeavored to refute the Objections drawn from Why the Heriticks are
tolerated.
other Causes, and among the rest that which was taken from the Tolleration
granted to Heretics: from whence it might be concluded that if Just Laws were
made to preserve their Lives, their Estates, and their Honors, Kings were much
less to be deprived of theirs under pretense of Heresy. He answered it in a
manner which showed, that according to his opinion the Laws under which
Heretics lived, did only suspend the execution of those which were against
them: and insinuating, that incase a new Heresy should arise, which might be
oppressed without danger by reason of its weakness, they would not fail to
deprive the professors of it both of their Estates and Lives; he showed clearly
enough that it was only the power of the Reformed, which he meant almost every
where in naming them Heriticks, which made their safety. This alone might
suffice, if men were equitable, to apologize for their Precautions and
Difidences: since nothing can be more natural and just, when People are
threatened with Punishments and Masacres, than to take ^easures to prevent them.
He did not forget in that place (...) relate the usage Servet had received at
Geneva, and the ^rians in England.

Speaking of the fourth inconvenience which he found in Distinctions of the
Cardinal.
(...) Doctrine of the Third Estate, he reduced his about the ^ety of Kings to
distinctions of Tyrants by Usurpation, and Tyrants by Administration, and some
others which might ^cover how much those pretended Sureties were illusive. ^e
Case was not to preserve the Lives of Kings against the ^rts that are Lanc'd in
the disputes of Colleges, where ^ose distinctions might have been of some use;
but against Assassinates, whose fury could not be repelled by a Distinguo. This
subject requires, and I say the same of most of those which ^ate to practice in
important matters, Principles Independent ^all such subtleties; which may at
once give the most ignorant, a clear Idea of the Duties that are imposed upon
^em.

In order to end that long discourse by a conclusion wor^y His Conclusion.
of the rest, he endeavored to persuade that it was a ^eat moderation in the
Popes, to suffer such to remain in ^e Communion of the Church of Rome, which
held the Doctrine of the Third Estate: and according to him they were very much
obliged to the Court of Rome, for not being Excommunicated by them, and
declared Heretics. Finally, to dispose his Auditors the better to relinquish
that Article, he ^cus'd the Reformed of being the Authors of it, and to have
^pt in that proposition, which he called the Apple of Discord, (...) the Pe^ion
or Address.
Cahiers of some Provinces, to sow Division among ^e Catholics. He said that
they had long threatened that ^nterprise; That the said project came from
Saumur: That nevertheless both the Synods and Ministers would refuse to ^gn
that Doctrine: which he proved by their Confession of ^aith; by the exceptions
which they added to the protestations of their Obedience and Fidelity; and by
their taking (...) Arms, when ever the Court had attempted to deprive them of
the Liberty of their Consciences.

Whereupon we may observe first, That he applied their 1615.
Doctrine to his with a great deal of malice; since there (...) Reflections
a great deal of difference between not obeying Kings, when they will force
Consciences; or making them liable to deposition by virtue of an Eeclesiastical
Censure, and exposing them to the Daggers of Murderers, under the pretense o^
Anathema's. The one was the Sentiment of the Reformed* the other was the
Opinion of the adherents of the Cou^ of Rome, the impudent pretentions of which
the Third Estate would suppress. Secondly that the Reformed in taking Arms
never intended to revoke the Oath of Allegiance they ha^ sworn to their Kings;
but only to secure themselves again^ violence and oppression, being still ready
to lay down the^ Arms, as soon as their persecutors had done the like. ^nally,
that the Cardinal justified against his will according to his principles, those
Wars which the Catholics have (...) often reproached: since they never did
take Arms but when their Princes violated that Oath made to God and to the^ to
make them live in peace and liberty under the protecti^ of their Edicts. It was
a usual thing among the most viole^ Votaries of the Court of Rome, to impute
those very thing to the Reformed as high Treason which that Court teach^ as a
duty to the Catholics.

This Discourse produced no effect in the House of Commons. The third Estate
Persists. Character of Miron, President of the Chamber of that Order.
Chamber of the Third Estate, by reason that Miron who presided in it
maintained the importance and necessity of the Article with Vigor and
Capacity. He neither wanted Wit, Learning, o^ Courage: and as he equaled the
Cardinal in that, he had the advantage of a great probity over him. Moreover he
was seconded by the Parliaments, whose Heriditary Doctrine he designed to pass
into a Law: and all the good French, whether Reformed or Catholics, were very
desirous that his proposition might be converted into a Law of the State.

So that he would perhaps have carried it in spite of the Clergy, and have
disabus'd the Nobility, had the Court taken care of their own Interests. But
the Queen stood in need of the Clergy, either to maintain her Authority, or to
accomplish the Marriages with Spain which she earnestly desired. ^e was obliged
to pleasure the Court of Rome and the Spa^rds, who interess'd themselves very
much in that dispute: ^e one to take the advantage of the weakness of the
Government, and to make some Encroachments upon the Kings of ^ance, who had
preserved their Independency better than ^ers against their pretentions: The
other to sow jealousies ^d difidences in the Kingdom, which they might take the
^vantage of in favorable occasions. The Jesuits who were (...) Popes faithful
Servants at that time, and very powerful at ^urt, where they had the direction
of the Consciences of the ^g and Queen and of the principal Ministers, did not
be^ themselves on that occasion; being sufficiently concerned (...) the
Assassinations which the Third Estate had a mind to ^vent, to think it
necessary to prevent the Condemnation ^he Doctrine which authorizes them.
Therefore the Cler^ obtained of the King under pretense to avoid disorder and
^susion, to refer the said Dispute to himself and his Council. (...) whereas
the said removal only suspended the question, ^n which the Third Estate seemed
resolved to press the King The Court silences the Third Estate.
(...) give his judgment, they thought fit to silence them quite ^n that
Article. They were commanded to put that Article ^te out of their Cahier, where
they designed to put it at (...) head of all the rest. Thus the Queen
sacrificed the Inter^ of the King her Son to her particular ambition; and hin^d
him from improving the greatest example of fidelity ^t Subjects can give to
their Prince.

The Clergy nevertheless in order to acknowledge that Illusive Decree of the
Clergy.
^mplaisance, and to show that they were not Enemies to (...) safety of Kings,
put an illusive proposition in lieu of the ^icle of the Third Estate, of
causing the Doctrine of the ^uncil of Constancia upon that matter to be
published: a ^ctrine which maintaining the interest of Crowned Heads (...)
appearence, submits them nevertheless to the Censure of (...) Popes; and
exempts them no longer from the Rebellion (...) attempt of their Subjects than
while the Popes maintain (...) favor them. In effect the Council only condems
this proposition: All Tyrants may and ought Lawfully and Merit^ously to be
killed, by any of their Vassals or Subjects, even by secret Machinations, and
by Artful Flatteries, notwithstandin^ any Oath whatever taken to them, or any
treaty they ha^ made with them, without staying for the sentence or Order (...)
any Judge whatever. Without minding the other equivo^ Terms in which the said
Article is drawn, it is evident (...) least in consequence of that last Clause,
Without staying (...) the sentence or order of any Judge whatever, that it
leaves (...) Princes exposs'd to assassinations and perfidiousnesses, again
whom Conspiracies are made after the Sentence or Order of certain Judges, that
is, after the ordinance of a^ Council or Pope: since that, according to the
Doctrine^ Cardinal Du Perron, there is no Jurisdiction but that which can stand
up against Kings. Now this was properly what (...) Third Estate would prevent;
in order not to expose Temporal power to the discretion of a See, which has
only sounded its Grandeur upon the ruin of Princes. So that by (...) shameful
and perfidious illusion, the Clergy substituted instead of the remedy which the
Third Estate and the King good Subjects word oppose in favor of Kings again^
the enterprises of the Popes, that very evil which (...) Third Estate and the
said good Subjects endeavored ther^ to remedy.

But the Clergy did not think they had carried the Prevarication far enough by
that Artifice. After have And their shameful Prevarications.
proposed to the King the Publication of that Decree, the beghought themselves;
and in order to render the Lives (...) Soveraignity of Kings more dependant of
the Popes, the only thought fit to order, that his Holiness should be intre^ed
to Confirm that Decree, and to order the Publication^ it. This way of
proceeding was pretty conformable to wh^ Cardinal Du Perron had done in other
occasions. In cert^ public disputes in which he had assisted, he had conclude
after a pompous displaying of false Erudition, that one mig^ maintain the said
matter pro and con with a safe Conscience (...) and that all the Doctrine of
the Independency of Kings ^ ^ly Problematical. In the mean time all Persons of
Honor trembled to think that in order to secure the Life and ^own of Kings,
there was, as they said, a necessity to ob^n a Pareatis of the Pope. The Clergy
pretended in vain ^at in sending the thing to the Roman See, the said Decree
^uld become more Universal, and more Authentic: That (...) the King caused it
to be published, it would only serve (...) France; whereas if it were done by
the Pope, the Doctrine (...) the Decree would become that of all the Catholic
part (...) Christendom. The Answer to it was that the said Decree ^ng only an
Illusion, the Publication thereof would only ^ve to render the Illusion more
general: and that incase it ^re of any Virtue, it mattered but little what
strangers ^ght think of the Kings of France, provided all the French ^de it a
point of Honor and of Conscience, to believe that ^ir Kings were only
responceable for their Crowns and ^tions to God.

The Clergy did not forget in that affair to gain the Prince Inequality of the
Prince of Conde.
(...) Conde on their side, who at first seconded the Third Estate. ^ey used
the same reasons to blind him, as had prevailed ^th others. They told him that
the Reformed employed (...) to make a Doctrine pass unawares to him which came
^m them; and which tended secretly to ruin the Catholic ^ligion. The Prince's
proceeding in this matter proved ^qual* and did not answer the hopes people had
of him. ^e advice he gave in the Council upon that Subject is diffe^tly
related. It is true that he took the thing upon a high^tone, after the
Dissolution of the Estates: but he succeed^ no better in it, since he obtained
nothing but words. In (...) mean time the Clergy having obtained all they
desired, (...) having made the Doctrine of the Council of Constantia
Preseverence of the Clergy in that Doctrine.
^s for the Faith of the State, persever'd in that opinion hear (...) years:
and some years before they recanted it, those that ^mpos'd their Memoirs by
their order, not foreseeing that (...) would be condemned within five or six
years time, In^ted the Cardinals Speech, and the Articles of that As^bly in
them. This may serve to prove that the Faith of the Clergy of France depends on
the strongest; That when the Government is weak, and involved in troubles, they
Sacrifice the Interests of the Crown without hesitation to the Roman See; and
that when there is more profit to be expected from Servitude in devoting it to
Temporal Powers, they likewise Sacrifice the pretended privileges of the said
See to the Grandeur of Kings.

During the Session of the Estates, there broke out a Sedition Sedition at
Milhau.
at Milhau, on Christmas Eve, in which Town the Reformed were the strongest:
and if we may credit the Complains the Bishop of Rhodes made about it in the
Chamber of the Clergy, the Catholics and particularly the Priests, suffered
very much by it: The Reformed took up Arms, routed the Ecclesiastics, broke
the Crucifixes, and the Crosses; Tore the Ornaments; broke down the Altars,
profaned the Relics; took the Pix out of the Tabernacle; flung down the
Consecrated Hosts, and trampled them under their seet. Then had already been
such another Sedition in the same place, under the preceding Reign, against
which the Clergy had complained: but either for want of proofs, or for other
reasons, the prosecution of it was laid aside. It was renewed upon this new
incident, of which the Circumstances were aggravated, in order to have a better
reason to renew the first complaints. The Clergy resolved to speak to the King
about it, and invited the two other Chambers to join their Deputies to theirs,
which they promised to do. It was performed two days before the dissolution of
the Estates by the Archbishop of Lions, who made a long discourse to the
Queen, in the King's absence, upon the Restoration af the Roman Religion in
Bearn; upon the reunion of Navar to the Crown; and upon the Sedition of
Milhau. The Queen told him that she had already Nominated Commissioners to
inspect those matters.

On the 23d. of February the Bishop of Lucon, since Cardinal The Bishop of
Lucons Speech.
of Richelieu, presented the Petition or Address.
Cahier of the Clergy to the King. His discourse was not Eloquent, tho he
pretended to Eloquence even to his dying day: but it was very violent against
the Reformed, accusing them of polluting holy ^aces by their profane Burials;
of keeping Churches in which the Catholic Service could not be performed, ^d
of enjoying Ecclesiastical Estates. He also complained (...) the excesses
committed at Milhau, and desired that it ^ight be revenged: but for fear of
alarming the Reformed, (...) declared that he only meant upon such as were
guil^, and that as for the rest the Clergy thought no farther on ^^em than to
desire their Conversion, and to promote it by ^^eir Example, their
Instructions, and their Prayers. The ^^mainder of his Speech only related to
the Grandeur of ^^e Clergy, which he represented as an affair of as great
^^nsequence as if the welfare of the State had depended ^^on it.
Notwithstanding those earnest entreaties about ^^e affair of Milhau, and the
Kings Answer, which is said (...) be, That he thought himself as much obliged
to re^^nge the Stabbing of his God, as the Parricide of his Fa^^er: the Clergy
did not obtain the Vengeance they de^. The reason of it is that the Reformed
likewise brought ^complaint to Court of a greater violence committed ^^ainst
them in those very parts, soon after the sedition at ^^ilhau. They had built a
Temple at Belestat, where they had Sedition of Belestat.
^right to perform the exercise of their Religion by the ^icts. The Catholics
pulled it down, and not being con^^ted with that, they acted great Violences
against the ^^form'd that lived there, who were Plundered, Beaten, ^ounded, and
very Barbarously used. It looked as if the ^^tholicks had done this upon the
account of Reprisals, and (...) be revenged of the violences that had been
committed (...) Milhau, by those of Bellestat. The King receiving the
^^mplaints of both sides much about the same time, it was ^^fficult to do
Justice to the one, without doing it also to ^^e other. So that the best
expedient the Court could ^^ink on, to avoid greater inconveniences, was to
satisfy ^^e Parties with general promises, and to refer them to ^^dges that
might take a particular cognizance of their ^^mplaints. It remained in
agitation till toward the latter ^^d of the year.

In the mean time the Clergy had composed their Ca^ which contained upwards of
300 Articles, among which thos^ that did not relate to their own Grandeur,
tended only ^^ Cah er of the Clergy.
preserve to the Queen the Authority of the Government which she was very
jealous of; or to betray the interes^ of the State, and to incroach upon the
Edicts, under whi^^ the Reformed were maintained. Such were upwards of 6;
Articles, which directly or indirectly tended to disturb the^ in the possession
of their Liberties. To that end they desired the Restoration of the Roman
Religion in all pla^^ under the King's dominion; particularly in Bearn, and
into all the Places newly reunited to the Crown: The Condemnation of Books and
Discourses that were injurio^^ to the Pope, lately Printed: The Revocation of
Pensio^ given upon Benifices to persons that were not qualifie^ for them;
specifying among the reasons of Incapacity the Pretended Reformed Religion:
Prohibitions to the Parliamen^ Leave, Permission.
to meddle with the observation of Festivals: The Exemptio^ of Imprisonment for
Ecclesiastics; and leave for Bishops ^^ condemn to the Gally's: Leave to apply
themselves to the next Judge Royal for the execution of Ecclesiastical
Sentences, incase the ordinary Judge were of the Pretende^ Religion: a great
extention of the Rights of Tith^^ Besides this there were complaints that the
Kings Office^ or those of the Pretended Religion hindered the Bishops from
rebuilding their Churches and their Houses. Other Articles desired that such
Monks as should be met o^^ of their Habit and Convent without Letters of
Obe^^ence, should be chastis'd as Apostates; which related directly to the
Monks that embraced the Reformed Religion: That the Jesuits might be reunited
to the University (...) Paris; That the King would be pleased to judge their
Ca^ses himself, and to take them under his protection; That the Printers might
be reduced to a certain number in every City; and that they should print no
Books without the Diocesian's Liscence; That all Books from abroad should be
prohibited unless they had the same approbation; Th^^ the Marriages with Spain
might be accomplished; that the King should take back again the Towns of
^^stage given by the Treaty of Ste Menehould; That ^^e Principality of Bearn,
and the rest of the Kingdom of ^var should be reunited to the Crown; That all
the ^^urch Lands there should be restored to the Ecclesiastics, ^thout
allowing them to be employed for the use of the ^^form'd, which was styled a
profane use; That a Party ^^amber should be established at Pau; That the
Reformed ^^dges there should not be allowed to take Cognizance (...)
Ecclesiastical Causes; That Militrary Offices, and such (...) related to
Justice should be given to Catholics; That (...) Edict of Settlement should be
made between the Catho^ks and the Reformed; That the Garrisons should be re^v'd
out of such Towns as were not seated on the ^ntiers. That Article did not
relate to the Places of Sure^; which another spoke of directly, and desn'd the
King (...) take them again: but this has contributed considerably (...) enslave
the Kingdom; by reason that it served for an ^^erture to disarm all those that
were able to desend ^ir Liberty. The next desired the Prohibition of all sor^gn
Correspondencies, Continuation of the Cahier.


Others proposed the restoring to the Ecclesiastics their ^uses and Castles
within the space of three Months: (...) oblige those that were ordered to prove
their being ^^form'd, meaning the Catholics that embraced the Re^^^m'd
Religion to make their Declaration before the ^ge Royal, six Months before
their being allowed to love their Causes to the Chambers of the Edict. That ^e
was sufficient to ruin them in the Parliaments. Others ^ir'd that all the
Causes in which Ecclesiastics were ^cern'd might be removed before the
Parliaments, Presidials, ^d other Catholic Judges: and that the Chambers
should (...) be allowd' to receive their Appeals. Articles proposed a^^ect
^^a^nst the Reformed.


Thirty two others followed these, which were di^tly against the Reformed. The
first of them was to ^press the exercise of their Religion; That in the mean
time they should be reduced to the Concessions of the late King; and that all
they had obtained during the minority should be revoked. The others imported
that they should restore the Churches to the Catholics: That they should not be
allowed to Bury their Dead in the ancient Churchyards, or in the Churches, and
that the Catholics should be allowed to oppose it by force of Arms: That they
should be forced to restore the Churchyards they had shared with the
Catholics; That they should be forbidden to write against the Sacraments of
the Roman Church, and against the Authority of the Pope, on pa^ of rigorous
punishments; That the Ministers should n^ be allowed to go into the Hospitals,
even to comfort the Sick; That Masters should be obliged to suffer their
Servants to perform the rites of their Religion, and to allow the Curates to
visit them when sick; That the exercise of the P. R. R. should be prohibitted
in Lands that were held in homage of the Church; That the Catholics tur^
Protestants should not enjoy the exemption of contributing toward the building
of Churches, etc. Until a year a^ their signification of their profession in
the Register Office* That their Temples should be a thousand Steps dis^ from
the Churches at least; That the Patronages of the Reformed should be
transferred to their nearest Catholi^ Relations, or in default of any to the
Ordinary; That (...) prohibition should be made on pain of corporal
punishments, to impose upon the Catholics the Sums raised (...) those of the
pretended Religion; That the Reformed Lord should not be allowed to have
Sermons in any of the^ Houses, but that in which they made their principal
abode* nor to make use of the Kings Consession for the others* That an Order
should be made for the Kings Officers to be admitted in the Synods: That the
Briefs should be recalled which granted to the Reformed Benifices,
Stewardships, or Pensions out of Ecclesiastical Estates; That Ecclesiastics
whether Secular or Regular might be challenged by the Bishops, after their
having* embraced the Reformed Religion, though no Information was made be^e
their Change; That the manner of electing the Judg^ that were to serve in the
Chambers, being prejudicial (...) the State and to the Church, the King would
be plea^ to revoke it, and to cause them to be chosen accord^ to the Order of
the Register; That the Chambers ^uld not be allowed to take Cognizance of any
Eccle^tical affairs; and that whatever state a Cause were (...) even after the
conclusion of the Process, an Ecclesi^ck Interposing the whole should be
removed to the ^liaments; That the Reformed of Calais should not be ^w'd to
Preach in Dutch, or in any other Language (...) French; That the Temple built
near Bourg in Bresse, (...) the convenience of Boesse Pardaillan who had been
^ernour of it, should be taken from the Reformed; ^t at Pont de Ves^e, the
Temple being only divided (...) the Church by a Wall, the Reformed should be
^g'd to provide another place; That Fathers or Guar^s hindering their Children
or Pupils from turning ^holicks, the Attorneys General should be ordered to
^ecute them for it; That the Children of a Catholic ^er, bred Catholics,
should remain so after his ^th, though their Mother was Reformed; That the
^eutenants General, and other Judges of that Religion * Chief Justices.
(...) Bayliwicks, should not be allowed to take Cognizance ^he Possessory of
Benefices, or other Beneficial matters; ^t the Colleges, and Semminaries that
had been found^y the Reformed at Charenton, at Saumur, at Clermont ^oivoisis
and in several other Places should be taken (...) them; That they should not be
allowed to have ^igners for their Doctors, Rectors, and Tutors; and (...) no
Foreigners should be allowed to teach any Do^e but that of the Catholic Church
within the King^.

An Article, which followed them, imported that all the Provinces and
Governments had charged the Instructions (...) Sequel of the said Articles.
their Deputies with Complaints against the enterprises (...) the Reformed; and
the next desired they should not be allowed to perform the exercise of their
Religion, not (...) keep Schools in Towns, nor in the Subburbs of Episcopal
Cities: accusing the Commissioners that were sent (...) the Provinces in 1611,
of having favored the Reform*^ beyond reason, upon that Subject, under
pretense of p^ting the Edict of 1577 in Execution. In which there (...) a
manifest fraud in the Clergy, which did not mention t^ Edict of Nantes here; as
if the Commissioners of 16^ had not been the Executors of it; or that the said
Ed^ had not confirmed that of 1577, in the Article of t^ first places allowed
in Bayliwicks. Nothing had be^ done beyond reason in delivering to the Reformed
Pla^ for the exercise of their Religion which had been promised to them by two
solemn Edicts: And the Clergy, (...) whom Henry the 4th had granted as a
favor, that Episcopal Cities should be exempted from being given as Places in
which the Reformed were allowed to perform the public exercise of their
Religion.
Second places of Bayliwicks, should not have dissembl^ that the said
exception, made in their favor for the second did confirm the General Law for
the first. The next desired that the King should not grant Ecclesiastical Ca^
or Towns for the future for places of Hostage; and t^ the Government of Mas
d'Agenois should be taken fr^ Calonges, by reason that the Clergy pretended
that (...) Reformed had neither the exercise of their Religion allowed there,
nor a Garrison before the year 1600. In the very next the Clergy was not
ashamed to desire contra^ to a Law which Christianity and humanity have
established that the Judges of the Party-Chambers might not be allowed (...)
pass in Mitiorem, incase they were divided in their op^ons in Criminal Cases,
under pretense that that Le^ prevented the punishent of Criminals. They desired
t^ in such a Case the Cause might be removed to the other Party Chambers, or to
the Chambers of* the Edict. ^ that when the accused had reason to expect
according to that ^quitable custom, to see an end put to their Trial by some
moderate Punishment, the Clergy thought fit to make them dance through all the
Jurisdictions of the Kingdom, and to keep them ^lways in dread, and in Fetters,
until that after having passed through all of them, they should fall at last
into the hands of a Chamber in which they might not find a sufficient number of
^dges to save them from Perishing. This may serve to judge ^f the Charity the
Roman Clergy was capable of; since they would not have it in the power of
Judges of their own Religion to spare humane Blood; and to reverse a sentence,
in ca^s in which Custom does authorize it, which ordained the spil^ng of it.
They complained in the next place of the demo^shing of Ecclesiastical places,
pretended to be done by the Reformed since the peace granted by the Edict of
Nantes: The ^shest example they could allege of it, was a thing which had ^een
done above 15 years ago.

They concluded all this, beseeching his Majesty to cause, what Conclusion of
the C^her.
^e should be pleased to grant the Clergy to be Registered and ^violably
observed: So that the Reformed would not have ^een able to subsist long if the
Clergy had obtained their de^ands. Moreover in a particular * Cahier of
regulations which ^ey called Spiritual, and which they humbly begged his Maje^y
to Authorize, they desired that the right of Burial in Church^s, and in
Churchyards should be denied to the Reformed, and (...) such as should be
killed in a Duel, dying without Confession, whatever Quality they were of. This
Article also shows ^he nature of their Charity to the Reformed, which they
compared in this place not only to persons they esteemed to be dam^ed without
redemption: but to persons condemned by all the ^aws, whose fury was the object
of public detestation. It (...) also observable that in all those Articles, in
which they spoke ^f the Religion of the Reformed they Transposed the word
Pretended, to render the signification of it the more Odious: cal^ng it always
Pretendue Religion Reformee, instead of Religion ^retendue Reformee, or barely
the Pretended Religion.

The End of the Third Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of Nantes. VOL. II. BOOK IV.
A Summary of the Contents of the Fourth Book.
Proposition disliked by the Nobility. Declaration of the King, which does not
cure the Evil. New Intrigues, in which the People are drawn, the Parliament and
the Reformed, who solicit to obtain another place instead of Grenoble; and
obtain Gergeau; which does not please them, and they desire Grenoble again; to
which the Court consents. Assembly of the Clergy. Settlement for the Pensions
of Converted Ministers. Conduct of the Court, and of the Prince of Conde, who
invites the Assembly of Grenoble to join with him. Diversity of opinions. The
King's Progress. The General Assembly sends Deputies to him. Those Deputies are
adjourned to Poitiers. The Queen waves the Princes propositions, and performs
her Progress without hindrance. Particular Cahier of the Assembly. General
Cahier. Answers which are not satisfactory. The Deputies are amused, they
Communicate their fears to the Assembly. Lesdiguieres keeps them in awe. They
remove to Nimes, inspight of him; and excuse themselves at Court, which does
not approve it very well. They are jealous of the Lords. Lesdigueres and
Chatillon are engaged in the Interest of the Court. The Duke of Candale
embraces the Reformed Religion. The Reformed are hated by the Favorites. The
Duke d' Epernon hates them mortally. Treaty of Union between the Assembly and
the Prince of Conde, under diverse reservations: which revives the Princes
Party. New Declaration which confirm the Edicts after an argumented Preface.
Effect of the Declaration. The Reformed are disarmed ^^ Bourdeaux. The
Consistory discontinues the exercise of their Religion. Two Advocates acquaint
the Parliament with it, which orders the usual Assemblies to be continued. The
Ministers withdraw. The Consistory cites the Advocates after the Conclusion of
the Peace: who appeal to the Parliament. The Consistory suspends them publicly
from the Communion Severe Decree. Passion of the Advocate General. Facts
disowned by the Ministers. Absurdities, and ridiculous pretention. Proceedings
against the Ministers. Sequel of the ill will of the Parliament. False Decree
of Inrollment of a Declaration against the Prince of Conde. Propositions of
Peace. Deputies and Lettes, from the Assembly of Nimes. The Lower Languedoc
remains peaceable. The King of England offers to be Mediator of the Peace,
which the Council of France refuses. Conferrence and Peace of Loudun.
Translation of the General Assembly ^^ Rochel, from whence they send Deputies
to Loudun. Unjust proceedings of the Court. The Assembly is almost forced to
accept a Peace. Edict of Blois. Private Articles. Sequel. Inrollment and
modification of the Edict.

Have enlarged upon the preceding Articles presented by the Clergy by reason
that they may be looked upon as the Plan or Scheme of the Persecution the
Reformed Propositions disliked by the Nobility.
have undergone from that time, until our days. As the ^^^^gy thereby showed
how little they were inclined to Peace (...) Equity, the Nobility which
followed their inspirations (...) movements, did not appear better disposed.
They (...) during the Session of the Estates, to Petition the (...) to maintain
the Catholic Religion, according to the (...) he had taken about it at his
Coronation. The Re^^^^'d who were present took that proposition to be made
^^^^nst them, and were persuaded that the Nobility aimed (...) Religion. And
indeed those that were acquain^^^ with the nature of that Oath, which I have
set down in ^^^^her place can think no otherwise; since that the King ^^^^ising
thereby utterly to destroy all Heretics declared (...) so by the Church, the
Application of it fell naturally (...) the Reformed, who are looked upon as
such by the ^^^^olicks. Therefore the said proposition was warmly ^^^^ed,
between the Reformed Gentlemen who were pre^^^^ and the promoters of it: in so
much that they were (...) to proceed to great extremities. The King was
ac^^^^nted with it, and he hindered it from going any further (...) promises:
and whereas peoples minds were strang^^^^'d by that dispute, he issued out a
new Declaration on 12th of March, which Confirmed all the Edicts.

(...) began with great Elogies of the Queen's conduct du^^^^ Declaration of
the King.
the Regency, and of the care she had taken to con^^^^ the Edicts, in imitation
of the late King, and to reme^^ ^he infractions of it, as soon as she was
acquainted with (...): which the King looked upon as the true Cause, which
(...) to the assistance of God had maintained his Subjects (...) the bounds of
their Allegiance to him, and in ami^^ among themselves. After which the King
expressed that (...) good effect of the Queens Prudence had obliged him, after
the Declaration of his Majesty, to entreat her to continue to assist him with
her Council, with the same authority as if the Administration of the Kingdom
were still in (...) hands. That by her advice he had issued out another
Declaration, of the same substance with that she had publish^ and caused to be
verified at the beginning of her Rege^ to signify that it was her earnest
desire to make his Subje^ live in Peace and friendship, and to observe the Edi^
Inviolably. In the next place he declared that he was so^ for what had happened
in the Estates, upon the proposi^ of the Nobility; and in order to satisfy the
Reformed, (...) rejected it at first, as little necessary, or rather absolut^
useless, since he was resolved to profess the Catholic Religion to his dying
Day: but after that he excused it, proceeding from the Zeal of the Nobility
toward the preservation of the Roman Religion, without a design of g^ing
offense to any body: whereupon he said that (...) Catholic Nobility had
declared it to him first separat^ and then altogether: That they had protested
to him (...) they were very desirous of the observation of the P^ established
by the Edicts: That they had entreated him to (...) the reunion of his
Subjects to the Providence of God, (...) the usual means of the Church; being
but too much ^*swaded by experience, that violent Remedies had ^*serv'd to
increase the number of those that had left (...) Church, instead of teaching
them the way to return to (...) Therefore in order to remove the jealousies of
the Refo^ who avoided factions and ill designs, and all pretense of
^*sturbances from those that endeavored to promote (...) The King confirmed
anew all the Edicts, Declarations ^*vate Articles, Settlements, and other
Letters and Decr^ given in favor of the Reformed, both by himself and (...)
Late King, upon the Interpretation and Execution of (...) Edict of Nantes; and
ordered the same to be observed ^*olably.

This Declaraton which remained upwards of (...) Which does not Cure the Evil.
Weeks before it was verified in the Parliament of ^ not cure the Evil the
aforesaid Contestaion had cre^. It hardly served to Pallitate it: And indeed it
was very likely that it should satisfy any body, considering it was Penned. It
was natural to suspect that a Constant Law could not be the Sequel of a Preface
without ^h. That Imitation of Henry the 4th's Prudence it In^ so much upon, had
never appeared in the Queen's ^duct. On the contrary she had abandoned all the
late ^s projects; alterd, confounded, and destroyed all ^he had done for the
Peace and grandeur of the King^; and concluded the Alliance with Spain, for
which ^ad expressed an Invincible Aversion to his dying day. affectation of
always speaking of the Imitation of a Prince whose Maxims had been overthrown,
offended those (...) grieved to see how much the Regency had disfigured
Government. It is odious to boast of a thing the con^ of which is notoriously
known by every body: and (...) protestations of performing a Duty which one
(...) from by a Thousand Actions, seldom persuade a (...) which Effects
contradict. Moreover every body too sencible how many Cabals and Factions had
torn Kingdom during the Minority to relish the praises that (...) given to the
Queen of having maintained it in Peace. ^es the Mystery of the Court appeared
too openly in ^d Declaration; in which the Regency was continued ^g the
Majority to the same Person, who upon the ^nt of the Majority should have
renounced it: and the contents found a fair pretense to murmur, in that a who
was Major, sound in body and mind, remained under the directions of others;
only alleging the ^nce of his Majority, to secure his Mothers authority; ^nly
made us of the Privilege of the Age he had (...) to put himself under the Yoke
of a second Guar^hip. The King was the only loser by the Declation ^s Majority,
and by the Session of the Estates. The (...) remained Regent under another
Name. Foreigners ^out merit whom he had advanced, to the Exclusion of the
Native French, and even of the Princes, exerted the Authority in the King's
name, by the means of (...) Princess whose mind and heart they governed. The
^form'd were sensible of the Equivocation of those wo^ by the means that are
usual in the Church, by reason that (...) had learned at their Cost by a dismal
experience, (...) Massacres and disingenuity are means much more in (...) in
the Roman Church for the Conversion of pretended ^ticks, than Sermons and good
example. So that peop^ minds being prepared by those Reflections, easily took^
again at the first occasion that offered it self.

The Prince of Conde who expected to raise his Autho^ New intrigues
by the means of the Estates, on the contrary lost the^ he had left by the
prevarication of the Clergy, and of t^ Adherents; and the Queen caught him in
the same snare^ had set out for her. She remained in possession the Government
in spite of him; she got the approb^ of the Marriages she had concluded; she
obliged the P^ to Surrender the Town of Amboise to her, which she had ^ven him
for his security at the Treaty of Ste. Menchould^ in order to tire the Patience
of the French to the utmost made Conchini a Marshal of France. The Marshal de
B^lon had served her usefully in that Conjuncture of A^ in hopes that his
Credit and Capacity, which appeared that occasion, would oblige that Princess
to give him ag^er share in her favor. But she was unwilling to put (...) self
into the hands of a man of his Capacity; and (...) who liked him as a
Counselor, would neither allow^ to be his Master, nor his Competitor.
Therefore the (...) shall finding that no more notice was taken of him than^
fore, resolved to be revenged, and renewed Intrigues (...) finally ruined the
Queen's Affairs: but which had the (...) fortune at the same time to occasion
the decay of (...) Reformed Religion, and the Slavery of France. The P^ of
Conde being very much disatisfi'd with the Estates, (...) yet more with the
Queen, willingly gave ear to new pro^sitions and he judged that things would be
disposed to fa^ur new designs.

It was necessary for him to set three wheels a going to To which they engage
the People.
^ve more success in his present discontents than he had (...) in the
preceding, which had only served to discover his ^eakness. There was a
necessity to get the People, the Par^ment of Paris and the Reformed of his
fide. The People ^as sufficiently disposed to join with the Malcontents, up^
the account of their natural aversion to Foreigners. It (...) easy to persaude
them that Foreigners have less regard (...) them than those that are born and
bred in the same ^ountry with them: and they excuse the excesses which am^tion
and avarice make their own Countrymen Commit, ^th more ease, than the least
attempts of a Foreigner. ^oreover the Deputies of the Provinces had received ^t
little satisfaction from the Court. The King had re^s'd to examine the Petition
and Addresses.
Cahiers of the Estates before their ^ssolution: a Maxim of great use to wave
the Complaints (...) the People, not to hear them, while they are in a Ca^city
to solicit answers to them. The Court took but very ^tle notice of those
Cahiers, after the departure of the De^ties. But the Clergy, which had served
the Queen according to her mind, obtained almost whatever they designed. ^he
Deputies of the other Orders obtained nothing but ^ain, general promises, of
which they were sensible that ^ey should never see the effects; and that the
People ^ould be obliged to seek out other remedies to redress ^eir Grievances.

The Prince had good Friends in the Parliament, which The Parliament.
^ere disatisfied; and thought themselves bound in Duty ^d Honor, to redress
by their Authority the Affairs which ^ere ruined by the false Policy of the
Court, But that ^rhaps would not have produced great effects, had not ^e Court
given an Overture to it, by an excess of severity. ^he Parliament seeing how
the Intentions of the well mean^g part of the Estates were evaded, gave a
Decree toward the end of March, which invited the Princes, the ^eers and
Officers of the Crown that sit among them, to Assemble with them to remedy the
disorders of the State The Court was very much alarmed, and offended at the
Boldness. They sent for the Parliament to have an account of their enterprise,
reversed their Decree, and forbad the execution of it. But that August Court
was no wise disheartened; and after several deliberations they made very grave
Remonstrances to the King, and such a^ became a Senate that loved the Glory and
Peace of the State* They spoke boldly upon all things that deserved to be
observed in the present Conjuncture: and as they insiste^ vigorously upon the
Article of the Third Estate, which the Court had rejected, they did the same
upon whatever related to the advantage of the people. All their discourse in ^
word tended to inspirethe King with maxims of an equitable Government. I should
swerve from my subject, in relating (...) the Articles of their Remonstrances.
Therefore I shall only observe that among 29 or 30 others, there was one which
related to the Edicts, and which desired the King to preserve t^ Splendour and
Dignity of the Roman Religion, witho^ swerving from the Edicts of Pacification.
So that (...) Parliament, which had formerly made so much dificul^ to pass the
Edict, had finally found by experience the ^^cessity of its observation. The
King received those ^^monstrances ill, either because they were too just to
please ^^ Court, in which the people only thought of making their ^tune at any
rate; or because they were too free to ple^ such as only aimed to oppress
Liberty; or finally because (...) was thought necessary for the King's honor,
who (...) often declared that he would not allow any to be made (...) him The
Queen looked upon them as Invectives ag^ her Regency; The Marshal d'Ancre as an
affront offered (...) those that envied him; The President Jeanin, as a repro^
of the discipation of the Finances, which were not impro^ in his hands. The
Dukes d'Guise and de Epernon, who w^ disatisfied with the-Parliament, offered
their Services to (...) King against that venerable Senate. So that all things
seem^ to conspire to mortify that Illustrious Body. The next day ^ Decree was
given in the Council, in the King's Na^^ which ordered the Decree of the
Parliament to be ^ ^ated, as well as their Remonstrances; That the Decree ^ould
be taken out of the Registers, and that of the Council ^t in the room of it:
all this was preceded by very abusive ^pressions, stiling the behavour of the
Parliament unlawful; which was a treatment they were little used to. Whitsun^de
salling out while the Parliament was deliberating upon affair, and afterward
the King's Progress toward Pyrenees, spended Peoples minds, and made them
forget the thing for while: but that injury done to the most venerable Body of
^e Kingdom, strengthened the Princes Party with a specious ^etence of
complaint, and increased it by a great number (...) Malcontents.

The Marshal de Bouillon labored on the other hand, to And the Reformed.
^evail with the Reformed by his Intrigues to join with the ^ince of Conde- He
flattered Rouvray who was one of their ^st heads, and who was one of the
Deputies General, with ^e hopes of being sent Ambassador to the United
Provinces; ^es Bordes Mercier, who had been Deputy General with the ^omise of a
Counsellor's Place in the Parliament; Berteville, ^ith the assurance of the
General Deputaion, which he had ^ng aspired to. He blinded all those that
hearkened to him, ^ith the expectation of a great Reformation in the Government,
which would secure the Edicts against the attempts of ^pain and Italy; revenge
the King's Death, recover the ho^our of the Monarchy against the
prevarications, of the Clergy; amend the lavishness of the Finances, and
deprive the ^oreigners who were universally hated of their odious authority.
But his strongest argument to prevail with the majority of the Reformed, was
the concequences of the Alliance with Spain; and to frighten them with the
secret Articles that were agreed upon. Moreover he writ to the Court to ^how
among other things the Reasons they had to dread the ^ffect of those Marriages.
Jeanin made an Answer to him upon that Article which might have satisfied the
most difficult, if he could have persuaded that there was any since^erity, in
the promises and words of the Court. The Laws, said he, established in France
to live in Peace, which have been observed so long already; will make us look
with horror on any Couneils that might tend to disturb it. Therefore unless
some wicked and ill advised Subjects occasion a breach, the Peace and
Tranquillity established by the Edicts will last for ever. That was very fine,
if the Reformed could have believed it true. But experience made them sensible
that there was no trust to be given to promises: and that while they were
attacked almost publicly by a thousand Wiles, it would have been ridiculous to
imagine people did not laugh at them, when they preached such unlikely things
to them. So that the Marshal easily found ^e disposed to believe that those
discourses were no oracles; or that Jeanin did not hold the Maxims of the Court

During those Transactions the Reformed continued their solicitations, Why
Solicet to ^ain another pla^^ instead of Grenoble.
to have another place granted them instead of Grenoble, where they were
allowed to hold a General Assembly. While they endeavored to obtain another
place, for sear of not being free there, the behavior of Lesdiguieres gave
them a new pretense to refuse it. The Husband of Mary Vignon, whom he had kept
scandalously along while and whom he had made Marchioness de Treffort, was
kill^ in such a manner as persuaded every body that Lesdiguieres was the author
or accomplice of his Death. That new scandal created a horror in the Reformed,
who could not resolve to put under the Authority and in the Power of a man
capable of such actions, a great number of their most confiderable Members; who
should be obliged to pay a thousand respects to a man who was suspected to be
guilty of so odious a Crime: They were afraid, with reason, that their Enemies
would take an occasion from thence to accuse their Religion of being too
indulgent and toremiss in their Morals And obtain Gergeau.
The Court being willing to gratify them in that point, consented at last that
they should hold the Assembly at Gerge^, where another had been held in the
late King's Reign. This place pleased them no better than the first. Their
pretense was that the preceding Assembly had been inconvenienc'd there for want
of Lodging: but the true reason was that theey thought that place too near
Paris; and that they were sensible that the Court had pitch`d upon it to keep
the Assembly in Awe.

The Deputies General made new Petitions to obtain a ^re convenient place: and
whereas the Court refused to Which they are not satisfied with.
^mply it^ occasioned diverse imovemerts in the Provinces, (...) which some
proposed to take a more convenient place, without relying on the Courtesy of
the Court to no purpose. They also proposed a meeting at Montauban, there to
agree ^out a place in which the Assembly might neither want Liber^ nor
Convenience. In the interim some extraordinary affairs ^ling out, which obliged
Lesdiguieres to make a Journey (...) Court; and they expecting to be freer in
his absence, which 'twas thought would be long enough to afford the As^mbly
time to form their resolutions, they thought fit to ^sire Grenoble again, and
to declare publicly that they ^ould make use of the Brief they had obtained
the preced^g year. This alteration at first created jealousies in the And
desire Grenoble again.
^ourt, who could not imagine it to be done without Lesdiguieres having given
the Reformed some secret assurances of not ^posing them. He had shown by the
manner of his assist^g the Duke of Savoy, against whom the King of Spain made
^ar, that he stood upon his honor some times. The Queen ^d engaged that Prince
in that War, and had promised by ^esdiguieres to assist him. But after the
conclusion of the ^arriages, she refused to execute that Treaty; by reason ^at
she was willing in order toplease the King of Spain to ^rce the Duke of Savoy
to makea Peace. However Lesdiguieres ^ssisted him, notwithstanding the
reiterated orders he re^iv'd not to do it, and whereas he could not do it in
the ^ing's name who disowned, it he did it in his own. The example seemed to
show, that tho he was devoted to the Court, he knew nevertheless how to disobey
when he pleased. ut after that bold action, he made his peace so soon and with
so much ease, that it looked as if the Court had con^ived at it underhand. As
for the suspicion the Court had of his being engaged secretly with the rest of
the Reformed, ^e easily destroyed it. He assured the Court of his Services and
of his Fidelity; and sent Bellujon there on purpose with his Instructions, and
to receive their Orders. He had ^ong resisted the removal which the Reformed
did solicit, being as desirous to have one of their Assemblies in his po^er,
as they were fearful of trusting it into his hands. Therefore And the Court
Consents to it.
when he found that they desired it of their own accor^ he was one of the first
that took them at their word: a^ the Court being satisfied with him gave them a
new Bri^ which allowed the holding of the Assembly at Grenoble. B^ whereas
Lesdiguieres presence was more useful to the Co^ at Grenoble than elsewhere,
they put of his Journey to another time. The Reformed being deceived on that
side, h^ no pretense left to go from their word: The Deputies ^pair'd to
Grenoble toward the middle of Jully: and contra^ to all appearences, the
Prince of Conde's Intrigues prevail^ over the credit and cunning of
Lesdiguieres.

But during those Petitions of the Reformed, and the del^ Assembly of the
Clergy.
of the Court, the Clergy as I have already said, Assembly at Paris, for the
renewing of the Contracts they common make with the King once in Ten years. But
whereas they ^ver give, any thing without receiving, they did not fail (...)
advance their Enterprises against the Reformed and to purs^ the project of
their Ruin which they had formed in the (...) states. It was with that
Intention the Coadjutor of Roans man a Speech to the King on the 8th of August.
he represented t^ State of the Roman Religion in Bearn to be so dismal and
(...) deplorable, that for want of Priests the Catholics co^ not Christen
their Children there till they were 20 years (...) Age; and he represented as
one of the greatest misfortune that the Ministers were paid there with the
Revenues of the Church. He said moreover in order to make the Reformed more
odious, that the Roman Religion was favored mo^ by the Turks, than by the
Reformed of Bearn: and those (...) cities tho plainly disproved by the replys
of the Reformed, an^ by the knowledge of all People* were disperc'd and receiv^^
as undeniable Truths. He complained that the Abbey of (...) Anthony de Viennois
had been lately given to a young Secular, presented by an Heretic, and to move
the more p^ against that injustice, he said that miracles were perform^ about
the Tomb of the late Abbot. He also returned the King thanks about the
reception of the Council of Tr^ which he had promised: but he made a little too
much haste ^on that Article. It is true that the King had promised to ^blish
it, but it was prevented by the Troubles that began (...) break out: and
perhaps he was glad that one of the Ar^es of the Peace of Luudun, disingaged
his word, and hindered (...) from doing what the Kings his Predecessors had
constant^ refused to do. Before the end of the same month the Bishop (...)
Beauvais began the same Song over again; and made strange ^licitations about
the affair of Bearn, complaining that the ^^tholicks were deprived of the use
of the Sacraments both (...) their birth, and at their Death, for want of
Priests to (...) minister them. He was very pressing upon the affair of ^lha^
which happened the Winter before: and tho the Catholics had done as much at
Belestadt since, he desired that (...) compensation might be made of those two
affairs. Nevertheless, the reciprocal solicitations of the Catholics and
(...) the Reformed, did not permit those affairs to be seri^^sly dicuss'd.
Their complaints only produced a delegati^ of Judges who neither pleased the
one, nor the other; ^d whose judgment proved inefectual. The Peace of Lou^n
abolished the remembrance of those two affairs, and the ^e passed thus in
spite of the Clergy, for a compensation (...) the other.

In the same Assembly, the Clergy, who had no success in the ^nquest of
Ministers, drew an ample Regulation for the distribution of 30000 Livers which
they had designed for the Pensions of ^ose that should turn Catholics: and
being sincible that the number of those Proselites was as yet too small, to
employ that little ^m, they consented that until their zeal had made a^
greater progress they should give the remainder of the said Sum to others
besides Ministers, provided it were only given to persons of Me^t. It appears
by those Regulations, that the Clergy was disa^sfi'd even with those they had
corrupted, since they took so much ^re to hinder that Money from falling into
ill hands. But notwithstanding all that, they met with no success in their
^retended Conversions; and even after the affairs of the Reformed were ruined
they were forced to employ their Money to ^ther uses.

In the mean time the Court had no manner of regard (...) the People, and broke
their promises with as little rega^^ ^ur of the ^.
as if they had designed to make Malcontents. They re-e^blish'd La Paulette,
or the annual duty they had been obli^ to revoke, because it had been desired
with great Earnestre^ and the Queen went her self to the Bastille from whence
(...) took 800000 Crowns, which were remaining there of (...) fourteen Millons
in ready Money, which the Duke of ^ly had hoarded there by his good management.
So that it loo^ as if they had a mind to favor the designs of the Prince (...)
Conde, who was preparing to hinder the accomplishment (...) And of the Prince
of Conde
the Marriages with Spain. His Discontents had removed him (...) degrees from
the Court; and in that Retirement he flatt^ himself of being powerfully
assisted both at home and ab^ he was in hopes that the King of England and the
United Provinces, who could not be pleased at those Marriages, wo^ assist him
powerfully; and indeed he had received great promises of it. He expected that
the Forces which were be^ Useless, by the Peace of Savoy lately made, and
wereup^ the Frontiers of Germany, would assist him: and perhaps (...) would
have proved so, had he had Money to buy them. (...) every thing failed him; and
he found himself Engaged in a^ which he could never have got honorably out of,
had (...) the Reformed succor'd him at their own Cost. The Queen (...) secretly
prepared every thing for the accomplishing of her ^*signs, amused the Prince
with Negotiations: and Sent Vill^ several times to Coussi, to confer with him
there about (...) means of an Agreement. But during those Treatys they (...)
bauch'd his Creatures from him; either by persuading t^ that the Prince only
designed to make his own Peace, and (...) it was already far advanced, or
offering them more po^ and profitable advantages under her, than they could
exp^ under the Prince of Conde. Insomuch that many of them ^o^ Gratifications,
or were dazzled by Promises. They broke (...) the measures he took with
Stangers, and made all his de^miscary.

None but the Reformed were still able to do something for him; but they were
slow to declare themselves. Their Assembly The Prince of Conde invites the
Assembly of Grenoble to join with him.
had been opened at Grenoble on the 15th of July; and Lesdiguieres having
refused the Presidentship, which was offered to him by all the Deputies, they
had Elected De Blet, Deputy for the Nobility of the Province of Anjou for their
President; and Durand Minister of Paris, and Deputy for the Isle of France, for
his Associate; and Boisseuil and Maniald for Secretaries. The Prince of Conde
sent a Gentleman thither to invite them to join with him, in order to procure a
good Reformation of the State; in which he promised to make the Reformed find
all the Sureties they could reasonably expect. A considerable part of the
Assembly inclined toward that Union; and the Pretenses the Prince used were so
plausible and so Noble, that they could hardly fail of making an Impression
upon many People. To pass the Independence of the Crown into an Act of the
State; to secure the King's Person against Assassinations, Excommunications,
and Depositions; to revenge the too long neglected Murder of the late King; to
hinder the Publication of a Council against which a great King had Protested,
and which was very prejudicial to France; to reduce Taxes and Impositions at
reasonable Rates; to remove the excessive Authority of Foreigners, and to call
them to an Account for the Abuses introduced during their being in Favor; to
settle the Edicts of Pacification beyond Reach: All these were great designs,
which appeared so Just, so Lawful, and so necessary, that no body questioned
but they would be attended with the Blessing of God, and that all true
Frenchmen would unanimously favor them. But others were of Opinion, that the
Assembly ought to leave the management of the Political part of those Projects
wholly to the Prince of Conde, and to apply themselves solely to take measures
for the safety of the Reformed Religion. They did not question but the Prince
had a Right by his Birth, to endeavor to purge the Government of all the
Abuses that were slipped into it; but they did not think it proper for the
Reformed to engage in it otherwise than by Prayers to God, and most humble
Remonstrances to the King. Some Provinces had given their Deputies Instructions
to that Effect.

The diversity of Opinions, managed by Lesdiguieres for the Diversity of
Opinions.
Interest of the Court, having appeared at the overture of the Assembly,
satisfied the Queen, that the Reformed would not be ready so soon, but that she
might have time to put her designs in Execution, before the Prince and they
could be in a Posture to oppose them. She had given great Causes of Complaint
to the Duke of Rohan, whom she was Jealous of upon that Account. Therefore
being desirous to oblige him by some Favor to forget what was past, she took
the occasion of a difference, between the Houses of Rohan and de la Trimouille,
about the Presidentship of the Estates of Britany, to which they both aspired,
with such Equal Rights, that it was impossible to decide the question,
otherwise than by adjudging the said Privilege to both, to enjoy it
Alternately. The Duke de la Trimouille who was lately returned from Traveling,
designed to appear in the Estates, and so did the Duke of Rohan. They refused
to yield to each other, which concurrence could not fail of being attended with
ill Consequences. The Queen being desirous to pleasure the Duke of Rohan, by
seeming to declare her self in favor of him, either to employ him elsewhere,
while she performed her Progress, or to oblige him in an Affair of Precedence
and Honor, sent him an Order to repair to the Estates to preside there; and at
the same time sent a contrary Order to the Duke de la Trimouille, whose
displeasure she did not Value, by Reason that he was very young, not much
known, and far from that degree of Credit and Power, in which the World had
seen the late Duke his Father. This availed the Queen but little; by Reason,
that her Refusal of the Government of Poitou to the Duke of Rohan, to whom she
had formerly Granted the Survivorship thereof, made a deeper Impression upon
him, than her pretended Favor about the Presidentship. He made no use of the
Order he had received from the Court, and Presided that time by consent of the
Duke de la Trimouille, by Virtue of an Accommodation procured by their mutual
Friends to hinder those two Potent Families, that lived in Friendship at that
time* from coming to a Breach.

Nevertheless the Queen, being so well satisfied with the then State of Affairs
as to assure her self of success, resolved The Kings Progress.
to improve it, and to do her Business before the Prince could have time to
oppose it. Therefore all of a sudden, while the Negotiation of Peace seemed to
draw toward a happy Conclusion, she sent an Order to him from the King, to
repair to his Majesty with all speed, to accompany him in his Progress, in
Order to the Accomplishing of his Marriage. And lest he might plead Ignorance,
she acquainted him with the very day he had pitched upon for his departure. The
Prince complained highly at this Precipitation, and took occasion from thence,
to take up Arms; but with so small a Number of Men, and so little prospect of
Relief, that he was like to sink under it. In the mean time the King set
forward, and continued his Progress slowly; though some of the most Judicious,
and best skilled in Affairs of State, were of Opinion that it was a Rash
Resolution; by Reason that the King removing from the Center of the Kingdom,
left a kindled Fire in it, which would have time and opportunity to do a great
deal of mischief, while the Court remained at one of the Extremities of the
Kingdom the most distant from the Conflagration. The Assembly of Grenoble,
which after all the delays The General Assembly ^^nds Deputies to the King. ^
P^.
occasioned by the diversity of Opinions, had at last determined to try what
they could obtain from the Court, before the taking any other measures, had
deputed three Persons to the King, to present their * Cahiers to him; and had
charged them expressly, humbly to beseech his Majesty to consider the Prince of
Conde's Remonstrances. Those Deputies were Champeaux, Des Bordes Mercier, and
Maill^ray. Champeaux had the greatest share of Honor in that Deputation, by
Reason that he was the Head and speaker of it: But Desbordes had more Credit,
because he was a Man of better Parts, besides his being engaged in the Prince
of Conde's Interest, to which the Marshal de Bouillon had drawn him, as I have
already said, by very fair promises. The King was gone before the Deputies
reached Paris; and could not overtake him, till they came to Amboise, from
whence, the King The Deputies are adjourned to Poitiers.
having heard them, adjourned them to Poitiers for an Answer. This delay was
ill resented by the Deputies, who looked upon it as an instance of the little
regard that would be had to their Entreaties. And indeed, one of the
Propositions of the Prince of Conde, which they were to insist upon in the
behalf of the Assembly, was either to break, or to put off the Marriages with
Spain until another time: And instead of hearing them upon that Subject, they
were adjourned for an Answer to a Place, where the King having performed half
his Progress, it was not very likely that he would go back, without making an
End of it.

It is true, that the Queen declared freely, that had it been desired sooner,
that Journey might have been put off to another time; but that it was then too
late to think upon it, that it was impossible to Retreat with Honor; That the
Place was fixed, the Day appointed, and that they were too forward on their
Journey to go back. There is no Reason to believe that she spoke in earnest, or
that the Impending Storm she beheld, made her sensible that she had Used too
much precipitation, and that it would have been better for her to have given
some satisfaction to those that opposed her designs, in order to break their
Measures. She was undoubtedly very well informed with the Intentions of the
Prince before her departure. But in reality, the forwardness of the Journey
affording her a good pretense to end what she had so well begun, without
heeding Remonstrances to the contrary, it was easy for her to pay those with a
specious Excuse, whom she had no mind to give a solid satisfaction to. The best
Excuse that can be made for a Refusal, is to pretend that the Request is made
too late, and that it would have been Granted, had it been proposed sooner. The
Fault then, seems rather to proceed from want of diligence in the Petitioner,
than from want of good Will in the Person that refuses. However, it behooved the
Queen to show that she had Power enough to do whatever she pleased, in spite
of half the Kingdom. Therefore she continued her Progress without Interruption,
and without the least accident as far as Poitiers: But as soon as she Arrived
there, her Measures were like to have been broke by Misfortune that could admit
of no remedy. Madame fell sick of the Smallpox, and the Court that could do
nothing without her, was obliged to tarry there two Months for the return of
her Health.

This delay seemed to afford the Prince of Conde the time to The Queen gets to
her Journeys end without Opposition.
prepare himself for War, which the Queens diligence had deprived him of.
However he could only raise a small Body of Men, which happily escaped the
Pursuit of Marshal de Bois dauphin, who was ordered by the Queen to observe
him, and followed him close. He was accused by some of not improving the
occasions that offered themselves to beat the Prince's Army, by reason of his
Irresolutions; but others were of opinion that he was Commanded not to Engage
in a Combat with the Prince, but only to amuse him, until the Exchange of the
Princesses of France and Spain were accomplished; because it was thought that
then it would be more easy to satisfy the said Prince. But whereas the
Assembly of Grenoble deferred to declare themselves, and expressed their desire
to favor the Prince's Arms, more by Words than Effects. The Court did not meet
so many Crosses in that Journey, as they might have done, had there been more
Union or Diligence in the contrary Party, or had the Prince's Forces been as
ready to take the Field, as his Declaration to appear. The Duke of Rohan had
been powerfully solicited to take up Arms, and did it at last being nettl'd
that the Queen expressed no more consideration for him: And after the Peace was
concluded, he had the boldness to tell her, That his Inclination did prompt him
to serve her; but that finding himself despised, he resolved to show that he
was capable of something. His Friends had promised him Six Thousand Foot and
Five hundred Horse, and had they been as good as their Word, he would have
been able with such a Body to stop the Court, and to afford the Prince of Conde
time to join with him. But the Promises that were made to him, were reduced to
a third part, and notwithstanding his utmost Endeavors, he could not raise
above Two Thousand Men. Moreover he lost a great deal of Time in making
Montauban declare it self, and in vain Endeavors to obtain a Reinforcement
from the other Cities which refused to give it him. So that the Queen had as
much time as was necessary to repair to the Frontiers, there to exchange the
Princesses, and to bring back the King and the new Queen to Bourdeaux.

During the Abode the King made at Poitiers, he could not Particular Petition
of the Assembly.
refuse to read the Petitions or Remonstrances.
Cahiers that were presented to him by the Deputies of the Assembly, and to
answer them according to his Promise at Amboise; and though the Answers did not
appear sufficiently positive to them, yet they concluded that the present
Conjuncture had Induced the Court to make them more favorable, than they would
have been at another time. There were two different forts of Cahiers, the one
General, the other Particular. The last contained Complaints and Demands upon
particular, though considerable Cases, viz. That the King would be pleased to
cause the Letters Patent for the Exemption of Ministers to be Registered, the
Verification of which had been depending about three Years; and to send an
Express Order to the Parliament, and to the Court of Aids to that end: That the
King would also be pleased to annul the Prohibitions made by the Judge of the
Provostship of Paris, about Erecting a College at Charenton, by reason that
since his Majesty had confirmed the Right of the Exercise of their Religion in
that place, it followed of Course that they were allowed a College for the
Education of their Children: That the Chamber of Accounts of Provence might not
be allowed to take Cognizance of the Affairs of the Reformed: That the
Declaration which referred it to the In which the Judges were half Catholics,
and half Protestants
Party-Chamber of Grenoble, in which it had been Verified, might be confirmed
by another obliging the Chamber of Accounts to Register it: That Poor Gentlemen
and Maimed Soldiers of their Religion, having obtained Oblats, or Secular Monks.
Places in Abbys, with the Maintenance of a Monk, might be received in the same
as well as the Catholics: That the same Privileges the King had granted to the
College and Academy of Montelimar, might also be granted to the Academy and
College of Die.

But the General Cahier contained 25 Articles, the substance General Petition.
of which was as follows. That the Independency of the Crown might be looked
upon for the future as a Fundamental Law, according to the Article of the The
Commons.
Third Estate, and to the Remonstrances of the Parliament: That an exact and
diligent Inquiry might be made about the Death of the late King, in order to
discover and punish the Authors thereof, according to the Memoirs that should
be given about it: That the King should refuse to publish the Council of Trent,
according to the Petitions and desires of the Clergy and Nobility: That as to
the Article of the said Petitions, which required the Observation of the King's
Oath at his Coronation, to which the said Clergy and Nobility had refused to
add the Reservation of the Edicts, notwithstanding the King's earnest Desire
and Command, and all the oppositions made by the Gentlemen of the Reformed
Religion; Deputed into the Chamber of the Nobility, his Majesty would be
pleased to declare that the said Coronation Oath did not regard the R^form'd;
and to give them full assurances that whenever he should answer the Articles of
the said two Chambers; he would reject the proposition of publishing the
Council, and make such a Declaration as was necessary about his Coronation
Oath. That such Ecclesiastics as were of the King's Council, and others who
were justly suspected by the Reformed, might abstain from the Trial and
Cognizance of the Affairs of the Reformed depending before the said Council.
That the Ecclesiastics of Bearn might not be admitted into the Council of the
Country, into which the Bishops of Oleron and of Lescar, together with a Canon
of the said place, had lately endeavored to introduce themselves: That the
Promises made in the King's Name at the Assembly of Rochel by Rouvray one of
the Deputies General, about the Terms of Pretended Reformed Religion, and the
Toleration of Provincial Councils might be put in Execution. That in the new
settlement that should be drawn of the Places of surety, they should employ
those that were dismantl'd in the Provinces that had the Loire on the North:
That the King would be pleased to declare the Office of Berger vacant, by
reason of his being turned Catholic, and to oblige the said Berger to deliver
it up to him, in order to bestow it upon a Person of the Reformed Religion,
according to the Edict; by reason that it was one of the Six Counselors Places
created by the Edict in the Parliament of Paris, in order to be enjoyed by the
Reformed: That the S^ granted by his Majesty for the Sallary of Ministers,
might be augmented and better paid for the future: That the Governors of the
Places of surety, might be chosen by the King upon the Nomination of the
Churches: That the Nomination of the Deputies General might be restored upon
the former settlement; insomuch that the Assembly should only be obliged to
Nominate two which should be accepted of by the King, instead of six out of
which he was to take his Choice: That the Places of surety might be left to the
Reformed for the space of Ten Years longer* That his Majesty would be pleased
to continue the Protection of the Sovereignty of Sedan, in the same form, and
upon the same Conditions his Predecessors had Embraced it: That the King's
Council might be reformed: That a stop might be put to the Proceedings of the
Sovereign Council of Bearn, against the Deputies of that Country who assisted
at the Assembly at Grenoble; since no Prosecutions were ever made against the
Bishops of the Country, for meeting at the General Assemblys of the Clergy of
France: They offered Reasons upon this Article, and alleged the Example of the
last Estates General, in which a Deputy of Bearn assisted in the Chamber of the
Clergy: And that of the Assembly of the Clergy then sitting at Paris, into
which the Bishop of Oleron was deputed. They maintained that this Rigor had
never been practiced against the Deputies of Bearn, that had assisted in other
Assemblies; and they cited the Example of the late King, who being but King of
Navar and Sovereign of Bearn, had assisted in Person at such Assemblys: That
the Country of Bearn might be allowed to summon a National Synod in their Turn,
like the other Provinces; and finally, that the King would be pleased to have a
regard to the Prince of Conde's Demands.

The Particular Answers. Petition.
Cahier received a pretty favorable Answer: And though there were several
Articles in the General Petition which the Court could have wished the Assembly
had not inserted in it, because they related to the Government, the Reformation
of which did not belong to them, yet they answered it: But it was only by
making plausible Illusions pass for a solid Satisfaction* The Court had made
sair Promises at the Assembly of Rochel, in order to its Dissolution, which
were forgotten, as soon as ever it was dissolved, so they promised many things
upon these new Petitions.
Cahiers, which they never designed to perform: They accepted the good
Intentions of the Reformed, about the Independence and safety of Kings;
observing nevertheless that it was an Affair which did not belong to the
Assemblys. They promised to make a more exact Inquiry into the Death of the
late King. They declared that the Reformed enjoying the benefit of the Edicts
were not comprised in the Coronation Oath. They granted that the Ecclesiastics
should withdraw out of the Council, whenever the Affairs of the Re^orm'd should
be treated of there. They refused to allow their Religion any other Title than
that which was contained in the Edicts: But they drew a Form of Attestation
which Ministers might use, to attest the Religion of such as should stand in
^eed of it. It was conceived in these Terms; I Minister of the Church
Established in such a Place according to the Edict, do hereby certify, that
such a one is a Member of the said Church, etc underneath which a Notary was to
add, Before Us, etc. has appeared such a Minister, above Named, Living at, etc.
who has acknowledged the Writing and Signing of what is above written, and that
it contains nothing but the Truth, etc. The Reformed Advocates, were allowed in
speaking of their Religion, to Name it by the Title specified by the Edict,
instead of calling it pretended Reformed* They promised the Creation of a new
Office, to supply the place of Berger. They continued the Protection of Sedan.
They granted that the Deputies of Bearn should be allowed to assist both at the
Ecclesiastical and Political Assemblys of the Reformed, which should be allowed
by the King. But they gave no favorable Answer to the other Articles that
related to that Principality; nor to those that mentioned the Augmentation of
the Sums granted for the Salary of Ministers; or the Nomination of Governors
and Deputys General, and the keeping of the Places of surety. So that at the
bottom, that which was granted had more appearance than effect in it; whereas
they refused whatever was most important and most solid.

These Answers were made on the 12th of September: And the Deputys to whom they
had been partly Communicated, acquainted the Assembly that they had no reason
to be satisfied The Answers of the Court give no satisfaction.
with them. Their Reasons were that the Jesuits Preached at Court, and declared
openly that the Marriages which the Court was going to Accomplish, had only
been resolved upon in order to Extirpate Heresicks; and that when Complaints
were made to the Chancellor about it, he barely answered, That there was no
heed to be given to what the Jesuits said, since they did not Govern the State;
which was no satisfactory answer to Persons who were sufficiently Informed of
the Power the Jesuits had over the Consciences of Sovereigns and their
Ministers. The Assembly was also very much troubled to find They amuse the
Deputies.
that though the Petitions.
Cahiers were Answered, yet the Deputys were not dismissed, their Journey being
daily put off under some pretense or other, which gave them reason to believe
that the Court designed to amuse them, to prevent their forming any Resolutions
before the King's Departure from Poitiers, where the Princess his Sister
remained long and variously Sick. Finally to get rid of their Importunity, upon
their earnest desire that the Answers to their Cahiers, which they were assured
were favorable, might be delivered to them, they were told that the King would
send them to the Assembly by Friar Master of Requests. This Friar had been sent
to Grenoble, to observe the Motions of the Assembly, and to be directed in all
things by Lesdiguieres. But when the Deputies departed from the Assembly to go
to the King to present their Cahiers to him, Friar left Grenoble at the same
time, to give the Court an account of the State in which he had left Affairs
there. He pretended that the design of his Journey was to dispose the Council
to give the Assembly satisfaction about their Demands: But the Deputies soon
discovered that his Intentions were very different from it, and that he
inspired the Court with the Delays and fair words they were amused with. The
Truth is that Lesdiguieres had ordered him to assure the Queen of his good
Intentions, and to let her know that she might safely continue her Progress,
without troubling her self about the Resolutions of the Assembly.

This Answer convinced the Deputies that the Court designed to pay them with
Illusions as they used to do; and the precaution The Deputies Communicate their
f^a^s to the Assembly.
that was used to send the Answers to the Petitions or Addresses.
Cahiers they had brought by a Man who had his dependence on the Court, to be
delivered by him to the Assembly it self, made them sensible that they designed
to use the Reformed at Grenoble as they had done at Saumur; and that Friar
would be ordered not to deliver the said Answers till after the Nomination of
the Deputys General, to Command the Assembly expressly to break up, and to
Authorize the Inferior Number against the Plurality of Voices, in case they
should refuse to Obey. However the Court being informed that this way of
proceeding might be attended with ill consequences, finally complied with the
earnest Solicitations of the Deputys, and delivered the said Answers into
their Hands. But that did not cure the evil, since they found that nothing was
granted them that could be looked upon as a favor, and that only such things
were left to the Reformed as could not be taken from them. The keeping of the
Places of Surety indeed was allowed them for six Years longer; but it was
visible that the Court did it more by Compulsion, than out of good Will,
because they could not help it; besides they were of opinion that their Demands
were but reasonable in desiring it for Ten Years, at a time when so many just
reasons of fear rendered the renewing of their Sureties so necessary. The
Assembly being informed of the Proceedings of the Court by their Deputies,
remained under the same Apprehensions: And lest Lesaiguieres should second the
Commission of Friar by his Authority, they resolved to L^^^^guires keeps a
great Awe over t^^^.
remove from a place in which that Lord had an absolute Power, and kept an Awe
upon them, which looked very like Slavery. They soon discovered that it was in
vain to expect any Protection or favor from him; and that his Engagements with
the Court upon the Account of his Grandeur, surpassed his Affection for the
public good, and that which in Justice and Conscience he ought to have had for
the Reformed Religion. All his Councils, all his Prudence, all his Intrigues
only tended to divide the Members of the Assembly; and all the Demonstrations
of his Good Will, were reduced to this Conclusion, That they ought to Obey, and
to leave the Management of Public Affairs to the King's Council. But the
Reformed seeing the Conclusion of an Alliance, of which they were persuaded
that the secret Articles obliged the Court to oppress them, looked upon such an
advice, to be Just like that of suffering their Throats to be cut, without
defense.

Thus the Assembly, which for some time had had a mind The Assembly removes to
Nimes.
to come out of Captivity, resolved absolutely upon it, when they were informed
that Friar was to come back from the Court along with the Deputies: And having
sounded the Intentions of the City of Nimes by St. Private, who reported to them
that they would be very well received there, they resolved to remove thither.
Lesdiguieres being informed of their Design, endeavored to break it by
Remonstrances, in which he employed all his Cunning: But he obtained nothing
but Thanks for his good Will; and the very next Day the Deputies prepared
themselves for their Departure. He was extremely Against his Will.
nettl'd at their expressing so little regard for his Reasons; and perhaps the
more yet because it would show that he had been too lavish of his Promises to
the Court, and that he had not so much Credit among the Reformed as he
pretended. So that in the first heat of his Anger, he resolved to stop the
Deputies, and caused the Gates of the City to be shut; and Cha^fepie a
Minister, one of the Deputies of the Province of Poitou was stopped at one of the
Gates as he was going out, only with an intention to take the Air. But after he
was cooled a little, and had reflected on the Consequences of that Violence, he
considered that his best way was to allow what he could not hinder; and to
cause the Gates which he had ordered to be shut inconsiderately, to be opened
again. He only forbid the Deputies of Dauphine to follow the others; and
acquainted the Court with the Departure of the Assembly.

On the other hand, as soon as the Deputies came to Nimes, being desirous to
Justify their Conduct, they acquainted the Gourt that they had been forced to
remove from Gre, noble, upon the Account of a Contagious Distemper which began
to Reign there, of which even some Members of the Assembly were Dead. The
Deputies that were sent with these Excuses were received and used as favorably
as if the Court had not been in the least concerned at their Escape out of the
constraint into which such a Man as Lesdiguieres might have kept them. They
seemed to approve the Reasons of the Assembly, and acquainted Lesdiguieres that
he would do well, to suffer the Deputies of his Province to follow them. This
seemed to be done on purpose to express a perfect consent to the Removal of the
Assembly: But the real Motive of it was, to have People there, who not daring
to disoblige Lesdiguieres, would of necessity follow his Inspirations and
Orders; and would serve for Spies to give him a faithful Account of all
Transactions there. Moreover in Order to put the Assembly in a place where they
might have no more Liberty than they had at Grenoble, the Court Resolved to
remove them from Nimes; and Ordered Friar to transfer them to Montpellier. This
seemed to be done for the Interest and Honor of the King, to the End that the
Assembly, which was only Lawful by his Permission, might seem to receive from
him the appointment of the place where they might continue their Deliberations.
But the secret Motive of the Council, was that Montpellier was at the disposal
of a Lord, from whom the Court expected as great services as from Lesdiguieres.
It was Chatillon, Grand Son to the Famous Admiral. That Consideration, and his
own Merit had acquired him a great deal of Credit among the Reformed. He was of
a Mild Temper, and was an Enemy to Troubles and Confusion, but he had not the
Zeal of his Grandfather for the Reformed Religion, in which his only Son was
so ill Educated, that he did not ^arry for his Father's Death to turn Catholic.
Moreover he was Ambitious; and the Court knowing his Foible on that side,
flattered him with the hopes of a Marshal's Staff, which was given him some
years after, as a Recompense for his having abandoned the Affairs of the
Reformed. So that he was a Man like Lesdiguieres in two Respects; First in
holding a great Rank among the Reformed, and Secondly, in being accessible to
Hopes and Rewards. The Reformed still confided in him, as they made it appear
several years after it, by Intrusting him with their Affairs in the Circle of
the Lower Languedoc. There had been an Example not long before, how much he was
liked on both sides The Government of Aiguemortes having been taken from
Rambures, the Reformed had made great Complaints about it; and the Court not
being inclined to restore it to him, whatever Promises they had made about it,
by Reason that they were desirous to maintain Berticheres in that Post, whom
the Churches were not pleased with, they were obliged to agree upon a third
Person to keep the Place, until the Case were decided. Chatillon was proposed:
The Court accepted of him, and the Reformed agreed to it. But soon after that,
in Order to put a stop to the Jealousies which the Enterprises of the Court
upon diverse places belonging to the Reformed might Create in them; Rambures
gained his Cause and was Restored.

The Assembly had not as yet laid aside the Confidence the The Assembly
mistrust the Lords.
Reformed had reposed in Chatillon till then, but they had already a general
diffidence of the Fidelity of those Eminent Persons, who only know how to Obey
Sovereigns, and who never join with their Inferiors, unless it be to Command
them; who never unite the Interests of their Party to those of their Fortunes,
and who look upon the Services of the People, and the Recompenses of Kings as
things that are equally due to them. They had Learnt at Saumur, that the
Reformed Lords were capable of promoting their private Interest, at the Cost of
others; and that the common Cause may become the sport of their Ambition, and
of their Intrigues. Those diffidencies were increased at Grenohle, from whence
the Assembly departed very much dissatisfied at the Behavior of Lesdiguieres:
Therefore they refused to put themselves in the Power of another, who might put
them to the same hardships, and so remained at Nimes; pretending, that they
were afraid of displeasing Lesdiguieres, by putting themselves at Lesdiguieres
and Chatillon, are engaged in the interest of the Court.
the Discretion of Chatillon; as if they designed to show, that they confided
more in the one than in the other. However, those two Lords used all their
endeavors to hinder the Assembly from joining with the Prince of Conde: And as
they had Creatures among them; they delayed the Conclusion of the Treaty a long
while. The Prince of Conde tempted them both to join with him, and sent some
Gentlemen to them, with Reasons and Offers to persuade them. But it was to no
purpose, because they expected greater and more speedy advantages from the
Court, than they could possibly expect in following the Prince, who had not
managed his Affairs well, and who seemed almost reduced to the necessity of
submitting to the Mercy of the Court.

But an unexpected Accident broke all their Measures, and The Duke of Candale
Embraces the Reformed Religion.
made them lose the Fruit of their Intrigues and Pains in the Assembly. The
Duke of Candale, Eldest Son to the Duke d'Espernon, being dissatisfied with his
Father, from whom he had endeavored to take the City and Castle of Angouleme,
threw himself into the Party of the Reformed, and Embraced their Religion
publicly at Rochel. They received him with great Demonstrations of Joy, and of
greater hopes for the future. They gained one of the most considerable Houses
in France by it: The Example of it might prove Fortunate, and invite other
Persons of Quality to do the same: So that they omitted nothing to express
their Respect and Esteem for him. The Assembly of Nimes, paid him great Honor,
and made him General of the Cevennes, and gave him so great an Authority over
them at the very first, that he broke through all the Oppositions of Chatillon
and Lesdiguieres, and made them Resolve to declare themselves in favor His
Levity.
of the Prince. But that was all the Good or Ill he did, while he was Reformed.
The Duke his Father was not Tractable in point of Religion. He had begun to
hate the Reformed from the time of his being in favor with Henry the III. It
seemed to be one of the Proprieties of their Religion, to be exposed to the
hatred of Favorites; perhaps, because The Reformed are hated by the Favorites.
they were not so willing as others, to bend their Knees before those Idols,
which the Gapricio of Princes, or of Fortune Raised above them; and that they
complained highly of the profusions that Ruined the State, to Enrich those
Objects of an unruly Favor. I will say nothing in this place, of the Cardinal
de Tournon under Francis the I. Of the Constable of Montmorency, under Henry
the II. and under his Children of the Duke of Guise Father and Son under the
same Kings, and under Henry the III. But at least the Dukes of Joyeuse and of
Epernon, Favorites to that last King, had ever expressed an invincible
Aversion toward them: And under Lewis the XIII. the Marshal d'Ancre, and the
Constable de Luines, showed the same Passion to destroy them. But besides this
General Reason of Hatred against the Reformed, he had another which was
Personal, because they suspected his having had a Hand iu the Death of Henry
the IV. Some The Duke d Epernon hates them Mortally.
looked upon him as an Accomplice to the Conspiracy which succeeded so fatally
against the Person of that Prince: And those who spoke with most Modesty about
it, made no scruple of saying, that sitting next to the King, he might easily
have warded the second Stab that was given him, had be been so pleased: So
that, whenever the Reformed mentioned the Revenging of the late King's Death,
and the making of an exact Enquiry after those that had a Hand in it, he was in
the Right to take the thing upon himself, and to believe that they aimed at his
Head. Therefore the Duke being enraged to see his Son engaged in the Religion
and Party of the Reformed, took so much Pains and Care, displayed the Marks of
his Tenderness, and of his Anger so properly, made Use of Hope and Fear with so
much Art and Power, employed the Promises and Illusions of the Court so
effectually, that his Son Embraced the Roman Communion again, with as much
Levity as he had quitted it; so that after some years Travel in most parts of
Europe, not forgetting to Visit Rome and Italy, he returned into his Fathers
Favor again.

During these Transactions, the Treaty between the Assembly The Treaty of Union
between the Assembly and the Prince of Conde.
and the Prince of Conde was agreed upon, and Signed on the 10th of November.
After the usual Preamble before all such Acts, containing Protestations of only
taking Arms for the King's Service, against those who Abuse his Name and his
Authority, and of having no design to depart from their Allegiance: The Treaty
imported, that the End of that Union was, to provide for the safety and
Preservation of the King's Person: To make an exact Inquiry after all those
that were concerned in the Death of Henry the IV. To hinder the Publication of
the Council of Trent, as a thing which derogated from the King's Authority, the
Rights of the Crown, the Liberties of the Gallick Church, and the Edicts of
Pacification: To oppose the ill Consequences which the Marriages concluded with
Spain, might produce: To Reform the Council, in removing from the Government
such as were mentioned by the Remonstrances of the Parliament: To provide for
the Performance of the Edicts, Declarations, Letters, and Briefs Granted to the
Reformed; and to see justice do e to the People of the Principality of Bearn:
To restore such to their Employments as had been, or should be dispossessed of
the same upon the Account of their Religion: To hearken to no Treaty unless by
a mutual Consent; and not to abandon each other, until they had received
satisfaction upon all their demands. The whole concluded by a Promise of
keeping a constant Correspondence together; and to impart to one another all
the Resolutions, and Advices that might be taken for the Public Good.

Nevertheless, the Assembly had intermixed some Articles, which limited the
Princes Power in some Measure. They retained the direction of the Forces, and
Sums the Reformed were to furnish, by the Authority, and with the Commissions
of the Prince, who should deliver them in Blanc; and be received by none but
persons belonging to the Assembly. They also reserved to themselves the Power
to dispose by way of Commission, by Letters Patent from the Prince delivered to
them in Blanc, of all Places, and Governments, Offices of Judicature and of the
Public Revenues, which should become vacant during the War: And they obl^g'd
themselves to cause those Commissions to be Converted, if possible, by a Peace,
into Warrants for Life. They desired, That provisions should be made for the
safety of the Provinces that should be the Theater of the War; either by
yielding to them some of the Places they were in hopes to Conquer; or by giving
them others instead of those they might lose. They added, That the Prince
should not be allowed to make any Innovation in the places belonging to the
Reformed; That such among the Reformed as should be obliged to quit their
Habitations upon the Account of the War, should be received for their safety
into Places held by the Prince or his Adherents, and that they should enjoy the
free Exercise of their Religion in the same, as also in the Armies in which
they should have Forces; and that those Refugies should enjoy the Estates of
those that should quit the Places Conquered by the Prince, or that should be
turned out for refusing to Obey him.

The Prince promised every thing, because his Affairs were Which revives the
Princes Party.
in an ill Posture, and that in case the Reformed had failed him, he would have
been forced to fly out of the Kingdom, or to submit to the Pleasure of the
Court. Though the Queen had a good Army and was very well served, yet she was
frightened, when she was told at Bordeaux, that the Prince was happily got out
of so many Defiles and Rivers, and that the Royal Army Commanded by the Marshal
de Bois Dauphin had not been able to stop his passage, and that he was coming
to tarry for him in the Way to his Return. She had yet less Reason to despise
him, when she found that the Reformed were joined with him, Reinforcing his
Army by the Duke of Soubise's Forces; and assisting him in other Places by
considerable diversions. The Duke of Sully himself embraced that Party after
many Irresolutions, and increased the Prince's Army by his Forces, by his
Friends and by the Towns he possessed in Poitou and elsewhere: But that was the
only Action in which he showed some Resolution, from the time of his Disgrace
at Court until his Death. The Duke of Rohan, who was neither well Attended, nor
well Obeyed, Seized upon the Town and Castle of Leitoure; by the Intelligence
he held with Fontrailles; which neither the Duke of Guise, who Commanded the
Royal Army in those Parts, nor yet the Political Assembly of the Upper
Languedoc that was held at that time, in the Neighborhood thereof, but refused
to meddle with those Differences, notwithstanding the earnest solicitation of
the General Assembly, could prevent.

The Court being exactly informed of whatever past in the Letters, Declaration
which confirms the ^^d^cts.
Assembly at Nimes, received a particular Account of what they had done in
favor of the Prince of Conde; so that they had time enough to prepare a
Declaration upon that Subject, which gave the Reformed a fair pretense to
remain quiet in their Houses. It appeared the very same Day the Treaty was
Signed between the Prince and the Assembly: As if the Kings Intelligence had
been so Critical, as to know before hand the day on which it was to be
concluded; or that chance had ordered the Minute for the Remedy, at the very
hour of the Disease: The main End of the said Declaration was to keep those of
the Reformed, within the bounds of their Allegiance, who were not yet departed
from it; and to bring back such as had joined themselves with the
Malcontents; and to render those inexcusable who should resuse to lay down
their Arms, after having been earnestly invited to it. Therefore the
Declaration was very full; and all the pretenses that could serve to excuse the
Resolutions of the Assembly were refuted in it, with a great deal of Art. They
enlarged at first upon After a very Argumental Preface.
the King's Kindnesses, and the care he had taken, as well as the Queen his
Mother, to cause the Edicts to be observed; and to remedy the infractions
thereof: Therefore they alleged, that the Reformed ought to have kept within
the Bounds of their Allegiance out of Gratitude, and in remembrance of the
favorable Usage they had received from the Late King; Especially, at a time
when the King's Minority ought to Excite the Virtue, Courage, and Fidelity of
his good Subjects to maintain the Authority which God had given him, as the
Basis of every Man's safety, as well as that of the Public. In the next place,
they complained that this way of proceeding of the King, had not produced the
Effect that was expected from it upon all people; That several sided with the
Prince of Conde, some through Ambition, and a furious desire of raising their
own Fortunes by the disorders and ruin of the State; Others out of simplicity
deceived by the false Impressions which they had received from turbulent
Persons; who endeavored to persuade them that they would be persecuted, unless
they put themselves in a Posture of defense; telling them that there were
secret Articles in the Treaty of the Marriages with Spain, which contained a
Conspiracy to drive them all out of the Kingdom, or to exterminate them. They
said that this Imposition, or surprise that was put upon them, rendered their
Fault excusable, and made them fitter Objects of Pity than of Chastisement. In
the next place, they endeavored to prove, that this Terror was vain, because
those Marriages were concluded by the ways of Honor, as it is usual among great
Princes; from whence it followed, that Spain could not require Conditions of
the King, which would have made Deserts and Sollitudes in the Kingdom; which
the King did confess must have proved the consequence of such an Unjust and
Cruel Usage toward the Reformed, as it was Published by some, with an ill
design. They added, that nothing had been done with an ill Intention, in
promoting of those Alliances; that all had been Communicated to the Late Count
of Soissons, to the Prince of Conde, and even to the Duke of Bouillon, who were
present in the Council in which those Affairs had been deliberated; and that
they did not oppose it; That the said Marriages had not created the least
Jealousies, or Suspicions in other Sovereigns, after they had been informed of
the King's good intentions; yet that some People would needs persuade the World
that he was so inconsiderate, as to consent to make France the Theater on which
that Bloody Tragedy was to be Acted, and to decide the difference of Religion
by Arms; though nothing could be farther from his thoughts, since it was his
Opinion, that the decision of that Controversy ought to be left to God, who
would at his own time Use the best Remedies to Reunite all Christians to the
Catholic Church, which the King looked upon to be the best, and in which he was
resolved to Live and Dye. After which they praised the Zeal and Loyalty of
those that had refused to take up Arms against the King; who had on the
contrary offered their Services to him, and had resisted the Solicitations and
Threatenings of the others. They cried up the Number and Quality of those Loyal
Protestants, among which there were considerable Lords, Gentlemen, Cities,
Communities, and even Places of surety. They likewise Exagerated the Rebellion
of the others, who had hardened themselves against those Examples; who
endeavored to debauch the Peaceable from their Allegiance; endeavoring ^o
persuade them, that they would be forced to take up Arms at last, or expose
themselves to Ruin, by suffering those ^o perish that had taken them up
already; which his Majesty ^oped would not prevail upon those Loyal Persons.
Finally, those Assemblies were Styled Unlawful and Conventicles, which favored
the taking up of Arms, as being composed of ^uborn'd Persons, who without Order
or Power, and often against the Commands and Orders of their Superiors adhered
^o the propositions of the Factious, for their own Ends to ^he prejudice of the
Worthy Persons of their Religion. This ^ong Preface was followed by a
Declaration from the King, That he would not impute the Faults of some
particular Members to the whole Body; for which Reason he confirmed ^ll the
Edicts, saying, That they had been observed till then; Commanding at the same
time, that in case they had been ^nfring'd in some Places, it should be
forthwith Remedied. Secondly, in consideration of the Fidelity of an Infinite
Number of the Reformed, among which there were Persons of great Quality, who
deserved singular Marks of his Affection, ^^e pardoned all those who had taken
up Arms, and that they should enjoy the benefit of the Edicts as well as the
others, provided they returned to their Allegiance, within a Month after the
Publication of his Declaration in the Bayliwicks: That they should declare the
same at the Registry of the next Court within their Precinct, and restore the
Places they had taken in the same Condition, in which they were before those
Troubles; which being done, and they not relapsing into a New Infraction, he
would take them under his Protection, and grant them a full Pardon for all that
was past. Finally, he condemned as disturbers of the public Peace, all those
who should persist in the Rebellion after the expiration of a Month; he
deprived all the Cities and Corporations of all the Favors, Immunities and
Privileges that had been Granted them; and did forbid all Governors, and
Lieutenants General to let them enjoy the Liberties mentioned in the Edicts;
which they should render themselves unworthy of by persevering in their Revolt.

This Declaration produced the Effect of all other Declarations of that kind,
That is, It left every Body in their former Effect of the Declaration.
Opinion. Those who had not taken Arms, either because they had no prospect of
safety in it, or because they expected more favor from the Court than profit
by the War, remained quiet for the most part. Those who had taken them, only
laid them down by a Treaty. Many refused to Engage in it for fear of a greater
evil, or out of simplicity, imagining all the Words of an Edict to be so many
Truths. Nevertheless those who did reflect on the Intrigues begun against them
by Spain, so many Years before the Death of the late King; upon the
Propositions that had been made to him so often to destroy the Heretics; upon
the Maxims that were introduced in the Council since his Death; upon the
Passion of those who were entrusted with the Management of Affairs; upon the
Projects formed by the Clergy, in the Estates, and in the Assembly that
succeeded them; upon the Divisions the Court had sown among the Reformed; upon
the Illusions wherewith they had paid all their Demands; in a word, upon all
the Proofs they had received of the Ill will of the Council, and of all the
Catholics toward them: Those I say did not suffer themselves to be deluded by
the Specious Arguments of the Declaration: And the Remembrance of the
Enterview, for which under the Reign of Charles the 9th. the same place had
been chosen for the same Powers, who had now had a new Meeting there, under
pretense of the Exchange of the Princesses, created no small Jealousies in
them. A Queen of the same Name; the like Conjuncture of Affairs; a strict
Alliance with a Crown that was an Enemy to their Religion, gave them cause to
fear that something was concluded there against them, according to the Bloody
Maxims which the Duke of Alva had then inspired to the Council of France. It is
reported that the Reformed Ministers being prejudiced by those Suspicions
Preached in sundry places, that Persecution was at hand. The Catholics on
their side expressed their Zeal a little too much; and spoke publicly of a War
of Religion, as if it had been resolved upon. The Sermons of the Jesuits were
particularly Animated by the same Spirit that is observed in their private
Conversations; and diverse marks appeared in sundry places of the Notions they
inspired their Penitents with at their Confessions. And yet it is most certain
that Religion was not the real Motive of that War. It was a pure Affair of
^tate, into which none but the Lords on the side of the Reformed did engage
with a small number of their Creatures; ^he People, several entire Provinces,
and almost all the Cities ^emain'd within the bounds of their Allegiance. So
that the ^eclaration spoke the Truth upon this Subject, in saying that ^he
greatest number of them remained Peaceful and Loyal.

But the King's return to Bourdeaux, after the exchange of The Reformed
d^^arm'd at Bourdeaux.
^he Princesses, and the Declaration of the Assembly of Nimes, ^^ favor of the
Prince of Conde, were attended with very ^^l Consequences. Although the number
of the Reformed ^here was very inconsiderable compared to the Catholics, and
^^oreover most of them Merchants, whose Genius and Pro^ession is not inclined
to War, the Sheriffs thought fit to disarm them after the King's Departure.
This Precaution only ser^ed to fling them into a strange Consternation and
Despair. They fancied that the Catholics had a design to be rid of them ^y a
Massacre; and that their Arms were only taken from them ^o dispatch them the
sooner. The Reformed had already been ^s'd ill in several parts of the
Province, but particularly at ^as a' Agenois, where they had been accused of
favoring the ^esigns of the Duke of Rohan, and to have held Intelligence with
Cilonges one of his Captains, in order to deliver up the Place to him. From
whence they concluded that the Reformed being every where suspected of holding
a correspondence with the Prince of Conde, according to the Resolution of their
Assem^ly, their Enemies would make use of that pretense to exert a thousand
Violences against them: And that it was not safe for them to remain without
Arms at the Mercy of so Mutinous and so Seditious a People, as those of
Bourdeaux were. Therefore the Consistory being assembled at Begle, the usual
place in which The Consistory discontinues the Public Exercise of their
Religion.
they performed the public Service of their Religion, about a League distant
from the City, resolved to discontinue the said Exercise, for fear of exposing
the whole Church to a Massacre, which would be easily executed they being all
Assembled together. The Service of the said Church was performed at that time
by two Foreigners, Cameron and Primrose, Learned Men full of Zeal and of great
Credit, who seconded the Resolution of the Consistory. But there were two
Advocates of the Parliament among the Elders, called Saint-Angel and Auvergnat,
who opposed it, and used their utmost Endeavors to hinder it. Nevertheless the
Authority of the Ministers prevailed. Whereupon the said Advocates, whither out
of fear of losing their Practice, in case they should consent to a Resolution
which showed a diffidence of the sincerity of the Court; or whether Two
Advocates declare it to the Parliament.
they held any secret Intelligence there; or lastly whither they designed to
distinguish and set a value upon themselves by some extraordinary proceeding,
accused the Consistory before the Parliament, and represented the said
discontinuation of the Exercise of their Religion as a very odious Enterprise
tending to fill the Minds of People with Allarms and Jealousies* as also very
injurious to the Magistracy, that had taken the Reformed under their
Protection, and had promised them a Guard for the safety of their Assemblies.
The truth is, th^^ the said Resolution struck a Terror every where: And the
People supposing that the Consistory had powerful Reasons ^^ fix upon that
Expedient, looked upon this proceeding as a ^^g^ that they did not confide in
the Protection promised by the last Declaration. And that there was no relying
on that Phantasm of the Public Faith, so often violated.

The Parliament received the Deposition of the two Advocates; 1616.
and on the 5th of January of the following Year, they The Parliament ordains
the Continuation of the Exercise of the Reformed Religion.
made a Decree, Commanding the Reformed to continue the said Exercise as they
were wont to do at the usual place, ^^ pain of being Punished as Criminals of
leze Majesty. But they did not think it safe to Obey; since that being deprived
of Arms to defend themselves, they would be exposed to the Mercy of Friends and
Foes, both at the place of their Worship and by the way. They did not think the
Guards that were promised them sufficient to defend them against the Troops
that served the Prince, or those that were in Arms for the King, or the
Seditions that the Indiscreet Zeal of the Catholics might excite against them.
But then they were afraid of exposing their Ministers to the Indignation of the
Parliament by their Disobedience. Therefore they thought fit to remove them
from the City to secure them; and accordingly they did send the one to Tonneins
and the other to Royan: So that the said Reformed of Bourdeaux having no longer
any Ministers to perform Divine Service, had a lawful pretense by their absence
to discontinue the same and to keep at home. But after the Peace was made, the
Church having recalled their Ministers, and reassumed their former Exercises of
Religion, the Consistory Assembled as they used to do; and the first thing they
did, was to call the two Advocates to an Account for what they had done in that
Affair. Saint-Angel was more obstinate and passionate than the other, who
hearkened to Reason, and at last submitted to the Censures of the Consistory ^t
the Request of his Friends. So that all the Indignation of The Consistory cites
both the Advocates after the Conclusion of the Peace.
that Assembly fell upon Saint-Angel, who would never submit. But before he was
abandoned by his Companion, the Consistory cited them both to appear before
them, according ^o the forms prescribed by their Discipline. Saint-Angel had
^lledg'd in order to excuse his opposing of the two Ministers, that the
Discontinuation of the Public Exercise of their Re^igion, would prejudice the
Right granted by the Edicts, to which the Church would seem to renounce, by
interrupting ^he course of the Assemblies. But when he found himself ^ress'd by
those that brought the Citation of the Consistory to ^im, he concluded that
they would laugh at his Pretense, in ^ase he should appear, and that they would
lay some Morti^ying Censure upon him. For that reason he refused to obey They
appeal to the Parliament.
^he said Citation; and in order to secure himself and his Col^egue against the
Censure, he appealed to the Parliament: But ^e did it with so much Violence and
Inconsideration, that he exposed himself to the utmost Degree of Public
Indignation. He accused the Ministers of High Treason there; and upbraid^d them
with their Foreign Extraction: He endeavored to ^epresent them as Men infected
by the Maxims of their own Country; according to which they made no difference
between Absolute Authority and Tyranny. He complained of ^he Elders that had
Cited him, without leaving him a Copy or Act of the Citation; as if he had been
ignorant how different Ecclesiastical Formalities were among the Reformed from
Civil Proceedings. He published the Speech he made to the Parliament, when he
presented his Petition; and the Ministers replied to it, by Printed Apologies,
in which he was severely used. His Request was granted; and the Consistory
ordered to cease their Prosecution. Whereupon the Ministers entered their
Protestation, and appealed to the A Chamber composed of Catholic and
Protestant Judges.
Party-Chamber which was then at Nerac.

In the mean time as the recourse Saint-Angel had had to the The Consistory
suspends them publicly from the Communion
Parliament, and the Prohibitions he had obtained were esteemed contrary to the
Liberty of Exercising the Ecclesiastical Discipline, which was granted by the
Edict of Nantes, the Consistory did not think themselves obliged to suspend
their Proceedings: They Condemned the Advocates to a public Suspension of the
Communion; and the said Judgment was pronounced against them the very next Day
after the signification of the Order they had obtained from the Parliament.
They were treated in the Act of that Censure, as Contemners of God, Rebels to
the Consistory, and Disturbers of the Peace of the Church. This Affront
transported Saint-Angel beyond all measure: And whereas at that time he still
drew Auvergnat after him, they appealed from that Judgment as an Abuse; they
presented new Complaints to the Parliament; called the proceeding of the
Consistory Illegal; desired a Decree against Cameron; and leave to inform
against the Authors of that Affront; that the Secretary of the Consistory might
be obliged to produce the Books in which they entered their Acts, the better to
know what they had done. They obtained all: The Secretary was prosecuted to A
severe Decree.
produce the Books: And after all the Delays and Evasions he could contrive, he
was finally obliged to produce them at the Register-Office of the Parliament.
Cameron was Cited, and appeared to demand a Removal: About a Month was spent in
these Transactions, without regard to the Removal demanded by the Ministers: A
Decree was given conformable to the Desire of the Advocates: The Censure was
reversed being Abusive; the Consistory was commanded not to use the like
Proceedings for the future; Cameron was Condemned to a small Fine: And because
Saint-Angel had the Impudence to complain that he went in danger of his Life,
he was received under the Protection of the Parliament, and was allowed to
Inform against those that had threatened him. Yet though the Decree was so
favorable, he was allowed no Costs.

Du Sault, Advocate-General, spoke in that Affair in Terms The Advocate-General
Passion.
which require my giving an Abstract of his Discourse in this place, because it
shows a Passion without bounds, and without the least Moderation, in which he
proceeded so far as to allege things as Matters of Fact, which were ever
denied by the Ministers; and to maintain as Infallible Maxims, Propositions
which are opposite to Common Sense. This was his Character in Affairs of
Religion; and he has given proofs of that unruly Passion to his very Death. He
opened the Cause from its first Original; and affirmed that upon Saint-Angel's
The Ministers disown the things alleged by the Advocate-General.
Request the Ministers were summoned before the Council Chamger; in which they
cleared themselves by Oath of any Intention to leave the City; that they
promised to continue their Preaching at Begle, although there were no Body to
hear them; That the Court at that time did Command them not to retire from
Bourdeaux; that they were received under the King's Protection; that the
Sheriffs were ordered to guard them safely both in going or coming, and the
Ministers enjoined to produce the Witnesses they had of the Threatenings made
against them. The Ministers maintained the clean contrary; that they had
promised nothing, far from Swearing any thing; that they made no Reply when the
pleasure of the Parliament was declared to them. That their silence was not of
the Nature of those which could be Interpreted as a Consent, since it was
forced, and that it was impossible for them to speak without Transgressing the
Respect that was due to the Deputies of the Parliament, and without exposing
themselves to the hazard of being secured, by declaring that they could not
Obey. They said also, that the safeguard that was offered them was not
sufficient: That the putting of them without Arms into the Hands of the
Sheriffs, who were only attended by Catholics in Arms, was to expose them to
the Mercy of those that occasioned their Fear; That tho the said Guards had not
been composed of suspected Persons; yet they were not capable to defend them
against all the Parties they might chance to meet in their way; That St. Angel
himself being more frightened than the rest, cried out in a full Assembly, when
the said Convoy was proposed, and who shall secure the Guards? Intimating, that
they were not capable to secure others from a Danger, they could not avoid
themselves.

After diverse Reflections upon the Course of the Proceedings, Du Sault pretended
that Cameron's Appeal was not allowable; Absurdities*
by reason, that it was a Case in which the Government was concerned. He said,
that the End of the Suspension pronounced by them, which was supposed to be in
order to the Amendment of those that were Condemned to it, was a mere Chimera;
that the said Judgment was an Attempt against the Authority of the Court; That
it was a manifest abuse of Censures contrary to the Holy Decrees; which was a
very absurd Observation, from an Advocat General against the Reformed, who did
not trouble themselves to observe in their Discipline what he called the Holy
Decrees; which are the Canons of the Roman Church, and the Decrees of the
Popes. Nevertheless, it was upon that weighty Observation he laid the stress of
his Argument, to prove that this was a Case reserved to the Parliament, as an
abuse tending to interrupt the Course of a Lawful Proceeding. He Added,
contrary to the Faith of the Edicts, and contrary to the Common Practice, that
the Benefit of Appealing to the Chambres Miparties, in which the Judges were
half Catholics and half Protestants.
Party-Chambers was not allowed to Foreigners; and he pretended, that the
Parliament had often adjudg'd it so: Which might be true, without being Just;
by reason that the said Parliament, notwithstanding that it was Just to
preserve and allow those Chambers the Extent of Jurisdiction that was Granted
them by the Edicts, did nevertheless lay hold of all occasions to dispute it,
and to incroach upon it by a thousand Attempts.

In the next place du Sault coming to the Merits of the Cause, endeavored to
prove that neither the Consistory, Ridiculous Pretensions.
nor Cameron had any Right to Excommunicate, having neither Jurisdiction; nor
Orders: And the better to inhance this gross pretension, he added that the
Liberty of Conscience which the Reformed profess, dispences every one of them
from all Laws and Censures, either of theirs or of the Roman Church; and that
their Discipline extended only on such as were willing to submit to it. He
added with the same Spirit, that their Suspension was not the Suspension of a
Sacrament, because their Cene.
Communion was not a Sacrament: And whereas Auvergnat had acknowledged his
Fault, and submitted to the Consistory; he affirmed that his Submission did no
wise prejudice St. Angel whose Suspension contained an intolerable Error,
being pronounced against a Man who had done no ill; who had done nothing but
what was good; who had done nothing but what he was obliged to do, in
acquainting the Court with the Resolutions of the Consistory. After which he
cited the 35th of the particular Articles of the Edict; and affirmed, as if he
had never read it, that the said Article allowed Ministers to be Sued, and
Cited in Cases, in which the King or State were concerned: From which he
concluded that this was the Case, since the Consistory proceeded against a Man,
and would Censure him, for applying himself to the Court. In this he committed
at least two Faults equally Gross and Malicious: The one in corrupting the
sense of the Article, which mentions nothing of prosecuting the Members of a
Consistory, in cases in which the King or State are concerned; but exempts them
from being called as Witnesses before Justice, to depose what has been revealed
in their Companies or Assemblies, by scandalous Persons that are Summoned
there, or by the Elders and others of which they are composed, unless in Cases
in which the King, or State are concerned. The other in applying the said
Article to St. Angel, who had only drawn the said Censure upon himself by a
spightful Calumnious Accusation, which he had preferred to the Parliament
against the Ministers; tho not Ignorant at the same time, that in case he had a
just cause of Complaint against them, and sufficient Reasons not to apply
himself to the Assemblies and Synods, he ought at least to have summoned them
before their proper Judges, and to have made his Application to the
Party-Chamber. This may serve as an Example, to show how disaffected
Parliaments knew how to abuse the Edict: And it is easy to Judge by their
unjust Explications of it, and their manner of applying it, how they performed
the Execution thereof.

It was upon these Foundations the Decree was given, and that after the usual
Informations, Primrose and Cameron were Summoned Personally; and that for
nonappearance, the citation was converted to an Order for Imprisonment, and
that after the usual delays they were Cited to appear within the space of three
days. They were not Idle on their sides during these Rigorous proceedings: But
in Order to stop the Violence of a Parliament, which the Reformed were ever
Jealous of, they applied themselves to the King, from whom they obtained a
Decree, with a Warrant to Summon St. Angel before the Council, within the space
of six Weeks; injoyning the Ministers also to appear there; together with a
Suspension of all the Proceedings in the mean while. As for St. Angel, he got
nothing by this extraordinary way of proceeding: And while he Tormented the
Ministers of Bourdeaux, by Wranglings, and Disputes which did not permit them
to Publish his Suspension, another Minister did it for them. Hesperien came to
Preach at Begle and publicly A continuation of the ill Will of the Parliament.
pronounced the said Censure. In the mean time this Affair cooled in the
Council; and time having freed the Ministers of this Trouble, they continued
their Functions in the Church of Bourdeaux, from whence Cameron was removed
about two years after, to be Professor in Divinity at Saumur. However the
Parliament being dissatisfied, at their not having been able to obtain their
Ends of them in the preceding Affair, omitted none of the occasions that
offered themselves to Trouble them: I will relate one Example of it, and no
more. The following year, some Persons accused of Pyracy, being put into
Prison, were denied a removal to the Chamber-Mipartie in which the Judges are
part Catholics, and part Protestants.
Party-Chamber, under pretense that the Privilege of the Edict did not extend
to Pirates. Perhaps other Judges would have used them with less severity than
that Parliament, that had ever signalized it self, by Violences against the
Reformed, who were looked upon by them, as Guilty and Convinced of what ever
was laid to their Charge. But the said Parliament retained their Cause, and
Condemned them to Death. They submitted to it with so much Constancy, and
received it with such Signs of Christian Resignation, that Cameron thought
himself obliged to Honor their Memory with a short Relation of what past at
their Death. It was a kind of Reflection upon the Parliament, to Write a Book in
Praise of Persons who were Condemned to a shameful Death by them. Moreover
there were some strokes in it, which reflected directly upon them, because the
Reformed thought that they had Violated their Privileges. Therefore they
revenged themselves upon the Work, until an occasion offered it self to be
Revenged on the Author; and the Book was Condemned to be Burnt Publicly by the
Hangman.

After the Prince of Conde had taken Arms, the Court did A False Decree of
Inrollment of a Declaration against the Prince.
not fail to Proclaim him a Rebel, and to publish the usual Edicts in such
Cases against him and his Adherents. The Parliament of Paris to whom the said
Declaration was sent refused to pass it; by reason that the Prince had too many
Friends in that Senate, and that the Pretense of his Arms was grounded on the
same Abuses, that had occasioned the Remonstrances of the Parliament, which
were so ill received. So that after diverse Contestations, the Plurality of
Voices declared against the Verification of the said Declaration; and a Decree
was made upon that Subject, by which the Court declared, that they neither
could, nor ought to Register the same. The Party which followed the inspiration
of the Court and of the Favorites, caused the Words nor ought to be omitted
out of the Extracts of the Decree which were Published. And soon after it they
had Credit enough, to forge another Decree of Inrollment without any Exception,
which was found in the Register, in the room of the first. We may easily
imagine, that this bold Falsification of a Solemn Decree, in a Case of such
consequence, was highly resented. It created great disputes among the very
Members of the Parliament, who proceeded on both sides to invectives and
Protestations. The Prince resented it highly, as he had reason to do; and being
at that time in a better Condition to speak than he had been at first, he
complained of it by a Declaration full of the Marks of his displeasure. He took
occasion from thence to make New Demands; one of which was to punish those that
were concerned in the Falsification of the Decree.

Nevertheless, when all things seemed to be in the greatest Confusion, they
were disintangl'd all of a sudden; and Propositions of peace.
a Peace was talked on before the end of the Year. The Queen having gained her
ends, by the King's Marriage, Judged a Peace necessary to injo^ the Fruits of
that Alliance, to disarm and divide her Enemies, and to maintain her Authority
and her Creatures. On the other Hand the Prince seeing the Marriages were
accomplished, and that his Arms would prove ineffectual in that point, finding
himself moreover sufficiently formidable to make an advantageous Peace, forgot
his Promises and Treaties of a sudden, and only thought of clearing his own
Affairs. The Duke of Vando^^ who declared himself, and raised Arms for him in
Bretagne, and the Duke of Nevers who likewise raised Men without declaring
himself, rendered him the more considerable: The one by seconding him by a
Potent Diversion; and the other, because he had the power to do it, in case the
Court refused to buy his Forces at his own Rate. The most obstinate were
sensible, that it was impossible to dissolve the Marriages, not yet consummated
indeed, by reason of the infancy of the Parties, but Celebrated with all the
Forms, for the performance of which France and Spain had interchangebly given
Hostages. Had the Infanta of Spain been received ill in France, Spain had a
Daughter of France in their Power, on whom they might Revenge themselves. Thus
all things inclined to a Peace; and Public good seldom being the True Motive,
but the pretense of Princes, it was the thing that was least thought on during
the Treaty. The very Assembly of Nimes sent Deputies to the King, to beseech
him to grant a Peace to his Subjects; and those Deputies were received as if
the Court had had no reason to complain of those that sent them.

The Truth is, That they were not looked upon as Deputies from a General
Assembly; because it was not held in a place allowed of by the King, and that
the Court was unwilling ^o look upon their Resolutions as those of all the
Reformed, ^f which a considerable Number disowned them. Those Deputies
presented Letters to the King from the Assembly, (...) which they justified
their Conduct in Terms which ^how'd that they did not think it Criminal. Those
Letters were Pathetick and Eloquent. The Apology they ^ade for the Reformed was
grounded upon the just fear they ^ad conceived, seeing the Distempers of the
State increased, ^e Remedies rejected, the Remonstrances of the Prince of ^nde
and of the Parliament, hardly taken into consideration. ^e have seen, said
they, in the said Letters, your Sovereignty ^isputed, and brought into
question, the Independency of your ^own undecided; so that, We whose
Subsistence, next unto ^od, depends on the firmness of your Scepter, had Reason
to ^ink it high time to look about Us, when we found that Endeavors were used
to shake the very Foundations of it. Soon ^ter continuing to allege the
Reasons that had obliged them (...) Arm: We have seen, added they, Armies
Raised on all ^rts, and have heard several speaking the very sense of their
^earts, pr^saging the Felicities of Your Majesty's Marriage, by ^e Design of
our Ruin; as if that Alliance were to be Ce^ented by the Blood of your most
Faithful Subjects, which we included they would no longer defer to spill, than
till their ^ractices on our Patience had opened a way for them to do it. They
added to those Complaints of the Threatenings against ^em, the Contempt that had
been expressed toward the assembly; the Refusal of an Answer to the Petitions
o^ Addresses.
Cahiers that ^ere presented at Tours; the removing of the most conside^e among
the Reformed out of their places; the advancement of their greatest Enemies.
They desired the King to apply proper Remedies to all those hardships, which he
himself might reap the Chief Advantages of. They excused ^^e Refusal of the
Assembly to repair to Mompellier, by the ^me Reasons that had induced them to
remove from Greno^l^, which his Majesty had been pleased to approve of, namely,
that they did not enjoy their full Liberty there. They 1615.
also declared that the Assembly had hindered those of the Lower Languedoc from
taking Arms which the Dukes of Monmorency and of Vantadour could Witness for
them. After which they concluded with the usual Protestations of Obedience, and
with hopes that for the future they should have more favor and Justice done
them.

It is most certain, that the lower Languedoc had no share in The Lower
Languedoc remains peaceable.
the Troubles, whither it were that it proceeded from the care of Lesdiguieres,
who had taken his Measures with Alincourt Governor of the Lionnois, and with
the Dukes of Monmorency and of Ventadour, to preserve that and the Neighboring
Provinces in quiet; or that the Assembly were desirous for their own safety to
hinder the War from breaking out so near them; or finally, whither a reciprocal
fear had obliged both the Reformed and Catholics to remain in quiet. It is no
wonder that two Enemies who do not know one another sufficiently to know the
weak side of each other, or that know one another too well to despise each
other, should remain in Peace, notwithstanding the opposition of their
Interests* by reason that they mutually dread each other. Berteville who was
one of the Deputies that brought those Letters, made a Speech to the King
partly suitable to the substance of the said Letters. The King answered, That
he was willing to grant his Subjects a Peace without the Intercession of any
Body. The reason of this Answer was, that the King of England was The King of
England offers his Mediation for a peace.
desirous to have a hand in this Treaty. That Prince had promised the Prince of
Conde a considerable Supply before the beginning of the War: But whereas he was
not much inclined to Arms, and that a Controversy pleased him better than a
Battle, he contented himself with the Quality of a Mediator. The Prince of
Conde desired that the English Ambassador might assist at the Conference. The
Marshal de Bouillon also desired it. The Assembly of Nimes was of Opinion, that
the The Council of France refuses the said Mediation.
Treaty would be more solemn and solid, by the Mediation of a Foreign Prince,
out of respect to whom all Promises would be better kept. But the King's
Council would allow no Mediator^; being sensible that he who interposes in that
Quality between the Sovereign and his Subjects; deprives him commonly of the
acknowledgement and merit of what he grants ^t the request of another.
Therefore the Ambassador was only allowed to come to the Conference as a
Witness: The Prince of Conde and his Adherents agreed to it; but King James
neither got much Honor by it, nor the Cause he de^gn'd to Favor, much
Advantage.

Loudun was pitched upon for the place of the said Conference, 1616.
which was opened on the 10th of February. The King's Conference and Peace of
Loudun
Commissioners repaired thither; and the Prince of Conde gave notice to those
of his Party to do the like, or to send Deputies ^ut he troubled himself no
farther with their Interests, than was just necessary for the advantage of his
own. The Marshall de Bouillon found his account in it, by reason that the Court
was willing to favor him so much, as to oblige him not to renew the Troubles.
The Dukes of Rohan, and of Sully got nothing by it. Nay, the first was
neglected ^o that degree, that he was not so much as summoned to appear ^t the
Conference, in which he came without being Invited ^hither. But it was not long
before he showed the Prince of Conde, how sensible he was of that slight. The
Duke of Sully contributed considerably toward the Conclusion of a Peace; and
it would have been very difficult to have persuaded the Reformed to it without
him. Yet he was never the more favorably used for it in what related to his
own particular Affairs; and he received no manner of favor beyond the General.
The Reformed were not mentioned until all the rest were satisfied; after which
the Prince of Conde obtained some things for them, lest he should seem to
farsake them quite, after having received so proper and so necessary a succor
from them. But the Court did not forget their old Maxim, which was to grant
them nothing but what they could keep in spite of them; and to favor them as
little in the rest as possibly could be.

The Conferences lasted about three Months at Loudun, during The removal of the
General Assembly to Rochel.
which time the Assembly of Nimes obtained leave of the King to remove to
Rochel, to be nearer to the place of the Treaty. Thus from a Conventicle which
was looked upon as particular, disowned by the rest, and unlawful, it became a
General, Authorized Assembly. The Prince of Conde fell dangerously sick during
these Delays. His Illness changed the face of Affairs; and Projects were
forming already of what was fit to be done, in case he should die. The Queen
who seemed to be most concerned in that Accident, because the Prince was the
only Person who could dispute her Authority, neverthele^s dreaded the Death of
her Enemy, because she foresaw that it would break of the Treaty of Peace;
which would expose her and her Creatures to new Dangers, and the State to new
Confusions. So that the Prince's Recovery was looked upon on both sides as
equally advantageous to all; and the fear of his Death had disposed every body
to put an end to those Tedious Conferences. He became more tractable himself
while he thought he should Die, and thought he was obliged in Honor and Duty
to end a War before his Death, which he had occasioned: He persisted in the
same Sentiments after his Recovery, being desirous of rest. The most difficult
having made their Conditions, the Assembly of Rochell only remained
disatisfy'd. Sully undertook to prevail with them to receive the Conditions his
Majesty was pleased to grant them. In order to which he repaired thither with
the English Ambassador, who joined with him in order thereunto. The Assembly
was better united than they had been at N^mes: And whereas their Resolution of
joining with the Prince of Conde had only been carried by two Voices, their
Opinions proved more uniform about the Sureties they thought necessary for the
execution of the Treaty of Peace: So that Sully's undertaking proved pretty
difficult. Nevertheless he succeeded in it, because he omitted nothing that
could persuade, making use of Reasons, of Authority, and even of Money, which
often proves the most convincing of all Arguments. He prevailed with the
Assembly to send Ten Deputies to Loudun with a Power to accept The Assembly
sends Deputies to Loudun.
the Conditions that had been agreed upon with the King's Commissioners.
However they only granted them that Power, on Condition that they should have
leave to continue their Session until the Verification of the Edict were past;
That the Armies should be actually Disbanded; That Tart^^ should be restored to
them; which place the Reformed pretended had been taken from them by Surprise:
and that Commissioners should be dispatched forthwith; to put the Edicts in
Execution in the Provinces.

But Sully at his return, far from receiving Thanks for his Disingenuity of the
Court.
pains, was disowned for having engaged so far in the Prince's Name; and in
order to show that he had done nothing without Authority, he was obliged to
produce his Instructions. The Reason of this disavowal was that the Court would
not consent to the Continuation of the Assembly after the Conclusion of the
Treaty. However that difficulty was removed by obtaining leave for the Assembly
to remain at Rochel until a time prefixed; and that the said delay should be
employed by them in the Nomination of Deputies General. Sully drew an
Instrument upon that Subject, which was at first approved of by all Parties
only altering a few words. Moreover the Assembly sent a new Power to their
Deputies to Authorize them to approve it: After which the King's Commissioners
retracted, and would alter the Instrument in several things. This Game was
played twice or thrice: Sully was disowned, and then owned again in what he
did: The Writing was agreed to and altered so often, that those who were
employed about it had no longer any Patience. The Reason which made the
Commissioners so difficult, is that the principal Persons being satisfied, the
Court had a mind to use the Assembly haughtily, and to oblige them to receive
what they would give them with submission. They were sensible that the Lords
would not renounce the Advantages they obtained, to better the Condition of the
People.

Finally the Prince being informed by Sully of the Difficulties The Assembly is
almost compelled to accept a Peace.
which delayed the Conclusion, put an end to them like a Prince who considered
no body but himself. He whispered something to Villeroy; and soon after did the
same to Sully: After which he declared that Villeroy had granted what was
desired; and at the same time he Signed the Treaty, without allowing any body
time to answer him. This abrupt Conclusion vexed the Deputies of the Assembly
extremely; but they could find no Remedy; They discovered by several Instances
that it was a designed thing, to oblige the Assembly to receive whatever
Conditions the Lords had thought fit; and that they had only been desired to
send Deputies out of Formality. On Tuesday Morning before they had Signed, even
before their having given their Consent to what the others had concluded,
Orders were sent to the Minister who was in his Pulpit, to acquaint the People
that the Peace was made, and to exhort them to return God thanks for it. This
made those murmur, who knew that there were difficulties undecided; and made
them judge that it was a forced Peace, which they were obliged to accept of for
fear of falling into greater Inconveniences. And indeed the Marshal de Bouillon
himself forgot the Interests of the Common Cause, because he had secured his
own. He Exclaimed higher than any Body against the Assembly, though they had
only followed his Motions. He declared that he would look upon those to be
Enemies to the State, who should refuse to sign the Peace. Moreover he was
accused of having engaged himself to the King's Commissioners by writing to
March against the Assembly, and to make War against them, in case they should
disown what their Deputies had done, or should continue their Session beyond
the Term granted to them. The Duke de la Trimouille his Nephew who was Young
and Easy, and who did not tread long in his Father's Steps, did the same in
Imitation of his Uncle. But the Marshal de Bouillon designed thereby to show,
that he was the Moving Spirit of the Party; that his Advice was sufficient to
incline them to War, and his Threatenings to make them accept a Peace. The
Assembly gave him no cause to proceed to Extremes against them: They submitted
to the Treaty; they did Nominate Deputies General: And Berteville to whom the
Marshal had given hopes of obtaining that Deputation, was Elected according to
his Promise; Maniald was joined with him: After which the Assembly Dissolved it
self, without staying until the time that was granted them.

This Treaty was thus published, and Intitl'd, An Edict Edict of Blois.
given at Blois in the Month of May. It contained 54 Articles, among which
those that had a relation to the Public Good, were soon Converted into
Illusions, by the turn of Affairs that followed soon after. Most of them only
contained such things as are commonly employed in general Pardons. The Third
Article was in favor of the Roman Catholic Religion, which was to be restored
in all Places where their Worship had been Interrupted during the Troubles.
Their Ministers were maintained in the Liberty of their Functions; in the
Enjoyment of their Estates; and in the Possession of their Houses, of which the
Restitution was ordered. The Fourth was a weak Injunction to make Inquities
into the Death of the late King, under pretense that the King was informed that
his Officers had been remiss in it, notwithstanding their having received
express Orders about it from the Queen, both by word of Mouth and in Writing;
and the King promised to Write to all the Bishops of the Kingdom, to cause the
Decree of the Council of Constantia to be published in their respective
Diocesses, which speaks of the Life of Kings and Sovereign Princes. The Fifth
reversed a Decree of Suspension of those which the Parliament of Paris had
given in favor of the Independency of Kings, provided that such things as were
Imported by those Decrees should remain unperform'd, which had not been put in
execution yet; which related to the Assembly of the Princes and Officers of the
Crown with the Parliament, in order to the Reformation of the State. That is,
the King reversed those Decrees in Terms which seemed only to reverse the
Suspension of them. The Sixth presupposing that the Court had gone a great way
in answering of the Remonstrances and Demands.
Cahiers of the Estates General, promised that they would proceed in it without
any Discontinuation. The King engaged himself by the Seventh to Examine the
Article of the The Commons.
Third Estate: But he did not oblige himself to pass it into a Law. The next
Imported that the King would give no more considerable Places to Foreigners:
But he destroyed the said Promise at the same time, reserving to himself the
Power of bestowing them on such, under the pretense of singular Merit, or of
great Services. Some others followed these in Course which seemed to be useful
to the State; but were couched in Terms as Illusory as the preceding. The
Fourteenth confirmed the Edicts and all that related to them. The next Created
a new Office of Councellor in the Parliament of Paris, to be given to one of
the Reformed in the room of that of Berger, who had only changed his Religion
on condition that he should not be dispossessed of the said Office. The
Sixteenth restored the free Exercise of the Reformed Religion, in all places
where it had been Interrupted upon the account of the Troubles. The Seventeenth
allowed the Proceedings of the Prince of Conde, and of his Adherents both
Catholics and Reformed: Even of those who composed the Assembly of Nimes,
which was at Rochel at the time of this Edict. The Twentyfourth only related to
Rochel. The Forty seventh ordained the Restitution of the Places which had been
seized by the Adherents of the Prince: And whereas Tartas had been taken by
Surprise from the Reformed, the King ordered the present Restitution of the
same, before they should proceed to the Restitution of the others. But in order
to punish the People, as it is common for the folly of the Great ones, the King
reestablished some old Impositions which he had occasion for to pay the Peace
he was obliged to buy.

There were also private Articles, which were no less important Private
Articles.
than the General ones. The last promised 1500000 Livres to the Prince of Conde
and the Lords of his Party. The Court had no mind they should be seen by the
Parliament, for fear of Contradictions. Therefore they were sent to them Sealed
up; and the 53 of the General Articles, was very positive in ordering them to
be put in Execution. The First maintained the Gallick Church in its Liberties.
The Second disowned the pursuit of the Clergy for the publication of the
Council of Trent; and promised that it should have no Effect. The Third
excepted Leitoure from the Article about the Restitution of Places; because
there was a Dispute between Fontrailes and Angalin about the Captainship of the
Castle. The Dispute was begun before the War; which was the reason that
Fontrailles favored the surprising of the said place by the Duke of Rohan, who
turned out his Competitor. He made a shift to maintain himself in it until the
year 1620, and then only quitted it upon good Terms. In the mean while, the
Article Imported that until the decision of the Dispute, the King would deposit
it into the Hands of an Exempt of his Guards, or some other Reformed Officer.
The Fourth regulated a very particular Affair. Villemereau Councellor in the
Parliament of Paris, and le Maitre, one of the Masters of Accounts of the said
Court, had embraced the Reformed Religion. The Courts which they belonged to,
had hindered them from Exercising their said Employments upon that Account. The
Reformed took it very much to heart; and seeing that Berger did not lose his
place, though he was turned Catholic, they pretended that the others ought not
to be used worse, for embracing the Reformed Religion. The Catholics urged,
that the Number of Reformed Counselors was Limited to Six by the Edict; and
that therefore Villemereau's place ought to be taken from them; or at most that
they could only pretend to keep it in compensation of that of Berger. The
Reformed on the other Hand, pretended that the Edict only Limited the Offices
they were to have of necessity; but that it did not ba^ their Access to all
others, which they were declared capable of by the Edict. So that Berger's
place could not be taken from them without injustice, since it was one of the
Six allowed them by the Edict; nor yet, that of Villemereau, which he had not
rendered himself incapable of according to the Edict, by turning to their
Religion. This Article decided the thing in their behalf; which was the most
considerable point in favor of them in the Treaty; thereby gaining a New
Office in the Parliament, and another in the Chamber of Accounts, which is one
of the most considerable Courts of the Long Robe.

The Fifth confirmed the Exemption of the A Land Tax and heavy Imposition upon
the People.
Tailles, which had been Granted to Ministers, by a Declaration of the 15 of
December 1612. which had not been Verified* The Seventh abolished the
Remembrance of the Sedition of Milhau; and put the Catholics under the
Protection of the Reformed for their Safety. The Eighth did the same about the
Affair of Belestat, and put the Reformed under the Protection of the
Catholics. The Tenth restored the place of Master of the Ordinance to its
former extent, in favor of the Duke of Sully, from whom they had retrenched
something of it to Vex him. The other Articles contained some favors Granted
to some particular Persons. Moreover, the Reformed also Inrollment and
Modifications of the Edict.
obtained a Brief for an augmentation of 30000 Crowns for the keeping of their
Garrisons, and for the Sallaries of their Ministers, besides what the King had
already allowed them more than his Father.

The Verification of that Edict was not delayed long. The Court of Aids passed
it on the 8th of June; but with several Modifications; Principally upon the 14
of the General Articles, and the 15 of the Private ones. The Parliament did not
do it until the 13, after reiterated Remonstrances. They Modified the 14th
Article and the following, which they declared should be no President for the
Future. That which stopped these two Courts in the 14th Article, was not the
Confirmation of the Edicts which they had so often Verified: But the Briefs
that were mentioned in it, which being unknown to them, gave Cause to suspect
that the King promised immense Sums in it to the Reformed. They opposed it so
much the more Vigorously, by reason that they were not Ignorant that Kings
often make such Gifts, in hopes that they will have no Effect. It costs them
nothing to make such Grants, by reason that they are sensible that they will
not pass in the Courts in which the Letters of it are to be Verified. But in
this occasion, the Queen was willing the thing should pass, by reason that she
was desirous to expect a more favorable Conjuncture, to retract her promise.
This was an Edict, like to those in which nothing is refused; which they are
resolved to keep no longer, than while they may revoke them with safety. In the
mean time the Parliament and the Court of Aids refused to pass those Briefs,
without examining the Contents, or Use of the Sums which might be mentioned in
them. The Parliament made great Oppositions to the Article which related to
Villemereau; and the Reformed were never fully satisfied upon that Subject;
because a War was declared against them before it was determined. The Chamber
of Accounts did not Verify the Edict, until the 28th of the Month; and as to
the Article about le Maitre, they said, that before he should be allowed to
enjoy the Benefit of that Article, he should clear himself of some things he
was accused of; as it had been ordained by the Chamber, by a Decree of the 23d
of March. Thus an End was put to the War; and the State beheld the Renovation
of a Peace, of which the Sweets proved as Short as Flattering.

The End of the Fourth Part.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of NANTES. VOL. II. BOOK V.
The Summary of the Contents of the Fifth BOOK.
A Declaration upon the Coronation Oath. The Prince Authorize^ himself at
Court. The Queen puts him into Prison; which occasions great Disturbances. The
Reformed make themselves Masters of Sancerre. A Declaration upon the Edict of
Peace. The Duke d* Epernon makes War against Rochel. Privileges of that City.
Pretenses of the Duke. Rochel has recourse to the King, and makes an Ill
Defense. The Duke retires after reiterared Orders. Importance of his
Enterprise. The Circle Assembles at Rochel, and summons a General Assembly:
Which is not approved of by every Body. The Deputies of the Circle are ill
received at Court. Reasons to prove that the Assembly is necessary. Extremities
to which the Malcontents are reduced. The King's Temper. The Original of the
Fortune of Honor Albert de Luines. Some questioned whither he was Nobly Born,
Character of his Confidents. Death of the Marsh^^ d' Ancre. Alteration of
Affairs, and confirmation of t^^ Edi^^s. Luines Marries into the House of
Rohan. The Assembly of Rochel deputes to the King, and receives an order to
break up. They obey and resolve to protect the Churches of Bearn. Their
Petitions and Remonstrances.
Cahiers. National Synod of Vitre. Deputation to the King. Letters to the
General Assembly, and their Answer. The Churches of Bearn and of Auvergn^^^^
disturbed. The Count of Sancerre commits Host^ the City. The Churches of the
Province of the Country ^^ Foix, and those of Provence ill used. Leave given to
Ministers to assist at Political Assemblies. Places of Bailywicks established
but not exactly. Rogueries committed by the converted Moors. The Bishop of
Lucon retires from the Queen* The Jesuit Cotton out of favor; Arnoux succeeds
in his place. A Sermon Preached at Court by him. The Answer of the Ministers of
Charenton, to an Information exhibited against them. Writings on both sides.
The Bishop of Lucon Writes against the Ministers. Assembly of the Clergy. The
Bishop of Macon's Speech. The Jacobins turned out of Mompellier. They refuse to
admit a Jesuit Preacher there. The State of Bearn ill represented. The Effect
of this Speech. A Decree Authorizing the Jesuits to Preach at Mompellier. A
Decree of restoration of the Ecclesiastical Lands in Bearn. Reunion of that
Country to the Crown; which is opposed ^e Estates, La Force and Lescun. Deceit
of the Co^^t. A Dissertation upon this matter: Discontinuation of Hommage:
Inconveniences of the Disunion, and Advantages of the Reunion. By whom the
Union is pursued. Motives of the Opponents, and their answer to the
Dissertation. Publication of the Edict of Reunion. The Clergy obtains the
Decree of restoration of Church Lands, which declares, That the Deputies have
been heard, and the Writings seen. Subtilty of the Clergy. A Violent Speech.
The Bearnois endeavor to ward the Blow. Remonstrances of Lescun. Libels. The
State of Religion in Bearn. Lescun obtains only Words. Those of Bearn p^rsist
in their oppositions. Writings in favor of them. Why the Clergy refused to
take the reimplacement themselves. An Answer to the Writing of the Bearnois.
The Sequel of the Answer. Injustices against the Reformed throughout the whole
Kingdom. Enterprises upon the Cities of Surety. The free Exercise of Religion
hindered in sundry places. Injustices of the Parliaments. Jesuits. Burials.
Answers to the Petisions or Addresses.
Cahiers. Illusory Remedies.

WHILE the Prince of Conde was still uncertain whither he should go to Court
there to gather the Fruits ^f the Peace: The Queen who was unwilling he should
have ^^e honor of procuring some Advantages to the Reformed, ^^om whom he had
received such good Services, granted them (...) Declaration suitable to the
Answer the King had already gi^en to their Petitions, or Demands
Cahiers, about his Coronation Oath. It import^d that though the King had
sufficiently evideno'd his Intenti^ns, by the Confirmation of so many Edicts,
nevertheless being informed that some Reformed still entertained Suspicions, ^y
reason of what was happened between the Deputies of the Nobility in the Estates
General, he was still willing to give them farther Proofs of his good Will
toward them; and in ^rder to remove all their Scruples about the Propositions
made ^n the Estates; he declared that it had never been his Intention ^o
include in his Coronation Oath those of the Reformed Religion, who lived in the
Kingdom under the benefit of the E^icts, Secret Articles and Declarations given
in favor of them: And that in order to their better observation for the
future, ^he confirmed them anew. This new Edict was dated the 20th of July,
and was verified within a few Days after.

But the Public Tranquillity did not remain long ^^disturbed: And the very
Conditions on which it was obtained gave an occasion to renew the Troubles. The
Prince of Con^^ ^^^ The Prince Authorizes himself at Court.
bethought himself; during the Treaty of Peace, to make two new Demands, after
all the rest were granted to him, which gave the Queen a great deal of
Vexation. The one was, That the Queen should take from the Marshal ^* A^^^^,
with whom the Duke of Long ueville, Governor of ^ic^^^^, could not agree,
whatever he had left in that Province. The other was, To grant him to hold the
Pen in the Council; which was the power of Signing the Decrees of the Council,
the Weekly State of the Finances, and the Accounts of the Exchequer: That is,
he desired an Authority, which would be so much the greater in the Affairs of
the State, the Quality of first Prince of the Blood, being joined to that of
first Minister. The Queen had Spies at Loudun, which had given her an account
of those Propositions of the Prince; before Villeroy, who had engaged himself
to obtain the approbation ^^ that Princess, had acquainted her with it. She
thought that those Novelties had been Inspired to that Prince by that Minister,
who had been favorable to him all along in the Tr^^ty; as if he had designed
to Employ his Credit against the Marshal d' Ancre, who designed to ruin him.
But as soon ^^ he had spoken to the Queen, she immediately granted the Prince
new favors, though she had expressed a great deal of ^y to it to her
Confidents. The Reason of that ^^teration was, that Villeroy hinted, That in
case the Pr^^^^ should make an ill use of that Power, contrary to the Quee^^
Intentions* it would be in her Power to secure him whenever she thought ^^^.
Nevertheless this Expedient, which the Queen improved so well soon after, did
not reconcile Villeroy with the Marshal d' Ancre, who put him out of favor in
a short time. However he was restored to his Places again, as soon as that
Favorite was Dead; but he did not live long to enjoy th^^* The Prince coming
to Court, after some Delays, soon saw ^ Crowd of Courtiers attending on him,
and even the Marsh^l himself speaking before him, to secure himself against the
Public Ha^^ed. The Queen seemed at first cordially recon^^^il'd to him, and
the Prince of Conde who was satisfied with ^he degree of Authority he had
obtained, sincerely desired on ^is part to live in good understanding with her:
Insomuch that ^e took the Marshal d' Ancre into his Protection at the Queens
^equest, and promised to secure him against all Insults. But ^^at occasioned so
many Complaints and Reproaches against ^im, from those who had assisted him
during the Wars, and who were all Enemies to the Marshal, that he chose ra^^er
to retract the Protection he had promised him, than to ^^se so many Certain and
Useful Friends, for one Man, who ^as odious to the whole Kingdom. Whereupon the
Marshal ^as obliged to remove from the Court, and to retire into ^^s Government
of Normandy. The Queen was extremely ^^ncern'd to see her Authority fallen to
that degree, that it ^as not in her Power to maintain the dearest of her
Crea^^res, without the Assistance of the Prince: But it received a ^^nsiderable
Addition, when she found her self at the Mercy (...) a reconciled Enemy; for
whom the whole Court had al^ost abandoned her. Therefore, according to the
Advice, The Queen puts the Prince of Conde in Prison.
(...) which she had received the Overture from Villeroy, she ^t him in Prison.
This Enterprise as bold as unexpected, should have been greater, and perhaps
would have secured ^^e Authority of that Princess for a long time, had she
dared (...) resolve three or four days sooner, to seize the other three
^^incipal Heads of the Cabal with him, who were all come ^considerately to
expose themselves to be seized upon. But ^^e durst not undertake it, not being
prepared for it; and ^ereby she lost the benefit of the Prince's Imprisonment;
(...) reason that the others having reflected on their preceding ^^prudence,
exposed themselves no longer as they had done; that at the first Notice they
received of the Princes Prison; ^^ey all made their escape as well as they
could; that they ^^ok up Arms again for their common defense, and that ^^ey
never laid them down, until the Marshal d' Ancre's ^eath, and the Queens
Retreat had changed the State of ^ffairs.

In the mean time this Imprisonment occasioned great Alte^^tions. Which
occasions great disturbances.
The Inhabitants of Paris revenged it upon the House and Rich Furnitures of the
Marshal d'An^re, which the Queen suffered to be pillaged for three days
together, for fear of exasperating those Riotors by opposition. The Reformed
did rise in diverse parts; and dreading that Affair would be attended with
general Consequences, which might bring all those into Question, that had been
concerned in the last Troubles; they took some measures to avoid being
prevented. This first Act of Authority done in the King's Name since his
Marriage, renewed all their Former Fea^^; and taught them to judge by what had
been undertake^ against the first Prince of the Blood, after a Solemn Treaty,
what the Court might be capable of doing to the Prejudice of the Edicts,
against odious people, whose Ruin had been Swo^^ for so many years. Among other
things which those diffidences put them upon Acting, they made themselves Man
of Sancerre, a City that had been Famous ever since the (...) The Reformed
seize Sancerre.
Siege and cruel Famine they endured under the Reign of (...) the IX. They
looked upon it as one of the Places of Surety and had possessed it as such,
under the Title of Places that were annexed to ^^^ers.
Mar^ with that of Thouars. But the Count of Sancerre Lord o^ the Place,
animated with the same Spirit as all the other Catholic Lords, who had made
sundry such undertaking in diverse places, being unwilling to leave his City in
(...) Power of the Reformed, had found the way to re-establish himself in it,
and to get the upper hand there. Cou^ Marans his Eldest Son lived there, in
order to keep all things in the State his Father had settled them: But the
Inhabit^ turned him out, alleging, that since the said City had been surprised
from them, they had a right to retake it. Moreo^ the only thing in debate in
this Affair, and in all others of the same Nature, was barely the Guarding of
the said places. They neither disputed the Revenues, nor Rights of Fie^^ with
the Lords; but they pretended, that there ought to be no Garrison settled by
them in the same, and that those (...) of places were to be left to the Guard
of the Inhabitants. The Affair was carried before the Council, which at any
other time would undoubtedly have favored the Lord against the City, because
their design was to make the Reformed lo^ their places of Surety, beginning
first by those of Marriage, and by such as they held against the Inclination of
the Catholic Lords. But the Court had other Prospects at that time. They were
unwilling to increase the Party of the Malcontents by vexing the Reformed.
Therefore they deposited the City and Castle of Sancerre into the hands of the
Inhabitants, Declaration upon the Edict of Peace.
to be Guarded by them, until farther Orders: For which Letters Pattent were
Granted to them. The same reason induced them to publish a Declaration on the
30th of September, which confirmed the Edict of Blois and the Treaty of Loudun.
The pretense of it was, that all the Lords who had left the Court, after the
Imprisonment of the Prince of Conde, had only done it out of Fear that they
designed to revoke it: and they added farther, as if it had been certain that
they ^^d had no other reason for it, that they had assured the ^ng of their
good Intentions; and had expressed to him with Respect, that they only desired
to live in quiet. All ^is was Invention, and it only tended on their part to
^ke their time and measures: And the Queen made use of with great Policy to
persuade distant Provinces, that the affairs were in a fair way of
Accommodation; and thereby to destroy the Correspondencies that might be formed
there against her Authority. The Duke of Sully who was come back to Court again
after the Peace, and who was called to council, was against that Declaration,
which he neither ^ok'd upon to be sufficient to bring back the Malcontents,
or Honorable for the King; because that the Lords who were gone would have
time to show the falsity of what it con^i^'d, before it could make such
Impressions in the Provinces as the Queen desired: But the Court was in hopes
of the contrary, having so often experienced the Credulity of the people, that
they did not question, but they would be decided by those specious
Protestations.

The Duke d'Epernon was one of those, the Marshal d'An^ The Duke d'Epernon
makes War against Rochel.
was Jealous of, because his haughty Humor did not per^it him to humble
himself before him. Therefore, seeing ^s Enemy recalled to Court, and more in
favor than ever; ^e Old Ministers turned out, and the Queen's Creatures put in
their Room; the Bishop of Lucon Secretary of State; and Mangot Keeper of the
Great Seal, he was afraid lest the hatred of the Favorite might prove
prejudicial to him. He resolved to put himself in a posture of defense, in case
any should dare to Attack him: But his Pride not allowing him to join with the
other Malcontents, because he could not have the Chief Command among them, he
was forced to seek another pretense to take up Arms. Rochel afforded it to him.
He pretended, that important City was one of the Privileges of the said City.
Dependencies of his Government. The City on the contrary pretended an
immediate dependence from the King; not to be obliged to suffer any Soldiers
but their own Inhabitants; or to have any Governor but their Mayor, whom they
Elected yearly. Their Pretense for it was, that having formerly been under the
Power of the English, they had voluntarily submitted to France on that
condition. The Truth is, that the most Ancient Historians confess, That they
obtained so many Privileges, and such advantageous Conditions, that they tended
as much to put them at Liberty, as to change their Master. The only Objection
against them was, that having been taken since by the English, and afterward
retaken by the French, they were no longer to be considered in the State in
which they were put by the first Treaty, but (...) having received new
Conditions, when retaken by force by the Kings of France. The Duke d'Epernon
made use of that Pretense: And the Council also used the same, when they
resolved to ruin the Power of that City, which so many Privileges daily
increased. But they replied, that the Inhabitants had not violated their
Treaty, when the said place was taken by the English; that having only been
forced to submit to a Superior Power, without Fraud or Treason, at a time when
the King was not in a Condition to succor them, they had not forfeited their
first Conditions; that the English after the taking of it had left them their
Privileges; Tha^ the French not having retaken it by Storm, and against the
Will of the Inhabitants, could not deprive them of them; that the City had
contributed toward its return under the French Dominion, both by the Affection
the Inhabitants had preserved for it, and the little Assistance they had given
the English; Whereby it was evident, that they had lost nothing by being
restored to the Power of their Lawful Sovereign; and that they were restored to
it with their former Advantages. They added, that the Kings of France had
confirmed all their Privileges, several times since their being retaken; and
moreover had augmented them by New Concessions: Whereupon they laid a great
stress upon what happened to Lewis the XI. a Prince who having oppressed the
Liberty of his Kingdom in many things, was not of a humor to do that for a
City that had lost her Freedom, which did not belong to it by an evident
indisputable Right. He made his Entry in Rochel on the 24th of May 1472. He
Swore before Gaubert Cadiot who was Mayor of the Place, to preserve all the
Privileges of the City, which are all set down in the Act. The King was upon
his Knees before the Crucifix during the Ceremony, and obliged himself to
succor the City in case of need, even with his Person, and to Death
inclusively. We may say, that the said Oath is the most perfect Abridgement of
the Fundamental Obligation of a Sovereign toward the Preservation of his
Subjects. After this Oath was taken, the Mayor Cadiot took the Oath of
Allegiance to the King in the behalf of the whole City.

This did not hinder the Duke d'Epernon from taking up The Duke's Pre^^nsiens.
Arms, under pretense to force the said City to pay him those Devoirs they
refused him; and to obtain satisfaction for some Injuries he pretended to have
received from them. He complained, that the Rochelois had surprised the Castle
of Rochefort, which he pretended to be in his Government, and that they had put
a Garrison in the same. He Published a very severe Manifesto, and full of
Invectives against the Reformed in General; and at the same time marched
against Rochel with 6 or 7000 Men, and committed some Spoils about it. The City
did not expect those Acts of Hostility; whither they thought that the Duke
would not dare to proceed to an open War against a City that was Powerful of it
self, and seconded by all the Reformed Party; or whither they expected a speedy
Relief from the adjacent Provinces in case of being attacked. This 1617.
was the Reason that they were unprovided, that they made an ill defense; and
that the World beheld with Astonishment that formidable City, which had been
attacked in vain by so many Kings, reduced to suffer the Incursions of a
Private Person, without being able to free the Estates their Inhabitants
possessed in the Country from the Pillage of his Soldiers. Their Recourse was
to the King, to whom they Rochel applies it self to the King and makes an ill
defense.
made their Complaints against the said Duke: And whereas the Court was
otherwise employed at that time, and that they were desirous to see the Duke
lay down his Arms, those Complaints were hearkened unto, and the Duke was
ordered to leave the Rochelois in Quiet. However, he did not desist at first.
Boissise who was the first that was sent to him, could not prevail with him to
give over his Enterprise; and was even constrained to throw himself into
Rochel, to acquaint the Inhabitants that the King disowned the Dukes
proceeding, and to give them leave to take up Arms for their defense: Which
however, could not hinder him from being suspected of double Dealing. Vignols
being sent sometime after him, to renew the same Orders to the Duke, found him
better disposed. The Duke, properly speaking did not lay down his Arms: But he
withdrew his Forces from the Territories of the Rochelois; and his Excuse for
his so easily granting what was desired of him at that time, was that he was
sufficiently Revenged by the devastations he had committed. He Writ very boldly
to the King to excuse his Enterprise, considering that he was a Man who had
much to fear, and who was not beloved.

The Glory of that Expedition has been mightily cried up Importance of his
Enterprise.
in the History of his Life; and that Exploit mentioned in it, as if it had
been the first Cause of the Siege, Cardinal de Rocheli^u laid before the said
City; because, say they, That the success he obtained in that small War, made
the Court sensible, that since they could not defend themselves against the
Forces of a private Person, it would not be impossible for the King's Forces,
taking a favorable occasion to reduce them to reason. But the Truth is, that
the said Action is too much Honored in it. It neither answered the Noise the
Duke had made, nor the Threatenings of his Manifesto. He ought not to have laid
down his Arms, without having first dismantled that Proud City, and made it a
lasting Monument of his Vengeance, and of his Power. Nevertheless, all this
dwindled to the Pillaging of Peasants, and destroying of the Estates of some
private Persons: Which a Band of Thieves might have done as easily as a
Regulated Army. After which, he retired home, having only seen the Walls of the
City at a distance: Very well pleased to cover his Retreat with the King's
Authority, who had laid his Commands on him to lay down his Arms. Therefore,
the Reformed had some Reason to turn the said Expedition into Ridicule, and to
relate in the form of extraordinary News, That the Duke d'Epernon had made his
Entry before Rochel.

But during this small Trouble, Rochel having implored The Circle Assembles at
Rochel.
the Succor and Council of their Neighbors, Assembled the Circle, according to
the Regulation made at Saumur; that is some Deputies of the Provincial Council
of five Neighboring Provinces, to deliberate about the means to repel the Duke
d'Epernon. Those Deputies observing great Marks of a good understanding between
the Duke d'Epernon and Vignolles, and little or no Effect of what had been
promised; being moreover dissatisfied about the Conduct of the Court, which
gave good Words, but came to no performance; suffered themselves to be
persuaded by the Marshal de Bouillon to do something extraordinary, in order
the better to mollify the Court and the Duke d'Epernon. The Duchess of
Bouillon, who seconded her Husband pretty well, passing in those parts, under
pretense of going to Turenne by his Order, solicited those who had a respect
for him so powerfully, that the Circle resolved to Convene a General Assembly
at Rochel for the 15th of April; and that they sent Deputies to the King, to
ask his Leave in order thereunto. The Marshal And Convenes a general Assembly.
had a great interest in that Affair. As he was one of the Malcontents, who
had made a New League against the Marshal d'Andre, he had been declared a
Criminal of State; and according to the Maxims of the Court, he was none of the
least Guilty, since that besides his Religion, and his being Esteemed the
Primum Mobile of that Cabal, it was very well known, that he endeavored to
strengthen his Party abroad, when he required Money and Men. Therefore, he was
also desirous to make an Interest at home, to the end, that in case his other
Measures should fail, he might at least be able to make his Peace, or to save
his Person, by the Credit of a General Assembly.

This Convocation did not please every Body. Many thought it unnecessary,
because the Court promised to see Justice done to Rochel, and that in Effect,
the Duke d'Epernon began by degrees to perform what he had promised, and not
executed. They added, that it would be dangerous; that it would displease the
King, who seeing it formed at a time when the Troubles began to be renewed in
his Kingdom, would think that it was held against to his Service. They said,
that it was convened contrary to the Settlements, which did not allow a
Province which had no Grievances to desire it. They endeavored particularly to
insinuate, that Rochel, upon whose particular Account it was desired, would
abandon the rest of the Reformed, as soon as they had received satisfaction
from the Court. These were the sentiments of those who preferred Tranquillity
to all things; and especially of the Reformed, who lived in the Neighborhood
of Paris, who commonly were more inclined to Timorous, Slow Councils, than to
bold precipitated Resolutions. But the others replied, that if the King had
received ill Impressions concerning the designs of those who desired the
Assembly, it was necessary to remove them by the good Resolutions they should
take in it; that a General Assembly being capable to reunite all People to the
desire of a Peace, was the best expedient that could be taken to procure it,
and above all to obtain it from the King's Clemency, by most humble
Supplications; that nothing was done contrary to the Settlements, considering
the Just Cause of Complaint they had; that the strongest of all Laws, in a time
of Confusion and Disorder was Necessity; and that Rochel would not abandon the
common Cause, for the particular Offers that were made to them.

However, the Deputies of the Circle were not well received The Deputies of the
Circle are ill received at Court.
at Court; from whence they departed without obtaining the permission they
desired. Besides, the usual reasons the Court had to dread Assemblies, they had
some that were particular for this. The Troubles were so great every where,
that they could not Authorize a General Assembly, without being guilty of
Imprudence; by reason, that whatever side they inclined to, they were capable
to give the upper hand to the Party they should Embrace; and perhaps ^rm one
apart, which might take the advantage of the Weakness of the others. It was
generally believed, that the Duke of Vendome designed to put himself at the
Head of the Reformed; and it was publicly discoursed, that he kept a ^an on
purpose at Rochel, to Treat in his Name with the Assembly. There was no time to
make Rome Relish that ^^rmission, the Council of which had taken such an Empire
over that of France, that they regulated all their proceedings. The Queen had
been obliged to give the Cardinal de ^ye^se ample Instructions before the
Assembly of Saumur, (...) excuse the favor she had Granted to the Reformed
upon ^e account of Necessity; either in confirming their Edicts ^y a Solemn
Declaration; or by allowing them to Assemble (...) a time, when they could draw
such advantages by their ^nion. It would have been difficult to use those
Reasons at ^resent, which might have passed for good at that time, because they
could not have been insisted upon, for fear of discovering the Weakness and
Confusion of the Government. The shortest way was to refuse the permission
desired by the Deputies of the Circle, in hopes that those who did not approve
that Assembly, would have Credit enough, to perwade the rest to have patience.
Nevertheless, that Refu^ aggravated matters instead of suppressing them; and it
did not hinder them from inviting the Provinces to send their Deputies to
Rochel on the appointed day, so that as they persisted in the Resolution to
hold the Assembly without leave, in case they could not obtain the consent of
the Court, they thought fit to Publish their Reasons about it.

Therefore they Published a kind of Manifesto, in which K^as^ns to prove that
the Assembly is necessary.
they observed, that people were in Arms every where; that the two Parties, who
aimed to destroy each other, pretended equally the King's Service; which might
occasion the Ruin of the State, and of the Churches, unless a distinction were
made a what the Real Service of the King consisted, in order to side with that;
that particular Persons, apt to divide themselves, according to their Interests
and Inclinations, were not proper Judges to decide that Question; that its
General Assembly was more capable to do it; that the Edicts of Nantes and of
Loudun were daily violated as to what related to the Churches; that the
Deputies General having made their Complaints to the King about it, without
having obtained the least Redress, there remained no way to Remedy the same,
but by a General Assembly; that the Commissioners promised by the Court in the
Assembly, which was held at Rochel at the time of the Treaty of Loudun, had not
been in the Provinces, or at least, that whatever was favorable to the
Catholics having been Executed long since, nothing had been performed of those
things which were advantageous to the Churches; that the Court had refused the
so often promised Creation of two Offices of Masters of Requests for the
Reformed; that a Fort had been demolished in one of the Suburbs of Gergea^, in
Order to render that Town of Surety Useless to the Churches, and to deprive all
the Reformed between the Seine and the Loire of a secure Retreat; that they had
refused to put a Reformed Governor in Sancerre, according to Henry the 4th's
Promise; that Fontrailles having promised to go to Mass, provided he were
maintained against Angalin in Leitoure, which rendered him incapable of
Commanding there, because it was a Place of Surety, of which the Governor
ought to be a Protestant, his Proposition had been heard, and that Angalin was
not reestablished, although the Change of Religion of his Competitor had removed
all the difficulties of that Affair; that the Parliament of Paris had
suppressed the Place of Co^drai, which was one of the Six allowed by the Edict
to the Reformed, under pretense of that of Villemerau which they had gained;
which showed, that they would not admit them without distinction into
Employments; that la Ferte Vidame had been taken by Surprise from the Vidame of
Chartres, a Reformed Lord, at whose Charge a Garrison had been put into it,
though he had never been suspected, nor a Rebel; and that no regard had been had
to his Petitions; that the Switzers of the Reformed Religion that were
Quartered at Poi^iers, had been forbidden to go to Church; which was looked
upon as a step to do the same to the Scots and Switzers of the Guard; that
instead of protecting the Duke of Bouillon against the Archdukes, he had been
declared a Criminal of State; which alone required a General Assembly, in Order
to consult about it: That the Council had resolved the reunion of Navar, and of
the Principality of Bearn ^o the Crown, to have a pretense to introduce the
Edict of Nantes there, contrary to the Edict of Loudun, and that which had been
Published in consequence thereof; that the said Union was attended with several
Inconveniences; Viz. that the Ministers, and the Colleges would be deprived of
their Subsistence; that the Presidentship in the Estates of Bearn, would be
given to the Bishops; that la Force would be deprived of the Government, and
his Son of the Survivorship; that the Garrison of Navarreins, an important
City, provided with Canons, and Munitions would be disbanded, and that the said
City would thereby remain exposed to the Surprise of the Spaniards. They added
to all this, considerations upon the Enterprise of the Duke d'Epernon against
Rochel; and from all those Subjects of Complaint, concluded that the Assembly
was necessary to redress them.

Those Reasons were so much the stronger, by Reason that Extremities to which
the Malcontents are reduced.
the Court had been informed of those Injustices by the Petitions of the
Deputies General, who had not been able to obtain an Answer to them: Another
Consideration likewise, made them exceedingly more weighty. The Party of the
Malcontents was reduced almost to the utmost Extremity. They had but one Town
left; and the Duke of Mayenne was Besieged in Soissons, and no longer in a
Condition to defend himself, had he been vigorously pressed. They were afraid,
that the Marshal a'Ancre after this, being Proud of their Defeat, and moreover
an Enemy to the Reformed, would inflict a Punishment upon them for the
Resolutions taken at N^^es, which had reduced him upon the very Brink of the
Precipice. But his unexpected fall removed the pretense of those Terrors. When
Fortune seemed to have placed him, above the reach of his Enemies, a Tragical
End was preparing for him, by means which he never could foresee, nor prevent.
The The King's Temper.
King was hardly minded at Court. He was young, and of a Weak Constitution. He
Loved Hawking and Music, and passed his time in those little Amusements,
leaving the sole Authority of the Government to the Queen his Mother. He was
nevertheless Jealous of his Power even to Excess, though he neither understood
it, nor could enjoy it. During the whole Course of his Life, he never could
exert it himself, nor suffer it into the Hands of another. It was equally
impossible for him, not to raise his Favorites to a vast degree of Power, and
to endure them when Possessed of that Grandeur to which he had raised them
himself. By making them Rich, he put them in a State to displease him. The
Excess of his Complaisance for them, was as it were the first degree of his
Hatred: And I question, whither an Example could be found in his History of any
Favorite, whose Death, or Ruin he was concerned for. But his Sentiments were
concealed in his own heart: And whereas he only Communicated them to few, those
who are of Opinion, that there is always a Mystery in the Conduct of Princes,
accused him of a Black and profound Dissimulation. To say the Truth, the reason
of his silence was, that he neither confided in himself, nor in others; and
that he had a great deal of Timorousness and Weakness. Most of those who have
spoken of him, acknowledge that he had Courage; and that he did not lose his
Judgment in danger; that he loved and understood War; that he was a good
Scholar; but that he was not capable of Original of the Fortune of Honor
Albert de ^uines.
Reigning.

There was a Man about him, whom no body was Jealous of, because his parts were
too mean to be feared. He was suffered with him as a Man, who amused him with
the pleasure of Hawking, which those who had the Authority were very well
pleased to see him employed about, to the and that they might do what they
pleased. They say, that this Man begun to insinuate himself into the King's
Favor, by ^ present he made him of two Pigriesches.
Wary Angles, taught to Fly ^t small Birds in Hedges. This Animal is not much
larger than a Sparrow, and is naturally addicted to peck others, and to keep
them from his Nest: So that Application and Care may easily form him for that
small War; to which he ^s naturally inclined. This Present Enchanted the King,
who ^ook a great deal of Pleasure to see those little Birds imitate those of a
higher Flight. They diverted him at all times. ^n Rainy Weather h^ made them
fly in his Chamber, or in some Gallery. He affected to go often to Mass to the
Capu^ins; their House being conveniently Seated to afford him that pleasure; by
reason, that his way thither was through ^he Thuileries, a Royal Garden, in
which he met with Birds, which he caused to be taken by those Wary Angles. He
had a little Net set up at the End of the Hedge, into which those Birds being
thus pursued, never failed to Entangle themselves; and he took abundance of
pleasure to see them plucked by those little Animals, which he often carried
himself upon his Finger, with Bells and Varvels like Hawks. And l^st that
Pleasure should fail him sometimes for want of Birds, he caused abundance to be
taken and bred, which he never set free again, but to be taken by those Wary
Angles. Whereas the Reader may perhaps never find in any other Book, which were
the beginnings of the greatest Fortune that ever a Subject was raised to: I
thought I might make this digression to oblige him.

The Person I am speaking of was Luines, a Man almost It has been questioned
whither he was a Gentleman
unknown, and even during whose Favor, some questioned whither he was born a
Gentleman. It is certain at least that he was very Poor: And it is reported,
that when he came first to Paris with Brantes and Cadenet his two Brothers,
they had but one Cloak amongst them* which they wore by turns, two of them
remaining at home while the other was in the City, or at Court about their
common Affairs. No Body thought him capable to persuade the King to any thing
but the Pleasures of Hawking: But they were mistaken; and Luines having found
the Ascendent he had over the King's Mind, made use of it to destroy the
Marshal d'Ancres. Whither he were put upon it by the Malcontents who had
gained him; or whither he were Animated by the Spaniards, who dreaded the
Marshal's growing so Powerful, as to have no longer occasion for them; or
whither he designed to raise his Fortune upon the Ruins of that Wretch, he took
the advantage of the King's Foible which he knew; and stuffed his Head with
Jealousies and Vexations, against those who abused his Authority and Treasure.
Three Men served Luines in that design: Deagean a Subtle, Violent and Ambitious
The Character of his Confidents.
Man, who was first Clerk to Barbin the Queen's Creature, betrayed his Master,
and came every Night to give the King an Account how they played with his
Power. Marcillac an inconsiderable Person, who Traffick'd for his Service,
seconded in the day time by his Discourse, what the other had advanced.
Desplans, a Soldier in the Guards, had a share in the said Conspiracy. Deagean
was the only Man of Parts among them: But he had too much Genius for Luines,
who in order to be rid of him, bounded his Fortune to a Place of President in
the Chamber of Accounts of Grenoble, where he sent him to reside, under
pretense of watching the Conduct of Lesdiguieres. The King being persuaded by
those Agents of Luines, who among other things, never failed to acquaint him
with the Murmurs of the People against the disorders of the Government, was at
a Loss which way to rid himself of his Wardship. He had a mind to Fly to Meaux,
there to Summon his Subjects from all Parts to his Assistance. Some proposed to
him to go to the Parliament upon some Pretense; and there to cause the Marshal
to be seized in his Presence, and to give an Order for his Trial. But Luines
either Dreading the King's Weakness, or the Queen's Authority, chose to have
him Seized in the Louvre. The King gave Order to Vitri to do it, who apparently
had received secret Orders from Luines about it, to whom the King having sent
him back again, to know his Pleasure, he carried the thing farther than it was
designed. He caused Death of the Marshal d'Ancre.
him to be killed on the 4th of April, under pretense that he had leave so to
do, in case he made any resistance. Yet he made none, but only expressed his
Astonishing by some Words, when Vitri acquainted him that he was his Prisoner.
But this Action of Vitri was justified, and that Service made him a Marshal of
France.

The State of Affairs was quite Altered by that Death. The Alteration of
Affairs.
Queen being penetrated with Grief, was deprived of all Authority. Her
Creatures lost their Places; those she had removed from Court were recalled:
The Malcontents submitted themselves; and the King Granted them a General
Pardon in the Month of May, in which acknowledging that they had only taken
Arms for their safety, against the Insolent, Violent and Pernicious designs of
the Marshal d'Ancre, who employed the King's Forces contrary to his Intention
to ruin them; that after his Death, they returned immediately to their
Allegiance, and that they had implored his Pardon very submissively, he revoked
the Declaration that had been given against them, Abolished the remembrance of
what was passed, confirmed the Treaty of Loudun, and the Edict of Blois, and
Ordered that all his Subjects, as well Catholics as Reformed should live in
Peace, under the Benefit and Authority of his Edicts. After which the favor of
the New Favorite was exerted against the Miserable Remains of the Marshal's
Family, even to Inhumanity. His Lady was Executed for pretended Crimes, of
which she was found Guilty, more upon the Account of the hatred of the Public,
than by any solid Proofs. Luines was Adorned with his Spoils, and saw himself
so great-all of a sudden, that he was Astonished at his own Fortune. He made
use of his Authority in a manner yet more Odious than the Marshal d'Ancre,
whom, to say the Truth, he neither surpassed in Birth or Merit. His Favor was
only for himself; he enjoyed it amidst Seditions, and Civil Wars; and he
engaged himself into Foreign Cabals, to the great detriment of his Country.

I must also add, that in order to maintain his Credit, he Married the Daughter
of the Duke de Mombazon, of the Luines Marries into the house of Rohan
House of Rohan. This persuaded the Duke of that Name, that he would be
considered by that Favorite, who was Honored by his Alliance. But the Duke
being come back to Court, after the Treaty of Loudun, had reconciled himself
sincerely to the Queen, who had received the Excuses ^^ made to her about his
taking Arms very favorably. All that he had obtained by the Treaty was the
assurance of the Government of Poitou, provided he could obtain the Duke of
Sully's Demission; because there was an Article in the Edict which promised
expressly that the King would Grant no more Survivorships. When he had obtained
the Demission, he was obliged to come to Court in Person to obtain his Letters
Patent for the same. He did it boldly enough; tho he thereby exposed himself to
the Mercy of Persons, of which some hated him Mortally; and the others were
very Faithful. Nevertheless, it proved to his Advantage; and the Queen gave him
his Patents, which the change of Affairs hindered him from enjoying. Yet
notwithstanding, he applied himself to the Service of that Princess with so
much Fidelity, that he made an End of Ruining himself at Court; and that far
from drawing an advantage by the Alliance of that New Favorite, he created an
irreconcilable hatred between them. It will be necessary to know the
particulars, which were the Motives or occasions of the following Wars.

During these Transactions, the Deputies of the Provinces that were Invited to
Rochel, were got thither for the most The Assembly of Rochel sends Deputies to
the King.
part; and that Assembly created equal Jealousies, on all sides* by reason that
the State being divided into several Parties, ^^ body knew which they would
join with. But the Marshal's Death, and the Queen's Exile having appeased the
Troubles the most specious Reasons of the Assembly were removed* They sent
Deputies to the King upon this unexpected* alteration, to Congratulate the
recovering of his Authority. Those Deputies did not see the King, who refused
to treat them as Deputies from a Lawful Assembly: But after that the Answer ^e
sent them was not disobliging. The King referred to hear And receives an Order
to break up*
them when the Assembly should be Dissolved; they were desired to behave
themselves as good Subjects ought to do, when they have something to desire of
their King; to draw their (...) Cahiers: To separate forthwith; and to retire
into their * Petitions and Demands.
Respective Provinces: That upon that Account the King would favor them in all
things that were reasonable and ^st. Therefore they broke up at the return of
their Deputies, They obey and resolve to protect the Churches of Bearn
according to the Advice of the Wisest, who remonstrated to them with a great
deal of Vigor, That it behooved them to ^how by that mark of Obedience, that
they did only Assemble when they had just reasons to fear; but that they
dissolved of themselves as soon as ever those fears were dissipated. They
^^serted an Article in their Cahiers which related to the Churches of Bearn,
desiring that no Innovations might be ^ade in that Principality, either in
Church or State. But they showed yet better how much they concerned themselves
^^ the Affairs of that Province, by an Act they made, which obliged all the
Churches to assist those of that Province, in ^ase of Oppression and Necessity,
by some Alteration of the State, ^ither in the Ecclesiastic or Politic part,
if those Churches ^plor'd the assistance of those of France. They ordered the
Provinces of the Upper Languedoc, and of the lower Guyenne, to Assemble by
their Deputies with those of that Sovereignty, of necessary, to endeavor to
prevent their being oppressed. They writ to the great Lords to Intercede for
the Reformed of Bearn, and they exhorted all the Councils of the Provinces to
recommend them to the Deputies General. The Affection they expressed for those
threatened Churches proved useless: And the King's very Answer to the Article
which spoke in their behalf, destroyed by one word which was Inserted in it on
purpose, all the hopes of their being favorably used. The King promised to
preserve all his Subjects of the Country of Bearn, both Catholics and Reformed
in the Possession of their Ancient Privileges; and to maintain Peace and Union
there as among the other Subjects of his Realm. The Equivocation of the word
Ancient was a plain Argument, that the Council designed to look upon the
present State of Bearn as a Novelty* And to restore the Catholics there to all
the Advantages they had lost, by the attempt they had made against their Lawful
Queen.

The Assembly Inserted in their * Cahiers some other important Their Petitions.
Articles; viz. Concerning the Exemption of the Ministers, and the Declaration
given upon that Subject, which the Court of Aids still refused to verify; the
Necessity of Reformed Associates for the Instruction of Criminal Causes; the
discharge of certain Offices which were imposed upon the Reformed, tho* they
thought they could not Officiate them without wounding their Consciences;
concerning the Privilege of Reformed Magistrates and Officers, not having
discharged their Trust in their Offices, to be prosecuted in the Chambers of
the Edict, and before no other Judges; and several others, to which they
received Specious Answers; but without Effect. Besides all these Articles there
was an Instruction which they charged the Deputies General with, to beg of his
Majesty to put the Prince of Conde at Liberty. This was the only effect
produced by the Solicitations of the Princess his Mother, who was at Rochel,
and who endeavored to oblige the Assembly not to break up before they had
obtained his Deliverance. Nevertheless they were obliged to give over that
pursuit, because the State of Affairs was not disposed toward it, and that the
new Favorite was not in the least inclined to put a Prince at Liberty* who
would soon get the better of him in the Management of Affairs.

While the Assembly was still in being, the National Synod National Synod at
Vitre.
assembled on the 18th of May at Vitre. The Principality of Bearn had obtained
leave in the preceding Synod to Convene it: But all things were altered since
that time; and that which was looked upon then to be useful toward the
preservation of that Province, seemed to be of ill consequence against their
Privileges, as soon as it was known that the Council did propose to reunite it
to the Crown. In submitting to the same Discipline with the other Churches of
the Realm, they seemed to act against their own pretensions, that they could
not be subjected to the same Laws with the rest of the Kingdom; and by making
but one Body Ecclesiastic with the rest of the Reformed, they afforded a
reason to say that it was not inconsistent with their Privileges, to be united
^o the other Provinces depending of the Crown, as part of one and the same Body
Politic. Those Reasons were approved ^f. The Synod excused them from
submitting to the Discipline of the other Churches, and to the National Synods,
du^ng the present Conjuncture. But they allowed the Deputies ^f that Country to
assist at their Deliberations, and to give ^eir Votes, unless some of them
desired the contrary. So ^at they appeared in that Assembly as Deputies not of
subject ^hurches, but of Churches that were Allied by the Commu^on of the same
Doctrine.

Immediately after the Overture of the Synod, they deput^ Deputation to the
King.
four Persons to the King, with Letters filled with the usual ^ubmissions and
Protestations of Obedience and Loyalty. Letters to the General Assembly; and
their Answer.
they also writ to the Assembly of Rochel, to give them an account of what they
had done; and to express their Inten^on to remain in perfect*Union with them.
The Answer of the Assembly was made in the same Terms; and moreover ^ontain'd
an Article, by which they demanded of the Synod ^e Contribution of certain Sums
for the General Affairs. This contribution, which was to be raised out of the
Sums granted ^r the Sallaries of the Ministers, appeared dangerous as to the
consequences of it: but whereas there was Money due to them, and that the
Concessions of the Treaty of Loudun had made ^he Churches pretty easy, they
would not refuse all, and ^anted something at the Request of the Assembly. In
the ^ean time the Deputies were well received at Court; and ^ame back to the
Synod with Answers capable to satisfy them, ^ad fair words been sufficient to
redress the Evils they com^lain'd of. The King writ very obliging Letters by
them, in which he praised the Loyalty of the Reformed, and gave them ^ssurances
of his Protection for the future* and to maintain whatever was promised by the
Edicts, in case they persever'd in that Conduct.

That would have been very well, if while they were exhorted to be Loyal, the
Court had not at the very same time The Churches of Bearn and Auvergne
disturbed.
labored openly by a thousand Vexations and Injuries to t^ their Faith and
Patience. Besides the dread which the Prosecutions of the Clergy created among
the Churches of Bearn, those of Auvergne were also very much tormented. They
had not as yet been able to enjoy the benefit of the Edict there peaceably, by
reason that the Catholics had opposed it. There were potent Families in that
Province who were altogether inclined to a League, and who thought it a point
of Conscience to hate the Reformed, and to Persecute them without Mercy. They
used them Cruelly in all respects; and the Reformed were not in a Condition to
resist them, because their Number was inconsiderable. The Court might easily
have put a stop to those Violences, had they been well inclined; but it is
easy to judge of their Disposition in that respect, by the little care they
had taken to redress the Wrongs done to the Reformed of that Province: The
Synod gave express Orders to the Deputies General, to make earnest
Solicitations to obtain a redress for those Afflicted Churches; and to press
the Court to send Commissioners thither, in order to regulate those long
Differences by some Decisive Decree: which had already been desired often to no
purpose.

Moreover the War continued between the City of Sancere* The Count of Sancerre
exerts Hostilities against the City.
and the Count de Marans; who did the Inhabitants all the harm he could. He
proceeded on his part to Surprises, Outrages, and Assassinations: And he was
accused of having lately caused Captain Bouchard, in whom the City reposed
great Confidence, to be Murdered. So that the City had two great Affairs in
hand; the one to preserve their Privilege of being a City of Surety which was
disputed, and the other to defend themselves against the Hostilities of the
Count. As they had a greater Extent of Ground than Riches, they were soon
drein'd by the great Expenses they had been obliged to make; and they could not
hold out much longer, without being assisted. Therefore they had recourse to
the Liberalities of the Churches of the Country of Foix.
Synod. The Churches of the Country of Foix were reduced to the same Misery of
late Years. They were forced from Jurisdiction to Jurisdiction, about the
Quality of Places of Sure^y: which the Cities in which they performed the
Exercises of their Religion had had till then: So that they had troubles upon
that Question in the Parliament, in the In which the Judges were part
Catholics and part Reformed.
Party-Chambers, and in the Council of State. This was a subtilty of the
Council, either to weaken the Reformed, by taking from them ^veral Towns they
held by that Name, the Title, or Quali^ of which was disputed by their Enemies
upon diverse pre^nces; or to put them upon some desperate Resolution, by ^ese
Proceedings, in order to have a plausible occasion to ^mplain of their
Behavior. For that reason the Court affected, whenever they renewed the
Permission of keeping them to slip in some Equivocal Terms in the Briefs; to
the ^d that being favored by that Ambiguity, they might say, ^at those they
designed to take from them were not comprised (...) the same.

Provence was also exposed to great Vexations. The Reformed And those of
Provence ill used.
were very much divided there; and the Catholics ^ok an occasion from those
Discords which they themselves ^ad sown, to do them all manner of Injustices.
That Pro^nce overwhelmed the General Assemblies and the National ^ynods, with
Complaints, which the Members of one and ^e same Church brought in there
against one another: And ^e Deputies of those Different Parties, often mutually
disputed the Right of their Deputation. Nevertheless ^ere were so few Churches
in that Province, that they were not able to furnish the Number that was
necessary to di^ide it into two Assemblies; and that it had been proposed some
times to annex them to those of Dauphine, to make but ^ne Synod of them. So
that their own weakness rendered their Union the more necessary, by reason that
they weakened themselves still the more by their Division. The Synod
recommended all those Affairs to the Deputies General; and did not forget the
Edict of Exemption which the Ministers had been amused with for five Years
together, without their De^uties having been able to get it into their hands,
to pursue the Verification of it, which the Court did not press in the ^east.

The Synod allowed Ministers to assist at Political Assemblies, which had been
forbidden by the former Synods. The Permission given to the Ministers to assist
at Political Assemblies.
reason of it was that those who had given an occasion to make that Prohibition
being either Dead or Revolted; and the Discontents of the Duke of Bouillon
being cooled, there was no reason to exclude the Ministers from those
Assemblies, in which they might sometimes prove useful by their Zeal and
Prudence. But the Synod at the same time desired the Political Assemblies to
Exempt the Ministers from Deputation to the Court; whither it were that they
looked upon themselves as Persons that were odious to those that Governed; or
whether they thought the Intrigues of the Court not suitable to the Profession
of the Evangelical Ministry; or whether they thought that as they were Persons
dedicated to Preach the Truth, it was not fit to Expose them to the
Temptations, which till then, had rendered the Air of the Court so fatal to Men
of their Character. The Synod also Nominated four Deputies to assist at the
General Synod the States General of the United Provinces did propose to
Assemble, to determine the Disputes of the Arminians, which were called
Remonstrators; and of those who called their Doctrine a Novelty, which were
called Counter-Remonstrators, or Gomarists. But the Council of France did not
approve that Deputation, as I will relate in another Place.

Moreover it appears by the Acts of the said Synod, that Places of Bailywicks
established with little Exactness.
until then the settlement of the Towns or Villages in which the Public
Exercise of the Reformed Religion was to be performed in the said Bailywicks
Places of Bailywicks had been made with little Exactness. They had sometimes
been desired in Places that were so inconvenient, that they had built no
Churches in them. The Truth is that the Catholics had not as yet bethought
themselves to maintain, that the Right of performing the Exercise of the
Reformed Religion in those Places, was lost by a Prescription of some Years.
Therefore the Reformed were Allowed to resume the use of them when they
pleased, notwithstanding their having left them as it were in suspense for
sometime: And sometimes also they Transferred the said Privilege from one place
to another, by a kind of Concession, which the Commissaries, or Judges of the
said Pla^ did not refuse to Authorize by their Ordinances. Thus Tingri being
given for a Place of Bailywick in the Province of Champaigne, that Right
remained long without Effect; by reason that Lorrain, in the Neighborhood of
which the said Town was settled, and from whence it was hoped that the Reformed
would repair thither to hear Sermons, could not furnish a sufficient Number of
People to maintain a Church there. Therefore the Synod being unwilling to lose
that Considerable Right, ^rder'd it to be Transferred to Langres, where there
was more likelihood of forming a Considerable Church.

It likewise appears by the same Acts, that some Moors be^g Rogueries of the
Converted Moors.
Invited to remain in France, upon the account of the Edict ^e late King had
Published on their Behalf, when they were ^rn'd out of Spain, stopped in the
Places that had been as^gn'd to them. Though the Edict only allowed such to
re^ain in the Kingdom as should embrace the Catholic Reli^n, yet several of
them Embraced the Reformed. But where^ for the most part those that remained
were only such as had nothing to carry away, it was not Conscience that
inclined ^em more to one side than the other: It was only a prospect (...)
subsisting one way or other. As their Conversion was on(...) Interest, it soon
degenerated into Public Roguery. The ^oor being neglected in the Roman Church,
whereas the Re^rm'd had the Reputation of assisting them with more Order ^d
Charity, all the Beggars turned Converted Moors; and ^nning from Church to
Church to surprise Alms, they re^c'd the Consistories and Synods to take
measures to secure ^emselves against this sort of Plundering. The Catholic ^al
did not murmur at that time to see the Reformed Religi^ preferred to the Roman:
And they did not envy this Honor (...) the Reformation, because they could not
deprive them of it without Expense. The same Zeal being refined in our Days,
^as not been able to endure things to remain upon the same ^ot; they chose
rather to let the Jews and Mahometans re^ain in their Error, than to permit
them to embrace Chri^ianity by Embracing the Reformed Religion. However these
^retended Moors being very troublesome to the Churches, the ^ynod I am speaking
of resolved to apply proper remedies to it. They ordered People to Watch the
Conduct of these Converts, and to take certain Precautions, by giving them
Testimonials, to prevent those Impostures.

During these Transactions Luines, who knew the King's The Bishop of Lucon
retires from the Queen.
Easiness by Experience, suffered no Persons of any Genius to be near his
Person, nor any of those who had had any Engagements with the Queen. The Bishop
of Lucon, so famous since under the Name of Cardinal de Richelieu, was one of
the Creatures of that Princess, and one of those whose W^^ and Parts were most
capable to inspire Jealousy in a Favorite. Therefore Luines was so far from
suffering him to live at Court, that he would not so much as allow him to
remain with the Queen. The Bishop being sensible that he was obnoxious, removed
out of the Kingdom: But yet being unwilling to give over his hopes altogether,
he retired to Avignon, where he thought himself secure under the Pope's
Authority. Nevertheless the better to remove all manner of Suspicions, he
feigned to renounce Politics, and to apply himself for the future in things
more suitable to his Profession. In order to which he took up Controversy, and
Writ against the Reformed; taking an occasion so to do from the Affairs I am
going to relate. Luines also removed from the King Cotton the Jesuit, who had
been all along engaged in the Queens Interest, and who endeavored to persuade
the World, that this sudden Retreat from the Court was only the effect of his
disgust of the World, though it was only the effect of a very Mortifying
Disgrace. But Luines put in his room a Man of the same Society, Disgrace of
Cotton the Jesuit. Arnoux succeeds him.
who being obliged to him for his Promotion, seemed to him a fit Instrument to
manage the King's Inclination to his Advantage. But he was cruelly deceived;
and this Villain paid him for his good Will, like a true Jesuit: So that he
also was forced to retire at the end of some Years. Thus the King left the
Management of his conscience as well as of his Kingdom to the discretion of his
Favorites; and changing his Affection according to their Pleasure, he allowed
them to Reign into the most secret parts of his Confessions and of his
Thoughts. This Jesuit was Arnoux, known at Court by Conferences and Sermons,
which had gained him some Esteem. Amongst the A Sermon Preached at Court by him.
Sermons he was most noted for, he Preached one at Fontain bleau before the
King, in which he attacked the Confession of Faith of the Reformed, and
maintained that the Passages cited in the Margin were falsely alleged. This
Accusation could not fail of being taken notice of, in a Court in which there
were abundance of Officers and Lords who did profess the Reformed Religion. So
that upon the Disputes occasioned by the said Sermon, the Jesuit who had not
advanced this Proposition with an Intention to retract it, gave a Memoir of the
Falsi^ies he pretended to observe in the said Quotations to a Reformed
Gentleman who desired it; and the said Gentleman gave it to Du Moulin.

The Ministers were not as yet reduced to suffer every thing The Ministers of ^
Charenton's Answer.
without making a defense: Moreover they were firm and vigorous in their
Repartees; and particularly when they met (...) Jesuit in their way they never
failed to speak of the Merits of his Sect. Therefore Du Moulin who had a
Sprightly Wit, (...) Fruitful Imagination, a heart full of Zeal, and who, as it
^as been owned by his very Adversaries, did Write with as much Politeness as
Force and Ease, was not long before he Answered the Jesuit, having first
Consulted Montigni, Du^ant, and Mestrezat his Colleagues in the Ministry. They
gave it the Title of, Defense of the Confession of Faith of the Reformed
Churches of France, against the Accusation of Arnoux the Jesuit, etc. which
they Dedicated to the King. They mentioned with some Vigor in the Dedication
the Services the Reformed had done to the State; and they used the Jesuits in
it, in the same manner as all Persons of Honor had used them till then. They
did not forget the last Estates held at Paris, and the Controversy that had
been moved there concerning the Independency of Kings, who, they said, had lost
their Cause by the Faction of the Clergy. Arnoux and the Jesuits being nettl'd
at this Letter, caused a great deal of Noise to be made about it: So that
almost as soon as the Book appeared Against whom Informations are given.
they informed against the Work, against the Author, and against the Printer.
The Lieutenant Civil, or Common Judge having first taken Cognizance of it, that
Affair was soon after removed before the Parliament, which occasioned a Dispute
in point of Jurisdiction between the Great Chamber, and the Chamber of the
Edict: The first pretended to retain the Cause, as being a Civil Cause; and the
last would have it Tried before them, as being an Affair of Religion. This
Contestation was determined by a Decree of the Council, bearing Date July the
20th, which referred the Cause to the King: And within a fourth Night after it,
another Decree was made, in which the King forbad the Dedicating of any Book to
him without his express leave; suppressed that of the Ministers, forbad the
reading of it, or to keep it, under certain Penalties; and ordered the Provost
of Paris to Prosecute the Printer.

This Decree dictated by the Jesuits, only served to set a Pamphlets on both
sides.
greater value upon the Book. Diverse Pamphlets were dispersed on both sides
upon that Subject; among which there was one which acknowledged Arnoux the
Jesuit to be the Aggressor, and that pretended that it was a Crime in the
Ministers to have dared to defend themselves. So that according to the Maxims
of that Writer, the Condemnation of the Ministers could only be looked upon as
an Oppression of Innocence, so much the more Unjust that though those who had
been attacked had been punished, the Aggressors had not so much as received a
^light Reprimand. It was agains this Book of the four Ministers that the Bishop
of Lucon resolved ^^ Write. He insisted particularly upon their Letter, and
endeavored The Bishop of Lucon Writes against the Ministers.
to prove, that they had filled it with falsehood. He made all his Efforts to
justify the last Estates: But he did it by Reasons which he knew to be false
better than any Body; which most of those that had been concerned in what past,
there could easily have convinced him of. That manner of Writing was an effect
of his fear. It was the Style that best pleased the Jesuits, whom that Bishop
was then as loath to offend, as he despised them since, when he found himself in
a more prosperous Fortune.

About the time the Synod was at Vitre, the Clergy was Assembled Assembly of
the Clergy. The Bishop of Macon's Speech.
at Paris, and vigorously prosecuted the Project they had formed in the last
Estates in Order to the Ruin of the Reformed. The Bishop of Macon made a Speech
to the King ^^ the second of June, at the Head of the Deputies of that Body:
And it is easy to Judge by the Style of it, that the Catholics were no longer
inclined to use the Reformed equitably. He called the Reformed Monsters, and
compared their Church to Agar, styling it a Concubine. He acknowledged that the
Clergy dissembled with them, and only Tolerated them for the sake of Peace. He
maintained that the Catholic Churches were happier under the Turks, where the
free Exercise of their Religion was allowed, than in those Places where the
Reformed were Masters. His Complaints were grounded particularly upon Three
Points. The first was, that the Bishop ^f Mompelier having been desirous to
introduce Reformed Jacobins Jacobins turned out of Montpelier.
into the Monastery the Friars of that Order had in the said City, by the
Consent, as he said, of the Old ones, of the General of the Order, and by the
Authority of the Parliament of Thoulouse, the Inhabitants instead of allowing
that Alteration, had not only refused to receive the New ones, but ^ad turned
the Old ones out of the City. But the Bishop did not say what had induced the
Inhabitants to do it. The Bishop of Mompelier had for a long while occasioned
continual ^isorders and disputes there, and had offended the Reformed ^y the
boldness of his Enterprises. Whither it were then, that they were afraid that
these New Friars, under pretense of an Austere Reformation, might be endued
with a more selitious Spirit, and consequently more capable to second the said
Prelate in his designs; or whither it were that remembering the Original of that
Order, which had Signalized it self from its first Formation, by a thousand
Massacres, and who had acquired the Government of the Inquisition in Spain by
such Qualifications, they were afraid these New comers might introduce this
Spirit of Fury and Cruelty in Mompelier, and might have secret Instructions
from their General ^ending to that End; Whither, I say, it were for the first,
or last of these Considerations, the Reformed refused to admit such Guests.
They involved the Old ones with the New, by reason that the one having given
their Consents to the Introduction of the others, it was evident by that, that
they were animated by the same Spirit. They refuse to suffer a Jesuit Preacher.


The second cause of Complaint was, that the same People had refused to suffer
a Preacher in their City, whom the Bishop had pitched upon to Preach there in
Advent and in Lent. The Governor had undertaken to obtain their leave for it;
and after having used Persuasions he had employed Commands. But the reason the
Reformed urged was that the said Preacher was a Jesuit, and that the Members of
that Order endeavoring to imbroil every thing where ever they came; it was but
just to keep them out of Cities, in which the Reformed had so much Interest to
hinder Seditions and Disorders. It was so evident that the Jesuits only sought
to introduce themselves in those Places, to Plot something against the Repose
of the Reformed, that apparently their Reasons could not fail of being
understood and approved of by all those who were not prejudiced by Passion.
Moreover, there was a General Reason, which obliged the Reformed to oppose all
the Alterations the Catholics endeavored to make in the Places of Surety;
which was, that one of the Conditions granted with the Places of Surety,
imported that no Innovations should be made there. So that the Bishop of
Mompelier's Enterprises were Unjust; since they were two important Innovations,
the one to introduce a New Reform of Friars into that City, and the other to
call a Preach^ thither of a suspected Society, which had no right to send any.
Yet the said Bishop was Fenouillet, for whom Sully had obtained the said
Bishopric, as I have related elsewhere.

The Third Complaint was the Use that was made in Bearn, The State of Bearn
falsely represented.
of the Estates that did formerly belong to the Ecclesiastics. He spoke about
it in the most Violent terms; as if it had been a Horrid Sacrilege, to apply to
the Use of the Reformed Churches Estates which had been so lawfully confiscated
and taken from those that did formerly possess them. To move pity the more, he
desired that Mass might be reestablished in above one hundred Parishes of that
Principality, affirming with as much boldness, as if he had spoken the Truth,
that out of thirty persons there, there were five and twenty Catholics. This
was notoriously false; and I need not give a farther Proof of it in this place,
than that in our Days after the Alteration of Religion, occasioned in that
Province by Oppression during the Civil Wars; by the Establishment ^f several
Monasteries, that had seduced many Families; by whatever the Art, Violence,
Promises and Threats of the Catholics, and the Inconstancy and Weakness of the
People ^ad been able to contribute toward it, there still remained more
Reformed there than the Bishop calculated by his Speech. Of about 33000
Families which Inhabited in Bearn, there were reckoned about seven thousand of
them professing the Reformed Religion Ten years ago. But the Clergy seldom
leave their Affairs imperfect, when after having put them ^n a pretty good
condition, they only want an Imposture to make an end of them.

Nevertheless, this Speech proved effectual; and the Turn The Effect of that
Speech.
^e gave to his Remonstrances was very well relished by the Court, which was
resolved to satisfy him, even before he had been heard. He had the boldness to
say, that he did not ^esire his Majesty to cross the Seas, to drive the Enemy
of the Christian Name out of the East; but only that he would be pleased to
restore an entire Liberty to some Catholic Churches of his Kingdom, which he
pretended were oppressed by the Injustice of the Reformed. This was the
Character of that Prelat's Eloquence, that he filled his Discourse with little
Allusions, among which some happened to be well applied. That which he made in
this Place, alluding to the Cruisado's undertaken to Conquer the Holy Land, and
particularly to that of a Prince of the King's own Name, who was Cano^iz'd in
recompense of his having ruined his Kingdom, by those Wars beyond Sea,
flattered the King agreeably, who aspired to imitate his Predecessor. Besides,
the Tacit Comparison he made of the Reformed that enjoyed Ecclesiastical
Estates in Bearn, with the Mahometans Possessors of those Places, to which an
Ignorant Zeal leads so many Pilgrims, pleased all those who were prejudiced
against the Reformed with a Blind hatred, and already resolved to Sacrifice
them to the Passion of the Clergy. So that the Bishop did not fail to obtain
part of what he desired. A Decree authorizing the Jesuits to Preach in
Montpelier.


A Decree was made by the Council of State, on the 10th of November following,
which allowed the Catholics of Mompelier to have Jesuit Preachers, and such
others as the Bishop should think fit to send thither: Declaring that the King
by his Briefs never designed to deprive the Catholics that inhabited in such
Cities as were held by the Reformed, of the Liberty of having such Secular, or
Regular Preachers as the Dioces^ should think fit to call thither: which was
said by way of Interpretation of the Answers the King had given to Petitions,
or Addresses.
the Cabien of the Reformed in 1611. and 1612. which they made use of to keep
the Jesuits out of the Places of Surety. The truth is that this Interpretation
was Contradictory to the Answer: But they began to introduce a certain Policy
into the Council, which makes a sport of the Credulity of the People, and which
finds a way to destroy the most formal Laws, and those that are most clear,
under pretense of Interpreting the^. This singularity was also observed in the
said Decrees, that the King did not so much as order the said Preachers to
observe the Edicts, and to abstain from such Terms in their Sermons ^s might
give Offense. Neither did the said Decree prove sufficient to Introduce the
Jesuits-into considerable Places; a^ the Reformed opposed the said Innovation,
as long as possible they could.

But the Bishop's Speech had a more speedy and greater effect, A Decree of
Restoration of the Ecclesiastical Estates that had been formerly confiscated
in Bearn.
as to what related to the Affairs of Bearn. They obtained a Decree of
Restoration, which gave a beginning to the Civil Wars, which only ended by the
so long and so earnestly wished for Ruin of the Reformed. Therefore I will
enlarge a little upon this Subject, though there are some things in it which seem
to be beyond the bounds of my Chief Design. In order to which I will repeat in
this place, that the Affairs of Bearn had been very much discussed in the
Chamber of the Clergy during the Session of the last Estates; and that their
Deputies had chiefly demanded two things, of which the one tended to the other,
and served as a Degree to arrive to it: The first was the Reunion of the
Principality of Bearn to the Crown: The second the Restoration of the
Ecclesiastical Estates, which had been Confiscated about threescore Years
before by the Authority of Queen Jane. The Council resolved to begin by the
Reunion, as being that which admits of the most plausible Reasons, and which
concerned no ^ody particularly. Nevertheless the Bearnois judged otherwise
Reunion of that Country to the Crown; which is opposed by the Estates.
of it; and being persuaded that the Clergy only stirred (...) it, for their own
advantage, on to oblige the Court in one ^ing, in order to obtain other favors
from it in Recom-Pence, they used their utmost Endeavors to ward that blow
which they believed to be fatal to the Liberty of their Coun^y. La Force was
their Governor, a Man of Sense and La Force.
Courage, who had Noble Places, and a great deal of Experience; and who was
much better pleased with being Governor ^f an Independent Principality, which
was only considerable ^y its Sovereignty; than with a small Country which would
^e inconsiderable, being once mixed with the other Provinces that were United
to the Crown. Therefore he did not fail to represent the Consequences of that
Affair to the Bearnois, and (...) second their Endeavors with great Courage
and Vigor. ^e was nevertheless accused of having only been difficult to
satisfy in that matter, to make himself the more considerable; and that his
only aim in opposing the Court was to be Indemnify'd for what he was to lose by
that Alteration.

But there was another Man of great Authority in Bearn in And Lescun.
whom the Reformed who were the strongest there, reposed a great deal of
Confidence. It was Lesoun a Councellor in the ^overaign Council of the Country;
a Sprightly, Resolute, ^igorous Man, who had Courage, Learning and Eloquence:
And the Bearnois held him in great. Veneration for that generous Love for his
Country, and for the Public Good, of which ^ve find no more Examples, unless
it be in Ancient Histories. The Court on the contrary made him pass for a
Factious Turbulent Person: And took a pretense to make him perish as a
Perturbator of the Public Peace, by reason of the Undefatigable Zeal he
expressed for the Welfare of his Religion, and of his Country. It is by those
Rigors that all those who have ^im'd at Despotick Power, have stifled in all
Hearts the Seeds of that Virtue, which was formerly the Noblest Character of
the Hero's: Those were used by them as Criminals of State who looked upon a Man
of Honor to be obliged above all things to preserve the Privileges of his
Country: And they were sensible that Men would lay aside that greatness of
Soul, formerly so much Reverenced, finding it only attended with Disgrace and
Misfortunes: And that all such would be sent to the Gallows, or to the Block to
whom Antiquity would have raised Triumphal Arches and Statues. This Lefcun was
deputed to the Council, after the Clergy had caused the Bearnois to be summoned
there to be present at the Trial of the Restoration of the Ecclesiastical
Lands they pretended: But he was employed at the same time in the Prosecution
of both those Points; and he was amused long at Paris, without being expedited.
Finally whether the Court was ashamed to try those Affairs in his presence, and
that they were at a loss about his Titles, Remonstrances, and Reasons; or
whither they were not as yet fully resolved about it, at a time when the
Kingdom was threatened with a thousand other Troubles, he was sent back again:
And to remove all manner of suspicion of their designing to try the business
after his departure, they returned him the Pieces he had produced; and they
made a Verbal promise to him that they would not end those Suits without first
giving him notice of it, and without hearing him.

Nevertheless they broke their Word to him: And in the sequel Deceit of the
Court.
they made use of the Writings he had produced, as a pretense to say that they
had heard his Reasons and seen his Papers. Therefore at the beginning of
December in the Year 1616: in order to prepare People to receive the Edict that
was published some Days after it, they put out a pretty fine Differtation, upon
the particular Question of the Reunion of Bearn to the Crown. It presupposed
that the said Reunion had already been made before by Henry IV. When he did
reunite Navar by a solemn Edict, in the Month of July 1607. the Dissertacion
upon this matter.
general Terms of which extended the same Reunion to all the Estates that did
belong to him; before the Crown fell to him: So that the thing in Debate was
not properly the Reunion of Bearn; but, to put the said Reunion which was
already made in Execution. The Author of it pretended that it was granted upon
Right, and confirmed by several Examples; That King's did contract a kind of
Marriage with the Kingdom that fell to them; That the Reunion of their other
Estates with that Crown, was a Gift which they were obliged to make to it upon
the account of that Marriage, which became part of that Crown; That several
Kings before Henry IV. had done the like; and that the Case of Bearn was the
same. And as one of the main Reasons the Bearnois alleged against those
Examples, was that they only related to moving Estates, and such as paid
Hommage to the Crown of France; whereas Bearn was an Independent Principality;
They refuted this Pretension by a long Chain of Contrary Proofs. The first was
drawn from the Ancient Division of France, whereby it appeared that Bearn had
been part of the Kingdom of Aquitain. The second was taken from the Privileges
the Bearnois possessed in France, where they were reputed Natives; and were not
obliged to ^ake Letters of Naturalization, to enjoy the Prerogatives of
Frenchmen. The third was grounded upon the Prince of Bearn's having paid
Hommage to the Kings of England, Dukes of Aquitain; That the same Princes had
often appealed from the Judgment of their Barons to the Parliament of Guyenne,
and from thence afterward to Paris; That by some Passages of the fifteenth
Book of the Registers of Innocent III. it did ^ppear that the Duke of Aquitain
had Commenced a Suit against the Vice-comte of Bearn, as a Lord to his Vassal.
They alleged for the fourth, That the said Principality had been sometimes
under the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Thoulouse; and they added finally,
That when the Lords of that Country had refused to pay Homage for it, War had
sometimes been declared against them to constrain them to do it.

They granted that there was a Prescription of many Suspension of Homage.
Years in favor of the Bearnois: But then they said, That it could be no Plea
for them, by reason of this Despotick Maxim, That no Prescription can avail
against the Rights of the Crown, which are sacred, and can never be Alienated.
A Maxim very opposite to Natural Right, which ^ever prejudges in favor of
Liberty; and which wills that Servitude should be Established by great Titles,
but that they should be Abolished by short Prescriptions. Moreover they
grounded the Nullity of the said Prescription, upon its proceeding from the
Suspension of the Rights of France in favor of a King of Navar, who having
been deprived of part of his Dominions, and reduced to retire with all his
Court in Bearn, had not been prosecuted for the said Hommage, upon the account
of his Zeal for the Service of France, for fear of adding Affliction to the
Afflicted. They denied that ever the said Province was Infranchis'd by Charles
Martel, as they pretended. They alleged the Example of the Reunion of
Bretagne, which had been done notwithstanding the pretensions of the People who
thought their Country Independent of the Crown; and who had formerly given the
Name of Mauclere to one of their Dukes, Named Peter; because th^^ Ill Clerk.
not understanding his Rights, he had acknowledged himself a Vassal of France:
So that they claimed a Right, derived from an Injustice committed against the
Brittons, even contrary to the Articles of the Treaty made with them when
Charles VIII. Married their last Duchess, to do the same to the Bearnois.
These are the Maxims of those who pretend to change the Nature of things by
saying, I will have it so. What they have done once, whither justly, or
unjustly, becomes an Example for the future; and whereas they have done it
maugre the Complaints and Murmurings of the Parties concerned, they have
acquired a Right of doing the same as often as new Occasions offer themselves.

In the next place they endeavored to prove, That the withdrawing
Inconveniences attending the disunion; and Advantages of the Union.
of Bearn from the rest of the Crown would be liable to a Thousand
Inconveniences; that considering what had happened to Navar, by the Invasion
of the Spaniards, who had Usurped it from a Prince who was too weak to defend
it, every body ought to desire to see Bearn Incorporated in a State potent
enough to defend it; That its situation at the Foot of the Mountains which
serve for a Barrier to the two Kingdoms, required to be united to that on the
side of which it was seated. Moreover that they had no Intentions to ruin the
Privileges of that Principality, nor to meddle with the Sovereignty of their
Laws; That it was necessary to create ^ Parliament there not as in a Conquered
Country, to keep them within the Bounds of Obedience: but to honor it as a
Country in which Henry the Great was Born; That there were many Examples in
Antiquity of Honors done to places that were remarkable by the Birth of great
Princes; That it was necessary to preserve the old Laws and Customs of the
Bearnois; and to dismember some Lands that were under the ^urisdiction of the
other Parliaments, in order to afford a larger extent of Jurisdiction to that
which should be Created in Bearn. They added to all this, great Elogies of
Marquemont, Archbishop of Lions, who had seconded this Proposition in the last
Estates. They represented that Reunion as very advantageous for the whole
Kingdom of France, which would ^hereby be freed on that side of forcing
Incursions; and for the Country of Bearn it self, who would become a sharer in
the Glory and Happiness of the rest of the Kingdom. Finally (...) order to
render the Reformed Odious, as if the Opposition ^d only proceed from them, and
from a Spirit of Faction, ^e Author spoke of that Reunion, or Conjunction as
of a thing which the Bearnois earnestly desired, and he begged it ^f the King
in their Names in very pressing Terms.

Nevertheless the Bearnois in general were very distant from By whom the
Reunion was pretreated.
that Thought; and the major part of the Catholics concurred with the Reformed
in the Design to prevent that Important Innovation. There were none but the
Clergy seconded by the House of Grammont, which was at odds with La Force, and
some others either too Credulous, or prejudiced by Bigotry, or such as expected
to raise their Fortunes by such an ^lteration, who furthered that Enterprise.
No body was ignorant that the Clergy were the Authors of the aforesaid
Dissertation; and none looked upon them to be so well inclined to the Public
Good, as only to design the advantage of others. Moreover there was something
very singular; in that the design of that Reunion had been Inspired by the
Council of Spain, which endeavored it with all their might: Imagining perhaps
that those People who are naturally hot and presumptuous would never suffer
their contractual Laws to be Violated, without taking up Arms to maintain them:
Or that the Reformed Churches of France would never behold the ruin of those
of that Province without renewing the Civil Wars. It is most certain at least,
that during the delays of that Affair, Spain did powerfully excite the Council
of France. They furnished the Reasons and Proofs which were alleged against
the pretensions of the Bearnois, and which were visibly taken out of the Titles
of Convents, or Spanish Historians; out of the Registers of Barcelonna, the
Archieves of the Metropolitan Church of Tarracona, and other places. Several
Libels which were dispersed upon that Subject, which seemed to be Printed at
Avignon, were nevertheless brought from Spain. It was easily proved by the way
by which they were brought; and even without that it was easy to judge at the
first reading, that Spain had a hand in them. The Style of the League was
apparent in them, which in all their Writings mentioned the King of Spain. One
of those Libels, after having admonished the King not to suffer himself to be
persuaded out of it, added these Words. What would the Prince of the Church
say? What would the Catholic King say? What would the Emperor say? Which
sufficiently showed that those Foreign Powers had a hand in it.

Persons of Judgment easily saw, that the Promises of preserving Motives of the
Opponants.
the Rights and Privileges of that little state were nothing but an Illusion:
Since the method they observed to effect the said Reunion violated their most
Essential Rights; which consisted in not being members of another Body, but to
be a Body a part, although in the Hands and under the Authority of the same
Master. Besides, according to the Constitution of that Principality, no Law
could be made there, nor reversed unless by the Approbation of the Prince and
the Estates: Whereas the Prince would make that Reunion, like an absolute
Master, contrary to the desire, and in spite of the opposition of the People:
which was properly to trample upon the Law, which they called Fundamental and
Contractual. As for the Reformed they were very sensible that the Council would
not stop there; That this first step was only a Trial, to reduce the Reformed
Religion in Bearn, on the same Terms as it was in the rest of the Kingdom. The
Policy of our Days would not allow such Countries as were not united to the
Crown at the time of the Edict of Nantes, to enjoy the Privileges of that
Edict, because they could not be designed to be ^mprehended in it at that time:
But yet under Lewis XIII. it ^ould needs have it, that at whatever time the
said Reunion ^as made, it was sufficient to introduce the Roman Religion ^ere
according to the Edict, in the same Splendour in which (...) was thereby
Established elsewhere. So that the Reformed (...) Bearn seeing Religion and
Liberty were equally concerned (...) that Affair, omitted nothing to Ward a
blow which would ^casion the ruin of both. Whereupon their Enemies up^aided
them as being guilty of a very shameful, or very Cri^inal Inconstancy, in
having formerly desired their Churches (...) be United to those of France, in
order to make but one ^dy in the National Synods, and in the General
Assemblies; ^hereas they now expressed so much Repugnancy to become ^embers of
the same Body Politic with the rest of the King^^m. But that Reproach did not
move them, by reason that the ^id diversity of Sentiments had been produced by
the ^versity of Conjunctures. They had desired to be United with ^ose Churches,
in order the more to engage themselves in the ^ommunion of their Doctrine: And
they opposed the Union (...) their Country to the Crown, as a thing which would
serve (...) introduce the General Oppression of their Consciences and (...)
their Persons.

Therefore they answered the Dissertation I have already And their Answer to
the Dissertation.
^ention'd, applying themselves more to destroy the Conclu^n, than to refute
the Arguments one after another; which were composed of those kind of
Probabilities, which become demonstrations in the Cause of the strongest; but
yet which ^o not hinder People in point of Politics to be ready to main^in the
contrary, when their interest requires it. This Pamphlet under the Name of a
Gentleman of Navar, maintained that the greatest Princes had ever been pleased
to preserve the ^itles of their Ancient Possessions, as Monuments, of the
Grandeur of their Predecessors; That some of them still re^ain'd the Titles of
Kings of Jerusalem, and Princes of Antioch; That Henry III. himself after
having lost the Crown of Poland, ^ad kept the Title of it; That the Republic
of Venice, though deprived of the Kingdom of Cyprus, would not suffer the Arms of
that Sovereignty Carved upon a Column before the Church of St. Mark to be rased
out; That those who were least favored by Fortune took as many Titles as they
had Castle* That those who proposed the Reunion of Navar, and of Bear^ to the
Crown, seemed on the contrary only to be desirous to extinguish the Title of
King of Navar, as if it were inconsistent with that of King of France; that
though it were true that according to the General Acceptance of the World the
greatest draws in the least, yet that it did not follow that the Glorious Name
of France should Abolish that of Navar, and reduce the State of it into a
Province by destroying th^^ Rights and Privileges; That it lessened the
Authority of Kings to change their Kingdoms into Provinces; That the Tre^^^
Grown of the Popes, and the Thiara of the Kings of Per^^^, showed sufficiently
that it is an honor to wear several Crown^* That the King of Spain did not
confound his Kingdoms; That the Emperor though elevated above other Princes,
was ^^^ ashamed of the Titles of King of Bohemia and of Hungary; That it was
true that the King of France bearing the Name of those two Crowns, preserved
the Right of Lawful Sovereign over both; but that in case all the Laws of the
Kingdom were violated; it signified nothing to retain the bare Title of it;
That God having made the Fundamental Laws of Monarchies, they cannot be
Trampled upon without Sacrilege. That they were like the fixed Star, which
cannot change their Place unless when the Firmament turns.

These were partly the Reasons of those who were afraid, The Edict of Reunion
published.
that the Court designed to submit as it came to pass, those remains of a free
State, in which Oppression was still unknown to the Laws of a Kingdom in which
the King's Authority began to grow excessive. But yet neither these nor the
others could prevent the publishing of the Edict of Reunion, in the same Month
in which those Writings appeared. The E^ of Bearn opposed the said Edict, and
nominated Deputies (...) the Syndicks of the Country to draw their said
Opposition in form. They positively maintained that Bearn was (...) Lordship
disti^ct from all other Sovereignty; That the Bearnois being Governed by Laws
and Customs had only E^^cted Sovereigns in order to maintain those Customs,
without ^^lowing them the Power to Alter, Correct, or to reform them without
the Estates of the Country, and by their Consent. that this was their
Contractual Fundamental Law, which the ^rince was obliged to swear to keep at
his Inauguration; That ^^cording to that, the King could not alter it; That
Henry ^^. himself had rejected the Proposition of it, being unwil^^ng to wrong
a Country in which he was Born. Those Con^^derations made them hope that
provided they could be heard (...) the Council, they might obtain something
favorable from ^* But instead of receiving any satisfaction from them, they
^^ve them fresh Causes of Complaint; and the Assembly of ^^e Clergy obtained a
Decree of Restoration of the Church The Clergy obtain a Decree of Restoration.
^^nds, after having so long solicited for it. Maniald, one (...) the Deputies
General, who staid at Paris while his Col^^ague went to Vitre to assist at the
National Synod there, be^^g informed that the Council was preparing to give the
said ^ecree, remonstrated on the 21st of June, that it was fit to ^^low Lescun
time, according as it was promised to him, to ^^pair to the Court again to give
in his Reasons, and to deli^^r those Papers into the King's Hands which were
returned to ^^m the preceding Year. But the Clergy prevailed notwith^^anding
this just Remonstrance. Du Vair, who was made ^eeper of the Great Seal, and who
did not think himself un^orthy of a Cardinal's Cap, belied in this occasion, as
in ^^veral others, the Reputation of Probity he had acquired, ^^fore his being
raised to that Dignity: And in order that all ^^e Clergy might share the favor
of one of the Members of ^^eir Body, he pushed on that Affair with all his
Credit. So ^^at on the 23d of the said Month in the presence of La Force, ^ho
used his utmost endeavors to hinder it, a Decree was ^^ven in the Council, by
which the King ordered the said ^rocess to be brought before him: And two Days
after it a ^efinite Decree was given to the satisfaction of the ^lergy.

This Decree declared positively that the Deputies had been heard, and that the
Council had seen the Writings and Answers; and ordained three things. Which
declares that the Deputies have been heard, and the Writings seen.


First, The Restitution of Church Lands, and the Restoration of the Catholic
Religion, throughout the Principality of Bearn.

Secondly, The preservation of the Reformed in all their Privileges; and the
Reimplacement of the Sums that were taken from them by the said Decree of
Restoration, upon the Ancient Demesne of Bearn; and in case that were not
sufficient, upon the Demesnes of the Adjacent Places; according to which it was
said, that the Sums should be stated upon the Expense of the Household, as
ordinary and local Charges, which were to be acquitted before all others, the
Assignments ^^ which should not be Converted to any other use. They ^^^
bethought themselves of this Illusion of Reimplacement, ^^ render the said
Decree of Restoration more tolerable ^^ such as only judge of things by
appearances: And indeed the Churches and all particular Persons seemed thereby
to be Indemnify'd.

Finally the Decree adjourned the Demand of the Clerg^ to be admitted into the
Estates of the Country, to the retur^ of the Commissioner the King would send
thither to put the said Decree in Execution. After which the King writ to those
who had the management of the Ecclesiastical Affairs in Bearn to send some body
at Court to be present at the making of ^^^ said Reimplacement.

It was an Exquisite Subtilty of the Clergy, to order th^^ Subtilty of the
Clergy.
Affair in the Nature of a Civil Process, as if it had only be^^ a Contsteation
between private Persons: Whereas the thing in question was to revoke a Law,
passed by the Authority ^^ the Sovereign, with the Consent of the Estates, for
the punishment of a Rebellious Clergy, who had betrayed their Lawful Princes,
and caused their Subjects to take up Arms to d^prive them of their Inheritance.
But they were sensible that it would prove an easier Task to judge a Process,
than to revoke a Law grounded upon such good Reasons. Nevertheless as Decrees
are no Laws in France, they were obliged afterward to convert the said Decree
into the form of an Edict, ^o the end that the Inrollment of it might be
performed with ^ore Formality. In the mean while the Clergy being unwilling to
appear Ungrateful, caused the Bishop of Are to A Violent Speech.
^eturn the King Thanks on the 18th of July; whose Speech had ^et more Violence
in it than the Bishop of Macon's. Among ^he Complaints which followed those
Thanks, there was one against the Book of the four Ministers, and against their
De^ication to the King. He called them Impudent, Ministers of ^rreligion and of
Falsehood, and he styled their Religion the Whore ^f Satan. He bragged that they
had been forced to lay down ^he Cudgels in the Conferences of Mantes and of
Fo^taine^^ea^. He* Elevated the Fidelity of the Clergy very high; and in order
to create Jealousies about the Reformed, he ap^^y'd to them what the King of
England, had sometimes said ^^ the Independents of his Kingdom of Scotland.
After this, ^hen the Assembly broke up they charged their Agents with a (...)
Cahier containing 46 Articles: And they acquitted them^^lves * Petition.
so well of what was recommended to them upon that ^ubject, that exeepting only
one Article they obtained all ^^eir Demands, as I will observe elsewhere.

The News of this Decree being carried into Bearn, the E^^ates The Bearnois
endeavor to Ward the Blow.
who were Assembled at Orthez resolved to undergo any ^^ing tather than to put
it in Execution, being equally of^^nded at the thing, and at the manner of it.
A Decree given ^^ntrary to the Promise made to Lescun, and without having ^eard
half of what the Parties concerned had to say* especi^ly a Decree which in a
Despotick manner abrogated Laws ^^at had been made with all the required
Solemnities, seemed (...) them unjust, not being sensible as yet, that Modern
Policy ^^lls nothing Justice but the Will of the Strongest. They De^uted Lescun
to the King with humble Remonstrances, and to ^^treat him to allow that the
Deputies his Majesty should de^^re them to send to him to be present at the
making of the ^^eimplacement, might be chosen in an Assembly composed (...) the
three Estates of Bearn, and the Deputies of all the Churches of France. Lescun
took Letters in his way from ^ochel, from whence the Assembly was already gone.
He could not obtain an Audience at St. Germains before the 17th of September.
La Force presented him; The Deputies General seconded him; and acquainted the
King that all the Churches of the Kingdom would have written to him as well as
Rochel, if they could have met together again without offending him.

Lescun made an Excellent Speech to the King, and seconded Remonstrances of
Lesc^n.
the Petition he presented to him from the Estates with powerful Reasons;
alleging that the Contractual Law had been duly observed for the space of
above three hundred Years, and that there was no example of its having been
Violated; or that ever the Customs received in Bearn, according to that Law had
been altered, otherwise than by the Consent of the Estates. He desired an
Answer to a Cahier of Grievances, and to diverse Petitions he had presented; and
begged a Pro^cution might be made against the Authors of a Libel, Inti^u^
Libels.
Le M^ine, which had been written upon the Affairs of Bearn in a style full of
Venom and Violence. One may judge of it b^ what the Author said; that it was in
the power of the Catholics to destroy the Reformed, and that the only thing
which hindered them from doing it, was that they valued the Life of one
Catholic more, than the Death of a hundred Huguen^. In another which
introduced two Peasants speaking about the Affairs of the Times, they made one
of them say, That the Huguenots were Impudent to complain of St. Bartholom^
Day, and to call the Butchery of it, a Massacre; by reason that it was one of
the most Equitable Acts of Justice that had ever been, or that ever could be
done. Moreover Lescun denied whatever had been said of the State of Be^^ by the
Bishop of Macon. He affirmed that the Catholics were The State of Religion in
Bearn.
so far from being Twenty five in Thirty there, that on the contrary the
Reformed were Ten to One, particularly among Persons of Consideration; and that
they sustained almost all the Charges; That the Catholics were so far from
being ill served in the Exercises and Rites of their Religion, that they had
upwards of 300 Priests, besides Bishops, Canons, and Preachers; whereas the
Reformed had but 60 Ministers; That the Catholics were also so far from being
inconvenienc'd in their Worship, being forced to seek out places distant from
their Habitation to perform the same, that most of them had ^ass said at home,
or very near them; whereas the Reformed ^n several Cantons went to Church at
three ^eagues distance from their Houses; That the Catholics had three parts
^^ four of the Churches, and possessed two thirds of the Ecclesiastical
Revenues; That the number of those which were Enemies to their Churches daily
increased, whereas of late ^he Places of Ministers which became vacant by
Death, were ^uppress'd by the King's Authority.

These Cases were considerable enough to deser^e to be Lescun only obtain Words.
^lear'd, before a Definitive Judgment were given in that Affair: Since that if
L^scun spoke the truth, nothing could be more ridiculous or false than the
Complaints of the Clergy, ^or more Inhumane or Unjust than their Ambitious
Prosecutions. But Equity had already for some years been banished ^^om the
Court. Justice and Sincerity were Buried with the ^ate King; and as little care
was taken to raise them out of the Grave as to revenge his Murder. Principally
in Affairs of Religion, the false Assertion of a Bishop though contrary to what
was publicly known was believed to the prejudice of the Reformed when they
alleged Truths attested by Proofs above ^ll Exceptions. Therefore Lescun
obtained nothing, but leave ^o treat of the Affairs of the Churches of Bearn
jointly ^ith those of the other Churches of the Kingdom, and by the same
Deputies. The meaning of this was that by virtue of the Reunion, they were
looked upon as making but one ^ody with the others; That their particular
Complaints were laid aside, and ordered to be Annexed to the General Affairs;
and that whereas the Court only granted Illusory Words to the rest of the
Churches upon their Remonstrances, those of Bearn were to expect the same
Treatment.

Accordingly, while the Estates of Bearn were preparing The Cahi^^ of the
Clergy is favorably answered.
their Instructions, and that L^scun was ready to carry them to the Court, the
King answered the Petition or Address.
Cahier left by the Clergy ^o their Agent; and without acquainting Lescun, or
the Deputies General in the least with it, the King granted them on the last of
A^g^st, besides the restitution of all the Ecclesiastical Houses, and
Churchyards on certain Conditions, the Presidentship in the Estates of the
Country; The admission into the Common Council and Sovereign Courts; The
E^emption from all Jurisdiction but the Popes; The Establishment of Jesuits in
Bearn, without restriction of Number, ^^ of Functions, and without retrenching
any thing of the Privileges of Scholarship from those who should study in their
Houses. One Article only was excepted against. The Clergy desired four Cities
of Surety in Bearn. This could be of no use to them, in a Country where
according to their own relation there were six Catholics to one Reformed.
Moreover the said Proposition was most ridiculous in the mouth of those very
Persons, who had imputed it as a great Crime to the Reformed, to have taken
such Precautions with their King. But it is the Nature of Mankind: We daily see
Persons who Exempt themselves from Common Laws; and think those things Lawful
in them, which they impute as Crimes to the rest of the World.

After this great Victory, the Bishops of Bearn went to 1618.
Bourdeaux, and to Thoulouse to obtain the Verification of the The Effect of
those Advantages is prosecuted without.
Edict published upon the aforesaid Restoration: After which the Bishop of
O'eron came back to Court, and the Bishop of Lescar repai^'d into Bearn, in
order to press on both sides the Accomplishment of an Affair so far advanced.
He had the Cunning to flatter La Force with the hopes of a Marshal^ Staff, and
a Sum of Money to Indemnifie him; by which means the said Lord promised to
obtain the Approbation of the Edicts of Reunion and Re-implacement in Bearn.
But ^^ soon perceived that the Court Laughed at him. They thought they might
dispense with his Credit, because they had a Party in Bearn which would get the
upperhand, though never so weak, being seconded by the King's Authority. This
Party consisted of the remainders of the Faction of Gramm^^t, which had been so
famous for the Disputes between them and that of Beaumont their Rival, which
had finally occasioned the loss of the Upper Navar, which Ferdinand had
Usurped. The Count of Grammont was a professed Enemy to L^ For^e, being Jealous
of his Authority, and for other particular ^easons: Insomuch that his Relations
and Friends being joined ^o those which the Zeal of Religion, the Credit of the
Bishops and Confessors, the Pensions, or the hopes, the Levity, or the
^mprudence of the People could engage in the same Interest, ^ere preparing a
considerable Succor for the Court. Moreover Luin^s hated La Force; either
because he had an Aversion ^or all those who had Merit and Capacity; or because
La Force ^ad two Sons at Court, who began to get too great a share (...) the
King's Favor, to expect any from a Favorite full of Ambition and Jealousy.
They were Aimet and Mompouillan, who had been bred with the King from their
Infancy, and ^ad wherewithal to obtain a preference before all others of their
Rank. Particularly Mompouillan advanced apace toward the highest degree of
Favor; and he seemed only to want a little more Age, to have as great a share
in the Government, as he possessed already in his Prince's favor. Luines ^ad
employed him to raise his own ^ortune upon the Ruin of ^he Marshal d'Ancre.
The Clergy had used their utmost Endeavors at that time to obtain the
aforesaid Decree of Restoration; and Luines told Mompouillan, in order to
animate ^im the more against that Odious Favorite, that he was the Man who
seconded the Pretensions of the Prelates; and moreover that he designed to take
the Government of Bearn from ^a Force, lest he should hinder by his Credit, the
alterations they proposed to make in that Principality. So that Mompouillan, a
young Man without Experience, thinking to promote the advantage of his Family,
promoted Luines, speaking continually of the said Marshal to the King, as of a
Man that Usurped his Authority, and did abuse it to the prejudice of every
body. By this means he ruined his Favor, to lay the foundation of another:
And when Luines had destroyed the Marshal d' Ancre, the only Recompense he
bestowed on Mompouillan, who had served him so effectually in that Affair, was
to involve his whole House in his Personal Disgrace. Neither was it likely that
L^ines would promote the Fortune of the Father, since he dreaded the Progress
of that of the Children; nor that a Man whose Favor was not yet settled, would
suffer the Children of an Ingenious Man near the King; or that the Jesuits
would permit that Prince to honor Heretics with his Confidence and Affection.

La Force by endeavoring to keep measures between the Inequalities of La Force.
Court and Bearn, as if he had had a prospect thereby to reader himself the
more necessary on both sides, by forming difficulties which he should have the
honor to remove, crea^^^ Jealousies on both sides: And finding that he was
played upon by the Court, he was obliged to protect Bearn a little more than he
had done, in order to preserve some Credit and some Recourse. But the Marshal
de Bouillon only had the Art ^^ gain by those Intrigues; and to behave himself
with so much prudence, or good Fortune; that he was equally courted o^ both
sides; That he was at once the Author of the Leagues that were formed by his
Advice, and the Mediator who dissolved them by his Intermission; ever in Credit
with the Princes and Lords, over whom his Genius had an Ascendent; and ever
caressed at Court, because they could never dissipate the Confederacies he had
formed without him. Neverthe^es^ La Force finding at last that neither his
Merit, nor his Services could procure him the Recompenses that were due to him,
and which had been promised him while Henry IV. was alive, took the contrary
Party like a Wise Courtier: And being sensible that the best and most effectual
way to obtain what o^^ desires from the Court, is often to make ones self to be
feared, he raised so many Obstacles against his Enemies, that they were forced
in order to retrieve him, to grant him, what they had refused in order to keep
him.

This Affair occasioned several Assemblies to be made in Bear^ The Countryof
Bearn pursues in this Opposition.
several Oppositions, and several Decrees by the Soveraig^ Council: And the
Court omitted no means to succeed in the said undertaking. They were sensible
that according to the Rigor of Right the Enterprise was unjust: But the Clergy
being little sensible to Reasons of that Nature, and allowing a large Extent to
the old Maxim which permits to Violate Right in order to Reign, think that they
may trample upon it to promote their Interest. Moreover the King was Embarked
in that Affair: And according to the new Policy, they were of oinion that a
Prince being once engaged can never retract. ^he injustice of a design is no
longer a reason to break it, when ^ce it is formed; by reason that Injustice
ceases as soon as Su^^eam Power is engaged. A Sovereign makes and destroys
^^ght by a Word. Whatever is just, or unjust before he has ^^onounc'd, alters
its Nature as soon as he says, I will have it ^*

During these Contestations, as several Libels were pub^^^h'd Writings on their
behalf.
against the Reformed and against the Bearnois, these al^^ set forth Volumes of
Manifesto's and Apologies. There ^^pear'd a Writing of that Nature Printed in
London, Intitu^^d, A Discourse of the Seizure of Ecclesiastical Estates in
Bearn, ^c. The Author treated the thing at large, and began by ^^e occasion of
that Seizure. He related the Conspiracy of ^^e Catholics of the Country
against Queen Jane and the ^rinces her Children, which I have mentioned
elsewhere; their Retreat to Rochel during the revolt of their Subjects; ^he
Reduction of the Country to their Allegiance by Mongom^^ry; The Seizure of the
Estates in order to punish the Ec^^esiasticks; The Reformed established by the
Queen's Autho^^ty, and by the approbation of the Estates; The Assignment ^f the
Ecclesiastical Estates for the maintenance of the Mini^^ers, the Poor,
Scholars, Colleges, and the Rectors, or Su^eriors of the same: Of the Garrison
of Navarreins; of the ^ing's Lieutenant; of the Council and the Sovereign
Court; ^f the Captains of some Castles; of the Counselors and Au^itors of the
Chamber of Accounts, and of other principal and necessary Officers: The
Institution of an Ecclesiastical ^^na^e, composed of two Counselors, two
Auditors, two Gentlemen, two Ministers, two Qualified Persons from the Third
Estate, an Ecclesiastical Attorney, and a Treasurer General to have the
direction of the said Assignments; The Oath taken by the late King in 1581. to
preserve the Old Laws and Customs, and all the Advantages and Grants to which
his Predecessors, or himself had consented; the Suppression of the
Ecclesiastical Senate some years before by Miossans, who nevertheless made no
alteration as to the Designation of the said R^es; The Protestations of the
Estates against the said Enterprise; The reiteration of their Opposition; The
Confirmation of all the Regulations made by Queen Jane by the Edict of 1599.
which restored the Roman Religion in Bearn; and that which Lewis XIII. had made
in 1610, 1611, 161^, 1615. of all the Edicts of the late King and his own.
After which the Author made Reflections upon the manner in which the said
Restitution had been made: And he observed very justly upon the Edict of
Reimplacement, that it could not be of more force than those which had been
revoked; That the Pope and the Clergy would never be at rest, until those new
Regulations were violated, as well as others that were more Authentic; which
were treated at Rome as liable to Destitution the Princes concerned in them as
Favorers and Promoters of Heresy; That the Demesnes of Bearn were
unalienable, and that the Successor was obliged to redeem the Engagements made
by his Predecessor; That a perpetual Engagement of the Revenue is an effective
alienation of the Estate; That the remainder of the Assignments were given out
of the Country to their Privileges, and in Suspicious Places, among the Enemies
of the Reformed Religion. 'He added Remarks upon the Nature, Original, and
necessity of Tithes; and ^e concluded that the Reformed could not lawfully be
obliged to pay theirs to Catholics. Finally he said that the King learing the
Ecclesiastical Estates in Bearn in the same Condition in which Queen Jane had
put them, might have made the Reimplacement of the Sum to which the Revenue^ in
dispute amounted, upon his Demesnes in favor of the Clergy. This Expedient
would have looked more reasonable undoubtedly* And the Clergy would have been
better able to improve the said Reimplacement, by their Credit in the Council,
than the Reformed, to whom all things were contrary.

But the real truth is, that the said Indemnification was only Why the Clergy
would not take the said Reimplacement for themselves.
a blind to deceive the Bearnois, and to induce them to beat the rest with
patience: Therefore the Clergy who did not think it safe, were not so ill
advised as to content themselves with it. The Court which had granted that
Reimplacement upon the Remonstrances of Du Plessis Comptroller General of
Navar; and at the Entreaty of the Duke of Rohan to persuade the World that they
proceeded in that matter, upon ^^e hearing of the Parties, and an ample
knowledge of the ^^use, would have wanted no pretense to make it void at An
Answer to the Writing of the Bearnois.
^^easure. A reply was made to the said Writing of the Bear^^is in the Name of
the Catholics: But the Author of the ^^eply did not meddle with the Conspiracy
of the Catholics (...) Bearn against their Sovereign. Being favored by this
si^^ce he represented the War made against those Rebels by ^^ongommery, by the
Authority of the Queen and of her Chil^^en, as a Chain of several Massacres: He
said that the Seizure (...) the Estates belonging to the Clergy, had only been
made ^^ovisionally; but he did not add that two years after it the ^^een had
actually Converted it into an adjudg'd Fact, insti^^ting perpetual
Administrators of the said Seizures, which ^ere to be employed by them to other
uses. He pretended that ^^e Estates that had made the said Alteration, could
not be ^^ked upon as lawful, since the Ecclesiastics had been ex^^ded, which
were to compose part of them: As if there ^^d been no Lawful Estates in the
World before there was a ^^ergy; or that a whole Country concurring with their
So^^raign, had not naturally a Right to alter some Circumstan^^s in the form of
the usual Government. He added that ^^ose new Laws could not pass for
Fundamental ones, by rea^^n that such Laws must take their Births with the
States: A ^axim which the Clergy had adopted in the last Estates Ge^^ral, to
oppose the Article which the Third Estate pretended ^^e for the surety of
Kings: But a very false Maxim, since ^is most certain that entire Estates
composed of a Head and ^embers, may give the force of Fundamental Laws to all
^^ch as they agree upon, and that are necessary to secure the ^^ranquility and
Prosperity of the Public: Otherwise no^^ing would be more unfortunate than
Humane Society, if ^^e first Laws under which they were formed being either
ren^^r'd of no force by Artifice, or violated by force, it were ei^^er
impossible or unlawful to re-establish them upon new ^^undations. He affirmed
with the same boldness, that Prin^^s never Swear to observe the Laws of their
Predecessors; which is proved to be false, by all sorts of Testimonies, by all
the Lights of Reason, by all that can be called Right and Justice, and by all
those things which make the certainty of Humane Affairs. In the next place he
declared, that the la^ King designed to do what his Son had done: And that the
only reason that had hindered him from so doing, was that he d^ not: A falsity
often advanced by the Clergy, since that Princes being no longer in a condition
to give them the Lie; and which has been extended by the Missionaries, and by
tho^ that have drawn the Plan of the Persecution of our Days, even to his own
Edicts, though he was really so Jealous of the^ that he would never have
attempted the least thing against them. His known Integrity, his great Designs,
his rei^ted Protestations, and his constant practice during the space^ Twelve
Years, are sufficient Testimonies of his Disposition toward the Religious
Observation of such useful Laws.

Nevertheless in order to prove that the said Prince had designed A
Continuation of the said Answer.
to alter the State of Bearn, the Author recited all the Grants he had made to
diverse Bishops in those Parts, to the^ Chapters, to the Curates, Abbots and
Priors, and to all the Ecclesiastics: From which the Reformed would have h^
more reason to conclude, that the Clergy is never satisfied* than the Clergy to
conjecture that the late King would have been capable to break his Word. He
repeated the Instance made by the Clergy during the Estates General in 1615. a^
in their Assembly in 1617. and because an Illusive Aud^ had been given to the
two Diserote Father and Son, Ministers^ Bearn, before that Affair was judged,
he maintained that the had been admitted to make a full defense. He Laughed at
the Precription of Fifty Years which the Bearnois pleaded; and opposed that of
the Clergy to it, which he ridiculously made^ amount to 1500 years: As if the
Possession of the Clergy ha^ preceded not only the Temporal Greatness of the
Bishops, b^ even the first Preaching of the Gospel at the foot of the P^renean
Hills. The rest of the said Writing was abusive. He spoke of the Reimplacement
as if it had been the effect of a pure Favor, which rendered the opposition of
the Reform'^ very unjust. He talked of the Tithes as of a thing which having
belonged to the Ecclesiastics before the Seizure, ought to be restored by the
Edict which revered it; and he main^in'd moreover that the Estates of the
Church were unalienable, as Estates of which God was the Proprietor: A
Mona^ical Maxim, which making God Possessor of Lands and Re^nues, and Titles of
Vanity, shamefully debases to a Ter^e^ial and Temporal Nature, a Reign
altogether Spiritual and Heavenly, which Jesus Christ exerts over his Church.
He endeavored to Insinuate to the King, that the Reformed de^ing to be freed
from paying of Tithes to the Ecclesiastics, ^esign'd to keep for their
Ministers both the Tithes and the ^ms that were granted to them in lieu
thereof. He concluded by a Maxim very proper to remove the force of the most
^lemn Edicts, viz. That they only served to preserve an anci^nt Right in favor
of those for whom they were made; but ^at they did not create a new Right.
According to which ^otion it was easy to revoke whatever passed for a new
concession, or that was derogatory to the Ancient Right, in ^he Edicts which
had given a Peace to the Kingdom.

But the Reformed of Bearn were not the only People against whom Injustices
were committed. The Court was not more ^quitable toward those of other
Provinces. The Commissioners that were sent to redress some Contraventions,
made ^one but Illusive Ordinances: And whereas in the foregoing ^eign all
Difficulties were for the most part decided favorably for the Reformed, they
began under this to give nothing ^ut advices of a removal to the Council, of
sharing or dividing Judgments in which the Artifice of the Catholic
Commissioner rendered the clearest Rights doubtful, which even those of his own
Religion were ashamed of. So that the Reformed finding that the Commissioners
did them no good in the places where they had been sent, did no longer desire
the Court to send any elsewhere, lest they should do more harm than good.
Renard who was sent into Bearn, was at the same ^ime Commissary in Guyenne with
Lusignan: But when they ^ress'd him to perform his Commission, at least in such
places ^s should happen in his way, he refused it; and the reason he ^lledg'd
for his refusal was, that he would first see the effect of his Journey into
Bearn; as if he had had a mind to insinuate, that in case the Reformed of that
Principality did not content him, he would make the others answer for it. And
indeed he had received orders from the Court to behave himself so, to keep the
Reformed of the Adjacent Provinces in suspense; to the end that the hopes of
being gratified by the Commissioners, and the fear of losing the benefit of
their Commission, should hinder them from engaging too far in the Affairs of
Bearn, which they were unwilling they should meddle with. The Parliament of
Paris refused to receive the two Places of Counselors which have been so often
mentioned; of which the one was that of a Catholic who had embraced the
Reformed Religion, and the other was to serve (...) Indemnifie them for the
loss of that of Berger who had made himself a Catholic. They had obtained from
the King upon that Subject an Edict, Mandates, and Verbal Orders, which
appeared very express: Nevertheless the Parliament did not yield; and the Court
of Aids was not less severe upon the Subject of the Exemption of the Ministers.
But under (...) very absolute Government, which exacted from all the Orders of
the Kingdom base Submissions toward the Favorite, this Disobedience persuaded
the most suspicious that there was a Guile, and that the Court was willing the
Parliament should disobey.

So many Enterprises were made upon the Places of Surety* Enterprises* upon the
Cities of Surety.
that it was hardly credible that it should be attempted without secret Orders.
Some were made upon Tartas, upon the Mount of Marsan, upon the Mass of Verdun.
Though Fontrailles had promised to turn Catholic whenever they pleased he
still continued in Leitoure, and feigned that he was still of the Reformed
Religion. They judged by the little regard (...) expressed to the weak Orders
he received from the Court, the his deceit was not ill received there.
Desportes who was a Capital Enemy to the Reformed, maintained himself in a
Fortified Castle, of which the Reformed had ordered the Demo^tion by a Decree
of the Council: It is true that for fear he should obey, they had given another
which removed the Affair before the Commissioners, and still left Desportes in
Possession; which occasioned great Troubles in the Cevenes and the Gevaudan.
Antraguers, against whom they made diverse complaints, kept his Governments in
spite of them.

The free exercise of the Reformed Religion was hindered in The Exercise of the
Reformed Religion hindered in diverse places.
^ivers places; particularly at Ruffec in Saintonge, where it ^ight to have
been allowed according to all Rules. The Mar^ioness de Ruffec alleged for her
reason that it was done without her Consent: As if that Consent had been
necessary for ^ose Places in which there was an evident Possession, in the ^rms
of the Edicts. The Duke de Vendome having taken Possession of the Castle of the
City of his Name, by an Agreement he had made with the Governor, did not fail
to demo^sh the Temple the Reformed had built at the foot of the said ^lace. He
caused that Violence to be committed by his own ^ivery Men, without keeping the
least measures of Honesty, (...) Formalities of Justice. The Church of the said
Place made complaints to him about it, which were the better ground^ by reason
that he had promised to leave all things in the ^me Condition he had found
them. He seemed to be inclined to make some reparation for that Enterprise;
though he re^ly did not design it. He declared that he could not suffer in
(...) place, which he pretended to make part of his Basse-court, the free
exercise of a Religion contrary to his: Besides he had (...) mind to take the
advantage of the Reformed of Vendome, who having been in possession of that
Place from the very time of Queen Jane, thought that no body would dispute a
Right acquired by so long a Prescription: For which reason they had forgot to
take other Sureties from the late King besides the ^dict. They were obliged to
apply themselves to the King, in order to obtain the restoration of their
Temple. Commissioners were sent on purpose to examine that Affair upon the very
spot; but they could not determine it without great difficulties. The
Catholics were often ready to proceed to the utmost Violences; and the
Reformed were not much wi^er. Finally the business was made up, these being
obliged to relinquish part of their Right to secure the rest; the Exercise of
their Religion was removed out of the City, near one of the Gates, by a solemn
Ordinance; and the King was at the Charge of building the Temple, and of the
price of the Ground on which it was built. Nevertheless this showed the
Reformed that the Court had no mind to favor them, since that in doing them
Justice, even in the most reasonable things, they still abated something of
their Right. The Parliament of Bourdeaux refused to remove Criminal Causes in
which the Reformed were concerned to the Chamber of Nerac: And in Injustices of
the Parliaments.
order to have a pretense to retain them, they had the boldness to say, that
all the Crimes the Reformed were accused of, were so many Crimes of Treason, by
reason that they were of a Religion contrary to the State. They were prosecuted
in diverse places for Crimes abolished by the Edicts; and particularly by that
of Blois. The Jesuits increased in credit* more Jesuits.
and more; and had not only obtained a Decree on the 15th of February, which
allowed them to keep an open College at Paris for all sorts of Sciences,
without regard to the Decrees to the contrary made by the Parliament, nor to
the oppositions of the University: But also caused a Decree of the Accademi'so^
Theology and Arts, to be reversed, which declared that they would admit none to
the Degrees or Privileges of Schollarship, but such as had studied in their
Colleges, or in those of the Accademies that were in Confederacy with them.
They endeavored also to slip into the Cities, Towns and Castles, granted to
the Reformed for their safety by the Edicts.
Places of Surety. Rego^rd being sent to Leitoure by the Bishop, in the quality
of a Preacher, The King took it ill that the Consuls had given him a Summons to
depart from thence, alleging the quality of the place. He wrote to the
Inhabitants to order them to suffer the Jesuit to remain and to Preach there;
telling them that he hoped that he would keep within the bounds of the Edicts.
A thousand Disputes were made about the Burial of the Reformed. The Countess de
Roussi being Buried in the Quire near the Altar of the Parochial Church, the
Attorney General took the thing in hand for the Curate; and declaring that the
Church was Polluted by the Burial, obtained a Decree of Burial.
the Parliament at Paris, which ordained an Information to be made against the
said Contravention, and that the Church should be reconciled, if it had not
been done already* Which implies the removal of the Corpse by which the said
Church had been profaned.

All these Complaints, and many more being inserted in a long Petition, or
Remonstrance Answers to the Cahiers.
Cahier, a Council was held on purpose at the Chancellors on the ninth of July,
in which 33 of these well expressed Articles were examined: But instead of any
effectual satisfaction, they only obtained removals to the Chambers, and
ineffectual Letters to the Governors and Judges of the said places. The Cahiers
presented at the beginning of the Year had been answered in the same manner;
and were not dispatched until the 21th of February. The Answers, though
favorable in appearance, were only Evasions, to free the Council of the
Importunities of the Deputies General. It is easy to judge of it by that which
was written on the side of the 13th Article, in which the Reformed complained
that the Ecclesiastics of Languedoc su'd them for the Demolishing of Churches
and Convents during the Troubles; and Indicted them before the Parliament of
Thoulouse, where the said Causes were retained, without any regard to the
Removals desired by the Reformed. This was one of the Crimes that are always
abolished by the Edicts of Peace; and which are looked upon as unavoidable
Consequences of War, the Necessities of which neither respect Palaces or
Churches, when they are places the Enemies may improve to their advantage. The
King's Answer was, that he would not suffer any prosecution to be made upon the
account of the Materials of the said Demolishments employed to other uses
during the Troubles; and he reversed* all Decrees to the contrary. This seemed
to be to the purpose; nevertheless it did not put a stop to the Prosecutions;
and they were obliged to renew their Complaints. The truth is, that the form of
the late King's Answers was partly the same: But there was this essential
difference between his and his Sons, that the Fathers only served, as it were,
for Memoirs of the Commands he was to send into the Provinces to the Governors,
and other Officers of Justice: Insomuch that the Answer had the force of a Law,
by an express order to put it in execution; which he never failed of sending to
such places where it was necessary: But the Son's Answers were only words, to
free the Court of Importunities and Solicitations: And whereas as soon as the
Deputi's were out of sight, they forgot their Promises, the Reformed received
no benefit by it in the Provinces, where they Laughed at their answered Cahiers.

The same Fate attended the other means, which had served Illusive Remedies.
under the late Reign, to put them out of Trouble. A Removal or Appeal before
the Commissioners was become a Jest, by reason that the Reformed Commissioner
was ever at the Devotion of the Court; and that the Catholics having no
favorable Instructions, suffered themselves easily to be prevailed upon by the
Clergy and by the Jesuits, which Persons of that Character have ever
endeavored to oblige. A Confirmation of some Articles of the Edict violated by
the Catholics was but a Song; by reason that the Answer which granted it, not
being seconded, could not obtain more respect than an Edict, so solemn as that
of Nantes; or a better observation of the Settlements, which an Edict of that
Consequence could not secure against the Injustice of a false Zeal. A
Declaration of what the King would, or would not have, being weakened by the
little earnestness that was expressed to put it in Execution, met with no
Obedience. Perhaps I may enlarge more upon this Subject in another place: But
this is sufficient in this place to show the Effect of the Remonstrances and
Petitions the Reformed were daily obliged to present; viz. to obtain Illusive
Remedies for real Evils; and to see the Clergy authorized to raise greater
Persecutions against them, by the little redress they met with from the King's
Authority, to oppose the first Attempts.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of NANTES. VOL. II. BOOK VI.
A Summary of the Contents of the Sixth BOOK.
Extreme despair of the Bearnois. An Assembly refused at Castel-jaloux and at
Tonneins. They meet at Orthez, and are prescribed. Sedition at Pau. Maliae of
the Commissioner. Presages and Devotions. C^^ft of the Council. First and Final
Mandate directed to the Sovereign Council of Bearn: Followed by Decrees of the
said Council. Sentiments of some particular Persons upon those Affairs.
Dispositions of the Grandees. The State of Foreign Affairs. Dangerous
Consequences of Moderate Councils. An Apology of the Conduct of the Bearnois.
Artifice of the Bishops of that Country. Remarks upon the Speech of the Bishop
^f Macon. Difficulties against the Reimplacement: Against the Tithes.
Prescription. Conclusion. The Queen Mother makes her Escape from Blois. The
Prince of Conde is put at liberty. The Assembly os Orthez Transferred to Rochel
takes the King's part, and breaks up. Another Assembly allowed at Loudun. Their
Preliminary Demands. Why the Reformed have so often renewed the same Demands.
The Court refers the Complaints to the General * Cahier, and other Articles of
Complaints. The Assembly prohibits the Preaching of Jesuits, or other Monks in
the Towns of Surety. Decrees of diverse Parliaments to the contrary. Deputation,
Letters and Remonstrances to the King. The Reformed were inclined to serve the
Queen Mother. A Vexatious Answer from the King, and the Effect of it.
Oppositions of the Catholics against the Settlement of a College at Charenton.
Assembly of the Clergy. They are exempted from pleading in Courts where all the
Judges are Reformed. Reiterated Orders to the Assembly of Loudun to break up.
An Expedient of Accommodation. An Unexpected Declaration against the Assembly.
The Prince of Conde deceives the Reformed. Affected diligence of the Attorney
General. The Assembly remains steady. The Negotiations are renewed. The
Assembly obeys upon the Words of the Prince of Conde and of the Favorite.
Effect of the separation of the Assembly. New Intrigues against the Favorite.
The Duke of Rohan sides with the Queen. Scruples of the Queen Mother. The Power
of the Party she forms. Useful Advice of the Prince of Conde, and ill advice of
the Bishop of Lucon. Reasons of the Bishop. Defeat of the Queens Forces,
followed by a Peace. Unexpected Journey of the King in Bearn. Faults of the
Reformed, and the Cause thereof. Remonstrances cannot stop the King: He arrives
at Pau^ Makes himself Master of Navareins: Takes the Oath: Alters the whole
frame of the Government. Suppression of the Captains of the Parsans. Treatment
of the Reformed. Injuries, Threatenings, Violences. The Evil increases after the
King's departure. Wickedness of the Bishops. Cruelties of Poyane. Diverse
Relations of the King's Journey. National Synod of Alais. Political Settlement.
The Ministers deputed for the Synod of Dort give an account of the opposition
they have met with to stay them. Affairs of the Synod crossed by a thousand
Artifices. They resolve to send Deputies to the King, and revoke their
Resolution. All manner of Succors is refused to the Deputy of Bearn. Important
Considerations waved. News of Consequence suppressed. Treachery of some
Ministers unpunished. Affairs of Privas, and their Original. Accommodation
broken off by the Lord thereof. The Place is deposited. V^olerces of the
Garrison, and Calumnies against the Inhabitants. An Assembly at Anduze.
Behavior of Chatillon. Churches attacked. Invectives against the Synod of
Alais. Assembly at Gergeau. Important Propositions. 1st. Whether they shall
Vote by Heads, or by Provinces. 2ly. Whether they may Exceed their
Instructions. Deliberations of the Assembly. Other Assemblies in Anjou and in
Burgundy. Diverse complaints of the Reformed in those Provinces. General Alarms
of the Churches after the Alterations made in Bearn. Assembly at Milhau crossed
by the Deputies of Lesdiguieres and Chatillon. Effect of the Promises made to
the Assembly of Loudun. Counselors received in the Parliament of Paris.
Leitoure taken from Fontrailles. The Brief Signed for the keeping of the Places
of Surety is not given. The interest of Favas hastens the return of the
Assembly at Rochel. Declaration which styles it Unlawful. The Prince of Conde
and the Favorite fail in their Guaranty to the Reformed. A supposed Letter
under the Name of the Duke of Mombazon.

DUring these Transactions Peoples Minds were strangely 1618.
agitated in Bearn, and they lost all manner of Patience, Extreme Despair of
the Bearnois.
when they heard how the Court had received their Deputies; and the
Intercession of the Deputies General. The Council would not allow the
Deputation of the Bearnois to be real, and though it had all the Marks that
were necessary to Authorize it, they rejected it, as being made in the Suburb
of St. Germains, by Persons who had no Authority. They would hardly look upon
the Cahier that was presented by those Deputies: And after having seen it, they
granted nothing of what it contained. Moreover the King forbad the holding of
any Assembly upon that Affair, and refused to hear either Apologies, or
Remonstrances. These hard and absolute Proceedings cast those People into
Despair, who had been used to a milder Treatment; and who judging of the Future
by the present, forefaw that the oppression of which the first steps were so
fierce and so cruel, would undoubtedly reduce them in the sequel to the most
dismal Extremities of Slavery. Therefore those who had the management of that
Affair, resolved to improve the Determination of the Assembly of Rochel, and to
summon the Deputies of the Councils of the three Neighboring Provinces, to
Implore their Advice, and Assistance, to secure themselves. In order whereunto
after having celebrated a Fast in all the Churches The Assembly refused at
Casteljaloux.
of Bearn, to beg of Almighty God a happy success in that Enterprise; they
Convened an Assembly of the three Provinces at Castel-jaloux: But the thing
being done publicly, by Persons who had no private ends, and who did not look
upon that proceeding to be Unlawful, the King had timely notice of it, and sent
orders to the Consuls of the place before the Deputies arrived there. He also
writ to the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and to the Chamber of Nerac to impeach all
such as should be concerned in the said Assembly, and to use them as.
Infractors of the Edicts, and Perturbators of the Public Peace; which the
Parliament did not fail to effect with their usual Passion. Whereupon the
Governor and the Consuls of Castel-jaloux refused to admit the Deputies within
their Gates, being unwilling to displease the Court. Tonneins whither And at
Tonneins.
the Deputies repaired from thence, treated them in the same manner. This made
them fearful that they would meet the same treatment throughout Guyenne, and
that while they lost their time in seeking a safe and convenient place, the
Court would oblige the Bearnois to do that by force which the ^^^ovi^^e was not
in a condition to hinder. They also con^^^ded that it would not be proper to
hold their Assembly in a p^^^^ ^oo far distant from that which might stand in
need of their ^ssistance.

Therefore they repaired to Orthez in Bearn, where they They repair to Orthez.
were certain of a kind Reception. The Court could not pre^ent the effect of
that Resolution, by reason that it was held ^ecret until the very moment in
which it was put in Executi^n. As soon as the Assembly was formed they writ to
the ^ing, who would neither receive their Letters, as coming from an Unlawful
Assembly; nor yet give a hearing to the Deputies General. On the contrary he
put out a very severe And ar^ proscribed.
Declaration, on the 21st of May, against the Authors, and Members of the said
Assembly. In the mean time the Court expected to hear the Effect of the Journey
of Renard, Master ^f Requests chosen by the Clergy, who had been sent into
Bearn to put the King's Orders in Execution, and to get the Decree of
Restoration Registered in the Sovereign Council, ^he Edict of Reimplacement,
and the Decrees of Verification ^t Thoulouse and at Bourdeaux, and that of the
Council given ^n consequence thereof, which ordered the Council of the Province
to do the like. The said Commissioner was very ill ^eceiv'd at Pau, where the
Common People and all the Scho^^^rs Seditino at Pau.
stirred a great Sedition against him. The Wisest had not Authority enough to
hinder it. The Assembly of Orthez, and the Council of the Academy endeavored
it in vain. So that Renard was obliged to retire: But he did it like a Man who
was willing to aggravate Matters. For which reason he Maliae of the
Commissioner.
refused some Honors that were offered him as to a Commissioner from the King:
He refused to Communicate his Commission, he only distributed some Letters
among those the Court was sore of, by which they were commanded to assist him:
He would not accept the Sureties that were offered him to come to Pau, to
acquaint the Sovereign Council with his Instructions. Moreover he went away
very abruptly after having sent a Verbal and very Violent Report to Court;
charging La Force and the Sovereign Council with all the Disorder. He joined
the Decree that Council had lately made to it, by which upon the pursuit of the
Clergy, and upon the opposition of the Estates and of the Churches, they
declared, That they could not make the Inrollment; and that the King should be
humbly Entreated to leave things in the Condition in which they were; and that
every body should return home and live in Peace. The Bishops had excepted
against Lescun, pretending that he was a Party against them, as if it had been
a private Process: But their Recusation was not allowed of, by reason that
Lescun had done nothing without Authority. The said Decree was made about the
end of June.

During these Transactions, the People ever curious of Presages Presages and
Devotions.
and of Prodigies, did not fail to make great Reflections upon some Earthquakes,
which were observed in some parts of Bearn, the very next day after the
Departure of the King's Commissioner: And whereas those Signs are generally
equivocal, and only signify what People desire or dread, every body drew
Consequences from it, conformable to their Temper. Nevertheless as People are
most inclined to dread, when they reflect on Accidents of which the Causes are
unknown to them, most looked upon them as an advice from Heaven, which denoted
to them that the Affairs of the State were threatened with a great alteration,
and that both the Churches and the Country were going to suffer ruinous
shakings. For that reason the usual Devotions on such occasions were renewed in
Bearn; and a public Fast was celebrated there on the 9th of July.

The Court being informed with the ill Success of Renard; Craft of the Council.
Commission, nevertheless made an advantageous use of his Journey: And by an
Italian Policy they pretended that the Cause of the Bearnois having been
defended at large in the Council of Pau, was a sufficient reason to refuse an
Audience to the Churches which desired that it might be pleaded before the
King. This Evasion would have been plausible, supposing, what is seldom true,
that Princes were informed with the particulars of the Affairs that are
reported to them: And then they might without Injustice to the Bearnois have
freed the King of the Fatigue of several tedious Audiences, by acquainting him
with what had been said in the presence, or with the Participation of his
Commissioners, who was to give him an account of it. But the Favorites, and
the Ministers were unwilling to use the King to take so much Cognizance of
Affairs. They knew he was easy, but withal capable to understand reason; and
they were afraid, that should the Question he well explained before him, it
would deprive them of the fruit of all their Craft. They satisfied him with
Reflections upon Sovereign Authority which seems to be incroach'd upon by the
Liberty Subjects take to come to plead in the very Council of their Princes
against the Laws which they have made. This was the Character of Luine's
Government, coun^ii'd by Spain and by the Clergy. He and his Creatures on^^
preached absolute Power to the King, which Doctrine he swallowed as greedily,
as if others had not exerted it in his ^^ead. The Clergy has followed the same
Maxim at all times: ^eing persuaded that it would be more easy for them to
manage the Hearts of Kings to their advantage, if they could ^inder them from
hearing the Complaints of their Enterpri^es from the very mouths of those that
are oppressed by them.

Therefore instead of hearing the Remonstrances of that Unfortunate First and
final Mandamus directed to the Sovereign Council of Bearn
Principality a Mandamus was issued out on the 25th of July, which, in order to
express the more Authority, was ^l'd first and final. It was Argumented,
contrary to the Custom of Acts of that Nature, which being only Declarations of
an absolute Will, seem not to require Reasons. They made the King declare in it
that he had been obliged to make the Decrees and Edicts which related to Bearn
for the discharge of his Conscience, which could not bear the affliction of the
Catholic Church: To satisfy the vows of the King his Father, who had often
expressed his Regret before his Death; for his not having finished the said
Work: To secure the repose of the Reformed, which the Bishops would never have
left in quiet while they were deprived of their Right: That he had considered
and heard all before he did pronounce; that he had made provision for what was
most material by the Reimplacement, which was a diminution of 78000 Livres of
the Revenue of the State; That he had relinquished his own to satisfy the
Reformed; That he still offered, after the Inrollment of the Edict, to do
Justice to the Interests of particular Persons who should complain of any
damage; That he demanded Justice of the Connivance of the Council of Pau, in
the late Sedition; That he would have such punished as had first taken up Arms.
He complained of the Assembly of Orthez, and in general of all Bearn: Imputing
nevertheless all the evil to some Factious Persons, without which he declared
that he would have used the utmost Extremities. He threatened to take the
refusal of the Inrollment as a formal Disobedience; and he Commanded La Force
to see it performed, and to assist the Council in the Execution of the Edict,
even by way of Arms.

While the Mandamus was preparing, Vispalie Advocate in Followed by Decrees of
that Council.
the Sovereign Council of Bearn, being sent with Letters from the Assembly of
Orthez to Rochel, and to all the other Provinces of the Kingdom, was seized at
Bourdeaux and his Letters taken. Complaints were made about it, as of an act of
Hostility in time of Peace; and Reprisals had like to have ensued. But the
Remonstrances of the wisest appeased the hottest: And they only writ other
Letters, and sent them more secretly and more safely. But when the Mandamus
came in Bearn, it occasioned great Emotions. The whole Country was alarmed at
that Novelty. They no longer questioned but the Court had a design upon their
Liberty, since that instead of being moved by their Complaints of an Edict made
against the Laws and Customs, and without the consent of the Estates, they
attacked them in a new, but yet more dangerous manner, by Mandates, which are
only used in Places where Princes are the sole Depositors of the Legislative
Power: Not in such where the free Consent of the Estates is necessary to make a
Law. Thus the whole Country was in a great Agitation. The Lay Patrons, the
College of Orthez, the Garrison of Navarreins, which were paid out of the
Forfeited Estates, the Syndicks of the Country and the Deputies of the Churches
joined together in the fame Oppositions. Some Deputies from abroad also entered
into it. The Synods of Castel-^^lo^^ and of Mazieres likewise thought fit to
send Deputies thither. During the greatest heat of this Agitation, the Council
of Pau appointed a Day in order to give a decisive Judgment; and being
Assembled on the 3d of October, they declared that considering the Nature of
that Affair in which every body was concerned, there was no reason to allow the
Recusations proposed by the Clergy. Finally on the 5th of the said Month a
Decree was made, importing that before any farther Proceedings should be made
in the matter, the King should be most humbly Petitioned to provide for the
safety of what related to the Rights of his Reformed Subjects, according to the
Edicts of his Predecessors and his own; and to hear their Remonstrances to that
end: Nevertheless in order to put a stop to the Proceedings of the Clergy, and
for the Repose of his Majesty's Subjects, it was ordered that the
Ecclesiastics should remit the answered Petitions, or Demand.
Cahier, which was mentioned in the Edict of Restoration of Ecclesiastical
Lands; and that the Attorney General should also remit the Decree of the 25th
of June. This Cahier was that in which the King granted to the Clergy of Bearn
by his Answers all the Advantages I have mentioned elsewhere: So that the said
Decree opened a way for a long Suspension, and to propose new Difficulties upon
the Restoration of the Clergy in all their Ancient Privileges.

Although, till then the Bearnois had only defended themselves Sentiment of
some particular Persons upon those Affairs.
by ways of Right, by Petitions and Deputations to the King, by oppositions
according to form, by Decrees of the Sovereign Council, yet there were prudent
well meaning Persons that did not approve that resistance. The Duke de Rohan
and Du Plessis Mornai were of that Number. They were afraid lest this should
engage all the Churches to take up Arms without consideration. They were of
opinion that it would have been better to accept the Reimplacement, as a proper
Expedient to repair the prejudice occasioned by the aforesaid Restoration: And
they would have engaged themselves to obtain leave from the King to resume the
Church Lands, in case the Assignment of the Reimplacement were diverted, or
appropriated to any other use. Not but that they looked upon the Cause of the
Churches to be just; but they saw that Justice disarmed: They thought it better
to suffer the loss of some Privileges, which they had not the power to defend,
than to hazard all by an Infectual Resistance: That this would be the way to
involve, even those that had not yet been meddled with in the ruin of those
that were attacked: That it was fit to take care lest the Churches of the
Kingdom, by protecting those of Bearn out of season should lose themselves what
they would preserve for others.

The Duke of Bouillon tired with Affairs and Broils, beginning Disposition of
the great ones.
to feel the weight and Inconveniences of Age, engaged to the Court by Favors,
minding the Settlement of his Children who were of Age to be introduced into
the World, and being perhaps desirous to see how things would go, before he
would engage himself, did not express the same heat in this as he had done in
others. The Duke of Sully was hardly reckoned upon in General Affairs; and had
neither renounced the Recompenses of the Employments that were taken from him,
nor yet the hopes of being Restored. He saw that the Court was subject to such
sudden Revolutions, that he thought they would want a Man like him. So that
whenever any applications were made to him about the Affairs of the Churches,
he only answered with Equivocal Councils and Irresolutions. Lesdiguieres formed
a Party, separated from the rest; and though all the Corruption of his Heart
was not known, the Reformed were sensible that Interest was the chief Article
of his Religion. Chatillion had as much if not more Ambition than Piety; and
was as much engaged to the Court by the first, as to Religion by the second. La
Trimouille was so young that it was not possible to judge what might be
expected from him. The Letters written by the Assembly of Rochel to the said
Lords, had produced no great effect, and had neither been able to unite them
among themselves, nor yet to awaken them in favor of the Common Cause. The
Duke of Rohan, Soubise his Brother, and La Force were the only Persons who
seemed resolved to undertake every thing.

Moreover Affairs abroad afforded no prospect to hope that State of Foreign
Affairs.
the Protestants would assist the Churches of France. The House of Austria
taking the advantage of the Troubles of the Kingdom, began to execute their
Projects in Germany; and assuming the pretense of Religion in order to hinder
the Catholck Princes from opposing them, oppressed the Protestants publicly.
Bohemia was full of Troubles; and the ill success of the Arms which the People
had taken up for the preservation of their Liberties, made them lose in a short
time both their Political Liberty and that of their Consciences. These
Confusions held all the Princes of the same Communion in suspense; expecting
the Event to see what measures they should take. Prince Maurice was employed in
the United Provinces; and the Arminians afforded him too much business to
permit him to engage in the Affairs of France. The King of England played the
Theologian: And while on one side he suffered People to give the Pope great
hopes, in his Name to restore his three Kingdoms to the Roman Communion, he
disturbed all the North, with Disputes which made him pass for a Zealous
Protestant So that considering the present State of Europe, it was impossible
to expect a happy Issue of the Resistance of Bearn. The King's Forces not being
employed elsewhere might Dangerous Consequences of the a^vice of the Moderate.
all be sent that way, and subdue the Country before the rest of the Reformed
had taken their final Resolutions. Moderate Councils only served to break their
Measures and occasioned great loss of time. They prevailed with those who only
wanted a pretense not to meddle with any thing, to forsake the Party of the
others: And the time which would have been necessary to put themselves in a
posture of defense being consumed in useless disputes, when the King was ready
to go into Bearn to force them to obey, he found no body ready to resist him.
Too much consideration commonly ruins the Affairs of the People. A little
boldness is better in those Cases, than slow considerate Proceedings:
Particularly when we are to deal with Enemies who esteem themselves to be above
all Laws, and who lay aside the Maxims of Integrity and Justice, by reason that
they know no other Rules of it but their Will. That Prudence which sticks
scrupulously to the Maxims of Probity is for the most part Unfortunate: The
Enemy takes the advantage of the Niceness of the Consciences of those he
attacks; and while they were deliberating about the Right of Resistance, they
afforded him time to prevent them.

Toward the end of the Year the Bearnois published an Apology, composed by
Lescun with the advice and approbation An Apology for the Conduct of the
Bearnois.
of the Assembly of Orthez, to whom it was Dedicated. That piece was written at
different times, as may easily be discovered by the management of it. The Style
is not of a piece: The Arguments are distinct, and not well followed: It is
full of Allusions to Holy Writ, and other Authors. But yet it is good and
solid; and the Rights of Bearn were asserted in it with vigor enough, to give
a pretense to Charge the Author with a Crime of State for his boldness;
particularly because he speaks vehemently against Arbitrary Power, although the
respect due to the King be Religiously observed in it. The Events of any
consideration were noted in it by Years and by Days: The Establishment of the
Reformation in Bearn; The Ancient Rights of the Country; The Examples drawn out
of the Old Laws of the Bar.
For, which show that even in the beginning of the Thirteenth Century the
People did not Swear Allegiance to their Sovereign, till the Sovereign had
Sworn to the Barons, and to all the Court that he would be a faithful Lord to
them, that he would Govern them justly, and that he would do them no prejudice:
The said Oath was renewed in 1585 by the late King in imitation of his
Predecessors. The Author proved at large in it, that the Laws only received
their Force by, and never could be altered without the Authority of the Prince
and the consent of the Estates; but more by the one without the other To prove
which he brought several Examples. He recited the alteration which was made in
Bearn under Queen Jane; and the Vengeance which Mongommery exerted against
those who had obliged that Princess to fly by their Conspiracies: A Vengeance
which even Molu^, one of the most cruel Persecutors of the Reformed, looked
upon as sent from Heaven; by reason that the said Count reduced all that
Country in three Days time, and took all the Leaders of the Rebellion
Prisoners. Artifices of the Bishops of the Country.


After that Lescun related the said Expedition, and all that passed upon the
account of the Forfeiture and Seizure of the Ecclesiastical Lands, until the
Month of October of the said Year. He observed the Falsity of what had been
advanced by the Bishops, who in order to be heard at Court pretended to be
Authorized by the Catholics of Bearn; and to be seconded by the Catholics,
told them that the King had ordered the aforesaid Reversion, or Restoration of
his own accord: from whence they concluded that it would be imprudent to refuse
an advantage which offered it self. Those good Prelates, ^^ which one was of
very obscure Birth, as being Son of a Man who had been a Cobbler, Butcher, and
had kept a Ca^aret, those Prelates, I say, who made so much noise whenever the
Reformed took up Arms to defend themselves, made ^o difficulty of taking them
up to attack. They made Assemblies, Fortified their Houses, gave Military
Employments, kept Guards as in time of open War; and those Officers of
Episcopal Creation never went abroad without being attended by Armed Men.

In the next place he did refute the Bishop of Macon's Speech, Remarks upon the
Bishop of Macon's Speech.
which I have mentioned before: And he made this particular Remark upon it,
That this Prelate had taken his Exordium out of the same Subject from which
that of a certain Libel ^ad been taken called, The English Catholic, written
against Henry ^. So that the one began with the same Arguments in order to
Exasperate the King against his Subjects; as the other had done to make the
Subjects rise against their King. He approved the Book Printed at London
concerning the Rights of Bearn; and he added diverse Reflections to it upon the
Violation of Promises, and upon the omission of the usual Formalities in the
Decree of Restoration. This among others was of great Consequence. D^ Vai^ had
assisted at the Judgment by virtue of his quality of Lord Keeper, though being
a Bishop he ought not to sit in the Council, when the Affairs of the Reformed
were treated there; according to the Answer made to the fourth Article of the
Cahier of Loudun, in which the King declared expressly that the Ecclesiastics
should withdraw whenever those Affairs were treated of there. He observed the
Unjust Precipitation of that Decree, made after having returned all the
Writings and Productions to the Parties, ^s if they had designed to give it
over; notwithstanding which ^t had been judged without any new Adjournment
given to the Parties concerned: And to the end they might not say, that they
had examined all the said Writings before the returning of them, he gives a
List of several other Acts which he designed to join to the first Productions.

He observed that the Reimplacement promised by the King, Difficulties against
the Reimplacement.
might be evaded by the Capricio of a Treasurer; whereupon he cited the Example
of the Country of Gex, and of Bearn it self, where the like Promises had proved
ineffectual: That the Demesne of Bearn was unalienable; That the attribution of
a perpetual Usufructuary was a real Alienation; and consequently that the
Reimplacement would only serve to render the Reformed the more odious, as
enjoying such an Income by a Title contrary to the Rights of the Country; That
without touching Regulations so often confirmed, the King might have given the
Reimplacement to the Bishops, who would have enjoyed it without fear of being
deprived of it again; whereas the Churches being obliged to accept it, they
might get it revoked when they pleased; That the King might think it a burden
to his Conscience at some time or other, to see his Revenues employed for the
maintenance of the Reformed Churches, since it would not permit him then to
suffer the Ecclesiastical Lands to serve for that use; and that it was to be
feared that the same Conscience would oblige him to take the Places of Surety
from the Reformed.

He also argued about the dispute of the Tithes; maintaining Against Tithes.
that they are not due as a ground Rent, but as a Religious Duty which cannot
be paid by the Earth, but by Persons, and concluded that the Reformed could not
pay them to the Clergy with a safe Conscience. In the next place he proved a
Prescription Prescription.
of 40 Years, and answered the two Exceptions of the Clergy, viz. That it had
been interrupted by the Protestations the Clergy had entered against it from
time to time; and that there can be no Prescription against the Roman Church,
unless of a hundred Years. He replied to the first, that as often as the Clergy
had renewed their Contestation they had been cast: And to the second that in
Bearn, that Right is of ^^ force against the Old Law, nor in France against
Royal Ordinances. * For.
He did not forget that in all the Writings that were made against Bearn,
absolute Power was sounded high, and that they were not ashamed to publish,
that the pretentions of Bearn were good in time of old, while they had a
particular Lord; but that belonging now to a King of France, the Case was
altered. That is to say, That the King's Right was only force, which according
to the Opinion of the most Equitable ^n France, is only a Right among
Barbarians: Whereas the Apology was only grounded on the Laws of the State,
very different from the particular Will of the Prince, which may ^ary according
to time, while the others are constant and unvariable.

He upbraided the Jesuits with their Parricides, and their Conclusion.
Doctrine concerning the Authority of Kings; and returned the Catholics some
of the Darts they used to Lance against the Reformed, called the King Abraham,
the Roman Church, and the King of Spain, Hagar and Ishmael, and the Reformed
and their Church; Isaac and Sarah; complaining that Agar and ^hmael would turn
out Isaac, and the true Children of the House unknown to Abraham: And finally
he protested in the Name of the Reformed, that not being the Agressors they
would not be responsible for the Evils that might ensue, if being attackt they
should be forced to make a Lawful defense. He implored the assistance of all
those that were of the same Belief, and of all those that loved the good of the
State; lest those should expose themselves to the reproach made to Mero^ by the
Israelites ( J^g. 5. v. 23.) of not being come to the assistance of the Lord;
and these to the Courtesy of the Cyclop. He pretended this recourse to be
founded on Right and Examples. He taxed the Favorite by the by of enjoying
Employments which were only due to Princes of the Blood: And he insinuated that
the King had been the greatest gainer by the Treaty of Loudun, and the Assembly
which met at Rochel at the time of the Fall of the Marshal d' Ancre.

While Affairs were in this State in Bearn, the Queen Mother 1619.
was tired with Blois, where she was under Confinement, The Queen Mother makes
her Escape from Blois
as in an honorable kind of Prison. Luines, who had a mind to know her
Secrets, put a thousand unworthy Tricks upon her; and Fooled her and the Duke
of Rohan, pretending to come to an Accommodation with that Princess, in order
to discover those in whom she reposed a Confidence. He even made use of the
Treachery of Arnoux the Jesuit, who under pretense of Confession, discovered
whatever she had upon her heart; which he acquainted the Favorite with, who
improved it to his own advantage. The Jesuit, after so base a piece of
Treachery, disdained to excuse it, and thought it sufficient in order to cover
the Infamy of so base an Action to say that he had begged God's Pardon for it.
The Queen being Exasperated by the Treatment she received, resolved to make her
Escape. She applied her self at first to the Marshal de Bouillon, whose Ability
she was acquainted with, and who had a considerable City in which he might have
afforded her a Retreat. But he refused to engage in so great an Undertaking. He
only advised the Queen to apply her self to the Duke d' Epernon, who was at
Mets at that time, very much disatisfy'd with the Court. The said Duke accepted
her Proposals immediately; and having taken the Queen in a place where he had
appointed to meet her, he carried her safe to Angouleme. Luines was stunned with
that Blow, which he did not expect. He was sensible that he had disobliged all
the Kingdom: His prodigious Fortune created a Jealousy in all the Grandees;
and the People oppressed by a thousand Vexations, imputed it all as it is usual
to the Avarice and Ambition of the Favorite, Therefore he thought it better to
stop the progress of the evil by Negotiations, than to let it increase it self
by Negligence. Moreover he gave way either voluntarily, or by reason that the
thing having been sued for without his knowledge, he was obliged to consent to
it handsomely, to the return of the Bishop of Lucon to that Princess, on
condition that he should dispose her to a Peace; and the Bishop being weary
with studying of Theology which he was not very wellskill'd in, aspiring only
to return to Court, where he was in hopes of making himself useful, made no
difficulty to acquiess to it. Thus after some Messages to and fro, the Peace
was concluded. The Queen had the Castle of Angers and de Ponts de Ce for her
Security, with leave to come back to Court.

But the Duke de Luines who was afraid that she would find many Persons there
who would rather follow her than him, The Prince of Conde is set at liberty.
and that she would soon resume her former Authority to his prejudice, and
revenge the bloody Injuries he had done her, found a way to render that
permission of no use to her. The Prince of Conde whom she had put in Prison
about three years before, passed his Days dismally there, though the Princess
his Wife had voluntarily confined her self with him to keep him Company. He
amused himself in the Study of Controversies: But he did not apply himself to
it like a Man that designed to understand the Questions thoroughly, and to take
his Party after having maturely weighed the Reasons on both sides. This way of
Study is too long and too tedious for Princes. They must have abstracted
Methods, to shorten their Labor, and to free the Matters from the dryness and
difficulties they are surrounded with. A little Superficial Knowledge passes
among them for profound Science; and of all Arguments none are so proper for
them as Prejudications. He was delighted with those little Reasons, which the
Jesuits, and the Missionaries their Emissaries did begin to put in practice:
And he rendered himself more troublesome thereby to the Reformed, whom he
persecuted by Disputes, in which he would always be in the right, than he
proved formidable to them in the War he waged against them with great Violence.
Luines hoping that Resentment would induce that Prince to protect him against
the Queen, secured himself with him, and put him at Liberty: And as if he did
design to acquaint the Queen, that it was against her that he had sought that
support, he obtained a Declaration for the discharge of the Prince, in which
the Conduct of that Princess was indirectly taxed: But yet in such a manner
that it might easily be perceived by any that had Common Sense She was so much
offended at it, that she would not come to Court; and she expressed her
Resentments so high, that it was easy to judge, that she would use her utmost
Endeavors to revenge it. She was very near doing it, and Luines had been
ruined had she been well advised.

But while these Broils employed the Court, the Affairs of Bearn remained
Dormant, by reason that the Court had no time to mind them. Moreover they
abolished by an express The Assembly of Orthez Transferred to Rochel.
Declaration of the 5th of July, the Crime of the Assembly of Castel-jaloux and
of Orthez, which toward the latter end of the preceding Year after having been
Converted into a General Convocation, had been transferred to Rochel, for the
Convenience of the other Provinces. The truth is that the said Convocation did
take the King's part publicly against the Queen; and even refused to hear
Chambret who was sent by Takes the King's part
that Princess to sound them. Besides which they declared all such Desertors of
the Union of the Churches, who should side with any body but the King. After
which they broke up on the 22th of April; upon the King's Promise of allowing
And breaks up.
another Assembly in the Month of September following. The Another Assembly
allowed at Loudun.
Brief of permission was Signed on the 23d of May; and the Assembly repaired to
Loudun, where they began their Session on the 26th of September. The Court in
reality ventured less than they seemed to do, by allowing that Assembly in a
time of such Confusion. They were very well informed with the Divisions that
reigned among the Reformed; and they had ready means to improve them; Artifices
to delude the Simple; Recompenses to purchase those that were Self-Interested;
Threatenings to frighten the Weak; and all those being made useless to the
Party, they had more Forces than were necessary to oppress the rest.

Several Lords sent Deputies thither: La Force did not fail to do the same, and
the Affairs of Bearn were canvas'd there, as soon as it was formed. Insomuch
that they soon drew Seven preliminary Articles, which they gave to those that
carried their Submissions to the King; until they could make more ample
Complaints, to be sent by the Deputies General.

The first demanded the Revocation of the Decree of Restoration, or at least a
Suspension of it, until the Bearn^is had been heard.

The Second demanded the continuation of the Places of Surety, and especially
that an account should be given of those that were held by Lesdiguieres, who
had all along refused to communicate it to the Churches of the Kingdom.

The Third related to Leitoure, which Government they desired should be taken
from Fontrailles.

The Fourth renewed the Affair of the two Counselors in the Parliament of
Paris, in which they refused to receive them: And the Court took but little
care to oblige the Parliament to Obey according to the King's Promise.

The Fifth mentioned the Creation of a place of Substitute to the Attorney
General in the Parliaments of Paris and Grenoble, to be given to Persons of the
Reformed Religion.

The Sixth contained Complaints about the Surprising of Tartas, which had been
taken from the Reformed by Craft in time of Peace, demanding the Restitution of
the said Place.

The Seventh remonstrated that the Catholics had burnt the Temple of Bourg in
Bresse, and demanded Reparation for that Violence.

I will observe enpassant that they endeavored to make Why the Reformed have
so often renewed the same Demands.
the Reformed pass for Troublesome Obstinate People who would never give over,
and who did perpetually renew the same Demands, even after the King had
declared by diverse Refusals that he would not satisfy them. But there never
was a more Unjust, or more Imprudent Accusation. The Truth is, that it was
never urged against them until their decay gave way to their Enemies to make
Crimes of all their Actions, and to take their very Sighs, and their most
humble Petitions for a lawful pretense to destroy them. I own that they have
often renewed the same Demands: But that was chiefly when they had received
Promises which had never been put in Execution, or when those things were
refused, which had been solemnly promised to them. So that it was not a
Criminal Importunity, to press the performance of a Royal Promise on all
Occasions. If there was a Crime, those were guilty of it who prevailed with the
King to break his Promises, and to Engage his Word to Impose upon the Credulity
of his Subjects. If there have been things on which the Roform'd have Insisted,
though they have been denied to them at the first Proposal, they have done no
more in that than what all manner of Communities had been used to do, in things
which they were in hopes of obtaining at some time or other: viz. to renew
their Demands from time to time, for fear of giving cause to tell them,
whenever they found a favorable occasion to speak a new about them, that
having once given over the pursuit of them, they had no right to resume it.
Among several Examples of this Practice, that of the Clergy admits no
contradiction. That Body fond of their Liberties, thought them violated by the
Concordat between Francis I. and Leon X. and not despairing to find a
favorable occasion at some time or other to break it, they resolved to
Petition the Court for the Restoration of the Liberty of Elections, whenever
they should have an occasion to make Harangues to the Kings by their Deputies.
They not only formed the design of it; they obliged themselves to it by Oath;
and for above the space of a hundred Years, their Deputies have never failed to
make this Liberty of Elections one of the Articles of their Harrang^ies.
Nothing but an absolute command could oblige them to desist from that useless
pursuit. If they were not troublesome to Kings by Petitions so often renewed,
and which did attack one of the Privileges they have most reason to be jealous
of; there is no reason to allege as a Crime against the Reformed, that they
did not always acquiess to the first refusal, in things in which no body was
concerned, which did no wise Incroach upon the Regal Authority; and which they
thought necessary for their safety.

La Moussaye, who together with four other Deputies carried that first
P^t^ti^^. The Court refers the Complaints to the General Ca^.
Cahier of the Assembly of L^udun, could not prevail with the Court to accept
it; though several Persons endeavored to satisfy the Court, that by
redressing some of the main Grievances, the King would receive full
Satisfaction from the Assembly. Lesdiguieres himself had sent the President ^u
Crose to the King, to Petition him to prevent the Demands the Assembly might
make to him; and to give the Churches satisfaction upon some considerable
Points, even before the Expi^ation of the Term of the Convocation. But he was
said with the common Answer, of good Intentions, and of General Promises. So
that according to the old Style of the Court, the Complaints of the Assembly
were referred to the General Cahier, and they did not fail to exhort the
Deputies to dispatch their Affairs speedily, to Nominate six Persons to the
King, out of which he should choose two for the General Deputation, and to break
up.

The Assembly took at first pretty Vigorous Resolutions. Resolutions and Oaths
of the Assembly.
They obliged their Members to take diverse Oaths; to serve the Churches, to be
secret, to obey their Resolutions, to speak their mind freely and without fear,
to preserve their Union, not to break up, before their having seen what answer
the Court would make to their Petitions and Demands. Substance of the General
Cahier and other Articles of Complaints.
Cahiers. They drew it with speed: And they did not want matter. The Edict was
Violated so many ways, and in so many places, that there was sufficient reason
to complain. Besides the concerns of Leit^^re, of Tartas, and of Bou^g in
Bresse, the Catholics endeavored in all places to obstruct the Liberty of the
Exercise of the Reformed Religion. They had suspended it at Clermont d^ Lodeve,
which the Reformed held as a place of Surety; and when they endeavored to
re-establish it there, the Catholics took up Arms to oppose it. The Temples of
Moulins and of Laval, where the Reformed of Guise went to Church, had been
Demolished. The Reformed had been turned out by force of Arms of Baux in
Provence. A great Sedition had been kindled against them at Banjenci, and the
Allarum Bell rung out upon them. Two of them were flung out of a Garret Window,
and one of them not being sufficiently hurt in the Opinion of the Mutineers,
was run through with Swords. The Lieutenant General of Orleans in prosecuting
the Fact, received the Depositions of those very Persons who had committed the
Violence, as if they had been Lawful Witnesses: And when the said Case was
brought before the Parliament of Paris, the Attorney General, who by his place
was obliged to cause the Edicts to be put in Execution, abandoned the
prosecution of it. The Ministers of Bourges and of Chataigneraye were turned
out of the said Cities; and the Reformed had received the same Usage at
Chalons, upon Saone, and in the Bearnois; though according to the Edict, they
ought to be suffered in all Places whatever. The Exercise of their Religion was
obstructed about Lions, Dijon, and Langres. The Officers Royal, the Consuls,
and Seneschals, opposed the said Exercise of the Reformed Religion in Nineteen
or Twenty Places in the Provinces of Guyenne, of Languedoc, of Provence, of
Vivarais, of Forests, of Poitou, of Saintonge, of Perigora, and of Normandy;
some by Prohibitions, others by Fines; although the said Exercise was Lawful in
all those Places according to the Edict. The Catholics took away the Children
of the Reformed without Redress. At Paris they had taken those of Le Maitre,
who had a place of Master of the Accounts, and who had embraced the Reformed
Religion a little before his Death. The same thing had been done at Royan, at
Ambrun, at Milhau; and lately at Leitoure Regour^ the Jesuit, for whose good
behavior the King had passed, his Word had stole away a young Child about 10
Years of Age. They had Violated the Sepulchers, or hindered Burials in the
accustomed places at Aix, at Girdes, at Mirebeau, at Ongles, at Saints, at St.
George d' Oleron, and in diverse places of Gayenne. They had turned out the Sick
of the Reformed Religion out of the Hospitals, and such as were allowed there
were tormented in their Consciences, to oblige them to change their Religion:
Especially at Paris, those that had been received in the Hospital of St. Lewis
during the Plague, had been deprived of the Consolation of seeing Ministers,
which were not allowed to visit them. The Parliaments incroach'd upon the
Jurisdiction of the Chambers of the Edict. A Messenger who was Tried at
Thoulouse, was Condemned there notwithstanding his appealing to the Chamber of
Castres; and the said Parliament refused to submit to the Decrees of the
Council, which ordered the said removal. Some of the Inhabitants of Mas d'
Agenois being prosecuted at Bourdeaux, upon suspicion of their having designed
to deliver the said place up to the Duke of Rohan, being joined in a Plot with
Calonges their Governor, as I have related it in another place, the accused
having desired a removal to the Chamber of Nerac, the Par^ament had no regard
to it; insomuch that during the Disputes of Jurisdiction, several of them Dyed
in Prison: And upon the Information made about the surprise of Tartas, the
Reformed who had been abused there, were used worse yet in the Parliament,
which had retained their cause notwithstanding ^he Instances made by the
Chamber of Nerac. The Parliament of Aix had no respect to the general Evocation
the Re^'d had obtained in the Parliament of Grenoble. Several c^^siderable
Alterations had been made at Montaud, Vareilles, ^m, Montgaillard in Foix,
which were reputed places of ^u^ety, in which, at least according to the Brief
of 1598, no innovations were to be made. Moreover the Reformed desired ^ new
Brief, for the keeping of the Hostage Cities; The Settlement of those of
Dauphine; the Revocation of the Edict of Restoration of Church Lands; the
Restitution of Privas to ^he Inhabitants, and the Reparation of the Outrages
they had ^eceiv'd from the Husband of the Lady to whom the said ^ordship did
belong.

Some Examples of the said Facts are cited in the Articles The Assembly forbids
to suffer Jesuits and other Monks to Preach in the Cities of Surety.
which I have here abreviated, which are not to be found in the General Cahier
of the Assembly of Loudun, by reason that they are taken from things which
happened since: Yet I thought fit to Insert them here, at once. While the
Petition or Address.
Cahier was drawing, the Assembly made a Rule among the rest, which forbad the
Governors of the Places of Surety to suffer the Jesuits, or Monks of other
Orders to Preach there, under pretense of being sent thither by their
Diocesans. The said Rule made all the Catholic Party rise. The Parliament of
Decrees of diverse Parliaments to the contrary.
Paris made a Decree contrary to it, at the request of the Attorney General,
like unto that which had been given for Mompellier. The Parliament of Bourdeaux
did the same in favor of Tessier the Jesuit, who had been sent to St. John d'
Ang^ly, by the Bishop of Poitiers: And the Parliament of Thoulouse forbad the
Reformed throughout their Jurisdiction to refuse the Preachers sent by the
Diocesan, whither Jesuits, or others: Directing the said Prohibition
particularly to the Governors of Figeac and of the Isle of Jourdain, who had
given an Intimation of the aforesaid Rule of the Assembly to the Catholics of
those two Cities. The Attorney General st^'d the said Rule an attempt against
Royal Authority by way of Monopoly; as pretending to prescribe what Preachers
should be allowed in the Roman Church, which he called the Fundamental Religion
of the Realm: And cited the Decree made in favor of the Bishop of Mompelier,
and the King's Letter to the Inhabitants of Leitoure.

The Cahier was presented to the King on the 20th of December Deputations,
Letters and Remonstrances to the King.
by three Deputies, Couvrelles, Bouteroue and Alain, who declared to the King
the Resolution of the Assembly not to break up without seeing the Answer he
would be pleased to give to their Complaints. They Remonstrated to the King how
much reason they had to endeavor to secure themselves, considering the
Injustices that were daily committed against the Reformed throughout the
Kingdom; the surprising of several of their Places; the Inexecution of diverse
things often Sworn, the Effect of which the Deputies General had solicited in
vain during many years; the Rebellions that were made in all Places against the
Ordinances of the Commissioners, when they were any wise equitable. Those
Remonstrances and the Letters of the Assembly were very respectful; and they
protested both by the Mouth of their Deputies and in Writing, that it was not
against the King they desired to be secured, but against the Enemies of the
Reformed Religion. The King made a threatening Answer, by reason that Luines
Inspired him with hard Sentiments. That Favorite The Reformed were inclined to
the Queen-Mother's Service.
thereby thought to avoid the Fall he had cause to dread by reason of the
Easiness of his Master's Temper. Moreover he was displeased at the Joy the
Reformed had expressed at the Queens Reconciliation. The Assembly of Loudun had
sent Deputies to her as soon as the Peace was made: And the said Deputies not
considering that they Harrangu'd that Princess before Brantes, one of the Duke
de Luines Brothers, said many things to the advantage of her Regency, praised
her for having caused the Edicts to be observed, and made great Submissions to
her. These were so many Indirect Reflections against the present Ministry; for
which reason this Deputation was ill received at Court. The King indeed
promised to satisfy the Assembly, provided they did break up immediately; and
to permit them to leave two Deputies with him until the Entire Execution of the
things promised: But he declared at the same time that in case they did not
break up, he would look upon them and their Adherents as Perturbators of A
Dismal Answer.
the Public quiet, and that he would abandon their Persons and Estates,
without any more ado to whosoever would fall upon them. The Assembly persisted
in their Resolution, notwithstanding this Answer. They knew by Experience that
And the Effect of it.
under that Reign promises of Satisfaction were as soon forgotten as made: And
the Wisest among them were of Opinion, that some of the Articles of their
Cahiers were too Decisive, and that the Subsistence of ruin of their Churches
depended too visibly on them, for them to break up without knowing what Answer
should be made to them. Nevertheless the Assembly Writ to the Churches upon
that Subject about the beginning of the following year; and remonstrated to
them, in order to give them an account of their Resolutions, that the
Parliament of Paris had waved Ten Mandates, for the Verification of the
Articles which related to the two places of Counselors, granted above three
years before it; That the Edict was Infracted inall places; that so many
Promises and Oaths, either Violated or Ineffectual, ought to excuse their fears
for the future; and several things to the same purpose. But they mentioned
particularly the Example of several Assemblies, that had continued their
Sessions, until the Answer to their Grievances had been Communicated to them.

One of the most sensible Afflictions the Reformed received Opposition of the
Catholics to the Establishment of a Coll^ge at Charenton.
that Year, was the opposition that was made to the Establishment of a College
they designed to Erect at Charenton. It had been spoken of for some time: And
the design of the Reformed had been crossed on several sides; principally by
the oppositions of the Judges of the Place. But whereas that year they seemed
not to yield to those Obstacles, the University thinking that the said College
would prejudice theirs, and that the Reformed settling good Rectors in the same,
it would encourage People to send their Children thither, they took fire
against that Enterprise, as they had done formerly against that of the Jesuits.
The Muses of Colleges are commonly hot and Self-interested: Therefore they
carried their Complaints in a very violent manner to the Count de Soissons,
whom the King had left at Paris, during the Voyage he made to reconcile himself
to the Queen his Mother; to the first President, and to the Attorney General:
their pretense was the grief of seeing a College of Heresy settled so near the
Metropolis of the most Christian Kingdom in the World, there to contrive the
manner of attacking the Catholic Religion; perhaps the said Opposition was
also made in some measure out of Policy; by reason that the University having
been so constant in refusing the Jesuits a small share of their Privileges, it
would not have looked well for them to suffer the Establishment of an Heretical
College within two Leagues of Paris without opposition. However those
Complaints broke the Measures of the Reformed, and the Erection of the said
College has never been mentioned since.

The Clergy also Assembled that year at Blois, from whence Assembly of the
Clergy.
the Bishop of Seez, and some others, were deputed to the King to Harrang^e
him. They found him at Plessis Les Tours. The Bishop in his Speech insisted
long upon the Affairs of Bearn; and he was very pressing upon the Execution of
the Decree of Restoration. But moreover he desired a thing which appeared
pretty new; viz. the Reparation of what had been written against the Chief of
the Clergy; and he affirmed with as much boldness, as if the King himself and
the Council had not known the contrary, that the Clergy did keep within the
bounds of the Edicts. The Truth is, that lest he should be suspected of
assuming a Spirit of Charity and of Toleration, he added that it was only to
obey the King who would have it so. The Clergy had never bethought it self,
till then to complain of the manner in which the Reformed used them in their
Writings; and they had had the prudence to let them alone, while they thought
they could not help it. The Complaints he made about it now in so extraordinary
a manner, were a proof that Affairs were altered; and that tho they were as
liable as ever to hear those Truths, yet it was no longer safe to urge them.
They obtained a Declaration on the fourth of September, which exempted them
from answering Exemption which is granted them of pleading in such Tribunals
where all the Judges are Reformed.
for the Possessory of the Benefices and other annexed Estates, to the
Tribunals in which all the Judges were Reformed. The King allowed them a
removal to the next Catholic Judge, whither Royal, or other: And in case the
said Removal were denied them by the Reformed Judges, he annihilated that very
moment, and from thence forwards all their Judgments. The said exemption was so
great an Encroachment upon the Jurisdiction, the Reformed were declared capable
of by the Edicts, that it could not be looked upon otherwise, than as a breach
made to the very Edict. The Reason alleged by the Clergy was, that since the
Reformed were allowed unsuspected Judges, it was but reasonable, that the
Chiefs of the Established Religion should be exempted from answering before
their Enemies. But the thing was not equal. The Reformed had never pursued the
Clergy with Fire and Sword, as the Catholic Judges had pursued the Reformed,
being moved thereunto by their Zeal, and by the Instigation of the Clergy.
Moreover the Edict had regulated the reciprocal pretentions of the Reformed and
of the Clergy: Insomuch, that there only remained to observe it bona fide,
without daily renewing the remembrance of things past by New Injustices.

In the mean time, the King being resolved to oblige the Assembly Reiterated
Orders to the Assembly of Loudun to break up.
of Loudun to Obey, they persisting in their former Resolution after having
heard the Report of their Deputies, sent Du Maine Councellor of State, and
Marescot one of his Secretaries thither, to acquaint them more positively with
his final pleasure. These Gentlemen having performed their Charge, more like
Messengers who serve a Warrant, than like Commissioners who carry Royal
Instructions, did not move the Assembly; which renewed their Submission to the
King by a Third Deputation. That Prince gave a hearing to the said Deputies;
but the only Answer he gave them, was to Order them to Command the Assembly to
break up; and then Ordered them to retire. La Hay who was Speaker of the said
Deputation, having taken the Liberty reply, the King interrupted him, making a
Sign to the 1620.
Usher to turn them out. This was the behavior Luines inspired to the King. He
persuaded him that a Prince, after having given his Command, ought never to
suffer his Subjects to use Replies, or Remonstrances. What ever Reasons people
had to urge, he made him believe, that a King's Word was decisive; and that the
Affairs of most moment ought to pass for decided, without Appeal, whenever he
had said, I will have it so. This was very convenient for that Favorite, who
not being very capable of State Affairs to which his Fortune had called him too
soon, loved the way of Abridging them: So that after the pronouncing of a Word,
every Body was obliged to submit to the Discretion of that haughty Favorite,
who loved no body, because he was sensible that he was beloved by none. When
those absolute Decrees engaged him into other Troubles, he had Recourse to
Wiles to get out of them: And whereas he considered no Honor but that of
Governing the King, he never thought his engaged in the breaking of his Word.

The Deputies being gone to wait upon the Chancellor, after having received
this Vexatious Answer from the King, Expedient of Accommodation.
believed that some Expedient of accommodation might be left yet; because he
put them in hopes that in case the Assembly would send some Persons to the
Court with a Power to Treat, some good Expedient might yet be found out. The
said Proposition was accepted by the Assembly; and the Marshal de Lesdiguieres
being at Paris at that time, in Order to take the Oath of Duke and Peer of
France, he and Chatillon, who happened to be there at the same time, took upon
them them the Quality of Mediators. In Order to they began to Negotiate with
the Prince of Conde and the Duke de Luines; with whom they agreed, that the
Assembly should break up before the end of February; that immediately after
their separation, the King should Answer the Cahier favorably; but that he
should forth with remove Fontrailles out of the Government of Leitoore; allow
the keeping of the Places of Surety for four years longer to the Reformed; and
oblige the Parliament of Paris to receive the two Counselors so often
mentioned. This was to be ^erform'd within the space of six Months; and in case
it ^ere not done, the Prince and Duke promised to obtain ^om the King a New
Brief of leave for them to Assemble ^gain. As for Bearn, that within a Month
after the Six forementioned, after the Accomplishment of the three Ar^cles I
have related, the King would hear the Remon^rances they had to make about the
said Principality, and that he would provide toward the satisfaction of the
Estates and of the Churches. Moreover, hopes were given them, that in case any
hindrance should be made directly or indi^ectly about the Reimplacement, the
King would consent ^o their resuming of the Ecclesiastical Estates.

The Assembly being informed with all this, and being perwaded that they might
obtain something more yet, sent a An unexpected Declaration against the
Assembly.
New Deputation to the Court again; for which they chose ^erteville la Hay, la
Chappelliere, Minister of Rochel, la Miletiere, and Poixferre, giving them a
full Power to Act in their Name. But while they were on their Way, Luines
obtained a Declaration on the 26th of February, by which the King mentioned
according to Custom his good Intentions for the Observation of the Edicts; his
having allowed the Reformed to keep Deputies at Court, as they did under the
^ate King, to inform against the Infractions of the Edicts; ^eave to hold
Provincial and General Assemblies, in Order ^o Nominate the said Deputies, and
to draw the Cahiers of their Grievances. After which he spoke of the Motives
which had induced him to allow the Assembly of Loudun; The Deputations they had
sent to him; The Commands ^he had sent them to break up; the Petition they had
re^enew'd to obtain his Leave to continue their Sessions until ^he had Answered
their Cahier. Finally presupposing that there were some disaffected Persons in
the Assembly, who endeavored to inspire ill Designs into the Rest, against the
repose of the State, he Granted a New delay of three Weeks, to begin from the
day of the Publication of the said Declaration, to Nominate the Deputies
according to the Usual Method, and then to break up; in default of which he
declared the said Assembly unlawful from that very moment, and contrary to his
Authority and Service; those that should remain at Loudun, Guilty of High
Treason, and deprived of the Privileges of the Edicts, and of all other favors
he had Granted them; but particularly of a Removal of their Affairs to the In
which the Judges were part Catholics, and part Reformed.
Chamber of the Edict: And he commanded them to be prosecuted as perturbators
of the Public Peace. And in Order to keep up the Division, which was but too
great among them already, he did not only confirm the Edicts, in favor of
those who should withdraw within the time prescribed by him, and of all those
who should keep within the bounds of their Duty; but moreover he promised those
Loyalists, that in case before the end of the time prefixed whatever their
Number might be, they did Nominate Deputies to reside with him, he would
receive their Nomination, and allow the Persons so chosen to reside with him,
and there to perform the accustomed Function.

This Artifice had not altogether the same Effect that time, as it had had
eight or nine years before at Saumur; by reason that the said Declaration was
too visible a Guile, The Prince of Conde deceives the Reformed.
and that it came out at a time, when by the Mediation of two considerable
Lords, and upon the Parole of a Prince of the Blood, and of a Favorite, all
things were looked upon as being accommodated. The Prince of Conde himself
carried the said Declaration to the Parliament, in order to get it Verified;
and in presenting it, he seconded it with several discourses* which the
Refirm'd might reasonably have looked upon as a Declaration of War. The
Deputies of the Assembly were strangely amazed, when at their Arrival at Paris
they found things so altered; and yet more, when going as far as Amiens to
obtain an Audience of the King, they could not obtain it, and were obliged to
come back without an Answer. The News of this Fraud occasioned the same
Astonishment in the Assembly. Lesdiguieres Conduct looked very Suspicious; and
they did not say what they thought of the Prince of Conde's. He had reason to
think himself obliged to the Assembly, if Persons of his Quality could think
their Inferiors capable to oblige them. They had taken his part on diverse
occasions. They had Petitioned his deliverance while he was in Prison. Their
last Assembly had ^en spoken too much upon that Subject, in the Opinion of ^e
Wisest. Those that had been made in every Province (...) Order to depute to
Loudun, had taken his Liberty to ^eart: And had not Luines made haste to give
it him, the ^ssembly General would never have desisted from desiring ^* That
perhaps was one of the Reasons which obliged the ^^vourite to hasten to restore
it to him, because that had (...) tarried too long, he should not have had the
Honor of ^* Nevertheless, while the Reformed were Treating with ^es, as it
were under the Auspices of that Prince, they ^w him going up to the Parliament,
with a Declaration in Affected diligence of the Attorney General.
^s Hand against them, and a Discourse in his Mouth full (...) Violence and
Threatenings. The Attorney General made (...) End to spoil the thing, by sending
the Declaration to ^e Assembly by an Express out of Affectation: And all ^is
being added to what Du Vair had said in a full Parlia^ent, in which the King
had appeared some days before, ^r the Verification of some Money Bills; that
the said ^ey would be of use for sundry things, but particularly (...) repress
the Reformed; all these things made the most mo^erate sensible, that a War was
designed against them, and ^at in Order thereunto, the Court designed to render
them ^e Aggressors of it. The Assembly remains firm.


For those Reasons, the Assembly became more United ^d ^irmer than it was
expected; and the Favorite dread^^g other discontents, which did not allow him
to proceed ^y farther in his Ill Will toward them at that time, had ^ecourse
to Negotiations again. Lesdiguieres resumed them, The Negotiations are r^s^m'd.
^xcusing the precipitation of that unexpected Declaration, and endeavoring to
make it pass for an Effect of the Jealousy the Court had of some Members of
the Assembly, which they had a mind to reduce to Reason, out of fear of falling
into worse Inconveniences. In Order to resettle his Credit again, which was
very much shaken by that last business, he caused his Deputy in the Assembly to
Swear and Sign the Union, and Chatillon d^^ the same. Whereupon the preceding
propositions were resumed, and Du Plessis was of Opinion, that it would be the
best way to accept them* The Assembly did not yield to it without resistance*
But the Messages of Bellujon and of Gilliers, by whom Lesd^guieres pressed them
to acquiess, which were constantly seconded by Letters from Du Plessis, whose
Advice was preferred by them, before all things, finally Vanquished those
difficulties. A great stress was laid upon the King's Word, given and Warranted
by the first Prince of the Blood, and by the Duke of Luines. The Prince
expressed that he took it as an Affront, that they would not look upon his
Faith and Oath as a sufficient Warrant of a Royal Promise: And in Order the
better to persuade, that the King would be a very exact Observer of it, he
observed that it was the first the King had given to his Subjects. The Duke de
Luines affirmed, that it was sufficient that he had given his, and that he
would make it as good as a Brief, and even better. These were the Terms used by
the Duke de Mombazon his Father-in-Law in speaking to Du Pl^ssis, who had
written to him some time before a Large Letter, in Order to persuade him that
the best way for his Son-in-Law, in Order to maintain his Credit, and to
prevent the renewing of some Faction like unto the League, at a time when
Affairs seemed deposed toward it, was to avoid all occasion of Civil Wars, as
so many Rocks, against which he might loose himself.

Thus the Assembly obeyed, being persuaded by Lesdiguieres, The Assembly Obeys
upon the parole of the Prince of Conde and of the Favorite.
by Chatillon, and by Du Plessis, to whom the other two had given the same
Assurances, that as soon as they broke off, Satisfaction would be given them
about the Affair of Leitoure, the keeping of the Places of Surety, and the
Reception of the two Counselors; that in the next Place, the King would hear
the Remonstrances of those of Bearn, and that in case all that were not
performed in seven Months time, they should not only have Leave granted them to
Assemble again, but that it should be Lawful for them to do it without a new
Permission. This is the Snare in which Credulity made them fall, which they
would not have done, had not Lesdiguieres and the others persuaded them not to
insist to have the said Assurance in Writing, lest the Court might pretend
afterward, never to have made any such Promise. Finally, They nominated six
Persons to the King, who chose Favas and Chalas out of the said Nomination, to
exert the General Deputation; and soon after, the Assembly's having received
Notice of the said Election, they broke up.

The King seemed very well pleased with their Obedience, Effect of the
Separation of the Assembly.
and expressed it in very obliging Words. Moreover, he added something to it,
which might have been called Effective, had not a Project been formed at the
same time to render it ineffectual; which was to add a Year to the Brief, that
had been promised for the keeping of the Places of Surety, which were thereby
left in the same Condition, in which they were, for five Years longer. But the
Court might easily allow them a longer time yet without any Hazard, since they
had already prepared Means to re-take them. The Court had a great deal of
Reason to rejoice at the Breaking up of the Assembly Great Intrigues were
forming there against the Greatness of the Favorite. The Queen had a violent
Desire to return thither. The Bishop of Lucon, who New Intrigues against the
Favorite.
was not come back to her to Confine himself to the Castle of Angers, was very
sollicitous for her to return there. But the main thing was to come there
strong enough to reduce the Prince of Conde and the Favorite to her Pleasure.
She easily formed a great Party, by reason that all the Lords being displeased
with Luines, whom they despi^'d, thought it more Honorable for them to obey the
Widow of Henry the Great, and the King's Mother, than a Man, whom Fortune had
raised in one Night, whose Avarice and Ambition had no Bounds. The Duke of
Rohan was one of those, that engaged furthest into the Queen's Interests.
Though the Favorite was Allied to him, they were not Friends: Their Genius was
too different to Sympathise. Luines had used the Duke of Rohan barbarously,
while the Queen was Conf^^'d at Blois. That Duke had proposed a Reconciliation
between them; and alleging to him, that he would find more Support in her than
in the Prince of C^nde, he had advised (...) to leave the said Prince in
Prison, and to recall the Queen to Court. Luines, who was unwilling to suffer
any Persons there of more Authority than himself, did not set that Prince at
Liberty, and seemed to hearken to the Duke's Proposition; but it was only, in
order thereby, to penetrate into the Queen's Secrets, to discover her
Confidents and Friends, to draw Advances from her which discovered somewhat too
plainly her Passion to return to Court. He made use of it to ruin the
Creatures of that Princess, and to make the King jealous that in case she
should come back to Court* she would soon resume her former Authority there.
This Prince being Jealous and Credulous, fancied strait that she had great
Designs against him, and that perhaps she aspired to Deprive him of the
Government. This was the Thing he was most sensible to, though at the Bottom it
ought to have been indifferent to him, since another was to Reign in his Name,
whither it were his Mother, or his Favorites. But the Duke de Luines proceeded
farther in his Wickedness. He insinuated into the King, that the Queen might
attempt against his very Life, in order to make the Crown fall to the Duke of
Orleance, in case she could not otherwise secure the Authority to her self. In
order there unto he taught him all the Mysteries of the Government of Catherine
de Medicis; and he insinuated to him, that the Death of Charlis the Ninth had
not been occasioned, as it was reported, by an Effort which had broken a Vein
within his Stomach, but because he had declared too openly, that he designed to
Reign himself, and to Resume the Authority which that Princess had kept too
long. Some Lords belonging to the Court, having accidentally put the King upon
that Subject, were surpised to find him so well acquainted with the
Particulars of that History. It was easy thereby to judge that he had been
taught it, in order to make him fear, what a Princess of the same House, and of
an equal Ambition, and as full of Courage, was capable to undertake to Reign.

Therefore the Duke of Rohan, who was already ill with The Duke of Rohan
ingages in the Queens Party.
the Favorite, seeing moreover that the Prince of Conde was at Liberty, against
whom he had given such a disobliging Council, and to whom he had written in a
pretty insulting manner during his Confinement, took absolutely the Queens
Part, and used his utmost Endeavors to engage the Assembly of Loudun in her
Interests. He failed but little of succeeding in it; and had not the Court
found the Way to dissolve it, by the Illusion of the fair Promises I have
mentioned, it was very likely that he would have performed it. He was one of
those who were against their breaking up, and he promised the Queen that he
would have Credit enough to hinder it: But the Advice of others being preferred
to his, he notwithstanding was one of those that insisted most on the Sureties
that were fittcst to be taken, once to find some good Effect of the Promises of
the Court. So that he only Consented upon the positive assurances which
Lesdiguiere and Chatillon gave, upon the Word of the Prince of Conde, and of
the Duke de Luines, that the King would allow the Deputies to assemble again at
Rochel, in case the Things promised were not put in Execution at the appointed
time. He represented that Consideration to the Queen, and endeavored to
persuade her, that whereas the Court no longer kept their Words of late, the
Assembly would not fail to repair to Rochel, at a time when the Designs of that
Princess being ready to succeed, the Reformed would fully resolve to join with
her: That the new Fraud of the Favorite would give them just Reasons to do it;
and that their present Obedience would only serve to show, that it was against
their Will they were obliged to proceed to Extremities. The Court was not
ignorant of his Proceedings with the Queen, and as some public Negotiations
were still kept on foot with the Queen, they acquainted her that the Duke's
Abode at Angers was ill resented. To which she answered, that when she had
received Satisfaction, she should easily know how to Discard him; but she
relied too much upon Scruples of the Queen Mother
him, to oblige him to remove* and she was glad to see that the Favorite had
some Jealousy of his Assiduity with her. After the Queens Affairs were ruined,
the Catholics published, in order to render the Reformed odious, and to
persuade the World that she had not had great Designs, that they had offered
their Services to her, and that she had refused their Offers. But Politicians
would have found something very odd in that Pious Rebellion, which making the
Queen take Arms against the Government, did not allow her to strengthen her
Party by the Alliance of the Heretics, which, without doubt, would have been
the main Force of her Party. The Truth is, that the Queen was not so
scrupulous. She never refused to join the Forces of the Reformed to hers. She
used all Means imaginable, after her Retreat from Angouleme, and during the
Assembly of Loudun, to oblige them to declare for her; and she had many
Creatures among them* She only stopped in one thing out of Scruple. She would
sign no Treaty with them, lest her Name should appear in a Treaty with
Heretics, and the Catholics should upbraid her with the Advantages the
Reformed would have got by a League, which would have put the Widow of Henry
IV. and the Mother of their King at their Head. This only excepted, she did not
refuse their Services; and she was glad to be seconded by them, provided they
could not convince lier of it under her own Hand. This Thought made her seem to
be irresolute, and her Irresolutions created a Diffidence in most of the
Members of the Assembly, who upon that account were as slow to declare
themselves as the Queen. Those little Scruples ruined the* great Designs of
that Princess; and it is most certain, that considering the Disposition of
Peoples. Minds, the Separation of the Assembly proved a Masterpiece of the
Duke of Luines.

The Queen daily increased her Party secretly, by the Power of the Party she
forms.
Concourse of the Malcontents that joined with her, and who were desirous to
restore her the Authority she had lost. The Discontents were more universal
than ever. The King's Power and Favors were reserved only for three Persons,
who exhausted the Finances to Enrich themselves, and who Engrossed all the best
Employments, though others deserved them much better. No body could imagine
where the Progress of a Fortune so rapid would terminate, which in three years
time had elevated three Brothers, whose Birth was hardly known, to Dignities,
which the most Ancient Families could hardly obtain, after* Thirty or Forty
years Services. The Waste of the Finances was so Exorbitant, that in order to
satisfy the insatiable Avidity of the Favorites, all the Fund of three years
had been consumed beforehand, without so much as providing for the Necessities
of the present year. Therefore every body joined with the Queen. The Duke de
Mayenne, being either informed, or suspecting that the Court designed to secure
him* (...) from Paris, at the very time the King received the News of the
Obedience of the Assembly; and the Satisfaction he received at that happy
Success, obliged him, lest a different Treatment might alter their Minds, to
grant them the Brief, I mentioned, so speedily, by reason that the Court did
not know as yet, what Consequences might attend the Retreat of that Prince. But
as soon as they had received Letters from him, whereby he assured the King,
that his only Design was to secure himself, and that he had no thoughts of
taking up Arms, they soon moderated that Eagerness of Good Will, and forgot the
rest of their Promises. However, the Duke de Mayenne had only given these
Assurances in order to amuse the Court, by reason that all those who designed
to join with the Queen like him, were not as yet ready. Therefore he secured
Guyenne, of which he had the Government, to the Service of that Princess. The
Duke d'Epernon did the same in Angoumois, and all the other Governments and
Places under his Command. The Duke de Rohan was doing the same in Poitou for
her. The Reformed only tarried for the first Success to embrace the same Party.
Normandy was almost prevailed with to follow these Examples by the Duke de
Longuev lle, to whom the said Government had been given, in Recompense of that
of Picardy, which he had been forced to yield to the Duke de Luines. But when
all things were ready to break out, the Advice the Prince of Conde gave to the
King, and that which the Bishop of Lucon gave to the Queen, ruined all those
Designs.

* The Prince advised the King to secure Normandy before the Useful Advice of
the Prince of Co^de, and ill Council of (...) Bishop (...) Lucon.
Queen could have time to get the upper hand there: and the bishop stopped the
Queen at Angers, where her Forces were not capable to oppose a Royal Army;
besides that, it was a very weak Place. The principal Members of the Queen's
Party, and among the rest, the Dukes de Mayenne, and de Rohan, advised her to
retire into Guyenne, where she had a very fine Army under the Duke de Mayenne's
Command; where her Presence would not fail to oblige Bourdeaux and the
Parliament to declare for her; since they seemed only to tarry for it, and
where the Favorites would not have been able to follow her, without being stopped
continually by some Town or other, that would shut their Gates against them;
besides, the fear of leaving secret Enemies behind them, who as soon as they
had crossed the Loire, might raise the Northern Provinces. To this they added,
that on the Contrary, remaining at Angers, of which the Inhabitants were
disaffected to her Service, she would be deprived of all Communication with her
principal Forces, and have no Recourse after the least Disadvantage.

The Bishop refuted those Reasons, by Remonstrating to The Bishops Reasons.
the Queen, that in putting her self into the Hands of the Duke de Mayenne, she
would disoblige the Duke d'Epernon. a proud haughty Man, to whom she had been
lately highly obliged: That in removing farther from Normandy, she would loose
the Advantance of the Correspondence she held there with many considerable
Persons: That her Retreat would be looked upon as a Flight, which would be
imputed to her Diffidency of her Forces: That it would discourage her Friends,
who would be obliged to forsake her, not to expose themselves to pay for the
rest of the Party. She did yield to those Considerations, which ruined her.
Some have been of Opinion, that the Bishop was gained by the Duke de Luines,
who gave him hopes of a Share in the Public Affairs; and that being thus
blinded by Ambition, and relying upon Predictions, which promised him a
glorious Ministry, he betrayed his Mistress by a Council, of which he knew the
Inconvenience. The King, in pursuance of the Prince of Conde's Advice, marched
with speed into Normandy* with such Forces as were ready near his Person; and
while the Remainder of his Forces were assembling, he Subdued that Province
without any Resistance. Prudent, Governor of the Castle of Caer, was the only
Person who seemed to have a mind to defend himself; but he did it only to be
entreated, and in few days he delivered bp the Place to the King. As soon as
all things were quieted on that side, the King's Forces marched toward Angers,
where the Queen found her self on a sudden, as it were Invested, unprovided,
and surpised, not knowing what to resolve upon. Therefore a Peace was
proposed, every body endeavoring by that Negotiation, to gain time, and to
find Means to deceive the contrary Party. But the King's Forces having
accidentally, and perhaps unwillingly Defeat of the Queen's Forces followed by
(...) Peace.
defeated the Queen's at Pont de Ce, the Treaty was broke off, and that
Princess was obliged to accept such Conditions as were offered her, that is, to
submit at the Discretion of an Enemy, who was not near so Powerful as herself;
her Friends were forced to lay down their Arms, and all she could obtain for
them, was a General Pardon.

The King finding himself Armed thus, without any Enemies The King's unexpected
Journey in Bearn.
to oppose him, and having moreover gathered the remains of the Forces the
Queen's Friends had been obliged to disband in Guyenne, he resolved all of a
sudden to make use of them, in order to force Bearn to obey, which was not
ready to oppose him. He marched toward Bourdeaux with speed, without declaring
his Design. The Reformed, either not being jealous of it, or wanting a Pretense
to take up Arms, by reason that the six Months, in which the Court had promised
to satisfy them, were not as yet expired, did nothing to put a stop to that
Expedition. La Force, being surpised by that unexpected Journey, and having
made no use of his Time, could neither put himself in a Posture of Presence,
nor get any Assistance out of the adjacent Provinces, which were astonished at
the Sight of a Royal Army. Therefore he came to the King at Bourdeaux, to
persuade him to after his Resolutions by Remonstrances: He added Promises to
oblige the Bearnois to obey, provided no Violence were used. But whether the
Court did not trust him, or whether the Clergy expected more from the King's
Presence, than from the Good Will of the People, the King continued his March.
La Force met him again at Grenade, and brought him formal Proofs of the
Obedience of the Estates. He renewed his Remonstrances; he represented to the
King, what Dangers he was going to expose his Person to, in a Country, in which
the Roads are very dangerous and Troublesome, where there is nothing but Heath
and Mountains, and where Torrents and Floods are continually met with, and
where the Passages being difficult at all times, were much more difficult yet
at the beginning of Winter. But all proved ineffectual: The King refused their
Submissions, and his Reasons could not move him. Therefore he was forced to go
back, without having obtained any thing.

The Memoirs of that Time accuse him of having neither Faults of the Reformed,
and the Cause thereof.
known how to obey, nor yet to defend himself; and it is most certain, that in
all that Affair, the Reformed did nothing but by halves; they dreaded the
Rreproach of being Aggressors so much, and of renewing the Civil Wars without a
Lawful Cause, that since the time the Catholics had begun to trouble them by a
thousand Disputes, they had not been able to fix upon a certain Resolution;
ever ready to satisfy themselves with Words, when the Court gave them good
ones; and to feed themselves with Hopes, whenever they were flattered with the
specious Name of Royal Faith. Several among them were sensible that the Court
had formed the Design to destroy them, and that they only troubled them by a
thousand small Vexations, sometimes harder to bear than great Injustices, in
order to incline them to a Rising, which having no apparent Cause, might give
them a reasonable Pretense to oppress them. But that very Consideration
prevailed with them not to take Arms, in order to frustrate the Designs of
their Enemies by their Patience. So that this Disposition of Honest Men,
afforded those who were Corrupted by Pension, or Promises from the Court, a
fair Field to make them neglect the Expedients, and loose the Opportunities to
defend themselves. For which reason their very Enemies have reproached them,
that, considering they were People who had acquired the Reputation of great
Politicians, by the Success of their Affairs during several years,
notwithstanding all the Forces and Artifices that had been opposed against
them, they did not know how to improve their Advantages; and that they suffered
with too much Blindness, and without seeking out a Remedy, the Preparations of
their Ruin, which were making before their Eyes.

The King continued his March as far as Preignac, and there The King proceeds,
notwithstanding Remonstrances.
received the Remonstrances which du Faur and de Marca, Counselors at Pau,
came to make to him in the Name of the Sovereign Council, to obtain an Audience
for the Churches, according as he had been pleased to prescribe it himself. But
it proved ineffectual; and he answered them, that since they had not been able
to oblige the Bearn is to obey him, he was going to do it himself. He performed
it accordingly, and he made his Entry at Pau on the 15th of He arrives at Pau.
October. Two days after it he came to Navarreins, a strong Place, which might
have sustained a long Siege, had the Governor been pleased to defend it. But de
Salles, who was a very ancient Gentleman, being desirous to obey, caused the
Garrison to march out, to receive the King with more Respect; and the
Inhabitants following his Example, repaired to their Arms, only to give a
greater Air of Triumph to the Entry of their Sovereign. The only Reward de
Salle received Makes himself Master of Navarreins.
for that Submission, was the Loss of his Government, without any Recompense
for it, and that he saw the Survivorship thereof taken away from a Nephew of
his, to whom it had been granted, and the Baron de Poyane, a Catholic, was put
in his Room, with a Garrison of the same Religion. The King came back to Pau
after it, where he had summoned the Estates of the Country; and, as if his
Council had designed to Instruct him how to make a Jest of his Faith and Word,
they allowed him to take the usual Oath to the Estates, before he He takes the
Oath.
received that of his Subjects; but he began to violate it the same day. It is
remarkable, that during the Course of that Expedition, the King only advised
with three Persons; viz. the Duke de Luines, du Vair, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, and the Jesuit Arnoux his Confessor. The very same day on which he swore
to observe the Laws of the Country, grounded upon the Consent of his
Predecessors, and of the Estates, he gave the Presidentship of that Assembly to
the Bishops and Abbots, who immediately took Possession of it. He also caused
the Declaration to be verified, which allowed Alteration of the whole Form of
the Government.
them to assist at the Grand Council of the Country, with a deliberative Voice,
and place next to the Presidents. He caused the Answer he had made to the
Cahiers, presented to him by the Bishops three years before, to be Registered.
The next day he caused the Edict of the Reunion of Navar, and of Bearn to the
Crown to be verified; and besides all the other Alterations that followed the
Persecution, within a little time the Judges of Bearn were obliged to forget
their Language, and to give all their Judgments in French. Finally, In order to
leave nothing whole in that Country, he also caused the Edict of the
Suppression of the Captains of the Parsans to be Registered, the Institution of
which was as Ancient as the Principality.

Those Parsans were Cantons, in which all the Youth were Suppression of the
Captains of the Parsans.
Listed under a Captain, at whose Command they were obliged to take up Arms. So
that in two or three days time, every Canton was able to Assemble all the
Milita of its Canton, and to form among them all, a Body of Five or Six
thousand Men. There were Six of those Cantons, who by that speedy Convocation,
could easily defend the Entrance into their Country, even against powerful
Armies. This is sufficient to show, that had they been as much inclined to
Rebellion and Disobedience, as they were Zealous to Preserve the Liberty of
their Country, and of their Conscience, those, who put the King upon that
Journey, would have exposed him to receive an inevitable Affront. But they only
resisted by Remonstrances and Sighs; and yet were used like Rebels, that
Surrendered upon Discretion. They lost the Estates How the Reformed of the
Country were used.
which served for the Maintenance of their Ministers, their Colleges, their
Seminaries, their Poor, and their Garrisons. Their Temples and Churchyards were
taken from them; they were constrained every where to bestow half the
Employments on the Catholics. The Jesuits were allowed to settle wherever
they pleased, and to perform whatever Functions they thought fit: That is, That
poor Country was given as a Prey to their Greediness, and the King founded a
College for them in particular at Pau, where he also established a Convent of
Capucins. When he made his Entry into that City, he refused the Canopy, which
the Magistrates offered him; but after he had restored the Cathedral to the
Catholics, he caused the Sacrament, which the Catholics adore, to be carried
in Procession. He assisted at it himself with a Zeal, which the Biggots
admired, and which made the Catholics express great Marks of Hatred against
the Reformed.

All that Journey proved a Chain of Violences, like unto Abuses and Threatenings.
those that have been practiced in our days. The most moderate could not
forbear Threatenings of Exemplary Punishment; of Hanging, of Beheading, to
abolish the Reformed Religion throughout the Kingdom, calling it a cursed
Religion; to banish all the Professors of it, or to give them some Ignominious
Mark. The Soldiers broke the Temple Gates, demolished the Walls, tore the Books
and Pictures on which the Ten Commandments were written. They Stole from, and
did Cheat the Peasants that came to the Market at Pau, supposing them all to be
Huguenots. The Lord Keeper's very Servants were as furious as the rest. They
forced the Reformed, that fell into their Hands, to make the Sign of the Cross,
and to Kneel whenever Processions passed along. Women durst not appear in the
Streets, for fear of being followed like Infamous Women, with foul Injuries,
and insulting Cries. Some of them being with Child; were compelled to Swear, to
cause their Children to be Baptized in the Roman Church, as soon as they were
delivered. Children were forced from their Parents, and could not be recovered;
and all that was done in the King's Presence. The Soldiers lived ^n Discretion
i^ the Country, and published, that the ^g had promised them the Plunder of the
Reformed, forced away the Ministers, abused their Wives, and forced Men and
Women to go to Mass with Cudgels: Attempted the Ho^ of Women, and even fell
sometimes upon their Husbands, when they had the Courage to Defend them. An
(...) of forced Conversions appeared in those days, of which ^^ love now such
fresh Examples before our Eyes. We may very well conclude that Lescun was not
forgotten in that Confusion. The King took away his Place of Counselor, and
had he been found, he would have been scurvily used. The Baron de Benac was
also forced to fly, for fear of losing his Head. La Force tarried, and he made
a shift to be continued in the Government of the Country.

The Violences continued after the King's Departure. The Garrisons that were
left in Oleron, at Sauvaterre, at Nay, and other Places, abused their Landlords
intollerably. Some forced them to advance the Oats and Hay for their Horses,
in Expectation of their Musters: Others compelled Children to make the Sign of
the Cross; others abus`d those who went to perform the Exercise of their
Religion; and others endeavored to hinder them from doing it with Stripes. The
Bishops were the Ringleaders of those Insolences. The Bishop of Lescar feigned
on purpose, that he was informed that, the Reformed designed to attack the
Catholics on Christmas Eve, and to Murder all the Ecclesiastics: And the
better to persuade Wickedness of the Bishops.
that false Report, he caused the Gates of the City to be shut; caused armed
Men to attend him, and carried Pistols along with him at the Mass of Midnight,
as being resolved to defend himself. The Bishop of Oleron caused the Garrison to
take Arms at the same time, and sent some Soldiers out of Town to search the
Gentlemen's Houses thereabouts; declaring that the Baron de Benac lay concealed
in an adjacent Forest, with several armed Men. He alarmed even the Lower
Navar, where they broke down Bridges, and put Guards in the Passages, as if
there had been an Enemy at the Gates. But the end of all this was to have a
Pretense to send Verbal Reports to Court, to justify the Violences of Poyane.
That new Governor exerted great Cruelties against the Inhabitants of
Navarreins. His Pretense for it was, as they said, Cruelties of Poyane.
that they had held Correspondencies with some Gentlemen. Relations to the late
Governor. Those Gentlemen named Bensins, being full of Indignation at the
Treatment their Relation had received, made themselves Masters of a Tower in
the Neighborhood of Navarreins, which they fortified, and from whence they
were in hopes to annoy that Place. Poyane Armed immediately to force them out
of it; and easily dissipated their Enterprise. The Marquis de la Force told his
Father, that he ought not to suffer Poyane to take Arms without his
Approbation, and to Besiege a Place, which was not under the Government of
Navarreins; but the Court sent la Force a positive Order to let Poyane alone,
by reason that the King approved his Conduct. So that he was forced to take
Patience, and to digest that Affront without expressing his Resentment about
it. After this Poyane exerted great Cruelties against the Inhabitants of the
City; and though the Conspiracy was only attested or confessed by suborned
Persons, and that all those who were executed about it, constantly denied their
having any Knowledge of an Enterprise upon that Place; so many were put to
Death under the Notion of Conspirators, that it might rather be called a
Massacre than an Example of Justice. The King being persuaded that whatever was
set down in the Bishops Verbal Reports, was infallibly-true, justified what
Poyane had done, and refused to hear the Complaints presented to him by the
Reformed. Moreover, those that escaped that Butchery, were deprived of the
Liberty of exercising their Religion, and the Minister was turned out of the
Town, and was forbidden ever to return thither to perform his Functions.

Books were written on both sides upon that Subject. It is Different Relations
of the Kings Journey.
thought that the King's Confessor writ the Book Entitled The King in Bearn, in
which all the Transactions there, are represented just and lawful; and
especially as a true Triumph of the Catholic Church. The Reformed, opposed The
Tragical History of the Desolation of Bearn, to the said Book; by the bare
Recital of which, relating the Circumstances of Time, Persons, and Places, it
was plainly demonstrated to all equitable Persons, that there is no Impudence a
Jesuit is not capable of.

While the King was Marching toward Bearn, the Reformed National Syned of
Alets.
Assembled a National Synod on the first of October in the Town of Alets. Great
Complaints were made in it of the Injustices that were done to the Reformed
throughout the Kingdom. Several Churches were mentioned there in which the
Exercise of their Religion was interrupted. They considered the Affair of
Privas, of Leitoure, and of Sancerre. They complained that at Severac, at
Guides, at Vaux in Provence, at Serverettes, and at Langres they received
molestations, which amounted even to Violent Persecution. Puimirol had been
burnt during the Troubles; and the Temple of Montignac had been Demolished. But
one of the Greatest Affairs that was examined there, was that of some
Ministers, who being deputed to the Assembly of Loudun, had the boldness to
Preach their private sentiments there, against the Resolutions of the Assembly.
There were several of them in the Lower Languedoc, who were engaged in the
Interests of the Court by a small Pension, and who occasioned a thousand
disorders in the Political Assemblies of the Province, by reason that the
Deputies that formed them, being Nominated by the Churches, there were too many
Ministers. Even such as could not get the Nomination of some Churches, obtained
the deputations of some great Lord, in Order to be admitted in them. The Synod
being desirous to remedy a thing which had already been attended with ill
Consequences, forbad the Ministers to accept deputations to the Court, o^ to
great Lords or from them: And Ordered that for the Future, the Deputies for the
Assemblies should be chosen Political Regulations.
rather by the Laity, than by the Churches. As that Regulation exceeded the
bounds of Discipline, the Synod added, that the first General Assembly should
be desired to approve it, and whatever else might free the Churches of
Political Affairs.

Du Moulin, Chauve, Chamier, and Rivet who were Named The Ministers deputed for
the Syned of Dordrecht give an account of the reasons that have stopped them.
by the preceding Synod, to assist in the Name of the Churches of France to
that which the United Provinces were Assembling at Dordrecht in 1618. about the
affair of the Remonstrators, in which all the Reformed part of Europe sent
Deputies, gave an Account of the Reasons that had hindered them from performing
their Commission. Chamber and Chauve were gone in Order thereunto: But they
received an Order from the King at Geneva not to proceed ^ther. That Prince had
been frighted with the Corre^ondencies, that might be formed under the pretense
of ^at Journey, between the Reformed of France and those of ^ther Countries, As
the Catholics filled his Mind with whatever could render them Odious to him,
they made him ^ar Leagues against him; Republican Maxims, which would ^e taught
them in those Countries, in which the People had (...) aversion for Monarchy:
For which reasons he hindered Communication, which they persuaded him was very
^gerous. And yet he had been solicited by his Allies, to ^ow some Ministers of
his Kingdom to assist at the said ^od: Moreover, he had solicited the States
General him^lf to allow the said Synod a full Liberty. But he was ^sily
prevailed upon to do any thing, when any Body per^aded him that his Authority
was concerned: Besides Bar^ Pensionary of Holland, was accused of having Writ^
secretly in France, to hinder the sending of any Body ^r. The deputed Ministers
went away without Leave, (...) fear of a denial; preserring to excuse a thing
done, ^er than to expose themselves to be denied the underta^ng it: But that
precaution proved ineffectual; and the ^'s Orders stopped them by the way. The
Synod of Alets or being able to do any thing better, nor to express the Marks
of the Uniformity of their Doctrine with that of Foreign Churches, and of the
Synod of Dordrecht, any ^he^ way sub^c^b'd their decisions.

The Affair of Bearn caused great agitations in that Assembly, (...) Bearn
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
there were so many Members of it Corrupted by the Court, that they had the
Credit for a long while to (...) the Complaints and Remonstrances of the
Depu^es of that Province, who renewed them four times in three days, without
being able to obtain a Deputation to the Court on their behalf. All manner of
Artifices were (...) in practice to persuade the World, that the report of the
King's Journey was false. False Letters were Written to ^vers Persons, to
acquaint them that those Affairs were accommodated. They said, that the Synod
had no right to meddle with that Affair, which was not Ecclesiastical; that the
King would refuse to hear the Deputies of an Assembly, which exceeded the
Bounds of their Power, in an affair of that Consequence; That the Principality
of Bearn, only desired to be United to the Churches of France for their own
Interest, and would be ready to separate themselves from it again, as soon as
they had served their own turn at their Cost; Moreover, that in case the King
were minded to oblige Bearn to Obey, he would no wise matter the Intercession
of the Churches, since every thing submitted to his Arms and to his Presence.
The Deputies of Bearn made a great deal of noise at that refusal to assist
them; they cried that the Churches of France betrayed them; Cursed the day of
their Union and made strange Imprecations against those that forsook them so
shamefully. The People of Al^^^ being informed of these disputes, took the part
of the Bearnois; and Murmured highly against the Synod. They failed but little
of coming to a Sedition.

This Accident made the Court Cabal slacken a little, in They resolve to depute
to the King.
spite of which, finally, after Ten or Twelve days disputes, they resolved to
Write and send Deputies to the King; to beg his Leave to hold a General
Assembly at Rochel, as he had promised in order to dissolve that of Loudun; and
to entreat him to determine the Affair of Bearn, and of L^yto^. They also
resolved to Write to Lesdiguieres and to Cha^, whom they looked upon as
Guarrantees of the said Promise, since they had received it from the Prince of
Conde, and from the Duke de Luines, and carried it from them to the Assembly.
But the Persons that were gained by the Court, spread so many false Reports in
the Synod, that they filled every Body with Consternation and Terror; And that
the Synod broke on the 13th of the said Month the Project of deputation, which
they had formed the day before.

The Bearnois were almost desperate at that Inconstancy: All manner of Succors
is refused to the Deputies of Bearn.
But that did not hinder them from receiving new Causes of Complaint. Moreover,
after the Synod was informed of what had past in Bearn, they refused to send
Deputies to the King, to interceed for that Wretched Province. They would not
so much as Order all the Churches of the Kingdom, to make Public Prayers to
God for the Ruined Churches of Bearn; which the Catholics themselves looked
upon as a piece of Cowardice. In a Word, those that had sold themselves to the
Court, ordered matters so, that they made the rest take and Change their
Resolutions as they pleased; which appeared almost in all the Affairs that were
proposed. Insomuch, that the least clear sighted discovered and Confessed that
there were Traitors in the Company; but they wanted either means to discover,
or Courage to Chastise them.

La Planche Minister of the Province of Dauphine, made Important considerations
evaded.
a great discourse of the Reports that were spread about the Affairs of
Religion that were Transacted in Vateline, where it was said, that the
Spaniards had committed a great Massacre of the Reformed; and about the designs
that were forming in France to Ruin the Churches. He spoke of them like a Man,
that had very good Informations. He affirmed that Canaples Grand*Son to
Lesdiguieres, who soon after Married a Niece of the Duke de Luines, had Changed
his Religion; That after the death of the Grandfather, whose Engagements to
turn Catholics were not as yet known, there was no likelihood to preserve that
Family; That it was publicly discoursed that the King would shortly take the
Cities of Hostage from the Reformed; which he would do by retrenching the
payment of their Garrisons; That the Governor of Grenoble was a Catholic; that
those of Montelimar and of Livron were Pensioners to the Court, and several
things of that Nature: But the Pensioners prevailed so far, that those
Considerations proved ineffectual.

The News of the Alterations the King had made in Bearn, News of consequence
suppressed.
and that of an Enterview between the Duke of Guise, Lesdiguieres and
Chatillon, under pretense of the War of Piemont, but in reality to hinder the
Reformed of the Provinces of Dauphine, of Languedoc, and of Provence from
making a diversion, having reached the Synod, with Circumstances which did not
permit them to doubt of it, the same Cabal had still the Credit to suppress
them as long as it was necessary, 1618.
to prevent the applying a remedy to the same, or to take measures to stop the
Progress thereof. A Conference which was designed at Vsez, about the Affairs of
the Country, was also prevented by the Artifices of the same Persons.

La Far Minister of Aubenas was accused of holding a Treachery of some
Ministers unpunished.
Correspondency with Ornano, the King's Lieutenant in that Province: Yet though
the Proofs of his Treachery were apparent, he was so well seconded by the
Suffrages of his Adherents, that the Synod could not use him according to his
desert. They only suspended him for two Months, without turning him out of his
Church. Codurc who created continual Broils in the Political Assemblies, and in
the Synods, and who deserved the most Rigorous Chastisements of their
Discipline, had like to have saved himself by the same Protection. He was
Minister at Ganges, where he had put the whole Church in disorder. He was
accused before the Synod of Alets; but so powerfully defended, that the only
punishment they could inflict upon him, was to deprive him of his living at
Ganges. They would have given him another, but he refused it. He did propose to
retire to Mompellier, there to lead a private Life* But the Synod having
forbidden him ever to meddle with Political Affairs, he became thereby useless
to the Court Party, in favor of which his covered Zeal could no longer create
disorders and disputes. Some Conjectures might induce us to suspect, that the
said Codurc is the same that was Corrupted by Deagean, the Story of which is
worth relating. It will be found in another place.

The Affairs of Privas were also very much talked of in Troubles of Privas.
the Synod; and whereas the Troubles of that City have had long and fatal
Consequences, it is necessary to give an account of their beginning. Chamba^d a
Gentleman of that Country, a Zealous Reformed, had Married the Heiress of
Privas, which is a Baronny, the Lord of which has the Privilege, to enter into
the Estates of Languedoc in his Turn. He was killed in the King's Service
during the Wars of Piedmont; and his Widow forgot him almost as soon as he was
l^^d in his Grave. She afterward fell in Love, with Vice Comte Lestrange's
Son, a very handsome young Gentleman, And their Original.
but a Violent Catholic, and Married him. The Inhabitants opposed the said
Marriage to that degree, that the Vice Comte was obliged to enter the Ladies
House by stealth, in order to Consummate the said Marriage. Chamb^^d had
Married one of his Daughters to Brison, Governor of Pou^^^; who did not fail to
join with the Opposants; both as being concerned in the Affairs of that House;
and as pretending that the Government of the Castle of Privas belonged to him.
The Example of Sancerre, one of the Cities that had been possessed the longest
by the Reformed, taught them what they were to trust to, in case they suffered
a Place like Privas to fall into the Hands of a Catholic; The said Place was
none of the Largest, but yet strong enough to defend it self against a Royal
Army. Moreover, Mass had not been said in the said City for sixty years past;
and they were sensible that their New Lord would not fail to reestablish it
there. So that, it proved an easy matter for Brison to excite a kind of War
between the Lady and the Inhabitants of the Place: But it was soon after
accommodated by Commissioners upon Conditions, which the Vice Comte only
accepted, in order to break them at the first occasion. He Accommodation broken
by the Lord.
seized upon the Castle by Surprise, and caused the Nobility of the
Neighborhood to Assemble there, under pretense to Congratulate his Marriage;
but in effect to make himself the strongest. Whereupon, the Inhabitants
immediately repaired to their Arms; and the Vice Comte accompanied by his
Friends, having met some Citizens in Arms, Charged them before they Attacked
him, and thus the War began (...) New. Brison, who stood upon his Guard put
Succors into the City, and forced the Vice Comte to abandon it. He ^^mplain'd
of that Violence to the Duke de Mommorency ^ernor of the Province, and to Far
the Intendant, who (...) Britaut Master of Request along with him, endeavo^ to
reconcile the Lord and the Subjects. But their endeavors proved ineffectual,
by reason that after the unexpected Hostilities of the Vice-Count, the
Inhabitants would no longer confide in him, and refused to come to an
Accommodation with him, unless they had very good Sureties.

That Affair remained undecided until the Dukes return, The Place i^ deposited.
who was at a great distance from the Province at that time. He took the
Vice-Count's part, and drew near the City with 7 or 8000 Men. It would have
been very easy to oppose it, had Chatillon whom the Reformed had entrusted
with the Government of the Circle, undertaken it. But he did no wise oppose the
Duke who was his Friend and his Kinsman, at the approach of whom, Brison
quitted the City, tho he had near 2000 Men to defend it, besides the
Inhabitants. Mommorency was received in the Place, and put one of his Followers
and a Garrison of 50 Men into the Castle, until the King had ordered otherwise
about it. So that, that Affair took the Form of a Process among private
Persons: The Reformed pretended, that the said Place having been in their Hands
at the time of the Edict; It was to be Esteemed a Place of Surety, since it was
included in the General Terms of the Briefs, which allowed them the keeping of
all the Places they were in Possession of at that time: The Vice-Count on the
contrary maintained, that as the said Place did belong to a Private Person of
the Reformed Religion, it had lost that Quality, by falling into the Hands of a
Catholic Lord. In the mean time, the Garrison committed Violences of the
Garrison and Galum^^es against the Inhabitants.
a thousand Violences; and even during the Session of the Synod of Alets, the
Soldiers cut an Old Man over the Head, and forced another Inhabitant, whom
they pursued on purpose to abuse him, to fling himself into a Precipice, to
avoid falling into their Hands. And yet they had the Impudence to Complain that
the Inhabitants abused them, and to send for Commissioners to redress their
Wrongs. But the Commissioners finding that the said Complaints were ill
grounded, went away again without doing any thing: And as they did the
Inhabitants no harm, by reason that they found them Innocent, neither did they
do them Justice for the Violences the Soldiers were guilty of.

A particular Assembly was held at Anduse, upon the Account of those Troubles:
But they did not redress the Assembly at Anduse.
hardships that distressed City suffered, by reason that Chatillon, who alone
had the Power to do it, did nothing to defend them. That Affair was in this
Condition when it was brought before the Synod of Alets, which only succored
Privas by Recommendation, and with the Sum of 200 Crowns. The Truth is, that
they ordered a Collection in the Province, to help them to defray the Charges
of the War. They Wrote to Chatillon, to entreat him to awaken his Zeal in
favor of that important Place. Those Letters produced some Effect: Chatillon
seemed to recover out of his Lethargy: Brison Besieged it a New; and forced the
Garrison of the Castle to March out of it upon Terms. But Chatillons behavior.
Chatillon having had an Enterview with Mommorency, the Zeal of that Lord
slackened all of a sudden, which made the Storm, we have mentioned elsewhere,
to fall upon that poor City.

The same Synod before their breaking up, used their utmost Cha^ Atta^k^d.
endeavors for the preservation of the Church of G^g^, which was daily plagued
by the Bishop of Mompelier; who had sent for Marion there on purpose, a
Minister who was lately turned Roman Catholic, in order to draw in others to
embrace the same Communion by his Solicitations and Example. They also took
Measures to hinder the Bishop of Vsez from coming to live at St. Ambrois, where
he was capable of doing the Reformed more harm, than at Vsez it self, by reason
that they had more Power there then he, both by their Number, and by the
Protection of the Lord thereof, who being at odds with the Bishop, was glad to
maintain the Reformed against him. But those little Remedies applied to great
Evils, proved inconsiderable to Cure them. It is impossible to imagine, how
much those, that managed the design of destroying the Reformed, Exclaimed
against the Assembly of Anduse, which seemed to be Summoned for the defense of
Privas; and against the Synod of Invectives against the Synod of Alets.
Alets, notwithstanding the Court Cabal had all along been predominant in it.
The most Violent Invectives, and the blackest Colors, wherewith it is possible
to describe the Worst of Rebellions, fall short of those wherewith the Conduct
of those Assemblies was aspired. And yet all that could be said of them with
Justice, is, that whatever past there, were only unprofitable Marks of the
Affliction of a Wretched People, who found themselves betrayed by their own
brethren without daring to punish the Traitors, and who found themselves
sinking, without daring to Complain, or to defend themselves, because there
were Persons among them, who styled their Complaints Insolence, and their
Defense Rebellion.

The rest of the Kingdom was not more at rest; and I Assembly of Gergeau.
will give an account in this Place of what past in an Assembly of the
Provinces of Orleans and of Berry, in order to show that there were
Transactions in all Parts, which foretold the approaching decay of the
Reformed. The said Assembly was held in the Month of July at Gergeau: It was
composed of the Deputies of 28 Churches, and Fortified besides by the Deputies
of the Adjacent Provinces, by those of the Provincial Council, and by those
that did assist at the last General Assembly. Chatillon and Sully who had Lands
in that district, did not fail to Write to them to give them assurances of
their Affection for the common good. The main design of that Assembly was to
hear the Deputies that had assisted at Loudun, who were to give an Account of
what past there. They brought some propositions which the General Assembly had
referred to the Provincial Assemblies to be Examined by them, and to be
inserted in the Instructions of the Deputies that should be sent by them into
the next General Assembly. There were two among the rest, which tended to
prevent the Corruption of the Deputies. The Important Propositions
first was, whither when a Church desired that the Votes should be taken by
Provinces, the opposition of another could hinder it. The second was, whither
the Deputies upon pretense of New Cases, which had not been foreseen when their
Instructions were made, could deviate from their said Instructions. Those two
Propositions had been suggested by those who held a Correspondence with the
Court. They became useless when the Votes were given by Provinces, by reason
that their Colleagues, not being corrupted like them, might carry Affairs by
the Plurality of Voices. They were yet more at a loss when they were tied to
their Instructions, which being drawn in Provincial Assemblies, were seldom
conformable to the Instructions of those that were corrupted. Those two
Questions were attended with Difficulties. The first had often occasioned
Disputes in 1. Whether they should Vote by Heads or by Provinces.
Councils, and in the Estates General. The Popes had often lost their Cause
when Councils gave their Votes by Provinces. For that reason they refused to
allow that manner of Voting in the Council of Trent, in which the Number of the
Italian Bishops, which surpassed that of all the Prelates of the Remainder of
Europe, that assisted at it, would have been reduced to one Voice, in case they
had not Voted by Heads; which would have given a great Advantage to all those,
that had a mind to reform the Sea of Rome. In the States General, the Brigues
and Solicitations of the Court often proved ineffectual, when they Voted by
Provinces. So that the Assemblies of the Reformed being liable to Brigues and
Corruption as well as the others; the same Question might be of use in it, as
well as in all the others.

The second Question was not without Difficulty neither. It seems to be a Maxim
of Right, that those who only act in a Cause as Attorneys for others, ought
never to swerve from the Instructions which limit their Power. But in Affairs,
of which the Conjunctures change from Morning to Night, it seems both
unreasonable, and very dangerous, to tie Deputies so Inviolably to their
Instruction, that they may not be allowed to do that of themselves, which it is
most likely their Principals would order them to do, if they had time to
Consult with them about it: Particularly, since it is to be supposed, that
those who entrust any body with their Power in Affairs of great Consequence,
look upon them as honest Men, it would seem to be a Reflection upon them, not
to allow them to swerve from their Memoirs in unexpected Cases. Too much
Regularity in such a Case, may either occasion tedious Delays, or lose an
Occasion which may be difficult to recover. This was the Reason why those
Questions 1610.
were not decided every where alike. To Vote by Heads, and not to depend upon
Instructions was liked best, especially in such Provinces, where the Court had
many Pensioners; But they were of a contrary Opinion in this; and the Synod of
Alets, as we have already seen, endeavored to make the General Assembly
approve the same Sentiment. Moreover, they added, that it would be necessary to
make the President his Assistant, and the two Secretaries set their Hands to
the Memoires of the Deputies that should assist in the same; and to oblige
them, in order to avoid Deceit, to produce them, whenever they should advance
Propositions, which they should pretend to be contained in the same.

This particular Assembly finding it self Considerable by Deliberations of the
Assembly.
the Number and Quality of its Members, treated of several great Affairs: of
delaying the National Synod; of hastening the Assembly of Rochel by way of
Continuation of that of Loudun; to oblige the Duke de Sully to Watch the
Preservation of Gergeau, a Place of Surety, which was unprovided with Men, and
ill paid. They made diverse Reflections upon the Promise made to the Assembly of
Loudun by the Prince of Conde and the Duke de Luines, by which it was easy to
judge, that they did not trust much to it. The Communication of those
particular Assemblies with their Neighbors, maintained so general a
Correspondence among all the Churches, that they were all instructed with what
past in any of them, so that the same Affairs were partly treated of in all of
them. Therefore it may very well be concluded, that the same thing was done in
that which was held at Saumur at the latter end of the same Month of July; and
in that of Burgundy, which was held at Pont de Ves^e on the 5th of the
following Month. There had been Deputies of those two Provinces at Gergeau; and
the Province of Orleans sent Other Assemblies in Anjou and in Burgundy.
theirs reciprocally in those two Assemblies, so that for the most part, all
things past there in the same manner.

Diverse Complaints were made in those Assemblies, of the Injustices that were
done to the Reformed within their respective Diverse Complaints of the Reformed
in those Provinces.
Jurisdictions. The free Exercise of the Reformed Religion was hindered at
Chartres. A private Person had been turned out of the Shrievalty at Remorantin,
barely upon the Account of his Religion; and the Election of another was
opposed upon the same account. The Judge of Orleans had Condemned a Temple to
be demolished within the space of a Week, which was all built, the Covering
only excepted, upon a piece of Ground given at Chilleurs by Chemerolles, who
was High Justicer of the Place. Their Malice went farther yet at Montrichard.
The Catholics were forbidden there to assist the Reformed to carry their Dead
into the Ground; which Prohibition extended even to Servants toward their
Masters; threatening them, in case they did not obey, with Ecclesiastical
Censures, and even with Excommunication. The Parliament of Paris had refused to
regard the Warrants of a Sergeant Royal, because he was of the Reformed
Religion, and that he had served an Execution upon a Catholic, at the Suit of
a Reformed. The same Parliament made two Vexatious Decrees in a short space of
time, upon the Subject of Burials; the one on the 2d of July, which ordered the
Reconciliation of the Church of Lonlac, in which the Heirs and the Widow of
Buchon Sieur de Lallier were accused of having deposited his Body with Violence
and Force of Arms. The other on the 1st of August, in the Chamber of the Edict,
upon a Sentence of the Seneshalship of Angoumois, which Condemned the Baron
d'Etangs to take his Mother out of the Ground, whom he had buried in the
Chapel of M^ssignac two years before. The Sentence was confirmed; but the Fine
of 200 Livres, to which it Condemned the Baron, was moderated to 48 Livres in
Alms for the Bread of Prisoners; to which was added, that before they should
proceed to the Removing of the said Corpse, the Attorney General should take
Information, whether it could be done conveniently, in order to proceed to what
should be thought reasonable, after the hearing of the said Information.

But the Noise of the Alterations made in Bearn, stifled those slight
Complaints; and the whole Kingdom talked of General Alarm of the Churches,
after the Alteration of the Churches made in Bearn.
the Promise made to the Assembly of Loudun, in the King's Name, which was
violated in every Article. All the Neighboring Churches to that oppressed
Province were particularly alarmed. Lescun not daring to appear at Home came to
Montauban, where the Assembly of Rouergue sat. He made his Complaints there;
and they gave him a full Hearing. The Circles of the Upper Languedoc, took his
Affair to Heart, the rather, because it was reported, that the King designed
such another Progress in Languedoc the following Year. This Report could not be
looked upon as false, by reason that a Copy had been produced in the Synod at
Alets, of a Letter written to Mompelier by the King, in those very Words; and
those who produced it, affirmed, that it was taken from the Original, Dated
October the 9th. This showed evidently, that the Catholics had already formed
the Design to destroy the Reformed, and that the Court only endeavored to
amuse them by Promises, in order to find them at odds and disarmed, when they
should attack them, the better to destroy them. Therefore those Circles
resolved to protect the Churches of Bearn, and Convened a Provincial Assembly
at Milhau on Assembly at Milhau.
the 26th of October, where they agreed to assist the Churches of that
Principality; to send Deputies to the Reformed Lords, to invite them to join
with the Assembly in order thereunto, and that it should remain at Montauban,
until the Meeting of the General Assembly at Rochel. They Authorized Count
d'Orval, the Duke of Sully's Son by a Second Venture, much more Zealous than
the Duke his Father, and the Marquess his Brother, and well seconded by his
Mother, a brave courageous Lady, to Arm in Rouergue: the Marquis de Mala^se, to
do the same in Quercy and in Albigeois: St. Rome to do the same in Lauragais
That Power was only* provisional under the Authority of that Assembly, until
the Session of the General one. Moreover, they exhorted the Cities to repair
their Fortifications, to make new ones, to provide Ammunitions, and to stand
upon their Guard. They did write to Lesdiguieres, and to Chatillon. They
regulated the Form and Power of the Abridg'd Assembly that was to remain at
Montauban, which they only Authorized to Elect a General with the Consent of
the Provinces. They ordered the Assembly to meet forthwith, to nominate a
Governor under certain Restrictions.

Those Resolutions were extremely opposed by two Men Opposed by the Deputies of
Lesdiguieres, and of Chatillon.
who were present. The one was Bellujon, Governor of Villemur, who only acted
by Order from Lesdiguieres, and who had a great deal of Credit at Castres: The
other was Des Hippolites, Deputy of Chatillon, who was very much respected at
Milhau. Those two Men gained the Deputies of Chartres and of Milhau, who having
opposed nothing till then, by reason that all the preceding Propositions were
not as yet decisive, opposed that of drawing the Settlement of War; and
threatened also to oppose the Effect of the first Deliberations, unless that
Affair were referred to the General Assembly. This was the way to wave all the
other Resolutions, and to waste the time of those who did concern themselves
for the Churches of Bearn, and to abate their Courage. But that did not hinder
the Assembly from proceeding on, which, having exhorted those Deputies to give
over their Oppositions, they continued to form their Settlement of War in
spite of them.

The Desolation of Bearn being then publicly known, every Effect of the
Promis^^ made to the Assembly of Loudun.
Body was very sensible that the Reformed had a just Cause to Complain that the
Court had deceived them, and had a Right to Assemble again, according to the
Power the Assembly of Loudun pretended to have received so to do. The Truth is,
that in order to blind the World, the Court had done some things which they
designed to pass upon them, as an exact Observation of their Promises. The
Parliament had Counselors received in the Parliament of Paris.
^t last received the two Counselors, the Affair of which, had been depending
for four Years together; but they had done ^t, and the King had caused it to be
done in a manner, which showed sufficiently that they did not do it with a good
^ntention. The Prince of Conde went to get it passed into an Edict; but he only
obtained it upon the account of the present Occurrences, and lest in refusing
it, the Reformed might have a Pretense to Assemble again. Moreover, some People
were of Opinion, that he had whispered Reasons for it, which he did not speak
in full Parliament; and that he had affirmed, that it would be the last Favor
that should be granted to the Reformed. The Parliament on their sides put
inconvenient Restrictions to it.

The Restitution of Leitoure was not performed; and the Leitoure taken from
Fontrailles.
Court would oblige the Reformed to take the grossest Illusion in the World, as
a real Satisfaction upon that Subject. The King being at Bourdeaux, removed
Fontrailles out of the said Place, and allowed him a Recompense of 50000 Livres
for it. But he did not restore it to the Reformed, neither did he give the
Government of it to Angalin, from whom Fontrailles had usurped the Castle; nor
to la Chesnaye, nor to Clausonne, nor yet to the Son of Favas, one of the
Deputies General, who had all been flattered with the Hopes of it. It is true,
that he gave it to Bleinville, a Reformed Gentleman, who had neither the
Consent of the Churches, nor an Attestation from the Assembly; and who was an
Officer of his Household; and of the Number of those Reformed, who, provided
they kept their Places and Pensions, did not much trouble themselves with the
Safety of others. Moreover, lest his Religion should induce him to do any thing
for the Advantage of the Churches, they gave him Subaltern Officers, and a
Garrison of Catholics; consequently very unfit to keep a Place, for the
Preservation of those they esteemed Heretics.

The Brief for the Places of Hostage had been promised and The Brief, expedited
for the Keeping of the Places of Surety, is not* given.
expedited; but it was not delivered: So that the Demonstrations of Kindness,
which the King had given after the Obedience of the Assembly of Loudun, were
degenerated into a Court-Mockery. The Affair of Bearn gave yet a greater
Subject of Complaint. They reckoned upon a Suspension of six Months, after
which the King had promised to hear the Deputies of the Country, and to use
them favorably upon their Remonstrances. In the mean time the King marched
into that unhappy Province with Force in hand, before the Expiration of the
first six Months, and before any of the other Promises were sincerely executed.
There seemed to be no manner of ground to deny that the Reformed might Lawfully
assemble again; and Favas pressed it with all his Power. He thought thereby to
obtain the Government of Ley^oure from the Court; and when he perceived that
they amused him with Words, and had a Design to give it to another, to the
Prejudice of his Son, he threatened to Convene an Assembly at Rochel; and in
order to show that his Threatenings The Interest of Favas.
were not vain, he Writ into all Parts to give an Account how things past, and
did it perhaps more Faithfully than otherwise he would have done, if he had not
had a Personal Reason for it.

His Letters finding every body full of Indignation for so Precipitates the
return of the Assembly at Rochel.
many Deceits, and General and Particular Injustices, did not fail to produce
the Effect he expected; and Rochel; which had been Empowered by the Assembly of
Loudun, assigned one to meet there on the 20th of October. Luines being
informed of all this, but certain of the Chief among the Reformed, whom he had
engaged by secret Negotiations, pursued his Design, and performed the
Expedition of Bearn, without being afraid of the Despair into which that Breach
of Faith might throw all the Churches. He obliged the King to write to the
Major, and to the Peers of Rochel, to inform them, that he had not given the
Assembly Leave to meet there, and to forbid them to receive it. But that
proving ineffectual, Declaration which makes it pass for an Unlawful. Assembly.
he issued out a Declaration at Grenade on the 22d of October, which declared
that Assembly unlawful. In order to ruin their Pretense, the King denied his
having promised any thing to the Assembly of Loudun at their Breaking up: And
^^id moreover, that all the Articles he had promised were actually performed;
and as if the Desolation of Bearn had not proved the contrary, they made him
say, that the Reason of his Journey to Bourdeaux, was only to get Leitoure out
of the Hands of Fontrailles.

The Noise the Reformed made upon this Breach of Word, was The Prince of Conde
and the Favorite fail in their Garrantee to the Beform'd.
great, and proved ineffectual. Besides the Vexation of being deceived like
Children, they had the Grief to find that the Court denied it all. The Prince
of Conde, and the Duke de Luines, Lesdiguieres, and Chatillon failed in their
Garrantee. It was not very easy though to persuade so many Persons, to whom
the same Promise had been made so solemnly, that they had promised them
nothing. Therefore they began first with Cavils very much below Persons of that
high Rank. They found out little Equivecations upon the time of the beginning
and ending of those six Months. They said that the Prince and the Favorite had
promised nothing in the King's Name; that they had only spoken in their own;
and that they had only engaged to interceed with the King, who had been the
sole Master of the Event. The Duke de Mombason, bred in another Reign, in which
Sincerity was accounted Virtue, remembered his having been the Bearer of that
Promise to (...) Plessis; who having written a very sharp Letter to him about
it, the Duke sent him an Answer on the 1st of November, in which he declared
positively, that he had said nothing to him, but what the King and the Duke de
Luines had charged him several times to say, in proper Terms. But whereas a
Witness of that Consequence was irksome A supposed Letter written in the Duke
de Mombason's Name.
in that Affair, the Jesuit Arnoux writ another Letter in the Duke's Name,
Dated December the 10th. It was full of Excuses about the Conduct of the Court,
conformable to the Declaration of Grenade; which consequently left the
Complaints of the Reformed in their full force. That feigned Answer was
printed, to destroy the true one, which had been printed also; and the Duke
durst not disown it publicly, for fear of Offending his Son-in-Law; but yet he
owned in private, that he was the Author of the first, which du Plessis had
received, and that he had not written the Second. Nevertheless, as all these
Illusions did not appear sufficient to excuse a Breach of Word, the Jesuits
suggested another Pretense; viz. that the Reformed being Rebels, they had
forfeited They begin to use the Reformed as Rebels.
all the Favors that might be granted them. It past at first for an adjudg'd
Case that they were Rebels; they were Condemned without Inquiry or Examination,
as if it had been notorious. They pretended notwithstanding, that their Conduct
had been very Innocent, since they had only taken Arms till then for Affairs of
State, in which Religion was not concerned, and in which the Catholics had
been concerned as well as the Reformed, the Motives of the Conduct of which,
the King had approved by solemn Treaties; but in their own Affairs, they had
employed no other Methods, but such as were ^llow'd of since the Edict; viz.
Assemblies, Deputations, Petitions, Remonstrances, etc. Nevertheless, that
Pretense was so conformable to the Designs of the Court, that it was received
there as a Principle, and by Treating the Reformed as Rebels, they forced them
to become so.

The End of the Sixth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of NANTES. VOL. II. BOOK VII.
A Summary of the Contents of the Seventh BOOK.
THE Ecclesiastics are seized upon at Montauban: which the Consuls excuse, and
the Catholics aggravate. The like Transactions elsewhere. Character of
Masuier, who writes to the King with Malice. Division of the Judges about the
Inrollment of the Declarations at Castres. Troubles at Nimes, occasioned by a
Jesuit. Circle of the Lower Languedoc assembled at Lunel. Retaking of the
Castle of Privas. All manner of Justice refused to the Reformed, who are driven
to Despair. Collusion with Chatillon and Mommorency. Orders from the Court to
lay down Arms. Taking of Walons. Siege and Taking of Walls. Walons is Re-taken,
and Restored. Assembly of Rochel. Lesdiguieres falls ou^ with the Assembly. The
small Affection he had for his Religion. He Marries Mary Vignon, against the
Discipline of the Reformed: Of which he makes public Acknowledgment. Stratagem
of the Duke de Luines, in order to gain him. Double Commission to Treat with
him. What Empire Deagean takes over Lesdiguieres. Feigned Disputes of Religion.
Bressieux employed to ruin the Work of Deagean. Bullion succeeds in it better
than he. Lesdiguieres does not hearken to his Friends. Policy of Deagean.
Luines is made Constable. Lesdiguieres remains at Court. Mediation of the Dukes
de Roh^n, and de la Trimoville, rendered ineffectual by Favas Du Plessis and Du
Moulin solicit the Assembly to break up. Du Moulin in Danger of being made
Prisoner. Coldness of James the First about the Affairs of the Palatinate. Du
Moulin writes to him; and his Letter falls into the Hands of the Council of
France. He makes his Escape happily. Effect of his Letters to the Assembly.
Difficulties, which put a Stop to the Negotiation. New Conditions of
Acommodation. Seven Articles, which the Court agrees upon to amuse the
Reformed. The old Counselors of State are against War. The Duke de Luines is
not inclined to it neither; but the Queen, the Prince of Conde, Puisieux, the
Clergy, the Pope, and the Spaniards, prevail for War. Some are for
Exterminating all: and others are for Sparing the Peaceable. Reasons of the
first Advice. Reasons of the Second: which is followed, and succeeds. Reasons
Published to Blind the Reformed. New Difficulties about the Time of beginning
the War. How those Difficulties were removed. The King goes away from Paris
unexpectedly; and takes away the Offices of Receipts from the Reformed Cities.
Settlement of War in the midst of the Negotiations of Peace. New Troubles in
Bearn. The Duke d'Epernon is sent thither. Cowardice of the People of Orthez.
La Force Retires. All Bearn is subdued. Blindness of the Reformed. Seditions at
Tours and elsewhere. The Court steps the Progress of it. The Sedition Revives.
Punishment of some of the Guilty, which deceives the Reformed. New Declaration.
The General Assembly defend themselves in Writing. Particulars of their
Complaints. The Marshal de Bouillon writes to the King. Reply of the Jesuits to
the Writing of the Assembly. Lesdiguieres Breaks off with them. The Assembly
draws a Project of Defense. Division of the Provinces in Circles. The Marshal
de Bouillon refuses the Place of General. Irreparable Fault of the Assembly.
Generals of the Circles. Seal of the Assembly. The Peaceable among the Reformed
are disarmed: Which causes a great Desertion. Treachery against du Plessis, to
get Saumur out of his Hands. The Court amuses him with Promises, even in
Writing. He is upbraided by the Assembly. Declaration of the King against the
Cities of Rochel and St. John de Angeli; which obliges the Reformed to renounce
the Party of the Assembly in Writing. Interested Cowardice of the Governors of
the Cities of Surety. The King Dismantles the Fortifications of the Towns that
are delivered up to him. Apology of the Assembly. Invective against the Jesuit
Arnoux. Relation of what passed since the Assembly of Loudun. Relalation of the
Stratagems of the Court. Why the Assemblies refused to break up before their
Cahiers were answered. A violent Answer in the King's Name. Kidnapping of
Children. The Reformed excluded from all manner of Favors. The The Catholics
are excused from giving Churchyards at their own Cost, in lieu of the old
ones, which they took again. Writing of Tilenus against the Assembly of Rochel.
Siege and Reduction of St. John de Angeli. Declaration from the King, which
Abolishes the Privileges of that City.

WHile the Churches of Bearn were exposed to the 1620.
Violences, I have mentioned heretofore, the The Ecclesiastics are seized upon
at Montauban.
Inhabitants of Montauban thought that they should serve their Brethren, by
Frightning the Catholics with Reprisals. So that one day, after a long
Deliberation upon the News of the Cruelties exerted at Navarreins, they seized
upon all the Ecclesiastics, and kept them a little above Twenty four Hours
Prisoners in the Bishop's House. At the same time they gave Notice to the other
Inhabitants that were at Thoulouse, or in the Country, to retire into the City,
lest the Catholics should also use Reprisals upon them. The very next day
those Prisoners were let out again, and only had the City for Prison, with
Leave publicly to perform all the Exercises of their Religion in the Church of
St. Lewis, where they used to perform them. But whatever Assurance, and Liberty
was given them, they refused, upon vain Pretenses, to continue their Functions;
to the end that the News of Divine Service being interrupted at Montauban,
being carried to Court, might render the Conduct of the Inhabitants the more
Criminal. Soon after it, they were allowed to go out of the City, taking Leave
of the Consuls; but no manner of Outrage was offered to their Persons, during
the Process of that Affair.

The Consuls writ to Masuier, first President in the Parliament Which the
Consuls excuse.
of Thoulouse, to acquaint him with their Reasons. They told him, that the
cruel Execution of Navarreins having strangely moved the People, they had
secured the Ecclesiastics, only to save them from their first Fury. But the
Ecclesiastics And the Catholics aggravate.
gave a different Account of it, and made it pass for a very heinous Attempt.
They also writ to Masuier, as soon as they were at Liberty; and though their
Letters only contained the same Facts which the Consuls owned, yet they made
them seem to be very Guilty. The Truth is, that there The l^ke Transactions
elsewhere.
happened some Transactions very like those, in the County of Foix, where the
Reformed of Saverdun, of Cazeres, and of Pamiers, seized upon the Catholics,
and upon some Houses seated upon the Passages, and searched some Travelers,
suspecting that they carried Advices or Orders against their Safety. They also
endeavored, but in vain, to surprise a strong House belonging to the Bishop of
Pamiers. Those Proceedings did not please every body; and the abridg'd
Assembly, which was at Montauban, was against confining the Ecclesiastics
closer than within the Walls of the City. But the Spirit of Reprisals was
predominant in the People of those Parts; and even at Castres they threatened
the Counselors of Thoulouse, who served in the Party-Chamber, to use them
according as the Reformed should be used elsewhere by the Catholics.

Masuier being informed with all this, writ a very violent Character of Masuier.
Letter to the King about it. He was one of the most violent Persecutors in the
World; and according to the Character another President of the same Parliament
has given of him, the greatest Villain that ever was at the Head of an
Authorized Society. He was a Man without the least Politeness; a down right
Barbarian in his Temper, in his Language, and in his Manners. He was Covetous
even to a degree of Infamy, and Cruel to the utmost. He neither understood
Justice, or Equity, in point of Religion. It is reported of him, that being
engaged in a Treaty made with some Persons, about the Creation of several new
Offices, he had the Confidence to come into the Parliament, to preside at the
Decree of Verification of the same. The Attorney General knowing that he had a
Share in the Treaty, recus'd him, and his Recusation was allowed of. Masuier
was Censured in a full Parliament for his ill Conduct, and the said Censure was
entered into the Register. The Prince of Conde, who was at Thoulouse at that
time about the same Affair; and who being as Covetous as Masuier, was suspected
of being Concerned in it as well as he, came the next day to the Parliament,
and had much ado to cause the said Censure to be taken out of the Register; but
he had not Credit enough to blot it out of Peoples Minds, and an undeniable
Witness has preserved the History of it. The same Author, speaking of the Zeal
of that unworthy Man against the Reformed, says, that he would have been
praiseworthy, had he been more moderate. He was beloved at Court, by reason
that he was a Slave to all the Orders that came from thence, and that he knew
no Rule of Justice beyond a Signet Letter; but he was hated by the People. The
very Inhabitants of Thoulouse Conspired against his Life, and upwards of Four
thousand Billets were dropped up and down the said City against him one day, in
which they threatened him with the utmost Extremities. Had he been to be tried
for any Crime, though there had not been sufficient Proofs against him, the
Hatred of all those that knew him, would have been sufficient to supply the
Insufficiency of the Proofs. The Reformed have often had the Comfort to see
that their greatest Enemies were Men of that Character.

Masuier therefore writ to the King, as if the Ecclesiastics Who writes to the
King with Malice.
had only been seized at Montauban, in order to Massacre them, at the first
News of any Ill Treatment acted any where else against the Reformed. He
gathered all the Reports the Catholics spread up and down, and grounded
Designs of the whole Party, upon the least Word that fell from any overra^n
Person. He endeavored to persuade, that there were some peaceable Persons in
Montauban, who did condemn those Proceedings; but in order to lay the Blame
upon the Generality, he said, that they were at the Disposition of the
Factious. He affirmed that the Enterprise upon Nava^ had been resolved at
Milhau; and he even proceeded so far, as to specify the day, on which the
Reformed were to take Arms. He had no other ground for either, but malicious
Suspicions, or Reports spread on purpose to persuade that the Reformed were the
Aggressors. Nevertheless, the appointed day, which was the 25th of December,
passed, and the Reformed did not commit the least Act of Hostility; and they
gave the King so much time to prepare himself, that he had enough to prevent
them. Moreover, that pretended day, was an Invention of the Bishops of Bearn,
who took Arms themselves that very day, under that Pretense, as I have related
elsewhere.

Masuier envenomed the Conduct of the Reformed Counselors Division of the
Judges of Castres about the Inrollment of the Declarations.
at Castres extremely in the same Letter, and imputed their Dividing upon the
Prohibition of the Assembly of Milhau, and upon the Inrollment of the
Declaration given at Grenade against the Assembly of Rochel, as great Crimes
against them. But whereas there were Reasons for that last Division, it is
proper to give an account of it. The King not being satisfied with prohibiting
of that Assembly, and ordering the Members and Adherents thereof to be
prosecuted, ^d moreover by an express Clause derogate from the Privi^ges of the
Edict, which referred all the Civil or Criminal Affairs of the Reformed to the
Chambers; and he referred ^e Cognizance of that particular Crime to the
Parliament. The Division only related to that one Article. The Catholics
passed it without Difficulty; but the Reformed reserved the Cognizance of those
Affairs to the Chambers, with the usual Condition, to make Remonstrances to the
King about (...). There really was a great deal to be said upon that new
Clause, which first appeared in the Declaration given against the Assembly of
Loudun. It was a Breach of one of the most considerable parts of the Edict, of
which the Consequences were visible. It was a great one for the Example of it;
since that in case they did allow such an Incroachment upon a Jurisdiction so
well settled, and so necessary, it would encourage those who had inspired that
first Enterprise, to attempt them upon all the rest, and by degrees, to ruin
all the Articles of the Edict by the like Exceptions. It was also considerable,
^s to the thing it self, by reason that a General Law becomes ^llusive, when
under pretense of Confirming it in the main, (...) Custom is made to derogate
from it in particular Cases. It was also very considerable for the Danger to
which it exposed all the Reformed, who might thereby easily be Involved in
those sort of Crimes. The Parliaments of Thoulouse, and of Bourdeauz
particularly, had admirable Secrets, to convert all the Affairs of the Reformed
into Crimes of State. It was sufficient, in order to convince one of those
Heretics, to accuse him before those passionate Judges; the very Name of
Reformed was a sufficient Conviction; Proofs were only desired for Form sake.
Those Reasons being added to the peculiar Interest of the Chamber, occasioned
the Division of it, by reason that they lost as much by it for themselves, this
Clause taking away part of their Jurisdiction, as for the Public of the
Reformed, for the Life and Safety of which, the Edict had made them
Depositaries.

This is what Masuier imputed as a great Crime against the Reformed Counselors
of Castres; and upon which he Trouble at Nimes, occasioned by a Jesuit.
desired an Order from the Court to Condemn them, to remove the Modification of
that Clause, on pain of Suspension of their Places; as if, after the
Considerations I have alleged, it were not very visible, that there could be
no harm in hesitating a little upon an Affair of that Importance; and to advise
the making of most humble Remonstrances to the King, before they did proceed
any farther. Masuier might have added to all this, some Troubles that happened
at Nimes upon the account of a Jesuit, who had been allowed to preach there by
the Consuls. They had disarmed the Catholics; who, excepting that they had not
the Power to do Harm, enjoyed a full Peace and Liberty. The News of the
Execution of Navarreins being brought to Nimes during the Avent, exasperated
the People, who exclaimed against the Jesuit in Words, whose Name was James
Georges. Some cried that he ought to be Stoned; others that he ought to be
Banishd; others that he ought to be kept, to be exposed upon the Breach, in
case the Duke de Mommorency came to Besiege the City, as it was reported. Those
Words, which resemble the License of the Soldier, who jests, and who has a mind
to frighten, were taken up as if they had been followed by the most Inhumane
actions. Nevertheless, the Jesuit was only frightened, and the People did him no
other Violence.

But this News of the Cruelties committed at Navarreins, occasioned Circle of
the Lower Languedoc assembled at Lunel.
the Assembling of the Circle of the Lower Languedoc at Lunel, to put
themselves in a Posture of Defense, and to provide for the Safety of the
Churches. The Pensioners of the Court were dumb. The Transactions in Bearn were
publicly known; and those who would pass for Reformed had not the Confidence
to excuse them. Chatillon counterfeited himself so Zealous, that he was elected
General of the Churches of the Lower Languedoc, of the Cevennes, of Vivarets,
and of Gevaudan, and that they gave him an absolute Power to dispose of
whatever related to the War, and to the Finances. The abridg'd Assembly of
Montauban confirmed that Power, and soon after the Assembly of Rochel did the
same. This Post ^ut him in a Condition to be bought by the Court, and to hinder
those Provinces, which were able to make the strongest Diversion, from
Succoring each other. Nevertheless, he did something at first in the War of
Privas, which was renewed on the beginning of the Year, and which would have
had another Success, had Chatillon been endued with more Constancy. Brison, who
relied upon his Assistance, made 1621.
himself once again Master of the Castle after some days Siege. Retaking of the
Castle of Paivas.
All the Actions of Courage of the Besiegers have been represented by the
Catholics, as Actions of Rage and Cruelty; and during all the Course of the
Wars, which began that year, they held the same Language; Military Actions were
termed otherwise than they used to be. When the Reformed were attacked, their
Resistance was styled a black Rebellion. Their Courage in Assaults, or in
Sallies, in Combats or in Sieges, were termed Fury. All the Enemies they killed
in a just War, were Massacres. All their Undertakings to secure themselves, to
Fortify their Cities, to prevent Surprises from their Catholic Fellow
Citizens, was nothing but Barbarity, Impiety, Sacrilege. In a Word, all their
Proceedings were vilify'd with all the Malice imaginable by Writers and
Orators, in order to engage the Catholics the more to their Ruin. I think
this general Remark will be sufficient: I thought it necessary, le^t People
might be imposed upon by the Style of those Days; and I will not renew it
elsewhere.

The occasion of the new Enterprise of Brison, was that All manner of Justice
refused to the Reformed.
the Inhabitants of Privas having raised some Works to secure themselves
against the Garrison of the Castle, by reason that they could obtain no Redress
for the Injuries they received from them; St. Palais, who Commanded in it,
fired his Artillery upon the Town, to put a Stop to the Work. He refused to
hearken to the Remonstrances the Citizens made to him about it; and the Duke de
Ventadour, the King's Lieutenant, to whom they applied themselves after that
Refusal, instead of giving them an Audience, used them like Rebels, and
threatened to hang them. They were used in the same manner throughout the
Kingdom; and the poor Wretches did not know which was best for them, to Obey,
or to Resist. A thousand Indignities were put upon them, when they armed
themselves with Patience; and they were threatened with the Punishment of
Criminals, as soon as they seemed to have a Mind to defend themselves. They had
no Choice left, but to suffer their Throats to be cut without Speaking, or to
be Condemned as Rebels. This is forcing of People to act by Despair. I will not
treat this Question methodically in this place, viz. Whether in those
Extremities it be a sin Which are reduced to Despair.
against the Gospel to defend ones self; but I dare say, that in such Cases
Nature inclines People to defend themselves, having no prospect of Safety any
other way. And no equitable Person can deny, but that Acts of Despair ought
less to be imputed to those that commit them, than to those who reduce them to
the indispensible Necessity of committing them.

The Duke of Mommorency not daring to besiege Privas a Und^rhand Dealing of*
Chatillon with Mommotency.
second time, during the Assembly of the Circle, with whom Chatillon seemed to
agree, feigned to be willing at the Request of that Lord, who came to him at
Mompellier with the Consuls of Names, and of Vsez, and some Deputies of the
Assembly, to hearken to some Accommodation, and promised not to come to Privas,
unless it were with a Spirit of Peace. But it was only to gain time to assemble
his Forces, and to find out a way to disband those of Chatillon, who only
wanted a pretense for it. An Expedient was foun^ for it in an Interview of
Lesdiguieres, of the Duke de Ventadour, and of a Gentleman from the Duke de
Mommore^^^, who either could not, or would not come in Person. They resolved to
get an Order from the Court for both Parties to disarm, and to leave things in
suspense in the mean time. The Order was brought by Des Ruaux, and Chatillon
obeyed; but he had had the Complaisance before, the Order came, to suffer
Villeneuve de Berg to be taken by the Duke at Mommorency without opposing it;
although the said Town was necessary to incommode an Army that should besiege
Privas, in the Neighborhood of which it was seated, and to put a Relief in it,
which might come through the Sevenes, of which it was the Passage. The Duke de
Mommorency caused Mass to be said in it immediately, which had not been
celebrated there for upwards of Sixty Years.

The Order was to refer the Cognizance of the Affair of Order from the Court
injoyning both Parties to disarm.
Privas to the King; and that the two Chiefs should Disarm; but Mommorency did
not disarm, under pretense that Chatillon, who agreed under hand with him, had
not properly laid down his Arms, since he had only dispersed his Forces,
without disbanding them. But he had only kept them on foot to amuse the Simple,
since their Retreat favored Taking of Walons.
Mommorency to take Walons, out of which the Garrison, which had been put into
it by Chatillon, withdrew by his Order. The Duke also attempted Walls by a down
right piece of Treachery. That little Town, pretty strong by its S^ituation,
did belong to Colonel Ornano, who was afterward Marshall of France.
Montmajour his Brother, desired to have the Command of Walls, under pretense
that he would take more care than another, to make his Soldiers behave
themselves civilly there, by reason that it was his Interest so to do.
Mommorency had two ends in so doing; the one was to imitate Chatillon, in
dispersing his Forces, instead of Disbanding them; but in Dispersing them, he
gave them convenient Quarters to assemble again in a short time, and to hinder
those of the Reformed from rejoyning, in case they should have a mind to Succor
Privas. The other was to put a Catholic Garrison, under the Name of a Catholic
L^^d, in a Place where there ought to be a Reformed one, according to the
Briefs: That is, that in order to show the Ref^rmed what they were to trust to
about the Restitution of Privas, the Court designed to dispossess those of
Walls, who were under the same Circumstances of the Guard of their Town.

The Inhabitants easily discovered the Snare, and refused to S^^^e and Taking
of Walls.
quarter the Duke's Forces. They were forthwith besieged within ^ight of
Chatillon; and being disheartened at the first Discharge of the Cannon, they
surrenderd upon shameful Conditions. The Consuls begged Pardon upon their
Knees, and the Duke put a Catholic Garrison into the Castle. They 1621.
valued themselves extremely upon the taking of that little Place, because it
was commonly called Little Geneva, all the Inhabitants being Reformed; and the
Maiden, by reason that it had never been taken by Arms. The Catholic Religion
was restored there, and the Example of the Duke, together with the Endeavors of
the Jesuits, soon made such Conversions there, as we have seen in our days.
Chatillon, who still kept some measures, durst not suffer Walls to be taken,
without seeming to prevent it: But whither he did not use so much diligence as
was necessary, or that the Consuls, surrendered the Town too soon, d'Autiege
who commanded the Succors, was acquainted with the Surrender of the Town by the
Way. In Order to employ his Forces, he retook Walons, and forced an Exemt out
of it, whom des Ruaux had left there. The Duke Besieged it again immediately:
And as if d'Autiege had only put himself into it, to receive Walons ^s retaken,
an^ rest^r'd
an Affront, he Surrendered it within three days, upon very hard Conditions. He
Marched out of it with his Men, without any thing but their Arms; and he
promised, that neither himself nor they, should bear them in the Province for
six Months time; and he did not so much as obtain a Capitulation for the
Inhabitants, who were left at the discretion of the Soldiers.

During these Transactions, the Assembly which was Summoned Assembly of Rochel.
at Rochel repaired thither; and all the Endeavors used by the Court to
prevent it, proved ineffectual to prevail with them, or to frighten them. Although
they had changed the Place, they still retained the Name of Assembly of Loudun
for some time, because they pretended it to be a bare continuation of that,
which was held in that City, which had only been suspended to please the King,
in expectation of the performance of his promises; having the Power to Assemble
again, by Virtue of a Verbal promise they had received of the King for it, in
case the things agreed upon, were not performed at the appointed time. They
writ to Lesdiguieres and to Chatillon to inspire them with the resentment they
ought to have, at the Public breach of a Promise, of which they had been as it
were, Guarantees, and Depositorys. Chatillon made fair promises, which he did
not keep; and when he had obtained a Place from them, which made him to be
feared at Court; he obtained what he pleased there, and fell out with the
Churches, for their Service. But Lesdiguieres ^ef^s'd to hearken to the
Propositions of the Assemby. There Lesdiguieres falls out with the Assembly.
passed a long Commerce of Letters between them, by which they insensibly
exasperated each other; and finally proceeded to invectives and Reproaches on
both sides Among the Letters which the Assembly had written to him, while they
were at Loudun, there was one in which they offered the Place of General of the
Reformed to him, to keep him an Army of 20000 Men, and to pay him 100000 Crowns
a Month, and to give him sufficient surety for the payment of the same, in any
Protestant City of Europe, he should be pleased to pitch upon. But he was no
longer in a Condition to receive those Offers; and the Court had engaged him
with greater hopes.

Notwithstanding he still professed the Reformed Religion, The small Affliction
he had for his R^^^^ion.
he was already a Catholic at the Bottom, since* he had promised to be so. His
secret practices with the Jesuits; the preferring of Crequi, a Catholic Lord,
to the most Illustrious Alliances of the Reformed; his affecting always to make
a separate body from the rest* Joining with the Churches when he stood in need
of them, and forsaking them when they wanted his Assistance, were good Reasons
to show that Religion was not his predominant Passion. Moreover, he had lately
given a sensible Proof of it. Mary Vignoa, with whom he had led a very
scandalous Lite for many years, whose Husband it was thought he had caused to
be Killed, either to enjoy her with more freedom, or to hinder that Jealous
injured Man from destroying his Wife, Governed him absolutely. After her being
a Widow she turned her Lust to Ambition, and omitted no means to become his
lawful Wife, after having so long been his Mistress. She had two Daughters by
him, which she was in hopes of marrying to Sovereigns, if she could cover the
Defect of their birth by Marriage. Lesdiguieres was amused with the same hopes:
So that this Woman found it an easy task to obtain what he passionately
desired himself. He Married her; and being sensible that all Persons of Honor
would blame that Action, he was the first that turned it into Railery. It is
one of the Maxims of those that resolve to do unaccountable things: They
prevent peoples looking upon their Behavior He Marries Mary Vignon.
as Infamous, by using them not to speak of it as of a serious thing.

The said Marriage was directly opposite to the Discipline Contrary to the
Discipline of the Reformed.
of the Reformed, which did expressly prohibit a Man's Marrying a second Wife,
after having committed Adultery with her during a first Marriage. Moreover, it
was Celebrated in the Roman Church, upon the Account of Mary Vignon, who had
Power enough to prevail with him to do it. The Truth is, that he made Public
Reparation for it: But that did not hinder people from judging, that he might
easily Of which he makes a public acknowledgment.
have avoided that false step, and that Mary Vignon would have made no
difficulty, in order to become Duchess de Lesdiguieres, to be Married by a
Minister, if he had desired it. Besides, the Reformed did not like the prospect
this New Marriage gave him, for the Establishment of his Family. The Catholic
Religion was always put at the Head of all the hopes the Catholics him with:
And whereas the favor of the Court was necessary for his designs, they did not
fail to insinuate to him, that he might expect a great deal more from it, by
turning Catholic, than by remaining steady, by a scruple of Honor to the
profession of a Religion that was run down, and which they had resolved to blot
out of the Memory of Men.

On the other hand, Luines had designs, in which he was Notable Artifices of
the Duke de Luines, to gain him.
in hopes Lesdiguieres would be of Use to him; and therefore in Order to gain
him, he flattered him with the Dignity of Constable. Not that he designed to
give it him: But aspiring to it himself, he durst not venture to ask it in his
own Name, for fear of a denial. That great Office which placed almost all the
Regal Authority in the hands of a Subject, had not been filled since the Death
of the last Duke de Mommorency, to whom Henry the Fourth had given it. The
design of introducing Arbitrary Power, did not suit with the great Authority of
a Constable: Therefore the Court designed to oppress it; and it was actually
abolished in the beginning of Cardinal de Richlieu's Ministry. It had been
vacant about seven years, when the Duke de Luines undertook to ^^ve i^ disposed
of again: But in order to meet the less difficulty in it, he resolved to revive
it, under a Name, more Illustrious than his own; not doubting but after that,
he would easily find a way to get it for himself. He certainly was very well
acquainted with the foible of Lesdiguieres, to un^take to abuse him, as he did:
And had he dared to put the same Trick upon the Duke d'Epernon, he would never
have been Constable.

In Order thereunto, he pitched upon two different Men, Double Commission to
pr^va^t with him.
^^ whom he gave two different Commissions. The one was (...) persuade
Lesdiguieres to turn Catholic, in hopes of being made Constable. The other had
Orders to represent to him, that that Grandeur would create him a World of
^nemies, and that he would do better, to persuade the ^^ing to give it to his
Favorite; and to rest satisfied with certain advantages which would be granted
to him, to make him amends for the said Refusal. The Commission of the ^^rst
was known to the King, who was not as yet acquaint^d with the pretentions of
the Duke de Luines: But that of the second was only known by the said Duke, who
was unwilling the King should be acquainted with that ^eere^ Intrigue: Besides,
he only gave it to stop the Progress of the (...) which succeeded better and
faster than he desired. The (...) that was employed about the Duke de
Lesdiguieres, was the same Deagean, who had served the Duke de Luines, to
incense the King against the Queen his Mother, and against the Marshal d'Ancre.
The King reposed a great Confidence in him ever since that Affair; an I
sometimes gave him private Commissions, without the knowledge of his Favorite:
As he had done after the Queen Mother made her escape out of Blois. He made use
of him to write to the Bishop of Lucon to repair to that Princess, and to
dispose her to an Accommodation. Deagean relates it himself, though other Memoirs
do not speak of it, as of a thing done without the Dukes knowledge. But if what
Deagean says about it be true, it was enough to make the Favorite his Enemy. A
Man that had a Genius for Affairs, who was Subtle, Dissembling, Ambitious, and
Bold, was capable of doing to much with an easy Prince, who reposed some
Confidence in him, to be agreeable to Persons, who had neither Wit nor
Experience enough to oppose him. Therefore, the Duke took a pretense to send
him to Lesdiguieres, to remove him from the Court; and in Order to keep him at
Grenoble, a Place of first President of the Chamber of Accounts, was bought for
him in that City, under pretense that it would hinder people from penetrating
into the real Motives of his abode in that Province.

Although Deagean was very sensible for what reason he was What Empire Deagean
gains over Lesdiguieres.
confined in Dauphine, yet he accepted the Commission that was given him;
relying perhaps, more on the Gratitude of Lesdiguieres, than he had reason to
trust to the Duke de Luines. And flattering himself, that he would promote his
own Fortune the better, by opposing the Protection of a Constable, against the
Jealousies of a Favorite. The success can never be unhappy, when matters are
well disposed. Deagean easily persuaded Lesdiguieres to change a Religion which
he little mattered: But in Order to render his Solicitations the more
Powerful, he made use of the Wiles they used to practice. There still remained
a Scruple of Honor in Lesdiguieres, which persuaded him, that it was a shame
for a Man of his Age to change his Religion. But he removed it by private
Conferrences, by reason that Public Feigned Deputies of Religion.
ones made too much Noise, and that Deagean had no mind to make any. He got
Ministers, whom he had gained to meet him at Lesdiguieres, as if it were
accidentally, and whom he seemed not to know, that the meeting might seem
undesign'd. Those Traitors, after some feigned resistance, never failed to
yield to Deagean's Reasons; and to give him a fair pretense, to press
Lesdiguieres to overcome those little Scruples. Le Visconte Professor at the
College of D^, who was an Italian, and who had been a Friar, was one of them.
He suffered himself to be vanquished in a Conference; after which, he confessed
Ridiculously, that it was impossible to Answer Deagean's Arguments. That Comedy
was Acted so grossly, that it was impossible for Lesdiguieres not to perceive
it. It was pleasant to see Deagean, who had passed the best part of his Life in
the Dignity of Clerk of the Finances, to become a Champion in a dispute of
Religion; and without using any other Arguments but certain Vulgar Sophisms,
repeated over and over, to reduce all of a sudden, Persons of some Reputation,
and better Versed than himself, in matters of Controversy, to confess that his
Reasons were convincing. Nevertheless, those Artifices acquired Deagean so
great an Empire over Lesdiguieres, that he Governed him as he pleased; and that
when the General Assembly offered to create him General of the Churches, to
maintain him an Army of 20000 Men, and to pay him 100000 Crowns a Month, and to
give him sufficient security for the payment of it, in any Protestant City he
should be pleased to choose; the said Deagean dissuaded him from accepting of
the said Offers, and even dictated the Answer he made upon that Subject. He did
the same with all the Letters Lesdiguieres writ to the Assembly.

This great Credit of Deagean had like to have broken the measures of the Duke
de Luines, who entrusted the second Bressieux ordered to ruin the works of
Deagean.
Commission, I have mentioned, to the Marquess de Bressieux, which tended to
cross the Negotiation of Deagean, and to persuade Lesdiguieres to yield the
Dignity of Constable to that Favorite, upon which Condition, he was allowed
not to turn Catholic. This New Deputy was ordered by an Article of his
Instructions, to obtain a promise from Lesdiguieres, before he did reveal his
Commission to him, that he would conceal it all from Deagean: But he could
never prevail with him to do it; and for fear of worse, he was obliged to stick
to the Terms of the first Commission, and to content himself with pressing
Lesdiguieres to turn Catholic. But the Duke de Luines, imputing to the
Marquess, who perhaps was not inclined to pursue so great a Cheat; the ill
success of his design, employed Bullion in the same Intrigue; who prevailed so
far upon Lesdiguieres, as to persuade him Buliion succeedes i^ it better than
he.
to come to Paris, to renounce the Constableship, and to yield that Dignity to
the Duke of Luines; to advise the King, whom he said he would oblige, to Raise
his Favorite to that high Place; and finally to serve against the Churches,
still professing the Reformed Religion. Lesdiguieres resisted a little at
first; but finally he was so good, as to consent to all; and was not ashamed to
serve in the Quality of Marshal General, under a Constable, who was hardly any
thing of a Soldier. The Duke d'Epernon, more resolute, and more haughty than
he refused to Obey either; and whereas he had the art to keept the Court in awe
of him, the Court was obliged, in order not to lose him to give him the Command
of a small Body, without receiving Orders from any Body.

Such Low, and such abusive Wiles were practiced to obtain Lesdiguieres does
not hearken to his friends.
this consent from Lesdiguieres, that had not his Mind and Heart been weakened
by Age, it is not to be believed, that he would ever have submitted to such
unworthy proceedings. The best friends he had among the Reformed, being
acquainted with what passed, by reason that the Duke de Luines had had the
cunning to Publish it, to raise difficulties upon that Affair, omitted no means
to raise his Courage again; and to make him sensible, how shameful it was for
him to Sacrifice his Religion and his Honor, toward the Ambition of the Duke
de Luines. But those who possessed his Reason, made him pass over all those
considerations; and he only seign'd to persevere in the Reformed Religion, to
deceive those that had still some confidence in him. The Catholic Zeal will
undoubtedly appear very tractable in this Affair: But at the same time it
cannot be denied, that the Roman Church alone knows, to what degree treachery
and Hypocrisy may be carried innocently; and within what bounds they are to be
kept, to make them part of the service of God. What Deagean did to remove
Notable Guile of Deagean.
the Scruples of Lesdiguieres about Religion, is so singular upon that Subject,
that it deserves a Place in History. Among the Ministers he had bribed, there
was one of the Lower Languedoc, in whom Lesdiguieres reposed a great deal of
Confidence, who had been his Chaplain, and who had secretly abjured the
Reformed Religion. He acquainted Deagean with all his Masters secrets, and told
him the Reason for which Lesdiguieres expressed, in a certain Conjuncture, a
little more repugnancy to pleasure the Court, than he was wont to do. The cause
of that little disgust was a certain Suspicion, which was given him of some
designs formed against the Reformed in Dauphine, in which he was to be
involved. When Deagean had Learned that secret, it was easy for him to destroy
the Suspicions of Lesdiguieres, whose mind he turned as he pleased. Therefore,
the said Minister doing him such good Services, he would have been a Loser, by
his changing of his Religion publicly, by reason, that being then no longer
able to penetrate into his Master's secrets, he would no longer be able to
betray him. But Deagean provided against it by a Notorious Cheat. He obtained a
Brief for that Minister from the Pope, who allowed him to perform the Function
of his Ministry for three years longer, on condition, that he should neither
Preach against the Doctrine of the Roman Church, nor Administer the Sacrament
according to the Reformed manner. I do not know, which ought to appear most
singular in this to Men of sense, the Niceness of that Villains Conscience, who
would not be guilty of Hypocrisy without Leave, or the Popes complaisance, who
under the pretense of his being useful, allowed him to make a sport of Religion
for three years together, and to abuse God and the World with impunity. They
did not do so much for Lesdiguieres. They only excused him for a while from
keeping his Word. The Truth is, that he had made a promise in Writing, to
embrace the Roman Religion: But since they did not perform their promise to him
in recompense of it, they did not press him to put his in Execution. Moreover,
when they found that he pressed the conclusion too fast himself, they desired
him not to make so much haste; to reduce his Ambition to less Employments, and
to keep his Religion in lieu of the Dignity which he was persuaded to yield to
another* As if a Man, who was ever ready to Sacrifice his Conscience for
Temporal Advantages, would be so far in Love with Piety, as to think himself
rewarded for the refusal of such Advantages, by the Liberty of professing his
own Religion.

There happened three, very singular Incidents in that Negotiation. Luines is
made Constable.
That the only Man who could be thought capable of the first Dignity of the
Kingdom, should consent to fool himself to get it for another. That the King
should be so weak as to be persuaded, that a Man who was not able to Exercise a
Regiment, without the help of a better Soldier, deserved to be Constable. That
all the Court should Adore that Masterpiece of Fortune, and that the Princes
should submit to an Authority so ill placed. A Brother of his was also soon
after made Marshal of France, who was hardly a better Soldier than himself,
and who showed at the Siege of Montauban, at the cost of many brave Men, that
he did not understand how to charge a Mine. The Truth is, that the King soon
repented the complaisance he had had for his Favorite. The Crowd of Courtiers
that attended that new Constable, displeased the King, who finding himself
almost forsaken, whereas his Favorite was followed by all the Court, called
him sometimes with a spightful Air, King Lunes: And let fall some Expressions
of the desire he had to humble him. That was his Forble; he could not endure
the greatness he had raised himself. Tho incapable to keep his lawful
Authority, he was Jealous to see it in the hands of those to whom he had given
it.

But whatever Lesdiguieres could do, did not prevent his Lesdiguieres remains
at Court.
being in danger of being secured at Court. He had been warned of it by the
way, and he failed but little of Experiencing, that the said Advice was well
grounded. Nevertheless, the Court obtained so many things of him, that they
thought him secure; and whereas he was always to remain with the King; they
looked upon his presence, as a sufficient Pledge of his Fidelity. By that means
Dauphine, in which there was a great deal of Reformed Nobility, was retrenched
from the Union of the Churches; 12 or 13 Places were secured, in which he
promised to put Catholic Governors and Garrisons; and he was set up for an
Example to many of the Reformed, whom the Court would oblige not to meddle with
the Assembly, and even to bear Arms against their Brethren. But tho he assured
every Body, both by Word of Mouth and in Writing, that he did not design to
change his Religion; yet he Writ to Cardinal Ludovisi^ who had lately succeeded
Paul the V. and who had taken the Name of Gregory the XV. after his Election to
the Pontificat, to congratulate his Exaltation. He had formerly promised that
Cardinal out of a Compliment, that when ever he came to be Pope, he would turn
Catholic: And that Jest was employed as an Argument to persuade him to do it;
as if he had been obliged in Honor to do it, after so positive a promise.

During these Transactions, the Assembly of Rochel remained Mediation of the
Dukes de Rohan, and de la Trimouille.
steady; and the Court was not without disquiets on their side, by reason that
they were sensible, that there were many Malcontents in the Kingdom, besides
the Reformed: So that they were glad to find, that some of the Reformed Lords
were willing still to offer their Mediation, in order to an Accommodation. The
Dukes of Rohan and de la Trimouille undertook it, after having taken measures
with Du Plessis about it, and Writ to the King upon that Subject. But Favas
finding himself fooled at Court* and that the Government of Leitoure had been
given to Blainville, in spite of him destroyed the Project of that Mediation.
He tarried at home in Guyenne, after the King's departure from Bourdeaux; and
he seemed to be unwilling to meddle any farther with the Of which Favas ruins
the Project.
General Deputation: But he was unhappily obliged to come back to Court, in
order to have the management of the Negotiation of that Agreement. He spoiled
it by his uneven Temper; and the Court, which knew him, made use of him to
deceive the Reformed, and to reconcile some Princes with the Constable, who
built great designs upon the War of Religion which they saw at hand. Those
Malcontents were the Count de Soissons, a young Prince, who had partly the
Genius of his Father, and the Dukes de Nevers, and de Mayenne. Villarnoul
Son-in Law to Du Plessis, suffered himself to be persuaded to tell the Count,
that the Accommodation of the Assembly with the King was concluded: And Favas
himself had the Complaisance to Write to the two Dukes, that he was going from
the Court, with a perfect satisfaction for the Assembly. Nevertheless, he
repaired to Rochel, with a greater mind to exasperate matters, than to
Reconcile them.

The heats of that Man, whose mind ran still upon Letoure, Du Plessis and du
Moulin solicit the Assembly to break up.
broke the Course of the Mediation, those two Lords were willing to take upon
them. So that, they were reduced to endeavor only by their Letters, and by
their Deputations to persuade the Assembly to keep within the bounds of their
Allegiance. Du Plessis particularly behaved himself so, that he was suspected
of having lost part of the Vigor of his mind with Age, and to be moved by
Interest as Lesdiguieres. Du Moulin also joined with them. He had been at Sedan
ever since the Synod of Alets. He did design to call at Rochel, in returning
from the Synod to Paris: But things were so imbroil'd before he could come
away, that he durst not follow his Inclination, for fear of making himself
Criminal, by Communicating with a prohibited Assembly. His Prudence in this
point availed him nothing, the Court would have him guilty, Right or Wrong. He
received notice at Lions, by a Letter from Drelincourt his Colleague, that he
would be taken up, as soon as he came to Paris. This News obliged him to take a
by way to go home, where he tarried but one Night, and went from thence to
Sedan; where the Duke de Bouillon gave him the place of Professor in Theology,
and of Minister in Ordinary. Tilenus his Enemy did not fail to Write Violently
against that retreat, which he endeavored to represent as a Mercenary flight.

The pretense the Court had to seize upon him was, that Du Moulin in danger of
being secured.
the English Ambassador had desired Du Moulin to Write to the King his Master,
to exhort him to assist the Elector Palatin his Son-in-Law. That Prince having
too soon taken the Name of King of Bohemia, which had been offered him by the
People, lost a Battle near Prague, and his New Kingdom, together with his
Ancient Patrimony, which the Emperor dive^ted him of, as a Rebel. France
suffered it calmly, by ^eason that the Policy of Spain and of Rome prevailed in
their Council, and represented that War, as a War of Religion. Jeannin himself
remembered, that he had been a Member of the League; and Writ a Pamphlet, to
hinder ^he King from succoring the Bohemians, in which he urged so many Reasons
to prove, that all the Advantage of that War would remain to the Protestants,
and all the damage ^o the Catholics; that France lost that opportunity of
ruin^ng the House of Austria in Germany; and that they looked upon the Ruin of
an Ancient A^ly of France, as a Triumph of the Catholic Church. The King
meddled no farther with this War, than by a Solemn Embassy, at the Head of
which, he placed the Count d'Auvergne: And that served ^^ly to render the
Catholic League the stronger, and the Emperor more formidable. But the
Coldness of the King of England Scandalized, even those that profited by his
Weak^ers. He did not relish certain Maxims of Honor, which Coldness of James
the I. about the Affairs of the Palatinat.
he was continually put in mind of; and he thought it a ^iece of Policy, not to
assist Subjects against their Sovereigns, ^ven in the Case of a manifest
oppression. He applied that ^e Policy, which no other Prince ever bethought
himself ^f, to the Affairs of his Son-in-Law: And his Ambassador who was
sensible, that he was despised every where for that false Prudence; had a mind
to draw him out of that Error. He looked upon Du Moulin, as a Man capable to
revive the Courage of that Prince, by whom he was very much respected. Du
Moulin writ, after having excused it a while; and his Letter was given to the
Courier the Ambassador Du Moulin writes to him and his Letter falls into the
hands of the Council of France.
sent into England. But it was soon after put into the hands of the Ministers
of the Cabinet Council, whither it were ^one designedly by the Courier, or by
the Ambassador; or whither it were intercepted by some Wile; or finally,
whither King James himself, who had particular Engagements with the King of
France, had Communicated it to the Ministers of that Prince. The said Letter
was looked upon as being very Criminal, by Reason, that the Condition of the
Churches of France was set out in it, and their approaching Ruin alleged, as
a proper Reason to excite the King of England to assist his Son-in-Law, whose
Prosperity was a Refuge to the Reformed, as his Ruin was a Presage of Decay
for them.

The Jesuits, whose Bane Du Moulin was, were glad of that Opportunity to ruin
him, and having neither been able to Corrupt him by fair Offers, nor to destroy
him by diverse Conspiracies against his Life, they imagined that he could never
escape them that time. But they were deceived, and he escaped that Snare by the
Diligence of his Retreat. It was from Sedan he writ to the Assembly of Rochel.
It is uncertain whether he did it of his own accord, or by the Order of the
Marshall de Bouillon, who was of the same Opinion with all the Grandees of the
same Religon; or whether his Friends perceiving that his Enemies had a mind to
represent him as a Seditious Person, who inclined People to Rebellion by his
Advice, advised him to disprove them by such a Letter. But it is certain that
it was written with great Vigor, and that he declared in it, that the Assembly
would be answerable for the Ruin of the Churches, in case their refusing to
break up should occasion it. The Effect of that Letter Effect of those Letters
to the Assembly.
was, That it increased the Divisions to the utmost Extremity. Some Members of
the Assembly withdrew, and never could be prevailed upon to come again. Others
acquainted Du Moulin that his Letter had been read, but not approved of, and
begged of him not to communicate it to any body, lest it should serve as a
Pretense for those, who had a mind to withdraw out of the Union.

It were to be wished, that the Assembly had followed that Advice, only to try
what the Court would have done after their Separation; in order to render the
Cause of the Churches the clearer, by removing the Pretense of Disunion from
those, who had too much Faith and Credulity. The Event showed, that if those
Members of the Assembly, who would not break up without Security, were not the
most prudent, yet they were the best informed; and those who hindered them from
taking such Measures for their Safety, had cause to repent at leisure, their
being too Credulous. Two things ^opt the Negotiation: The one was, that the
Assembly ^ould not resolve to beg Pardon for meeting at Rochel, by reason that
they pretended, that they might lawfully do it, after ^o positive a Promise, as
they had received for so doing at London from the King. That Confession of
having done ill Difficulties which st^pt the Negotiations.
was of greater consequence than it seemed to be at first, since (...) implied
a tacit Acknowledgment that the things promised had been performed: The
Consequence of which was, that (...) would stop their Mouths for the future
upon the Business of the two Counselors, of Leitoure, and of Bearn. Favas
^sisted upon those Considerations with great Vehemence. The other was, that
they were willing to see at least something done upon their Complaints, before
their Breaking up, for fear of being shortly obliged to begin all things a new,
as it had happened more than once. Moreover, the Decay of the Reformed Religion
in the Kingdom of Bohemia, which those who were for the Dissolution of the
Assembly, made use of to make them dread the Events of War, was taken in
another Sense by many, who looked upon it as a good Reason to take Precautions
against the Oppression, of which the Affairs of Germany gave a Presage.

Nevertheless, the Assembly not being able to withstand New Conditions of
Accommodation.
the Advice of all the Grandees, from whom they received Letters upon Letters,
and Deputations upon Deputations, to induce them to submit, obliged the Lords,
who had offered their Mediation before, to resume the Negotiation of an
Agreement. The thing seemed to be brought pretty near a happy Conclusion that
time. The said Lords found an Expedient, which apparently was like to satisfy
every body. They thought fit that the Assembly should break up for form ^ake,
without removing above one or two small days Journey from Rochel: That the
Deputies should remain in Places of Safety, under pretense that they could not
go Home, by ^eason of the Declaration which rendered them Criminal: That they
should tarry for the King's Answer, in a Readiness to assemble again in case he
should break his Word: That it should be done without mentioning the Right they
pretended to have had to Assemble: That before the said Separation, the Council
should agree with the Deputies General, about seven Articles they were to
present to the King: But that he should not dispatch them till the Assembly
were actually dissolved, and the Members gone Home: And that in order to enable
them so to do, the King would revoke the Declaration, by which they were
declared Criminals.

Those seven Articles, which were treated of several times Seven Articles which
the Court agrees upon.
with the Deputies General, and which were at last agreed upon, with some
Modifications, contained in Substance, that the Reformed should not be obliged
to use the Words of Pretended Reformed, in speaking of their Religion: That the
King should remedy the Political and Ecclesiastical Affairs of Bearn: That La
Force and his Children should be maintained in their Places, as they had been
during the Life of the Late King, and paid their Arrears and Pensions; and that
Lescun should have his Employments restored him: That the Settlement of the
Places of Dauphine should be delivered according as it had been promised by the
Treaty of Loudun: That the Modification of the Article of that Treaty, which
spoke about the Reception of two Counselors in the Parliament of Paris, should
be removed: That the Cahiers of the Assembly of Loudun should be speedily and
favorably answered: That care should be taken for the Payment of Ministers,
and of the Garrisons: And finally, That the King's Soldiers should be removed
from such Places where they created Jealousies.

But the Intention of the Court, by these Negotiations, To amuse the Reformed.
was only to amuse the Reformed, as they used to do, in order the better to
take their Measures, and to break those of the Assembly, by flattering the
Credulous with the appearances of an approaching Peace. The truth is, that the
Resolution of making War had not been taken in the King's Council without
Difficulty. Though there was a great Party that pressed the Ruin of the
Reformed, the Wisest of the Council were against it; particularly the three
oldest Ministers that remained of the ancient Court, who could not abandon the
late King's Maxims. They thought it a piece of Rashness to attack a Party that
had Two hundred strong Places, the least of which might tarry till a Breach was
made before they did Capitulate, and of which, many could sustain long Sieges
before good Armies: That there was no likelihood of improving their Divisions,
which would cease immediately as soon as a War should be declared against them,
by reason that then the most Simple would begin to fear for themselves.
Moreover, that there was not more Union at Court than among them, by reason of
the Jealousies about the Government: That the Reformed had the Reputation of
being good Soldiers, and good Politicians: That there was no reason to believe
that they had given over their foreign Correspondencies: That the Conformity of
their Condition would engage those Countries that profes'd the same Doctrine,
to succor them. That the Allies of France would be troubled at that War,
because it would enable the House of Austria to oppress them, while the King
should be diverted from Foreign Affairs by those Domestic Broils. That the
United Provinces would be exposed to all the Forces of Spain, which would take
the Advantage of the Civil Wars of France, to oppress that State, which the
King had so much Interest to preserve. That the King had no Money, by reason
that the Avidity of his Favorites devoured all his Revenues; insomuch that all
the Money of several Years was spent, and that all the Expense was still to
come.

The Duke de Luines, on his side, had no Inclination to The Duke de Luines is
little inclined to it.
make a War. Du Plessis had given him some Advices upon that Subject which
stuck to his Heart, and which made him fear, either that the Malcontents would
increase the Party of the Reformed, or that a Peace would be made at his Cost.
But on the other hand, the Ministers were all for taking Arms. But the Queen.
The Queen expected a kind of Regency while de Luines should lead the King from
Province to Province; and perhaps she had higher Designs. The Bishop of Lucon,
who was one of her Creatures, had a mind to make himself necessary. The Prince
of Conde, who expected to have the Command of the The Prince of Conde.
Army, no longer remembered the Services he had received from the Reformed.
Puisieux, Son to the Chancellor, who had succeeded Puisieux.
Villeroy, both in the Secretary of State's Place, and in his Passion for the
Spanish Maxims, was at the Devotion of Spain, and pressed the Duke by so many
Reasons, and found so many Expedients to cure him of his Fears, that finally,
he inspired the same Sentiments in him. The Clergy The Clergy.
of France being ignorant and corrupted, thought their whole Duty was
comprehended in the Extirpation of Heresy; and they offered great Sums,
provided they were employed in that War. The Pope, who has the Art to persuade
Princes The Pope.
that they are obliged to sacrifice the Repose of their State to his Grandeur,
and who always advances his own Affairs at the Cost of others, seconded that
Advice by all his Authority. But the Ministers of Spain in particular, who were
the principal The Spaniards make the King resolve upon War.
Promoters of that Cabal, omitted nothing to engage France in a War, which,
according to all human appearance, was to set the first hand to the Decay of
the Monarchy. The Policy of Spain was so refined at that time, that they made
those serve toward their Projects, who had most Interest to oppose them; and
that they engaged France voluntarily in a Civil War, of which they ought to
have dreaded the cruel Consequences, after having experienced it for the space
of Five and thirty Years.

But finally, the thing was resolved upon, after the Duke de Luines had
obtained the Dignity of Constable, which gave him the Command of the Armies. He
was thereby delivered of the Fear of being obliged to make the Prince of Conde
too Powerful, by giving him the said Command. But when that Difficulty was
removed, there arose another, which was of no less Consequence. There were two
Opinions about the Degree to which they should proceed in the Ruin of the
Reformed. Some said that it ought to be done Some are (...) destroying Root and
Branch
at once; that the best way was to destroy both the Heresy and the Heretics,
and to imitate Charles the Ninth, who only Consented to the Massacres of 1572,
on condition that no body should be suffered to escape that might upbraid him
with it. The Pope was of that Opinion, and was seconded by the Cardinals, by
the Clergy of France, and by the Jesuits. The Pope offered on that Condition,
to contribute Two hundred thousand Crowns, the Cardinals as much, and the
Clergy the same Sum. The Jesuits, who are used to take, offered nothing, unless
we impute to their Intreagues, the Offer of Thirty Millions of Livres, which
was made by some of the Partisans, or such as Farm the King's Revenues.
Grand Farmers, for the Confiscation of the Estates that belonged to the
Reformed on this side the Lotre. It is very well known, that those subtle
Politicians have more than once slipped their Necks out of the Collar, when Money
has been required of them, by proposing Advices or Expedients to raise some,
without contributing any thing toward it themselves. But some were of a more
moderate Advice, or rather more And others for sparing the most Peaceable.
Politic, who were for laying Religion aside, and only to wage War against the
Resorm'd as Rebels; and to let the Edicts subsist in favor of such as should
remain quiet in their Houses.

The Reasons of the first Advice were, that in case any Distinction Reasons of
the first Advice.
were made among them, those that should be spared would prove the most
dangerous: That they would perhaps prove one day the Recourse of their Party:
That they would ^^^ain at Home, not out of Fidelity, but out of Prudence: T^^t
they would keep a Correspondence with those that should be in Arms: That they
would be their Spies, to give them Notice of whatever should relate to them:
That they would ecretly assist them with Money and other Necessaries toward
the War. But the Reasons of the others were, That Reasons ^f ^^e Second.
the Distinction that should be made of the Peaceable, and of the Rebels, would
be a certain way to weaken the Party by ^^viding them: That a considerable
Number of Persons, in ^^^es of preserving the Liberty of their Religion by
their Obedience, would retire home, and would behold the Destruction of the
rest without moving: Whereas in case they declared War against the whole Party,
the most Peaceable would be forced to join with the others for their Common
Defense: That for that Reason it would be imprudent to u^ near Four hundred
thousand Men, to which the Num^^^ of the Reformed, capable of bearing Arms, was
thought to amount: Besides, That such as would be spared by that Po^icy, would
remain at the Mercy of the Conqueror after the Destruction of the rest: That
this Distinction would hinder the Protestant Allies from taking any Jealousies
about that War, and would persuade them that they did not aim at their
Religion, but that they were armed against a Cabal that was always ready to
trouble the State, and to join with the first Malcontents who had a mind to
exclaim against the Government.

This Advice prevailed, and Experience showed that the Which is followed.
Reasons of the first were all Illusions. The Reformed, who were put in hopes
that the Edicts would be observed, gave little or no Assistance to the others:
and during the whole course of the War, the Catholics, and particularly the
Gentlemen, were much kinder to the Reformed in Arms, than to the Reformed that
remained Peaceable. They gave the most considerable and the most certain
Advices: It was from them, those Cities that were resolved to hold out a Siege,
bought Provisions and Ammunitions; and from whom, in a word, they received the
greatest Testimonies of Correspondence and Sincerity. The reason of it was,
That there were many Catholics, who not being blinded by the Zeal of Religion,
foresaw what the Event has but too much demonstrated, and what even the
Catholic Historians have not scrupled to write; that under pretense of
reducing the Reformed, the Court concealed a Design to Establish Arbitrary
Power; and that the Ruin of what they called a Cabal, would serve as a Step
toward the Oppression of the whole Kingdom. The Reformed on the contrary being
blinded by Promises of Liberty, avoided all Commerce with those that were in
Arms, for fear of giving the Court a Pretense to involve them in the
Destruction of the others, as their Accomplices; and there were many, who in
imitation of Lesdiguieres, were not ashamed to bear Arms against their
Brethren. The worthiest Persons amongst them, only succor'd them with Prayers
and Tears, which the Fear of Oppression only allowed them to shed in secret.

During the whole Course of the War, the only Cry was, Reasons published to
blind the Reformed.
that the King's Arms were only designed against the Rebels: That the Edicts
should be observed in favor of the rest: That they had no thoughts of
destroying the Reformed Religion: This is what was written abroad; what all the
Pensioners of ^^e Court preached up and down; and what was Published ^^ all the
Declarations. In order to hinder People from ^enetrating into the secret
Reasons of those Reports, the Court published others, which could do no harm,
and which ^ere so plausible, that they might pass for true. They said that
(...) was not reasonable to force Consciences that were used to a ^^ng
Tolleration; that what had been good 60 years before to ^^event the
Introduction of Heresy, while Liberty of Consci^nce was unknown, would be
dangerous after having relished it (...) long: That it was not fit to give any
Jealousy to the Pro^estant Neighboring Princes, lest they should come to the
Assistance of the Reformed; whereas none was to be expect^d from the Catholics
Abroad, who were desirous to make ^he War last, to hinder France from crossing
their Designs: that the King had many faithful Subjects among the Re^o^m'd, who
ought not to be Confounded with those Rebels. Others added moreover, in order
to make their Reasons the ^ore weighty, that the Reformed were useful in
France: that they were born Enemies to the Enemies of the State: That in case
there were none of them left in the Kingdom, it ^ould be necessary to send for
some from Abroad, far from destroying those who were born there. The Reformed
were ^^^t the only Persons that said this; there were Catholics even in the
Council, who were really of that Opinion; and ^t the beginning of the present
Reign, there still were Mini^^^s who had been bred in the Policy of Cardinal de
Richelieu, who held this Maxim as a true one, and who expressed it in the very
Terms I have used. New Difficulty about the time of beginning the War.


This Difficulty being removed, there appeared a third. Some were of Opinion to
begin the War without delay, in ^rder to suppress the Reformed, who were
astonished, and not in a Posture of Defense. It was the Advice of the Prince of
C^nde, who expected to make a better Figure in the War than at Court, where he
was obliged to have base Complaisances for the Favorite, and where he was
looked upon with an ill ^ye by the Queen Mother. Du Vair, Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, and the Jesuit Confessor to the King, seconded it with all their
Might. Jeanin and the other old Ministers, who were not heartily inclined for a
War, opposed it, and thought that it would be proper to talk of a Peace on the
contrary in threatening a War; and in the mean time to prepare for the last, in
case the Reformed should refuse the first on Conditions worthy of the King. The
Duke de Luines joined with the last, but for other Reasons. He saw no Money
ready for the War; he had rather apply the Finances to his own, and to his
Friends Advantage, than to a doubtful Enterprise. He was at a Loss to whom he
should trust the Command of the Armies. He was not secure of the Foreigners. He
had no body to whom he could confide the Provinces he should leave behind him,
in marching with the King toward the Southern Provinces. In fine, the Number
of the Reformed Lords made him dread Diversions wherever they had any
Authority.

But he was so happy, that all those Difficulties were levelled. How those
Difficulties were removed.
He gained most of the Great ones. Chatillon was bought with the Promise of a
Marshal's Staff. The Marshal de Bouillon remained long Newter. Lesdiguieres
fooled himself, and many others followed his Example. He met with no
Oppositions from Abroad. The King, under pretense of a Journey into Picardy,
secured himself on the side of the Netherlands, and Spain freely granted him
all the Assurances he could desire, being far from putting any Obstacles to a
War they desired passionately. Cadenet, Brother to the Favorite, who was
created Duke de Chaunes, easily prevailed with the King of England, who thought
himself obliged to lose all the Opportunities which a good Politician would
have improved, to make himself Arbitrator of Europe, when there was a Necessity
to succor Subjects against their Prince in order thereunto. The United
Provinces were not in a Condition to Break with France. It is true, that as
that Crown had had some hand in the Divisions of that State, and seemed to
favor the Party of Barnevelt, they had also given some Discontents to the
Prince of Orange. But those petty Subjects of Complaint did yield to greater
Interests: The Terror of the Prosperities of the House of Austria, did not
permit the States to fall out with an Allie so necsseary as Lewis the
Thirteenth. The Court sowed the utmost Divisions among the Reformed. They
endeavored to revoke the Power of those who were deputed to the Assembly. They
endeavored to make the other Cities jealous of Rochel, either as designing to
promote their own Advanvage at their Cost, or as designing to become the Center
of their Union, and to ingross all the Authority. Though all the Reformed were
not susceptible of those Diffidences; yet there were always some who suffered
themselves to be caught in the Snare of those false Impressions.

Notwithstanding the Court gave ear to all the Propositions The King goes
unexpectedly from Paris.
of the Mediators, with as much Application, as if they had had a sincere
desire of Peace: People were strangely surpised to find in the middle of those
Negotiations, when the Court thought that they had taken sufficient Measures to
succeed in their Enterprise, that the King repaired to Fontainebleau, from
whence he writ to the Duke de Bouillon, and to Du Plessis, and some others,
that the Obstinacy of the Assembly was the Occasion of his Journey, and that it
obliged him to repair to Tours, and perhaps farther, if it were necessary, to
be near at hand to give his Orders. He mixed with this Advice, Assurances of
his good Intentions, in favor of those that should remain within the Bounds of
their Duty. The next day after his Arrival, he reversed the Privilege of
Elections, and removed And removes the Offices f^r the Receipts of his Revenues
out of the Reformed Cities.
the Offices for the Receipts of his Revenues, out of the Cities held by the
Reformed, by an express Declaration, and transferred them to Catholic Cities,
under pretense of hindering the Reformed from seizing upon the Royal Treasure.
But he restored that of Saumur by a Brief, to satisfy du Plessis, for whom a
far greater Affront was preparing. This Edict might reasonably pass for a
Declaration of War; but it did not open the Eyes of those who were inclineable
to a Peace, and they continued their Mediation, some with Sincerity, and others
to please the Court, which was desirous to amuse the Reformed by those
Appearances. So that Conferences were held still, in which all things seemed to
tend to an Accommodation. The Constable seemed to open his Mind freely to the
Deputies, and to consent to a Peace upon tolerable Conditions. For which reason
the Agents and Mediators left Paris with Pavas, to repair to Rochel by diverse
ways, and upon different Days, in order severally to dispose the Assembly to
receive the Conditions they brought them. But without tarrying longer than the
next day after Favas's Departure; a Council was held in the King's Presence, in
which a Settlement was drawn of Forty thousand Foot, and Settlement of War
drawn in the middle of the Negotiation of Peace.
Eight thousand Horse, to be distributed in the Provinces according as it
should be necessary. The Government of Bearn was given to Themines in the same
Council; La Force was deprived of all his Places; the Survivorship of them was
taken from his Son the Marquess de Mompouillan, who created Jealousies in the
Favorites, and in the Jesuits by his great Accomplishments, and by the Share he
had in the King's Favor; and he was ordered to retire from the Court. That
Prince permitted those who governed him, to dispose of his Inclinations, as
they did of his Finances, and of his Authority; and always approved the Reasons
that were alleged to him, no longer to love what he had most loved.

The Pretense used for that Disgrace, was, That Peoples New Troubles in Bearn.
Minds began to be heated again in Bearn, and that the Affairs there seemed to
be upon the Point of a new Revolution. La Force was enraged, that instead of
making him some Reparation for the Affront he had received from Poyane, who had
taken Arms, not only without his Leave, but without his Knowledge, the Court
had sent him an Order by Saludie to lay down his Arms, approving the Actions of
Poyane. The Marquess de la Force pressed his Father to resent that Affront, and
looked upon the Proceeding of the Court as a bloody Injury, to oblige an old
Governor of Province, an ancient Officer of the King's Household, to disarm
before the Governor of a Town, who ought at least to have honored him as a
Superior, and to communicate his Designs to him, though he were excused from
receiving Orders from him. Moreover, it was too sensible an Affront from the
Court to La Force, to send Orders to an inferior Officer, without acquainting
him with it. Therefore the Bearnois being already as uneasy at the Alterations
that had been made among them, as they were fatal to their Liberties, the
Discontents and Intrigues of their Governor soon disposed them to improve the
Occasion. The Earnestness the General Assembly expressed for their Affairs,
increased their Courage, and easily persuaded those People, who were naturally
Confident, that they would soon be as Free as the French. La Force being
flattered with that Hope, writ to the King in the Month of February, a Letter
that was very pressing, and well written, upon the Refusal the Court had made
to hear the Deputies of the Assembly. That Letter perhaps proved one of his
greatest Crimes. The Court no longer relished those free Contradictions. He
Remonstrated with too much Boldness, how much the Severity of the Court
increased Peoples Terrors. He complained that the Catholics of the Province
said publicly, that the King was resolved to declare a War against the
Reformed, and to destroy them; and he concluded by a pressing Exhortation, that
his Majesty would be pleased to hear what the Deputies of the Assembly had to
say.

That Letter and the Advices the Court received from The Duke d'Epernon is sent
thither.
Bearn, that the Towns, out of which the Garrisons had been removed, were
revolted, made them forget that La Force had obeyed the Order he had received
from Saludie without replying: That he had caused the Tower of Mongiscard to be
restored and dismantled, which the Bensins, accused of the Conspiracy of
Navarreins, had fortified to annoy that Place: That in order to observe some
Decorum, he had delivered that Fort, not to Poyane, who had besieged it, but to
Counselors, that were deputed by the Sovereign Council of Pau, who caused it
to be demolished. The King not being satisfied with turning La Force and his
Children out of their Employments, ordered the Duke d'Epernon to turn them out
of Bearn, and to reduce the People to their Allegiance. The Court did not do
the Duke that Honor out of a Pure Effect of Good Will; but lest in case they
should slight him in a Time of Troubles, he might grow jealous of the Forces
that marched toward his Governments, and put himself in a Posture to hinder
the Progress of the Favorite, who did not love him; tho his Policy obliged him
to dissemble, and to express an exterior Friendship to him. The Court gave him
nothing to help him to make that Expedition. He had not so so much as time
allowed him to raise Money and Men; and he marched toward that Country with so
small an Army, that had he not relied upon the Correspondencies the Court held
in the Towns, his Enterprise would have been a great piece of Rashness. The
Truth is, that La Force was not yet ready, and that he made his Preparations
like a Man, who was uncertain what he had best to do. The Succors of the
Provinces, who had undertaken the Preservation of Bearn, failed him, and that
of the Assembly General was yet at a great distance. Therefore he had recourse
to Submissions, and endeavored to stop the Duke's March by reiterated Offers
of Obedience and Fidelity. But the Duke made no less have for that, and for his
first Expedition he besieged Orthez. The Place was in a Condition Cowardice of
the People of Orthez.
to make a long Resistance, during which, Forces might have been assembled,
which might easily have dissipated the Duke's, who had neither a Place to
retire to, nor Provisions, or Ammunitions. Moreover, there were more Men in the
Town capable to bear Arms, than there were in the petty Army that besieged it.
Nevertheless, The Force of their Correspondencies within proved so effectual,
that they surrendered without tarrying for the Cannon, as if they had only
tarried for the Duke's coming to their Gates, to commit that Piece of
Cowardice. That Success afforded the Duke d'Epernon all that he wanted, by
reason that the Town was very well provided. La Force La Force retires.
judging by this Success what he had to trust to from all the rest of the
Country, retired out of the Government. After which all the Towns that were in
his Party being astonished at the Capitulation of Orthez, and at the Retreat of
the General, surrendered upon the first Summons. The Truth is, that the Duke's
Severity, as soon as any body showed the least Inclination to resist, struck a
Terror every where. Those very Places that obeyed, had the Grief to see their
Fortifications demolished; but every where else, Confiscations, Banishments,
Hanging, were the Duke's daily Sports, whatever the Author of his Life reports.
We have a Specimen of it, by the poor Pretense he took at Oleron, to Execute a
wretched Soldier he found in the Town. The Duke Condemned him to dye, because
he had managed the Work of some slight Retrenchments which it had been covered
with. That did not render him more Criminal than those who had set him at Work,
and who had taken him into their Service. Nevertheless, he was Executed; but
not being able to persuade himself, that what he had done deserved Death, he
imputed his Crime to his being a Provencal, and reproached the Duke at his
Death, that he was the Victim of his Hatred for that Province.

But those Rigors of the Duke rendered his Expedition All Bearn is subdued.
very short, and very successful. After the Capitulation of Orthez he soon made
himself Master of Oleron, of Salies, of Nay, of Sa^veterre, and finally of Pau;
and having ordered all things according to his Mind, he left the Country in a
full Submission. That Expedition did not last above three Months, which
afforded him time to come back to the King, who was before St. John d'Angeli at
that time. The War was begun in Poitou as soon as in Bearn, and with the same
Success. Though the Duke d'Epernon's Commission was known by every body, and
that the Settlement of War drawn in the King's Council was become Public, the
Mediators being stupefied by some strange Charm, would still persuade
themselves that it was nothing, and that, provided the Assembly would obey, the
King would proceed no farther; so that their Letters, and their Advices still
retarded the Affairs of the Reformed, and afforded the Court time to take all
their Measures at leisure. Nevertheless, Favas, being informed by Chalas his
Colleague, in the General Deputation, who with the Court, with what passed
after his Departure, acquainted the Assembly therewith, and gave them an
Account of the Illusions they had been amused with, while the Court was
preparing to laugh at them and at him openly. As that Settlement of War had
been drawn the next day after his Departure, he received the News of it the
next day after his Arrival; so that he was enabled at once to inform the
Assembly with the Disposition of Peace, in which he thought he had left the
King's Council at parting, and of their Resolution for a War, of which the News
was written to him.

They heard at the same time that he arrived at Tours on Sedition at Tours.
the 18th of the same Month. One Martin, who kept a Public House there, had
embraced the Reformed Religion; and that Change had occasioned some Jests, and
some Satyrick Songs, which had often exposed him to the Laughter of the People.
The Magistrates not having suppressed that License, though contrary to the
Edicts, and to sound Policy, the Catholic Children had learnt those Songs, and
the said Martin dying soon after it, they sung the said Songs while his Corpse
was Carrying to the Ground. Some of those that accompanied the Corpse being
disturbed at that Noise, gave one of the Children a Box on the Ear. The simple
Catholics, who diverted themselves at those Childrens Play, and who often
excited them to do what they durst not do themselves, cried out that he was
killed, because he was a Catholic. Whereupon the People rose immediately, fell
upon the Reformed, abused, wounded, and affronted all those they met. The Night
did not appease their Fury. The next day the Seditious went to the Churchyard
of the Reformed, dug up the Corpse, which had been flung into the Ground in
haste, tore it in pieces, and committted a thousand Indignities against it.
From thence they went to the Temple, and burnt it: They plundered the House of
the Sexton, and committed great Violences against him. This Rage lasted three
days; but finally, it was appeased for want of Matter, by reason, that the
Reformed hid themselves, and that the most considerable retired in such Places,
where they expected to find most Safety. The Magistrates barely made some weak
Informations of the Fact, and imprisoned some of the most Miserable; but as if
the Reformed had been as Guilty as the rest, some of them were also secured to
keep the Catholics Company.

Those Mutineers seemed to have looked upon the And elsewhere.
King's Journey to Fontainbleau as the Signal of their Enterprise; and the
People judged by the Coldness of the Magistrates, that they were certain the
Court would approve those Proceedings. Nevertheless, the thing was looked upon
to be of too much Consequence in that Conjuncture, to be winked at. The Court
was sensible that the Impunity of those Violences would open the Eyes of those
they designed to blind, by the fair Promises of the Observation of the Edicts;
and that in case Despair should reunite the Reformed, their Ruin would prove
a difficult Task. Moreover, it was an Example of very ill Consequence, which
appeared, in that the People rose at Pottiers as well as at Tours, beat down
the Wall the Reformed had built about their Churchyard; broke the Tombs,
violated the Sepulchers, and endeavored to demolish the Temple. Those Violences
did not extend to Persons, by reason that the Place in which the Reformed
performed the Exercise of their Religion, was at a great distance from the
City; and that the Magistrates, who dreaded Reprisals, put a stop to the
Disorder. But the Punishment of the Seditious was very inconsiderable, and did
not terrify the Mob so much, as to hinder them from committing the like
Excesses in diverse other Places, as at Croisie, at M^uze, and elsewhere.

The Court dreading the Consequences of the Sedition of Tours, received the
Complaints of the Reformed, The Court stops the Progress of it.
who desired that an Examplary Punishment might be made of it; and in order to
blind them with an apparent Satisfaction, the King issued out a Declaration on
the 20th of December, by which he took the Peaceable Reformed into his
Protection, and enjoined the Parliaments, and all other Officers to whom the
like Edicts are commonly directed, to make them enjoy a Liberty suitable to the
Edicts. Moreover, he sent the Mild Malleville, Master of Requests, to Tours,
with a Commission to try the Guilty without Appeal. The said Commissioner,
without making any Informations, but those that had already been made by the
Judges of Tours, put the Reformed at Liberty, and Condemned some of the
Catholic Prisoners to Dye. That Severity renewed the Sedition, and the People
being in a greater Fury than ever, ran to the Prisons, broke open The Sedition
is renewed.
the Doors, put the Condemned at Liberty, Plundered the Houses of the Reformed,
and among the rest, that of a Notary, whose Minutes they tore. The Commissioner
being Terrified, was constrained to hide himself; and the Mutineers could not
be appeased until the Magistrates promised them to obtain a General Pardon for
their Crime; that the Catholic Prisoners should be put at Liberty, and that
the Process should be burnt. The King, whose Authority was concerned in that
Second Sedition, took his time to do himself Justice; and leaving Fontainbleau
to march toward Poitou, he came to Tours, and there caused four or five
Wretches to be Executed, who had been Punishment of some of the Criminals.
concerned in that Tumult; but the most considerable escaped. The Execution of
those Wretches calmed the Minds of those, that had been terrified by those
Violences committed in so suspicious a Conjuncture. The Reformed kept at Home,
and saw without any Emotion, the Weight of the War fall upon the small Number
of those that followed the Orders of the Assembly. Moreover, They accused them
of Obstinacy, and of being the Cause of their own Misfortunes, by an affected
Consideration of future Misfortunes. In a Word, the Effect of that Shadow of
Justice, which the King Which dazles the Reformed.
did the Reformed on that Occasion, was such, that the very Catholics wondered
at it, and made Jests of the Simplicity of those Wretches. An Historian, who
speaks of those Affairs like a passionate Catholic, nevertheless says, upon
that Subject, That he does not wonder that the Vulgar, whose Impetuosity is
blind, should be caught in such a Snare; but that he cannot imagine how it
could deceive the Grandees, the Gentry, and the Officers of that Sect, who had
been repnted till then Wise Politicians.

On the Fourth of the same Month, the King published New Declaration.
yet another Declaration before his Departure from Fontainbleau, of the same
Style with all the rest. It began with a Protestation of having all along been
desirous to cause the Edicts to be observed, as the most effectual way to make
his Subjects live in Peace; of having winked at the Infractions committed by
some of the Reformed; of having endeavored to make them sensible of their Duty
by Diverse Edicts published on purpose. From thence it proceeded to the Motives
of the Declaration given at Grenade, in the Month of October last past, to
interdict the Assembly of Rochel; and complaining that it had not hindered the
Reformed from assembling in the said City and elsewhere; from ordering diverse
Acts of Hostility, as by Reprisals; from Electing Chiefs; from Fortifying of
their Garrisons; from Raising Men and Money; from Listing Soldiers, Casting of
Artillery, Buying of Arms and other Amunitions. It added, That notwithstanding
all this, the King had granted several things, desired by the Memorials
presented to him by the Deputies General: But, that finally he was resolved to
go as far as Touraine, and to march himself toward Poitou and elsewhere, to be
near to apply a Remedy to those Evils; being resolved to maintain the Public
Peace, to cause the Edicts to be observed, in favor of such as should keep
within the Bounds of their Allegiance, and to chastife the Rebels: Whereupon he
confirmed a new, all the Edicts and Declarations, and ordered them to be kept
in favor of those that were, and should remain within the said Bounds of their
Duty, whom he took, as well as their Families and Estates, under his Protection
and special Safeguard; commanding his Officers and Governors of Cities to see
it performed. He ordered the same thing for the Catholics, to the Officers of
the Places in which the Reformed were the strongest. After which he came to
Blois, from whence he repaired to Amboise, and afterward to Tours, to Thouars,
where the Duchess de la Trimoville received him, and finally to Saumur, out of
which he turned Du Plessis in a very Unkingly manner.

While the Court was so diligently employed about The General Assembl^ d^f^nds
it ^^lf in Writing.
the Preparations of War, the Assembly was near as diligent in putting
themselves in a Posture of Defense; being equally troubled with the little
Union they observed in their Bosom, and with the little Authority they had in
the Provinces, and the continual Contradictions of those who thought they were
the Wisest, who did nothing but Preach Obedience to them. As soon as they were
informed that the King had refused to hear their Deputies, they ordered them to
put those Remonstrances in Writing, which they were to have made by Word of
Mouth. They did it accordingly, and in order that every body might be
acquainted with them, they published them. After having declared, that the
Reason which obliged them to make them public, was, that they were not allowed
to speak to the King; they set forth all the Promises that had been made to the
Assembly of Loudun in the King's Name, the Prince of Conde's, and the Duke de
Luines; and they related the very Expressions they had used; and among the
rest, what the King had said to those who carried the Nomination of the
Deputies General to him, that he would perform the Promises of the Prince, and
of the Duke. They complained that those Solemn Promises had been violated; and
having observed at what time the King took his Progress into Bearn, they
thought it was a great Injustice to impute it as a Crime to the Assembly, to
have met upon the Word of a Prince, of the Favorite, and of the King himself.

After which they proceeded to the Particulars of those Particulars of their
Complaints
things in which, the Court had not performed their Promises: viz. That the
Settlement of the Places of Dauphine had not been delivered, though it was an
Affair but of half an Hour. That the Reception of the two Counselors in the
Parliament of Paris had been deferred as long as possible could be. That it had
not been performed till after the Convocation of the Assembly. That only one of
them had been received in Reality, the Reception of the other being evaded by
the Clause of Modification, which obliged Le Cog to resign his Place to a
Catholic. That every thing had been altered in Bearn, and the Assembly of
Rochel declared Criminal, without hearing the Persons concerned. That the
Exercise of the Reformed Religion had been interrupted at Clermont de Lodeve,
though it was a Place of Surety. That the Catholics hindered the Execution of
the King's Orders by Force of Arms, and the Proceedings of the Commissioners
sent to re-establish it there. That the King's Council declared that the King's
Authority was concerned in it; but yet that they Authorized it by Conniving at
it. That Privas had been taken from the Reformed, though it was a Place, where,
according to the Edicts and Briefs, nothing ought to be Innovated. That during
Eighteen Months last past, the Court had detained the Sums promised for the
Maintenance of the Garrisons, and for the Sallaries of the Ministers. That
Seditious Sermons against the Reformed were tolerated. That their Dead were
taken out of the Ground again. That their Temples were burnt. That their
Ministers were turned out. That the Delivery of the Places, in which they were
to perform the Exercise of their Religion was hindered; and among the Places in
which those Excesses were committed, they mentioned Moulins, Bourges, Baux in
Provence, Lion, Dijon. That their Cahiers were not answered, and that when any
of the Articles were answered, either the Answers were not put in Execution, or
they were contrary to the Intention of the Edicts. That the Commissioners sent
into the Provinces, either refused to perform their Office, or performed it
ill, by a visible Collusion. That all this proceeded from the Council and
Malice of the Jesuits. They Concluded, Imploring the King's Favor, and
earnestly desired the Revocation of the Declaration which treated them as
Criminals, protesting that they only desired the Liberty and Safety of their
Religion, to remain inviolably tied to their Allegiance.

The Marshall de Bouillon writ from Sedan to the The Marshall de Bouillon
writes to the King.
King, the same day that the Remonstrances appeared. He freely expressed the
Reasons of Diffidence that had been given to the Reformed, by the Threatenings
of Revoking the Edicts, that is, to take away the Liberty of their Consciences,
the Safety of their Lives, their Estates and Dignities. He said that the Affair
of Bearn had been anticipated; that the Promises had been ill executed; that
Garrisons had been put in diverse Places without Necessity; that the Assembly of
Rochel was used with too much Severity. He entreated the King to hear the
Remonstrances of their Deputies, and to reject the Councils of those that
advised him to force the Consciences of his Subjects. But the Council was
hardened against those Advices which tended to Peace; and seemed not to relish
them, only the better to take their Measures.

The Jesuits answered the Reproach that was made Reply of the Jesuits to the
Writing of the Assembly.
against them of exciting a War, in Writing. In order to refute it, they made
use of the Sermon the King's Confessor had lately Preached at Court, that the
King was obliged to protect all his Subjects, even those that were of a
different Belief from his. That Answer tended to persuade that their Society
was innocent of all the Ill they were accused of; and that they only applied
themselves to Convert those that Strayed, and to prevent the Progress of
Heresy by their Sermons and Writings. They made it a Crime for the Reformed to
suppose in their Complaints, that the King suffered himself to be governed by
the Jesuits. And they said that all the Articles set down in their Petition
were false; and for an Instance of the Innocence of the Society, and of the
little Share they had in the Violent Councils that were daily given to the King
against the Reformed, all their Actions were represented in it in a manner full
of Fury and Venom. That Apology could not deceive those who had any Sense. It
was very well known that the Theology and Morality of the Jesuits are always
Slaves to their Policy; and that it is impossible to guess their Sentiments by
their Sermons. It was easy to oppose to the Moderation of the Jesuit Arnoux,
the Seditious Sermons of the Monks of the other Orders, who being more
Impetuous, and Hairbrain'd than the Jesuits, declared inconsiderately in their
Pulpits, what those cunning Politicians had the Art to cover with a profound
Dissimulation. Even at S^^mur, a Franciscan Friar had had the Boldness to say,
comparing those who were for tolerating the Reformed, to the Soldiers that Spit
in the Face of Jesus Christ, that for his Part, who was afraid of no body, he
declared publicly, that a War was necessary. We may Judge by that, what
Liberty they took in Places of less Consequence than Saumur, where they stood
in no dread of the Reformed. Moreover, it was very well known, that in the
Application of the Jesuits toward the Conversion of those they called,
strayed, all means were lawful alike to them; and that according to their
Maxims, success rectifies the most Violent and most Unjust Expedients.

Lesdiguieres before and after his coming to Paris, acquainted the Assembly
with all that Deagean inspired him with, and endavour'd to persuade them, that
they were to blame to complain. The Assembly answered him pretty Vigorously,
and took him to Witness himself of the Royal promises, upon the Account of
which they did repair to Rochel. But when he Writ to them from Paris, with
Reproaches and Threatenings, declaring that he would bear Arms against them,
unless they did submit to the King's Pleasure, they answered him upon the same
Tone, which broke off all manner of Correspondence between them. He had played
his part so well till then, that he had deceived the most clear sighted; and
that he seemed equally well affected to the Peace of the State, and the
preservation of the Churches. His Refusals of joining with them, being mixed
with such specious Reasons, and with such moving Protestations, that even those
that did not believe him, did not know what to Answer him. During the War of
Privas, the Provincial Assembly of An^^s^, deputed the Marquess de la Charse to
him, who represented all the Grievances under which the Reformed Labored to
him. He omitted nothing to persuade him to take some useful Resolution for the
good of the Churches. He employed in his Discourse all the Motives of Religion*
of Honor, and of Interest; the good of the State, the Advantage of the common
Cause, the particular interest of his Person and of his Family; Remonstrances,
Reasonings, Conjurations, etc. But he could not prevail upon his Mind which was
prepossessed by Deagean. Lesdiguieres lessened as much as he could by his
Answer, the Subjects of Complaint and of diffidence alleged by the Marquess.
He endeavored to prove, that all the proceedings of the Court were Just; and
gave no other Advice, but that of ^ing, and of submitting. But he accompanied
his Advice with so many fair Words, and with such (...) of his Affection for
the Churches, that the Marquess ^s constrained to seem satisfied with his
Refusal; and ^o seem to believe that he spoke from the bottom of his heart. He
never put off his Mask till he came to Paris, and obliged himself to serve
against the Churches.

But as there were Members of the Assembly at Rochel, The Assembly draws a
Project to defend themselves.
^o acquainted the King with all the Transactions there, so ^ere were Persons
at Court, who gave the Assembly a ^ithful Account of all the Resolutions that
were taken here against them So that, after they knew that the King was gone
from Paris, they did Nominate Nine Commissioners to draw a settlement of War:
And on the ^oth of May, after having heard that Seditions were made (...) all
parts against the Reformed; That the King had made (...) settlement of near
50000 Men on his side; that he had made a New Edict, which at the the bottom
was only a Declaration of War; That he was gone from Fontainbleau fully
resolved to begin it in Poitou; That consequently there was no longer any
reason to rely on Negotiations they agreed upon 47 Articles prepared by their
Commissioners, which Regulated the Distribution of the ^nces, the Generals that
should Command there, (...) Power, their Office, the Authority of the Provin^
Councils and of the Assembly; the Discipline they ^d observe in their Arms; The
manner of Treating ^ners of War, and of managing Military Enterprises; that
should be freed from Spoils, and what should be observed for Correspondence.
They also contained Regulations for the Finances; and the manner of Raising
them, of receiving them, and of laying them out. The last made Provision for
the Subsistence of the Reformed* that should be obliged to quit their usual
abode, and to abandon all their Estate during the War. But the first was
Division of the Provinces into Circles.
the most remarkable, by reason, that it contained the division of all the
Churches of the Kingdom into Circles, which were to have each their General,
and to furnish a certain part of the Men and Sums, that were necessary for the
common defense. Those Circles had been Instituted long ago: But they were only
composed at first of some Neigbouring Provinces, who were to Assemble
themselves by the Deputies of their respective Councils, as soon as any of them
should be attacked; and were obliged to assist each other, as soon as required.
They had Uunited those in such a manner which were able to maintain their
Correspondence with less difficulty, and that bordered in part upon each other.
Some Alterations were made about that Institution upon the Occasion of the
approaching War: particularly, in that a Man of Quality was created General of
every Circle: So that the said Division seemed to be formed upon the Model of
the Circles of Germany, from whence the very Name of Circle was borrowed.

Those Circles were of an unequal Extent, according as The Marshal de Bouillon
refuses the Place of General.
the Provinces of which they were composed, had more or less Churches or strong
Places; and by that Inequality of Extent, the Reformed had endeavored to make
them partly equally strong. There were Eight of those Circles. The first was
composed of the Isle of France, o^ Normandy, Pickardy, Beausse, Berry, Anjou,
Maine, P^che, Tourane, excepting the Isle of Bouchard, which was joined to
another Circle. The Generality of that great Circle was designed for the Duke
of Bouillon. Moreover, the Office of Generalissim^ of the whole Party was
offered him; but he refused it upon the Account of his Age, and of the Gout,
which he was very much troubled with. He remained Neuter, as to Action; but he
often gave the Assembly good Advices, which were not followed. Among the rest
he advised them to put a Caris^n of Six thousand Men into Saumur, by reason
that it was not likely that the King would leave a Place of that Consequence
behind him; and that if they did put a sufficient Garrison into it, to resist
the first Effort of his Arms, the War would soon be at an end. The Assembly
believed him, and sent Forces to secure that Place; but Irrepara^.
upon some ill Advice, they were countermanded, after they had begun their
March. Soon after it, when they heard that the King was marching that way, they
were sensible of the Fault they had committed, in not providing the said City
with Men, Amunitions, and Money. They endeavored to repair that Fault by
Diligence; but the King made yet more Diligence than the Assembly, and before
the Relief they sent was got half way, he had turned Du Plessis and his Garrison
out of Saumur.

The Second Circle, composed of Poitou, of Bretagne, General of the Circles.
and of the City and Isle of Bouchard, was to be Governed by Soubise, Brother
to the Duke of Rohan. La Trimouille had the Government of the Third, which was
to contain Angoumois, Saintonge, and the Islands. The Lower Guyenne made the
fourth Circle, and La Force was Governor of it. The Fifth, given to the
Marquess his Son, comprehended Bearn, and the Dependencies thereof. The Upper
Languedoc, and the Upper Guyenne, which made the Sixth, was to be Commanded by
the Duke de Rohan. The Seventh, which contained the Lower Longuedoc, the
Cevennes, Givaudan, and Vivarets, was to be Governed by Chatillon. And the
Eighth, composed of Burgundy, Provence and Dauphine, was left to Lesdiguieres,
from whom it could not be taken. Rochel made a Circle apart in that Division;
and there was a particular Exception in favor of them in the Forty seven
Articles I have mentioned, which exempted them then and for the future of
having any Governor besides their Mayor. Of all those Circles, none but the
Upper Guyenne made any Resistance that year, so that it proved by so much the
more easy for the King to vanquish, that he had in effect but the Eighth part
of the Reformed of his Kingdom to deal with; since even in that Circle which
made some Resistance, several Towns and Captains made none at all.

The Catholics made a great deal of Noise about these Seat of the Assembly.
Settlements, and for that the Assembly had caused a new Seal to be engraven,
in order to fix it to their Ordinances and Commissions. The Constable himself
represented that Action as a public Declaration of their Resolution to
withdraw from their Allegiance to the King; of designing to establish a New
Holland in France, and to settle a Republic there, of which the Assembly
retained the Superiority. It was easy to persuade it to the King, who was bred
with an Aversion to the Reformed, and was ev^^ susceptible to the Jealousies,
that were inspired in him about his Authority. But to say the Truth, it was a
wretched Reproach; for if the War was just on the side of the Reformed, the
Regulations made, in order to sustain it, and the Seal engraven in the Name of
their Union, could not render it Criminal. The Question was, whether the
Reformed were in the Right to take up Arms; by reason that granting, that it
could be no Crime in them to make Laws to unite themselves, nor to agree about
a Seal, as a General Mark to know each other by. Moreover the said Seal was
only an Emblem of their Religion, the same as is still often met with in the
first Page of the Books of Religion, written for the use of the Reformed. There
only were some Words engraven about it, which signified that they took up Arms
for Christ, and for his Flock. The first Letter of the last Word not making a
good Impression upon the Wax, the Sense was different, and the Words that
appeared, signified only for Chr^^^* and for the King. This Diversity might
persuade some People that they had two Seals; and there are some Writings of
Catholics, in which there are Remarks that (...) that some have read it one
way, and others another; (...) I find nothing positive about* it in* the
Memoires I have seen*

Besides these Regulations, the Assembly did defend themselves by Apologies and
Manifesto's, while the King The Peaceable Reformed are disarmed.
pressed them with Sword in hand. All the Lords upon the Discontents of which
they reckoned, had made their Peace with the Constable, and served against
them. The Duke de Mayenne commanded a Body of Men in Guyenne. The Prince of
Conde commanded another in Berry, where he besieged such Places as did not open
their Gates to him, and disarmed the Reformed that made no Defense. He took by
a Form of Siege Sully and Sancerre; and the Reformed of Blois, of Tours, and
other Places, where they were not much to be feared, were obliged, like the
rest, to suffer themselves to be disarmed. Count de St. Paul being assisted by
the Marshal de Vitri, made himself Master of Gergeau; and thus the Reformed had
no Retreat left them about de Loire. The Duke de Longueville disarmed them also
in Normandy; and they received the like Treatment in all the Provinces the King
left behind him. This Proceeding so contrary to the last Declaration, which
promised such great Matters to those that should remain at Home, cast a Terror
and Repentance in the Hearts of all those unfortunate People, who regretted too
late their having reposed so much Confidence in a Court, accustomed by the Duke
de Luines to violate them, as soon as they ^o^^d a specious Pretense to do it.
The fair Words of those who committed those Violences could not remove their
Consternation, being then afraid that the Catholics would only wait for the
happy Success of some Battle or ^^^e to Massacre them. Insomuch that many of
them W^^^^ c^^s^ a great D^^^^tion.
(...) out of the Kingdom, or retired in such Places, where they were in hopes
of meeting Friends and Protectors. (...) was crowded with them. Even those who
could not resolve to quit their Estates, sent their Children or Wives into
Places of Safety, and remained at Home, almost persuaded that they should be
the Victims of some Bloody Orders, or of some Popular Sedition.

But nothing made so much Noise, as the Trick that was put upon Du Plessis, who
was the King's old, and Faithful Trick put upon Du Plessis to get Saumur out of
his hands.
Servant. The King sent him word that he designed to take up his Quarters at
Saumur, and Villarnoul his Sonin-Law was told positively, that he had sent to
Court to learn the Kings Intentions, and that no more should be done on this
Occasion, than had been done on others, when the King and Queen Mother had
lodged there. That Du Plessis should only draw out the Garrison of the Castle
for Form sake, and that after the King had tarried there as long as he thought
convenient, he would leave him the Government of the Place, as he had possessed
it till then. Lesdiguieres and the Constable engaged their Words to him for it
positively. Nevertheless, Du Plessis was turned out of the Castle, under
Pretense to Lodge the King there, and they did not so much as allow him one
Chamber for his Family. Soon after it, he was told that the King designed to
keep Saumur at least for three Months longer; and finally, he was offered a
Recompense for it. He never would accept any Composition; and he expressed a
great deal of Concern to find, that after Two and thirty Years Trial of his
Probity, he was suspected of not being able to preserve the same Probity to the
end of his Life. He insisted strongly upon, that there remained still near four
Years of the Time for which the last Brief confirmed the keeping of the Places
of Surety. He proposed Means to remain in the said Place, without giving the
King any Jealousies; and represented, that the said City was a Refuge to many
peaceable Families, who were come thither out of the Country and elsewhere, to
avoid the Spoils of War. That their Terrors would be revived, in case the
Appearance of Surety, they expected to find in the City, should be removed; and
the natural Inhabitants would forsake all themselves, if he received a
Treatment, of which they would think the Consequences would prove fatal to them.

All this produced nothing but Promises by Word of Mouth, and in Writing,
Signed by the Constable, and They amuse him with Promises even in Writing.
by the King himself, to return him the Place in a certain time; and to amuse
him in the mean time, they ^rt him the Title of Governor, and put Count de
Saulx, Grandson to Lesdiguieres, who still professed the Reformed Religion,
into Saumur, to keep the Place as long as the King said that he would detain
it; but in order that Du Plessis might only have the Shadow of the Government,
a Catholic Garrison was put in it. Soon after that, Du Plessis retired to his
House of La Foret upon Saivre, where he soon discovered that he was fooled.
This Disgrace drew a thousand Reproaches from Reproaches made to him by the
Assembly.
the Assembly upon him. They called him Coward, Hypocrite, and Deserter. They
had been jealous of him for some time; and they had ^ke to have seized upon
Villarnoul, the last time he came to Rochel with the Instructions of his
Father-in-Law. His Councils, which always thwarted those of the Assembly, and
that were ever contrived with Lesdiguieres, had created great Jealousies; so
that the seizing of Saumur, which was only a Trick of the Court, was locked
upon in the Assembly as a piece of Treason of Du Plessis, which they upbraided
him with in very disobliging Terms. Time justified him, even to those that were
most suspicious; and when they saw him dye within some years after it, without
having received from the Court the just Recompense, either of the Government,
or of the Expenses he had been at, nor yet of his Goods, and particularly of
his Books, which had been exposed to a kind of Plunder, nor of* the Amunitions
he had paid for with his own Money, nor of several other things, in which he
had been a great Sufferer, they found that the Court had imposed upon his Good
Nature and Sincerity.

The King published another new Declaration at A^ort on the 27th of May, which
declaring all the Cities The King's Declaration against the Cities of Rochel,
and of St. John d'Angeli.
and Persons Criminal, who sided with the Assembly, and particularly, the
Cities of Rochel and St. John d'Angeli, of which, the one harbor'd the
Assembly, and the other was preparing to sustain a Siege, forbad all the
Reformed to adhere to that Party, or to acknowledge the General Assembly, or
any other Assembly, Circles, Abridgments, Councils of Provinces, or
Congregations that held any Correspondence with the Assembly of Rochel, or that
should be held without positive Leave from the King. All their Adherents were
declared guilty of High Treason in it, and Condemned to the Punishments
expressed in the Ordinances. The Cities of Rochel and of St. John d'Angeli, and
those that followed their Examples, were deprived of all the Grants,
Privileges, Franchises, and other Favors they had obtained from the Kings.
But that which was most remarkable, Which obliges the Reformed to renounce the
Party of the Assembly in Writing.
was a Command made to all the Reformed Gentlemen and others, of what Quality
soever, even in the Cities and Communities, to repair to the register Office of
the Bayliwick or Seneshalship of their Precinct, there to declare that they
would serve the King against those that adhear'd to the Assembly: That they did
renounce all manner of Communication with them, and that they disowned whatever
might be resolved on there, or in any other Assemblies of the same Party; which
the King more over would oblige every one of them to give in Writing for their
Discharge. This was Executed with so much Severity, that the Duke de Sully, and
the Marquess de Ro^y his Son, were forced to serve as Examples to others, and
to sign the Declaration in the Terms of that Ordinance. Care was taken to send
a particular account to Court of the manner in which it had been rejected, or
received, in those Places where it was sent; and it was observable, that
wherever there were persons bribed by the Court, the Obedience was very exact.

Thus far the King had met no manner of Opposition; and all the Governors of
the Places of Surety that happened Self-interested Baseness of all the
Governors of the Towns of Surety.
^e in his Way, delivered up their Places to him with as much Ease as Du
Plessi^s, but their Prudence had ^^^e Interest in it. They all secured
Recompenses for their Cowar^i^e; and that Commerce was so much in vogue during
that War, that no body surrendered up a^own to the King, without obtaining
something for it. Even four of them, who had surrendered their Towns up
generously to the King at first, without bargaining for it, bethought
themselves, seeing the Advantages others got by their Obedience, and prevailed
with some Places to revolt, in order to have an Opportunity to make a Treaty by
which they might get something. Parabere surrendered Niort with Ostentation.
Loudrieres, who was only Deputy Governor in Font^nai le Com^e, delivered the
Place without acquainting the Governor with it, who was absent. After which, he
had the Confidence to lock himself up in St. John d'Angeli, in order to form
some Division there, under pretense of Serving during the Siege of that City,
which the King threatened; and Soubise was either so imprudent, or so ill
informed, as to receive him. Chatea^n^^^. Governor of Pons, suffered himself to
be gained by Lesdiguieres, though he had been one of the honest, and most
obstinate of the Assembly. The Truth is, that the Court seemed to Besiege that
Place, the better to color that Treaty. Those Bargains were in vogue even in
those Provinces where the King was not in Person, and Mon^^mm^ry, who Commanded
in P^nterson, a small Sea Port Town in Normandy, delivered it up to the King on
certain Conditions. A^genton, the only Place of Surety the Reformed had in
B^^ry, was delivered up to the The King d^mol^shes the Fortisications of the
Cities that are delivered up to him.
Prince of Conde, upon the Account of such a Bargain. As soon as the King was
Master of any Place, he caused the Fortifications to be demolished; which might
have seemed strange, had not the World had evident Proofs before of the
Di^ingenuity of those that Governed him. Those Towns which surrendered at the
first Summons could not be treated as Rebels; and whereas they belonged to the
Churches yet for above three years to come, according to the last Brief,
confirmed since by the Writing the King had given to Du Plessis, the King ought
to have been satisfied with their Submission, without depriving the Reformed,
who kept within the Bounds of Duty, and who surrendered them so handsomely of
those Refuges. But the Design of that War, was to revoke the Briefs; and
whatever Distinction the Court had promised to make between the Reformed that
were Peaceable, and the Factious, they were resolved equally to take all the
Places of Surety from them.

The Apology of the Assembly appeared about the Apology of the General Assembly.
time of that Commerce of Cities, under the Title of Declaration of the
Churches of France, and of the Sovereignty of Bearn, in their Assembly at
Rochel, of the unjust Prosecution they are prosecuted with by the Enemies of
the State, and of their Religion, and of their lawful and necessary Defense.
All the Editions of that Apology are not alike; some have Articles that are not
in the others: Some of them have not, what we read in others; that the Edict of
Nantes was made at a time when the Reformed might have shared the Kingdom with
the Catholics, if they had pleased; which they had renounced, by reason that
they only desired the Liberty of their Consciences; and that having subscribed
the Peace on those Conditions, they were in the right to make War, when that
Condition was violated, to preserve by Arms, what they had lost by a Cowardly
Peace. But at the Bottom, the beginning of that* and perhaps this air of
Loftiness would have been excused, ^ad the Assembly had strength enough to have
made it good. After the accustomed Protestations in Manifesto's, and an
Invi^itation of French and Foreigners to hear the Complaints which they had to
make, by the way they refuted the Reproach of Rebellion, and fell foul again
upon the Project of ruining ^e Reformed ever since the sitting of the States in
1615. where ^ere was a Proposal made for petitioning the King to fulfill his
Coronation Oath. More especially they lay hard upon the Je^its, and principally
upon the King's Confessor, whom they ^acqu'd with a long Invective. They ripped
up his Behavior Invective against the Jesuit Arnoux.
(...) Bearn, his Attempts against the Parliament of Paris, whose Decrees he had
caused to be cancelled; and against the University, whose Censures he had
caused to be disannulled: his Credit greater then that of the Bishops, who in
three days had pre^il'd to get the Decree of Compensation past, which the whole
Clergy had solicited fifteen years in vain; the Tricks which he ^'d to abuse
the King's tender Conscience, and the Authority which he assumed to himself, to
be of his Council of Conscience. ^om thence they past to the Maxims of his
Society, touching ^ith and Promises engaged to Heretics; to the Testimonies of
^e Clergy's passionate Violence; to the unjust Acts of the Par^ments; to the
Admonitions whispered in the ears of the Re^rmed at Court, that they must
either quit the King's Service or their Religion. Nor did they forget the
Affairs of the Counsel^rs in Parliament; the Corruption of the Governors of the
Pla^s of Security; the seditious Sermons of the Preachers; the ^undring of
Churches; the digging up the Dead out of their ^raves; the cruel usage of those
that lay Sick and upon their ^eath-beds in Hospitals, where they were denied
requisite Noushment and Remedies; and the forcing of Children from their
^others Arms. They complained further, That when the Reformed had recourse to
the Magistrates for Justice, they were ^uted and laughed at; and that when they
went to lay their ^omplaints at the King's feet, they were treated as Rebels.

After this, they proceeded to the Affairs of the Assembly of ^don; and having
laid open the Original and Benefit of those Assemblies, they justified this by
the manifold Oppressions, of which they had so much reason to complain. They
set down at large the series of all their Differences and Contests with the
King, till their Breaking up; and till the Promises made 'em b^ the Prince of
Conde and the Duke of Lunes; and made it o^ how all those Promises had been
violated. They gave an Account of the King's march into Bearn, and of all the
Violence^ which had been there committed. And here they hinted a^ along at the
Sophism which the Jesuit Arnoux had made (...) of, to justify the Breach of a
Promise made to Sales, when he was put out of Navarreins, that there should be
no Innovations introduced. This Promise, said he, either relates to the
Conscience, or to the State. It concerns not the Conscience continued he,
because it is contrary to the Precept of the Church if then it be a
State-Promise, it ought to be referred to the Secret Council, whose Opinion it
is, that it ought not to be kep^ This Sophism would not suffer the King, who
was rather a goo^ Prince then a Logician, to follow his own Inclination, which
was to be as good as his word.

Then they proceeded to make a display of the Artifices which the Court made
use of to corrupt Lesdiguieres; the War of Pr^vas; Mommoranci's Exploits; the
way which they took to g^ Chatillon, and ruin both la Force and his Children.
They (...) the common Reports, that gave out nothing but the destructi^^ of the
Protestants, and went so far as to limit the time with three months. To these
things they added the new Exploits (...) the Duke of Espernon in Bearn, and of
the King himself at S^^mur. They took notice of the Cunning of the Court, who
ha^ invited the Duke of Rohan, and the Duke of Subise, his Brothe^ to meet the
King, to the end that Auriac, who betrayed 'em might more easily surprise St.
John d' Angeli; which he attempted in vain, because they kept out of the snare.
The^ add the small Satisfaction which the Court had given to the particular and
general Commissioners; and they observed tha^ when Lesdiguieres had written to
the Assembly to oblige 'em (...) break up, he would never promise 'em any thing
in the King'^ Name, but only upon his own score; by which it was apparent, that
he was willing to reserve an Excuse to himself, that he could not possibly
alter the King's mind. But in regard it was charged upon the Assemblies General
as a Crime, that they ^fus'd to break up, before they had received an Answer to
their ^pe^s which the States General refused to give 'em, they set Why the
Assemblies refused to break up, before their Papers were answered.
^rth the Inequality of these two sorts of Assemblies: for that ^e States
General met together to make Laws and Regulations (...) State, the Authority of
which ought solely to flow from the ^ing. But the Assemblies of the Reformed
meeting only to ^mand Reparation for Wrongs and Oppressions, which fixed ^m
within the Rules of ordinary Justice, whereby the Parties ^ere not obliged to
withdraw themselves, till their Complaints ^ere adjudg'd; they concluded with a
Protestation, That they ^d no Design against Regal Authority; they glori'd in
the ^ervices that were done the two last Henry's, by the Reformed against the
Catholics; they offered all Obedience and Service to ^^wis XIII, and implored
his Royal Succor, and the Compassion (...) Foreign Princes, but principally
God's Assistance against ^eir Oppressors. This Apology was signed by the
Moderators and Secretaries.

There was an Answer made to it in the King's Name, but A violent Answer to ^^
in the King's Name.
^here was nothing in it to show that it was owned by the King ^Twas said that
the Oath sworn to exterminate Heretics, of which they made such loud
Complaints, was no new thing; ^ut that it had never been put in execution; that
they never ^urmur'd against Henry IV. who had taken it; and that Lewis ^^II.
had taken care to free himself from such a cruel Obliga^ion by a Declaration
set forth on purpose. They eluded that Reproach thrown upon the Jesuits, for
meddling more then be^ame 'em with the Government, by saying, That the Ministers
^ad as much Authority over the Reformed; as if there were any Comparison
between the one and the other; That it was ^ereditary to their Sect, to seek
the Oppression of Kings in their Cradles; which they proved by King James's
hatred of the Pu^itans of Scotland. To destroy the Advantage which the Reformed
pretended to have over the Catholics, in being more obedient to their
Sovereigns, they alleged, Assemblies held in opposition to their Approbation;
the Oath, the Regulations and Seal of the Assembly of Rochel. 'Twas asserted,
That the Succor which the Reformed had given to Kings, proceeded from Interest,
because they procured their own Security by it; besides that they had shared it
with the Catholic Nobility: And here 'twas thought necessary to add, that
Leitoure was neither a City of Security, nor Marriage; that it belonged by
Inheritance to Fontrailles; and 'twas deemed no more then what was reasonable;
that the Reformed should take it for full satisfaction, that it was given to
Blainville. Upon the Refusal to receive the two Counselors in the Parliament of
Paris, it was replied, That Parlaments were more ancient then the Reformed;
that there was no Law which justified the admitting of Heretics into it, as if
the Edicts of Nantes and Loudun had not the force of Laws. And lastly, That the
Reformed had enough to content 'em in the enjoyment of the Chambers, half one
half the other, without thrusting themselves into Parlaments. 'Twas alleged,
That they had no cause to complain of the nonperformance of some Promises by
the King, in regard there was no Law which obliged him to pay 'em: as if so
many Brevets, one after another, more especially, that which granted a certain
Sum to the Reformed in compensation of Tithes for their Ministers Salaries,
ought not to have bin as effectual as any express Law. Then followed a storm of
railing Expressions, which made the Reformed responsible for all the Confusions
and Disturbances which had happened in the Kingdom for sixty years together: as
if they had bin the Contrivers and Authors of the League under the Two last
Reigns; or of those Troubles, of which the prodigious Fortune of Marshal d'
Ancre had bin the occasion. The Violences committed at Pau, during the
Procession of the Eucharist, were palliated, by saying, That the People were
either to get out of the way, or fall upon their knees: 'twas alleged, that
such a thing might be done by the favor of an ambiguous Expression to delude
the Catholic's Zeal, and that it was Prudence to do it sometimes. The Reformed
were accused of drawing upon themselves the Sedition at Tours, by reason of a
Box of the ear which one of 'em gave a Child; and therefore adjudg'd it a
sufficient Reparation for their Losses, that four or five of the Canaille were
hanged for it. As to the forcing away of Children, of which the Reformed made
great Complaints, the Answerers endeavored to make it lawful, by saying, That
^e Children became Catholics by Choice at the Age of Fifteen ^ears; and that
there was a very ancient Law which allowed ^m to be Masters of their Choice at
that Age. So that the ex^ress Provisions of the Edict of Nantes were looked upon
as no^ing by the Authors of that Answer.

Therefore two particular Accidents deserve to be recounted ^ere, to show what
Sincerity was observed at that time in the Conversion of Children.

A certain Inhabitant of Paris growing jealous of his Wife, Forcing away of
Children.
(...) whom he had several Children, was so far transported by that ^orbitant
Frenzy, that he killed the poor Woman; for which ^e was punished according to
his deserts. But his Relations ha^ing demanded the Children, to the end they
might be bred up (...) the Religion which their unfortunate Father professed,
there ^as a Decree made in Parliament, That the Right of their Edu^ation was
devolved to the King, by reason of the Father's Crime, so that the Children
were brought up in the Catholic ^aith. Another Man, originally a Native of
Normandy, had ^hree Children; He put one to the College of Jesuits; and ^me
time after he returned to Paris with another of his Sons, ^ith a design to put
him also to the same place; but under^anding from the first, that he was
refused the Liberty of his Conscience, the Father carried 'em both away, with
an intent ^o place 'em in the College of Sedan: but a Priest, his Kins^an,
forced 'em away from him upon the Road, and sent 'em ^o the Jesuit's House at
Pont a Mousson. The Father prosecu^d him for a Rape before the Bailiffs of
Rheims, who, after a ^edious Suit, condemned him at length to the Galleys for
Contu^nacy. But the Priest appealing from the Sentence, removed ^he Cause into
the Grand Chamber. Servin, Advocate General, ^leaded long and hard for his
Client, and put the stress of the ^i^pute upon this Issue, Whether or no a
Father who had re^ounc'd his Right by the Edict, by declaring his Intentions to
^ut Children under the Tuition of Catholic Regents, which he ^ould not choose
but know to be such, could reassume when he ^leas'd his Right to their
Education, and take away the Children from their Catholic Tutors? He concluded,
that the Father's decla^ing his Resolutions to entrust such Regents with the
Education of his Children, was a sufficient Renunciation of his Right, and that
he could not recover it back. For form's sake also the Children were brought
into Court in their Father's presence, the one above Eleven years old, and the
eldest about Thirteen yearst of Age: at what time, being prepared before hand
what to say, they desired to be bred up in the Catholic Religion. Thereupon a
Decree was made conformable to Servin's Conclusions: The Priest was discharged
from his Condemnation; the Children were sent to the College of Na^^, under
the Tuition of the Principal, and the Father was condemned to pay the usual
Quarterly Pension, and to supply the rest of their Maintenance; and besides
that, he was forbid to take away his Children from the said College, under the
Penalty of Thirty thousand Livres. Never was Edict so Notoriously violated as
was that of Nantes by this Decree, in those Articles which forbid the
inveigling of Children to change their Religion, and which permitted the
Parents to send 'em to Catholic Colleges, upon assurance that they would not
molest their Consciences. By this the World may judge, whether the Assembly had
just cause to complain or no; and whether the Replies of their Enemies were of
any convincing force against 'em. This Decree was made the 22d of December.

Affairs of greater importance, this year, will not permit me to insist upon
particular Acts of Injustice done the Reformed in several places, either in
reference to Legacies, or charitable Gifts to the Poor, which were sure to be
adjudg'd to the Catholics, as soon as they demanded 'em; or in respect of their
Churchyards and Burying-Places, which were the occasion of a thousand Brabbles
every day; or in relation to things that might be reckoned in the number of
Favors. But that I may not make a general Omission, I shall only recite two
Examples, which deserve to be remembered The first is, That in February, the
Parliament of Paris, by a Decree, declared a Soldier of the Reformed Religion
incapable of the benefit of a Monk's place, for which he had Letters of
Assignation, and condemned him to pay back the money which he had received.
Those Places were very small Pensions which some Monasteries were obliged to
pay to maimed Soldiers, who were no longer able to work or do duty for their
living They that enjoyed these Pensions, were also ^oand to wear a Cross upon
their Cloaks; and in regard the Monks were desirous to be exempted from
admitting the Reformed, because they scrupled to wear a Cross, the National
^^nods had given leave to such as were maimed and infirm, to dispense with that
Scruple; permitting 'em to wear a Cross, as the Symbol of their present
condition: so that before that De^ree, the Reformed: had enjoyed the Benefit of
those Pensions, as well as others. But in regard this proved a fatal Year to
'em, ^ew Pretenses were found out to exclude 'em from it.

The second Example is, That upon a Process removed into Catholics dispensed
with granting their Churchyards at their owa Charges.
Parliament, by reason of a Corpse interred by the Reformed in a ^art of a
Catholic Churchyard, of which they had bin a ^ong time in possession, the
Catholics bethought themselves of ^ brangling shift, which exempted 'em from
granting other Churchyards to the Reformed; and gave 'em leave to reassume
those parts of the old ones which the Commissioners had either adjudg'd or left
'em. I have otherwhere observed the Alterations which the Parliament of Paris
and the Clergy had caused ^o be made in diverse Articles, both general and
particular, of the Edict of Nantes, and principally in the 45th Article of
Particulars, that mentions the Delivery of Churchyards. There was so much
Honesty and Justice in that Article, as it had bin decreed at Nantes, that tho
it had been absolutely altered, nevertheless it had bin put in execution, as if
there had been no Alteration in it from the Original. The Commissioners were
agreed upon this Point, and it is not above twenty Years siuce the Reformed
enjoyed certain places at one end or other of a Catholic Churchyard, which had
been assigned 'em by virtue of their Decrees, with the Advice and Consent also
of the Catholic Clergy of those places, and of the Catholic Communities,
because they chose to grant 'em a Portion of the old Churchyard rather, then
buy 'em a new one. Honesty had also prevailed so far in this Particular, that
this Article was reprinted according to the Draught as it was at first agreed
upon, and so it is to be sound in all the Editions. But this Year the Reformed
were deprived this petty Convenience: James Talon, first Advocate General,
pretended that those Editions were falsifi'd; but accuses no body for being the
Author of that Falsification, and caused the Edict and the particular Articles,
as they were registered by the Parliament Register, to be brought to the
Hearing. But certain it is, that the Alteration of that Article did not exempt
the Catholics from allowing the Reformed other Churchyards in recompense:
However Talon, a Man of great Wit and Subtilty, found a way to extract out of
that Article by the force of Consequences, Interpretations and Meanings, which
the Article never mentioned expressly, and gave out a Decree, prohibiting the
Reformed to bury their Dead in the Churchyards belonging to the Catholics, and
which ordered 'em to provide other Burying-places at their own Charges. About a
Year after, he caused another Decree to be set forth, which commanded a new
Edition of the Edict, according to the Original remaining in the Registers.
Wherein there appeared something to comfort the Reformed for the damage which
T^lo^ had done 'em by his Cavilling: For they who in our days sought after new
Tricks and Shifts to elude the Edict, and chiefly the particular Articles, had
the Confidence both to report and write, that those Articles were never
registered in any Parliament. It must follow then that they were torn out of the
Register, since they were to be found in that which the Advocate General caused
to be carried to the Audience, and according to which the next Years Edition
was printed. I shall add, for the more clearly making out the Falsehood of that
Pretense, that they had bin verified in the Parliament of Rouen, in the Reign of
Henry IV. upon the 5th of August 1609. and inserted into the Register the next
Year, upon the 27th of the same Month, in pursuance of Letters Patents dated
July 15.

I do not here pretend to give an Account of all the Writings Tilenus writes
against the Assembly of Rochel.
that appeared for and against the Reformed upon the subject of the Wars; but I
cannot omit a Pamphlet which Tilenus wrote under the Title of, An Advertisement
to the Assembly of Rochel. Nor could the Jesuits themselves write in a more
venomous and embitter'd style. He preached Patience as if there could never be
any end of it. He maintained that Kings were never bound either to their own
Ordinances, nor to the Decrees of their Predecessors; which he supported by
such weak Reasons, as might ^e easily confuted by distinguishing between the
nature of those ^aws. He asserted, That when Kings brake their Words, it
^ehov'd the People to have so much submission as to believe, that ^^ they had
good Reasons to promise, so they had as good Reasons to retract their Promises.
He exclaimed against the Toleration allowed at Charenton for the Luxury of
Marriages; against the Flight of Moulin; against the Assembly, of which ^^e
greatest part disowned their own Proceedings; and who by their own ill
behavior had exposed above Three hundred of the Reformed to great dangers in
the Provinces on this side ^^e L^^^^. After this, he discovers a little too
openly the cause ^^ his ill humor, by calling in question the Synod of Alets,
because they had approved the Decisions of that of Dordr^^ht, notwithstanding
the Opinion of some Ministers who by no means approved it; and he accused of
too much severity the ill usage ^^ the Arminians in Holland; and yet, if he
might be believed, then the Reformed were delivered up to the Fury of their
im^^acable Enemies, by means of unjust Acts, and Breaches of lord, that cried
loud to Heaven, they did amiss to complain. ^uch is many times the Moderation
of those that preach up To^^ration: they would engross it all to themselves:
but if others ^t with never so little vehemence more then ordinary, nay, if
(...) do but sigh and bemoan themselves, their very Groans and ^^ghs are not to
be endured.

In the mean time, the Dukes of Rohan and Soubise, who had Siege and reducing
of St John d'Ang^^i.
^ long time refused to yield to the Importunities of the Assembly, having bin
disgusted by the Court, where the Prince of Co^de (...) the Constable were the
Duke of Rohan's Enemies, resigned themselves wholly to the Orders of the
Assembly; and after some Submissions on their part, and some Offers from the
^ourt which signified nothing, they resolved to hold out St. ^ohn a' Angeli to
the last. The Duke of Rohan left his Brother ^^ the place, and after he had
furnished it with Men and Ammunition, went into Gu^en to raise more Forces. On
the other side the King, after he had summoned Subise by a Herald, besieged the
City; and Subise, by the foul Practices of Loudrieres, who discouraged both the
Soldiers and Inhabitants by his discourses and his counsels, being constrained
to surrender the place, marched out sooner then he would have done, had he not
been afraid of being forsaken. All the security which either the City or the
Garrison had, was a wild and general Capitulation; by which the King promised
only in writing to the Inhabitants their Lives, their Estates, and the Liberty
of their Consciences and Persons; reserving to himself the disposal of every
thing else as he should think convenient: declaring at the same time that he
did not pretend to make any Treaty, but only to grant a Favor. However the
Capitulation, as slight as it was, had the hard fate to be but very ill
observed. The Soldiers plundered the Town, and yet constrained the Mayor, the
Sheriffs, and the principal Inhabitants, to give 'em a Certificate, and forced
another from the Minister, that they had behaved themselves civilly. On the
other side the King retiring to Cognac, set forth a Declaration, which was
verified at Bourdeaux; wherein to put the greater value upon his Clemency,
which had spared their Lives and Estates, and given Liberty of Conscience to
the Reformed of St. John d'Angeli, he ordered the Fortifications and
Privileges of the City abolished.
Walls of the City to be razed, and the Moats to be filled up: He took away
their Charters and their Franchises, and made the Town liable to Taxes for the
future: He cancelled their Government by Mayor and Sheriffs, and and annexed
the common Stock of the Town to the Royal Demesnes; leaving 'em, out of his
special Grace and Favor, their Election and ordinary Jurisdiction. Upon which
Declaration a certain Historian, very much devoted to the Roman Church,
observes, That it would have been taken for a just punishment of that City, had
they not since that, used many very Innocent and Catholic Cities after the same
rate.

The End of the Seventh Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of Nantes. THE SECOND PART. THE EIGHTH BOOK.
A Compendium of the Eighth Book.
MArshal de Bouillon's Letter. The King marches into Guyenne; the Siege and
reducing of Clairac. The King's word ill observed. The Pope's Breve to the
King. The Reformed every where unfortunate. The Siege of Montauban. La Force
defends the Place. The King raises his Siege. Chamiere's Death. The Duke of
Mayenne dies. The blame falls upon the Constable. The Jesuit Arnoux's disgrace.
The Duke of Luines dies. Assembly of the Clergy. A violent Harangue of the
Bishop of Rennes. The History of Dominic de Jesus Maria. Sedition at Paris. The
Church at Charenton burnt. The Reformed forsake their Houses. They are accused
of setting Fire to the Bridges of Paris, and the Prison at Lion. The Circle of
Lower Languedoc displaces Chatillon. Great Confusion in that Circle. The
Condition of the Court. The King returns to Paris. A remarkable Writing of
Jeannin, advising Peace. The Opinion of those who were more inclined to War.
The Reformed take new Courage. The King departs from Paris. His Success in
Poitou; in Guyenne, where he treats with la Force. The sack of Negrepelisse,
and St. Antonin. Lesdiguieres interposes for Peace. Factions at Mompellier.
Sedition against the Catholics. Bitter Harangue of the Bishop to the King.
Remarks upon the Style of that Harangue. The Church of Foix laid waste.
Attestation given to the Monk Villate. The King forbids the Reformer to forsake
their Houses. Count Mansfeild treats with the Reformed. Proposals of the
Marshal de Bouillon to the Duke of Rohan upon that occasion. The Court gains
Mansfeild. The King makes use of Foreign Catholics in France. The Negotiations
for Peace renewed. A Writing set forth upon that occasion. Siege of Mompellier.
Capitulation made by Lunell, ill observed. Small Cities ill defended. Success
of the War in several Places. Chatillon made a Marshal of France. Seditions at
Orleans, Fronsac and Lion. The Original of the word Parpailler. Other
Originals. Of the word Hust. Violence of the Sedition. The Reformed are
disarmed. War against Rochel. Soubise sollicits for Succor from England. Treaty
of Peace reassumed near Mompellier. Conclusion of the Treaty with an Edict.
Rigor of the Parlaments. Advantages of that Peace. Qualifications of the Edict
of Peace. All the Cities accept the Peace, which is ill observed by the Court.
Treaty at Mompellier. The King returns to Paris. De Puisieux in Favor. The
Bishop of Luson made a Cardinal. Character of that Prelat. After what manner he
received the news of his Promotion. Excessive Flatteries. Foul Play offered the
Rochelois. Enterprises of Valence at Mompellier; where he takes the Duke of
Rohan Prisoner, and makes a division of the Consulship. General Papers.
Extravagant Answers. Exercises forbid. The Reformed excluded from Dignities in
the University of Poitiers. The singing of Psalms in the Streets and in Shops
forbid. A common Soldier deprived the Benefit of an Oblate. Attempts upon
paternal Right. A Declaration establishing a Commissioner in Colloquies and
Synods. A National Synod. Galand the first Commissioner ever present to a
National Synod. He is admitted out of pure Obedience. Deputies sent to the
King, who sends back the Deputies laden with his Orders. The Court inclined to
favor the Arminians. A Writing published by la Militiere. Answer of Tilenus.
Authority attributed to the Kings of France. Imposture set up against the Synod
of Dordrecht. Obedience of the Synod of Charenton A Tignations ill paid.
Propositions made to the Synod by Galand on the King's behalf. A new Deputation
to the King, and the effect of it. Oath of Union. A Citadel built at
Mompellier. Mariald opposes it in the name of the Reformed of the City.
Presages of a new War. The death of du Plessis. The death of Marshal de
Bouillon.

WHile the King lay before St. John d'Angeli, he received the Submissions of
the Duke of Tremouille, who had surrendered Marshal de Bouillon's Letter.
Taillebourg without much entreaty. On the other side, Marshal de Bouillon at
the same time sent him a Letter full of smart Remonstrances: of which the
principal Heads were, The retiring of the Reformed, which he attributed to the
notorious violation of the Declaration of the 24th of April. He observed how
the Reformed, notwithstanding their peaceable Demeanor, were disarmed. How
there had been taken from 'em four Towns upon the Loire, which had never had
any Correspondence with the Rebels: How the boldness of the Preachers was left
unpunished, who preached nothing but Sedition, and equaled to Martyrdom the
death of those who were slain in the War against the Heretics: How severely the
Judges put in execution the Declaration of the 27th of May; and forced not only
Men and Women, but even Children too, not Fifteen years of Age, to take the
Oath to disown the Assembly of Rochel: How they that were desirous to retire,
were stopped upon the Highway; which was also done to those who went no farther
then Sedan, tho that City were under the King's Protection. All which, said he,
persuaded those affrighted People, that the King had some design upon their
Religion, under pretense of humbling Rebels. To this he added some things that
concerned himself, by reason of the little care that had been taken to observe
the Treaty of Protection made with him for his Principality of Sedan.

In the mean time the King, continuing his Conquests, marched into Guyenne with
his Army, where he met with the same facility, The King marches into Guyenne.
in reducing all the Places which the Reformed held in that Province, which he
had found in Poitou and Saintonge. The Treaties which the Governors made with
him, regulated the march of his Army, and he went from City to City, presenting
himself before the Gates of such Towns into which he was sure of being
received. Boesse Pardaillan refusing to acknowledge la Force for General, out
of a jealous Humor quitted the Party, and surrendered about twenty Towns to the
King. It Is true, that the greatest part of 'em being betrayed, betook
themselves again to their Arms, so soon as they thought they might safely do
it. Panissaut, animated with the same jealousy, constrained la Force to quit
several Places where he was inferior in number. Lusignan surrendered Puimirol
with a frankness void of Self-Interest. But when he saw himself laughed at for
going about to approve himself an honest man, at a time and in an Affair that
no body regarded Honesty, he betook himself to his Arms again; and then they
were forced to give him Ten thousand Crowns to pay his Debts. The City of
Tonneins also, desirous to signalize her Loyalty, found her self exposed to the
same Raillery. For several Lords of the Army being constrained by bad weather
to shelter themselves in the Town, together with their Baggage, were well
received and entertained by the Burgesses, and some small Parties wandering from
the Body of the Army being in no small danger, had the Town had any intention
to have fallen upon 'em, were treated as in a friendly Country. But for all
this, when they complained of some damages done 'em by the King's Soldiers, and
urged their abovementioned Kindnesses as proofs of their Loyalty, Answer was
returned 'em in an insulting manner, That they were not to produce as marks of
their Fidelity, what they had done for want of Courage. This was the way to
enforce men to be Rebels, thus to brand their Obedience with the ignominious
Name of Cowardice. And indeed such usage as this, ought to be a Motive to all
Men of Courage, rather bravely to die in the generous Defense of themselves,
then stoop to an ignoble and fawning Submission, that renders 'em the Scorn of
their Enemies.

The Duke of Mayenne, who prosecuted the War in that Province, had performed
some petty Exploits, and taken in some ^mall Villages, which had put themselves
in a posture of defense. ^ut the King met with no resistance till he came
before Clairac, Siege and taking of Clairac.
which adventured to sustain a Siege. But 'twas the ill luck of his City, that
there were several People who staid within it, to ^o other purpose then to
discourage others; so that the City did not hold out so long as it might have
done, had not the Garrison and others bin treacherous among themselves. The Town
surrendered at discretion; which done, the King granted the inhabitants their
Lives, and the exercise of their Religion. He excepted six persons only out of
Pardon, and hanged up three (...) four, among which was the Minister. The King
was accustomed to the punishment of such as wore that Character; and thus it
was, that the Jesuits, under his Name and Authority, ^ejoic'd at the Sacrifices
of their Enemies which they offered to their malice. They had persuaded the
King while he lay at ^oitiers, to condemn to death Clemenceau and Mallerai, the
one (...) Minister, the other an Advocate residing in the Town. But because
they had escaped their Clutches, the Minister being fled ^o Rochelle, and the
Advocate to Nerac, they resolved not to lose ^ll their sport, and therefore had
'em executed in Effigy, and their persons defamed with ridiculous Satyrs. This
Rigor was observed in all Places that made any Resistance. The bloody Council
of Clergymen thought it the most proper course they ^ould take; in regard that
punishment always betokening a Crime in those upon whom it was inflicted, those
Rigours fomented in the King's mind that prepossessed Opinion wherein ^e had
bin bred, that the Reformed were Rebels.

The Clemency afforded to Clairac, had but little effect; for that the Soldiers
entered the Town, and plundered as much as they could carry away. Nor is it
true that they were hindered by Bassompiere, as was reported by a certain
ignorant and malicious Scribler; for that he was at Paris all the while that
Clairac was besieged, and did not return till the Siege of Montauban. Besides,
they were the cause that a good part of the Garrison was destroyed in passing
the River. True it is indeed, that the Garrison had a general Pass for their
safeguard upon their marching out, and that the common Soldiers were permitted
to wear their Swords. But under pretense of saving 'em from the Fury of the
Soldiers of the Royal Army, they were ordered to cross the water. But that was
no more then perfectly in order to lead 'em to the slaughter; for the King's
Soldiers fell upon 'em, and stripped a great many. Which unexpected Violence
(...) terrified the rest, that there not being above two or three Boa^ provided
for their passage, while they crowded too numerously into 'em, the Vessels
sank, and left 'em to the mercy of the water. Others thinking to escape by
swimming, to avoid one sort of death, met with another. There was also a Rope
that crossed the River for the use of the Ferry boat. But the King's Soldier^
seeing that several of those poor Creatures hung by the Cord^ most barbarously
cut it; so that they perished with the rest of their Companions. Had there not
bin extremity of foul play among the Commanders, it might have bin an easy
thing to have prevented this Disorder, in regard there were then upon the place
several Gentlemen of the Constable's Household, and some other Officers, who
took no care to restrain the Cruelty of the Soldiers. But this Siege as well as
that of St John d' Angeli, had cost the Lives of several of the Nobility; so
that they resolved to sacrifice these poor Wretches to their revenge. The Fault
o^ those that permitted these Barbarities, was laid upon the common Soldiers:
however, for fear of the same usage at another time, two or three of those who
had cut the Cord, were hanged for a show of satisfaction.

While the King pressed hard upon Clairac, he received a A Brief from the Pope
to the King.
Brief from the Pope, wherein he congratulated his Victories; exhorted him not
to lay down his Arms till he had subdued Rochelle, and deprived the Heretics of
every thing that served 'em for their security. He extolled his Enterprise to
the Skies, and gave him great hopes of an issue correspondent to such
prosperous Beginnings, together with strong assurances of the protection of the
Saints. Among the rest of his Eulogies, there was one very particular, That he
had followed the Example of his Ancestors, who had paid as much Honor to the
Instigations of the Popes, as to the Commands of God. The more sincere sort of
Catholics acknowledged this Brief to be a real Truth, tho others who were
ashamed of it, would fain had it passed for supposi^ious. 'Twas dated the Tenth
of July.

During the continuance of this Siege, and the following The Reformed
unfortunate every where.
^onths, the Duke of Mayenne continued the War in the Quarters assigned to his
Conduct, and made himself Master of Mas (...) Verdun, Mauvesin, and the Isle of
Jourdain, giving satisfaction ^o the Governors: But to the end that all men
might have their ^hare in the miseries of the War, the Sums which were promised
^he Governors were paid 'em by the Inhabitants of the parts adjoining. The Duke
of Espernon employed his time in burning ^he Houses and Mills about Rochel; and
the Duke of Montmo^n^y performed some petty Exploits in Languedoc, which tended
all to annoy the City of Nimes. The Duke of Rohan, who expected that Montauban
would be attacqu'd after the rest, kept himself in the parts adjoining to
Castres and Albi, to provide ^r their security, and held himself up with much
more Courage then good Fortune. The Assembly of Rochel sought for succor from
all parts, but nothing succeeded to their wishes; ^ll Foreigners refused 'em
the assistance which they implored. The Intrigues of Vatteville Mont-chrestien,
whom they had sent ^to Normandy with several Commissions to raise men, proved
^ortive by his death. Mombrun, who endeavored to raise some ^orces in the
Dauphinate, was not able to do any thing considerable, by reason of
Lesdiguieres's return, who prevented him: and the Count de Suse, who had a
design upon Grenoble, being known by a Catholic Peasant that served him for a
Guide, was ^d into a Precipice with his Followers, from which he could ^ot save
so much as one single person; and he himself had ^erish'd through the Rigor of the
Parliament, had not the King commanded 'em to surcease their prosecution: So
that till then all things gave way to the King's good Fortune; insomuch that ^e
made himself Master of about Fifty Towns, of which several were able to have
given him as much trouble as St. John (...) Angeli; yet all submitted, before
so much as one great Gun ^as fired upon 'em; nor do I reck'n in those which
either he or any of his Generals had bin forced to besiege.

But Montauban put a stop to the Career of all this Prosperi^y. The City and
Parliament of Toulouse had engaged the King to sit down before that Place, at a
time when the Season was already far spent, and that his men were quite tired
out with labor, and the hardships which they had undergone. But Montauban was
such an annoyance to Toulouse, by reason of the Excursions which the
Inhabitants made, even to the Gates of that great City, that the Tholousains
promised to supply the King with every thing that was necessary for the Siege,
provided he would but undertake it. And the good Success which had all along
till then attended him, made him easily believe that Montauban would be as
little able to withstand the Torrent of his Prosperity as the rest. Thereupon
the Duke of Mayenne, and Marshal de Themines had Orders to make the Approaches.
The former of these two had made himself Master of several Towns in the
Neighborhood, but he could not surprise St. Antonin notwithstanding that he had
gained the Governor, whose name was Penaveire. That faithless person had sold
him the Town for Two thousand Crowns, for the payment of which the Duke had
subscribed a Writing. But the Consuls coming to desire some Order from him
which concerned 'em, he gave 'em the Writing by mistake. Upon sight of which,
the Consuls testifying their Astonishment by their Looks, the Governor
perceived his Error, but put it off with a good face, and a ready presence of
mind. However he could not remove the Jealousies which th^^ Accident had
raised; so that after that, he could not deceive the Consuls, who trusted him
no longer, but stood upon their own Guard.

In the mean time the Siege of Montauban proved unsuccessful. La Force defends
the Place.
La Force and the Count d'Orval, Son of the Duke of Sulli, were got into it,
and held it out like men of Courage* And as for the Correspondences which the
King held in the place, they all failed; because that they who were the chief
Conspirators were slain, and the rest were discovered. The Duke of Rohan also
relieved it with a considerable Reinforcement, notwithstanding all the
Precautions of the King's Generals, or the Duke of Angoulesm, who kept the
Field with a flying Camp* After that, several Proposals were made for a Peace;
but the King refusing to grant any Accommodation but only to the Duke of Rohan,
and he denying to accept any other then a general Peace, those Projects came to
nothing; nor could they and any Expedient to color the raising the Siege.
However the King was forced to draw off, after he had wasted near three The
King raises the Siege.
months time before that place. Chamier, a Minister and Professor in Theology,
who was slain with a Cannon-shot, was one of the most considerable among those
whom the Besieged lost. But the King mist a great number of brave Gentlemen,
and among the rest the Duke of Mayenne, who was killed in the Attacques of
Ville-Bourbon. He was a Prince of a surpassing Prowess, but who made too great
an ostentation of it, and took delight to expose both himself and others
without any shelter to the Enemies shot, out of a Vanity little becoming a
great Soul. However it brought him to his end at length, as he had in the cause
that many others by his Example had sacrificed their Lives to the same
vainglorious Emulation. They of Montauban had notice that the Army would
suddenly dislodge, by a Soldier of the Religion, who the evening before the
Siege was raised, fell a playing upon the Flu^e the Tune of the Sixty eighth
Psalm: which the Besieged took for a Signal of their de^^verance; nor were they
deceived.

They who had bin the occasion that the King received this ^isgrace, threw the
blame upon the Reformed who served in his Army. But the Constable, who had
collected from several Circumstances, that his power with the King was
declining, began to reflect upon the Advice which had bin several times given
him, to have a care of Civil Wars, of which the least ill Success would make
him bear both the reproach and the loss. He perceived it more especially at
Toulouse, where many ill offices were done him. It Is true, that he was still in
so much credit as to procure the Banishment of the Jesuit Arnoux from the
Court, who, tho he were beholding to him for his Preferment, ceased not however
to plot and contrive his Ruin. The King also took another Confessor of his
recommendation. Nevertheless the Constable began to consider, that 'twas high
time to think of Peace, and all that he looked after was, which way to recover
the Reputation which the King's Military Glory had lost before Montauban, to
the end he might put the more honorable Conclusion to the War. But he died
before the end of the year during the Siege of Monhurt. He also underwent the
same destiny with all the rest of the Favorites. For he was neither piti'd by
any body, nor lamented by his Master. All his Grandeur died with him, and he
hardly left behind him sufficient where with to defray the Expenses of his
Funeral.

During the Siege of Montauban, the King gave Audience to the Deputies of the
Assembly of the Clergy, which being met* and having began their Session at
Paris, had bin removed to Poitiers, and from thence to Bourdeaux. They offered
the King a Million of Gold, provided he would oblige himself to lay in all out
in the Siege of Rochel. They consented only that the King should erect
Receivers Offices, and Provincial and Diocesan Passionate Harangue of the
Bishop of Rennes.
Comptrollers of the Tithes. Cornulier, Bishop of Rennes* made a Speech to the
King, and sang triumphal Paeans before the Victory. He returned the King Thanks
for what he had done for the Church, hoping that in a short time there would be
but one Religion in France. He reckoned the War, according to the Principles of
Ecclesiastical Charity, among the wholesome and gentle means, of which the King
made use to bring things to a happy Conclusion. He accused the Reformed, with
great Passion, of all the past Troubles, and of having aspired to shake off
their Yoke, with an Intention to share the Crown among 'em. He added several
Complaints, which he accompanied with all the Aggravations that could embitter
'em; that they had turned the Churches of the Diocese of Rieux in^ Stables;
that they had carried away the Pyxes wherein the Sacrament was kept; that they
had shot the Crucifix through and through with their Muskets; that they had
ti'd it to their Horses Tails, and dragged it to Tonneins; that they had salted
their Meat in the Fonts of Baptism, after they had carried it in Procession
round about the Church, as they did in a certain place within the Diocese of
Pamiers; that in a place adjoining to Mompelier, they had cut off a Curate's
Nose, and when they had done, threw him headlong from the top of the Steeple.
However, 'twas not then a proper Season to take notice of these Extravagancies,
supposing his Stories had bin true, which could be thought no other then the
hair-brained Pastimes of Licentious Soldiers; nor to desire that Punishment
might be inflicted upon the Guilty only, as the Bishop of Luson did in 1615.
when he presented the Papers of the Chamber of the Clergy at the rising of the
States. There were also mustered up many more Crimes of the whole Religion; nor
were the Innocent distinguished from the Guilty: And he demanded extremity of
Remedies, as being to be applied for the Cure of extraordinary Mischiefs; and
the more vigorously to move the King, he quo^ed the Examples of sundry Princes
whom Heaven had punished for neglecting the extirpation of Crimes of the same
nature. He applauded the King for having taken up the Rod of Iron, and exhorted
him roundly to pursue his Resolutions. He could not find any milder term,
through his whole Speech, for the Reformed Profession, then that of Irreligion:
nevertheless his passonate vehemence against the Professors of that Doctrine,
did not take him off from thinking of the Affairs of the Clergy, nor from
manisesting his great care for the preservation of their ^mmunities and
Revenues. He desired that the Reformed might not perform their Exercises within
the Ecclesiastical Demeans and Lordships; but above all, that the Agreements
which the Clergy had made with the King might be punctually observed. He built
his Request upon a Maxim, which would have bin of great advantage to the
Reformed, had it bin inviolably adhered ^o. The Word of God, said he, is called
Truth: In like manner the Promises of Princes ought to be firm and stable, not
va^k nor feigned; and this he was for having take place, chiefly (...) what
concerned the Church. But in regard there was no que^ion to be made but his
tacitly impli'd meaning was That the ^i^ of that same constancy of the King's
word, did no way belong to the Heretics, he farther desired, That the Tempest
con^r'd up against 'em, might not be allayed after the usual manner; but that
all the places of security might be utterly demo^^sh'd. He blamed Violence in
matters of Religion, when it did not tear up Errors by the Root; and
acknowledged, That whatever was introduced by Force, was neither of long
continuance, ^or of any value toward the propagation of Faith, which ought to
be free. But for all that, he pressed the King to imitate Philip Augustus, and
the Father of St. Lewis, who utterly extirpated the Albigeois, the Heresy, and
their Habitations. So that according to the Principles of that pious Cruelty,
he made no scruple of commending and justifying Violence, so it were put in
practice for the extermination of the Reformed and their Doctrine. He exhorted
the King more especially to reduce Rochel into a Country Town, and to disperse
the Reformed into the Villages, in imitation of Constance, who confined the
Gentiles thither* and who for that reason were called Pagani, or Villagers;
upon which immediately the whole Empire became Christian. This Harangue, tho
full of venom and virulence, was not however without a certain briskness, which
is requisite for Invectives* that they may not seem tedious.

But the death of the Duke of Maine had like to have caused great disorders in
the Kingdom. The Reformed were in danger of being massacr'd at Paris, when the
news was first brought thither. That name was in high veneration among the
common People, who bare the League in remembrance. Insomuch that the multitude
resolved to revenge his death upon the Reformed in that great City, who were
the most quiet and peaceable throughout the whole Kingdom. All the whole week,
from the 21st of September, till Sunday the 26th, was spent in deadly Menaces.
Now it happened that some days before, a Carmel^ Friar, who called himself
Dominic de Jesus Maria, arrived in tha^ The Story of Dominic de Jesus Maria.
City, having acquired both in Spain, in Italy and Germany, a great reputation
of Piety. It had cost him however nothing but the Mops and Mows of a detestable
Hypocrisy, and bloody Counsels against the German Protestant Princes. He was,
by birth, a Spaniard, as also by his inclination and education. After some time
spent in Travel, and some stay at Rome, and in the Emperor's Court, he became
so famous, that the greatest Princes thought it an Honor to 'em, to have a
veneration for him. He was the Promoter of the Bohemian War, by reason of those
Acts of Injustice which he persuaded the Princes of the House of Austri^ to
commit against the Protestants, and by means of that same inhuman Zeal with
which he inspired and animated the People. One Artifice which this Monk made
use of to inflame their minds, was, that he always carried about him an Image,
which he called, The miraculous Image of our Lady of Victory. It was a Picture
of about a Foot and an half in height, and about a Foot broad, wherein the
Nativity of Christ was painted. It was ^und under a huge heap of Chips and old
rotten Wood: The figure of the Virgin also, by some mischance or other, had
both the eyes torn out; and this same wretched Monk reported ^ery where,
without any other proof then his own word, that the Heretics were they who had
committed that Sacrilege. This Picture he carried always about him, and he
never showed (...) without a world of Imprecations upon the heads of those who
had so rudely disfigured it. He made use of it in Bohemia, (...) incense the
Imperialists, and spur 'em on to a War with the People of that Kingdom who were
revolted. He made use of (...) in France, to animate the Catholics to undertake
the utter destruction of the Huguenots. At length he carried it to Rome, where
the Pope sanctified it with a Consecration upon the Altar of St Paul, and
together with all the Cardinals, all the People, and all the Clergy, paid such
extravagant Honors to it, as if ^e would have justified the truth of those
Reproaches which the Reformed throw upon the Church of Rome in reference to
Ido^try. After the ruin of the Reformation in Bohemia, where it ^ad bin so
potent, this Monk came into France to make his advantage of the Civil Wars, and
there to do the Catholic Religion the same service as he had performed in
Germany. He was received at Paris as a man that was full of the Spirit of God,
and whose Actions were all as so many Miracles. The People ^rowded after him,
and some persons of Quality also; but to ^ender himself more venerable, he
would not be seen every day, ^cting to lock himself up in a Convent of his own
Order. Nevertheless he was obedient to his Superiors, who understanding the
knack of inflaming the Peoples desire by feigned denials, grounded upon the
pretended humility of this Hypocrite, sufferd him at length to appear, when
they thought it seasonable to act the Farce. Then this pretended Saint received
the Homages that were paid him, next to Adoration, they kissed his Feet; they
thought themselves sanctified by touching the hem of his Garment; they carried
away pieces of it, which they kept as Relics; and thought 'em the cause of a
thousand Miracles, of which there was not so much as the least appearance. It Is
easy to apprehend what a predominancy his Speeches had over a People so
prepossessed, to whom this Villain preached nothing but Sedition and Violence.
But the Chancellor, the Duke of Mombazon, together with the Sorbonne, abhorred
these Affectactions, and maugre the passion of the People, constrained the
Monk, who said he was sent from the Duke of Bavaria to the King, to depart
Paris, and pursue the delivery of his message* However, during his Journey, he
behaved himself still after the same manner, and he had like to have bin the
cause of a thousand mischiefs, in places where the People bewitched with his
Grimaces, were inclined to Sedition. Insomuch that even a^ Saumur itself, where
the Catholics had received so many kindnesses from du Plessis for 32 years
together, while he was their Governor, they resolved to massacre their
Fellow-Citize^ of the Reformed Profession. But d' Aiguebonne, who commanded
there in the absence of the Count de Sault, by his diligence prevented the
fatal effects of that desperate design; and so wel^ secured the Gates of the
City, that the Promoters of the Conspiracy durst not make any Attempt. These
wicked effects of the Monk's piety, lost him his reputation in France among all
honest men, who perceived that his Zeal had something too much of the Spaniard
in it, which kept 'em from being deluded by his counterfeit Sanctity; so that
after this Journey, there was no farther talk concerning him.

But at Paris, all the care that was taken for the security of (...) at Paris.
the Reformed served to no purpose. They judged that they were not to forbear
the continuance of their Public Exercises, because of the Threats of the
People, in regard it would be a diminution of the King's Authority, who had
taken 'em into his Protection, and would show a distrust of his Word and
Justice. Therefore on Sunday the 26th they went to Charenton, and the Duke of
Mombazon ordered all things the best he could for their security, guarding the
Road in person, by his presence to protest 'em in their return. But for all
that, the seditious Rabble fell upon those that lagg'd behind; so that from
words they fell to blows, and some few were killed. Among the rest, one Woman
that would not bow to the Image of the Virgin set up over St. Anthony's Gate,
was murdered; and a Priest, mistaken by the multitude for a Minister, had much
ado to escape their hands, by the assistance of the Duke's own Servants. Some
Houses also, where the People, out of compassion, had sheltered some of the
Reformed, were forced open and pillaged. And all this was done under the very
Noses of the Guards and Archers, who were appointed to conduct the Reformed,
and might have prevented these Violences, had they but let fly two or three
times among the Rabble. But the veneration they had for Catholic Blood, would
not permit 'em to shed the least drop for the preservation of the Huguenots. So
that in less then a minute the City was all in an uproar: the Chains were drawn
up; the Citizens were ordered to stand to their Arms; and Guards were set at
the Gates: But Night was more powerful then all the Orders which the Magistrate
could give, and sent the seditious Mobile to their own Houses.

The next day, the Mutineers not daring to attempt any thing The Church of
Charenton burnt.
in the City, where their Party was not strong enough, ran all to continue
their Violences at Charenton. Where they pillaged some Houses; but their chief
spite was at the Church, which they burnt; together with the Shops where the
Booksellers left their Books of Devotion, which they durst not sell in other
pla^es. The Library was robbed; the Walls of the Cloister pulled down; nor did
the Fury of these People cease, till their Rage ^ad no more Materials to work
upon. It Is true, that the Duke of Mombazon and the Parliament caused two of the
chief Actors ^o be seized, who were also executed for an example to others. ^t
while he was at the Parliament, busy in consultation by what means to stop the
Career of these Enormities, the Sedition broke but again in the Fauxbourg St.
Marceau, where the greatest part of the Reformed Artificers, who are debarred
from keeping Shops in the City, were set up, to the end they might follow their
Employments without molestation; and in this Uproar also one or two of the
Reformed were killed, and some Houses pillaged. But at length the Tumult was
appeased, and the Parliament having issued forth a Decrce, putting the Reformed
under the Protection of the King and the Law, which was presently dis^cht away
to the several Bayliwicks under their Jurisdiction, ^his same Spirit of
Violence was suppressed for some time, to the great grief of those who in
several places were prepared for Insurrections no less dangerous.

But for all this, the Reformed began again to quit their Habitations, The
Reformed quit their Habitations.
and many People left Paris, as others quitted other places, who had hitherto
flattered themselves that they should live in security, so they had no hand in
the War. They likewise, who staid behind, locked themselves up in their Houses
for some days, tho in continual fears; or else they concealed themselves among
the Catholics, with whom they had contracted a friendship either upon the score
of Kindred, or Neighborhood, or some tie of Interest. As for the Ministers,
they were in the number of those that retired; and tho they alleged for
themselves St. Cyprian's Reasons, fearing, as he did, that their presence made
the Sedition more fatal to their Flocks, yet their abandoning their stations
was censured by a sort of People who are always finding some fault or other in
the conduct of other men.

But tho the Seditious themselves were suppressed, yet the Spirit They are
accused of setting fire to the Bridges of Paris.
of Sedition was not laid; for some Houses happening to be a fire at Paris, and
the Flames taking hold of the Houses adjoining with that fierceness as to burn
down the two Bridges, called P^ aux Marchands, and Pont au Change, the People
presently accused the Reformed, as if they had bin the Authors of the
Conflagration. Nay, they would have had it believed, that they had a design to
have set the whole City on fire, to revenge the burning of their Church at
Charenton. But, after all the most diligent Inquisitions that could be made,
they could not find the lea^ Pretense to make good that Calumny: a clear
discovery being soon after made, that the Accident happened through the
negligence of a Maidservant. There happened also such another Mischance at
Lion much about the same time. A Gentleman returning out of Germany, and taking
Post in that City, had a Quarrel upon the same occasion with one of the Canons
of that City, who assume the Title of Counts of (...) Upon which the Canon
riding before to stay for the Gentlem^n upon the Road, discharged two Pistols
at him, but mist with both: on the other side the Gentleman had a better Aim,
and killed the Canon fairly, according to all the Maxims allowed by ^^^ of the
Sword; nevertheless he was seized and imprisoned at ^^^. The next day the Jail
happened to be a-fire, and very much endamag'd both the Prison and the Palace.
Presently the Catholics knew where to lay the fault: for because it had so
fallen out, that the Gentleman's Servants, and some of the Re^med had bin heard
to say, that the Gentleman was wrongfully imprisoned, in regard he had done
nothing but what was grounded upon the Law of Self-defence, therefore the
Catholics would have it, that either the one or the other set fire to the
Prison. But the Informations acquitted the Parties accused, and made it appear
that the Misfortune happened through the carelessness of the Keeper and his
Servants. Thus the seditious discourses of the Monks both in public and
private, had infused this malignant Spirit among the vulgar Catholics, that the
blame, whatever happened, was by them laid upon the Reformed; and that they
looked upon the most moderate and most peaceable, as People that were always
hatching and contriving mischievous designs, and seeking an opportunity to put
the Kingdom in confusion. So that they found themselves in the s^re condition
with the Primitive Christians, who were accused by the hotheaded Gentiles of
all the Misfortunes and Calamities that befell the State, whether Famine,
Pestilence, Inundations, or Drowth.

During these Events, the Circle of Lower Languedoc was in The Circle of Lower
Languedoc ^^s^^ss Chatillon.
a miserable condition. Chatillon made no other use of his Authority, then to
prevent the Reformed in those Quarters from ^ouring their Friends in other
places; and it may be easily conjectured, what they might have bin able to have
done, had he ^^^ faithful, by what they did in despite of all the disturbance
which he gave 'em. Montauban was relieved, notwithstanding all his opposition;
and as negligent as he was in the preservation of the places, of which the
Assembly had given him the Government, the Duke of Mommorancy made no great
progress. Nevertheless there were so many People who were sensible that ^llon
was intent upon his own Affairs, to the prejudice of the Public Concerns, that
at length the Assembly of the Circle which then ^ate at Mompelier, turned him
out of his employment; and the 21st of November, set forth a very large
Declaration, containing the Reasons of their Severity. They accused him of
having betrayed the Churches, and of making his own Fortune at their Expense:
For having raised men, not for the service of the Reformed, but to understand
the utmost strength of the Circle; what number of Soldiers they could raise;
and what quantity of Arms and Ammunition they were able to provide: For having
often let the Enemy escape, when they might have been easily defeated: For
having thrust out of employment such persons as he knew to be too well affected
to the Common Cause: For having given notice to the Enemy to stand upon their
Guards: For having represented to the Reformed the Mischiefs greater, and the
Remedies more difficult then they were: For having kept private several
Matters, which he ought to have communicated: For keeping Spies, which he sent
to the Court, to discover the Secrets of the Reformed: For having favored and
received into his friendship those who had surrendered their Strong holds to
the King: For having scornfully affronted the Assembly of Rochel: For having by
his own Authority disannulled their Resolutions: For having restored to the
Enemy the Booty taken from 'em in a just War, without so much as demanding, at
least by way of compensation, what had bin plundered from the Reformed: And for
suffering the loss of great quantities of Arms stored up with great Expenses.
But he had done one thing contrary to the interests of the Party, which did him
more harm then all that was laid to his charge: For he had drained the Province
of Cevennes, by a Levy of Six thousand men, which he had sent into the Venetian
Service. And this was the reason that the Province could not raise the one half
of the Soldiers that were promised, when the Duke of Rohan was constrained to
take Arms.

This displacing of Chatillon, put the whole Circle into an extraordinary The
great Confusion in the Circle.
Confusion; for that Chatillon's Party was very potent in those Quarters. They
who were not Members of the Assembly, nor had any share of the Public Command,
complained that the Assembly abused their Authority, and some Provinces
murmured against it. Berticheres, whom they had elected for Lieutenant General,
endeavored to keep his ground without any Superior; to the end that having a
more spacious Country to surrender, he might be able to make an Accommodation
so ^uch the more advantageous with the Court. And indeed there was nothing
which preserved to the Reformed what was ^^ft in the Circle, but that Affairs
at Court were not in much better posture, where the Constable's death had
wrought great ^lterations. Every one aspired to be Master of the King's Favor,
that they might have the sole Authority in the Government. But whether it were
that the Pretenders obstructed one another, or that the King, who, as I may
say, was but just ^ot out of Wardship, as yet too sensibly remembered the
^oable which the greatness of his Favorite had put him to; or whether his
distrust of those who were about his person, kept ^im upon his guard against
Surprises, he would not suffer himself to be prevailed upon, all of a sudden,
by any new Affection: so that, in the mean while, the Cardinal de Retz,
Schomberg, Grand Master and Superintendant, and de Vic, to whom the Seals were
committed, took upon 'em the greatest share in Affairs. The Prince of Conde,
who was desirous that the King should continue the War, joined with 'em, in
regard they were all of ^e same mind; and this is one thing very remarkable,
that the Marshals of France, and such as might pretend to the same Dig^,
appeared as much inclined to Peace, as the Officers of the ^ong Robe and the
Finances were averse to it. The Prince therefore, and the three Ministers, who
were of his Opinion, (...) as much as lay in their power to stop the King's
return to Paris, where they expected nothing less then to be opposed by the old
Ministers; and where the Prince was afraid lest the Authority should devolve
again into the hands of the Queen Mother. To this purpose, having persuaded the
King to march toward Bourdeaux, they proposed to him the making himself Master
of Chatillon, a Town belonging to the Marshal de Bou^, upon the River Dordogne;
and the Expedient they had ^ound out to compass their design, was to treat with
the Garrison of the place, which stood Neuter as the Master did, in the same
manner as they had practiced with du Plessis. The effect of their Consultations
therefore was, that the King should enter into the Castle, under pretense that
'twas his pleasure to lodge there; and that when he was in, he should turn out
the Garrison that kept it for the Duke of Bouillon. But this City, as well as
all the rest, which belonged to that noble person, was comprehended in the same
Treaty, upon the confidence of which the Duke lived peaceably at Sedan, and
never concerned himself in the War; so that the Proposals of surprising it, was
manifestly opposite to Honesty and Sincerity. However that sort of Policy that
moved upon the hinges of Craft and Injustice, was justfi^'d while the deceased
Constable was in favor. Nevertheless, i^ regard the honest men were more
numerous then they wh^ gave this pernicious Advice, they persuaded the King to
abandon the Attempt, and so it ^ell to the ground.

The King then having left the best Orders he could in the 1622.
Provinces to hinder the Reformed, who were brought very lo^ The King returns
to Paris.
in Poitou and Guyenne from rising again, returned at length ^^ Paris, where the
old Ministers recovered a little credit with him and inclined him to Peace. The
Chancellor and Jeannin deemed it very necessary, and made no question but that
it was more proper to destroy the Reformed then War. There is to be see^ a
small Treatise composed by the last of these two, which perhaps may be looked
upon as one of the most authentic Pieces tha^ are to be produced in favor of
the Reformed; and which utterly overthrows the Pretense, which was taken from
their supposed Rebellion, to exterminate 'em. He acknowledges almost in express
words, That the Catholics were the Aggressors i^ that War, and that the
Reformed acted merely in their own defense: at least it is to be deduced from
his discourse by eviden^ Consequences. He presupposes, That it behooved the
Reformed A remarkable Writing of Jeannin, a iv^sing Peace.
to be united, since it was evident to 'em that there was a design^ upon their
Religion; and he sets down several Reasons why they had cause enough to think
so: That so long as they believed the King's Intentions to be no other then to
chastise Rebels, there were many who continued in perfect Obedience; but that
they found themselves no more kindly used then they who had t^kn Arms: That the
principal Members of the Council publicly gave out, that the King would no
longer permit any other exercise of Divine Worship then that of the Catholic
Religion: That the Preachers stust their Sermons with Menaces of the same
nature, ^d endeavored to persuade men, that the following of any other ^unsel
was profane, and savor'd of Impiety: whence it followed, ^at the War would
prove more bloody and universal then it had ^n, if the Reformed, united as it
behooved 'em to be for their common Interest, should put themselves into a
posture of de^nce. Farther also, and that clearly enough, he asserts, That ^e
Aim of those who advised a War, was to take their opportunity, because the
Foreign Protestants being busi'd at home, ^u'd not attend the succor of those
that were oppressed in ^. He made excellent Reflections upon the Wars which ^d
been all along continued against 'em, with the same design (...) destroy 'em,
sometimes by Fire and Sword, sometimes by De^it and Treachery. Thence passing
to give Sentence upon the ^casion that had constrained their Enemies to grant
'em such a number of Strongholds, he concludes, That after the Massacre ^ St.
Bartholomew, and the Siege of Rochel, there was a necessity (...) allowing 'em
a greater number, to secure 'em, says he, against ^r Perfidiousness and
Infidelity. He observes, how much the ^eace, which they were suffered to enjoy
for five years together, under the Reign of Henry III. was to their
disadvantage, through the Policy of that Prince, who excluded 'em from all
^ratifications: a powerful means to infect the minds of those ^ho are
oversway'd by their own Interests. The King himself performed the office of a
Converter, and his Reasons, which he ^^compani'd with Favors or Denials, as he
thought proper, ^eg^in'd to his Religion all those who had a design to please
him. several also who continued in the Reformed Religion, for their ^wn Soul's
health, yet bred their Children up in the Roman Religion, for the security of
their Fortunes. Jeannin adds farther, ^^ demonstrate how disadvantageous a
Peace would be to the ^eformed, for that when they had a mind to betake
themselves ^o their Arms after a long rest, they always found it a difficult
^ing to rouse up from their Repose and Tranquillity, those ^ho had for some time
bin tasting the delights of Peace; ^e^ides, that there was less danger in
attacking 'em, after they ^ad ^^^eminated themselves with the charming
softnesses of an ^^sy life. And he was so possessed with this Opinion, that as
he wrote before the Peace, to oblige the King and his Council (...) make it, so
he published another Writing, after it was concluded, to advise 'em to keep it.

But the King's Infirmity lying on his Conscience side, the^ The Reasons for
the War more prevalen^.
who assailed him in his weakest part, proved most successful; an^ for fear the
Counselors of Peace should by their more weight Reasons deface the Impressions
which they had fixed in his min^ they got him out of Paris as it were in
hugger-mugger, in hope they should have more power over him when they had him
at the head of an Army. To say the truth, there was a strange alteration (...)
Affairs after the King's return to Paris. But it seems, he though^ a Peace
would not be for his Honor in the present Conjunction. On the other side, the
Reformed had almost every where regained The Reformed reassume fresh Courage.
fresh Courage. The Duke of Soubise had recovered their Affairs in the Lower
Poitou, and in the Islands. La Force had reincourag'd to the defense of their
Liberties some of those Cities which their Governors had sold. He had wrested
St. For o^ of Theobon's hands, by means of a Female Intrigue, in regar^ that
Gentleman was in love with one of his Kinswomen. To^neins, Clairac, and several
other Strongholds once more acknowledged the Reformed for their Masters. The
Duke of Ro^a^ elected General of the Circle of Lower Languedoc, had by (...)
Policy and Prudence, his Frankness and his Patience, reconciled the Differences
which had for some time disunited that Province; so that the King had almost
lost all the fruit of the preceding Campaign, which had cost him so much men
an^ money.

The King departed from Paris upon Palm Sunday, and by received The King leaves
Paris.
Intelligence, that the Duke of Espernon having drawn o^ all his Forces for the
security of his own Governments, there wa^ not any strength in the Lower Poitou
that could make head against His Success in Poitou
the Duke of Soubise, therefore he was constrained to begin his Campaign in
those Quarters; where the Duke, either for want of Judgment, or through the
Infidelity of those who commanded under him, became the unfortunate Spectator
of the slaughter of his men, and in one day lost the fruit of all his Labors.
Royan was surrendered to the King, after a Siege of some few days; and these
Successes buried in oblivion the Treaties of Peace which had bin observed till
that time; and the Duke of Rohan's Commissioners not arriving till after the
Rout of his Brother, were enforced to return as they came. On the other side
the King, upon some jealousy of the Duke of Tre^ouille, who had removed to
Sedan the Prince of Talmont, his Eldest Son, afterward known by the Title of
Prince of Tarente, whom he had left at Thouars under the tuition of the
Duchess Dowager, dismissed from Taillebourg the person entrusted with the
Command of that place, and secured the Castle for himself, which was of some
consequence at that time. After this, the King marched into Guyenne, where he
presently retook all that And Guyenne, where he treats with la Force.
The Reformed were Masters of; and where he utterly ruined 'em by the Agreement
which he concluded with la Force. In pursuance of which, he honored him with
the Batoon of Marshal of France, which had bin promised him above Twelve years
before. Moreover, he gave him a Gratuity of Two hundred thousand Crowns, to
recompense him for the loss of his Governments, which both he and his Children
were obliged to quit. Thus it comes to pass sometimes, that Rebellion is more
fortunate then Merit; and that a man by rendering himself formidable, secures to
himself the reward of his Services. La Force surrenders to the King the City of
St. Foy, where the King solemnized the Festival which the Catholics call by the
name of Corpus Christi day; the Ceremony of which that City had not beheld for
many years before. But la Force treated only for himself, obtaining for his
Friends no more then a bare Act of Oblivion; which created him many Enemies in
the Country, where many of the Nobility had followed him before. Moreover,
'twas twenty to one but that the King had broke his word with him, when he had
left himself to the discretion of the Court, because his Son still held out one
of the Strongholds which belonged to the Reformed, and made some Scruple to
surrender it; which resistance they would fain have had to have bin looked upon
as a Collusion between the Father and the Son. But that Advice was rejected, as
well for fear of the Consequences, as for the Reasons which the Prince of Conde
gave, who obstinately opposed it.

The King now hastening into Languedoc, was so fortunate as to meet with no
Opposition by the way; and for that, the Cities which he had no design to have
attacked, surrendered merely out of fear of being besieged. Negrepelisse and
St. Antonin, small Cities, not far distant from Montauban, were taken by
Assault, and all the Cruelties imaginable committed. The Women suffered all
that could be feared from the sensuality of Brutish Common Soldiers, and the
Men were almost all massacr'd. The Pretense was, That Negrepelisse had cut the
Throats of the Garrison which the King left there the year before; and that St.
Antonin had stayed took long before it surrendered. They also, who retreated to
the Castle first of all, after the Town was surrendered, had their share of the
same usage: And when they had surrendered at discretion, the Council ordered
twelve of 'em to be hanged. There were some that followed the King, who by no
means approved these Cruelties; who rescued as many as they could out of the
Soldiers Clutches, and redeemed some Women and Virgins, that were threatened
extremity of outrage, with their own Money. But the King, who was naturally
good natured, and under whose Name these Cruelties were committed, was more
concerned then any body. So that his abhorrence of such Barbarities proved not
a little serviceable to those that were inclined to peace, toward the disposing
him to resume the firmer Negotiations for an Accommodation.

Lesdiguieres, who had no longer any Competitor, renewed his Pretensions to the
Constable's Sword, and promised to turn Catholic, upon condition he might have
that Dignity conferred upon him; that he might be made a Knight of the Holy
Ghost, and his Son-in-Law Crequi, a Marshal of France. But to comfort the
Reformed for the loss of his Person, he became an earnest Intercessor for
Peace. He had already had one Conference to that purpose with the Duke of Rohan
at Pont St. Esprit; where all the Pretensions of the Reformed had bin reduced
to four Heads: The Restitution of all Places of Security; Liberty of Politic
Assemblies; Payment of the Sums promised for the Ministers Salaries, and the
maintenance of the Garrisons; and the disingagement of the Nobility that had bin
ruined by the War. These Articles being carried to the King by the
Commissioners introduced by Bouillon, were not agreed to, because the King's
Forces had defeated Soubize, and put him in hopes of an easy conclusion of the
War. But because the Season of the Year was far spent, and for that there were
many things to be done, these Proposals were again brought into play, and many
Journies were made to and fro, for the obtaining of Peace. The Duke of Rohan
also acted so far, that he had rendered himself suspected at Mompellier, and
saw his Credit upon the brink of an utter declination. For there were several
Factions in that City, who mutually sought to destroy one another. Among the
rest, there was one which was called the Faction of the Catharinots. A word, of
which I know not the original. However, it was the most Seditious of all the
rest, and looked upon as Traitors all those that did not tread after their
steps. Now Lesdiguieres having sent the President Du Cross, to Mompellier, to
persuade 'em ^ peace, that Faction stirred up a Sedition against him, and
safely murdered him. But the Duke of Rohan caused some of the most guilty to be
severely punished, which did not a little humble the Insolent Cabal. The
Minister Souffrein, who was accused to have a hand in that Murder, chose rather
to remain suspected, than to expose himself to the Issue of a Criminal
Prosecution, and withdrew from the City.

The same Mutineers also raised another Insurrection against Sediion against
the Catholics.
the Catholics of the City; and they carried it so far, that their behavior
being represented to the King by the Bishop of Fenouilles, awakened in him that
aversion which had been always in^ill'd into him from his Cradle against the
Reformed. That Prelate was both eloquent and witty; and he made a sedulous use
of his Parts to inflame the King's Indignation. He called the Conduct of the
Reformed a Tyrannical Phrenzy of Rebellion and Heresy; and the condition
wherein they kept the Catholics in his City, an Oppression great in it self,
ingenious as to the Invention, exquisite in Cruelty, and universal in the
Ravages it committed. He said, that Heresy, animated by Rebellion, which is the
usual spirit that attends it, was demonstrable by the accumulation of their
Crimes; and he imputed to it what e're Impiety durst ever presume to think of,
and put in execution, in opposition to that Veneration which is due to the Holy
Saints. He laid before the eldest Son of the Church, the Outrages that had bin
committed against his Mother, so dreadful for their Number, so violent in the
excesses of Fury, so solemn for the impudence of the Authors, so horrible for
the Sacrileges that attended it, so abominated by Heaven and Earth, that such
Hyperboles would have been hardly tolerable in setting forth the horrors of a
St. Bartholomew's Massacre. And to render the Reformed of his time more odious,
he compared the modesty of the growing Reformation with the Reformation
established; and in regard he had borrowed that same common place from the
Letter of that same Charpentier, whom Bellievre had gained to write an Apology
for Massacres, he envenomed this Comparison likewise with Impostures, and
perpetual Imputations of Rebellion. By the by he girded the Edicts of Peace,
which God, as he said, had never blessed, and which had been as yet of little
force to exorcize the spirit of Rebellion; so that his whole Speech was an
express Exhortation to revoke 'em. He aggravated, as heinous Crimes whatever
the Laws and Necessities of War had enforced the Reformed to act in their own
defense; and to raise a more tender Compassion, he complained, that after they
had so ill used the Catholics, they deprived 'em of the liberty to bemoan their
miserable Conditions. Yet all these horrid Crimes amounted to no more, then
that they had imprisoned the Catholics at Mompellier; that they had constrained
'em to bear their share in the expenses of the City; and that they had either
demolished or defaced their Country Houses. But in regard all this might be
easily excused by Reasons drawn from the consequences of War or the necessity
of putting themselves into a condition to sustain a Siege, for which the City
was obliged to prepare themselves he drew an Inference from thence, that they
had threatened the Catholics with a general Massacre. The name of Heresy made a
great noise throughout all his Speech; 'twas stuffed all over with descriptions
of those Propensities which it infused into men to ravage and destroy. He
upbraided the Reformed with having romag'd the Graves of the dead, and dug
'em out of their Sepulchers; as if the same thing had not been done every day
by the Catholics, who held it to be a duty of their Religion. This Crime was
aggravated as if it had bin very usual, and gave him an occasion to call the
Reformed by the name of damned Souls, which by the counsel and instigation of
Hell committed all manner of Crimes. And in the series of his Harangue he
added, that they surpassed the Devils in wickedness. The Body of a Nun, being
found buried in the habits of her Order, gave him a new occasion to display the
whole force of his eloquent Fury. And some Ecclesiastics being put out of the
Town, for fear they should betray it, and some of the Canons being detained as
Hostages, for the security of the Ministers, afforded him a large Theme for
another most embitter'd Complaint. Some Distresses also levi'd in the Houses of
those that refused to contribute toward the Public Charges, were looked upon as
Plund'ring: And the Crime was represented so much the more heinous, because the
Priesthood was advanced above Angelic Excellency. Afterward appeared a long
and pathetic description of a Church, without the exercise of Divine Worship; a
Reproach for making use of the Materials of demolished Churches in their
Fortifications, and for having forced thousands of Catholics to abjure their
Doctrine. The War also which the King had undertaken was called Sacred, and he
was exhorted to make no more Treaties with Rebels.

It would be a difficult thing to meet with such a violent Harangue, Remarks
upon the style of this Harangue.
and where the most innocent things, or at least the most to be excused, by the
necessity that constrained em, were blackened after the most odious manner
imaginable. The torments of an infinite number of poor Creatures that were
destroyed in all places where the Catholics came, the burning of Tonneins,
Monhart, Negrepelisse, and other Towns; their frequent Insurrections against
the Reformed, their forcing Conversions, of which that War afforded various
Examples, would make those tremble, and their hair stand an end, that read the
Story, should ^ set 'em forth in the style of this Harangue. But this is the
Character of the Catholic Prelates; whatever it be that never so little touches
the Respect which is due to their Grandeur, is by them cried down for
Sacrilege, and is never to be excused: But whatever they do in order to the
destruction of those that offend 'em, though never so opposite to all the Laws
of God and Nature, is lawful and clear from all Reproach and Censure: Thus the
City of Foix, the Metropolis of that Province, being inhabited by some Reformed
Families, the Monk Vi^^arte, a Desolation of the Church of Foix.
Capuchin, being sent thither by the Bishop of Pamiers, went thither toward the
end of the last year, to do all the mischief he could, under pretense of
preaching the Advent Sermons, and returned thither to preach the Lent Sermons
of this year. But his seditious Declamations, his Monastical Controversies, his
Conferences offered to the Ministers, the pious Violences of the Governors of
the Province, and the City, and the Treachery of some persons won over to their
Party, brought over all the Families to the Church of Rome. There was not one
withstood this Hurricane, but the Minister and his Wife, who was permitted to
retire, not so much out of Humanity or Justice, but to give the greater luster
to the Monk's Victory. And the Minister was spared, to be a testimony of the
desolation of his Church, and to carry the news to the places of his
retirement. To which purpose they caused a Trumpet to attend him, who under
pretense of conducting him, sounded forth the Triumphs of the Monk over the
Minister and his Flock, both in the streets of the City and in the Country.
Nor had the Reformed at Foix any other then a limited Exercise, as I have said
already.

In the mean time the Ecclesiastics of Foix gave this Monk a Attestations given
the Monk Villarte.
Certificate, which made him looked upon as the only Author of these goodly
Conversions, and which assured the world that no other violent means was made
use of then that of the Word of God. But it is observable, that they never
bethought themselves of attesting in behalf of these New Converts, that there
was nothing but what was free and voluntary in their change. The Art of
Converting was then but in its Infancy: Time brought it to some perfection; for
that in our days they never fail to cause these sort of Attestations to be
signed by those that had suffered the utmost extremity of Violence at their
hands. Moreover, the demolishing the Church, which was done by the bare
Authority of the Inhabitants, without staying for the King's Orders, followed
the Monk's Victory close at the heels; and the Catholic Churches of the City
shared among 'em the Spoils of the Reformed. It may be judged with what
moderation this Affair was carried on by the precipitancy of the Catholics, who
^ever consulted their Sovereign upon two Points of that importance. It may be
said, perhaps, in their behalf, that they did nothing without the private
encouragement of the Court, who ^ook in good part what ever was serviceable
toward the Conversion of the Heretics. But the Archbishop of Ambrune haranguing
the King upon his return to Paris after the Peace made, ^vent a little farther
then all this: He made the King an Apostle (...) his Speech; and, to support
his new Eulogy with a Reason, ^e added, that the King procured Conversions by
his Prudence, and the concurrence of his just Arms. The meaning of his words is
easily apprehended, which seemed to intimate, that in Conversions of this
nature, Terror wrought no less effectually ^hen Instruction.

While the King lay at Bezieres, where the Bishop of Mom^ He forbids the
Reformed to quit their Habitations.
had made him a Speech, he put forth a Declaration dated (...) 25. which
renewing the ill-observed Promises of the King's Protection to those that lived
in Obedience, and staid at home under the benefit of the Edicts, forbid all the
Reformed to ^^uit their Habitations, whether in City or Country, upon pain
(...) forfeiting all the Favors that had been afforded 'em, and to (...)
proceeded against as guilty of High Treason, Deserters of the Kingdom, and
Disturbers of the Public Peace. The Pre^ence for these Prohibitions was, That
the Reformed forsook* their Houses, to join with those that were in Arms; or
with Foreigners that drew toward the Frontiers, and threatened the Kingdom with
an Invasion. The truth is, that the greatest part of those that quitted their
Houses, were forced to wander (...) where in search of their security. The
heats of the Catholic Rabble, the seditious roaring of the Monks in their Pul^,
the uncontrolled Licentiousness of the Soldiers, the pro^ of Protection a
thousand ways broken, Capitulations ill observed, the frequent Tortures of
those who surrendered at discretion* the enormous fury of the Rascally Mobile
against the bodies of those who had undergone the utmost extremity and
Torments, yet steadfast to the end; and several other Circumstances of the
present condition of the Reformed in France, were ^rrible, that they expected a
Massacre every day, which every body strove to avoid, by withdrawing into
places where there was more probability of safety. But to speak the truth, the
Court was not free from Alarums; and if the Confederates had but had a little
ready money, they would have made the Court repent their declaring War against
'em.

Count Mansfeild, who was entered into the Confederacy Count Mansfeild treats
with the Reformed.
against the House of Austria, and who after the overthrow of the King of
Bohemia, had maintained his ground with good reputation, at that time besieged
Savern in Alsatia with a considerable Army: but before he could take the place,
he was constrained to retreat, for fear of the Imperialists, who were within
some few days march of him with three Bodies of an Army much superior in number
to his. In his retreat, he was constrained to cross Lorrain; which the Duke,
who had not his Forces ready durst not deny him. Now the Count, not having
money, (...) no other way to keep his men together, but by the liberty which he
allowed 'em to do what they pleased: so that there was (...) likelihood that he
could subsist any long time, provided his Parties could be hindered from
roaming about from their mai^ Body. Marshal de Bouillon therefore liking well
the opportunity, and weary of the Neutrality which he had observed since the
beginning of the War, and desirous to make one smart E^ say before he died, for
the support of a Religion, of which, as (...) clearly perceived, the Catholics
had vowed the destruction, (...) thought himself of treating with the Count,
and found it (...) hard matter to gain him. To that purpose he promised him
money, and that he should be conducted into France by (...) reinforcements of
men that would very much augment his (...). He promised also to send him the
Prince of Sedan (...) eldest Son, and the Duke of Trimouille to accompany him
and in a word, those Lords, assisted by the Counts of Suze (...) Roussi, and
some others, sent their Friends and their Servants who rendevouz'd from all
parts at the places that were assigned 'em. These motions persuaded the Court,
that all they who quitted their Houses, went to strengthen this Foreign Army,
(...) make a considerable diversion upon the Frontiers of Champaigne. For which
reason, several persons were seized, upon suspicion (...) favoring the Duke of
Bouillon's Enterprise; and besides some

Officers of his Household, who were imprisoned in several pla-^es; the Son of
the Vidame of Normandy was secured at Paris, (...) Count of Suze at Lion, and
the Duke of Sulli at Moulins, (...) being suspected to be of the Confederacy.
In the mean time Marshal de Bouillon, who had promised money before he knew
where to have it, made it his business to seek where to raise it: (...) he
wrote to the Duke of Rohan, to see whether he could (...) any that way. His
Letters however contained two things (...) opposite one to another: for at the
beginning he exhorted (...) Duke to Peace, for fear the continuance of the War
should (...) the ruin of the Reformed. He observed that their ill ^uccesses
proceeded from the dispersing of those who were able (...) bear Arms, but who
were made incapable of succouring one (...) by their separation. He added, as
it were, to lead him (...) of one discourse into another, that this misfortune
was oc-^ion'd by the want of Foreign Soldiers. For the supply of which defect,
he offered the bringing in of Count Mansfeild to (...) assistance of the
Reformed; in order to which, he de^nded three things; an express approbation of
his design; money for the payment of his Foreign Forces, and assurance (...) he
should be comprehended in the Peace, both he and his, if happened to be made.
But money was more difficult to be (...), then the demanded Approbation and
Assurances; so that the ^ourt had time enough to gain Mansfeild, and prevent
his entering (...) France. Propositions therefore were made him of being enter^
Mansfeild gained by the Court.
in the King's service, and some ready money fixed his resolu^ns. But the
Bishop of Alberstadt, a Prince of the House of Bruns^k, to whom some part of
the Forces belonged, was willing ^heark'n to Marshal de Bouillon's Proposals*
and to be contented (...) the small Sum which the Marshal offered for present
neces^y, till a more considerable could be raised: which differing ^linations
set the two Generals at variance, who never after (...) did any thing
considerable; so that after some Sieges attempted without Success, Mansfeild
retired into the Low-Coun^s, where his Army was utterly ruined.

France would have bin very much encumbered with him, had (...) hired his Army
into her Service: She had no Foreign War, (...) would the Council of Conscience
permit the King to concern himself with the King of Bohemia's Broils: and
therefore there was an Expedient found to get rid of him, by sending him into
the Service of the Low Countries then in amity with the King, choosing rather
that he should join with the States, the^ with the King of Spain or the
Venetians, who both courted him* Thus the Churches of France were flattered
with an appearance of hope that vanished as soon. Nor were the Reformed the
(...) that treated with Foreigners: for the King had set 'em an Example, and
sent into Languedoc some German Troops that serv's under the Duke of
Mommorancy: so that it could not be justly laid to their charge, that they went
about to expose their Country to the Plunder and Ransack of Foreigners, since
the Catholics were the first who had called the Reiters and the Lansquenets
into the Kingdom.

In the mean time the fear of Mansfeild's Army rendered the Negotiations of
Peace reuew d.
King's Council more pliable, so that the Proposals of Peace were renewed. But
whether it were that the Duke of Rohan Demands were too high, or that the
Council were freed from the terror of Mansfeild's ever coming to hurt 'em, the
Negotiation came to nothing, and Lesdiguieres spent all his pains and (...)
time to no purpose in promoting it. Nevertheless the Cou^^ began to hanker
after Peace, of which they who were desirous to advance themselves in the
King's Favor, or by the management of Affairs stood in great need, to the end
they might (...) have too much variety of business to trouble their heads wi^^
at one and the same time. For as for the Cities that remained they were of
quite another consequence then the paltry Tow^ the gaining of which had bin,
till that time, the sole Fruit ^^ the War. Only they were desirous that the
King should gra^^ the Peace, like the Lord and Master of it; and they avoided
^^ General Treaty, for fear the Union of the Reformed should be justified, and
as it were legitimated by a Treaty of that nature. These Sentiments were
sufficiently expressed by the Author of ^^ Treatise that appeared upon this
Subject, after the enterview ^^ Lesdiguieres and the Duke of Rohan. And indeed,
no less the^^ three persons, of a different character, delivered their Opinion^
upon the Peace. The one a Reformed, who was desirous to obtain the Four
Articles upon which the Lords were agreed; ^ other was a Zealous Catholic, who
was altogether for Extermination. The third a moderate man, who took the middle
^ay between the other two Extremes; but who rejected the (...) Articles as
contrary to the good of the State. The Author (...) himself the name of
Francophilus, because he was willing ^ give his judgment for those of the truly
honest Frenchmen, ^ho loved the Honor and Repose of the Kingdom.

He asserted, that it was not proper to allow the Reformed by longer possession
of Places of Security, because the time al ^ted for 'em to hold those Places,
was expired; That the Reasons why they were granted were out of doors; That the
League ^as the true motive which induced Henry IV. to trust 'em in ^e hands of
the Reformed: That he was willing to permit the ^eformed to be in Arms, that
they might be serviceable to him ^ case of necessity: That the particular
safety of the Reformed ^er so many Wars, was but a second motive of less
importance, ^^d only served as a pretense for the other; That the same Prince,
before his death, began to reassume 'em indirectly; and ex^ted Promises in
writing from the Governor, which he sent either, that they would keep 'em for
his Service: That the Reformed had made an ill use of 'em, and by consequence,
that they ^^d forfeited their Right, if they had any: That they were the
perpetual occasion of renewing the Troubles: That it was be^w a King to think
there should be such Reasons of mistrust between him and his Subjects, that his
word and Faith should ^^t be as good as Places of Security. 'Twas also there
maintained, That at first those Cities were not given to the People, ^^t to the
Princes of the Blood, who had sided with 'em: That ^ reality, they were of no
use to the Reformed, because the ^ant of 'em never could warrant 'em from being
attacqu'd by ^e King; That 'twas not to be thought that the King had any ^^sign
to ruin the Reformed, tho he had taken their Cities from ^^^: And he proved,
That 'twas nor the Aim of the Council either, by an Extract out of a Book
called, Les Arms Victori^ses du Roy, wherein it was made out, that it was a
great piece of injustice to force the Conscience; and that there was nothing
incompatible with the welfare of the State in the Toleration of ^wo Religions.
This Francophilus was of opinion, That the Reformed might be suffered to hold
Ecclesiastical Assemblies under certain Conditions; to reduce Colloquies from
four to one in a year; but to hold Provincial Synods but once in three years
nor for one Province to hold correspondence with another; no^ to have any more
National Synods; or if they had, not to me^^ above once in six years with the
King's permission* and in such a place as he should be pleased to appoint,
under the oversight ^^ a Commissioner to be present on the King's behalf. As
for Polity Assemblies, he deemed it necessary that they should be suppressed
as pernicious, or to suffer 'em only at some time three years after the
National Synods. He observed that the Nobility were never present at those
Assemblies, but only to flatter, and get Pensions whether in Peace or War, at
the expense of the Common Cause: That the Commissioners of the Third Estate had
the same Ends: That it was dishonest, unprofitable, and dangerous, for
Ministers to leave their Churches, to be present ^ those Meetings. And in a
word, he would have all these Meetings to be very rarely held, and after
another manner then ti^^ that time they had bin allowed. As to the Money, of
which the Reformed demanded restitution, he was of opinion, That ^^ ought not
to be restored: 'Twas in his opinion Money ill bestowed, which served only to
defray the Expenses of Assemblies* where nothing but War was talked of. The
disingaging of private Persons was to be referred to the King's Prudence; who
was ^^ judge upon whom it was proper to confer his Favors, and how far it was
fitting for him to extend 'em; provided those Favor were requested not with
their Arms in their hands, and with Rebellious Expostulations, but with tears
in their Eyes, and testimonies of Repentance. He concluded, That if Peace were
offered upon Conditions dishonorable to the King, a War would be more
advantageous.

The Contents of that Treatise may well be thought to be written by a Person
well informed of the Court's Intentions, since that afterward they put in
practice every thing that he asserted. The War then was continued; and after
the taking of several The Siege of Mompellier.
Little Places that might annoy the Army, the King sat down before Mompellier.
But the Prince of Conde, who had the Command of these petty Enterprises,
discharged his duty after a most cruel manner. Always some unfortunate
Creatures were (...) to be executed in those Cities that were surrendered (...)
himself; and it is a wonderful thing, that those Rigorous Proceedings did not
animate the Reformed to be more obstinate in their Resistance: For there was
not any Place that yielded, which could not have held out much longer, or that
might not we obtained at least an honorable Capitulation. Lunel was ^e of
those unfortunate Cities, where the Garrison that sustained ^e Siege, underwent
all the Cruelties that could be expected or ^r'd from a faithless Enemy. For
that instead of being safe conducted, as they ought to have been, they were
almost all (...) to pieces by the Soldiers of the Prince's Army, who gave but
^^^y slight and superficial Orders to prevent the slaughter. All ^e Paggage
which they carried out was pillaged; and they who ^^d committed this Barbarous
Action, re-enter'd Lunel with a ^ring confidence, carrying away those people
Prisoners who ^^ve them any hopes of Ransom, and making them the Porters ^
their Booty, as if it had been the Prize of a just and lawful ^ar. But by good
luck for some of those Prisoners, Bassom^rre happened to be at the Gate as the
Soldiers were coming ^^t, who caused some of 'em to be hanged; ordered the
Prisoners to be set at liberty, and their Baggage to be restored 'em. ^owevert
his was all the justice that was done to recompense the ^ughter of the greatest
part of the Garrison that marched out. ^^ch an Action as this committed by the
Reformed would have ^^en a copious Subject for Fenouillet's Eloquence to have
engaged upon.

Moreover, Several of these Places had bin half demolished: and the Reformed
being too late convinced of the truth of what (...) had often formerly repeated
to 'em, that the too great ^^mber of Places which they coveted to hold in their
hands, did not weaken up, and keep their Forces too much separated, they ^^e^e
desirous to preserve their Men for the most important Ci^^s, as Nimes, Vsez,
Mompellier, and some others. Their Re^^tance in those of lesser Importance was
only to amuse the Ene^ys Army, and that they might waste their Time, their
Ammunition, and their Men. Which makes it apparent* whither the Catholics had
any reason to complain that the Reformed demolished their Houses, and levelled
the Fortifications of their Castles, since they as little spared their own
Houses, as such Town^ also which they had no mind to defend.

The Duke of Mommorency likewise obtained some small Advantage Success of the
War in diverse places.
over the Reiters, and the Lansquenets: But the reducing of Aiguesmortes, which
Chatillon surrendered to the King was of greater consequence. He had held it a
long time as (...) were, in trust, and he was so well fixed there, that the
Assembly, who deprived him of the Government of the Circle, and who put him out
of Mompellier, notwithstanding the numerous* Party which he had there, could
not dispossess him of that Place. All that they could do, was to declare the
City (...) Associate with Chatillon in his Desertion, and to look upon (...) as
a Town in hostility against 'em. Nor had they made but a very lame Answer, in
the behalf of that Nobleman, to the Manifesto published against him by the
Assembly. The whole was reduced to a bare denial of those things which were
laid (...) his Charge, which in reality were too evident; or to excuse some
things, as done out of a good Intention: All the rest was only stufft with
Recriminations and Reproaches. But his Advancement after all this made it
appear, that their Suspicious were not ill grounded. For at length the Promises
of the Court, with which he had bin so long time held in play Chatillon made
Marshal of France.
were fulfilled to him; and the King created him a Marshal of France. But the
Duke of Vendome had no such good success in Upper Languedoc, where the King had
left a small Body of an Army. At first, he took in some Places inconsiderable
for their strength; but having laid siege to Briteste, he was foiled before
that Pitiful Hamlet, where the Garrison behaved themselves so manfully, that
after two Months time lot, he was so happy as to receive an Order to attend the
King before Mompellier, which gave him an honorable Occasion to raise his
Siege.

Among several Persons of Quality that laid their Bones in the Approches of
Mompelier, the Duke of Fronsac, a young Gentleman of great hopes; and the only
Son of the Duke of St. Paul was slain; and his Death had like to have bin
revenged by a Massacre of the Reformed. For the People of Orleans offered to
the Count of St. Paul, their Governor, to avenge the ^eath of his Son upon the
Reformed, their Fellow-Citizens; Sedition at Orleans.
(...) he had much ado to put a stop to their Fury, upon his reusal of their
insolent Offers. But when the Corpse of the young ^ince was carried to Fronsac,
where he was to be entombed, ^e Catholics could not be hindered from
sacrificing several of ^e Reformed to his Ghost, notwithstanding the presence
of the Count of St. Paul himself, whose menial Servants joined themselves with
the Catholics. Nor were they suppressed, till they had in some measure appeased
their bellowing Rage with ^e Atonements of Blood and Plunder. However the
Count, (...) show that he by no means approved such Acts of Violence, ^us'd one
or two to be hanged. Nevertheless, I know not that excuse he could make for his
Indulgence to his Servants, those punishment would have bin much more
exemplary, then ^at of any one culled out of the multitude. But the Sedition
(...) Lion could not be so soon pacified, where it brake forth most ^olently
upon the 27th of September. It began among the ^bble, intermixed with Lacqueys,
who seeing a Reformed pass ^ng in the Piazza of the Gray Friars, where he
lived, began (...) abuse him, but he made his escape to a Neighbor's house.
However, his Goods were plundered and burnt; at what time (...) others of the
Reformed crossing the Piazza in like man^r, were set upon, and most injuriously
handled by the same (...). There was then a certain new word, which was be^me
in fashion, and which the Catholics had always in their ^ouths, when they had a
mind to affront one of the Reformed. The word Huguenot was grown so stale, that
they were accustomed to it; and many very prudent and moderate People ^ade use
of it as a word equivalent to that of pretended Reformed. But instead of that,
they afterward invented another, which the Rabble swallowed with extraordinary
greedi^ss. This was the pleasing Nickname of Parpaillots; the Original of which
word lies very obscure. Some assert, that The Original of Parpaillots.
(...) first time it was made use of, was at the Siege of Clairac. the Garrison,
say they, made a Sally one night, and to the end they might distinguish each
other in the medley, they put their ^irts over their Clothes; which made the
King's Soldiers, by whom they were repulsed, give 'em the Nickname of
Parpaillots, because that under that dress, they resembl'd Butterflie^ which
have white wings, and of which there were great numbers flying about the Fields
at that time: For the Vulgar in Gayenne and Languedoc call those little Insects
Parpaillets, or Parpaillots. This word being pronounced by some in view of the
Soldiers as they marched out of Clairac, was taken up by others and in a moment
spread over the whole Army; from whence it flew over all the Kingdom where the
Soldiers were quartered* Nor were there many places in France where this word
was more in use then at Paris, and it missed but very little of being as common
in Guyenne; which renders that Province the most likely place from whence the
word was first of all derived.

Others refer it to some Surprises of the Reformed, who either innocently or
imprudently fell into the Snares that we^ laid for 'em. And some making the
Original of this word al^ most as ancient as the Civil Wars, refer it to the
simplicity ^^ the Reformed Chieftains, who went to Paris under the Pretense of
the Marriage of the Prince of Navarre, to lay themselves at the mercy of their
Enemies. For that upon the Massacre which ensued, they were compared by those
People wh^ insulted over their Credulity, to Butterflies, that fly of
themselves to burn in the Candle. And because the Comparison might first of all
perhaps be made by some one that lived in the Country where those Insects are
called Parpaillots, therefore (...) Gascon word was retained, in derision,
rather then the French. There are others who derive the word, with probability
enough* from the white Mandillions which the Reformed wore in the first Wars;
more especially in that which the Prince of (...) began, by his attempt upon
Meux. Those white Mandillions behaved themselves so well at the Battle of
Paris, in the judgment of the Turkish Envoy, who beheld the Combat from the
walls of the City, that he wished his Master but Six thousand such as they, to
subdue the whole world. That sort of Habit was the reason that they were called
Papillons, or Parpaillots, in English Butterflies, in regard their best men
came from that Province where that word is in use. These Derivations might seem
natural enough, were it certain that the word was known long before the Wars of
Lewis XIII. But some derive it from an Original less noble, and say, that among
those who were executed after the taking of Towns, some poor Wretch or other at
the same of his approaching death, with an assurance that his Soul, so soon as
it parted from the Body, should fly to Heaven, made (...) of the comparison of
a Papillon or Butterfly; which being ridiculed by the Spectators, they took an
occasion from thence, to call all the Reformed Parpaillots, or Butterflies.

However it were, certain it is, that the Reformed were highly offended at this
Nickname; nor did they look upon the word Huguenot as half so great an Affront.
And indeed there are two things of which it is equally difficult to give a
reason; the Original of certain words, which of a sudden become universally in
use, though no body can tell either who was the Author, (...) what was the
occasion; and the Idea of the Injury which People believe attends the use of
'em.

Thus the word Hust in Normandy was a Reproach which Of the word Hust.
(...) vulgar sort of People threw upon the Reformed. Nevertheless, the word in
it self has no signification, and concerning the Original of which, I never
could hear but ridiculous Stories without any probability; however the word was
looked upon as ^ery seditious. And I have seen Petitions presented to the
Magistrates, which have produced Informations, Sentences and Decrees of
Parliament, which forbid the use of that word, the ^nely Crime mentioned in the
Complaint.

'Twas the same thing with the word Parpaillot, of which the Reformed
complained as of a heinous Injury, though perhaps they would have found it a
hard task to have told what was so ^^ensive in it, unless it were that they
from whose foul mouths (...) came, spoke it with a design to affront 'em.

The Reformed then being assailed at Lion by that seditious Violence of the
Seditior.
Rabble, were, among other foul language, called Parpaillots, and threatened
with the Halter. To which, while some were a ^^ttle too forward to return as
good as the other brought, they ^^nflam'd the fury of those that were already
sufficiently heated, and whose number was already swelled to three or four
thousand, by the concourse of Lacqueys, Children, and the Rifraff of the
People; so that at last, they broke into the houses of the Reformed, plundered
whatever was of value, burnt what they could not carry away, beat, wounded and
killed several of those that fell into their hands. This Fury lasted three
days; neither the Magistrates, nor the Governor being able to stop the Career
of those Violences. And yet, to say the truth, considering the condition the
City was in at that time, they must needs have bin very remiss, or else it
never could have bin so difficult a matter to have reduced that Canaille to
reason. For d'Alincourt, the Governor of the City, had his Guards, the City was
divided into Quarters, which had every one their Captains and their Streamers,
and could have easily raised men enough to have dispersed those Rakehells. The
Queen and the Queenmother were both at Lion, together with the Bishop of Lus^^,
soon after made a Cardinal, with some Soldiers to guard 'em. But at Lion, as
well as at Paris, they were much afraid of spilling Catholic Blood. Otherwise,
they might have drawn together a little Army able to have done much more, then
stop the Insolence of a handful of Lacqueys. But they would not take any other
course to suppress the Mutineers then by Remonstrances; and perhaps they would
not have put themselves to the trouble of giving 'em any molestation, had they
not him afraid lest the Rabble, having once tasted the sweets of Pillage,
should have flown upon the Catholics, after they had got what they could from
the Reformed. All the severity of the Magistrate went no farther then to place
Guards in some places, and to threaten some of the most tumultuous to send 'em
to Prison. At length indeed the Queenmother caused herself to be carried to the
place where the disorder was most violent, and then the seditious Rout, already
almost aweary, began to retire. But there was no body punished for all this
Insolence but the Reformed; for instead of giving 'em satisfaction, d'Alincourt
disarmed 'em. Nor was there any care taken to revenge the death the Reformed
disarmed.
of those that were massacr'd, or to repair the damages of those who had bin
plundered and burnt. Nay, they were made believe, they had a great Favor done
'em, that so much care had bin taken to prevent their being torn in pieces by
the multitude. As for the Catholics, there were some indeed committed ^o
Prison, but released again in a few days after, without either Fine, or any
other punishment. The only harm that was done ^em, was only their being forbid
to use the word Parpaillot for the future. A little violent Rhetoric would have
made these Acts of Injustice look very odious. And had the Reformed ^appen'd to
have done such a thing in the very sight of both their Queens, all the blood in
their bodies would not have suf^^'d to have expiated their Crime.

While the King lay before Mompelier, the Count of Soissons ^ress'd hard upon
Rochel by Land, and the Duke of Guise by ^ea; and that potent City was every
way hard beset. The Count laid the Foundations of Fort-Lewis, which was like to
^rove a great Annoyance to it, in regard it commanded the Channel; so that the
Sea was no longer open to her, nor could he be relieved on that side but with
great difficulty. Nevertheless the Assembly stood their ground, and issued
forth the ^est Orders they could for the support of the common Cause. they held
Correspondences in several places, and sometimes ^^me of the Nobility, and some
Soldiers of good Note, got into the City to defend it. However, several of
their Enterpri^es had no success; and though Rochel had bin the occasion of
sufficient damages to the Royal Army and Navies both by Sea and Land, she was
at last reduced to fight for her own Walls. ^he Duke of Soubise, after the
Overthrow he had received, went Soubise sollicits for Succor in England
into England, and left no Stone unturned to procure some considerable Succor
from the King; but that Prince, always obstinate in his Maxims, would not hear
a word of it, but forbid his ^ubjects to assist the Reformed, whom he made no
scruple to all Rebels. Nevertheless he offered his Intercession with the King
of France, for obtaining a tolerable Peace between him and his Subjects. In
short, he ordered his Ambassadors to make (...) their business, as he had done
before, when Montauban was ^esieg'd, where Hay his Envoy had already made some
Over^^res; and when the Conditions were resolved upon as a ground work for
entering into a Treaty, he earnestly pressed the Duke of Rohan and the Rochellers
to submit to 'em. In the ^ean time the English were not of his mind as to the
War of France: for they gave such considerable Assistance to the Duke Soubise,
that he got together a Fleet of ten or twelve Sail, laden with all things
necessary for the relief of Rochel. But that Fleet was unfortunately cast away
in the Harbor before it set Sail; so that when the Duke came to take shipping,
he found nothing but the ruins of his warlike Preparations, and all the marks
of a terrible Shipwreck.

But before Mompelier, things did not succeed according to the King's Wishes.
The City held out stoutly; the Season spent apace; and the ill success of the
Siege of Montauban was not forgot; and though on the one side, the Reformed had
reason to fear that the King at last would take the City; on the other hand,
the King had as much reason to believe that he should be forced to lose all his
labor, and go without it. These Fears, on both sides, bent their Inclinations
to Peace: but the Prince of Conde would by no means so much as hear talk of it
and therefore the design of concluding it, was to be kept private from him.
Lesdiguieres, created Constable but a little before, undertook the Negotiation
once again, and after several Obstacles surmounted, which had like, several
times, to have dashed the whole Negotiation to pieces, at length it was decreed
and the Constable came to the Army to put a final end to it* One of those
things which occasioned the greatest trouble, was that the King would needs
enter into the City, and that the Inhabitants were afraid that if they did
admit him, he would make 'em pay dear for the Expenses of so long a Siege.
Neverthelefs, the King disdaining to promise one of his Cities, by a formal
Treaty, that he would not have entrance into it, there was a necessity of
endeavoring to persuade the Inhabitants to submit. To this purpose the Duke of
Rohan had leave to enter, and make the Proposal to the Citizens. He did so; b^
whether he undertook that Commission rather to inform himself of the true state
of the Town, then to persuade the People to a good liking of the Proposal; or
whether it were, that he could not remove out of their minds the fear of being
made a new Example of the Infidelities of the Court, he returned, without being
able to obtain the Consent of the City to admit the King. Upon that, he
promised to send 'em Relief, because the Town was in great want of men: but he
met with so many difficulties, after the Duke of Vendome's and the Constable's
^en were arrived in the King's Camp, that at length he resolved upon a Peace.

Thereupon it was concluded in despite of the Prince of The Treaty concluded
with an Edict.
Conde, who for madness, to see that he had so little Credit, and that an
Affair of such Importance should be concealed from ^is knowledge, quitted the
Court, and traveled into Italy. On the other side, the Duke of Rohan, with the
Commissioners ^f Cevennes, Nimes, and Vsez, came to Mompellier; and the ^9th of
October the Edict of Peace was published in the Camp before Mompellier. This
Edict was set forth in the Form of ^ Pardon, wherein the King, before all
things, took care to assert the Justice of his Arms taken up against the
Reformed; whose Rebellions he ascribed to the Artifices of those who thought to
make advantage of their Simplicity, and the Troubles of the State; and he took
God to witness that his Intension had always bin to procure the Peace and
Welfare of his Subjects. After which, he declared that he had granted a Peace
upon the humble Petitions and Supplications of the Reformed, who had besought
it by their Commissioners sent on purpose, together with a Pardon for their
Offenses. By this Peace he confirmed the Edicts not only of the deceased King,
^ut his own. He likewise confirmed the Secret Articles; but ^e added the word
Enregister'd, wherein he had an Aim that ^o body mistrusted; and which was
afterward the foundation ^f many Cavils. He re settled the Roman Religion in
several places where the exercise of it had bin interrupted, and recor'd to the
Ecclesiastics their Tenths, their Revenues, and their Houses. He also
reestablished the Reformed Religion in places where it had bin disturbed by
the War. He ordained that the Cities remaining in the hands of the Reformed,
preserving their ancient Fortifications, should demolish their new ^nes; for
which they gave Hostages; and he forbid the fortifying of any place, under any
pretense whatever. He extended the benefit of the Peace to all those that would
submit in fifteen days after publication of the Edict. He put down all Politic
Assemblies, if they were not authorized by his Express Permission; but he
consented to their holding Consistories, Colloquies and Synods, according to
custom, provided that nothing were handled therein but merely Ecclesiastical
Affairs. He granted an Act of Oblivion for all that had happened since the
first of January 1621, as full, and with the same Restrictions as that which
had been granted by the 76th, 77th, and 86th Articles of the Edict of Nantes.
He added a particular Amnesty for what had happened at Privas, wherein he
comprehended Brison, who had been the Author of those Commotions, and who had
kept his ground there ever since the beginning of the year. As for the
Accounts, and the Sentences or Decrees that had bin issued out against the
Reformed who had born Arms, they were regulated according to the Articles of
the Edict of Nantes, that mentioned the same things; and the Judgments
pronounced between Persons of their Party by the Judges settled in the Provinces
by Authority of the Chieftains, were confirmed; the Prisoners on both sides
were released without Ransom. All Persons of what quality soever were restored
to their Estates, their Dignities and Employments. The observation of this
Edict was regulated according to the Form prescribed by the 82d Article of
Nantes; and the King promised to send Commissioners into the Provinces to see
it duly executed.

This Edict freed from much trouble a great many Persons, Right of Parlaments.
against whom the Parliament had issued forth very severe Decrees, which were
put in execution without mercy. Thus the Unfortunate L^ssius, who had been
proscribed at the beginning of the Troubles, not being able to escape his being
surpised at Bourdeaux, was put to death, in pursuance of a Decree set forth
against him the 18th of May. For they thought it more proper and more agreeable
to their nature, to look upon his Actions as Acts of Rebellion against his
Prince, then effects of Zeal for his Religion and Country. He was suspected
for one of those who had a great share in the Intrigues of the Reformed, and
they coupl'd him with Chamier, who was slain at the Siege of Montauban, and
Hautefontaine, who lived with the Duke of Rohan. The Parliament of Rennes no
less violent then that of Bourdeaux, had upon the 10th of the same Month issued
forth a most terrible Decree against the Marquess de la Muce, and le Noir his
Minister. They condemned 'em for Con^^macy to the That is, to walk barefoot and
bareheaded through the Street with a burning Taper in their hands to some
public place, and there to acknowledge their Offense.
Amend Honorable, and to be drawn by four Horses. Their Posterity was
degraded, and declared Peasants: de la Muce's Houses and Castle were
demolished, and his Wood cut down to the ^eighth of a Man. Moreover, their
Goods were confiscated, and themselves fined the Sum of Ten thousand Livres,
and Six thousand Livres to be bestowed upon some Churches and Mo^asteries. La
Muce was also levelled with the Earth; though (...) Decrees of Contumacy the
Proceedings were not wont to be ^swift: But in regard the persons condemned
were out of the Parlament's reach, they were discharged for an Execution in
(...). There were also several other very Rigorous Decrees according to the
Passionate Humor of the Parlaments, which were to take cognizance of the
Parties accused. Nay, the Duke of Rohan himself had bin declared a
State-Criminal by a particular Decree made on purpose. However they spared him,
while the Constable de Luines lived; but after his death a Declaration was
published against the Duke and his Adherents; ^et though it came forth 27th of
December of the preceding ^ear* it was not verified till the fourth of July,
1622. So that (...) Duke bore Arms above a year against the King, made himself
master of several Places, relieved Montauban, and committed all manner of
Hostilities all the while, before he was ^s'd as a Rebel.

This Peace proved very honorable for the Duke of Rohan, The Advantages of
(...) Peace
who notwithstanding that the Reformed had lost about fourscore Towns, was yet
in a condition to gain a General Peace, which the King had refused at the Siege
of Montauban; but the Pri^ate Articles were still more to his advantage then
the General. The remaining Places were left in the hands of the Reformed, not
under the Title of Security, Marriage or Hostage, but by way of free Gift, and
voluntary Concession; which did ^ut only alter the name, not the thing. It Is
true, that the King would no longer tie himself to pay the Garrisons, nor what
was due for the time past, as the Sums promised either by himself, or his
Father, for the Salaries of the Ministers: Yet he gave 'em some hopes that he
would pay 'em for the future: But that Article was ill observed as well as the
rest.

By a particular Brevet, the King promised that he would neither keep any
Garrison, nor erect any Citadel at Mompellier* that the City should remain in
the Custody of the Consuls; and that there should be no Innovation, other then
the demolishing of the new Fortifications: which Brief was delivered to the
Duke of Rohan, who lodged it in the Consul's hands. By other Breifs, permission
was given that Rochel and Montauban should preserve their Fortifications in the
same condition as the^ stood; and that the Works about Nimes, Castres, Vsez,
and Milhau, should be but half demolished. But when that Article about the
demolishing of the Fortifications came to ^^ put in execution, notice was given
to the Parliament of Toulouse, that the Reformed went to work after such a
manner that by dismantling their Cities, they made 'em better and stronger then
before: so that upon the 14th of December there came forth a Decree, which
forbid those counterfeit dismantlings: which was the reason that that same
Article of the Edict was laid aside, and the places left in the same condition
as the Peace found 'em.

Nor did the Parliament verify the Edict of Peace but with several
Qualifications. The Parliament of Paris, instead of the words, Cities of the
pretended Reformed Religion, put in, Cities (...) by those of the pretended
Reformed Religion: and in the room of the words, Ecclesiastical Affairs, they
altered 'em into, Affairs concerning the Regulations of the said pretended
Reformed Religion* These petty Niceties however displayed no signs of
Embitterment: But the Parliament of Bourdeaux laid about 'em with the same
passionate Fury as they had shown during the Frenzi^^ of the League. They
verified the Edict, without approving any other then the Catholic Religion, or
admitting the words Ecclesiastical Affairs. They ordained that the dismantling
of their Towns should be continued, till it were thoroughly finished* that such
Judgments as were in favor of the Catholics, should stand good; but that those
which were advantageous to the Reformed, should be revokable upon a bare
Petition; and th^^ no Foreigners should be capable of being Ministers in the
Kingdom. These affected Severities in the Verification of an Edict, ^ight well
be looked upon as a Presage, that the Repose which it contributed to the
Kingdom, would not be of long conti^^ance.

Nevertheless, all the Cities which had joined together in the All the Cities
accept the Peace.
^^mmon Cause, accepted of the Peace, though there were ^^me that were afraid
of the Consequence. Privas, and Brison, who had held it out, notwithstanding
the Conquests which Cha^llo^ had suffered the Duke of Mommorency to make in the
Neighboring parts, came in upon the general Conditions. Montauban proud of
having held out a Siege where the King was in person, and of preserving her
Fortifications as a Tro^y of her Victory, accepted the Conditions also. Rochel
pressed (...) Sea and Land, and fearing to be assailed by the whole strength of
the Kingdom, if she refused the Conditions proposed, submitted to the Count of
Soissons, who commanded the King's Forces that attacqu'd her. However, the Duke
of Guise, ^ough well informed that the Peace was concluded, adventured (...)
engage the Fleet of that City; and because he could not ^^^d out a way to
excuse that Action, which cost a great deal (...) Blood on both sides, 'twas
given out that Rochel knew it as well as he, and that she would not have
accepted the Peace, ^^d she got the better. To say truth, her loss was not so
great, ^^t that she was still in a condition to appear formidable. And (...)
may be said, that her damage consisted in this, that the least ^es of a City,
that has no other assistance to trust to but her ^wn, are always considerable,
rather then in her receiving any great harm by the King's Fleet. But after the
tidings of the ^eace, all Acts of Hostility ceased, and the City thought
herself delivered from all her fears of a long Siege. Vsez, Nimes, Milhau, all
the rest of the Cities obeyed, and flattered themselves with seeing the Edicts
better observed for the future, then hitherto ^^ey had bin.

But Catholic Zeal had not yet altered her Characters: nor Ill observed by the
Court.
was it lawful for the Council to make a Peace of that nature, ^^t with a
resolution to violate it. One of the first effects of ^^e Infidelity of the
Court, was her defrauding the most part of the Deserters of the common Cause,
and denying 'em the Recompenses which had bin promised em; for the performance
(...) which Promises they never had bin urgent. The King thought that the Peace
which he had granted to all the Reformed, ha^ disengaged him from the Promises
which he had made to particular men, merely to retain 'em in their obedience.
Nor would many People have murmured at this piece of Infidelity, had the
stopped there: and it was agreed on all sides, that they who ha^ sold for ready
money, the Towns that were the security of their Religion and their
Consciences, deserved no better usage: b^ the Court-Designs soon after broke
out into Frauds of high^ importance. For they had promised the Rochelois to
demoli^ the Fort which the Count of Soissons had built, to curb and a^ noy the
City. But they were so far from observing that Article, that the Fort was not
finished till after the Peace was made nor could all the Complaints of the
Rochellois obtain a^ other then feigned Commands to demolish it; of which they
to whom they were sent, had private Orders to take (...) notice.

Among the secret Conditions which were granted to the City of Mompelier, there
was a Promise made to the Inhabitants, that the King should not enter with
above four Colors of Foo^ which should march out back again with him. To elude
which Promise, the whole Regiment of Guards was ordered to enter i^ under no
more then four Colors, unworthily abusing the a^ biguous signification of the
word; though, as time has made it out, the word Colors or Ensign, signifies
much more usually in common speech, a Company of Soldiers marching under (...)
Ensign, then the Colors or Ensign it self. But they carried the Fraud yet
higher; and to enforce the Inhabitants to suffer (...) Garrison 'twas thought
fit to demand Hostages of 'em, for security of the Commissioners which the King
intended to leav^ there, under pretense of looking after the demolishing of the
Fortifications: and the number of Hostages was so great, (...) which there must
be so many that had no kindness for the Coun^ or well affected to the Reformed
Religion, that they well equally terrified with the choice and the number.
Besides, that Proposal was made 'em with such an air, as made it sufficiently
apparent that Hostages were demanded of 'em to no other purpose* then to make
'em redeliver the Brief which exempted 'em ^^om admitting a Garrison, and which
made 'em afraid that if ^^ey did not provide for themselves, they should be
forced not only to give Hostages, but receive a Garrison also. At last some
people, who had bin none of the most zealous during the War, ^^fected a servile
compliance with the good will and pleasure ^^ the Court, in hopes of
reconciling themselves to the King, ^^d made it their business with great
fervency to discourage ^^hers, so that they accepted a Garrison, and thought it
their du^^ to receive it, though they had a mortal reluctance against it, if it
had bin a favor done 'em to abuse and then laugh at 'em. Nor did the Court
stop here; the Consulship of Mompelier ^as intermixed half Catholics, half
Protestants, and a Citadel ^oreover erected.

In the mean time the King returned to Paris, and in his march The King return
to Paris.
^^ok from the Reformed all those places which were under their ^overnment. The
Constable, though he were turned Catho^^^^, could hardly preserve his own in
the Dauphinate. Nay, (...) had bin despoiled of 'em, had not his Son-in-law,
Crequi, pro^^s'd to resign 'em after his death. The Adviser of these tart
^roceedings was Puisieux, who began to grow into favor. The ^^ath of the
Cardinal de Retz, who possessed a great share of ^^e Royal Authority, and the
absence of the Prince of Conde, ^^o shared another part, gave him an
opportunity to engross ^^e whole; and as if the King had bin weary of governing
alone, (...) resigned himself up almost without any limitations, into the ^^nds
of this new Favorite. The Spaniards had already got ^^e Ascendant over him,
and had infused into him their own ^^litics. The Court of Rome, which at that
time acted only (...) Concert with the House of Austria, supported those
Foreign ^axims to the utmost of their Power: so that Puisieux, full of
^eneration for those two Potentates, did nothing but with a ^^sign to render
himself their Minion, and who was therefore ^^ely guided by their Counsels. And
indeed till then there was (...) certain kind of Fatality which intangl'd the
Favorites in ^^reign Interests: As if they could have erected their Gran^^ur
upon a better Foundation, by corresponding with an Enemies Court, then upon the
good will of their Sovereign, and the prosperity of his Affairs.

But this Favor lasted not long; for while it seemed to be The Bishop of Luson
made a Cardinal.
almost Battery proof, there was an Alteration prepared for him which no body
suspected in the least: For the Queen Mother had not quenched as yet her
violent thirst of Rule; and in regard she had a great confidence in the Bishop
of Luson, she used her utmost endeavor to advance him, persuaded that he would
be so grateful for her Favors, as always to depend upon her* That Prelat had
wound himself into the King's good opinion because he had more then once
contributed to patch up the Differences between him and the Queen his Mother,
whose restless spirit gave him cause of vexation enough: so that he was loo^
upon with a favorable Aspect by both sides, and both Parti^ though themselves
beholding to him for what he only did (...) gratify his own Ambition. So that
he readily obtained of the Queen Mother the utmost of her endeavors to put the
Kin^ upon demanding a Cardinal's Cap for him; nor did the Kin^ make any great
scruple to consent to her Request. Neverthe less, this Negotiation held off and
on for above two years before it took effect, as being thwarted, perhaps, by
those that were unwilling by so fair and proper a means to hand a man of his
Genius into Authority. But the Solicitation was redoubled this year so luckily
and so effectually, that the Po^ granted the Cap to this Bishop at the
beginning of September* As for the Bishop, he had waited the success of the
No^tion with extraordinary Impatience, despairing almost of success, by reason
that Puisieux seemed to him a dreadful Enemy and such an one in whose power it
was to put a stop to his Preferment, more especially because his Kinsman
Silleri was the Ambassador at Rome. So that the News could not choose (...) be a
pleasing Surprise to him.

Nor could the towering Genius of that Prelat hinder him from The Character of
that Prelat.
being extremely sensible of the Impressions of unexpected Events and he was no
less prone to commit great Absurdities, when he had not time to compose
himself. Never was any man less the Master of his first Transports. But he was
so lucky, that he easily got time enough to recollect himself; and he was so^
dextrous, that he never let the opportunity slip. So that he ^em'd to have a
heart that nothing could surprise, and which was equally provided against all
Accidents. I shall here relate what was told me upon this occasion, by one of
the most considerable persons in the Court of France. There was at the Court of
Savoy a French Gentleman who had bin forced to quit that of France, by reason
of some distaste which he had given ^o the Bishop of Luson. That Gentleman, who
passionately ^ought all means to be reconciled to the Bishop, was in the Duke
of Savoy's presence when the Courier, who brought the News of the Promotion of
Cardinals, came to present him with the Letters: which were immediately opened
by reason of the Curiosity, which is common to all Courts, to know the names of
those whom the Pope has advanced to that Dignity: and then it was that the
Prince read aloud the names of four who had a share in that Honor. But then
the Gentleman hearing the Bishop of Luson's name, began to consider with
himself, whether if he should be the first that carried him the tidings, it
might not be enough to restore him to his favor: and thereupon finding he had
time enough to get before the Courier, he took Horse immediately, and made such
speed, that he got to Lion two hours before the Courier.

Presently away he went directly to the Bishop's Apartment, How he received the
News of his Pr^^otion.
who was no less surpised at his Arrival, then to see him at his feet. But
when he understood from the Gentleman the News of his Promotion, and how he
came by his Intelligence, he abandoned himself to such an excess of Joy, and
after such an unusual manner, as if the giving him the Cap, had deprived him of
his Reason. He forgot all the gravity and decorum of his Character, and
displayed his satisfaction by motions and gestures so unbecoming a man of his
Age and Quality, that the Gentleman was more afraid of his hatred then ever, as
having bin so unfortunate to be the Witness of a piece of weakness which the
Bishop had reason to be ashamed of as long as he lived. But after a little time
had given the first transports of his Joy leave to evaporate, the Bishop
delivered him out of his fears, and only very seriously admonished him not to
let any body know what he had seen, nor to appear at Court till the Courier was
arrived. But though the Gentleman were very trusty in observing the last
Injunction, he could no more forbear his disobedience to the latter then
Midas's Barber. In the mean time, the Bishop came to himself again, and had time
to compose the Disorders of his mind; so that when the Queen sent for him, to
impart the welcome News to him, he received it with such a careless Hypocrisy,
as if his Soul had bin above such a Transitory Dignity. That Gravity, which he
had had time to study, begot him a world of Admiration, and caused the
Courtiers to speak many things in his commendation. Thus many times in Eminent
Persons, the Hits of Chance are imputed to Prudence; Prosperity is admired as
the Architecture of the Man's Genius, and the Praises belonging to Virtue, are
bestowed upon outward Appearances.

The King lay then before Mompelier when the New Cardinal Excessive Flatteries.
came to pay him his returns of Thanks, so that he could not give him the
Bonnet till after the Peace, when he returned to Paris. I would repeat the
Prodigious Flatteries of those that harangu'd the King all along where he lay
upon the Road, did I not find that the Reformed imitated the Catholics; and
strove to outvy 'em in their Excesses and Hyperbole's. Nevertheless, I cannot
forbear to say something of the Consul Montelimar, who extended the
extravagance of his Style, and his Eulogies, farther then any other. He
insisted upon the Divine Aspect and presence of the King: He attributed to him
Virtues that Heaven revered, and the Earth adored, and a Life so holy in the
midst of Crowned Exaltation, and Royal Grandeur, that he deserved both the
Altars and Sacrifices of Sacred Veneration. These Fulsome Flatteries are either
the Effects or Forerunners of Pusillanimous Servitude; and Subjects renounce
their right of complaining that their Sovereign exalts his Power above Justice,
when they make him more then mortal by such soaring Adulations. Which is the
reason that nowadays we find that Flattery has no bounds, where the People
have lost their Liberty beyond recovery.

While the King lay at Lion, whither the Duke of Rohan followed him to solicit
the performance of the Treaty of Peace, the Commissioners from Rochel arrived
there the same time, to obtain an Order for demolishing Fort Lewis. It Is true,
they received some show of satisfaction, because they had a Letter given 'em
under the Privy Signet, directed to Arnaud Commander of the Fort, wherein he
was ordered to level it with the ground within eight days after the Rochelois
had dismantl'd some of their New Fortifications. But at the same time there was
another Letter written, which was sent by a shorter way, wherein Arnaud was
ordered to give no credit to the former Letter. So that when the Rochelois
delivered him the Letter which their Commissioners had brought, they were
scornfully used, and returned without any hopes of satisfaction. Soon after
also, notwithstanding these Counterfeit Letters from the Court, they ^aw quite
finished what remained to be done, in order to put^ing the Fort into a perfect
posture of defense. On the other side Valence, who was left by the King in
Mompelier, with a considerable Garrison, endeavored to make himself Master of
some places in Cevennes, under pretense of quartring some Soldiers that were
only upon their march through the Country. Upon which the Cities of Sauve and
Gange, either too credulous, ^r because they had not sufficient warning, gave
the Soldiers admittance. But the Duke of Rohan took such care, that the rest
preserved themselves from being so surpised.

Soon after, the Duke went to Mompelier, to regulate some 1623.
things which Valence, to whom, in his return from Lion, he The Duke of Rohan
detained Prisoner.
carried a Letter from the King which concerned the Execution of the Peace; But
no sooner was he entered the City, but Valence being informed of his Travailing
by himself, and by consequence, having had leisure to prepare himself for such
an Action, seized upon him as his Prisoner. His Pretense was, That he was come
to raise Commotions and that he did not pursue the Intentions of the Court in
the Execution of the Peace. It Is true indeed, he was not privy to the
Intentions of those who never made the Peace but with a design to break it: He
observed the Terms of the Declaration and Briefs: But Valence, who was
Puisieux's Brother-in law, better understood the Mystery. That Minister had
promised the Pope's Nuntio, That ^he Peace should serve to no other end then to
ruin the Reformed; and he made use of all the most palpable Frauds that could
be devised, to bring it to pass. But the news of the Duke of Rohan's being
detained a Prisoner, begat both astonishment and indignation in all the
Reformed who had any thing of courage left; and Soubise threatened to renew the
War. Nor was the Court less astonished at the News, then they were in the
Provinces: And the boldness of the Action appeared so great, that they were in
no small perplexity what course to take. There were some, who neither
considered the King's Honor, nor the scandalizing all Europe, that were for
putting the Duke to death: But Moderation was thought the better way: He was
released upon condition he should quit the City, and the Lower Languedoc, and
execute his Commission in the Upper. This Proceeding of the Court may be
attributed to several Reasons; some will say, that it was infused into 'em by
that little respect they had to Honesty and Sincerity, which would not permit
'em so publicly and egregiously to violate a Peace that had been so lately
concluded; or because they thought it not just, to ruin a Man of that
importance as the Duke, who had done nothing which deserved death, since the
Pardon that the King had granted him. On the other side, it may be said, That
either they they had not time to examine the Consequences of so violent an
Action, or that they feared to arm against 'em all the Lords that had submitted
to the King, if they used the Duke after such a manner as might give them just
occasion to be afraid of the like usage upon the first opportunity that
offered. Yet some have written, that none of these Motives induced the Court to
release the Duke, but that the Interest of a Ball decided the Dispute. For the
Queen had appointed one, wherein the Duchess of Rohan was to bear a part; and
every thing was ready, when the News of the Duke's Imprisonment arrived. Which
Accident would have quite broken off the Match; and the Queen must either have
lost, or been forced to have deferred a Pastime she was just about to enjoy;
which would have bin a very great disappointment to a Princess of her Age: and
therefore it was better to let an Enemy live, then disturb the Pleasures of a
Young Queen. So that the Duke was more beholding for his Liberty to a Dancing
Match, then to the Public Faith.

In the mean time Valence made the best of this Accident: for while he kept the
Duke in Prison, he proceeded to the Election of the Consuls, and caused the one
half to be chosen Catholics; as he had already done by the Marine Consulship,
out of which he had taken out one half of the Reformed. Both the one and the
other was against the express terms of the Brief, by which it was promised that
no Innovation should be introduced into the Consulship: and there is great
probability that the Duke of Rohan would have very much obstructed Valence's
Enterprise, had not the latter prevented him by Imprisonment. But when the Duke
was set at liberty he found the thing done, and the Order which obliged him to
retire into Upper Languedoc, deprived him both of time and means to apply any
Remedy. The Reformed complained, that Valence had made use of Violence in the
electing what Consuls he thought fit himself; and that he had kept the Consuls
that were going out of their employments, a whole night Prisoners in his own
house, to force their consent to the election of Catholics. But the Court took
^o notice of these Complaints; and all that the Duke could obtain from 'em was,
that Valence should recall the men that he ^ad quartered up and down in
Cevennes. Valence's Credit was then so great, that though he were no more then
Governor of Mompelier, he was consulted by all Languedoc, to know the secret
intentions of the Court; and that 'twas enough for him to say, that 'twas the
King's pleasure that such or such a thing should be done, to have it put in
execution. Orders of the same nature, given out of the Jurisdiction of his
Government were obeyed, as if they had come from the King himself: and Acts, ^f
which the purport only was, that Valence had written that the King's Pleasure
was so or so, have past in our days for definitive, in Affairs of great
importance. Nevertheless it was ^oth contrary to Probability and Custom, that
the Governor of (...) particular Town, should be the Arbitrator of a whole
Province. But in Affairs of Religion, 'twas enough to authorize Fraud and
Injustice against the Reformed, for a Catholic to ^ay, Le Roy veut, it is the
King's Pleasure. As for the Duke of Rohan, when he was got clear of Mompelier,
he went to Milhau, where he understood that the Duke of Espernon, to whom the
King, a little before had given the Government of Guyenne instead of that of
Saintonge and Augonnois, went about to hinder the Cities held by the Reformed
in Rouvergne, to elect their Consuls as they were wont to do; and that he had
written to 'em not to make any new Elections, till they understood from his
mouth the King's further Pleasure. But the Duke of R^han explaining his
Pleasure by the terms of the Peace, persuaded 'em to elect their Consuls at the
usual times, and after that to send Commissioners to the Duke of Espernon, to
know his Will. They took his Advice, and by that means preserved their right to
keep the Catholics out of the Consulship.

But while things thus past in Languedoc, the general Commissioners, General
Papers.
Mommarton and Maniald, who had been substituted in the rooms of Flavas and
Chalas, present a Paper to the King, wherein they demanded several things
necessary for the preservation of Peace. It consisted of Twenty two Heads, the
substance of which was, That Commissioners should be sent into the Provinces to
see the Peace duly executed; That the Garrison might be removed out of
Mompelier; That the Brief which promised there should be no Innovation, might
be observed; That Fort Lewis might be demolished; That the Reformed who had bin
condemned to the Galleys, might be set at liberty; That the Sums promised for
the Ministers Salaries, for the low state of Pensions, and the payment of the
Garrisons, might be discharged both for the time past and for the future; That
Candal, who had paid some money beforehand, might be reimburs'd; That the King
should provide for the payment of the Ministers of the Country of Gex, to whom
there had been assigned a Fund upon the Toll-money, in recompense of the
Ecclesiastical Revenues which had bin taken from 'em; That the King would be
pleased to contribute something toward the rebuilding of the Church at
Charenton, which was burnt down in the War-time; That he would be pleased to
cause the Church at Tours to be rebuilt at his own charges, in the same place
where it stood before the Sedition, according to his promise; That he would
vouchsafe to let the Church of Bourg be rebuilt, notwithstanding that the
Catholics disputed their Right to the Ruins of it; That free Exercise of their
Religion might be restored to the Reformed at Villemur, Fontain, Luson and
Tal^ont, in which places they had carried their Violences so high against those
that went about to assemble together, as to level their great Guns against 'em;
That the same liberty should be also allowed at Surgeres, Bagnols, St. Giles's,
Figeac, Puimirol, ^i^ en Armagnac, from whence they had expelled the Minister,
and lastly at Quilleboeuf in Normandy; That the Reformed of Poitiers might be
discharged from the payment of Twelve hundred Livres, which had bin laid upon
'em by way of Tax for the Guard of the City, though they would not do 'em the
honor to trust 'em with it, as they did the rest of the Inhabitants; That the
Edict of Compensation might be executed in ^earn, and that the Exercise of the
Reformed Religion might ^e restored to the Navarreines; And that the Churches,
Bells, Churchyards, which the Reformed enjoyed there, by the Decree ^f the
Commissioners, might be preserved to 'em, since they ^ad resigned all the rest
to the Catholics; That the Party Chambers might set up again in those places
where they had bin re^or'd, during the Wars; That the Reformed might be
exempted from the building of Churches, to which the Catholics of Ar^^i le Due
went about to constrain 'em; actually prosecuting ^em at the Council Board, in
order to have 'em comprehended ^n the raising Six thousand Livres, designed
toward the building of a Church for the Capuchins; That the Church of
Remoren^in, burnt in the time of the War, and that of Gergeau, pulled ^own
since the Peace, might be rebuilt; That the Cities of Ber^eras and St. For
might be eased of several Grievances; And ^astly, That for the re-establishing
a mutual confidence between ^oth Parties, the Forces left in Languedoc,
Cevennes, and other ^laces, might be disbanded

By the Answers that were returned the 4th of March to the Uncertain Answers.
Heads of this Writing, there was nothing expressly granted, but ^n exemption
from contributing toward the building of the Ca^uchin's Church, and the release
of those who had bin con^emn'd to the Galleys for having born Arms. All the
rest con^ain'd no more then uncertain and conditional Promises, or References
to the Commissioners, who, as they were told in their Answer to the first Head,
were already upon the Road. There was only a Promise, that as to the Garrison of
Mompelier, care should be taken about it, so soon as satisfaction should be
given to the Edict of Peace. The Alteration made in the Marine Consulship was
confirmed, as being grounded upon the definitive Decree of the Chamber of
Castres; and for the Consulship of the City, 'twas referred to the usual Forms.
As to the Article about the Toll-money, and the Affairs of Bearn, they were
referred to the Brief of the 24th of October, which promised to take care of
those matters. The Ministers of G^x were paid with general words. As to the
rebuilding of the Churches of Tours and Charenton, the Reformed were referred
to their own care and diligence. All the Articles that mentioned any places, or
demanded free Exercise of Religion, were referred to the Commissioners: and by
a Reference of the same nature, they evaded the Article touching Fort Lewis.
The Article about the money advanced beforehand by Candal, was referred to a
Petition which he was left at his own liberty to present himself: as to the
Twelve hundred Livres which the Reformed were taxed at Poitiers, their Answer
was to be imparted to the Sheriffs; and they promised to write to the Duke of
Espernon about easing the Grievances of Bergerac and St. Foy.

But the most part of these Promises were so ill fulfilled, that the Condition
of the Reformed was never a whit the better: On the contrary, the exercise of
their Religion was forbid in many other places, then those where it had bin
interrupted by the War. Particularly the Duke of Guize, who had married the
Exercise of Religion forbid.
Daughter of Joyeuse the Capuchin, forbid it at Poire, a place depending upon
the Principality of Roche sur Yon, which belonged to himself. The Church
grounded her Right upon a Possession well proved by the Terms of the Ninth
Article of the Edict of Nantes: But then they began to demand the Consent of
the Landlords, who were Catholics, as a thing which was very necessary. So
that the Parliament of Paris quite ruined that Church by their Edict of the 21st
of February, allowing only to the Inhabitants a place for the burial of their
Dead. There was also a Decree of Council, dated the sixth of July, which took
away from the Reformed Members of the University of Poitiers, their Right of
being Rectors and Deans, of presiding (...) Assemblies, or of having any
determining Voice in those ^here any Disputes were handled in reference to
Divine Wor^hip and Ecclesiastical Ceremonies. There was moreover one ^icked
piece of Fraud in that Clause, which tended to exclude ^he Reformed out of all
Assemblies; in regard the Catholics of ^he Assembly being obliged to a
Procession every Month, which ^hey mentioned at the opening of all their
Sessions, they con^uded from thence, that the Reformed could not give their
^oices upon any of those Occasions, because there was none of those Assemblies
wherein Ecclesiastical Ceremonies were not ^andl'd. There was likewise another
Decree of Council, da^d the 19th of August, which forbid the Reformed to sing
their ^salms either in the Streets, or in their Shops; a Liberty which ^hey
could not assume since that, without bringing trouble upon themselves; though
many times the Catholics were ashamed ^^ their setting forth Prohibitions of
that nature. The Seventh ^^ September came forth a Decree of the Parliament of
Paris, which deprived a Reformed Soldier of the Benefit of an The Benefit of a
Monk's place assigned a Soldier grown impotent and maimed in the King's Service.
Oblate, which the King had granted him in the Abbey of St. Julian at ^ours. The
Abbot opposed him, and a Catholic Soldier in^rpos'd his claim to that small
Pension; by which means the Reformed Soldier was excluded by a disadvantageous
Judgment given against him. But that which was most remarkable, was ^he
Pleading of the Advocate-General Talon, full of Bitter Pas^ges against the
Reformed Religion. He called those that em^rac'd it Apostates in downright
Latin: And to those who had always made profession of it, he applied the words
of Christ, ^^ is not good to give the childrens bread to dogs. To evade that
^ight to Charity and Alms, which the Edict had granted to ^he Reformed, he
distinguished Alms into two sorts; the one which he called Alms of Charity, and
the other which he termed, Alms of Precept. He pretended that the Reformed were
not ^^ be admitted to the first by virtue of the Edict; and that they who
received the benefit of Oblates were of the second sort. Which was a malicious
distinguishing where the Law it self never made any distinction, and to teach
others a general way to ^vade the most express Intentions of the Edict, by
inventing a destructive Distinction. But every thing began to be of force
against a Religion, of which they had vowed the ruin. There were also several
Decrees issued forth against the Authority of Fathers Attempts upon Paternal
Authority.
over the Education of their Children; and the Reason which they always
alleged for taking away that Right, was, That in regard they had by some
Express or Tacit Act consented that their Children should be educated by
Catholics, they had renounced the privilege of the Edict. This was the reason
that the Advocate-General Talon refused to restore a Daughter to her Mother;
because, said he, by having put her for some time into a Nunnery, she had
resigned the power of her Education.

Nevertheless, these were not the greatest Acts of Injustice that were done the
Reformed: I shall recite two that deserve particular consideration. The first
is the Declaration which was A Declaration establishing a Commissioner in
Colloquies and Synods.
set forth at Fontain Bleau the 17th of April, to deprive the Reformed of the
Liberty of their Colloquies and Synods, which till then, were left 'em almost
entire. By that Declaration it was ordained, that for the future, a Royal
Officer, and of the Roman Catholic Religion, deputed by the King himself, or by
the King's Governors and Lieutenants in the Provinces, should sit in those
Assemblies, to take care that nothing should be there treated of, but Matters
permitted by the Edict. It forbid the summoning or holding Assemblies, before
the Commissioner was appointed; and commanded his admittance without any
scruple or reluctance. Which Innovation was grounded upon two Pretenses: The
one, that they meddl'd with Politic Affairs in their Synods; the second was,
that they gave admittance to other persons besides their Ministers and Elders;
and that they took Resolutions contrary to the Intentions and Opinions of the
generality and most considerable of the Reformed. However, the Reformed made no
opposition to a Declaration of this importance, at least they carried it not
very far; seeing that three months after, they held Synods in all the
Provinces, and summoned a National Synod at Charenton, to meet the first of
September. They thought they might, by Submissions and National Synod.
Petitions, discharge themselves from this Restraint, more injurious by reason
of the Motives which induced the other Party to subject 'em to it, then
inconvenient, because of the necessity which lay upon 'em to expose to the view
of the Court the Se^et of their Discipline, and the display of their Policy. In
a word, at first it many ways perplexed 'em. For there were several Provinces
where the Governors started a thousand Difficulties about the nomination of a
Commissioner; and took that ^ccasion to vex 'em, as most proper to exercise
their malignant ^d no less ignorant Zeal against 'em. Insomuch, that all the
Commissioners which arrived at Charenton, came not till after ^e day appointed
for the sitting of the Assembly; and that ^veral excused their slowness, as
being occasioned by the Obsta^es and Delays, by means of which the King's
Governors and Officers protracted the summoning of the Synods in their Pro^nces.

The Commissioner appointed by the King for this Synod was ^us G^d, a person
who loved the Reformed Religion, ^d whose Offspring of later years have given
great Testimo^^^s of their Zeal and Affection for the Truth. But he was one of
those Reformed who made the Service of God and the King (...) almost equally
parallel; and who persuaded themselves ^t a blind obedience of Subjects to
their Prince was essential to Christianity. He believed that Sincerity was
altogether on ^e Court-side: and he had reason to believe it, because his
Religion was no hindrance to his Advancement, and his being made (...)
Councellor of State. But he was not aware that this was but an effect of
Policy, to cover the Design that was laid to ruin all; to ^eap Favors upon
some, to ^^ll others asleep, till they were in (...) condition to oppress all
together. He therefore served the Court with great Affection and Constancy; and
in regard he ^rew from thence considerable Recompenses for his good Ser^ce, he
found himself exposed to the Reproaches and Indigna^n of his Brethren. The
Commission which was given him ^as worded so, as seemed to render it perpetual,
and made People conjecture that for the future there should be no National
Synods held any other-where then at Charenton; to the end the Court might be
more near at hand, to observe the Proceedings of those Assemblies. Nevertheless
they were afterward permitted to be held in other places.

As for this Synod, they received him with respectful Protestations, that they
did it out of pure Obedience: to which they He is admitted in Obedience to the
King.
added some Complaints, to see their Liberty so narrowly confined, and the
Synods accused of going beyond their permitted Limits, by meddling with other
Affairs then their Church Discipline, and they decreed to make their humble
Remonstran^ to the King upon these Heads. The general Commissione^ declared,
that they had done what lay in their power to hind^ the registring of the
Declaration, which had bin drawn up and published without any regard to what
they had represente^ though their Importunities had put off the verification of
i^ for above a month. After this, they sent their Commissione^ to the King, to
return him thanks for his permission. the Commissioners were kindly received,
and enjoined to assure the Synod They send Commissioners to the King.
of the King's good will, if they continued in their Obedience* But he charged
'em by word of mouth to carry back two things One, That the King was willing to
tolerate such Foreign Ministers as were already admitted, but that he would not
that any Who return laden with Orders.
more should be admitted for the future. The other was, That he took it ill
that they had resolved to uphold the Doctrine decided in the Synod of Dort,
which he called a new Doctrine* which he would not afford his protection. To
which the Commissioners returned for answer, That that Doctrine was the same
with their Confession of Faith. Whereupon Reply was made* That the King left
the judgment of their Doctrine to themselves, nor would he concern himself with
it; but that he did (...) understand the making any person swear to another
man's Faith, or that any man should be deprived his liberty of believing what
Faith he pleased; so that in those times there was a great latitude allowed to
Liberty of Conscience.

It may be wondered from whence it should proceed, that the The Court inclined
to favor the Arminians.
Court was so inclined to favor the Arminians. It Is not probable certainly,
that they had any other reason then to make some great division, by giving free
course to a Doctrine which had created so wide a chasm in the Low Countries.
Besides the Arminians, who saw themselves quelled and born down by the censure
of their Doctrine, flattered the several Potentates, in hopes to raise
themselves by means of their Protection, if it were possible. Tilenus proceeded
to very great extremities upon this subject against the Reformed of France. He
wrote against 'em upon all occasions, without any moderation or curb upon
himself. Besides his Admonition to the City of Rochel, which he published in
1621. he printed the next year an Answer to a Treatise which was attributed to
la Milletiere, and which was entitled, A Discourse of the true Reasons for
which the Reformed of France both may and ought, in good Conscience, resist, by
force of Arms, the open Persecution with which they are oppressed. The Author
of that Discourse, after he has cited the History of Brochard Baron, which I
have mentioned in another place, compares the Edict of Cyrus in favor of the
Jews to that of Nantes; those who exclaimed against the first, to those that
ruined the second; the Calumnies of those that sought to render Cyrus jealous
of Jerusalem, to those that were made use of against Writing of la Milletiere.
the Protestant Cities. He distinguished the ancient and natural Subjects from
those who had bin subdued. He asserted, That if the Rights of the latter could
be grounded upon no other then upon Concessions and Favors; the Immunities of
the other were founded upon a relative Obligation of the King to his Subjects,
and of the Subjects to their Sovereign. He said, that Henry IV. was bound to
grant the Edict of Nantes by a twofold Obligation: the one Personal, which
obliged him to preserve those who had preserved himself: the other Royal, which
engaged him to maintain the Liberties of those who had supported his Crown.
After this, he justified the taking of Arms, and that there is sometimes a
Reason for lawful Self-defence, upon which he forgot not to enforce the example
of the Maccabees. He answered the contrary Arguments, and showed that the War
proceeded from the Pope and his Maxims. He concluded with the necessity of
expelling the Jesuits out of France, as they had bin driven out of Venice, and
accused 'em of the King's death, and several other Assassinations.

Tilenus answered this Discourse by a Writing, wherein excepting Answer of
Tilenus
the Portraicture which he gives of Milletiere, which is natural enough, it may
be said that he had neither sincerity nor judgment. And a man may judge of it,
by the ridiculous Answer which he gives to the Example of the Maccabees, and
which he thought to evade by saying, that the History that relates it was held
at Geneva for Apocriphal, as if neither Examples or Reasons availed any thing
in point of Policy or Right, if the Books out of which they were taken were not
Canonical. Moreover, he makes an Apology for the Jesuits which justifies the
Assassination of Kings: and with he audaciousness of a Missionary, he revives
the reproach of having suborned Simon de M^^, hanged at Paris for other Crimes,
to attempt the murder of Katherine de Medicis. Nor did he forget Poltrot, who
assassinated the Duke of Guise; and fain would have one Philip de ^^lombault,
Sieur de Varcieux, executed at Paris in the Court of the Palace, without any
noise, and without expressing the cause, to be a Russian of the same stamp;
grounding his Conjecture upon the privacy observ^d in his execution. He also
spends a great deal of time, to prove that Kings are not bound to observe the
Laws. Nor do she spare for Testimonies and Examples; and di^^n^angles himself
from the Testimonies on the other side, by saying, That a Prince is bound to go
according to the Laws; but if he breaks 'em, it is not lawful to resist him:
which is as much as to say in a word, that nothing obliges Sovereigns to the
observance of the most ^acred Laws; seeing there is no lawful means to defend
the Laws in opposition to their violence, when they break 'em. Whence it
follows, that every man who submits himself to a King, plainly renounces his
own safety, since he only grounds it upon Equity and Probity; for which, it may
so happen many times, that neither the Prince nor Counselors have any regard.
It Is for the People to consider whether such Politics as these are convenient
for 'em.

Above all things, Tilenus advances the Authority of the Kings of France to the
highest degree. The Emperor's Authority, in his Opinion, was much more limited.
Nevertheless, all that the most powerful of Kings have ever aimed at, has bin
to be Emperors in their own Dominions; and those Lawyers who attribute the
highest power to 'em, say nothing more of it. But that which might, beyond all
this, incline the Court to protect Imposture advanced against the Synod of Dort.
the Arminian Theology, was the Imposture supported against the Synod of Dort:
For they made France believe, that the secret Design of that Assembly, was to
form a Protestant League ^o destroy the Church of Rome. Tilenus also revealed
this important Mystery in his writing, and from thence concludes, That the King
did very well not to permit the Ministers of his Kingdom to go thither: as if
such a great Affair could not have bin ^esolv'd upon for want of French
Ministers. It may be judged by these little Remarks what kind of Answer
Tilenus's was; and at the same time, why the Court of France seemed so averse
^o the Doctrine of that Synod.

But I return to that of Charenton. They resolved upon a The Obedience of the
Synod of Charenton.
^unctual Obedience in reference to the two Articles, of which their
Commissioners made their Report, reserving to themselves ^he liberty of
addressing to the King for his permission, when they had a desire to send for
any Foreign Minister. As for the doctrine decided in the Synod of Dort, they
ordered it to be ^orn to under the name of the Doctrine of the Synod of Alets,
without any appearance in the wording of the Oath, that it ^ad any relation to
the Assembly of Dort. And the Articles of ^^at Doctrine were printed, together
with the Doctrine of the ^ynod; and they were cried publicly upon Pont Neuf:
But they ^ho were not pleased with those decisions, endeavored to dis^arage
'em by a thousand Observations, wherein Calumny was (...) Argument that carried
the greatest stroke.

The Commissioners had in charge to demand the resettlement Assignations ill
paid:
(...) Assignations which had bin given, and which were due for ^e preceding
years: for those which the Churches had obtained (...) the year 1621, were
allotted to other uses, nor had there ^n any for the year 1622. and at first
they had ordered bad ones ^r the present year: But Candal refusing to accept
'em, they ordered better. Nevertheless, because they lay far remote, they
remanded such as were nearer at hand, and of which they might have a quicker
benefit. At length the Commissioners obtained ^orty thousand Livres in ready
money, for which they had Bills upon the Exchequer. They had also fair Promises
for the future, but were put quite out of hopes for what was past.

During the sitting of the Synod, the King wrote a Letter to Proposals made to
the Synod by Galand.
^he Commissioner, dated September 25. and containing three ^h^ngs to be
proposed to the Synod. The first was, That the ^ing would not give leave that
either Primrose or Cameron, whom the Catholics could not pardon the Affair of
Bourde^^^, should exercise the Function of the Ministry, or profess Divinity in
the Kingdom. He said, That that Exclusion was not grounded upon their being
Foreigners, but upon Reasons that concerned his service. The second was, That
when the King permitted Politic Assemblies, it was his pleasure that no
Ministers should be deputed. He alleged, That they were taken off from their
proper Duties; and he added, that he could have wished they had prevented his
Commands. But if they did not obey, he should by an express Declaration give
farther Order about it; or else in the Brevets of Leave which he should grant
'em for holding their Assemblies. Nevertheless, he did not extend the Exclusion
to the Pastors of the place, who had his permission to be present. The third
was, That this Declaration of his Intentions should be inserted among the Acts
of the Synod.

The second Article was past, because they saw well that it would be in vain to
oppose it; and for that other Synods had already taken a Resolution conformable
to it, which nevertheless had never bin observed. The third Article passed in
the same manner: But they sent a new Deputation to the King upon the A new
Deputation to the King.
former, to beseech him that he would remit something of his Severity in favor
of Primrose and Cameron. And that Affair made 'em also bethink themselves of
Moulin, whom the Court would not permit to return into France. The King made
Answer, That he did not think they would have replied, after he had both writ
and said what he had done: That he had good Reasons, which the Synod would
readily allow, if they understood what they were; nevertheless that he gave all
the three Ministers leave to stay in the Kingdom, upon condition that for the
present they forbore all manner of Exercise of their Functions: adding, that
time would bring all things to pass. In short, Cameron was called next year to
the Academy of Mont^^ban, but died within a little while after, before the
second War brake out. Du Moulin returning from England, was discovered at
Dieppe, though in disguise, and had Orders to stop there, though it is true they
were not very exact in pursuit of him. After that he lived quietly at Sedan,
even after the King had dispossessed the Duke of Bouillon of it. As for
Bergerac, she had ^r share of the severity of the Court, which forbid the Synod
(...) allow any thing toward the maintenance of the College of ^^at City: But
the Commissioner never hindered the Synod ^om reviving the Oath of Union in
Discipline and Doctrine; Oath of Union.
^^r was the Court offended at it.

The second Act of Injustice done the Reformed, was the A Citadel at Mompelier.
building a Citadel at Mompelier, directly contrary to the Treaty (...) Peace,
and the Brief granted in pursuance of it. Nor was ^^e Artifice made use of to
justify the doing it very much to the honor of the Authors of it. For Valence
permitted the Sol^^ers of the Garrison to live as licentiously as they pleased
themselves, on purpose to give an occasion of making Complaints. and because it
seemed a difficult thing to suppress 'em, he ^ackt an Assembly of the Citizens,
who were to consult upon expedients most proper to restrain 'em within the
Bounds of their Duty. Now the Catholic Consuls ordered as many of their own
Religion as they could to be there: But as for the ^eformed, who were wont to
rely upon others for the Government of the City, and knew not the Mystery of
that Consultation, for the greatest part they never came, and others durst ^ot
appear: so that the Catholics were far superior in number (...) the others,
among whom also many were gained; which ^ave an occasion to say, that the
Reformed and the Catholics were agreed in the same demand. Now then the
Question being put, which was the best way to secure the Burgesses from the
Insolences of the Soldiers, the Catholics presently embraced the Propo^al of
demanding a Citadel, where the King might lodge his Garrison, and discharge the
City of quartering Soldiers. 'Twas ^n vain for the small number of Protestants
that were at the Meeting to oppose it; and so the business was decided as it
were ^y plurality of Voices, and Deputies were sent to Court to obtain the
King's consent, who was not very scrupulous of giving it.

But Maniald, who was one of the Deputies, being informed Maniald opposes it in
the name of the Reformed.
of this Enterprise, and entrusted with the Memoirs of the Reformed of
Mompelier, made a Speech to the King upon this Subject, the 14th of September:
complained of the foul Play that had been used; declared that the Inhabitants
of Mompelier were forced to make this demand; protested that their Names were
abused; required the demolishing of Fort Lewis, and produced the Reports of the
Works demolished by the Reformed according to the Treaty of Peace; to the end
there might not be a pretense of their not having done their duty. But they
would not be better informed at Court; they were resolved to believe Valence,
and the Catholics, to the contempt of the Protestation which the Reformed
made; and the Decree of the Parliament of Toulouse, put forth on purpose to
elude their Obedience, pas^ for a conviction that they had not done fairly as
to the demolishing their Fortifications.

'Twas impossible that all these Acts of Injustice should be Presages of a new
War.
committed without causing great alterations in the minds o^ men; so that the
Court expected to see the Peace suddenly broken. Nevertheless, as yet she had
no great inclination to the War, because the Government was not as yet well
settled. The Old Cardinals were jealous of Cardinal Richlieu. The high Favor
wherein Puisieux, and the Chancellor his Father-in law were, began to totter:
And there wanted a little longer time of Peace for every one of those who
sought the advancement of their Fortunes, to secure and settle their Affairs.
But the Council of Conscience, the Spanish Faction, that still held up its
head, the Clergy unanimous, were all for a War. And Cardinal Richlieu, who
would not seem to be lukewarm so soon after his Promotion, nor offend the Queen
Mother, who embraced the same Interests, leaned that way as well as the rest.
Therefore as a foreboding of the Troubles that were suddenly to revive again, a
Declaration was given out the 10th of November, against those who went from
Province to Province to sow Jealousies of the Infidelity of the Court,
furnished with Letters and Instructions of the Dukes of Rohan and Subise. The
King however declared, That he would not believe that either of those two
Noblemen were any way concerned in those Intreagues, or that the Reformed in
general had any thoughts of turning aside from their Obedience: However, to
give 'em more perfect assurances of the reality of his Intentions, he confirmed
the Edicts and his last Declarations; he ordered, that the Commissioners should
continue in the Provinces till they were absolutely fulfilled; and forbid all
manner of persons to speak, ^ite, suggest, persuade or give ear to any thing
that was con^ry to his good Intentions, or the Public Tranquillity; to go (...)
send into the Provinces, or to Assemblies that might be held the same effect,
and to act nothing that tended toward a War ^on pain of being punished as
Disturbers of the Public ^pose. Du Plessis lay drawing on, when this
Declaration Death of Du Plessis.
^ear'd, and God took him out of this World before the ^ond War, to spare him
the grief of seeing the Ruin of ^se Churches brought to perfection, to which he
had so ^g been serviceable by his Writings, by his Counsels, and ^his Example.
He had a little before come to an agreement ^th the Court about the Recompense
which he was to have (...) all his Labors, which after he had been so long put
off, and ^de the sport of his Enemies, was reduced to a hundred thousand
Franks. Marshal de Bouillon died some months before him, (...) upon his
Deathbed recommended nothing to his Children, (...) perseverance in the
Reformed Religion, and never to bear (...) against the King so long as he
secured the Peace of the Churches. Which last Injunctions of his, his Daughters
obeyed ^ch better then his Sons: For his eldest Son forsook his Religion, and
quitted the King's Service betimes.

The End of the Eighth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of Nantes THE SECOND PART. THE NINTH BOOK.
The Heads of the Ninth Book.
THE Commissioners impair the Condition of the Reformed Gergeau: at Remorentin:
at Tours. Commissioners Poitou, and Saintonge. The Character of Amelot, who
(...) the Churches by outward Shows of Honesty and Probity. Writing of the
Clergy of Saintonge. The Malignity of (...) Articles. Complacency of Chalac.
Enterprises of the Catholics at Rochel. Alterations at Court. Maxims of
Cardinal Richlieu. Proposals of Marriage between the Prince Wales, and the
Infanta of Spain; fruitless. A Match (...) for with Henrietta of France.
Negotiation of the Archby^ of Ambrun; the Match concluded upon advantageous
Conditi^ for the Catholics. Death of James I. Charles consumm^ the Marriage.
Suit between the City of Pamiers, and Bishop. Cavils upon the Right of
prosecuting the payment Legacies and Donations. Exemption of Ministers. Tr^
revived. Enterprise of the Duke of Rohan and Soubise (...) covered. Soubise
seizes the King's Ships, and is blocked (...) the Port of Blavet. He is thought
to be lost, and is disowned by all the world. The King's Declaration upon that
occasion. Soubise disingages himself, which changes the face of Affairs.
Politic Devotions of the Duke of Rohan. Seconded by his Wife. Manifesto of the
Duke of Soubise. Answer. Dispute about the Privileges of Rochel. Peace talked
of. Cruelties of the R^al Army in Foix. Soubise's Successes. Remonstrance of
the Reformed presented to the King. Answers to the Articles with which the
Reformed are not content. The Court recovers her Affairs. Assembly of the
Clergy; that furnishes out money with reluctance. The King excepts Rochel out
of the Peace; which delays the conclusion of it. Particular Laws which the King
would impose upon that City. A powerful League against Spain. A Design of the
Cardinal, of which he is forced to forbear the execution. Instances of the
English Ambassadors for the peace of Religion. Rochel accepts the Conditions
somewhat mitigated. Diverse Acts upon occasion of the Peace. Why the Court
demanded such Writings. Act past by the English Ambassadors. In what sense the
King becomes a Guaranty for the Peace. A new Edict which confirms all the rest
Foul Play showed by France to the Confederates. Jealousies between the Cardinal
and Buckingham. The Cardinal's weak side. Enterprises of the Catholics of the
Queen of England's Household. Conspiracy against the Cardinal. Condition of
Rochel. National Synod. Decree relating to Commissioners. Instructions of the
Commissioners. Chauve, the Moderator's Answer. Surprise upon the Synod of
Realmont. Infidelity of Masuyer: at which the Catholics triumph. They would
fain hedge in the Ministers into the Treaty of the Duke of Rohan with Spain.
Article of the Synod of Realmont, which orders enquiry after such as were
g^tity, which offends all the Churches, and is disowned by the National Synod.
Leave to nominate general Deputies: from which the Synod desires to be excused,
and send Deputies to the King. Remonstrances of the Deputies. Maniald dies, to
whom the King s^^stitutes Hardi. Return of the Deputies, and the King's Answer.
The Synod names general Deputies. Several Resolutions of the Synod. The City of
Castres refuses to receive the Luke of Rohan's Deputies. Memoirs of Complaints.
Burying of Lords that were the Founders in Churches. Legacies given to the Poor
adjudg'd to Hospitals. Marriage of a Knight of Maltha vacated. Vexatious
Declarations. Meeting of the Notable. Conversions forced in Bearn; at Aubenas;
at St. Amand. Extraordinary Acts of Injustice. Innovations at Mompelier.
Foundation of that City. Declaration against Foreign Ministers. Rochel remains
blocked up; the English declare War. T^ United Provinces assist France. The
English land in the (...) of Ree. Irresolution of the Rochellers. Letters of
the Co^^^ intercepted. A nice Question, Whether Huguenots ought to ^^ suffered
in the King's Army? Rochel determines and publish^^ a Manisesto. The Duke of
Rohan does the same. I^tr^ of Galand against the Duke. Rout of the English. S^
Fleet of the English of no use to the Rochellers. A third Fl^^^ as ineffectual.
The beginning of a Treaty of Peace with England and Surrender of Rochel. The
City refuses to submit to (...) English. Spanish Fleet at the Siege of Rochel.
Severities exercised toward the Ladies of Rohan. The Courage of Guiton, Maire
of Rochel. How the City was used.

IN the mean time the Commissioners that were promised to The Commissioners
make the condition of the Reformed worse at Gergeau.
be sent into the Provinces, went thither in earnest; but the course which they
took in the execution of the Edicts. served only to convince the most
incredulous among the Reformed* that the Court did but make a Maygame of 'em.
For the Church which they had at Gergeau, that had bin one of their Cities of
security, and where they had held some general Assemblies, was taken from 'em
in a City where they had always enjoyed one: and to make 'em amends for this
Act of Injustice, they had leave given to build another at the farther end of
all the Suburbs. The Catholics of Remorentin, who had burnt the At Remorentin.
Church, would never permit the building of another: but the Commissioners,
instead of punishing the Misdemeanor, and doing Justice upon the Offenders,
were so kind as to leave things in the same condition as they found 'em. But
the Injustice which At Tours.
they did the Reformed of Tours, was much more notorious. For the King had
promised, after the Sedition, of which I have given an account in another
place, to preserve to the Protestants of that City their privilege of meeting
in that place ^here they were wont to assemble, and to supply 'em with the ^um
of Six thousand Livres, toward the rebuilding of the church which the
Mutineers had fired. But the Commissioners ^ted quite contrary to this Promise.
They arrived at Tours in ^y, and would needs persuade the Reformed to accept of
another place; which Proposal being rejected by the poor People, ^o demanded
the performance of the King's word, the Commissioners departed without making
any regulation. Toward the end of September they returned again to Tours; at
what time ^^ey took a view of several places, of the situation of which ^^e^
drew up a long Report in writing, and designed the Reformed one for the
building of a Church, which the Reformed ^ould not accept of; but they got
nothing by it; for the Commissioners enforced 'em by an Order, to sell the
place where their ^d Church stood, and to lay out the money in the purchase of
^^at which was designed 'em.

Amelot and Chalas had a Commission to see the Edict per Commissioners in
Poitou and Saintonge.
^rm'd in the Provinces of Poitou and Saintonge. Chalas, who ^as made choice of
by Amelot, as the Catholic Commissioners ^^d almost every where the privilege
to nominate their Associates, was one of those complying sort of People who
have not ^udacity enough to oppose another man's Opinion; and who being men of
sincerity themselves, cannot believe that other men will deceive 'em. So that
the Reformed complained very much ^f his softness, and never thought themselves
beholding to him ^r any Justice that was done 'em upon some Articles. Amelot,
^n the other side, was one of those People that never did any thing without a
great deal of Pomp and Ceremony, and who ^ake it their strife to please all the
world, at least to outward ^ppearance. He made Mountains of Molehil^s, and
thought (...) advance himself at Court, by giving the Grandees Information of
every diminutive Trifle. He made a great noise of cer^^in Designs which he had
discovered, and which he would needs ^ave had to have bin looked upon at Court
as important Conspiracies. He endeavored also to bring du Plessis into
trouble, who thought of nothing at that time but of dying, and settling his
Family. But they understood him at Court, and knew that all these great Secrets
were nothing but Illusions; and that was evident enough, because they never
molested any of those persons that Amelot sought to blacken with his pretended
Informations. But to bring himself off like a person of credit, after it
appeared that all his discoveries were no other then Dreams, then he gave out
that those designs would have wrought terrible effects, had he not prevented
'em by his foresight, and broken the ^ea^ur^s of the Contrivers by opposing 'em
betimes. And indeed his pretense for those Chimera's with which he was
intoxicated, were no more then civil Visits which some Gentlemen thought proper
to pay the one to the other; which Am^ took for Meetings covered under the name
of Visits, where Affairs of State were debated.

He also endeavored to get the favor and esteem of b^th He raines the
C^^rches under appearance^ of Honesty.
Parties; by the Court he sought to be valued as a man faithful and pen
trating, so eagle-ey'd that nothing escaped him whatever happened in the
Provinces belonging to his Allotment. By the^ Reformed he strove to be prized
for a man of honesty, who preserv d 'em from a world of misfortunes by his
moderation and* his prudence, preventing 'em from committing great Errors. By
these petty Artifices it cannot be imagined how much mischief he did the
Reformed; not only because he sometimes obliged em to renounce their
Privileges which they had duly obtained* but because he seduced 'em with his
vaunting Flourishes of Probity and Affection to accept of his unjust Acts as so
man^ Kin^nesses done 'em. Thus it was that he made 'em lose their Right to the
performance of their Exercises in the City of ^^^tenai, and that he made 'em
remove into one of the Suburbs. And they were so simple as to consent to his
entreaties, because he told 'em, that in so doing they would oblige him. All
the recompense they had was, that Valade, the Minister of the place, who had
bin forbid to preach there, yet whose resettlement could not be obstructed,
because the Right of Public Exercise in that Town was not to be deni d, was
restored to his Functions by Amelot's consent. So that to make 'em amends, he
only granted 'em a Privilege that could not lawfully be taken from 'em; a
thing which it was impossible to refuse 'em without a great deal of Injustice.
In like manner at Bourgueil, where they had a Right duly acquired, and upon a
good foundation, Amelot made (...) consent to remove their Right to another
place, contrary to ^e advice of Chalas, who would have maintained 'em in that,
^e they were accustomed to meet. But that which was ^re particularly singular
in their submission, was this, That (...) told the Reformed a fair Story, and
made 'em believe it ^o, that their consenting to their removal, was but a
compli^e of good nature in honor to the Bishop of Chartres, their ^poral Lord*
to whom they acknowledged themselves to be ^holding. And thus did Amelot so
strangely put upon 'em by ^s treacherous Wheedles, that he made 'em confess
themselves ^g^d to him, who at the same time despoiled 'em of their
privileges. And with the same delusions he fooled the easiness (...) the
Inhabitants of Maillezaiz and Luson.

There was nothing more considerable in all this Commission, Paper of the
Clergy of Saints.
^en the Paper presented by the Clergy of Saints in the name (...) the whole
Province, and supported by the Mayor and Sheriffs of the City. Had you read it,
you would have said, That the ^eformed had bin the prevailing Religion, and
that the Catholic ^d bin persecuted. Nevertheless Complaints were intermixed
with those Demands, which made it appear that the Catholics ^d great Designs in
their eye, in order to the oppression of ^hers: which will appear by the
Abstract of those Demands ^d Complaints. The Reformed were therein accused of
af^ting the Priests when they saw 'em pass by; of obstructing ^e Processions of
the Catholics; the Administration of the Sa^ament to the Sick; the Burial of
the Dead, with the accustomed Ceremonies: Of not permitting the Catholics to
visit ^e Reformed when Sick, which, as it was presupposed, were wil^g to be
converted; or that the Communion should be admini^r'd to 'em; or that they
should be buried after their Conver^n: and the Gentlemen were chiefly accused
of expelling the ^^iests out of their Lordships. They complained of the
Usurpation of Churches, Houses, Tenths and Rights appertaining to ^e
^cclesiastics, and of Churchyards, where the Reformed bu^^ed heir dead by
force. They demanded that the Reformed ^ould be prohibited to bury in Catholic
Chapels, under a Penalty of 3000 Livres. They remonstrated that the
Churchyards, which the Reformed had adjoining to those of the Catholics, not
being enclosed with Walls, were the occasion of several Seditions; that the
Reformed had made themselves Masters of the Bells in some places, and in others
made use of the Bells belonging to the Catholics, to give notice of their
Sermon time; that they would not suffer Carpets to be spread before their
Houses; that they took no notice of Holy Days; that at Saints, they met in
private Houses, where they read Prayers, and sung Psalms aloud; that they sold
Felsh upon days prohibited. They demanded, That to avoid the meeting of People
that attended the Dead to their Graves, the Reformed should be bound to give
notice of their hours of Burial to the Mayor and Sheriffs. 'Twas said, That
they caused armed men to walk about a Nights, who committed several Disorders.
They desired Prohibitions to the Reformed Ministers, by which they might be
enjoined not to call themselves Pastors of the Churches wherein they served; or
to style their Religion Reformed, without adding the word Pretended. Lastly,
Presupposing that the Liberty of the Reformed was so great, that it could not
be suppressed by Authority of the Edicts, they demanded that the Obstinate
should be condemned to great Forfeitures, actually to be incurred, and to be
adjudg'd from that time forward.

The strain of the whole Paper was full of Malice: For they The Malice of
several Articles.
made particular and private Facts the ground of a general Complaint, when
perhaps the Fact had never bin committed above once during the War;
nevertheless they would have it an Affair wherein all places were concerned,
and the misdemeanor of every day. Others were aggravated, as being of great
importance, when there was nothing at all in 'em. However in the main, it made
the Reformed to be looked upon as very criminal, and threw an Odium upon all
their Actions. So that all men wondered, and that not without reason too, that
Chalas went Chalas's Complaisance.
hand in hand as he did with Amelot, in whatever Sentences he passed upon all
the Articles, and still gave his Verdict against the Reformed. More especially
the Articles about visiting the Sick by the Magistrates, to know in what
Religion they died: The Prohibition to pray and sing Psalms aloud, upon the
Forfeiture of five hundred Livres: The necessity of giving notice to ^e Mayor
and Sheriffs of the hour when they intended to bury ^eir Dead, to avoid
accidental meeting of Catholic Funerals (...) the street; the immediate
adjudging of Forfeitures, under ^etence of forcing the Reformed to observe the
Edicts: The ^registring of these Ordinances, as if they had bin to pass for
^veraign Laws and Edicts: These Articles, I say, a man (...) have thought,
should not so easily have bin condescended (...) a Reformed, whom it became to
have understood the consequences. There was but one Article wherein they
differed; ^at is to say, upon the words Pastor, Church, and Reformed Religion,
without adding the word Pretended. Amelot was for prohibiting the Reformed from
making use of those expressions, but (...) was for petitioning the King, that
the Reformed might (...) left to their ancient practice in those Particulars.
Besides, ^here was something of Justice in the Answer made to the Article
concerning Burials: For the Commissioners ordered, that convenient places
should be allowed to the Reformed for that purpose within fifteen days; and for
defect of so doing, that it should be lawful for the Reformed to bury in the
Churchyards belonging to the Catholics. Which Article most assuredly Amelot
granted, to the end he might the more easily hook in Chalas ^r all the rest.
And this the Reformed suffered, through the weakness of their Commissioner, and
this was that which the Catholics principally desired; in regard the current of
Affairs ^ad r^n such a course for some years, as to make the Reformed ^e^e^e
they were all in the wrong. Nevertheless these Regulations had not so much
efficacy, but that the Reformed strove to maintain their Privileges, of which
Amelot endeavored to deprive 'em to the end.

In this manner it was that the Catholics drew from the Enterprises of the
Catholics at Rochel.
^eace as much Advantage as they could have expected from (...) Successful War;
and while by a thousand Quirks and Artifices they evaded the Promises made
before Mompelier, the Catholics were everywhere put in possession of all that
they could pretend to. Rochel, also, that beheld Fort Lewis still standing
^ndemolish'd, mauger all the Promises which the King had made to raze it; yet
gave her: Consent that the Catholics 1624.
should recommence their Exercises. Mass was pub^ickly sai^ there at the
beginning of the year 1624. but the Catholics being desirous to extend their
Liberty a little farther, and to appear with their Procession in the Streets,
they met with a Lan^ of Soldiers that forced 'em to retire. And it was a prude^
Design in the Honest Burgesses. For they were willing (...) prevent the
Disorders which such an Innovation would inevitably have produced. But the
Verbal Process which they dre^ up to justify their Intentions, served to no
other end, but (...) exasperate the Court against 'em, and to confirm the King
i^ his Resolution to humble that City, all whose Actions were represented to
him, as too haughty and insolent.

In the mean while there happened an alteration of the Change of Affairs at
Court. For La Vieville, who was beholding for his Advancement to Silleri,
ruined his Benefactor, an^ brought Puisieux into disgrace. And it may be said
that they justly deserved their Fall. For their Politics were so Spanioliz'd,
that they made all the King's Power prove serviceable to advance the Grandeur
of the House of Austria; nor was it their fault that Europe was not to become a
Slave to that Family. But Vieville followed Maxims altogether opposite; and
caused France to reassume a good liking of her Ancient Alliances. But he did
not go far before he received the punishment of his Ingratitude. Acknowledgment
is seldom the Virtue of a Courtier; and an Ambitious Man rarely lets his
Fortune slip, when he can procure his Advancement by betraying his Friend. He
never holds that man to be his Friend, whom he looks upon as his Competitor.
Vieville therefore having been the occasion that Richlieu was admitted into the
King's Council, the Cardinal was accused of having banished him the Court, that
he might have no Superior in the management of Affairs. But he followed the New
Maxims that Vieville had introduced: And turned all his Designs to raise France
upon the Ruins of the House of Austria.

This was one of the Reasons why he labored to hasten the Cardinal Richlieu's
Maxims.
Destruction of the Protestants, already much weakened by the Success of the
preceding War; while Spain, unfortunately for her self and them, neglected to
assist their Party by her Intreagues. The same Design rendered him suspicious
of the Jesuits, so that he kept them low and despicable all the time of his
Ministry, and that they suffered many Mortifications, while ^e held the Raines
of Authority; of which the chiefest was, that they had a very small share in
the management of Affairs. A most piercing Grief to a Society which had had the
pleasure ^f riding paramount for so many years, and filling all Europe with
Violence and Treachery: But lost by this Disgrace the fruit of all their
Attempts, and all their Crimes; and saw, by means of the Cardinal's New
Politics, all the hopes of the Universal Monarchy quite frustrated, which Spain
had so well concerted, and of which she had so long pursued the Design. In
order to this it was that he renewed the Alliance between France and the
Hollanders upon such Conditions, as if he had at ^he same time designed the
Siege of Rochel. But one of those things of which he hoped to make the greatest
advantage, was the Marriage of Henrietta of France with the Prince of Wales,
who reigned, after the death of King James, by the name of Charles I. Spain had
a long time amused that Prince with hopes of Marriage with the Infanta, who was
afterward married Proposals for marrying the Prince of Wales to the Infanta.
to the Emperor: And that Prince, as well as the King his Father, fell so
cordially into the Snare, that he made a long Journey into Spain in order to
the Conclusion of this pretended Match. And indeed the Spaniard flattered him
with it, so long ^s the Council of Spain thought it necessary to act this
Comedy to prevent King James from intermedling with the Affairs of Germany. But
when the Council had had sufficient Experience of the Weakness of that Prince,
to assure themselves, that let 'em use him how they pleased, he would be never
in a capacity to revenge himself, they broke off the Negotiation, and sent the
Fruitles.
Prince of Wales back again into England.

Nevertheless, the thing was carried so far, that all the Articles were agreed
upon; and such great Advantages were obtained for the Roman Religion, that a
Prince, who had had never so little zeal for his own, would never have endured
the allowance of 'em. The Pope made no scruple to grant the Dispensation which
was demanded, and the Prince of Wales acting with a Sincerity, that might be
rather called Simplicity, 'twas only the fault of the Spanish Politics that the
Match was not concluded. The Cardinal therefore seeing the Treaty of that
Alliance broken off, and England disgusted, was willing to make the best of the
Conjuncture, and to fasten that Crown to the Interests of France by the
Marriage of a French Princess. The second of Henry the Fourth's Daughters had
bin denied the Prince of Wales, who had demanded her, while Lewis the
Thirteenth's Council was in the House of Austria's pay, and the Prince of
Piemont was preferred before him. But the Cardinal altering the Design, had
changed the Maxims of the Court: and he thought good to make the first Offers
to a Prince, for whom they had had so little value before. Nor did he find any
great trouble in causing the Overtures to be accepted. William de Hugues,
Archbishop of Ambrun, had a great share in that Negotiation; and if there be
any credit to be given to the Relation of what he did in England, which he drew
up by the Cardinal's Command, he had almost brought the Religion and Kingdom of
England to the brink of a general Revolution. He relates that before the
Cardinal came into favor, he had bin sent into England to persuade the King to
return to the Pope's Communion: That he disguised himself to go incognito, and
took upon him the Name and Habit of a Counselor of Grenobl^. That at his
arrival, he found the Duke of Buckingham informed both of his Disguise and his
Commission; of which both the King and the Prince had given him notice: That
the King appeared to him fully resolved to embrace the Catholic Religion: That
he came to an agreement with him upon the greatest part of the Articles in
controversy; more particularly concerning the Sovereignty of the Pope over all
Christians: That upon this Occasion he wrote a large Letter to the Pope; that
it was sent privately by an English Gentleman, who was a zealous Catholic: That
he promised to declare himself openly, so soon as he had taken order for
certain things which were concluded on: That the principal reason of his making
so many delays, was the desire he had to be sure of the King of Denmark his
Brother-in-law, to the end he might be the better able to prevent the Troubles
that might arise by reason of the Changes in his Kingdoms: That he had invited
him under other Pretenses to take a Voyage into England; and that when he came,
he made no question but to convert him too: That he desired the Pope to suffer
the English Lords to enjoy the Church Lands, that were now become their
Inheritance, for fear they should oppose his Designs, if he went about to
disturb 'em in their Possession: That he promised there should be no farther
^earches made after any Priests that should be sent into the Kingdom, either by
the Pope or the King of France: That he excluded the Jesuits only from that
favor, because he looked upon *em as the Authors and Contrivers of the
Powder Plot, by which they designed to have blown him up in his
Parlament-House: That he showed the Archbishop several Favors while he was in
England: That he gave him leave to Confirm in the French Embassador's House
above 18000 Catholics, who were exempted from all prosecution upon it, tho
there were many of the English that saw the performance of the Ceremony; so
little did the Archbishop care to be openly seen. That some of the more Zealous
Protestants having made their Complaints to the King about it, the King stopped
their mouths, by telling 'em it was done with his permission: That the Duke of
Buckingham had promised to imitate the King his Master, and that he was really
engaged in the Intreage. In a word, The Archbishop had Letters from him which
showed him too deeply concerned, to believe that all this Negotiation was no
more then a feigned Business.

This was the Condition of Affairs when they began to Marriage concluded upon
Conditions advantageous for the Catholics.
treat of the Marriage of the Prince of Wales; and it may be easily judged by
the bending of the King's Inclinations, that they should not meet with any
great opposition: So that the Cardinal obtained what he pleased himself, and
drew from him Conditions more advantageous to the Catholics, then those which
the King of Spain had demanded. Also, after all that was concluded, there was a
way found to add new Clauses, which the King was so complaisant as to
condescend to without any hesitation. It Is true, Berulle, who was afterward
made a Cardinal, being sent to Rome to solicit the Dispensation, suffered
some things to be slipped in, which went a little farther then what had been
agreed upon. But they who drew it up were easily pardoned upon making a show of
being sorry for it, and imputing it to the simplicity of the Prelate, whose
Zeal for his Religion had made him exceed the Bounds of his Power. But the
Court of England being in a good humor to refuse nothing, suffered her self to
be vanquished without the least Resistance, and was willing to take any Excuses
for the Alterations in good part.

But the unexpected Death of King James put a stop to the Rapid Course of the
Prosperities of the Catholic Religion, and suspended for some time the
accomplishment of the Marriage propounded. But Charles his Successor would not
retract from his Engagements during the Life of his Father; so that the
Marriage was accomplished to the great satisfaction of the Court of Rome.
England in some measure beheld the Catholic Religion sprouting up again in her
Bosom. For the new Queen was permitted to have a Chapel in all the Royal
Houses; to keep in her Family a Bishop and twenty eight Priests, without any
preferring one Order before another; that they should have liberty to wear the
Habit of of their Order publicly; and that all her Domestic Servants should be
of the same Religion; besides that, she should have the Education of her
Children till they came to be Thirteen years of Age. But God permitted the
Jesuits to spoil all by their unquiet and Seditious Politics, and to put the
Kingdom into such terrible Jealousies of their Practices, that order was taken
for the suppressing 'em. However, the Treaty of this Marriage was spun out till
May, 1625. tho because I would not interrupt the series of the Story, I was
forced to insert it in this place.

In the mean time there were several particular Affairs that Process of the
City of Pamiers against the Bishop.
were regulated after a different manner; among which, that of the City of
Pamiers, in opposition to her Bishop, was one of the most considerable. That
Prelate took upon him to dispose of the Consulship and Council of that City,
and to make himself Master of the sole Power of rating the Taxes upon the
Inhabitants. And his Zeal for Religion served for a Pretense to justify his
undertaking. He would have no body in those Employments but Catholics; and the
Parliament of Th^louse, whither he had removed the Cause, were not wanting to
^our his Pious Design. But for the bringing it to pass, there ^s a necessity
that the Laws must be violated, and that the ^^ctions of Officers must be
carried on after a new manner; regard that otherwise the Reformed, who were
richer, more ^^^siderable, and more numerous then the Catholics, would ^^redly
carry all before 'em by the plurality of Voices. As ^^ any respect to the Laws,
that was never able to stop the ^^ergy, when the violation of 'em served for
the good of their ^^airs: And it was the Bishop's aim to prefer none but his
^^ends and his Kindred, under pretense of excluding the Here^s. Nevertheless
the Catholics were so wise, as not to ^^ble their Religion and the Civil
Government together; and ^^derstood their own Interest so well, as to join with
the Re^med against the Bishop: So that after all the Cavils imagi^^^le, that
Affair was determined, and the Catholics as well as ^^ Reformed bore an equal
share of the charges of the City.

They began at the same time to elude the Donations and Cavils upon the Right
of pursuing the Payment of Legacies and Donations.
^gacies which the Reformed bequeathed to their Ministers ^^d their Poor. And
the most dangerous Cavil of which they thought themselves upon this occasion
was, that they refused suffer the Consistories to name Syndics and Proctors, to
pro^ute the Effect of such Contracts and Wills in their own ^^^es: So that
those Acts were made invalid, by refusing Ju^^e to those who were nominally
empowr'd by authentic Let^^s of Attorney, to sue for the payment of the money
when ^e. The Pretense was, That the Right of empowring Attor^es did not belong
but to authorized Corporations; and there^^^e they would needs have the
Churches and their Consistories be abominable Communities, which were not to
enjoy the ^^e Privileges with others. But this Cavil was so contrary the
Edict, which in the 42d Article of Particulars, declared express terms, That
such Suits might be prosecuted by a ^octor, in the Name of the Body and
Community of those of the ^^formed Religion, who were therein concerned, that
'twas im^^ssible to erect it into a Law all of a sudden; and if there were ^y
Inferior Judges where that Cavil was favored, the Supe^^or Judges redressed
it. Thus the Judge of Saints being desirous to have hindered Gaillon, a
Proctor belonging to the Co^sistory of the place, from suing for the Donations
and Legac^^ left for the support of Ministers, Doctors, Scholars, and po^^
People of the Reformed Religion, there was a Decree of the Council bearing date
the 19th of March, which maintained the Reformed of Saints in the enjoyment of
the Privileges gran^^ by the Edict; tho it be true indeed that the Decree
added th^^ Condition, that the King's Advocate or Proctor should be p^^sent at
the giving up of the Accounts.

But in revenge they frustrated the effects of a Favor wh^^^ the Reformed had
bin a long time soliciting; that is to say, th^^ the Ministers might be
discharged from paying Taxes. True is, that about twelve years before there was
a Declaration ^^ forth in their Favor; but the Court had so little desire that
should be executed, that there was not the least care taken ^^ have it
enregister'd in the Sovereign Courts; so that the General Deputies, after they
had lost all their Solicitations, and the extraordinary Pains, were forced to
present a Petition upon the same subject. Upon which they obtained a Decree of
the 17^^ of July, which exempted the Ministers only from being taxed ^ their
Movables, Pensions and Salaries; but which left e^^liable in respect of their
Inheritances and immovable Good which indeed was to leave 'em to the
discretion of the Asse^^^ and Collectors. In short, that Decree was the
occasion of thousand Suits, in regard that Acts of that nature are never look
upon as Law, but only as Regulations upon particular matter of Fact. The least
distaste of a Collector was enough to oblig^^^ those who challenge the
enjoyment of a Privilege, to cause the setting forth of another Decree which
might personally con^e^^ 'em; and the same Brabbles might be renewed every year.

In the mean time, Spain having observed the change of the Troubles renewed.
French Politics, and well foreseeing that there would be an alter^tion also of
the general face of affairs, whereby she should become a great loser, it she
did not cut out some work within doors for the French, she resolved not to let
slip the opportunity which the Discontents among the Reformed gave her to renew
the Ci^^^ War. The Peace of Mompelier was so openly violated, th^^ there was
not one Article of it left unbrok'n; so that all th^^ Churches had reason to
complain. But Rochel, that notwith^^^^ding all her Submissions, had not
obtained the demolishing of ^t Lewis, and saw herfelf as it were blockt up at a
distance by ^^ces quartered in places proper to disturb and annoy her, at same
time struck the rest of the Reformed Cities both with ^^ and Terror. They
beheld, with sorrow, the approaching ^^ that powerful City, and were in fear of
some design in ^d to destroy 'em all, so soon as Rochel, which was the ^^t
important, should once be ruined. So that all those who ^^ev'd that the ruin of
the Reformed Religion would prove a ^essary consequence of the subduing those
Cities which were condition to support it, expected some deliverance from ^ven
for the recovery of their Affairs. But no body minded ^^t a helping hand to the
work, only they wished that Provi^ce would take care of their security without
'em. However Duke of Rohan, and Soubise his Brother, meditated great ^^gns, of
which the consequences would have proved no less ^arkable, had they bin well
seconded. 'Twas said that the ^^r^s secretly spurred 'em on, and flattered 'em
with hopes considerable Succor, if they could procure a general Rising ^h^
whole Party; but that was a Condition which the Duke ^^^l^ not undertake to
perform. It Is true, that finding him^ abandoned by almost all the world, he
gave an ear to cer^ Overtures of a Treaty propounded to him by the Council of
^^; not out of any hopes that that same Court would assist ^ in good earnest,
but in some measure to raise the spirits of Party, and that he might be in a
condition to make an ad^^ageous Peace.

The ^ukes of Rohan and Soubise then were the only persons Enterprise of the
Dukes of Rohan and Soubise.
^ ^enew'd the War; and the reason that determined 'em to it ^ because the
Court made open preparations for the Siege R^^^l. There was a Fleet getting
ready at Blaver, a small ^ upon the Coast of B^etany to block up the City by
Sea, and give *em of all supplies of Relief, which chiefly consisted in ^
keeping the Sea open. The Rochellers, on the other side, ^m^d at these
Preparations, which they well knew were aimed ^^^m, implored the Aid of the
Duke and his Brother who con^^d together to ward off the Blow if it were
possible. They agreed that Soubise should rig out some Vessels, under pretenc^
of a long Voyage; that he should endeavor to surprise those that were making
ready at Blaver; that if he succeeded, the Duke should take Arms in the
Provinces where he had most Reputation: but that if the Enterprise failed, he
should disow^ his Brother's Actions. Their own Estates, and what ready money
they had, were the Fund upon which they laid the Foundations of this great
Design. But when all things were ready Soubise was betrayed by Nouailles, one
of his principal Officer^ Discovered.
who revealed the Secret; yet for all that, Soubise's diligence w^^ so great,
that he had prevented the measures which the Cou^^ had taken to hinder the
effect of the Enterprise, had he but h^^ a little more time to have made his
Retreat. For with those few men he had, he made himself Master of all the Ve^^^
Soubise gets possession of the King's ^^^p^.
which lay then in the Port. But he could not get possession ^^ the Fort, by
reason that upon the Intelligence which Nou^^^ had given, they had put a
Garrison into it much more numero^ then the Party that followed Soubise.
Besides, that the Duke ^^ Vendosme, Governor of the Province, had time to
muster little Army together, and to bar up the Haven with a^ Iron Chain, and a
Cable of an extraordinary thickness. B^ which means Soubise was shut up within
the place without either Men or Ammunition, and exposed for three weeks
together to the Cannon of the Fort, and the Small Shot of t^^ whole Army.

There was no body in the Kingdom but thought him lost beyond (...) thought
lost, and disowned by every body.
recovery, so that every one strove which should be the fir^ to disown him. La
Trimouille, la Force, Chatillon, and sever^^ others of the highest Quality,
disowned him in writing. The general Deputies, and those of the Church of Paris
follow their example. The Cities of Rochel, Nimes, Vsez, and M^tauban, together
with the Communities of Cevennes did the same, either by authentic Acts, or by
the mouths of their D^puties. And this it was that disappointed all the Designs
which the Duke of Rohan had formed upon several places, because ^^ body would
engage in a War which had proved so unfortuna^^ in the first Attempt. In the
mean time the King published Declaration at Paris, dated Jan. 25. eight days
after the Su^ prize of Blavet. I know not what to say of this date: but it 1625.
^^ems naturally impossible, that all the Disclaimers and Renun^iations The
King's Declaration upon this occasion.
as are mentioned in the Declaration should come in so ^^ort a time from so
many places so far remote, and where the News of the taking of Blavet could not
be arrived so soon. However it were, the style of it was like the language of
all the ^est; and if the Prefaces of Edicts were always true, it might ^e said
that the Reformed were much too blame to make such ^^oud Complaints. The Peace
of Mompelier was therein men^ion'd as a Favor, by virtue of which the
Sentiments of a ^ust Indignation had bin overruled by the natural Benignity of
a ^ing, the Father of his People, toward Subjects submissive and re^entant. It
spoke of the performance of the last Treaty in ^erms so violent, as if they
would have enforced the most clear^^ghted to have given their eyes the Lie; and
to believe that ^he Citadel built at Mompelier; the numerous Garrison which they
had put into it; the Alterations in the Elections of Con^^ls; Fort Lewis
completed to block up Rochel, after solemn promise to demolish it; the Public
Preparations made to seize ^^e Privileges and Liberties of that formidable
City; and a ^under'd more Acts of Injustice put upon the Reformed in several
places, were no palpable Breaches of the Edict of Peace. After this, the King
confirmed the Edicts in favor of those that continued in their Obedience;
declared Soubise, his Adhe^ents, and all those that directly or indirectly kept
any correspondence with him, guilty of High Treason; deprived all the Cities
and Corporations that favored him, of their Privileges and Immunities; gave a
month's time to him and his Adherents ^o return to their Duty; and upon that
condition, from that ^ery instant, granted 'em a full oblivion of their
Rebellion; or of they refused to accept of mercy, threatened 'em with the
ut^^ost rigor of the Laws.

But before this Declaration was verified, Soubise, being fa^our'd Soubise
disingages himself.
by a high wind, that blew directly for his purpose, broke the Chain and the
Cable, and maugre all the great and small Shot that was fired upon him, saved
his Men, and brought away the Vessels which he had taken, only two that struck
in the mouth of the Haven. When he was thus Master of the Sea, he made himself
easily Master of the Islands of Re and Oleron, and after several Refusals
obliged the City of Rochel to declare for him. This unlookt-for Success of an
Action which all the Which changes the Face of Affairs.
World had condemned for rash and inconsiderate, made both Friends and Enemies
change their language. Almost all those who had disowned Soubise before,
repented of their precipitate Renunciations: and excepting some of the
Grandees, into whose minds either their own Interest, or the Jealousy of such a
glorious Exploit infused other thoughts, all others were desirous of being
engaged, and ashamed of having balked their Cause. The Duke of Rohan resumed
fresh courage, and flattered himself that some of the Provinces would arm in
his behalf when he appeared among 'em. To which purpose he made incredible
efforts, that showed an invincible courage, and a diligence indefatigable; and
at length he obtained a good part of what he desired. On the other side, the
Court did all that lay in their power to hinder Religion from appearing to be
the pretense of this War, and therefore endeavored to make it a particular
quarrel of the House of Rohan. And they were obliged to proceed thus gingerly,
through their fear of augmenting the Party, and offending England and the
Low Countries, with whom they had not long before made an Alliance. On the
other side, the Duke did all that he thought proper to persuade the world, that
it was upon no other account, but only upon the score of Religion that he had
taken Arms. And because he was not ignorant how far some certain extraordinary
demonstrations of Zeal and Piety prevail among the People, he affected all the
outward Politic Devotions of the Duke of Rohan.
Shows of an extreme Devotion. He paid the Ministers extraordinary Honors.
When he entered into any City, be caused a Bible to be carried before him, as
the Catholics in their Religious Wars advance the Cross in their Forefronts. He
alighted from his Horse at the Church-door of every City, and never spoke of
business to any body, before he had said his Prayers upon both knees. And this
made him so much the more to be taken notice of, because the Churches of the
Reformed having neither Ornaments nor Relics, nor any thing of pomp or
magnificence to invite a man, it could not be thought that such Actions
proceeded from any other Principle then that of a most profound Piety. The
Duchess his Wife also, was a notable Second to him in all his Enterprises. She
Seconded by his wife.
^abour'd with great sedulity in persuading the People to take Arms, in all
places where she came; and because she traveled more by night then by day, the
equipage, wherein she appeared, ^^ruck a kind of awe into the Country People.
Besides that, ^eing in mourning, the People that attended her were all in
^lack; her Coach also, coverd with mourning, was drawn by ^ight black Horses:
which, together with the Flambeaux that were carried to light her along,
solemnized her Train with an Air so unusual, that the Peasants were affrighted
at it more then once. Nor were these little Formalities without some success;
for at last several Corporations joined with him one after another.

In the mean time Soubise gave an account to the Public of Manifesto of the
Duke of Soubise.
^he Motives that induced him to take Arms, by a Manifesto, wherein, looking a
good way backward, he renewed the remembrance of the Services done the deceased
King by the Reformed, and complained that since his death the Edicts had bin
openly violated, and that the Churches had bin only amused with ^romises which
never had bin observed. He upbraided the Ca^^olics with the surprise of Saumur,
which was detained from ^^ Plessis, though he had bin promised to be resettl'd
in it. He ^^rgot not the hard usage exercised at Mompelier, contrary to ^he
Faith of the Breifs which had bin granted to the Duke of ^ohan: and afterward
he added, that the exercise of the Reformed Religion had not bin reestablished
where it ought to ^ave bin: that the Reformed had been excluded from all
^^anner of Employments, even from the Offices of Sergeants: that the
Ecclesiastical Assemblies were deprived of their former Liberty: that the
Reformed were denied common Justice in their Affairs; and were often made to
lose their Suits, for no ^ther reason but upon the score of their Religion:
that at St. ^ille^, the Minister du Terond attending a Corpse to the Grave, was
knocked of the head, yet no punishment inflicted upon the guilty: that Briet, a
Judge in the Isle of Re, a man made up of Fury and Frenzy, had caused an
unfortunate Wretch to be ^urnt alive, as being convicted to have burnt a
Crucifix, which nevertheless was sound without the least harm done to it, after
the execution of that miserable Creature: and that Rochel was unjustly
oppressed, which had voluntarily submitted to the Crown.

But in regard that Writings of this nature rarely remain unanswered, a Reply
to Soubise's Manifesto soon appeared abroad; though the Author observed no Rule
or Measure. He had the boldness to assert, that the Reformed had done Henry IV.
but very little service, because they had neither supplied him with Money nor
Men. He made Reason of State an Excuse for the Alteration of the King's
Promises; though in the main he disowned the Maxim, which permits Princes to
break their Words either with their Subjects or with Heretics. He evaded the
Promise of the Restitution of Saumur, by saying, that i^ was never made, but in
case there had been no War. As if, though that had been true, it had not been
justice to have restored the City, at least after the Peace concluded. He
thrust in by head and shoulders an Invective against Favas, who never regarded
the ruin of his Party, provided he could make himself great. He intermixed the
Recital of the Jealousies which the Assemblies apprehended of the Authority
which the Duke of Rohan and his Brother went about to usurp. He evaded the rest
of the Complaints after various manners, but with very little sincerity, as may
be judged by the foregoing Examples As to the Exercises not being
reestablished, he said, that the Processes were depending in Council; but he
did not say, that thence arose the occasion of complaining, because those
Causes hung undetermined for several years together. He pretended that
Employments were conferred upon the Reformed; but he concealed, that that was
only done to draw 'em off from the Cause of the Churches; and that it was for
that reason only that La Farce and Chastillon had been made Marshals of France,
and Augustus Galand a Counselor of State. He averred that Teron died of an
Ulcer in the Lungs; whereas it was proved, that he had preached in his Church
not above fifteen days before Dispute about the Privileges of Rochelle.
he died.

At the same time also a new Dispute arose about the Privileges of Rochelle, of
which I have spoken in another place. I shall therefore say no more here, then
only this, that the Pre^ensions of that City to their Franchises were so solid,
and so ^ell grounded, that all the Artifices of those who went about ^^ deprive
them of 'em, could never imagine but only two vain ^retences. The one was, That
the City had forfeited their ^ights, when being taken by the English, it was
re-taken from ^^: The other was, That she had bin deprived of her Privi^dges in
1541. by Francis I. by reason of her Rebellion. But ^^ the first it was
answered, That she her self had bin assisting ^^ restore her self to the
Dominion of the French: That she had ^^ce that obtained New Concessions and
Grants, besides a Con^rmation of the Old ones; that Lewis XI. had sworn to
main^in her in her Immunities; and that it was past all contradi^ion that she
had enjoyed 'em till the year 1541. because it was ^^en that the King deprived
her of 'em. And to the second ^retence it was replied, That Henry II. had
restored whatever ^ad bin taken away by his Father, and resettl'd her in her
Pri^ledges.

But according to the Custom of War, no sooner were the Peace discoursed of
Troubles begun, but they began to talk of Peace. The Court ^pear'd inclinable
to it, because those Negotiations gave her ^ways an opportunity to corrupt some
body or other, or time ^^ put her self into a condition to give Laws. Soubise
and Rochelle ^^^t their Deputies to the King; and though the Duke of Rohan
thought it more proper to treat in any other place then ^^ the Court, he was
constrained, that he might appear united ^^ the rest, to send his Deputies the
same way, as also were ^^e Corporations that had adhered to him. However, in
re^ard the Council sought only to take their time, and to prepare ^^ favorable
opportunity to complete the Ruin of the Party, ^^e Treaty was spun out in
length, and Acts of Hostility began ^^ the Upper Languedoc. Yet Marshal de
Themines was not Cruelties of the Royal Army in Foix.
^ery prosperous in Albigeois; but when he entered the Province ^^ Foix, his
Men, with others that joined him there, committed so many Cruelties, that the
Catholics themselves were ^sham'd of 'em: So that this same Barbarous Army
having su^^ain'd great Losses before Mas d' Azil, where they were forced ^^
raise their Siege with Ignominy, several made no scruple* to look upon the Rout
of the Marshal as a Divine Punishment of his Violences. On the other side,
Soubise having landed in the Soubise prospers.
Country of Medoc to divert the Enemy, found an opportunity to perform a more
Considerable Exploit. For a Fleet set out to engage him, and reinforced with
some Dutch Ships, obliged him to put to Sea again, in order to meet and fight
that Squadron. In short, The Enemy was utterly defeated; and in regard, that
since the Enterprise of Blavet, every thing had succeeded according to his
wish; this New Advantage gave so much reputation to his Affairs, that the most
Timorous had the courage to declare on his side. The Court also became more
supple about the Conditions of Peace, while Rochel and some other Corporations
stood more stiffly upon Terms.

The Deputies therefore which the Reformed had sent to the A Paper of the
Reformed presented to the King.
King, and who had su'd for a Peace in most humble manner, at length at
Fontainbleau obtained an indifferent Answer to the Paper which they had
presented. It contained one and twenty Articles, the first of which named three
and forty Places, wherein a Re-establishment of the Exercise was demanded, as
in the year 1620. Nor was the City of Foix omitted in this same Catalogue:
Whence it appeared that the Triumph of the Monk Villate was but a Chimera; or
rather, that the Pretense had not been of any long continuance; since there
were still some of the Reformed remaining in a place, where the Monk had
boasted his Conversion of all that were there. The second demanded the
Restitution of the Churchyards which had bin taken from the Reformed in
several Places, of which Eight were particularly named. The third demanded
Liberty for the Ministers to reside where they pleased, according to the
General and Particular Articles of the Edict. The Fourth concerned the
Exemption denied from contributing toward the Reparation of Churches, and some
other things that savored of Compliance with the Roman Worship. The Fifth
contained a Complaint, that frequently the Bodies of the Reformed were dug
up again, under pretense that they were buried in Catholic Chapels or
Churchyards. Of which there was a fresh Example at Chartres. For the Bishop
had ordered the Body of Teligni, a Gentleman whose Land lay in that Diocese, to
be haul'd out of his Tomb; and the pretense of this Piece of Inhumanity
exercised upon the Body of that Gentleman, eight days after it had bin buried,
was, because it was buried in the Chapel of his House. The same Article
contained Complaints of the demolishing of some Churches, of woich they gave
for an example the pulling down the Church which the Reformed had at Cheilar.
They complained also of the banishing of several persons, who had bin driven
out of several Cities, for no other reason, but upon the score of Religion; and
among the rest of the places where these Exorbitancies had bin committed,
Villemur, Leitoure, Puimirol, and Soumieres were particularized. The sixth
expressed the demolishing of Fort Lewis; and the next, the levelling of the
Citadel of Mompelier, which the Inhabitants had bin constrained to demand. The
eighth insisted upon the Brief in ^598. touching places of security, the
purport of which was, ^at there should be no Innovation introduced. The ninth
mentioned the City Tolls, which had been very ill paid; and (...) tenth
demanded, that the Sums promised to the Reformed (...) Bearn, in recompense of
Ecclesiastical Estates, might be paid without any defalcation or diminution.
The following Article ^oke of the Decree of the Parliament of Bretagne, which
had broken the Article of the Edict wherein the Reformed were declared capable
of all Employments: they therefore demanded the Decree to be cancelled, and the
Article to be conformed. The twelfth was drawn up in favor of the
Party-Chambers, and of the Officers that composed 'em. In the rest (...) was
demanded, That the Reformed who had bin despoiled of their Goods and Estates,
by Grants, Confiscations, or under presence of Reprizals, should be restored to
the same; that Acts ^f Hostility should be forgotten; that the Declaration
published before Mompelier, might be registered in the Chamber of ^ccompts in
Paris; that they who had taken Arms in 1621. ^ight be discharged of Taxes laid
upon 'em during the Troubles; and that the Receivers who had caused 'em to be
paid, ^ight be obliged to restitution of what they had received; that they
might not be su'd in the Courts of Justice for what had bin ^one to the
prejudice of the Duke of Rohan's safe Conducts which he had revoked; that the
Privileges of the Reformed Cities and Corporations, principally regarding the
Election (...) their Consuls and Common Councils, might be preserved; that each
Party might be reciprocally discharged from payment of Debts created without
the consent of the other; that those of the Reformed might be equally shared;
and lastly, that they might be permitted to hold General Assemblies.

The Answers returned to this Paper were favorable enough Answers to their
Paper.
They referred the re-establishment of places for Exercise, and the restitution
of Churchyards to the Commissioners; and that in terms earnest enough, and
such as might have proved satisfactory, had those Promises bin sincerely
fulfilled. Principally there was one remarkable Clause about Churchyards to
this purpose, that if for important Reasons they could not restore to the
Reformed the same places which they had made use ^^ in 1620. others should be
delivered to 'em, as commodious a^ they could desire, at the charges of those
that should require the exchange. This set things very near upon the Basis of
the ancient Article of Particulars, and lost the Advocate General Talon, the
fruit of that Fraud which he pretended to have discovered, and which for twenty
years together had served for a Foundation to the Orders of the Commissioners.
The liberty for the Ministers to reside where they pleased was confirmed* and
the King reserved to his Council the power upon hearing of the Cause, to remedy
such Infringements as should be complained of. The Exemption from contributing
to things mentioned in the twelfth Article of Particulars was granted, only
with the exception of Treaties that had bin made upon that occasion between the
Reformed and the Catholics. They answered indirectly to the Article about
digging up the Bodies of the dead, upon which the Demandants were referred to
the 18th and 23d Article of the Edict, and to the Decree of Council of the 25th
of August 1620. But it was ordered that the Council should be informed of the
demolishing of Churches; that the banished persons should be restored; and that
the business of Cheilar, tho removed to the Council, should be sent back to the
Party-Chamber, which was translated to Beziers by reason of the Troubles. The
demolishing of Fort Lewis, and the observance of the Brevet of 1598. were
promised in general terms, provided the Reformed behaved themselves well. As
for the Citadel of Mompelier, they were willing to believe that the Inhabi^nes
had demanded it freely and unanimously. The King also promised, that the Sums
due for 1623 and 24 should be ^^id, to grant good Assignations for the present
year, and to take good the Compensation in Bearn. The admission of the Reformed
into all Offices, the preservation of the Jurisdiction of the Chambers, and of
the Dignity of their Officers; the (...) settlement of the Reformed in their
Estates; the Act of Ob^ion of all Acts of Hostility; the registring of the
Declaration of Mompelier, were all so many Articles granted. The discharge from
Taxes laid during the Troubles, was granted to those only who had taken Arms in
1621. for as much as was ^l due, without restitution of what they had paid. The
Ci^s hat still were held by the Reformed had their Privileges confirmed; and
if any Case of Appeal happened about the Election of Officers, the cognizance
of it was referred to the ^hambers. The Article about safe Conducts was
granted. That, about the reciprocal discharge of Debts created by one ^rty
without the consent of the other, was past for such as ^ere not yet paid: only
the King reserved to himself the equa^^ing the share of the particular Debts of
the Reformed; and ^mis'd to permit a General Assembly if they desired it, when
(...) time was come for electing the General Deputies.

These Answers being dispatched into the Provinces, met not The Reformed not
satisfied.
^th minds disposed to be satisfied therewith. Their great Successes had dazzled
almost all the world; and they who had ^us^d themselves most earnestly to be
entreated to quit their Obedience, were most backward in laying down those Arms
to which they had betaken themselves with so much reluctance: (...) that almost
all the Corporations refused the Answers as dis^tisfactory. More especially,
Rochel would have Fort Lewis demolished before all things, and would not hear
of Peace till that were done. But the Duke of Rohan, who was afraid of ^me
Back-blow of Fortune, and who was desirous to make ^e best of the present
condition of Affairs, labored for an Accommodation with all his might. And in
regard that for the obtaining in gross, what he could not obtain by piecemeal,
he was constrained to summon an Assembly at Anduse, where becaus'd the War to
be resolved upon, he summoned another (...) Milhau, to persuade 'em to accept
of Peace. But while the time was spent in Journies backward and forward, the
Court had leisure to recover their Affairs into a better posture. She sowed
Suspicions and Jealousies among the Reformed, and raised The Court recovers her
Affairs.
up a Party strong enough against the Duke of Rohan and his Brother, to
insinuate idle Fears, as if they intended to patch up an Accommodation to the
prejudice of the common Cause. She debauched some of Soubises's principal
Officers, and among the rest his Vice Admiral; and being strengthened with some
Men of War with which England and the United Provinces supplied her, she
repaired her Losses, and found a way to expel Soubise out of the Islands of
Oleron and Re, to cut in pieces his Land-Army, and scatter his Fleet at Sea.
The Mayor of Rochel also was suspected to have betrayed the Party; for that
having hindered Seven or eight hundred Gentlemen and other Soldiers to pass
over into the Isle of Re, under pretense that they might get over more easily
with the morning tide, he gave the King's Vessels leisure to seize the Channel
that separates the Island from the Continent: so that Soubise was deprived of
that Succor which might have prevented the defeat of his men.

The Clergy was then assembled at Paris, whither every Diocese An Assembly of
the Clergy.
had sent a greater number of Deputies then was permitted by the Regulations.
The reason of this Innovation was, because there were certain Books to be
examined, of which a Censure was demanded, in regard they contained a Doctrine
prejudicial to the King's Authority. But in regard that at the same time the
Pope's power was called in question, the Clergy, much more zealous to support
that, then to perform their duty, were desirous to augment the number of
voices, that they might be able to oppose those who had really French hearts.
The Bishop of Chartres also, being entrusted and enjoined by the Assembly to
write the Censure upon those Books, was disowned by the rest of the Clergy,
because he was not so officious as others to the Sea of Rome. The Parliament
sided with the Bishop, and enjoined the Assembly either to subscribe the
Censure of those pernicious Books, or to break up. But the Clergy refused to
obey that Decree; and to allay the Contest, the King summoned the Affair before
himself and his Council; ^ntenting himself with a general Censure of those
Books, without entering into the Particulars of the pernicious Propositions
which they contrain'd. The Nuncio appeared very hot in his Affair; caused an
Extract of the disowning the Bishop's ^ensure to be delivered to him, and sent
it to Rome, where they were extremely satisfied with this perseverance of the
Clergy (...) their accustomed Prevarications; for which the Pope returned (...)
thanks in a most obliging manner. But the Clergy for all his, could not choose
but be ashamed of their own Behavior, ^d ordered by a private Act, that the
remembrance of that dispute should be stifled. Nevertheless that Precaution
could not ^face it; and the Expedient it self which they had made choice (...)
to cause it to be forgotten, served only to preserve the memo^^ of it.

The Cardinal, during whose Ministry the Clergy was very They give money with
an ill will.
^owerful, and very much respected, was not yet so well settled (...) the
Government, as openly to displease the Court of Rome; and besides he was
desirous to milk from the Clergy a more ^en ordinary Sum, under pretense of the
War. But all these ^omplacencies could not obtain above Six hundred thousand
^rowns; which the Clergy did not give neither, without some testimonies that
they were loath to part with it. In the mean ^e the King wrote to the Assembly,
after the defeat of Soubise, to let 'em understand the good news of his
Victory; and (...) the end they might not be ignorant that Religion was the
^use of the War, whatever Assurances he gave his Protestant ^llies and Reformed
Subjects to the contrary, he told 'em expressly in his Letters, that by the Rout
of Soubise, Truth had ^mph'd over Falsehood. But then the Victors might say what
^ey pleased without any danger. For the Reformed, stunned with this Revolution,
thought of nothing but submitting themselves; and the Assembly of Milhau, upon
the first of August, ^ew up an acceptance of the Answers to the Papers decreed
(...) Fontainbleau. And in pursuance of this, sent away their ^eputies to the
King with their Submissions; who made their Addresses to him the 21st of the
month, and in most humble terms besought him for Rochel. To which the King's
Answer The King excepts Rochel out of the Peace.
was, That he granted a general Peace to all those who had taken Arms; but he
added these words, For Rochel it is another thing.

This excepting of Rochel, suspended the conclusion of the Which retards the
conclusion of it.
Treaty; for that the Deputies of the Assembly at Milhau had not power to
accept of Peace, but upon condition that Rochel were included. Which Union of
Interests was ill resented at Court, where it was told the Deputies, to fright
'em into a Disunion, that their sticking so close one to another tended to
Faction. However they wanted not Reasons to have justified themselves, had the
Court designed to have used 'em favorably. For they replied, That there was
nothing of Novelty in the Union; that till then the King had never disapproved
it; that they had bin always joined together in their Deputations, in their
Submissions, in their Petitions, in their Papers, which they had always
presented to the King in Union one with another. That by the Answer to Article
VIII. of the last Papers, it was promised there should be no Innovation in the
Cities held by the Protestants; which would be no more then a delusion, if
Rochel were excluded: That the Edicts of Peace had bin general hitherto, and
accepted in common, without any resenting the Union of Interests. That the
acceptance of the Peace without Rochel, would be an express condemnation of
that City; which would be an Action highly scandalous among People of the same
Religion; so much the rather, because Rochel was resolved to submit. That if
the rest of the Reformed abandoned Rochel to the King's Indignation, People
would be afraid that their general destruction was to be begun with the
particular ruin of that City; seeing that the Clergy, the Parlaments, and the
principal Persons of the Kingdom discoursed openly of extirpating Heresy, and
of beginning with Rochel; which was confirmed by the printed Pamphlets that
were publicly sold in Paris.

But the same Reasons which made the Reformed judge, that Particular Laws which
the King would impose upon that City.
their Union with Rochel was just and necessary, were the very Reasons that
obliged the Court to endeavor the dissolution of it. For the ruin of that
formidable City was sworn; and the Cardinal, who was desirous to signalize
himself by great things, thought it an Enterprise worthy himself. So that ^here
was nothing listened to, of what was spoken in favor of that City, whose
Destiny was vowed. Nevertheless, she was (...) much astonished as the rest at
Soubises's Defeat; and falling (...) a sudden from a Resolution a little too
haughty, into ^ost profound Submissions, she resolved to beg with humility that
Peace, which she had refused with disdain. Her Deputies ^ame and threw
themselves at the King's Feet, and besought ^is Pardon in most submissive
terms. But the King answered 'em ^ke a Master, that resolved to make his Pardon
his Punishment, and reduce 'em by the Peace into a worse Condition then the
Calamities of an Unfortunate War could e're have brought 'em. The Chancellor
therefore, to whom the King referred 'em, imposed these Conditions upon 'em.
That the Council and Government of the City should be in the same Condition as
it was (...) 1610. That they should admit an Intendant of Justice: That the
Fortifications should be demolished. That the King should be admitted with
respect, whenever he pleased to enter. That they should have no Men of War, and
that Merchants Ships should take their Passes from the Admiral of France. That
they should restore to the Ecclesiastics their Goods and Estates: And that
certain Wagons and Merchandise which belonged to the ^nhabitants of Orleance,
and which the Rochelois had seized, should be restored. Upon these Conditions
they were promised to be comprehended in all the Privileges of the Edict.

'Twas a sour piece of Condescension to submit to such severe and rigorous
Laws; nor could they tell how to mollify the Victor into more easy moderation.
In vain the General Deputies interceded for Rochelle in the name of all the
Churches. However Maniald took upon him to spoke, and made a most moving and
passionate Speech to the King; wherein he made a lively description of the
Misery of the Rochellois; he excused their taking Arms as done out of
necessity: Which nevertheless he condemned with Expressions full of execration,
whatever the Pretense were with which it was covered. He said, that the
Rochelois were come to accuse themselves, and sue for mercy. He besought the
King to grant 'em Peace, not as Enemies subdued by the Sword; but as Subjects,
with the moderation of his Scepter. He added, that without Liberty, they would
not be Subjects, but Slaves. Concluding, he implored pardon with promise of
submission, and of servitude also, if the King's satisfaction and the good of
his service depended upon it. But all this was to no purpose: The King was
resolved that Rochelle should be excepted out of the General Peace, and that
she should submit to particular Laws.

In the mean time there was a League concluded between the A powerful League
against Spain.
King of England, the Republic of Venice, the Duke of S^^^^, and the States of
the United Provinces, in Conjunction with France, against Spain, which kept
almost all Italy under the Yoke, and was fairly preparing to deprive her of the
remainder of her Liberty. These Confederates were very urgent with Cardinal
Richlieu to hasten Peace with the Reformed, to the end they might act
unanimously against the Common Enemy. It Is true, that Minister had it deep laid
in his thoughts to humble Spain, but he thought that the first step which he
was to take to that end, was to enslave France, and by that means to bereave
Foreigners of Opportunities to renew the Civil Wars. To that end, he judged it
necessary first to ruin the Reformed, The Cardinal's Designs.
who were still strong enough by their Union to support a Party of
Malcontents. And therefore he resolved to begin with Rochelle; after the
reducing of which, he did not expect to meet with much more Resistance in the
Kingdom. Nor did France want Persons who were sharp sighted enough to penetrate
the Cardinal's Design: But their foresight did not hinder 'em for all that,
from contributing to their own Servitude. They well perceived, that in
oppressing the Reformed they made Fetters for themselves; but every one was in
hopes to make his Fortune by the Public Misery. This was that which made the
Cardinal so obstinate to except Rochel out of the general Peace, to the end he
might separate it from the rest of the Reformed, and destroy it with more ease.

But two things constrained him to surcease this Great Design. Of which he is
forced to defer the execution.
The one was, That the Spaniards waited the Success of these Confusions, that
they might take their own Methods; that they treated with the Duke of Rohan to
accept of their Service; that the Duke had sent Campredon into Spain, to make
himself ^e more considerable by their Succor; that the Conjuncture (...)
Affairs rendered the Spaniards more stiff; and authorized the ^inning out a
Treaty begun with 'em, about those things which ^d kindled the War in Italy.
The other was, That Powerful ^abals were forming against him to remove him from
the Mi^stry. He saw the chiefest part of all that was great at Court (...)
Combination against him; and rightly judged that he should ^ve too many
Factions to employ his Wits, without taking ^^on himself the management of two
Wars at once, the one ^omestic, the other Civil. He resolved therefore to put
an end ^^th to the one, and the other; with a resolution to set a-foot ^e Civil
War again, so soon as the Conspiracies against his Au^ority would give him
leisure; and to apply himself to the Fo^ign War so soon as he had stifled the
Seeds from whence Do^estic Troubles might again spring up. For the first, he
made use The English Ambassadors importunate for the Peace of the Religion.
(...) the continued Importunities of Holland and Carleton to induce ^m to use
the Reformed with less severity, to the end he might (...) more at liberty to
carry on the Foreign War. On the other ^de, those Ambassadors pressed the
Reformed to accept the ^eace upon the Conditions that were offered 'em; and
assured ^^ that the King their Master would be Guaranty for the per^^mance of
those that were promised 'em. Particularly, they ^omis'd Rochelle, that the
King of England would so earnestly ^llicit the Demolishing of Fort Lewis, and
so moderate the ^ard Conditions that were imposed upon 'em, that he questioned
^t but to bring it to pass. They farther told 'em, that the ^ing of France had
given 'em his Word to demolish the Fort (...) convenient time, upon Condition
that Rochelle returned to ^r Duty.

These Solicitations and Promises made Rochelle at length Rochelle accepts the
Conditions somewhat mollify'd.
^etermin to humble her self: And the rest of the Cities, as ^ontauban,
Castres, Nimes, Vsez, which had not refused the ^eace but only because she
stood out, followed her Example, (...) soon as she had accepted it. Thereupon
it was concluded the ^6th of February. However, all that was altered in the
Laws ^^pos'd upon Rochelle was, that the Second Article, which ^ention'd the
settling an Intendant of Justice in that City, was expressed in these Terms,
That they should admit Commissioners to see the Peace performed, who might
reside there as long as they plea'd. There was nothing said either of the
Fourth, which imported that the King should be admitted whenever he pleased to
enter; or of the Seventh, which concerned the Interest of certain Merchants of
Orleance: But they put instead of them, the Restoration of the Catholic
Religion in the full Liberty of its Exercises; and a Declaration that Fort
Lewis could not be razed; but that such Order should be given to the Garrison,
and to the Garrisons of the Islands of Re and Oleron, that the Trade of the City
should be no way prejudiced. Instead of demolishing the Fortifications which
had been decreed at first in General Terms, nothing more was required then the
demolishing the Fort de Taden: And to soften the Article which enjoined the
Merchants Vessels to take Passes from the Admirals of France, 'twas only
ordained that they should observe the Laws of Traffic, without prejudice to
their Privileges.

There was an Act of these Articles drawn up, at the bottom of which was a
Promise that the Reformed should enjoy the benefit of the Answers returned to
their Papers at Fontainble^^, in July 1625; provided that on their part, they
settled things in the same condition as they were in at the same time. But for
fear, lest Rochelle should take any advantage of this Promise, that City was
expressly excepted: And it was declared. That the King did not thereby engage
himself to any other Favor then what was mentioned in the Act which went
before. The Deputies of the Reformed had signed in that Place. But underneath
there was yet a third Act, signed by the said Deputies as well in their own, as
in the name of the Deputies, from the Dukes of Rohan and Soubise, of Languedoc,
Rochelle, Montauban, Castres, Nimes, Vsez, Milhau, and Cevenes, wherein they
protested that they had besought the King with all the duty and most humble
submissions that Subjects could pay to their Sovereign, to pardon what was
past, and to grant 'em Peace; with a promise of great Fidelity for the future,
from which they would never swerve; and Offers of all manner of Services: All
which the King had graciously harken'd to, and upon which he had given his
Royal Word for Peace, and the observance of the Answers returned to the Paper
delivered at Fontainbleau. Out ^^ which however he had excepted Rochelle, in
reference to which he had declared his Will; and which, they said, they accep^d
as the most signal Mark of Clemency and Goodness that Sub^cts could receive
from a Sovereign; and they promised to ^and to it inviolably, and to cause the
Places taken since July ^st to be surrendered.

The Court, although they desired Peace with an extraordinary Why the Court
exacted such Writings.
^assion, exacted these Submissions, to make the Reformed own ^^at they were in
the wrong to levy War; and that they might ^ke advantage of their own
Confessions, if any new Quarrels ^ake forth. And the Reformed, who were not
ignorant of ^^e Court-Politics, past these Infamous Acts, either because ^hey
had bin wrought over, or because they found they lay at ^he mercy of the Court,
as the Duke of Rohan well foresaw; ^^ else because they were in hopes of
obtaining greater Favors ^y these Extraordinary Submissions; or lastly, in
compliance with those who could not like it, that Subjects should take Arms
against their Prince upon any Occasion whatever. However, to ^ssure themselves
of the King of England's Protection, whom All Passed by the Embassaders of
England.
^hey believed to be Guarantee of the Peace, they drew up an Act ^gn'd by the
Ambassadors, and dated Feb. 11. wherein they declared, that the Razing of Fort
Lewis was promised in time con^enient, provided the Rochelois returned to their
duty; and that without that Promise neither Rochel would have accepted the
Peace, neither would the Reformed have relinquished those things which the
Instances of the King of England made 'em ^elinquish; by reason of which they
put 'em in hopes of a powerful Intercession on his part, that they might have
satisfaction given 'em. This Paper was ill drawn up; nor did it clearly express
the Guarantie of which the King of England boasted. Nevertheless, it cannot be
denied, but that it must have obliged that Prince either to have disowned his
Ambassadors, or else to take care that what was granted the Reformed should In
(...) England was ^.
be faithfully performed; since he acknowledged that the sole force of his
Solicitations had vanquished their good nature to be satisfied with the King's
Offers. An honest man needs no more to engage him to make another man's
business his own, but that it was himself who caused the other to miscarry,
either by his Authority or Persuasion. And in this sense it cannot be denied,
but that the King of England was Guarantee of the Peace, since it was upon his
word, and in hopes that he would be answerable for it, that the Reformed
accepted it. But this Important Ceremony wanted due formality; and the Council
of France had so well ordered their Business, that nothing appeared from whence
any evident Conclusion could be drawn, that the King of England interposed in
this Treaty as a Mediator, or as a Guarantee. In a word, Policy will not permit
Princes to suffer, that another Prince should be Guarantee of Treaties which
are made between them and their Subjects. To consent that Subjects should have
recourse to the Garantie of a Foreigner for their Security in things that
concern the Word and Authority of their Lawful Prince, would be to tie 'em to
another Sovereign. For this Reason the Court of France, who had let the King of
England alone to use all the Arguments, of which they could make their
advantage, yet were not engaged by any Public Act to do the least Kindness out
of any respect for him, laughed at the Pretension of the English Mediator, when
he would have had his Guarantie taken effect; and looked upon the Embassador's
Writing as an idle piece of Nullity that obliged the King of France to nothing.

But after the Peace was signed upon the Conditions mentention'd, A new Edict
confirming all the rest.
the Ratifications of Rochel and Montauban were expected; of which the one was
performed the second, the other the sixth of March. Which done, an Edict was
published the same Month, which contained Twelve Articles. The Introduction
spoke of nothing but Clemency and Pardon on the King's part, and Submissions
and Supplications reiterated by the Reformed, and particularly by those who
remained in obedience, which the King said, was the better sort, and the
greatest part, and to whose Remonstrances he had had a special regard when he
accepted the Submissions of the Rest. The First Article confirmed the Regster'd
Edicts and Secret Articles, and gave Testimony that they had been well and duly
observed in the Reign of the deceased King, and after his death, till the
beginning of the last Commotions. Which was an Artifice to induce the Reformed
themselves to condemn all the loud Complaints of a thousand Breaches before
that time. The second restored the Exercise of the Roman Religion in all places
where it had ^in ejected during the Troubles; and ordered ample Restitution of
the Estates and Rights belonging to the Ecclesiastics, even of their Movables
that should be found in specie. The third granted the same favor to the
Reformed for the exercise of their Religion, and for the Churchyards which
they were pos^ess'd of in 1600. And the Clauses of that Article were taken out
of the Answer to the two first of the Paper decreed at Fontainbleau. The fourth
contained an Amnesty of all Acts of Hostility; even of those that might have
bin committed since the day of the Declaration dated October 1622. till the day
of the publication of this in the Parlaments: nor were the Submissions and
reiterated Supplications of the Reformed omitted. The fifth concerned the
raising of money, and gave a discharge of it in the terms of the Articles of
the Edict of Nantes, which mentioned the same thing. The sixth reestablished
the Seats of Judicature, the Receipts, the Officers of the Finances, in the
places from whence they had bin removed by reason of the Troubles; wherein the
Tablier of the Election at Rochel was also comprehended. The Privileges of the
Cities which the Reformed held in their hands were likewise confirmed. The
usual method for the electing of Consuls was to be observed; and the Appeals of
Persons aggrieved were to be judged by the Chambers of the Edict. The seventh
discharged the Reformed from all Sentences pronounced against 'em by reason of
their taking Arms: And this Article was very necessary every where; but chiefly
within the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Tho^^^se, where they had signalized
their extraordinary Zeal by a great number of Decrees against Corporations and
private persons. The eighth ordained a speedy Release of Prisoners and Persons
condemned to the Galleys. The ninth confirmed the Article of the Edict of
Nantes, which declared the Reformed capable of all Offices; reestablished
those that had bin put out; ^evok'd the Patents of their Offices granted to
others, and restored to the Reformed all their Estates, their Titles, Debts,
Accounts and Actions, and cancelled all opposite Acts, except the peremptory
Decrees of the Council and Chambers of the Edict. The tenth ordered that this
Declaration should be observed in the terms of the 92d Article of the Edict of
Nantes. The eleventh forbid for the future all manner of Politic Assemblies,
unless they had express leave to hold 'em; and all manner of Associations, and
keeping of Intelligences. Nevertheless Ecclesiastical Assemblies were
permitted, about mere affairs of Church Discipline, and in conformity to the
Declaration of August 1623. which enjoined the Synods to admit a Commissioner
deputed by the King. All manner of Fortifications and raising of Money were
forbid, without an express Commission. The last ordained the execution of the
Articles that related to Rochel, and the restitution of the Cities and Castles
during the War. It Is true the Mayor, the Sheriffs, and certain Burgesses of
Orleans; the Catholics of Mompelier and parts adjoining, Prelates,
Ecclesiastics, Gentlemen and others, opposed the verification of this Edict in
the Parliament of Paris; and the opposition of the first was admitted, but the
rest were referred to the Parliament o^ Toulouse. However their opposition was
only in reference to some particular Interests.

After the Peace was thus concluded, the Confederates were in France plays foul
with the Confederates.
hopes that France would have turned her Arms against the House of Austria. But
they were strangely astonished to see a ratified Treaty appear abroad within
eleven days after, which du Targis, Ambassador in Spain, had concluded between
the Two Crowns. It Is true, that to cover this foul Play, they made a show of
disowning the Ambassador, who seemingly was never to have bin pardoned, but for
the earnest solicitations of the Court of Rome. But this Farce deceived none
but Fools, for the Treaty held good after some slight Alterations, and the
Confederates exhaled their Resentments in vain Reproaches and unprofitable
Threats. There was only the Duke of Savoy, who being enraged at such a piece of
Perfidiousness, sent away the Abbot de la Scaglia into England, to excite that
Monarch to revenge, who had no less reason then himself to be chafed at such
Jealousy between the Cardinal and Buckingham.
a scorn of his Amity. And Affairs in that Kingdom began to incline toward a
Rupture; for there was a great Jealousy in point of Honor between Cardinal
Richlieu, and the Duke of Buckingham, but they were unequally matched: For
Buckingham was vain, hair-brained, lofty, and void of Foresight; Richlieu
^rafty, a Dissembler, a Hypocrite, and one that never ventured any thing
without good assurances of Success. They had this ^owever, which was common to
both; that they were hated ^y all men but such as were their Creatures, and
both were ^qually sovereign Governors of their sovereign Masters; tho others
say, there was a more secret cause of Jealousy between ^^em. For Buckingham had
appeared in the Court of France with the Character of Ambassador in a
magnificent Equipage, and had drawn the eyes of all the world upon him. He had
moreover pleased the Ladies; and his vanity had transported ^im to think
himself worthy to attempt the Queen herself. The Cardinal had the same
thoughts, and could not endure that his ^ival should receive any marks of being
preferred before ^im.

We may reck'n, among the greatest weaknesses of that cele^rated The Cardinal's
blindside.
Minister of State, that he was emulous of out doing all others, even in
Trifles: he could not endure that another man ^^ouid out do him in the most
pitiful things. To make Verses, or to speak better than he did, was not the way
to win his Favor, or to show that he understood Humanity, Philosophy, the
Mathematics, Divinity or Antiquity better then he. That he might enjoy the
Reputation of being the most expert man of his time in all things, he stretched
his weakness to that degree, as ^o attribute to himself the Works of other men;
and to own under his own Name those Writings, wherein, perhaps, he was no more
concerned, then to have bin the first that conceived the ^ude and indigested
Idea of the Subject. He had the same Sentiments as to Magnificence, and
Courting of Ladies; and for a man to presume to transcend him in either of
those two things, was a certain way to lose his favor. However it were, he
always used the Queen but very scurvily, after he observed the little value she
had for him; insomuch that while he lived, she had not all the World at will.

There was also brewing at the same time another occasion of a Rupture, through
the ill conduct of the Queens Household Servants. Their Zeal for the Catholic
Religion, soon made 'em exceed the Bounds to which they were confined by the
Treaties of Marriage. They introduced the Jesuits into the Household Enterprises
of the Catholics of the Queen of England's menial Servants.
of that Princess; where those turbulent and ambitious People made themselves
such absolute Masters of her Wit and Reason that they soon set her at variance
with the King her Husband. They so intoxicated her Understanding with their
Superstitions that they forced her to commit a thousand mean things beneath her
Grandeur, and unworthy of her Dignity. They persuaded her to adore, as Martyrs,
those of their Order, that had bin executed under the preceding Reign, as
Contrivers or Accomplices in the Powder Plot. And the occasion of a Jubilee
presenting itself, they made choice of the place where the common Male factors
are executed, whither the Queen was to walk bare-foo^ to say her Prayers. The
English, to whom the very Name of Jesuit is abominable, were justly offended at
this piece of Insolence; and the King himself, though he were extremely so^ and
easy, was highly exasperated: So that being otherwise disgusted at the
Misdemeanors of the Queens Domestics, he resolved to send 'em back into France.
Upon which, the Cardinal sent Bassompierre to him, to complain of such a
violence offered to the Treaty; and to endeavor to reconcile the differences
between him and his Wife, wherein the Ambassador had the good luck to succeed
within a little of his Wishes. But in regard the Ministers of both Courts made
it their business mutually to ver^ and thwart one another, the Cardinal caused
Bassompierre's Treaty to be disowned, and Buckingham obliged his King to revoke
his Word. After which, upon some Affairs of Commerce intervening, Buckingham,
who burned with a desire of returning into France, and brave the Cardinal,
would needs be sent thither once more with the Character of Ambassador. But the
Cardinal found a way to let him understand that he should not be welcome. Upon
which, the English Favorite enraged at such an Affront, obliged his Master to
declare War against France. And the pretense was, that the Court of France had
not observed the Articles of the last Peace. But his Measures were so false,
and his Conduct so foolhardy, that he completed the Ruin of the Reformed and
Rochel, while he sought his own and their Revenge.

While this Tempest was gathering together, the Cardinal abour'd to disperse
another Storm that threatened him nearer at Conspiracies against the Cardinal.
and. Spain, who well foresaw what Obstacles he would throw in the way of her
Grandeur, if he were not entangl'd in Domestic Divisions, found him work on
every side, and she erceiv'd the chiefest part of the Princes and great Lords
inclined ^ second her. The Reigning Queen hated the Cardinal; and Monsieur's
Softness made him comply with all the Sentiments of those who had the ascendant
over him. They put him out of conceit with a Match with the Heirest of
Mompensier, which had been projected in the time of the deceased King; and they
d'd his Head with a thousand Chimera's. But the Principal visions with which
they amused his Brains, were the deposing of the King, to the unmarrying him,
and giving to his Brother ^^th his Crown and Wife. Upon which Subject several
Libels ^^d appeared abroad; of which one that was entitled an Advertisement to
the King, made it a Crime in him to oppose the prosperity of the House of
Austria, and to confederate against ^r with Protestant Princes, and promise the
giving him an assistant or Associate in the Government. Which Libel occasion'ed
the Quarrel between the Bishop of Chartres and the Cler^^^. The Cardinal also
was dilacerated and mangled by a hundred Writings of the same nature; and
perhaps never any man as known to be laden with such a heap of Invectives and
^yrs. But he luckily disintangl'd himself out of all these Encumbrances. He
faign'd therefore to retire from the Court, ^^d away he went, to the end he
might give the King an occasion to recall him. But the Queen Mother, who could
not ^^en be without him, infused it so strongly into the King's Head, ^t if he
consented to the distant absence of that Minister, the conspirators would make
themselves Masters of his Authority, ^^t of his Person, that the Suspicious and
Irresolute Prince ^^n sent for him back again. This return of his having ad^n'd
his Credit to a higher degree, he began to put in pra^se those severe and
Bloody Politics that ruined so many Lords, which filled the Prisons with so
many Persons suspected of no ^er Crime then Love of Liberty; and rendered him
so absolute and formidable, that the King himself began to have an aversion for
him, and became jealous of his high Authority. The Count de Chalais was the
first Victim offered to his Arbtrary Power. The Duke of Vendosm, and the Grand
Prior his Brother, together with several other persons, lost either their
Liberty, or their Government, or their Pensions; and the whole Conspiracy was
perfectly dissipated.

In the mean time Rochel was tossed and vexed with various The Cardition of
Rochel.
Troubles; by reason that they who were interested in the new form of
Government, would not suffer things to be resettl'd upon the Old Foundation.
The People favored these Mutineers and the Sedition increased to that degree,
that the Mayor, who was suspected, was carried away by force, and very ill used
as the Author of these Changes. Nevertheless, these Disorder^ were appeased by
the necessity of obeying, and the fear of a greater Mischief, should they
furnish the Court with any Pretense, which was the thing she waited for, to
make war upon Rochel alone, and disunited from the rest of the Reformed Cities.
Mass was there said upon Ascension-day in St. Margaret Church; and the City
re-call'd her Deputies that had bin sent to Foreigners. But whether they waited
for the effect of the King of England's Promised Intercession, for demolishing
Fort Lewis; or whether they were desirous to see what would be the issue of the
Confusions at Court, they went but slowly on with dismantling their
Fortifications, more especially the Fort o^ Tadon, which was one of their best
and strongest Bulwark^ Lesdiguieres, discontented with the Court, fomented new
Troubles in the Dauphinate; Brison by his Counsels maintained him self in
Poussin, a paltry place; from which however they could not get him out, but by
giving him a Recompense of 4000 Crowns. And Montauban, Son of the Marquess of
Gouver^^ got almost as much, to lay down Arms.

Thus all things being in a manner peaceable and quiet, the A National Synod.
Reformed were permitted to assemble a National Synod at Castres, which sat
down the 15th of September, and the Court sent this Augustus Galand for their
Commissioner in pursuance o^ the Declaration 1623. the revocation of which they
could not obtain. All they could get was a Decree, which upon the complaint of
the Delays and Difficulties they met with in the nomination of Commissioners by
the Governors, and of the long time before the Commissioners came to the
Synods, imported thus much, That the Governors, or others to whom they should
apply themselves, having notice of the Place and Day of the Synod's sitting a
Month before, should be bound to nominate Commissioners, and those that were
nominated should be bound to be there at the place, and upon the day appointed,
or within three days after at farthest; which if they failed to do, the
Deputies had leave to assemble without 'em; they behaving themselves in other
things according to the Edicts. This same Galand had already been present at
the last Assembly held at Charenton, and the Figure he made at Court would not
permit him to quit his Interest, or to swerve from her Orders and Maxims.

He was entrusted with a Letter from the King to the Synod, The Commissioners
Instructions.
Commission to be present there, and Instructions in writing how to carry
himself. The Letter imported leave to hold the Synod, whose Deliberations were
thereby also confined to affairs of Church Discipline only. Moreover, it was in
the nature of Predential for the Commissioner; and lastly, it contained
asstances of the King's good will, and his observance of the edicts, provided
that the Reformed continued in their obedience. The Commission was plain and
downright, but it mentioned an express Injunction to be careful of seeing the
Edicts observed, and chiefly that of 1623. and to hinder the keeping ^f any
Conventicles at Castres without his leave. His Instructions were more ample,
and contained six principal Articles. ^he first renewed the promises of the
King's good will, while ^aithful Obedience was paid him. The second exhorted
the Re^^med to live in Concord with the Catholics, and not to have ^^y other
then sentiments of Equity and Justice for 'em; which the King promised to see
done on the Catholics part. The third exhorted a Renunciation of all
Associations, Unions and Intelligences either abroad or at home, any other then
with the King: and the Commissioner was to declare, that the King ^ever had the
least thought of disannulling the Edicts; which ^e proved, because the King had
confirmed 'em after he came to ^ears of majority; that he had renewed his
Alliances with Foreign. Protestants; that he had augmented the Gratuities which
the King his Father had given to the Ministers; that he had made use of
Protestant Lords in sundry great Affairs; and for that in the Insurrections of
the Reformed, he had bin always inclined to mercy so soon as they were ready to
submit. The fourth was of a singular nature, to oblige the Ministers to inform
against one another themselves, and to brand one another upon their own
judgments: so that Galand was to exhort *em to inform against those Ministers
who had held intelligence with the Spiniards, without taking notice in
reference to it, of any Amnesties of what was past. He was in that respect to
draw a Declaration from the Synod, conformable to what had past in the
Provincial Synod of Upper Guyenne held at Realmont; and to testify that the aim
of that Inquisition was not to punish the guilty, but to hinder those that were
faithful from being comprehended in the Crimes of others. The fifth admonished
the Commissioner not to let the Synod meddle with any thing but barely
Discipline. And the last took from the Ministers the liberty of going out of
the Kingdom, or settling themselves in any other places without permission; and
from the Synods ^^ power of sending any to Foreign Princes and Sovereigns, ^^a^
should desire 'em either for a time, or for a constancy. For 'twa^ the King's
pleasure that Demands of that nature should be sent to him: and the reason of
that new restraint was said to be, because that the Duties of Obedience were
not to be altered by ^ mixture of the Manners and Customs of Foreign Countries.

This Commission of Galands was ill resented by the Synod Answers of Chauve the
Moderator.
and Chauve, then Moderator, told him very roundly, That a Man zealous for his
Religion, ought not to have charged himself with Instructions of such a nature,
which only tended to over* reach and dishonor his Brethren. After which
Remonstrance he returned an Answer to all the Articles with as much Resolution
as Prudence. But for the better understanding of his Answer, it is necessary
here to explain what the Synod of Realm^^^ was, and what had bin there done
upon the occasion of Foreig^ Intelligences. The Duke of Rohan being solicited
by the Spaniards, was entered into Treaty with 'em, and had sent Campre^^^ into
Spain, for more positive assurances of the Succor that was offered. Not that it
was the design either of the Spanish Court, or the Duke of Rohan, to stick to
the Treaty; but both expected to make this benefit of it, that it might be a
means to bring the Cardinal to better terms. The Duke was in hopes thereby to
obtain a more advantageous Peace; and Spain willing to show, that if the French
went on with the War in Italy, that she had a way to revenge herself, by
continuing the Civil War in France as long as she pleased. Moreover, being
afraid ^est the Reformed should agree to an Accommodation, she made ^em a show
of large Succors to render 'em more stiff, and to engage 'em to stand upon such
Demands as would not be granted ^em: so that the Treaty was concluded by
Campredon, with con^iderable Promises. But while he returned laden with the
Articles of the Treaty, Peace was made both with the Reformed and with Spain,
the Treaty having no other effect, but only that it put the sooner conclusion
to both Wars. Campredon at his return was seized upon, and carried a Prisoner
to Toulouse, and there prosecuted for his life. In the mean time the Edict of
^arch being sent to the President Masuyer to be registered, one would have
thought that Campredon should have enjoyed the Masuyer'^ fa^se dealing.
benefit of the Amnesty. And indeed the President knew it better then any body:
but in a Cause of Religion, he would not understand what belonged either to
Justice or Honesty; and, ^o say truth, he was a mere Varlet in many things: at
least in point of Religion, he minded neither true dealing nor modesty. ^o that
he was so malicious as to keep the Edict in his Pocket, ^ll Campredon was
executed; for he sentenced him to death: after which he registered the Edict
with several Qualifications.

This Action was detested by all good men: but they who The Catholics tr^^^^^.
^ere of Masuyer's humor rejoiced at it, and were of opinion, that the
advantage of being able to retort upon the Reformed ^he death of a man
condemned by Justice, for having negotiated a League in the name of their
Captain with Spain, would ^ut-balance a piece of Treachery. It seemed to them,
that after this, the Reformed had no more to do but to hold their ^^gues, and
that they could no longer accuse the Catholics of their ancient League with the
same Crown. Nevertheless, there was a great deal of difference between the one
and the other; for this new League was the Duke of Rohan's business, not
entrusted by any body else, but who entered into it of his own head. Moreover,
there was nothing here transacted about dethroning the King, or excluding the
Lawful Heir from the Succession. Whereas the League which made such a noise
under the Reign of Henry III. was not the Crime alone of the House of Guise,
but of the greatest part of the Catholics, and of almost all the Cities of the
Kingdom: but more especially of all the Clergy, all the several Orders of
which, could hardly afford a dozen of honest French men; therefore things so
different could not be brought into Parallel. For which reason it was, that if
it had bin possible, they would fain have envelop'd They would have involved
the Ministers in the Duke of Rohan's Treaty with Spain.
the Ministers in the same reproach; and that they accused 'em under a pretense
which at first sight was enough to dazzle the simple. To this purpose they made
choice of a Commissioner, who was to be present at the Provincial Synod of
Upper Languedoc, and the Upper Guyenne, which was to be held at Realmont, such
an one as was proper to serve for such a design: and this man, either
corrupted, or else so silly by as not to see the snare that was laid for the
Ministers at that Sessions, would needs take upon him to propose to the Synod,
that Inquisition might be made after those who might have bin any way concerned
in Campredon's Negotiation. And the better to disguise the business, they
involved it in the general Name of Corresponding with Foreigners. Now in regard
the Synod was held in the Province where Campredon was taken and executed,
People of Reputation believed that an Act which should ordain such an
Inquisition, would be no more then a disowning of that Negotiation, and a Proof
of the Minister's Innocence; and they that sided with the Court, which were
always very numerous in th^se Southern Countries, agreed to it, as to a thing
which would be acceptable to the King. Therefore an Article was drawn up upon
the Commissioner's Proposition, which ordered an Inquisition after such as had
been privy to that Treaty, and which exhorted those who knew any such, to
discover 'em. But there was neither Informer nor Criminal to be found; so that
there ^^as this Circumstance added to the Act, that it was for the ac^^^ittal
of the Ministers. But the thing was understood far Article of the Synod of
Realmont, for the discovery of such as had a hand in the Treaty. Which offends
all the Char^^es.
otherwise then at Realmont: for it was judged that such Acts always create a
disadvantageous Prejudice; and that the Justification which ensued, did not
altogether remove the Suspicion which it had imprinted, that the Ministers
might engage themselves in criminal Correspondencies. So that all the Churches
^^ademn'd the imprudence and simplicity of this Synod: and ^^at of Castres
spared not their Censures and Remonstrances upon ^^. So that the Deputies of
the Province were obliged ^^ complain, that they had bin surpised by the
Commissioner.

Therefore when the National Synod saw that Galand proposed And is disowned iy
the National Synod.
the example of Realmont, the Moderator thought that ^rticle deserved an
Answer, which should take away from the Monks and Bigots all pretense of
exclaiming against the Mini^^ers. Therefore to the first Article of Galand's
Instructions, ^s Answer was full of submission and promises of obe^ence. As to
the second, he promised that Moderation and Equi^^ which the King required; and
assured the Commissioner, that ^^e Consistories should continually from time to
time exhort the Churches to it. But he complained that the Catholics did not
^^^^erve that mildness which they exacted from others; but that ^^ey exercised
the patience of the Reformed by a thousand Inju^^es. For which reason he
enjoined the Commissioner to be^^e^h the King to have pity upon the Reformed,
whom he re^^e^ented ill used in their persons; disturbed in the exercises of
their Religion; deprived of their Churches; of which some ^^d bin demolished
since the Peace, or given to the Ecclesiastics; ^^^^sess'd of their
Churchyards, where several Bodies had bin ^^gg'd up again out of their Graves;
and at length he com^^n'd that in several places the Ministers had bin beaten,
and ^^iven out of the Churches by violence; referring more ample ^e^^nstrances
to be made to the King upon these Complaints ^y the general Deputies. As to the
third Article, he protested that no Body knew of any Correspondencies held with
Foreigners to the prejudice of the Kingdom's welfare: he showed the general
detestation of such trafficking in smart and vigorous expressions; and he lost
not that opportunity to slide into h^^ discourse certain Jerks against the
Doctrine and Attempts of the Jesuits. As to the fourth, which mentioned the Act
of Realmont, he loudly complained of the surprise which the Commissioner had
put upon the Synod; thinking thereby to insinuate, as if some Ministers had bin
accused of holding Correspondence with the Spaniard; but he praised God, that
after an exact Inquisition, there was no body found guilty, nor no bo^^ so
daring as to accuse any body for being so. As to the fifth which forbid meddling
with politic Affairs, he answered that the preceding National Synods had taken
order about it. And ^^ to the sixth, which related to the sending of Ministers
to Foreigners, he replied, that the present Synod would take care i^ that
particular.

These Answers were approved by all the Synod, and Ch^^^ Leave to nominate
General Deputies.
had the Thanks of the whole Assembly for what he had sai^ After this Galand
presented a Brief to the Assembly, dated some days after the King's Letter,
which imported a permission ^ the Synod, in the presence of the Commissioner,
to nominate General Deputies to the number of Six, out of which the King would
choose Two. The Pretense was, that another Assemb^^ would be too expensive, and
create a great deal of inconvenience: He added also to this Permission a
Prohibition to treat ^ other Politic Affairs. But the Synod, who well perceived
that the Mystery of that Permission tended to break the Remainder of that Union
which the Reformed had so long maintained and who after six years slid away,
before they could obtain ^ new Assembly, rightly judged that there was no other
way to refix their Affairs, then a Licensed and Authorized Assembly, di^^ all
they could to excuse themselves from that Nomination. For From which the Synod
desires to be exempted.
which Reason, as the King alleged, the Good and Convenience of the Reformed
to avoid the Demand of a General Assembly the Synod on their parts urged their
Duty, which would not permit 'em to meddle with other Affairs then those of
Discipline, as a reason for their not nominating of General Deputies because it
was an Affair altogether Political. Besides, they found the Permission too much
limited; Because it contained not leave to take an Account of the last
Deputies, to give 'em a discharge, and to draw up Instructions for the new
ones. They resolved therefore to send Deputies to the King upon this Occasion;
And send Deputies to the King.
and at the same time to furnish their Deputies with Submissions and
Remonstrances, according to the custom of National Synods; and for this Journey
they made choice of Bouteroue a Minister, and Baleine an Elder.

The King was willing to see and hear 'em: The Speech they Remonstrances of the
Deputies.
^ade was humble, and to the purpose; and their Remonstrances contained Eight
Articles. In the first they besought the King to take off all the
Qualifications with which the Act had ^^en enregister'd. They complained in the
second of several Vexations which the Reformed endured by reason of those
Qualifications. The third spoke of the repairing of Churches pulled down, and
sending down Commissioners into the Provinces to ^^^e Orders about it. The
fourth besought the King to permit ^^ Moulin to return to Paris, as he had been
put in hopes. The fifth demanded a General Politic Assembly. The sixth ^^
continuance of the Relief promised the Ministers. The two ^^st desired, that
certain Assignations which had been allowed ^^n^^ll, Receiver* general of the
Municipal Tolls, might be made ^^^d to him.

But toward the beginning of the Synod, Maniald, one of the Maniald dies. Hardi
put in his room.
general Deputies, died: Upon which the King, never staying ^^r the Nomination
which was to have been made at Castres, in pursuance of his Brief, appointed
Hardi in his room, till others ^ould be presented to him. And the Pretense for
this Innovation was, That the King was unwilling to retard the Affairs of the
Reformed, which would be neglected, if there were no body at Court to take care
of 'em. Of which Substitution he gave notice to the Synod by Galand, who
assured the Synod, that the King had no design thereby to deprive 'em the
Liberty of nominating others according to custom. But a little afterward it
appeared by Galand's discourse, that the King had other thoughts ^^
substituting Hardi; and that such an Innovation without ^^esident, and little
necessity, proceeded from no good will toward The Deputies return with the
King's Answers.
the Reformed.

The Deputies from the Synod returned from the Court about a month after their
departure, and brought very obliging Letters from the King according to custom:
But the Flattering Expressions of those Letters were accompanied with very few
Effects. For there was only the Article about Limitations to which any thing of
a gracious Answer was returned. The King assured 'em that they were taken away
in several Parlaments, and that he would order 'em to be removed in the rest:
And he gave the Deputies an express Command for that purpose to the Parliament
of Toulouse, which was usually the most difficult to be brought to reason. Whch
Command Galand ordered his Son to deliver; but it wrought but little effect; so
that the Troubles began again, before the Reformed received the benefit of it.
The King also promised to make good the Assignations allowed to Candal, granted
Ten thousand Livres for the Expenses of the Synod; and which, perhaps, was the
most moving, Twelve hundred Livres to the Deputies for their Journey. But he
refused to send Commissioners into the Provinces, declaring only that he
thought it necessary to send some to Rochel, Saintonge, and the Country of
Aunix, and into the Upper and Lower Languedoc. He barely promi'sd to grant
Remova's to those that should be prosecuted in Parlaments, in pursuance of the
Qualifications of the Edict. Nor would he consent to the return of Moulin; nor
suffer the holding of a General Assembly, because the condition of Affairs
would not permit one; and for that the Reformed had no need of one; since it
was in the power of the Synod to nominate General Deputies, according to
Galand's Instructions. As for what concerned the Relief promised to the
Ministers, the King evaded it, by giving good words to one Party, and refusing
the other, by reason of the condition of the Affairs of the Kingdom.

Nevertheless he granted a Brief much larger then the former, The Synod names
General Deputies.
to authorize the nomination of general Deputies; and he set forth in express
words, that they should not put in nomination any persons but such as had no
dependence upon Great Lords. However, the Synod, little satisfied that the
Reformed were thereby put out of all hopes of a Politic Assembly, were still
desirous to start new difficulties upon the nature of the thing; pretending
that it was contrary to the Duty of an Ecclesiastical Assembly to intersere
with things that were reserved for General Assemblies. But Galand cut the Knot,
by revealing the Mystery of Hardy's being so hastily substituted in Maniald's
room; and declared, that if the Synod did not make the Nomination, he would do
it himself. The Synod then surrendered to Necessity, and contented it self with
several Protests, which they reiterated as often as they had occasion, that
they did not go about thereby to prejudice the General Assemblies, nor to
meddle with Politic Affairs, but in obedience to the King's pleasure. Besides,
they enjoined their Deputies to request leave to hold a General Assembly within
Eighteen months, and Provincial Assemblies as soon as might be, for the drawing
up Memoirs of their Grievances; in regard the Synod could not do it, because
the Deputies that composed it had not brought along with 'em either any Command
or Instructions from their Provinces to that The Synod names General Deputies.
purpose. Which done, they fell to the nomination of six Persons.

But before the Synod brake up, they resolved to demand of the Diverse
Resolutions of the Synod.
King the Re-establishment of Ecclesiastical Assemblies in their former
Liberty; and leave to raise certain Sums upon all the Churches throughout the
Kingdom, for certain Exigencies of the Cities of Rochel, Montauban and Castres;
of which a fourth part was adjudg'd to Castres; the rest was divided between
the other two. They also enjoined the Consuls of Montauban to solicit the
effect of the Command directed to the Parliament of ^i^lcuse for registring the
Edict. They likewise prosecuted d' Aistres the Minister, at Paris, for several
Causes; but chiefly for having conspired with the Catholics against the
Churches. He had a bitter Libel found about him, entitled La Chemise ^a^glante
de Henri IV. or, The Bloody Shirt of Henry IV. which reflected upon the King's
Honor; so that d' Aistres was degraded and excommunicated by the Synod. But
Galand was not satisfied with this Ecclesiastical Punishment; and therefore he
caused the Book to be condemned to the Flames by the Party Chamber, then
sitting at Beziers. Castres refuses to receive the Duke of Rohan's Deputies.


That Chamber had bin removed from Castres, during the Troubles; and that City
having a great desire to have it restored to her again, compli'd with all
Galand's Projects, whose Testimony she was in hopes would be favorable to her
at Court. Upon these Considerations it was, that she gave him a Writing wherein
she disowned the Negotiations in Spain; and joined with him to hinder the Duke
of Rohan's Deputies which he sent to the Synod, from being admitted; as also to
be a means that his Conduct was there censured. In a word, the thing was
carried so far, that Marmet, the Dukes Minister, being come to Castres, about
particular business, was not permitted to be in the Town above twenty four
Hours, though he protested that he had neither any Letters, nor any Commission
from his Master. But the Duke having rightly foreseen what he was to expect
from Galand, had taken his Measures quite another way. For he gave his Letteres
to the Synod, to Bearfort, a Deputy from Cevennes; and a kind of Manifesto,
which he had writ in his own Justification, to another Minister: So that they
who held Intelligence with Galand, finding their Designs prevented, durst not
attempt any thing farther.

In the mean time Blandel and Bauterne were deputed to carry A Memoir of
Grievances.
to the King the Nomination of the General Deputies; and the Synod, after they
had sat seven weeks, brake up. The Deputies made a very submissive Speech to
the King. Which done, the King, out of the six Persons nominated, made choice
of the Marquess of Clermont, Calerande, and Bazin, to reside near his Person.
These New Deputies were charged with large Memoirs of Grievances that were sent
'em from all parts. Paulet, Minister of Verzenobres, had been driven from his
Church by violence. The Marquis of Varennes, Governor of Aiguemortes, had as
badly used Bancillon, Minister of the Place. Censtans, Minister of Pons, had
been a long time Prisoner at Bourdeaux, where he was still detained; and
Billot, Minister of la Roche Chalais had been treated after the same manner,
though they ought both to have bin releast by the Edict of Peace. The Cardinal
of Sourdis, and the Bishop of Maillezais, persecuted the Church of Monravel;
where they attaqu'd in general the Right of Exercise, and in particular several
Members of it, by Processes, and other Acts of Violence. The Church of Motte
had labored very near under the same Extremities. That of Serveriettes had bin
also turmoil'd and harrass'd: and several Churches of Guyenne and Languedoc had
bin so absolutely ruined, during the War, that the Synod was constrained to
recommend 'em to the Charity of others. The Parliament of Pau had given out
Decrees which forbid Consistories to censure Fathers, Mothers, or Guardians,
that sent their Children to Catholic Schools; nay, to the very Colleges of the
Jesuits. The Parliament of Toulouse had given out several Warrants to arrest the
Bodies of several Inhabitants of Briteste for a Fact that was pardoned by the
General Amnesty. Berard, Advocate of the Court of Judicature at Soumieres, had
been imprisoned for no other Crime, but for abjuring the Catholic Religion. And
the Reformed Burial of Gentlemen who were the Founders of Churches.
were still disturbed upon the score of their Burials. The Advocate-General,
James Talon, caused several Decrees to be issued forth in one year upon this
occasion; of which the most favorable ordained no more, then that before the
Bodies were dug up, information should be given, whether it could be done
Conveniently. And what was singular in the Advocate-General's Reasons, was
this, That to deprive a Gentleman of a purchased Right, he had recourse to the
pre-possess'd Fancy of the Catholics, who sought to be buried in Churches, that
they might have a share in the benefit of Suffrages and Prayers. Which being
refused by the Reformed, that they ought not to enjoy that advantage which they
never minded themselves. As if the Controversy between the Catholics and the
Reformed, about the benefit or unprofitableness of Prayer for the Dead, had had
any Relation to the Rights of a Lord of a Soil, whose Ancestors had purchased
the Privilege of being buried in the Church, which they had both founded and
endowed. Upon which it may be observed, that the Burial of the Dead in Churches
was an effect of Superstition, as the Advocate-General expressly acknowledged,
and set forth at large the degrees of the progress of it. This Honor, said he,
having been at first conferred upon Martyrs, not because they were buried in
Churches, but because Churches were built over their Tombs; it was also
afterward allowed the Priest, to holy Persons, to those that enriched the
Church by their Donations, to Founders, and lastly, to those that were able to
pay for it. So that to speak properly, there was only the Founders Right which
had any other foundation then that of Superstition, since he might pretend to
it, as a perpetual Evidence and Monument of his Liberality. Neverthelesss,
James Talon could find in his heart to prefer a Right acquired by the
Superstition of the People, and the Covetousness of the Priests, before a
Privilege which derived it is original from the Bounty of a Founder.

The same James Talon caused a Legacy of a Reformed, bequeathed Legacies given
to the Poor, adjudg'd to Hospitals.
to the Poor, to the Treasurer of the Hospital of the City of Chartres. For
which the Pretense was, That according to the Edict, the Poor of both Religions
were to be relieved: which, if that reason had bin good, had bin sufficient to
have destroyed the XLII. Article of Particulars: but this Decree was made the
7th of January. There was another made in March, after two Hearings, which
annulled the Marriage of la Ferte Imbault, and forbid him to keep company with
the woman A Marriage of a Knight of Maltha vacated.
whom he had married: and the reason for it was, because he was a Knight of
Maltha, and for that it was contrary to his Vow. As if his Profession of a
contrary Religion could not unty him from such a superstitious Engagement. A
man may judge by these trials of a Parliament, where Justice was not altogether
unknown, how the Reformed were handled in others, who looked upon it as a
meritorious Act to load 'em with Vexations and unjust Sentences. The King
himself also set forth some Declarations by which the Edict was considerably
violated. Upon the 12th of January came forth one, which exempted the
Ecclesiastics from pleading for the possession of their Benefices and Goods
which were thereunto annexed in Courts where any of the Reformed sat, and
which referred 'em to the next Catholic Judge. The 10th of December appeared
another, which ordained that Processes should be adjudg'd at Pau, by all the
Judges that should be found upon the Bench, without distinction of Religion;
and in case of removal, the Cause should not be removed to the Party Chambers,
but to the next Parliament. And the foundation of this Law which laid the
Reformed at the mercy of the Catholics, when they were most numerous upon the
Bench, was this, That the Edict of Nantes was granted neither in favor of
Bearn nor Navarre. And thus the Clergy of that Country which formerly never
aspired to more, then to enjoy the Privileges of that Edict, had already
carried their exterminating Zeal so high, that they would not leave the
Reformed any longer the enjoyment of that advantage. So that those unfortunate
People having seen the particular Edict, which Henry IV. granted 'em, violated
in all the points of it, cannot have the consolation to live under the
prosection of the same Laws, with the rest of the Churches of the same
Communion.

In the mean time the Cardinal summoned an Assembly of the The Assembly of
Notables.
Men of Note, called Assemblee de Notables, at Paris, where he made a Harangue
himself. In this Assembly most worthy Proposals were made, and the most
profitable Resolutions in the World were taken for the Peace and Tranquillity of
the King, but they were not taken to be put in execution. They had only a mind
to amuse the People, who are easily dazzled with great expectations, and to
accustom 'em to the Ministry of the Cardinal who promised 'em those mighty
things. There was only one Declaration which spoke of reuniting all the King's
Subjects to the Roman Church by ways of Sweetness, 1627.
Love, Patience, and good Examples; of maintaining the Reformed in the
Privileges that had bin granted 'em by the Edicts; of re-establishing good
Discipline, and virtuous Manners; of advancing the Nobility; of causing Justice
to flourish; of reforing Trade, and easing the People. But of all these
Articles they remembered none but the first: For they procured the reunion of
several private persons to the Church of Rome, by the strong Arguments of
Interest, or by Vexations and Acts of Injustice. In pursuance of which, they
vaunted about this time of having converted in Bearn above 800 persons; and
because Forced Conversions in Bearn.
the care of these Conquests was committed to some zealous Missionary, who
managed these glorious Enterprises by his counsels and advice, they failed not
to attribute the success to his Doctrine, his Conversation, and his Piety, tho
it were more justly due to the utmost rigors of Violence and Injustice.

The same means which the Church of Rome has always called ways of Sweetness,
wrought the same effect this year at Aubenas. Where the Marquis of Ornano,
under pretense of the And at Audenas.
War, of which I shall suddenly have an occasion to speak, exercised most
extravagant Violences upon the Reformed of that City. Two Regents of that place
coming to kiss his hands i^ the body of the Town, as their Lord, he took from
'em their Hoods, which is the mark of their Dignity; and having called a
Council, he would not permit the Reformed, who had b^^ elected Counselors, to
take their Seats; he disarmed all the Reformed, and put the Regency into the
hands of Catholics and committed the Guard of the City to them, at the charg^
of the Reformed; and being constrained to reinforce his Part^ with some
additional Troops, because the Catholics were no^ so numerous as the other, he
quartered the whole Garrison upon the Reformed only; and this Garrison committed
Violences ^^ less barbarous then those in our days; from which those miserable
People could not redeem themselves, but by changing their Religion. So that in
three weeks there were no less then 25^ Families that turned Catholics, if the
Converters do not augment their number. And to add Insulting Domineering ^^
Violence, they forced those poor Creatures to sign a Writing wherein they
declared that they embraced the Roman Religion willingly. These extorted
Declarations, which they showed ^^ the King, persuaded him, that there were
hardly any of the Reformed who had not the same Inclinations; and that they
were only restrained by a Cabal of Ministers, and the power ^^ the Party. That
there needed no more then the taking of Rochel, and some other Cities, which
held up the Party; and the^ thousands of People would declare for the Catholic
Religion. I^ the mean time, encouraged by the example of what had happened at
Aubena's, they followed their Blows into other places. For At St. Amand
the Archbishop of Bourges, and the Governor of St. Amand, a little Town in
Berri, made a profitable use of this Pattern to bring back the Reformed to the
Catholic Religion: so that the fear into which they put the Inhabitants, of
quartering 200 me^ upon 'em, upon the same Conditions as the Garrison was
quartered at Aubenas, made above 60 Families abjure the Reformed Faith. And
thus it was, that the Edict published upon the Remonstrances of the Assembly of
the men of Note, was put in execution.

But besides these, they gave other marks of their slender Inclinations to
observe the Edicts; for there were above Forty Curches deprived of their
spiritual comfort, either through ^urbance of their Exercises, or Imprisonment
and Banishment Extraordinary Acts of Injustice.
their Ministers. They had taken from the Reformed, in se^al places, both their
Churches and their Churchyards, with any Form of Law, ever since the Peace
concluded. The ^rdinal of Sourdis, Archbishop of Bourdeaux, whose Example ^s
followed by some Gentlemen of the Country, exercised a ^^usand brutish
Cruelties upon Bodies that were buried in such ^ces as carried any marks of
Consecration, according to the ^tom of the Catholics. They refused to suffer
Veilleux, a ^nister called by the Reformed to Rouen, to attend their service;
^d the only reason for their refusal was, because he was a For^gner. Letters of
Reprisal were granted against the Re^med, for things that were fully forgiven
by the Edict of Peace. ^veral persons were also put to death for Facts that had
bin ^mmitted during the War with allowance of the Generals; ^^ich was expressly
comprehended in the Amnesty granted by ^^ last Edict. And there were reckoned
up above 10000 War^^ts given out in Languedoc, for arresting of People upon the
^e Pretenses. The Council also divided the Consulship by ^ecrees given upon a
Petition, in places, where according to ^^ Edicts, which promised that nothing
should be innovated in ^wns that were held by the Reformed, that Office was to
^^e bin let alone entire. The particular Deputies that were ^t to carry the
Complaints of these Acts of Injustice, were (...) used. Some were sent back
unheard, and laughed at for their ^ins: others were answered with nothing but
Bravado's and ^enaces. If any qualified person took upon him this Deputa^n, and
that they were to treat him with more Civility, they ^deavour'd to seduce him
by Promises, by Applauses, or any ^her way; not sparing any Artifices to find
out on which side (...) was most subject to their Batteries; and after all,
they sent ^^m back again as he came. They refused to receive from the ^eneral
Deputies the Papers drawn up in the Nam^ of all the Churches of the Kingdom.
And to the end they might utterly ^reak the Union that was between 'em, it was
required that they should present apart the Complaints as they were sent 'em ^y
every single Church.

In like manner, the Marquis of Fossez, who succeeded V^lence, Innovations at
Mompelier.
made an alteration at Mompelier to no other end and purpose but to vex the
Reformed. That City bore for her Arms a Bowl Gules in a Field Argent. But
because they met with a^ old Steeple, where there was to be seen over a Bowl,
the Figur^ of a Virgin carried by two Angels, the Marquis pretended tha^ that
was the real Arms of the City, and having summoned a^ Assembly of the Citizens,
he made a Decree that they should place that Figure over their usual Arms for a
Crest. Afte^ which, they made the Reformed, who since Valence's Alteration^ had
little or no share in the Government of the City, believe that they had given
their consent to it. For their Intention was, that this representation should
be looked upon as a mark ^^ the ancient devotion and veneration of the City of
Mompe^^e^ for the Blessed Virgin, since she had taken that Figure for the most
honorable part of her Arms; and at the same time t^ deduce a Consequence from
thence, to render the Reforme^ odious, as having retrenched that mark of Honor
from the Mother of Jesus Christ; to whom they were always accus'^ of not paying
sufficient Respect. Nevertheless, the Foundation of the Marquis's Conjecture
was very frivolous: For ha^ it bin true, they would have found other
Authorities to ha^^ proved the matter of Fact; seeing that the ancient Seals,
th^^ public Buildings, the Registers of the City, the Bishops, th^^ Canons, the
Priests, the Curious, would have preserved some better Testimonies of the same
thing. For it was much more probable, that that same Figure was only a Monument
of the The Foundation of Mompelier.
Foundation of that City, which is attributed to two Maidens* who being Ladies
of the place, bequeathed it to the Church, and died Virgins. For that was the
way at that time to purchase^ the reputation of Holiness: and it may be thought
that the^ City had consecrated that Virgin and those Angels, to preserve the
remembrance of the Sanctity and Virginity of her^ Foundresses.

However it were, this Action of the Marquis did the Reformed Declaration
against Foreign Ministers.
so much prejudice, that upon the 14th of April a Declaration came forth,
prohibiting 'em to make use of Foreign Ministers; to admit into their
Assemblies other then Natural Frenchmen; to send Ministers into Foreign
Countries without ^^ave; or to admit Foreign Ministers into Politic Assemblies.
^he Declaration was grounded upon this, That in the Natio^al Synod of Charenton
and Castres, where Galand was present, ^hey had unanimously resolved the same
things. This Edict was ^ut in execution very exactly; but that which created
the great ^ouble was, that it spoke of the Religion of the Reformed, as ^^ a
Religion which the Edicts had only tolerated, till they could ^e brought back
to the Catholic Communion. For this was to ^^in the Edict of Nantes, and sap
the very Foundations of its ^eing irrevocable, to make it barely an Edict of
Toleration. This was what the Leagues always drove at; but what the ^eformed
always opposed; who asserted that the Edict had bin ^^ays granted 'em as a
Fundamental Law of Union and Con^^rd among the French, which maintained 'em
without distin^^ion of Religion, in all the Natural and Civil Rights that could
^elong to 'em. And this carries an Idea far different from a ^are Toleration:
Nay, to speak the truth, to have taken the ^dict in any other sense, would have
bin to have made it a mere ^elusion.

But at last it was apparent, that Rochel was pressed upon more Rochel still
blockt up.
and more; and that notwithstanding all her Obedience, she was ^ill dealt with
as rebellious. Which showed that she was guil^y of two Crimes that could not be
expiated but by her ruin: ^he one, which was her Crime in reference to the
Clergy, was ^er Religion; the other, which was properly the chiefest, was ^er
Power almost independent. The first obliged the Clergy to ^ontribute vast Sums,
provided they might be employed only ^oward the reducing that City: The other
transported the Court to lay the foundations of Arbitrary Power upon the
de^truction of her Greatness. To this purpose Forces were quar^er'd round about
her upon various Pretenses; Cannon were brought to such and such places, from
whence they might be at ^and with little expense, when time required: the City
was surrounded with several Forts: the Platform of her Fortifications, her
Port, her Canal, and parts adjoining, was taken privately, and drawn with the
utmost exactness that might be. The Garrisons of the Neighboring Islands, and
Fort Lewis, were permitted to commit petty Disorders, of which there was no
notice taken; and when the City complained, her Complaints were looked upon as
Rebellion. The Inhabitants were corrupted, that they might have private
Correspondence in her Bosom, and the Mayor himself was wrought over to their
Interests. Nevertheless, all this could not be kept so secret, but that R^ was
full of suspicion of the Designs of the Court. But all this knowledge had the
usual effect of suspicions which produce nothing but Irresolutions: So that the
City not being able to determine, but by halves, either one thing or other,
could never resolve either to submit, or to defend her self.

All these Considerations verify the Reflections of some Authors of those
times, who comparing the past War with the present Peace, under the name of
which a thousand times more mischief had bin done the Reformed, then they
suffered by their Enemies Arms, observe, that the War having been full of
Treachery, breach of Faith, Frauds, ignominious and base Actions, the Peace
that followed was no better; a mere Cheat, unfaithful, and no way secure. In
this Conjuncture England, being England declares war.
assured of the Duke of Rohan, declares war against France. But the Cardinal
having caused Mountague to be apprehended, who after a Journey into Italy to
consult with the Duke of Savor, repassed into France, where he had several
Conferences with the Duke of Rohan, understood by the Papers that were found
about him, the whole Project of the War. The English Gentleman also took a Tour
into Lorraigne, where 'twas thought necessary to negotiate something; though he
pretended only to visit the Duchess of Cheureuse, who was banished thither, by
reason of the Cardinal's Jealousies conceived against the Duke of Buckingham.
This Accident gave France time to prepare her self; and she received the
Declaration of War with as much disdain, as if she had bin assured of success.
She had The United Provinces send succonr to France.
taken her Measures with the United Provinces, from whom she obtained
considerable aid upon this Occasion, and which did not little contribute toward
the subduing of Rochel. Not but that the Ministers of those Provinces preached
against that Compliance of the States with France, both vigorously, and with
great freedom. I my self have seen several printed Sermons, some of which
enlarged themselves very far to show that the Design (...) the French was to
extinguish the Reformed Religion; and ^th^^s added after a Prophetical manner,
that as the Provinces ^n^ their Ships and Men to the Reformed of France, the
time ^ould one day come, that the Reformed would revenge them^lves upon the
Provinces, and bear Arms under their King to ^stroy their Religion and Liberty.
But Preachers Reasons ^r agree with those of Politicians; besides, that the
United (...) were not in a condition to slight or disgust the Alli^ of France.

Toward the end of July, Buckingham appeared, not far from The English land in
the Isle of Re.
(...) with a Fleet considerable enough to have done great ^ings, had the
Chieftain had as much Courage as Pride; or (...) much Wit as Presumption. He
presently made himself Ma^er of the Isle of Re; but he lost himself miserably
before Fort ^. Martin, where Toiras, with a few men, and less Provision, ^ld
out a Siege of above two Months, which, if any other then Buckingham had
managed, it could not have stopped him three ^ys. Rochel was a long time also
before she would declare; whether it were because the Mayor and the Court were
agreed ^^gether, or whether it were that she was willing to avoid new ^etences
of making war upon her. Insomuch, that at first ^e would not so much as hearken
to Buckingham's Propositions, or admit the Commissioners which he sent to her.
So that ^bise, who had sheltered himself in England ever since his last ^efeat,
but had embarkt himself in the English Fleet, was con^ain'd to go alone to the
Gate of the City, with Beaker sent by ^e Duke, to desire leave to speak to the
Inhabitants. But the Citizens refused to open the Gate to him; and had not his
Mo^her come her self to take him by the hand, and bring him into he Town, he
must have returned as he came. The respect which the Rochelois had for that
Lady, made 'em forget their ^esolutions: So that they let Soubise pass, and
Beaker followed him. After which they gave him Audience in the Council, ^here
he set forth at large the Reasons which obliged the King ^f England to take
Arms: And he endeavored to make 'em ^elieve, that it was only upon the score
of Religion. He excused the small Assistance which he had hitherto given the
Reformed; and declared that the King of England found himself too much engaged
by his Conscience, by his Honor and his Word, to assist 'em more powerfully;
more especially because it was through his Intercession that they had accepted
a disadvantageous Peace.

This Speech produced nothing at first. Nay, the Rochellois The Irresolution of
the Rochelois.
offered Comminges to fight the English, provided Fort Lewis might be put as a
Pledge into the Hands of la Force, Chatillon, or Trimouille. One would have
thought, that Offer should not have bin acceptable to the Court, seeing that
both la Force and Chatillon, were brought off from the Common Cause, and that
Trimoville was treating about his returning to the Roman Religion: at least he
embraced the Communion of that Church within a year after, and renounced the
Reformed Religion in the presence of the Cardinal before the taking of Rochel.
In recompense whereof he had the Command of the Light Horse, and served some
years in that Employment, during the War^ of Italy; where he received a wound
in the Knee, so that h^ lost the use of the Joint. Some years after, being
disgusted by the Court, he retired to his Palace of Thouars, became a Bigo^,
and a great dealer in Controversies; and at length died in the Roman
Profession, after he had lived to a very old Age, but very ill maintained the
Reputation of his Father. In the mean time the Court which had other Designs,
gave no other answer to the Proposal, but a company of Fair words, with which
the Rochellois suffered themselves to be amused for some time. However, they
intercepted a Packet of Letters from the Court, Court Letters intercepted.
directed to the Duke of Angoulesme, who had obtained Orders to raise Forces to
oppose the English, and who had actually blocked up Rochel as close as it could
be, at a time when the Design of besieging it was kept secret. One of those
Letters are an express Approbation of what had bin done, in order to the
blocking up of the City; and gave the Duke advice about several things: and
among others, about the Passports which he gave to all those who had a mind to
leave the Town; because, said the Letter, it was best to let out as many as
they could, that so none but the most Mutinous might be left behind.

There was also a Letter for Marshal de Marillac, which handled very nice
matter. The Question was, Whether the Huguenots A nice Question, Whether
Huguenots were to be suffered in the King's Army?
were to be suffered in the King's Army? The Answer was, that the thing was
very doubtful; because that if there were me persons of worth, and no way to be
suspected, there might (...) others, whose chiefest business it was to be
Spies. 'Twas ^ded, That the Public Affairs required, that it should be made ^t
by Effect and Demonstration, that the War was a War of are, and not of
Religion; and then it might be lawful to ad^it Huguenots that would enter into
service. 'Twas said, That without excluding 'em out of the Army, there might be
a watch^ eye upon 'em; and then 'twas but confiding in those that ^ere honest,
amusing others, and keeping the main Resolutions ^cret, especially those which
concerned Rochel: or else if such Toleration seemed dangerous, 'twas advised,
that they should (...) dismissed under some fair Pretense. And these were the
^tters, which discovering the secret Intentions of the Court, ^etermin'd the
Rochellois to join with the English. But this Con^nction Rochel Resolves.
was so ill ordered, and so scurvily managed, that if we ^y judge by the event,
no body could believe it resolved upon (...) any other end, then to furnish the
Court both with a pretense, and with the means to facilitate the destruction of
that unfortunate City. For Buckingham, after he had drained her of all her
^rovision of Corn, some of which he was constrained to burn ^ter his defeat,
left the rest which should have relieved the City (...) relieve the Victor that
expelled him out of the Island, and ^unning away with ignominy from a handful
of men, made the condition of the City far worse then it was before.

In the mean time Rochel published a large Manifesto, where^ Rochel publishes a
Manifesto.
resuming things for a good way backward, she endeavored ^o justify her
Conduct; to display the Frauds and Artifices of the Court, but chiefly to make
good her Pretensions and Privileges. The Duke of Rohan also betook himself to
Arms, and set forth another Manifesto, little different in the main from that
of Rochel; only that the City insisted more closely upon The Duke of Rohan does
the same thing.
^er own proper Affairs, and the Duke spoke more at large of things in general.
The Answers to these Writings were sharp and violent; more especially the
Answer to the Duke's Manifesto savored of a sordid, base, insolent Spirit,
full of Gall and Venom, and sprinkled with Quirks and Quiddities borrowed from
the most lewd Scurrility of the Rabble: a piece becoming the Jesuit Riche^me,
to whom it was attributed. Never did any man write with more Fury nor more
Insolence, nor renounced more openly in his Writings the character of an honest
man* But more formidable Enemies were embattel'd against the Duke then this
same Scribler. For besides the Armies that were set o^ Intrigue of Galand
against the Duke.
foot to fall upon him on every side, among which, that commanded by the Prince
of Conde committed unheard of Cruelties, Galand was sent into Upper Languedoc,
to prevent the Cities from taking Arms, as those of the Lower Languedoc ha^
done the 10th of September, according to the Resolution of a^ Assembly of the
Nobility and Deputies from several Cities which met at Vsez. However, Galand,
wherever he could safely go, drew Promises of Obedience, and within the space
o^ a Month brought Montauban, Briteste, Puilaurens, Sorez^, ^^ Maz d' Azil,
Carlat, Pamiers, Mazeres, Saverdun, la Bustide, St. Amant, Mazamet, la
Cabarede, and several others to declare* It Is true that the Duke caused some of
'em to change their Opinions; that he surpised others; and that others which
had not suffered themselves to be coax'd by the fawning Cant of Galand, were
surrendered into his hands, so that at length the War became general on that
side. Pamiers was one of those Cities which the Duke surpised; but the Prince
of Conde having retaken it, very badly observed the Capitulation which he had
made; for he imprisoned, put to death, and condemned to the Galleys several
persons to whom he owed both his life and his liberty. All this was the reason
that the Duke lost time, who might have bin able to have performed greater
Exploits, if Galand's Negotiation had not brok'n his measures; nor would they
have ventured the Siege of Rochel, had not Galand succeeded as he did in
drawing off those other Cities from the Union.

But while the Duke of Rohan carried on the War with an 1628.
extraordinary Courage and with good Success, Buckingham Defeat of the English.
seeing Fort St. Martin relieved, raised his Siege, was defeated in his
Retreat, and returned into England; not a little suspected to ^e bin careless
of those things which he might have done ^ch more to his Master's honor. Upon
this, Rochel was more A second English Fleet of no use to Rochel.
^ly begin, and reduced to extremity. At what time, a se^d English Fleet,
commanded by the Farl of Denbigh, appeared ^on the Coast, only to make a show
of that Relief which the (...) expected; but retreated more basely then the
former, with so much as acrempting the least Enterprise. While they A third
Fleet more useless.
^re setting forth a third Fleet, Buckingham was slain by a pri^e person, whom
he had particularly injured. This caused a ^^^ge of Affairs, and the Command of
the Fleet was given the ^arl of Lindsey. But this Fleet did less then the rest,
and ^m'd only se^ forth to be Witness of the Surrender of Rochel. ^d indeed it
may be said of the three Fleets sent to the Succor (...) that unfortunate City,
that the first famished her, by taking ^ay her ^; the second amused her with
the show of Relief, ^t was never intended her; and the third sold her. Perhaps
(...) the blame of these ill Successes was not to be laid upon the ^g of
England; only that he was to be accused of great ^^akness, in suffering himself
to be governed by his Queen with (...) much p^iableness. However, that Princess
had the Knack (...) disappoint all the King her Husband*s Designs; and some^es
she did it so openly, that People could not refrain from ^ieving that he
himself was not at all troubled at it. She it ^s that prevented the Effects of
those Orders, which the King ^e to those who commanded his Naval Forces. She it
was, ^o, in the heart of England, held and protected all the Corres^^ndencies
with Cardinal Richlieu; and she did so much, that (...) not only drew upon her
own head the implacable hatred of (...) her Subjects, but embarrass'd her own
Husband in those un^ward Affairs that brought him at length to the Scaffold.
Af^ this, Cardinal Richlieu thought it proper to make a peace ^ith England,
which it was no hard matter to do, by throw^^g upon Buckingham all the past
misunderstandings: And the A Treaty of Peace with England, and the surrender of
Rochel*
^ore easily to vanquish the Obstinacy of the Rochellois, he in^s^d Suspicions
on both sides, that the one Party treated without ^e other. And thus Rochel
having held out a Siege of very ^^ar a year in length, and carried on their
Resolutions, during a long, and the most Cruel Famine that could be imagined,
beyond what could be expected from Nature, was forced to surrunder at
discretion upon the 28th of October. And no soone^ was it surrendered, but a
Tempest ruined the Mound which had stopped up the Entrance of her Channel; and
showed, that tha^ same mighty Work, that so much redounded to the Honor o^ the
Cardinal who undertook it, could never have contributed to the subduing that
City, had she not bin more enfeebl'd by he^ Friends, that in a manner robbed
her of her Provisions, the^ incommoded by all the Toil and Labor of her
Enemies.

During this long Siege, and these terrible Extremities, the This City refuses
to submit to the English.
City being solicited to submit to the King of England, would never heark'n to
it. To say she had any such design, was ^ mere Calumny of the Monks and
Jesuits. And they who writ^ the particular History of this Memorable Siege,
relate; that the Cardinal declared to the Deputies from this City, That H^ knew
very well, that the Deputies who were sent into Englan^ had resisted several
Temptations upon that occasion; that the King returned 'em thanks for it; and
that it was the main reason which confirmed him in those Sentiments of Mercy
which h^ had for the Town. More then this, the Cardinal found a wa^ to engage
Spain to be serviceable to the King in the Siege o^ that Place. It Is true, the
Council of Spain saw well the ba^ consequence of taking the Place, and fain
would have prevente^ it, especially after the Marquess of Spinola, who had seen
the state of the Siege, had given an account of it in Spain. An^ it is said,
that the first time he came into Council, that he pr^pos'd it as one of the
greatest strokes of Policy that could b^ thought of to succor that Place. But
the Council of Conscience carried it above reason of State; and the Pretense of
Religion, always useful to the Court of Spain since Ferdinand's Reig^ was at
this time the ruin of her Affairs. It Is true, that the ^^e Fleet of Spain at
the Siege of Rochel.
Fleet which she sent against Rochel came thither so ill provided and staid
there so small a while, that she had as good have se^ none at all. And it is as
true that she attempted to relieve the Duke of Rohan's Party, with whom she had
concluded a Treaty* But during her accustomed long Delays, Rochel sunk under
he^ Burden, and put all the World out of heart. The French themselves labored
with reluctance in the taking of that City, well foreseeing that from the date
of her Ruin the Vassalage of the whole Kingdom would commence: But by an odd
fantasticness of Human Wisdom, men often spread the Snares themselves for their
own Feet, and make the Chains for others to bind 'em ^o perpetual servitude.

The Ladies, both Mother and Sister of the Duke of Rohan, displayed a more then
ordinary Courage: and their Example was very useful to support the Constancy of
others. But they were recompensed with a close Confinement, where the Cardinal
held 'em during all the remainder of the Wars. The Mayor Guiton was looked upon
as a Hero by all those that love Virtue, where ever they meet it; and the
Catholic Authors mention him themselves with great applause; and all the Brave
Persons ^n the King's Army went to see him after the Surrender of the City.
Some write that he was promised to be continued in his ^ignity. But when he
went to kiss the Cardinal's Hand, it was old him that he was no longer Mayor;
that he was to lay aside ^he Ensigns of his Authority, and quit his Guards; for
that ^he Cardinal would not see him but as a private person. Upon which they
add, that he was so enraged, that he could not forbear ^^ying, That had he
expected such an Entertainment, he would ^ave found a way to have held out some
days longer. Which ^ad he done, the Cardinal must have raised his Siege,
because ^f the Rigor of the Season, the Diseases that lessened the Army, ^he
Tempests that ruined his Dam, and the Pressing Affairs which called him another
way. Nor was it a wonder that ^u^ton complained that they did not keep their
word with him; ^r it is not to be imagined, that because the Principal Articles
^or the surrender of Rochel were written and signed by the King, that there
were not others agreed upon by word of mouth. Al^ays in the reducing of Cities
that surrender at discretion, there ^^e several things which are not absolutely
left to the discretion ^f the Victor, but are privately corroborated with
verbal Assu^ances. And it was believed to be much more advantageous to ^he King
to take that Course, because what he granted after^ards to reduced Cities,
looked so much the more like a Graci^us Favor, when there appeared no Promise
in Writing: Besides that, the King would not oblige himself to his Subjects by
Acts that seem to carry the Form of a Treaty. So that there might be Articles
granted by word of mouth without other Assurances: and perhaps it was by one of
those Articles that Gu^ton pretended to be continued in his Dignity.
Nevertheless that particular is nowhere to be met withal in any of the most
Exact Memoirs of that City. For by the most express and assured Relation that I
can find, the King by the first of the Written Articles, promises to leave 'em
the free exercise of their Religion in the City; which put 'em in hopes that it
should not have bin removed from the usual place; but they were deceived; and
that Promise was evaded by an Insulting Equivocation. For after the Church was
given to the Gatholics, the Reformed had a Place appointed 'em without the City
to build another: and the King himself would needs take cognizance of the
place, and enlarged it somewhat beyond the limits marked out by the
Commissioners. To which breach of Faith and Word, when the Reformed were about
to have said something by way of complaint, they were taken up short, and to
stop their mouths, i^ was told 'em, that their City being surrendered at
discretion* the King would beat down the Walls and the Fortifications* which
being done, what before was without the Enclosure, being no longer divided from
the rest, the whole would make be^ one City. This was not the thing which was
meant by the secret Promise; but the vanquished must accept of what
Interpretation the Victor pleases to put upon their Promises.

The Inhabitants were kindly enough used; but the City los^ all her
Privileges. The Roman Religion was reestablished in all its splendor, which
it prefers above all things, and the King translated thither the Bishopric of
Maillezais. In the Month of November came forth a Declaration, which contained
twenty four Articles. The first six were all about the re-establishment of the
Catholic Religion, and the Circumstances belonging to it. The Seventh ordered
the erecting of a Cross in the place where the Castle stood, upon the Pedestal
of which was to be engraven the History of the Reducing the City, the memory of
which was to be preserved by a General Procession every year upon the first of
November. The Eighth commanded the founding of a Monastery of Minims upon the
Point ^^ Coreille, which is one of the Extremities of the Canal, to preserve
the History of the Mound or Dam in two Tables of Copper to be fixed upon the
Church-door. The next four contained an Amnesty for what was past, and a
confirmation of the Edicts for ^iberty of the exercise of the Reformed
Religion; the Church ^xcepted, which the King reserved to be turned into a
Cathedral. There were nine more that followed, which took from the City ^er
Fortifications, Franchises and Privileges, and quite altered ^he Form of the
Government. The Twenty second forbid all ^oreigners, though naturalized, to
reside in the City without ^xpress leave by Letters under the Great Seal. The
Twenty ^hird extended the same Prohibition to the Reformed who had ^ot bin
settled Inhabitants before the landing of the English. Which two Articles were
the source of an infinite number of ^exations in the succeeding years. The last
obliged the Inhabi^nts to take out Licenses to keep Arms, Powder and
Ammu^ition, and to trade abroad. So that there was nothing left but ^he Place,
and the remembrance of that poor City's former ^ower and Grandeur.

The End of the Ninth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of Nantes. THE SECOND PART. THE TENTH BOOK.
The Heads of the Tenth Book.
REjoycings among the Catholics. The War continues in Languedoc. Cruelties,
Insulting, and Executions. Personal Enmity between the Prince of Conde and the
Duke of Rohan* A new Sedition at Lion against the Reformed. The pretended
Conversion of a sick Man that fell mad. Decrees and Declarations against the
Duke of Rohan and his Adherents. The King and the Cardinal take a Journey into
Italy. The Siege of Privas, the Inhabitants of which are betrayed. Cruelties
exercised upon that City. Pretenses of the Catholics. Conversions of Soldiers
taken Prisoners. Declaration upon the taking of Privas. The Consternation of
the rest of the Reformed. A Trea^^ of the Duke of Rohan with Spain. Alets
reduced. An Assembly permitted at Anduse, and removed to Nimes. (...)
concluded. An Edict of Grace. The Contents of the E^^^^. The King's Letter to
the Queen upon the Peace. The Duke ^^ Rohan retires. The reducing of Montauban.
An Assembly of the Clergy. Particular Acts of Injustice; Missionaries. The Duke
of Rohan is accused of the Ruin of the Churches. Cavils about the Rights of
Exercise. The Bishop of Valence persecutes the Foreign Ministers. The Original
of the Injustice done upon occasion of the Annexes. New Seeds of Civil Wars.
The Queen Mother retires. An Alliance with Gustavus King of Sueden. Projects of
Reunion, wherein the Cardinal appears. Intrigues of Joseph the Capuchin. A
Draught of a Project. How the Synods were to be made to speak. Inclinations of
the Ministers and People. Projects of Petit and Milletiere. Difference of their
Intentions. Verity of the Project, of which the precise time is uncertain. A
National Synod. The Commissioner's Speech. Ministers suspected by the King,
excluded out of the Synod by his Order. The Answer to the Commissioners Speech.
The vain Opposition of the Commissioner to the Union of the Churches of Bearn,
with the rest. Several Proposals of the Commissioner. The Synod sends Deputies
to the King. Papers. The Deputies kindly received. Nomination of General
Deputies. The Reformed feared at Court. Important Resolutions of the Synod.
Exercise forbid. Donations. Consulships. A captious Clause. Oppression of the
Public Liberty. Civil War of the Duke of Orleans. The Bishops of Languedoc side
with his Party. The Reformed* continue faithful. Bishops deposed. Execution of
an innocent* Minister. The Duke of Rohan serves the King in I^^ly. The Affair
of the Annexes in the Dauphinate, referred to four Commissioners. Consulship of
Alets. Exercise forbid. Shameful Cavils. A rash Curiosity of two Scholars. The
death of Gustavus. Great Troubles in the Kingdom. Advice of the Commissioners
of the Dauphinate about the Annexes. Reestablishment of Privas. A Treatise
intitl'd, The Eucharist of the Ancient Church. Exercises forbid.
Party*Colledges. Continuance of the Public Oppression. Pretensions of France
over all Europe. The Duke of Sulli made a Marshal of France. A Decree upon
several Subjects. Precedence adjudg'd to the Catholic Counselors of the
Chamber of Guyenne in certain Cases. The Reformed Counselors of the Chamber of
Castres, forbid to wear Scarlet Robes. The pretended Possession of the
Ursulines of Loudun. Ridiculous Effects of Exorcisms. The death of a Priest,
pretended to have bewitched those Nunns. New Vixations upon the Subject of
Annexes. Grand days at Poitiers. Terror of the Churches. At important. Decree
upon several Articles. Another troublesome Decree about meeting the Sacrament.
The demolishing of the Church of St. Maixant. A Pleading of Omer Talon,
Advocate General. Distinction between the Right of Exercise, and the Right of
the Church. Diverse Decrees about grand days against the Reformed. Persecution
raised by Cacherat against the Churches of Normandy. Precedence adjudg'd to the
Catholic Counselors of the Chamber of Castres. The College taken from the
Reformed of Loudun. Exercise forbid at Paroi and la Chaume. Order of the
Intendant of Poitou upon the Subject of Annexes. The Reformed of Metz forbid to
have a College. The Duke of Bouillon changes his Religion.

THere was great rejoicing at Rome for the reducing of this City. The Pope sang
Mass himself, made Prayers Rejoicing among the Catholics.
on purpose; gave plenary Indulgence to some Churches for two days; and wrote
to the King Breifs crammed with Eulogies and Applauses. The whole Kingdom
resounded with nothing but Congratulations, Vows, and Returns of Thanks:
nothing was so talked of but the Cause of Heaven, the Interests of God, and the
Triumphs of the Church. Flattery turned all Accidents and Events into Miracles;
and Invention s^^pli'd 'em with all sorts. In the mean time the War continued
in the Upper and Lower Languedoc: and the Duke of Rohan held out the best he
could against three Armies, commanded by the Prince of Conde, the Duke of
Mommorency, and the Duke of E^ernon. The Catholics also in all places revived
the Cruelties of Charles the Ninth's Reign. There was nothing to be seen but
Plund'ring, Burning, Massacr'ng, and Executions upon Executions: Cruelties,
Insulting, and Executions.
and for an addition of Insulting to Cruelty, the People were made believe,
that the poor Creatures that were hanged, all changed their Religion at the
Gallows: Only to deprive 'em of the desire of recanting, or the means and
opportunity to contradict what was said of 'em, they could not forbear to send
'em to the other world; and the People were obliged to believe their
Conversion, upon the Faith of the Monk, who had persecuted 'em to death. And
some Relations are to be seen in Print, which aggravate the Barbarity of the
Catholics to that degree, as to ^ublish 'em guilty of ripping up the Bellies of
Women with Child, and tearing the half-form'd Embrio's out of their Wombs;
sometimes also after they had vitiated the Mothers. Moreover the Duke of
Mommorency, having forced some of the Reformed who had neither the Courage to
retreat or defend themselves, took 'em all upon Composition: but he would not
promise 'em their Lives, unless they would oblige the Duke of Rohan to
surrender Aimargues, a considerable place which he had surpised: and because
the Duke of Rohan looked upon the Condition as ridiculous, the Duke of
Mommorency caused no less then Sixscore of his Prisoners of War to be hanged.
Thereupon the Duke of Rohan, to enforce the Catholics to wage War with more
Civility, stormed one of their Fortresses, and put all the Garrison to the
Sword. Which Reprisals stopped the Career of those barbarous Executions:
Nevertheless the Enmity which had bin long between the Prince of Conde and the
Duke Personal Enmity between the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Rohan.
of Rohan, broke forth with greater Fury; for the Prince wrote very sharp and
invective Letters to the Duke, and the Duke answered him with as much disdain.
And then it was that the Prince, forgetful of his Character, revenged himself
after a manner no way becoming his quality; for toward the end of the year, he
procured a Decree in Council, that the Duke's Houses should be demolished, his
Woods cut down, and his Goods confiscated; and that he might be Master of the
Execution, he caused it to be committed to himself, and discharged ^is Trust
with an extraordinary exactness: nor did he think it beneath himself, to get
the Confiscation of his Enemy granted to his own use.

Nor were the Reformed better treated in those places where A new Sedition at
Lion against the Reformed.
there was no War, then in the Provinces where they were up (...) Arms: For at
Lion the seditious Rabble fell upon 'em a second time, and upon a Pretense no
less false then ridiculous. The Contagion, which made great havoc in other
places, was got into this City. This Misfortune was attributed to a sort of
People, who, as they said, were wont to go about and grease the doors of
private persons; for which reason those Miscreants were called by the name of
Greasers, or Engraisseurs. But in regard the Reformed were they who were to
bear the blame of all the Misfortunes which befell the Catholics, the Rabble
failed not to take this opportunity to wreck their Malice upon 'em. The
Magistracy made strict enquiry after this Crime, and seized upon some of those
pretended Greasers, among whom, as it was said* there was found one of the
Reformed Religion. But the punishment of those poor Creatures would not satisfy
the Mobile* all the Reformed must be disarmed to appease their fury: and the
Violences of that Canaille must be let alone unpunished, the they had knocked
several persons of the head. So that the Reformed were constrained to hide
themselves for several days, and some that were most exposed, were forced to
quit the City. About the same time also a Young man of the Reformed Religion
The pretended Conversion of a Sick Person that fell into a Frenzy.
was seized with a violent Fever, of which he died: and because he fell into a
Delirium, the Priests would needs make that an Argument, that he died a
Catholic. In the height of his Distemper he talked of nothing but his Father.
Thereupon a Jesuit being brought to the Bedside under the name of his Father,
asked him, if he would not die in his Religion, but never said which, whether
the Reformed, or the Roman? The sick Person having made answer, Yes my dear
Father, presently the Equivocal Term of Father, an Appellation which the
Catholics generally give their Priests, was laid hold of, as a proof that the
man desired to change his Religion. But the Real Father coming to his Son some
time after, and putting the same Question to him, which the Young man answered
in the same manner, they fetched about another way, that the latter Answer was
the effect of his Delirium; that he still thought he spoke to the Jesuit, and
that his last words were a confirmation of the former. So that notwithstanding
the Complaints of his Father, and the evident Symptoms of his Son's Delirium,
they would have it pass for a lawful Conversion; they drove all the Reformed
Persons out of the Room; the Catholics got possession of his Body, and after
his death buried him after their manner. For the Catholics care not at which
Door People enter into their Communion; Fraud, Violence, Fear, Interest,
Frenzy, all must be serviceable to their Triumphs, and the Salvation of their
Converts.

In the mean time the Court and the Parlaments darted all their Thunderblots
against the Duke of Rohan; more especially Decrees and Declarations against the
Duke of Rohan.
the Parliament of Toulouse made the most bloody Decrees against him that ever
were set forth against a Rebel: But on the other side, they invited all his
Adherents to quit him, with all the Fairest Promises that could be made 'em.
The King published a Declaration upon the 15th of December at Paris, wherein
extremely enhauncing the Favors which he had shown the Rochelois, and the
Advantages they had found by submitting to him, he exhorted all others who had
taken Arms to do as much, and to come in, and make their acknowledgments to
that effect, before the Prothonotaries of the Jurisdictions to which they
belonged, within fifteen days. He ordered also the Cities that ^eld for the
Duke to send their Deputies to the Court to make their Submissions; and upon
these Conditions he promised upon the word of a King, to be kind and favorable
to 'em; and to make 'em equal partakers of his Graces with his other Subjects:
but he condemned to most rigorous Punishments all those that persever'd in
their Rebellion. This Declaration wrought very little effect, because the Duke
of Rohan made those that adhered to him deeply sensible that there was much
more to be expected from a General Peace, then evey single man could obtain
from a Particular Submission. But these Reasons would have bin of little force,
had they not seen the Cardinal engaged in a Foreign War, which would not permit
him vigorously to pursue his utmost efforts in France against the remainder of
the Reformed.

That Minister was desirous to revive the Reputation of his The King and the
Cardinal take a Journey into Italy.
Master in Italy, where it was very low, by reason that they who governed as
Prime Ministers before him, had too great a kindness for the Court of Spain. To
that purpose, he sent an Army thither in such a Season of the Year, that there
was more likelihood 1629.
of seeing it ruined, then hopes of any Success to be ob^^ind by it. And to say
truth, Had the Success been unfortunate, the Expedition might have been looked
upon as rash and inconsiderate. But there is nothing that prospers better then
those things which an Enemy believes his Adversary dares not undertake. The
Army forced its way through all the disadvantages of Places, notwithstanding
the rigor of the Winter, and the Duke of Savoy's men that opposed their
Passage: And after he had settled Affairs on that side in a very glorious
manner, the King returned to Cevenes, and laid siege to Privas. And indeed
there was something surprising in the Speed and Diligence of this Great
Minister. For there had not elapsed above six Months between the reducing of
Rochel, and the taking of Privas; and during that small time, the Cardinal had
caused the King to take a Journey into Savoy, and recovered the Affairs of
Italy into a good Condition. This acquired him so great Credit with the King,
that it was impossible he should mount any higher; and besides, it spread both
admiration and astonishment all over Europe. So that the Reformed were in a
dismal Consternation when they saw the remainder of their Cities menaced by
those Victorious Troops, which in such a terrible Season had forced all the
Obstacles of Art and Nature. So that the Duke of Rohan had much ado with all
his accustomed Arguments, and the hope of Succor that Spain promised him, to
prevent the voluntary Surrender of all those Cities.

The King then, having received great Applauses in all place The Siege of
Privas, the Inhabitants of which were betrayed.
through which he passed in his way to Italy, for the success of his Arms
before Rochel; and having beheld at his return the Roads strewn with
Conversions, procured by a great number (...) Missionaries that marched along
with his Army, and such as wel^ knew how to improve the Argument of Terror, met
with (...) stop till he came to Privas, before which Place he sat down in May;
and into which Chabrilles and Montbrun had put themselves under pretense of
holding it out. But they were both suspected and it was discovered that
Chabrilles treated with the Court, and were to deliver up Vivaretz to the
Cardinal for a good Reward^ Mombrun was more wary, and would be entreated, and
su'd to* before he would yield: Besides, they mutually sowed distrusts in
prejudice the one of the other. Chabrilles offered to hold out the Place,
provided he might have the upper hand, as being afraid that Mombrun would
thwart him.

On the other side Mombrun declared what he knew of Chabrilles's Treason, and
did all he could, lest the City should be put into his hands. This quarrelling
of theirs fell out right, and had the intended Effect, to set the Soldiers at
variance one among another. The Relief which was to have bin sent thither, and
which lay at Boutieres, refused to march thither at the persuasion of
Chabrilles, who promised other Succors so soon as it should be seasonable. The
Soldiers of the Garrison deserted, and the greatest part of the Citizens did as
much. Thereupon Mombrun having thus rendered the place almost defenseless, went
away together with some few Captains to the King's Quarter, where he was
detained Prisoner for fashion's sake, on purpose to force the Town to a
Surrender at discretion. For in reality he had made his Bargain; and the
Pretense alleged for his Detention, that he had left the Town before he had
secured himself by a Capitulation, was a mere Shamm. So that the Garrison of
Privas, which was retired to the Fort of Thoulon, astonished at the detaining
of Mombrun, and the Captains that followed him, and finding themselves without
either Chieftain or Governor, surrendered at discretion. But when the King's
Forces entered the Town, the Fire took hold either of some Barrels of Powder,
or else upon some Mine that was prepared ready to spring, if the place had bin
attacqu'd according to the methods of War; which Accident blew up some of the
King's Soldiers, and gave others a Pretense to put the Garrison to the Sword. So
that all the Cruelties that could be exercised upon a City taken by Assault,
Cruelties exercised upon the City.
were put in practice at Privas. The City was plundered and burnt, and whatever
escaped the Fury of the Soldiers, was only reserved for the Gibet or the
Galleys.

The Catholics accused the Reformed to have set Fire to the The pretenses of
the Catholics.
Powder; and the Reformed accused the King's Soldiers to have committed that
abominable Fact, that they might have a Right to sack the City, which they
could not have by the voluntary Surrender of the Town. And indeed it is most
probable, that the Reformed would have taken better measures, had they bin the
Authors of that Accident. For it happened too soon to do any considerable
damage to the Enemy: nor was the little harm it did, worth the trouble of
making such an Attempt. However, the Soldiers were believed who accused the
Garrison of the foul Play. People that are hated, are soon believed to be
criminal; and the Antipathy which men have against 'em, gives an Air of
Evidence and Truth to all Accusations that are laid to their charge. For this
reason it was, that these poor Creatures were looked upon as guilty of
assassinating a Capuchin, who was called Jerome de Condrie^, and whom the Monks
of his Order will needs have to be a Martyr. There has bin also a Relation of
this pretended Martyrdom published, and so exactly dressed up with all the
Circumstances of it, that for a man to have been acquainted with all that is
there set down, he must not only have bin present at the Action, but a patient
and quiet Spectator also. Nevertheless, this pretended Crime must needs be
committed in a place where there was no body but the Criminals, and the person
that suffered; and the chiefest part of the Circumstances so ill jumbl'd
together, that it was easily to be discerned, that it was only a Romantic Story
of a roasted Horse, such as are brought us from Japan or China. But the King
being extremely tractable, superstitious, and prepossessed with an aversion for
the Reformed, swallowed, without any examination, what was urged against 'em,
to foment and buoy him up in his prejudiced Opinion.

In like manner they vaunted the Conversions of Soldiers, that Conversions of
soldiers taken Prisoners.
embraced the Catholic Religion before they died. But besides, what I have
observed in other places upon these pretended Conversions, I shall here speak
it once for all, that there were many Catholics who bore Arms in the Reformed
Army; That these Catholics hoping for better Usage, if they called themselves
Reformed, then if they acknowledged that being Catholics, they had served in
the Armies of those who were termed Enemies of the State and the Church,
tarried till there was no longer any hopes of mercy for 'em, before they
declared themselves; That some of 'em also saved their Lives by this Artifice,
acting the part of Zealots, and of the Godlier sort of the Reformed, till the
Missionaries put 'em in hope of Pardon, upon condition they would change their
Religion; That these persons easily yielded to whatever was infused into 'em by
the Monks: so that when they met with the Depositions of these false Converts
against the Ministers, or any other of the Reformed, 'twas neither Justice nor
sound Reason to give Credit to their Testimony. Moreover, the Cruelties
Exercised upon the taking of ^rivas, were cried up as a just piece of Severity,
and an Ex^mplary punishment: And as if that merciless Butchery had ^ot bin
enough to satisfy 'em, the King published a Declaration A Declaration upon the
taking of Privas.
(...) the Month of June, which forbid all those that were not in ^^ivas during
the Siege, to return, and Confiscated all their ^oods: It deprived all the rest
of the Reformed of the Liberty (...) settle there without express leave; and
set forth, that pos^^ssion it self, without permission, should not give 'em a
Title to (...) Right. We shall relate in due place the Injustice and Cru^^ties
that were committed in these later years, under the pre^^nce of that
Declaration.

The taking of Privas, and the Circumstances of the Reducing (...) begat Fear
and Consternation on every side: And besides, the ^avock which was begun in
several Places, by the little Ar^^^s which the King sent thither, quite daunted
the Courage (...) that were capable to defend themselves. They were utterly out
of Hopes of being Assisted by the English, who (...) the Taking of Rochelle,
had still held the Duke of Rohan* (...) suspense with fair Promises. But the
Cardinal had begun a ^reaty of Peace with 'em, before he carried the King into
(...); and the Negotiation was perfectly concluded during that journey: so that
the News of that Peace was published while (...) King lay before Privas. It Is
true, that the English En^^^ assured the Duke, that the Peace would not be of
any long ^ontinuance. But tho that Promise might have bin relied ^^on, the Duke
who stood in need of present Aid, could not (...) for an Assistance that was
promised him in pursuance of an ^^certain Rupture of so late a Treaty. There
remained only A Treaty of the Duke of Rohan with Spain.
^^e Assistance of Spain, where Clausell had concluded a Treaty ^^e Third of
May, in the Duke's Name. But 'twas well known, ^^at there was no Confiding in
that Succor, which the Insup^^rtable slowness of the Council at Madrid would
not permit ^^^m to expect in any time, so as to reap any Benefit by it.
Be^^^es, that the Catholic Zeal of that Court gave the Reformed ^^eat reason to
question, whether or no she were sincere in ^^r Treaties with Heretics: and
then again, that Foreign Al^^^ce did not please several of the Reformed
themselves. The Men of the Quill wrote to and fro with great vehemence; and the
Monks coming in for a share, most bloody Satyrs appeared against the Duke, and
all those that were of his Religion and Party. His Adversaries maintained
against him in all those Writings, that the Forraing Succor with which he
flatter^^ himself, was both impossible, unprofitable, and unjust. The also
excused by diverse Arguments the Breach of Treaties, which it was not always
requisite to observe. In pursuance of which Maxim, they showed, that all the
Reasons which the Reformed brought were Insufficient to justify their Arms.
They would needs have it, that the Reformed had extorted all the Favou^ which
had bin granted to 'em, and particularly the Briefs consequently, that the
Obligation was void, and the Revocation lawful. 'Twas said, that Kings were
obliged to punish Heretics, as the Servants of God, as Protectors of the Church
and because that Heretics have bin always troublesome to Stat^ and Kingdoms.
'Twas asserted, that the Reason of Publ^ Welfare, exempted Kings from observing
their Promises man to their Subjects, who were never permitted to wage Wa^ and
that tho they were attacqu'd, it was not lawful for 'em to defend themselves,
and they were very large and copious upon this Tyrannical Opinion. They were
also very diffusive upon the Question, what Place the Reformed held in the
Kingdom* Wherein it was asserted, that they were no separate Body: and upon
that Principle they condemned their their General Deputations; and in a word,
whatever else was the Consequence of a lawful Union. A new sort of Politics,
from whence the Pretenses for a Great Number of unjust Action were drawn.
Lastly, by a sort of Argumentation altogether Catholic, they alleged the
Victories of the Roman Church over Heresy to be a Mark of her being the True
Church; and the Fall of the Reformed as a Mark of their Heresy. But (...)
would be a hard matter to demonstrate, that Violence, Surprise, and Treachery,
which are the Weapons which the Roman Church makes use of against her Enemies,
were Weapon^ becoming the Truth, and that the Ruin of her Adversaries b^ such
means, was a good Argument to convince 'em of Heresy.

But while the Duke of Rohan struggled with these Difficul^es, the Reducing of
Alets, which opened her Gates to the (...) without any Opposition, totally
discouraged those that were (...) resolved to have defended themselves; and the
Advantageous Conditions which that City obtained, persuaded all the (...) to
imitate Her, that they might be no less happy then She. (...) Consideration of
the Disorders that happened at Privas, (...) 'em believe the Capitulation of
Alets the more tolerable; (...) that as it was one of the most Considerable
that belon'gd to (...) Party, her Example extremely swayed the Rest.
Nevertheless the Duke surmounted all these Obstacles, and neglecting (...) own
Advantages, which he was given to understand in the (...) Name, should be much
greater if he would treat apart (...) himself, then if he obstinately insisted
upon a General Peace; (...) engaged all his Friends and Adheretns, to make but
one Trea^f^r all. To which purpose he obtained leave to call a General Assembly
at Anduse, from whence it was translated to (...), to the end it might there be
more free. For the King An Assembly permitted at Anduse, and translated to Nimes
(...) the Confirmation of the Edicts, there was nothing which could cause a
Dispute, but the Article concerning the ^tifications. 'Twas the King's desire
they should be demo^'d, but the greatest part of the Cities refused to Con^ to
it. They judged it to be the greatest Mischief that could (...) 'em, tho they
should stand the utmost of Extremity. And ^say truth, in regard there were
still remaining about Thirty ^ng Holds, the meanest of which was able to hold
out a ^ge of three Months, they might have put the Cardinal to a ^nge, had he
insisted upon that Article. But particular In^ests, the Cardinals
Correspondencies, the Fear of Treachery, (...) Example of Privas, and chiefly
that of Anduse, that first (...) gave way, and first of all agreed to the
Demolishing of (...) Fortifications, made all the Deputies that were at the
Assembly submit to give the same Consent.

The Peace was then Concluded toward the end of June, published Peace (...)
(...)
in the King's Camp, and afterward the Treaty being (...) into an Edict, was
published at Nimes the next Month. It (...) granted in the Form of a Favor;
and because the King (...) it to his vanquished and humbl'd Subjects of his
mere good will, upon no other Considerations or Motives but (...) of his
Clemency, it was called the Edict of Grace. Upon which ^^tle there was a High
Valne put, to cure the Reformed of the The Edict of Grace.
Fears, lest this Edict should be no better observed then (...) Rest: and
because it was taken for a pretense to violate (...) that preceded, that the
Grant of 'em was wrested from (...) King by force; therefore that there should
be no excuse for (...) Infringing of this, because the King had granted it as a
Vict^^^ out of the mere Instigation of his Royal good will. Nevertheless, the
very next Day after the Publication of the Peace, (...) the 29th of June, the
Cardinal wrote a Letter to the (...) Mother upon the occasion, from whence it
might be concluded that the Motive to this Peace was not any Inclination to
(...) serve the Edicts obtained by the Heretics, but to ease the People of the
Consequences of the War, and for fear of offending (...) Protestant
Confederates, who would hardly have bin dra^^ to Confide in those who sought
the utter Extirpation of the Reformed Brethren. But the Queen was already
discontent^ with the Cardinal; nor was there any thing which more (...) pleased
her then the Success of the Enterprises which he undertook. She had done as
much as she could to hinder the Success of the Siege of Rochelle; and at the
same time that she vo^ Pilgrimages and other Acts of Devotion for the Taking of
she set all her Engines at work to disappoint the Prosperity that Important
Design. Not that she loved the Reformed tho they had served her faithfully upon
several Occasions: (...) in regard they had offended her in others, their
Injuries (...) deeper at her Heart then their Services. But that was (...)
strange thing: For we may build more securely upon the Resentment of Men, more
especially of Princes, then upon (...) Acknowledgment. Time obliterates out of
their Memo^ all the Impressions of their good Services: and when they pardon,
they do but suspend the Resentment of an Injury, the Remembrance of which the
least Pretense revives. Now (...) which obliged the Queen to fret at the
Cardinal's Prosperity was this, that she saw the Cardinal's Reputation fixed by
the Success of his Designs: whereas she saw her Credit sink by degrees, while
he that before was but her Creature, left her hard^ any share in the Government
of Affairs. And she would not have bin sorry to have seen him less fortunate in
his Enterprises against the Heretics, that there might have bin a Party left in
the Kingdom to restore her to the Authority she had lost, when occasion
offered. However, the Cardinal always paid her most profound Respects, that he
might not expose himself to the reproach of despising a Princess to whom he was
beholding for his Fortune. But to return to the History.

The Edict contained in the first place a long Preface, which Contents of the
Edict.
after an insulting manner set forth the means employed to reduce the Reformed
to obedience. The Taking of Rochel, the Sacking of Privas, the voluntary
Surrender of Alets, were represented in a Rhetorical Style, not common in
Edicts. There were the Names of Five and twenty Towns well fortified that durst
not stand the first Shot of the King's Batteries; and which together with the
Duke of Rohan and the Nobility of several Provinces, ^^d implored his Clemency
by their Deputies, offering to demo^sh their Fortifications for fear of giving
any distrust of their Fi^elity. After which the King, swayed by compassion only
of the Misery of his Subjects, and that he might more absolutely ^gain the
hearts of those who had bin guilty of so many Relapses, ^rdain'd in two and
twenty Articles what he would have observed for the future. The Edict was
termed Perpetual and Irrevocable; and according to the accustomed style, the
First Article enjoined the Re-establishment of the Roman Religion in all the
freedom of its Exercises; and of the Ministers of the Worship of it in all
their Goods and Estates. But by a singular Clause, 'twas the King's pleasure
that only Monks living up to the strictness of their Order should be placed in
the Monasteries of the Cities reduced. The Second was altogether new; for that
while on the one side it promised to maintain the Reformed in the free Exercise
of their Religion, on the other side it set (...) an extraordinary desire of
their Return to the Roman Church; and exhorted 'em to lay aside all Passion, to
the end they might be capable of receiving the Light of Heaven: And the King
inserted this desire of their Conversion, to the end it might be admired as the
most splendid Testimony of his goodwill. The Third related to the
Qualifications of the Curates that were to be settled in the Parishes of the
Conquered Countries, and the Provision that was to be made for their
subsistence. The next contained a general and particular Amnesty of whatever
had bin acted during the War. The Fifth contained the Declarations, Edicts and
Articles enregister'd in Parlaments; and that which followed, ordained the
Restitution of Churches and Churchyards, and gave leave for the rebuilding of
demolished Churches. The Seventh allowed three months time for the demolishing
of Fortifications, which was to be done at the expense of the Inhabitants
Labor, according to such Orders as the King's Commissioners should give; and
in regard the King left no Garrisons in the said Cities, he obliged 'em to give
him Hostages, who were to remain in custody, where he should appoint, till the
Work was fully completed: And the Preamble of the Edict declared, That the
Hostages had bin delivered before it was published: nor did this Article leave
the Cities any more then the bare enclosure of their Walls. The Eighth restored
the Reformed to all their Goods and Estates, their Tithes, Accounts and Suits,
and cancelled all contrary Decrees and Ordinances. The Ninth gave 'em leave to
re-enter into their Houses, and to settle in the Kingdom where they pleased
themselves. But he excepted out of the first part of this Favor all the
Inhabitants of Pamiers that resided in the City, when the Prince of Conde
retook it from the Duke of Rohan; and out of the 2d. he excepted the Islands of
Re and Oleron, Rochelle and Privas, where he suffered no body to resettle anew.
The next Seven that followed contained the Accustomed Regulations for the
discharge of Persons that had bin any way concerned in the management of Money,
or in the Administration of Justice* The 17th and 18th confirmed the Customs
for the Election of their Consuls, and the Municipal Government; and those of
the Assembly of Foix in reference to the Assembly of States.

The Ninteenth imported a Discharge, in favor of the Consuls, for the
management of the public Money. The Twentieth resetl'd the Seats of Judicature,
and Audits of Receipts, in such places from whence they had bin discharged by
reason of the Troubles: And the last restored the Party-Chamber to Castres, so
soon as the Fortifications should be demolished; and maintained it in all the
jurisdictions that had bin allowed it by the Edicts.

Upon the 15th of July the King wrote a Letter to the Queen The King's Letter
to Queen Mother about the Peace.
Mother, wherein he appeared extremely well satisfied with the Peace which had
bin concluded. He declared himself highly pleased with the Marks of their
Affection which the Reformed had given him: That he thought there remained no
more Seeds of Rebellion among 'em; and that they labored in the demolishing
their Fortifications, with the same zeal that they raised 'em. As for the Duke
of Rohan, after he had kissed the King's The Duke of Rohan retires.
Hand, he departed with permission to retire to Venice. To say truth, 'twas no
more then a Banishment covered over with the gay name of Permission. For it was
by no means judged a piece of prudence to let the Duke alone in France, where
his Reputation and his Intreagues might hinder the stifling the remainders of
the Conflagration. However, it was no less beneficial for him to keep himself
at a distance in such places where he could give no suspicion, as it was for
the Court to remove him. For the least jealousy of his Conduct, had he staid in
France, had either brought his Head to the Block, or locked him up in a
languishing Imprisonment. His Mother and Sister were released after the Peace;
and the King allowed some reparation to the Duke for the wast which the Prince
of Conde had made of his Estate.

This Peace in the main had not bin disadvantageous to the Montauban reduced.
Reformed, if by taking from 'em their Places of Security, they could have bin
cured of that distrust, which the ill observed Promises of the Catholics,
experienced for seventy years together, had imprinted in their minds. They
found themselves at the discretion of their Enemies by the Razing of their
Fortifications; and all the Power of the Prime Ministry being in the Cardinal's
hands, would not permit 'em to sleep in quiet under the Promises of his
Good Will. Upon these Considerations it was, that Montauban refused a long time
to ratify what the Assembly of Nimes had decreed. The Siege which she had so
gloriously sustained persuaded her that she was invincible: And her Inhabitants
were ^^ pu^^ up with their Success, that they believed that no body durst
attacque 'em. However, some Forces were sent that way to put 'em in fear; but
the Cardinal, who aspired to be accounted the most accomplished of all Hero's,
and to be thought able to do more by his presence, then a great Army by the
Di^t of their most daring efforts, ordered his affairs so well, that the honor
of reducing Montauban redounded wholly to himself. Thither he went; was
admitted; and put into it what number of the King's Forces he pleased; ordered
the Fortifications to be levelled and did more in a few days by an affectation
of extraordinary Clemency, and of being exact to his Word, then a Victorious
Army, where the King was in person, could accomplish by a long Siege. When he
made his Entry into Montauban, the Ministers presented themselves to kiss his
Hands; he received 'em: but before that, he gave 'em to understand, that he did
not allow 'em that Honor, as Deputies of any Particular Body, because the
Reformed made no Particular Body in the Kingdom; but only as men of Learning,
for whom he had an esteem. The end of this Compliment was, to let the Reformed
know, that their Union was quite extinct; and consisted no longer in any other
thing, then in their Profession of the same Doctrine. The Ministers of State,
the Intendants, the Governors of Provinces, and Princes themselves for a long
time, did 'em the same honor, as the Cardinal had done the Ministers of
Montauban: But at length, the Clergy, weary of hearing the Compliments of the
Ministers, preferred upon all occasions, before those of all the other
Deputies, obtained a Declaration which forbid 'em to make any such Deputations,
as I shall have an occasion to speak in another place.

As for the Assembly this year assembled at Paris, they chiefly Assembly of the
Clergy.
minded their own Affairs. They obtained a Decree of Council, which forbid the
seizing in the hands of the Receivers of the Clergy the Pensions which had bin
allowed 'em, under pretense of being the Debts of Converted Ministers. And this
opened a large Door for the Knavery of those who were laden with Debts, and had
not wherewithal to pay. But there were some Articles in the Ordinances of Lewis
XIII. upon which the Clergy thought fit to make Remonstrances. Among which
there was one which obliged 'em to draw up an Inventory of their Evidences.
Against which they urged that such an Article would do 'em wrong; for that the
Enemies of the Church, meaning the Reformed, (...) draw from thence a pretense
to molest 'em in the Pos^ of their Livings. Tho there was as much reason to
fear (...) Vexations of the Catholics, as those of the other People, because
they would have found a means to prove the Falsehood (...) Nullity of their
Evidences, had they bin once exposed to the Examination of cunning people; but
it did not behove them to speak of any other but the Reformed, whose Name was
(...) proper to conceal their secret Intentions. They demanded upon another
Article, that the Clause of Verified in Parla^ts, required by the Ordinance to
set a Value upon the Conces^s which they had obtained of several Kings, might
be taken away. For they saw well, that at that rate, they should lose a great
part or their Privileges, which wanted that Forma^ty: Whether it were that the
Parliaments did not easily allow (...) sorts of Favors; or whether it were
that the Clergy durst (...) present 'em for fear of a Refusal. They rather
chose that such Concessions should be granted by way of Contract with (...)
King, then by the public Forms of Law, in regard the most Zealous Defenders of
Arbitrary Power, almost all of 'em agree, (...) Contracts are more Inviolable
then the Laws. But I make this Observation chiefly in this place, to the end
that men may (...), that this Clause, of which the Clergy so well saw the
Consequence, had not bin inserted in several Edicts given in favor of the
Reformed, and particularly in that of Nimes, but only that they might have an
Opportunity to deprive 'em of a great number of Concessions of High Importance
for their welfare (...) quiet.

Now they who have a desire to understand how the Reformed Particu^^^* Acts of
Injustice.
were handled in such Places where they lived under the Protection of the
Edicts, may readily understand by some Examples. The 23. of April, at an
Assembly of the Town Hall of (...), there was a Resolution taken to admit no
more of the Reformed to be sworn into Masterships of Trades; and the Reason was
this, that the contrary Custom caused Differences, and for that the Catholic
Masters oppo'sd it. As if the Opposition of a few Malcontents were to have
bin of any value (...) an Affair which the Edict had so clearly decided. The
King, at another time, being at Valence in the Dauphinate, past a Decree of the
Council of State, touching the Bells, the Churchyard, the Minister's, and the
School-Master's Salaries, and other Affairs of the same nature, to the good
liking of all the Inhabitants: but the Reparation of the Church, contained a
Regulation, which in despite of Custom, and the apparent Interest which the
Reformed had in the Thing, confirmed to the Curate, the Catholic Consul, and
such and such Inhabitants as were of the same Religion, the Power of
distributing the Alms, and the Government of the Hospital. It may be easily
then judged, what share that Regulation left us the Reformed of the Alms, or in
the Government of the Hospital. But the Parliament of Rennes bethought
themselves of being more just this year, and by a Decree of the 12. of June,
Confirmed the Private Article of that Edict, which Exempted the Reformed from
spreading Carpets before their Doors upon solemn Procession-days; only barely
ordering that Carpets should be spread* But the Parliament of Dijon was not in
so good an Humor* For it happened that a private person was accused before 'em
for committing some Irreverence during the Procession of Corpus Christi Day.
The Party accused, according to the Edict, demanded the Removal of the Cause to
the Chamber of Greenoble But the Removal was denied him, under pretense that it
was a matter of Sacrilege, and that the Parlaments were to have the sole
Cognizance of those Crimes. But nothing was more unjust then this Pretention,
in regard that the pretense of Sacrilege was one of the Cases, wherein the
Reformed had most reason to be afraid of falling into the hands of Judges
altogether prepossessed. The Parliament of Paris also by a Decree of the Third
of August, reduced the Privilege of taking an Associate of the Reformed
Religion, for the drawing up and passing Sentences in Criminal Processes
brought against those of the Religion, to Cases of Marshal Law only. The Edict
extended it to Final Sentences, by whatever Judges they were given: and Custom
had stretched it to all manner of Criminal Processes, because it seemed
Equitable; the drawing up of the Process by the first Judge, being that which
of necessity byasses the Sentence of the Superior. I thought it requisite to
set down the Original of this sort of Practice; because that these particular
Decrees have (...) time bin turned into a General Law.

But nothing was more mischievous to the Reformed then the 1630.
establishment of Missions, which were Composed for the most Mlssiionaries.
part of persons of a violent, seditious, and pedantic Spirit, who thought it
an honor to themselves to excite Tumults, and to ^raw bad usage upon
themselves, that they might have an Opportunity to trouble the Principal
Members of the Reformed Churches. The most dangerous of these brangling
Pettifoggers were certain Laics of the Scum of the People, the most Eminent of
which were Pedlars, Cordwinders, Cutlers, and such ^ke Riffraff, who rambl'd
about from Town to Town, from Consistory to Consistory, from Synod to Synod, to
give Insolent Challenges to the Ministers, preach Controversies in public
Places upon Theaters set up like Mountebank's Stages; to teaze and weary out
the meaner sort of people with pitiful and ridiculous Cavils; and to endeavor
by the Conversion of some poor (...) Widgeon or other, to gain a certain spill
of Money which (...) Clergy had fixed as the Reward of such petty Victories. But
(...) shall speak more at large in another place of this new sort of
adversaries, my business in this place being only to let you know, how much the
Duke of Rohan was bespattered with Reproaches The Duke of Rohan accused of the
Ruin of the Churches.
and Scandals after the Conclusion of the Peace; the chiefest part of those
that had most importunately pressed him to make it, imputing the Fall and almost
Ruin of the Reformed Party to his Ambition, his Avarice, and his Precipitancy*
So that he was forced to write an Apology for this last Peace: wherein resuming
his Discourse from the Assembly of Rochelle which began the War, he made it
appear by a Recital of all that had been transacted, that his Conduct was
altogether Innocent, and that the last Peace was altogether necessary, at a
time when France having no Foreign Troubles to divert her, was pouring upon the
Duke with no less then six Armies at once. But these Reproaches were only
thrown upon him by those to whom the Peace was not so gainful as the War. For
in the main, the Duke had gained the Hearts of all the People, and almost all
the Reformed were of Opinion, that he would have done much greater Things* for
'em then the Admiral Chatillon, had he bin as well seconded by the Citizens and
Nobility as the Admiral was.

In the mean time they began to brangle with the Reformed Cavils about the
Right of Exercises.
in diverse places about the Right of Exercises, more especially on that side
next to Rochelle, where Thuilerie the Intendant, and St. Chament the Governor
made several Attempts. The first ordained that the Exercise should not be
performed but in Places where it ought to be, according to the Edict; and that
the Reformed, to make appear the Rights to which they pretended* should produce
their Proofs before the Intendant within fifteen Days. He added, that within
the said Term such Gentlemen as would perform the Exercise within their own
Houses, should declare which was the Place of which they made choice for their
Principal Dwelling: upon which they should enjoy the Right so long as they
remained there with their Wives and Families; and that the said fifteen Days
being expired without any such Declaration made, they should be deemed not to
have sufficient Proofs of their Right, and therefore should have no more
Preaching in their Houses till the King should otherwise ordain. This
Inquisition was the occasion that the Churches in those Quarters were forced to
undergo the Persecution of (...) world of brabbling Cavils. But what was most
troublesome, was, that the Churches whose Right was ocnfirm'd by Thuilerie's
Order, were in no better Condition, seeing that afterward they found out a
thousand Devices to deprive 'em of the Fruit of those Sentences. For in Places
of which the Lords of the Manors were Catholics, the best settled Rights in
the world signified nothing, in regard the violent Zeal of the Lord would not
let his Tenants enjoy their Advantage. Of which there was an Eminent Example at
Rochechouard, where the Exercise of the Reformed Religion began in the Year
1559. and where the Commissioners entrusted with the Edict of Nantes, confirmed
it in 1601. by a solemn Decree. Nevertheless the Lord by force expelled the
Reformed from the Place where they were accustomed to Preach, so that they were
forced to seek out another. And notwithstanding all their Complaints they were
exposed to long and tedious Vexations, which could not be determined but with
the dissipation of their Church.

The Bishop of Valence, a violent Spirit, and a hotheaded The Bishop of
Valence persecutes the Foreign Ministers.
(...), upon the 15th of June, procured a Decree of the ^rivy Council, which
forbid any Foreigner, tho a received Minister within the Diocese, to continue
his Ministry in the Kingdom. There were three of these whom the Bishop would
(...) involve in the same Prohibition; Martin, Scarpius and (...): for the
Bishop, as a Temporal Lord, had condemned 'em (...) three. A^^esi kept his
ground at Livron, without taking any (...) of the Decree. Scarpius retired to
Die, where he lived without officiating in the Ministry. And as for Martin, he
(...) changed the place of his Residence, but never stirred out of the Diocese
Which made the Bishop stark mad, a man otherwise proud, and transported with
his Passions. But he obtained nothing from the Council but only against Martin
who was the most hated, because he had bin a Capuchin; and for that after he
had quitted his Habit, he wrote a Book entitled. The Capu^ Reformed, wherein he
gave no Quarter to the Hypocrisies of that Institution; and farther, because
the Bishops having ^t him in Prison, his ill usage could neither make him alter
his Conduct, nor abate his Courage.

That year, the same Bishop began a Persecution, which deriving The Original of
the Injustice done upon occasion of the Annexes.
the Original of it in a particular Diocese, spread itself afterward over all
the Kingdom, and was the occasion of above 35 years vexation to the Churches.
The Pretense was, because one and the same Minister preached by turns in
several places. And the King was made believe, that those places which were
called Annexes, or Quarters, belonging to some principal Church, were so many
Usurpations that were not authorized by the Edict, tho there were nothing more
false. For those Annexes were places where the right of Exercise had bin
acquired for same one of the Reasons mentioned in the Edict; but not being able
of themselves to maintain a Minister apart, were joined together by the
Authority of a Synod, to make up a sufficient Salary for one Pastor. This was
no injury to the Interests of the Clergy; to whom it ought to have bin an
indifferent thing, how the Reformed order their Churches to be served. Besides
that, 'twas very convenient for the Reformed; who, by that means, provided for
their Churches and their Ministers at little Expenses. And that Reason was
sufficient to excite the Zeal of Catholic Persecution, to deprive 'em of that
advantage. And it may be thought that this Vexation began in Valence, because
it is a Bishopric composed of two in one, Valence and Die, tho the Bishop bears
the name of Valence only. Now that Prelate could not endure that the Heretics
should unite several poor Churches together, to enlarge the Minister's Salary,
because it belonged only to the Church of Rome to unite several poor
Bishoprics, to augment the Revenue of one single Bishop. This was seconded by
the Bishop of Vaison, who joined with him in his Persecutions: and Both
together obtained two Decrees of Council, one of the 3d of October, against the
Minister of Dieulefit; the other dated the 11th of the same month, forbidding
'em to preach in any other then the place of their Residence. Nothing could be
more vexatious in the Consequences of it to the Provinces wherein there were
many Churches, more especially since the King had taken away the money granted
by the King his Father in recompense of the Tithes.

It appeared by these Examples of the Persecution, that the New Seeds of a
Civil War.
Reformed had not now those Forces, which caused the Catholics to spare 'em
before; but that in despite of the Act of Grace, they would be brangl'd every
day out of the remainder of their Privileges. In a word, within less then two
years they had so many unjust Injuries done 'em, as are hardly to be imagined.
But two things hindered, that they did not hasten their destruction. The first
was, because the Court itself was intangl'd in most desperate Quarrels and
Confusions. Providence permitted, for the justification of the Reformed, who
had bin all along accused of being the sole Causes of the Troubles of the
Kingdom, that after the Ruin of their Affairs, the Catholics should have their
turn; should enter into Treaties, Leagues and Conspiracies, renew the Civil
Wars, and keep the Kingdom, till the death of the King, in continual
Combustions. The original of which Troubles was the Queenmother's discontent,
who could not brook the high credit to which the Cardinal had attained by the
success of his Enterprises. That Princess, ambitious and jealous of her Honor,
was affronted that the Cardinal, whom she had introduced into Court, should be
so powerful as to slight ^her; and that on the other side, she should have so
far lost ^her former Reputation, that she could not as well contemn her
Competitor. She saw herself despised since the taking of Rochel; and in truth,
since that Enterprise had succeeded, the Cardinal had changed his Behavior
with all the world: nor did he carry himself in any thing so cautiously as
before, because ^e thought he stood in need of no body's protection. Nay, he
could not forbear jesting a little too satyrically upon the Queen; and in
regard the Favor he was in had created him many Enemies, there were some that
took delight officiously to repeat his Jests, and to season 'em with some
dashes of particular malice. So that the Queen displayed all her Fury against
him, and notwithstanding all the care which the King himself, Cardinal Bagni,
and other persons of the highest quality took to reconcile 'em, she would never
pardon him. The Duke of Orleans took his Mother's part, and several other
considerable Lords did the same. As for the Cardinal, he was too much employed
in dissipating all these terrible Storms, to think of the Reformed; and his
Enemies had too much business on the other side, to mind these miserable
Remainders of a Party that made no longer any 1631.
Figure in the Kingdom. But the Cardinal had the good luck, The Queen withdraws
into Flanders.
or else the cunning, to vanquish all these difficulties, and to reduce the
Queen, his Mistress, to retire into Flanders, since she could not stay neither
with safety nor honor in a Kingdom where she had so long exercised the Supreme
Authority. The Duke of Orleans also departed France soon after, but returned
with his Arms in his hand.

The second thing which afforded some relaxation to the Reformed, Alliance with
Gustavus King of Sueden.
was, that the Cardinal was desirous to uphold the King's Alliances with the
Foreign Protestants; that he had renewed the League with the Foreign
Protestants; and for that he had renewed an Alliance with Gustavus King of
Sueden, a brave Prince, Ambitious, one that had acquired the Reputation of a
great Captain, and who but a little before had made an Incursion into
Pomerania, where he made it evident, that it was not a thing impossible to
bring down the Puissance of the Emperor. This Prince entered Germany at the
Cardinal's solicitation, and made those surprising Progresses which are hardly
to be believed upon the credit of Relations. They were afraid he would have
gone too far, so that after two years of continued triumph, he was slain at
Lutzen; no body being as yet able to discover w^^ther the mortal Stroke
proceeded from the hand of his Friends, or his Enemies. There was also great
care taken in treating with him, to prevent his Conquests from doing any
prejudice to the Catholic Religion; and that Prince was very complaisant with
the Cardinal upon that Subject. So that whether he would not offend a
Confederate attended every where by Terror and Conquest; or whether it were
that it was thought but Justice to spare the Protestants for the sake of a
Prince so favorable to the Catholics, it was not looked upon as a seasonable
time to overwhelm the Protestants of France.

But what they were unwilling to do openly, they attempted Projects of Reunion.
by means more closely concealed and dangerous. With this design it was, that
they set afoot again the Projects of Reunion, which were always as it were
Forerunners of a Tempest that was insensibly gathering together. Two sorts of
People were caught in this Snare. People that were sincere and upright, who
believed in the sincerity of their hearts, that a reasonable composition might
be drawn from the Catholics, at least in reference to the most gross and
palpable Abuses; and that after they should be agreed upon Expedients to secure
the Conscience, they might unite in an outward Communion: that Schism, looked
upon by both sides as a great mischief, would surcease by this Accommodation;
and together with Schism, all Discord and Hatred, Persecution of the weaker by
the stronger, which are the inevitable Consequences of it: that being returned
to the Bosom of the Roman Church, People that were expert, might the better
labor in the Cure of her Distempers, because they would be no longer
suspected; and for that being armed with Truth, they would in time, by the
light of it, dispel the darkness and mists of Prejudice and Error. There have
bin at all times some People flattered with this pleasing Vision; and who never
will be taught, that the mischiefs of the Roman Church are incurable, because
she refuses all manner of Cure. ^rro^s purely speculative, and which arise from
the false Idea's (...) which the mind is prepossessed, may sometimes surrender
(...) the evidence of a Truth well made out by Demonstration: (...) Errors of
Interest are proof against all the most evident ^nstrations, in regard they
derive their Original from the ^ption of the heart: and for that Malad^es of
that nature (...) (...) always to be ass^ag'd by Remedies that convince the
(...). Other People of a quite different Character, either (...) by Promises,
or pushed forward by Ambition, or else ^ited of their own parts, and aspiring
to the Honor of ha^ng put an end to these fatal Contests, which for above a
hun^er'd years together had occasioned such Convulsions over all (...),
desperately threw themselves into the gaping Chasma's (...) (...) pretended
Concord; and provided they met with any ^kelihood and facility, never gave
themselves the trouble of ta^ing securities and measures in favor of the Truth.

It Is said the Cardinal was desirous to make use of these two With which the
Cardinal closes.
(...) of People to endeavor this Re union; because he might procure the same
service from the simplicity of the one, as from the little sincerity of the
other. And though the Author of his Life dares not positively assert that he
had this Project in his (...), because he meets with nothing of it in his
Memoirs; nevertheless, it is not improbable that he had it in his thoughts:
whether it were that he was desirous effectually to accomplish that Enterprise,
or that he would have it so believed for a secret Reason of his own Policy.
However, the Method which has bin published, remains entirely in the limits of
the Project, of which I shall suddenly have an occasion to speak. Moreover, the
Cardinal affected all things that appeared to be great; and in regard he had a
great desire that all his Actions should be the Subjects of so many Panegyrics,
an Enterprise so extraordinary, as the Reunion of Religions could not choose
but be most proper to flatter his Vanity. In a word, there happened some things
during the first years that elapsed after the taking of Ro^, that seem so
naturally to depend upon this Design, that it may from thence with great
probability be concluded, that he had laid the ground work of the Project in
good earnest. On the other side, in regard that at the same time he had lost
his Reputation at Rome, where his Alliances with Gustavus, and other Protestant
Princes, were very much disgusted, because i^ seemed that the Catholic Religion
was as great a loser by their Victories, as the House of Austria; it may be
said, that he only made use of his Projects of Reunion out of a design to
regain the Pope's favor, by putting him in hopes that he would bring back all
Europe under obedience to the Holy See.

However it were, Projects were spread abroad upon this Intreagues of Joseph
the Capuchin.
Subject which seemed to come from the Cardinal, because the first Overtures
were carried about by a Capuchin, who had a great share in his Confidence. This
was the famous Father Joseph, to whom the Austerity of his Order was no
obstruction from being the Minister of the most Secret Intreagues of that
Prelat; nor from doing him more important Services by his Negotiations, then
all his Favorite Generals at the head of their Armies. The design was to bind
a Conference between the Reformed Ministers and some Catholic Doctors: but to
preserve the Advantage on the Roman Religion's side, two things were resolved
upon. The first was, That the Roman Religion caught he Pro.
should not yield an inch of ground, either as to her Doctrine o^ Worship; not
so much as in things of small Importance, of such as had bin the first
occasions of Schism; as the Matter of Indulgences. But to take away this
Pretense which this Obstinacy of the Romish Church, in her Opinions and
Practices, might give the Reformed to persevere in their Separation, there were
two Expedients set a foot. The first was, To agree on both sides upon the
Expressions that were to mollify and sweeten the Articles which would be most
harsh and uneasy. The other was, To show by Writings well composed and laid
together, that the Catholic Religion was not so different from the Reformed as
vulgarly it was believed; and that the difference was so slight, that it could
be no lawful cause of Disunion. The second thing that was to save the Honor of
the Romish Religion, was, that they were to bring it so about that the Reformed
should be the Sollicitors; to the end, that in the Reunion they might appear as
Penitent Children that made the first steps toward their Mother to regain her
Favor; and that the Catholic Church might look like a Mother that held forth
her Arms ^embrace her Children returning to their duty.

To bring this to pass, they were desirous to make use of the How the Synods
were to speak.
^od, themselves; and they were to endeavor to make the Proposals of it in the
Provincial Synods, to the end the Deputation to the National Synod might be so
ordered as to fall upon ^sons proper to manage this Design, and furnished with
power ^embrace the Expedients that should be agreed upon in the ^^e of their
Provinces. The first step, as the Plot was laid, ^s to send a Deputation to the
King with a Remonstrance, ^t certain ill affected Persons went about to
persuade him, ^t the Reformed Religion infused into the Professors of it,
Sen^ents contrary to the good of his Service; but that they in^ded to show the
contrary by a faithful Explanation of theirs: ^at to that purpose they besought
his Majesty to permit 'em ^enter into a Free Conference with such Doctors as he
should ^ase to nominate; and that if they could but be convinced that ^ere was
a possibility of Salvation in the Catholic Religion, ^^y would be glad to come
to a Reconciliation. Upon this Proposal they were to be taken at their words;
and because they ^manded no more then to bind the Conference, it was to be ^w'd
'em as long and as free as they could desire.

But for the accomplishment of this Design, there was a ne^sity Inclinations of
the Ministers
of securing a sufficient quantity of the Ministers. They ^^d ^ounded all that
resided round about Paris, but found 'em ^^y variously inclined. There were
some, who either through ^^ruption or simplicity, lent an ear to the Proposals,
and who ^o drew up draughts of a Reunion, which were communicated the Cardinal,
to the end he might be judge whether they ^^re proper or no: And there are
Memoirs that show the number of the Ministers thus gained to be about
fourscore. There ^re others who by no means approved these Projects; but who
^^ght be allured by various Interests, that hindered their opposition; whether
they were already engaged in Troubles, or feared ^e being brought into
Vexations; or whether they were not sens^ble of the Delusions of vain Hopes.
But there were others so that were stiff and inexorable, that came quick to the
point, ^^ declared that the nature of the Differences between the two Religions
would not endure an Accommodation. These In^ nations of the settled Ministers
about the Court, encouraged t^ Projectors to sound those in the Remoter
Provinces; that the might consider with which of these three different
Inclination it was most proper to close. As for the Reformed Laics, the And the
People.
found 'em all in the opinion of the Obstinate Ministers; and (...) greatest
part of 'em, not content to reject the Proposal as i^ possible, looked upon it
as fraudulent, and serving only as a ^ver for some wicked Designs. In short,
they were thinking make use of violence; and after the Success of the
Conference where the King was to be in Person, the more easily to ^u^nt^ Scales
which way he desired, they were to enfore all the rest the Kingdom to stand to
the Treaty which the Deputy-Minister should conclude. Edicts, Banishment of the
Obstinate, a^ Military Executions, were to make good the Resolutiors tak^ in
the Conference; but such as would not accept of the Reunio^ were to be allowed
the liberty to dispose of their Estates, a^ to withdraw within a certain time.

It was also thought convenient to hasten the summoning o^ Difficulties.
National Synod for the execution of this Design, because the thought that
things being well ordered in the Provinces, the Assembly would serve to forward
it. But they met with o^ unlucky Obstruction which retarded the Grand Affair.
For t^ Pestilence raged in several Provinces of the Kingdom; so the 'twas
impossible at that conjuncture of time to assemble Pro^icial Synods. And in the
Assembly it self that was held at Charenton, there were great complaints of the
Obstructions occasioned by that Distemper which hindered the Deputies from
coming to the Assembly. In the mean time, there were tw^ men found out, of the
two different Characters above-mention who seemed to agree with the Cardinal in
his Projects. T^ one was Petit, a Minister and Professor of Theology at Ni^e
Petit's Projects.
The other was Milletiere, who had written so much upon the Affairs of Rochel,
and who had a great desire to signalize himself by a large Book upon the
Subject of the Reunion. Petit ha^ the reputation of being an Honest man; but he
was one of th^^ that suffered themselves to be bewitched with the charming nam^
of Concord; and who, because they are honest, and mean we^ themselves, believe
all the World to be like 'em. Moreover, ^e had rather in view the Reunion of
the Protestants among themselves, and particularly of those that followed the
Doctrine ^f Arminius, condemned by the Synod of Dort, then of the Protestants
and Catholics. But in regard he only propounded general means, they were not so
easily applied to the Cardinal's Designs, with whom all honest men were afraid
of dealing upon this matter. Because it was a scurvy thing to deal with a
^rafty and Potent Minister, who with ease might abuse the ^eanest Overtures
that were made him. This caused the more ^^udent sort of the Reformed to fear
whatever bore the name ^^ Reunion; more especially the Synods rejected all the
Proposals relating to it with scorn. For which Reason, Petit's Protect being by
no means relishd, he never put it to the Press, but ^id aside all his idle
Fancies, and persever'd in the Reformed religion. Milletiere was a man all fume
and vapor, full of himself, and persuaded that nothing came near his Merit and
capacity. Moreover, either out of fear, lest the Court, remembering And
Melitiere.
what had past, should sit upon his Skirts, or in ^^pes to acquire great
Honor, and to raise some great For^^ne by the success of this Enterprise, or
tickled with the Ap^auses which the Jesuits gave him, that they might draw him
^ their Party, they quite debauched him, so that he sided together with the
Cardinal in his Project, and drew up a ^aught of an Accommodation just as the
Cardinal desired it. ^e allowed the Romish Church to be in the right almost in
all ^^ings; and in those which he would not give himself the trou^^e to
justify, he made use of soft and qualified Expressions, under pretense of
explaining 'em, and made 'em pass for questions that were not to hinder the
Reunion of the Reformed.

The different Projects of these two Men clearly displayed Difference in their
intentions.
^^e difference of their Intentions. The one laid down Principles to which the
Church of Rome was far from agreeing, ^^t against which she could not defend
her self, if there were ^ay thing of reality and sincerity in her Treaty of
Reunion: and in that sense it was, that the Affair was almost always taken by
such as through simplicity closed with their Designs. The other granted for a
Tacit Principle, that the Romish Church was in the right, and that there was
nothing else but misunderstanding on the part of the Reformed; and this was the
usual way of those who had this Concord in their eye, that they had more of
worldly Compliance, then honesty or zeal for the Truth. But these attempts
toward a Reunion came to nothing, because Petit did not carry his Overtures far
enough, and for that Miletiere appeared too evidently partial. Besides, he had
the misfortune not to be approved by the Catholics; so that when, after the
Synod of Alenson in 1637. he published his Means to obtain Christian Peace by
the Reunion of the Catholics and Evangelics upon the Differences of Religion;
he was terribly vexed to see that the Sorbonne so ill received it, and censured
it so briskly, as if they had held a correspondence with the Ministers of
Charenton. Yet this was no hindrance, but that he was a long time a charge to
the Churches, in whose Communion he affected to continue, to give the more
credit to his Visions. But John Daille, who began about that time to make
himself known by his Writings, refuted him so briskly from the very original of
these Projects, that poor unfortunate Miletiere became at last the abomination
of the Reformed, and the scorn of all Honest men. So that after several
Admonitions and Warnings to no purpose, the Synods declared him no longer a
Member of the Reformed Churches; no^ was there so much as one that would
receive him into her Communion: So that he was forced to turn Catholic through
necessity, to the end he might be of some Religion. After which he became a
Missionary, and went rambling about in search of Conferences; where he was
still so badly handled as would have put him quite out of courage, but that his
Obstinacy was such as nothing was able to vanquish. But at length Charles
Drelincourt, one of John Daille's Colleagues, and a true Scourge of Humourists,
such as Militiere was, totally routed him in a Conference, the Acts of which
were published. However, this did not happen till several years after the time
that I speak of.

To return then to my Subject, I say, that this Project of Reunion was spun out
a long while, and past through more then Issue of the Project in general.
one hand, because there are some Memoires still extant about the Time of the
Cardinal's Death. The Jesuit Cludebert succeeded the Capuchin, who died in
1638. and greatly boasted of his having gained many Ministers. But a Thing of
that nature remains very doubtful, when it is only attested by men of that
Habit: and what they report upon that Subject may well be thought no more then
a Romance made at Random. But the Cardinal had so much Business, by reason of
the Conspiracy of St. Mars, and was laden with so many corporal Infirmities,
that there is but little likelihood he should perplex his Brains with Designs
of so great Importance. We Will grant in the first place, that he was assured of
Peace with Spain, and that he had an Intention to keep a-foot the Forces that
served at the Siege of Perpignan, to the end they might be quartered up and
down in the Provinces, to reduce by Terror those that would not willingly obey.
Certainly a man would think there should be something too harsh and cruel in
such a design, for a Person that felt the Approaches of Death, and was just
ready to drop into his Grave; Consequently could not promise to enjoy the Fruit
of such a bold Undertaking. The most prudent Authors therefore acknowledge they
knew nothing of it but by Hearsay: and so that it may be thought that if he
did open his Mind to any body upon this Subject, he did it by way of Stratagem,
to make people believe that he felt himself strong enough to live a long time,
since he undertook such great Designs. Thus Tiberius concealed his deadly
Infirmities under the Cruelty of the Orders which he dispatched into all parts;
and made the Terrible Acts of Injustice which he committed, to the destruction
of his Subjects, to be looked upon as Testimonies of his Youth and Vigor.

But before the Cardinal drew so near his end, there had been The truth of this
Project.
Attempts made which the Wisdom and Constancy of several Ministers, and perhaps
the Confusions in the Kingdom rendered fruitless. Nevertheless I must needs say,
that this Project, in the full extent of it, and with all the Circumstances,
was not altogether a Chimera; that if it were not a Whimsey of the Cardinals,
yet it was a Megrim of the Jesuits: that we have seen it set a-foot in our Days
as a Project which the Court of France approved; and that almost every part of
it was put in execution. I may add, that the Illustrious Hugo Grotius went very
far in these Projects of Reunion: He had a strong Fancy for it all his
Lifetime. It appears also by Letters which du Vair, Keeper of the Seals, wrote
to him from before St. Angeli, in 1621. that he had been a great Stickler
before that Time in those Accommodations, and that he labored to bring 'em to
perfection, by giving up the Cause in some Things to the Roman Church, and
excusing her in all the rest. He likewise approved the Essays of Miletiere, and
testified a High Esteem of him and his Works. Some years before his Death, he
applied himself more then ever to this same Christian Concord, and Printed
Consultations, Remarks, Vows, and Discussions, which only served to create
Disputes about the manner of proposing the Peace. But let us now return to our
History.

The Contagious Distempers were no sooner in part abated, A National Synod.
but the Reformed held a National Synod at Charenton, with the King's
Permission, and tho the Brief were dated the 17th of January, the Synod did not
meet till the First of September. Galand also who had bin Commissioner in the
two latter, was likewise Commissioner in this; and he did several Things that
gave an occasion to the Weaker sort to observe that the Synod was not free.

His Speech was honest enough: He gave Assurances in the The Commissioners
Speech.
King's Name, that what was past was forgot, and that for the future they
should have all the liberty granted them for the Exercise of their Religion,
and to hold Synods; provided the Reformed continued in their Duty, devoted to
the King's Service, without speaking against the Public Tranquillity, and that
they refrained from keeping either Foreign or Domestic Intelligence. And he
gave these Assurances as in the Name Of a good Father, and a good King. But as
soon, under pretense, that the preceding Synods had made Regulations to which
the King had not agreed, and which were, as he said, conceived in Terms that
were subject to various Interpretations, he propounded the renewing of 'em, not
forbearing to hint some things that were never hinted before. He declared in
the first place, that the King would no longer admit of Protestations, nor
Remonstrances against the Establishment of the Commissioners that were present
at the Synods; and he alleged that it was Conformable to the Practice of the
Primitive Church, and the Politics of the best Regulated States. In the second
place he required, that no Foreigners should be called to the Ministry within
the Kingdom; because it was the King's Pleasure that those Functions should be
reserved for Natural Frenchmen. He put 'em in hopes, that by having Recourse
to the King's Favor, they might obtain Favor for those who had bin admitted
since the year 1623. But he extended the Prohibition for the future, to all
that were born in Foreign Principalities, Societies, or Republics,
Confederates, or under the Protection of France: and in a word, to all that
were not born in some place within the King's Dominions. In the third place,
That they who should be once admitted Ministers, should never stir out of the
Realm without the King's leave. And because that Salbert, Minister of Ro^, had
withdrawn himself during the Troubles, that he might have the Liberty to Write,
the Commissary declared him Suspended from the Exercise of his Functions:
forbid him to stir out of the Place which the King had allotted him for his
Exilement, or rather for his Prison; and disabl'd the Synod to nominate him in
the Distribution of the Churches. In the fourth place, He renewed the
Regulation which forbid the Ministers from meddling with Politic Affairs.

This Article had a particular Aim against Beraud, Minister Ministers suspected
by the King, excluded from the Synod.
of Montauban, a person of somewhat too violent a Spirit, and who went a little
too fast. During the last Troubles he wrote a Book, wherein not content to
justify the Taking up of Arms, he undertook to maintain, That Ministers had a
Call to bear 'em, and to shed Blood. The Commissioner aggravated the Importance
of that Opinion, dangerous in such a man as Beraud, who besides that he was
qualified as a Minister, was also a Professor in Divinity. He was also the
first that pronounced Sentence upon this Offender, and ordered the Synod to
Censure him. There were also two other men, whom it was the King's Pleasure to
have excluded out of the Synod, tho they were Deputies of their Province. The
one was Bouteroue, Minister of Grenoble, which the Parliament of the Dauphinate
thought worthy of no other Honor then to be committed to the Flames; because
it discoursed a little too freely of the Affairs of the Times* and of the
Lawfulness of taking Arms by the Reformed. The other was Basnage, Minister of
Carentan, who had had to^ great a share in the last Assembly of Rochelle, and
who appear*d in the Synods a very zealous and active Stickler. The Commissioner
having made an end of what he had to say, an Answer was made him to every Thing
that he had propounded* The Answer to the Commissioner's Speech.
In general, the Answer was very submissive; only they reserved to themselves
the liberty of making their Supplications to the King, not to exclude from his
Favor for the future, such as were born within the same Limits with those whom
he was willing to tolerate for the Time past; and to comprehend Salbert in the
Favor granted to all those who had bin involved in the Misfortunes of the
preceding Commotions. When they came to answer the Conditions which Galand had
expressed in his Speech and which were to serve as a Foundation for the
Assurances o^ the King's Good Will; they steadfastly denied that they had ever
spoken Words from which any Offense could be taken, and that were contrary to
the Public Tranquillity; but they complained on the other-side, that in several
Places the Catholics had perverted the Ministers Words, and wrested their most
Innocent Expressions into Criminal Language. As for Beraud, that it was proper
to hear him, before any thing could be said in his Business: He acknwoledg'd
the Book, and averred that he had not Taught any such Doctrine as was laid to
his Charge; and imputed to the Malice of the Time, whatever was taxed for
suspected in it. He said, that there might be some Ambiguous Words in it, but
that he detested the Consequences that bad bin drawn from it. But the
Commissioner would not let this pass for an Excuse, and convinced Beraud to
have expressly written in the Preface of his Book the very Things of which he
was accused. So that he was very smartly censured by the Synod, who stigmatized
the Expressions of his Book with the Appellation of Scandalous Terms, which he
had made use of to an ^^^ purpose. This Doctrine was condemned, and the
Ministers were forbid to teach it. In the mean time, Beraud continued excluded
from the Synod; and before he could be readmitted, he was forced to undergo a
new Censure from the Commissioner's Mouth.

But this was not all that Galand did in the Synod. He would The Commissioner
in vain opposes the Union of the Churches of Bearn, with the rest.
needs oppose the Union of Bearn with the rest of the Provinces. The Pretense
was, that it had bin hitherto displeasing to the Court; that it had bin
tolerated only for the Doctrine, and not for the Discipline; That the Clause of
the Regulations that only seemed to hinder it, till Bearn was united to the
Crown, did not authorize the admission of it after the Reunion, without asking
the King's leave. He insisted upon the Laws of Queen J^ne, which forbid the
removing the Causes of the Inhabitants out of the Country; and alleged the
Example of Sedan and Metz, where the Ecclesiastical Affairs were determined in
the ^ame Country. But the Deputies of Bearn wanted no Replies to overthrow
these Reasons; and the Reunion of their Country to the Crown, served 'em as a
potent Argument to make it out, that since they were accounted Members of the
Nation, they had a Right to require that their Causes might be adjudg'd in the
Synod of the Nation: that their Condition was not the same with Metz and Sedan,
which were only under the protection of the Crown, and far from being reunited.
They farther alleged, that the Laws of their Country were no way opposite to
'em; for that having their Synods and their Consistories within themselves,
there remained only some particular Affairs of the Pastors, that could be
removed to the National Synods. These Reasons, and some others, being seconded
by the inclination of the Synod, prevailed so far, that the Ber^^^^ got the
better of the Commissioner; and that the Union was made upon certain
Conditions. And the Synod, to the end they might be the less exposed to
Reproaches, for having done too much in judging this Affair, looked upon it as
prejudged by the usual presence of the Deputies of Bearn in the other
Assemblies, since the King had also sent Commissioners thither: more especially
for that the King had received their Complaints in the same Paper with those of
the rest of the Churches. So that the Synod could not properly be said to make
the Union of that Province with the rest, but judged it to have bin already
made; and for that they had presupposed that the Reasons of the Obstruction
ceasing, the King would no longer be displeased with it.

But Galand insisted farther, That there were several Articles Several
Proposals of the Commissioner.
that concerned the Discipline and Practice of the Churches to be reformed.
There were some that concerned the proclaiming of such as had changed their
Religion, which was wont to be done publicly: and others touching the
Registring of Christnings and Marriage: several upon the particular subject of
Marriages; upon the Censure of Books; upon the Censure of Unlicenc'd Books, of
which number the King had sent 'em several to be condemned: upon the laying out
of the Royal Money; upon Precedences in Churches; and the Prayers which were to
be made for the Lords of the Manor, or such in whose Houses the Churches
assembled. He was willing they should pray in general for the Lords of the
Religion, but not make any particular mention of the Lords of the Soil. He
proposed also, That for the future, they should hold no more National Synods in
any other place then at Charenton: and this was a Trifle which the Catholics
laid so deeply to heart, that tho the preceding Synod had granted to the
Province of Normandy the power to summon this, the Court would not grant it for
no other place then Charenton. He demanded also* That la Bastide, Minister of
St. Afrique, might be removed from that Church, and out of the Province of
Upper Languedoc, for some Actions for which he had bin imprisoned, and
afterward indicted. But more especially he propounded, That no other persons
but the Elders should be called to give their Advice in the Consistories;
because Assemblies and Meetings of Masters of Families, fortified Consistories,
and other Councils of the like nature, created Suspicions and Jealousies. On
the other side the Reformed gave him satisfaction in several things, because it
was no longer in their power to refuse him any thing: but they defended their
practice of praying for the Lords of the places where they assembled; and
Galand was obliged by dint of Remonstrance, to write to the King for leave to
strengthen the Consistories, when necessity required it, with three Ministers
and three Elders out of the Neighborhood.

In the mean time the Synod sent Deputies to the King to The Synod s^nds
Deputies to the King. Papers.
carry him their Submissions, and a Paper of fifteen Articles, which set forth,
That since the Reformed had neither any General to lead 'em, nor any strong
Holds, Acts of Injustice and Oppression were every day multiplied upon 'em.
After they had returned their most humble Thanks to the King for the marks of
his Favor, and a Supplication that such Edicts as he thought convenient to
number among the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom might be observed, they
desired the re-establishment of those Churches where free Exercise had been
interrupted: and by the Article it appeared, that there were three ^orts of
Interruption which deprived the Reformed of their Churches. The one was
somewhat remote, and was occasioned by the Hostilities which had enforced the
Inhabitants to quit some certain places during the War; and where the Catholic
Zeal would not suffer *em to meet again during the Peace. The other proceeded
from the desolation of the places which the Catholic Armies had ruined: and the
third derived itself from the Decrees which the Bishop of Valence had procured
upon occasion of the Annexes. For beside those which he had obtained the year
before, he had caused another to be issued forth, of the second of May,
wherein, to obviate the Reason why the Reformed pretended to fix themselves in
the possession of their Annexes, by alleging that they were places permitted,
the right of which being grounded upon the Articles of the Edict, had extended
the prohibition of one Minister to preach in several places, to places
permitted. For these several Reasons, without naming the places where their
Exercise had been obstructed in other Provinces, they set down Fourscore and
twelve in Cevennes, Vivarets, the Upper and Lower Languedoc, and in the Islands
of Re and Oleron. The fifth required the Revocation of the Decrees granted to
the Bishop of Valence. The sixth complain*d of the Prosecutions of some
Ministers, accused to have uttered words both disrespectful and undutiful, tho
they had only preached their own Doctrine with moderation. The next set forth
the delays of the Governors in the nomination of Commissioners that were to be
present at the Synods, which had reduced some Provinces to be without
Assemblies of that nature. The eighth and ninth insisted upon Foreign
Ministers. The tenth desired that the Prohibitions of Beraud, Bagnage and
B^teroue to sit in the Synod, might be taken off. The 'leventh concerned the
grand Article of the Edict, which declares the Reformed capable of all manner
of Employments; and complained, that it was so ill observed, that the Reformed
were not admitted into the meanest and lowest Offices; that they were refused
the Degree of Doctors of Physic, and the Title of Aggregated, where
Accumulation was customary; and that they were refused their Freedoms in the
meanest Trades. The twelfth demanded the Release of such as had bin condemned
to the Galleys, according to the Edict of Peace; of which number there were
above Two hundred. The thirteenth demanded restitution of the municipal Tolls
which had bin promised in 1628. as also by the Paper answered at Montauban the
next year: which had not prevented the Revocation of the Assignations allowed
for the year 1627. nor their failing to allow any for the three next years; so
that there was due for the time past the Sum of Six hundred thousand Livres.
The Compensation promised the Bernois after so solemn a manner, had bin as
faithlesly observed as the rest of the Edicts. The one moiety of it was of a
sudden defalk'd; so that the fourteenth Article required that care might be
taken about it. We might add to the same Article the hard Usage of the
Ministers of the Bailliage of Gex, who had bin deprived for a long time of the
King's Reliefmoney, which had bin granted 'em in recompense for the
Ecclesiastic Estates. Not that either Bearn, or the Country of Gex had any
share in the last Civil Wars; but only in testimony of a more perfect good will
to the Reformed, they that lived peaceably, and that they were called Rebels,
were treated both alike. Lastly, the fifteenth Article contained an humble
Request, That the Court would command the Advocate General of Bourdeaux to
surcease prosecuting a Minister and his Son, whose Cause was nevertheless
depending in the Chamber of Guyenne, which was then at Again, whither it had bin
removed.

The Deputies that carried this Paper, and the Letters from The favorable
Reception of the Deputies.
the Synod, to the King and the Cardinal, were Amyrant and ^^llars. The King
gave 'em leave to make their Speech to him at Monceaux, and testified by his
Answer, that he was well satisfied with them and the Synod. They were likewise
well received by the Cardinal, who assured 'em that the King would maintain and
protect 'em according to his Edicts: that he gave Beraud and Basnage leave to
sit in the Synod; but that before he granted the same Favor to Bouteroue,
'twas fit the King should be more amply informed of the Crime that was laid to
his charge: that the King would give a very favorable Answer to their Paper,
so soon as the Synod brake up. To the end, said he, that he might treat with
his Subjects in a manner more suitable to his Sovereign Dignity, and the Sacred
Authority of his Word: But the more edifying and solid part of his Answer was a
Gift of Sixteen thousand Livres in ready money, to defray the Expenses of the
Synod. All which the Commissioner imparted to the Synod, before the return of
the Deputies. Beraud resumed his Seat in the Assembly: soon after Basnage took
his again, and at length Bouteroue had leave to sit there as well as the rest.

For five years together there had not bin any alteration of the The Nomination
of General Deputies.
General Deputies: and during that time Bazin, who was one of those that were
employed, happened to die. The Synod therefore had Orders to supply his place,
but they were not left to their accustomed liberty of Nomination. 'Twas the
King's pleasure till then, that six Persons should be nominated for him to
choose two out of that number; and the circumstances of the Permission given the
Synod to name 'em, pointed so exactly to the Persons which it behooved 'em to
nominate, that it was to little purpose to make choice of any other. The Synod
well observed this Innovation, but because it was the King's pleasure, they
obeyed. The Marquis of Clermont was continued, and the Commissioner's Son was
put into Bazin's room. These were ordered to carry the Nomination made by the
Synod, accompanied with Letters full of Duty and Respect. To which the King
made known his Answer by the Commissioner; which consisted of a testimony, that
he was more and more satisfi*d with the Proceeding of the Assembly, and the
Nomination they had made: that he would accept of 'em after the Synod was
broken up; that he would give a Gracious Answer to their Paper, and he would
allow the Synod three days longer to sit.

They were so accustomed at Court to be afraid of the Reformed, The Reformed
feared at Court.
that they seldom slept in quiet, while they were assembled; and their very
Synods gave 'em terrible Alarum^* This, which was only composed of People still
consternated at the taking of Rochel, and the reducing of all the rest of their
Towns and Cities, disquieted their rest for all that: and the Catholics,
dreaded by the Progresses which Gustavus made in Germany, fancied him already
in France, and restoring by main Force the Reformed to their pristine Splendour;
which was the Reason that the King as earnestly pressed the separation of the
Synod, as if it had bin the Politic Assembly of Lo^dun, or that of Rochel.
Nevertheless, before they broke up, the Synod ordained three things, which gave
the Missionaries and Politicians fair Pretenses to make loud Outcries. The
first was a Regulation against the Accommodations of Religion, which referred
to an ^mportant Resolutions of the Synod.
Act of the same nature that passed in the National Synod of Mompelier 1598.
where all such kind of Projects were co^demn'd with extraordinary Severity. The
second was the Appointment of a Solemn Fast throughout all the Kingdom, which
the Catholic took for a Proof that the Reformed were in hopes of being
reestablished by the Arms of Gustavus: for which Reason, said they, those
People endeavored to engage Heaven on their side, by Devotions more then
ordinary. The third was a Declaration which the Synod made, that the Lutherans
who desired it might be admitted to the Communion; that the ^eformed might
contract Marriages with 'em, and take 'em for ^fathers, provided they would
instruct their Children only (...) those things, wherein the Lutherans and
Reformed both agree. The Missionaries believed all obstacles of Reunion with ^e
R^mish Church removed by this Declaration: for that they ^ald not conceive why
the Reformed should have any more ^epugnance against the Transubstantiation of
the Catholics, ^n against the Impanation and Ubiquity of the Lutherans; ^ore
especially since the Synod acknowledged, that tho there ^ere Error in the
Lutheran Doctrine, yet there was no Venom; ^^d that there was no Idolatry in
their Worship. The Politicians believed it to be an Artifice of the Synod's
Prudence, by his compliance with the Doctrine of his Ministers, to insinuate
themselves into Gustavus's Favor.

But notwithstanding all this, the Reformed were oppressed Annexes.
with several Acts of Injustice, almost over all the Provinces: ^o^ besides the
accustomed Cavils about the Rights of Exercise and Churchyards, the Decrees
obtained by the Bishop of Va^^n^^, almost Dispeopl'd whole Provinces. Nothing
was to be ^en but Churches shut up, and Ministers Imprisoned, for not ^aving
obey*d the Prohibitions against Preaching in more then ^e Place. The Minister
of Chatillon, a paltry Place in the ^phinate, served himself nine or ten other
Churches besides that; if we may believe the Substance of the last Decree
obtained by that Prelate: Nor was it impossible, because the ^reatest part of
those Annexes were particular Houses where (...) Gentry would have Preaching in
their Families; and where ^here were but few others besides their own
Domestics. Many ^mes also this Exercise was not common, it may be not above ^e
a Month, or once in three Months, in consideration of some Donative given upon
that Condition to the Principal Church. In the mean time, the rest of the
Bishops would ^eeds appear no less Zealous then the Prelate of Valence: So that
every one sought to ruin the Churches in his Diocese. This procur*d a Decree of
Council of the same nature, dated June 6. against Rivet, and other Ministers of
Saintonge, at the Request of the Bishop of Saints: Where a new Cavil was set
a-foot about the Place of Exercises; and if they could not dispense with
resettling 'em in Places, where the Proofs were too clear to be contested, yet
they would not restore 'em without paring off something from the Real Right
that belonged to 'em; and removing 'em out of the middle of the City where the
Church had always stood to the dirty Fag-end of some Suburb.

The Exercise was likewise forbid at Rioux in Saintonge, by Exercise forbid.
a Decree of the Sixth of March: The Clergy of the Province were Plaintiffs in
this Process, and there was a Question annexed to it concerning the Possession
of the Churchyard, which they pretended was to be left to the Catholics,
because there was above Eight hundred of them in the Parish, and not above
Twenty of the Reformed. But they never said a word that the Congregation, for
all that, was very numerous, as being much frequented by the Reformed
Inhabitants of the Parishes adjoining. However, the Church had strong and
sufficient Proofs of the Possession of it for above Eight years before the
Edict: But for all that, they were deprived both of their Exercise and their
Churchyard, leaving only another small Place for their Burials at the Charges
of the Corporation. And indeed the Poverty of the Churches was such as obliged
some Religious persons to bestow Donatives and Legacies to prevent the loss of
Legal Right. But the Catholics greedy of the Profits, and moreover minding
nothing but to hasten the Ruin of the Churches, commenced tedious Suits upon
these Donations, and sought a thousand Quirks and Pretenses in Terms and
Circumstances to bring the Cause about on their side. Many times also the Heirs
of the Donors opposed the Effect of the Will, and gave the Catholics an
Opportunity to apply the Profits to themselves. Thus Elias Alardin gave this
year an Annual Rent of Two hundred Livres toward the Maintenance of the
Minister, and Three hundred Livres to the Poor. But this Donation proved the
Original Occasion of a Suit that lasted above Fifty Years: and which was
adjudg'd to the Advantage of the Church not above three years before the
Revocation of the Edict; by that one single Act of Justice to cover and
palliate a thousand others much more crying that were committed over the rest
of the Kingdom.

The Promises of giving a Gracious Answer to the Paper, so Consulships.
^on as the Synod brake up, were so soon forgot, that upon the ^th of October,
the King set forth a Declaration, purporting, ^at in all Places where there
were but Four Consuls, the ^st and Third should be Catholics, if there were no
Capitu^ion to the contrary. The Design of which Declaration ^s to exclude the
Reformed from being admitted into the ^tes of Languedoc, whither the Cities
sent none but their first ^nsul Thus the Reformed were excluded from meddling
^th the Municipal Government of their Cities, and deprived ^ all the Honors
that were annexed to the first Consulship. ^t in regard that many times the
first Consul scorned that Em^yment, or was not capable of it, the most
Honorable Fun^ons were then exercised by the second, who was generally a ^an
of Learning and bred up to Business. And for the Clause ^at mentioned contrary
Capitulation, 'twas a mere piece of ^aud: For it was not meant thereby, that if
there were any such ^ause which gave the First Consulship to the Reformed, he
^as therefore bound to hold it: but if there were any such ^ause as took from
the Reformed the whole Consulship, they ^ere bound to rest contented. 'Twas
sufficient for a City that ^d Surrendered at Discretion, if an Order came from
the Duke ^ M^^morenci, or some other Chieftain of the Royal Arms; for a City
that had not expressly Articl'd that there should be ^ Alteration in the
Consulship, to say, that there was a Capi^lation to the contrary. Lunel and
Bedarieux for these Rea^ns lost their share in the Consulship which remain'e
entire to ^e Catholics.

But the Reformed were not the only Persons who com^ain'd The Pu^ Liberty oppr^.
of Oppression: For the Cardnial carried his Authority in ^e Government so
high, that all the Kingdom groaned under (...) New and uneasy Yoke. The
Catholics could not forbear ^urmuring, to see the Liberty of the Kingdom die
together ^th the Pride of Rochel; and they who were blinded by a false ^eql for
Religion, well perceived that the Power of the Reformed had only served for an
Obstacle to delay the Public S^vi^ude. The Sovereign Courts were treated with
unheard. (...) Scorn and lofty Disdain. The Court of Aides refused to veri^
certain Edicts that burdened the State with new Imposition^ and being informed
that the Edicts were just ready to be broug^ to 'em while the Court was
sitting, they would not stay (...) 'em, but rose immediately. For the
punishment of which presumption the Court was interdicted, and other Judges
(...) up in the room of those that had been so hardy, to judge of the^ Power.
They continued in this Condition for some Months nor could they be restored
till they had most servilely submitte^ themselves. Nor was the Parliament any
better used. For aft^ the Queenmother and the Duke of Orleance were withdraw^
the King sent a Declaration to the Parliament against the Prin^ and his
Adherents. But that same Senate, instead of verifyin^ the Declaration, divided,
and ordered Remonstrances. The King to punish this piece of Malapertness, sent
an Order to the Members to come a-foot to the Loure, not by their Deputi^ but
in a Body, and to bring the Registers along with 'em Which being done, the
whole Assembly, as August as the styled themselves, were enforced upon their
Knees to hear ^ tedious and mortifying Censure, which reduced all their Pow^
only to the enregistring and publishing all Declarations tha^ were sent 'em,
without any hesitation. The Keeper of the S^tore before their faces the Decree
for dividing the House, an^ the Parliament had the hard Fortune to hear a Decree
pronounced, which either exiled or suspended from their Employments some of the
most considerable of their Members.

It was not to be wondered that such unheard of Proceeding 1632.
should provoke the Spirits of the People to take Arms. The Civil War of the
Duke of Orleans.
Duke of Orleans therefore being returned into France, was (...) joined by a
numerous Body of Malcontents, and in a sma^ time beheld all Languedoc at his
devotion; and they who ha^ The Bishops of Languedoc side with him.
bin the most fierce Persecutors of the Reformed, threw themselves into this
New Party. Lestranges, Lord of Privas, side^ with the Duke, and perished in the
Cause. The Bishops ^ ^lbi, Vsez, Nimes, Alets, St. Pons and Lodeve joined with
the Duke of Mommorenci. The Bishiop of Leon also was accused to have had a
share in this War, and could not obtain his Pardon ^ill after the King's Death.
On the other side, the Reformed The Reformed faithful.
served the King with extraordinary Courage. The Second Consul of Nimes
preserved that City for the King, and ex^ell'd the Bishops and the First
Consul, who favored the Duke ^f Orleans. Montaubon sent her Deputies as far as
Monceaux, ^o assure the King of the Fidelity of the Inhabitants, who of^er'd to
march a League out of their City to meet the Duke, and ^ight his men if they
approached near their Quarters. The Duke ^f Espernon also had so much
confidence in 'em, that he made ^o scruple to enter the Town, tho much inferior
in strength, and to commit himself to the mercy of a People whom he had ^o
rudely handled in time of War. Marion, Camp-Assistant on the King's side, made
himself Master of Privas, which had ^in abandoned since it was taken, and
recalled the Inhabitants who served him successfully, and defended the Town for
the King against their own Lord. One would have thought that such an Action
should have cancelled the Memory of what was passed: and indeed those poor
Creatures were suffered to resettle themselves without any notice taken of it.
But Thirty years after, they were made to understand, by Cruel Persecutions,
that past Offenses are never to be expiated by succeeding Services; and that by
a Maxim quite opposite to the Rule of the Almighty, Transgressions are longer
retained in the Memories of Princes, then Good Services.

The Bishops of Albi and Nimes were degraded by reason of their Rebellion; and
the Bishop of Vsez, dying in the midst of the Process, avoided the Disgrace.
The rest were no less guilty, but perhaps might have better Recommendations;
and their Acquittal cost 'em no more then a little agony of Fear. However, the
Process commenced against Bishops for High Treason made so loud a noise, that
the Reformed could not forbear triumphing, and to reproach 'em with their
Principal Members tumbling into Rebellion, which till then, was looked upon to
be the only Portion and Character of Heresy. The Ministers looked upon it as a
piece of Divine Vengeance that the Bishops, who had so often accused 'em of
breathing nothing but Rebellion, should so openly precipitate themselves into
the Sin of Rebellion, that the veneration due to their Character could not
exempt 'em from Punishment. But to mortify these Triumphers, they thought it
expedient to put to death Marets, the Minister of Alets, as if he had had a
hand in the Insurrection. Nevertheless, all his Crime was only this* That all
the People of the City siding either with the Lord or with the Bishop, he was
not so fortunate as to hinder the City from joining with the Malcontents;
though he himself sat still without so much as meddling on either side. Thu^
was one Innocent Minister offered up to atone for the Transgression of several
Prelates, and the Minister of Alets paid for the Bishop. Couran, another
Minister of the same Church* was only banished. The City of Lunel, the Governor
o^ which was the Bishop of Nimes's Brother, was inveagl'd into the Duke of
Orleans's Party; and Scoffier Minister of the Place, was set down in the
Catalogue of those that were to be sacrificed. But after the defeat and taking
of the Duke o^ Mommorenci, he gave the Governor of Aiguemortes notice of the
Flight of the Bishop and his Brother, which was well taken (...) and that Mark
of his Affection for the King's Service, saved his life.

The Duke of Rohan was recalled to Court upon occasion of The Duke of Rohan
serves the King in Italy.
these Troubles; and honored with several Employments; whether it were to find
him business that might hinder him from seeking for any in these Confusions; or
whether it were to take him by the point of Honor, and engage him in the
King's Service by that Mark of Confidence. But this War being suddenly ended by
the taking and death of Marshal de Mommorenci, served only to advance the
King's Authority, and disgust the Duke of Orleans, who retired out of France a
second time; as also to add some new access of weight to the Slavery of the
People. The Reformed reapt this little advantage by it, That they had but few
Injuries done 'em this year, and continued somewhat free from Molestations.
Only the Ministers in the Dauphinate were still tormented because they preached
in more then one place. But upon a Petition which they presented to the King,
they obtained a Decree which sent 'em Affairs of the Annexes in the Dauphinate
referred to four Commissioners. Consulship of Alets.
to four Commissioners of the Parliament of Grenoble, who were ordered to take
their Informations, and after that to give their Advice to the King. These
Commissioners enlarged some Ministers, and sent 'em to the King for the
interpretation of the Decrees of his Council; so that they were forced to tarry
some years before the business was decided. The Consulships also gave some
occasion for Innovation. Machaut, the Intendant, ordered that the Consulship of
Alets should be alternative under the good pleasure of the King, and till he
should otherwise ordain. But the Reformed who found this Sentence extremely
opposite to their Ancient Customs, appealed to the Council, where the Question
hung for twenty years undecided. Upon Exercise forbid.
a Process commenced against the Reformed of Mountaign, touching the right of
Exercise, and building a Church, Bignon, Advocate General, procured a Decree
which deprived the Reformed both of the one and the other. He laid down those
things for a foundation of his Conclusions, which if he could have got 'em to
have passed current, the Reformed must have A shameful Cavil.
lost the three fourth parts of their Churches. First, He affirmed that the
Reformed had no right to any Church, but in places of Bailliage settled by the
Commissioners; and he supported this Assertion by the Decrees set forth in
1562. and 1577. which by consequence had bin revoked by the Edict of Nantes.
Moreover, he would needs have it, that the permission of the Lord, which was
produced by the Inhabitants, should be looked upon as extorted; because it was
not to be presumed that a Catholic Lord would permit the establishment of a
Religious Exercise that was contrary to his own. This was well found out to
destroy all those Places where the Reformed Exercise was performed in Catholic
Proprieties. Had the Church produced the most solid Proofs in the world of
their Possession, and failed of the Lord's permission, it would have bin urged,
that that very defect had disannulled all the rest; and if they produced the
Lord's leave, then they cried it must have bin extorted. But at last he
pretended that the Place belonged to an Ecclesiastic Lord; and so the Reformed,
who produced Evidences since 1558. could not reap the benefit of a Possession
near fourscore years. This was no more then positively to say, That whatever
Title the Reformed could produce, 'twas impossible for 'em to have any Justice
done 'em.

There happened at the beginning of this year an Accident An inconsiderate
Curiosity of two Scholars.
altogether singular; the Circumstances of which were so remarkable, as not to
be omitted in this History. Two Scholars of the Academy of Saumur took a fancy
to be present at the Mass, which the Catholics call Midnight-Mass, because it
is said upon Christmas Day in the Morning, presently after Midnight Bell has
rung. Many times a silly Curiosity carries young People to be Spectators of
these fine Shows, because a prodigious Concourse of all sorts generally crowds
to gape upon this Solemnity, as expecting something extraordinary. But what was
more, these young Hair-brains presented themselves before the Altar, as if they
intended to receive the Communion; but upon their taking the Symbols into their
hands not with that reverence as they ought to have done, they were known for
what they were, apprehended and indicted; but for fear of depriving the City of
the benefit which they reaped by the Academy, condemned to very easy Penalties.
There was an Appeal from this Sentence. But the Chamber of the Edict of Paris
surcharging the Sentence of the former Condemnation, ordered by a Decree of the
17th of February, That the Scholars should declare and acknowledge at Saumur
within the ordinary Jurisdiction of the Seneschalship, in a full Court, upon
their Knees, and bareheaded, That they had rashly gone upon Christmas Day in
the Morning to Midnight-Mass, and that they had indiscreetly received the
Sacrament of the Altar: That they should beg pardon of God, the King and
Justice; that they should be banished out of the City and Provostship of Paris
for three years, and out of the Seneschalship of Namur for ever; that they
should be fined twelve hundred Livres to the King; of which two hundred should
be laid out in Bread for the Prisoners in the Palace Jaile; two hundred for the
purchase of a Silver Lamp, to be hung before the place where the Sacrament of
that Church was deposited; and the remainder for the setting up a Copperplate,
whereon the Decree should be engraved, and for settling (...) Fund for the
furnishing that Lamp with Oil to perpetuity. The Decree also enjoined the
Scholars to obey their Proscription exactly, and forbid 'em relapsing into the
same Transgressions again upon pain of death; sent 'em to the Judges of Saumur,
who were to see the Sentence duly executed, and to detain 'em in Prison till
payment of the Fine. Which last Clause was without question added to oblige the
Parents or Relations of those Young men, to pay the said Fine as a Ransom for
their Release. However, they refrained in the Decree from the words Amend, and
Amend Honorable: so that had it not bin for the Fine, a man might have said
that it had bin a Consistory which condemned those young Fops to a public
Reparation for an Offense that deserved it according to the Discipline of the
Reformed: They had not then well studi'd the Privileges of the Roman Religion.
In these latter years they would have adjudg'd it, that those Scholars by that
Act had embraced the Roman Religion, and the Church and the Academy both, would
have bin interdicted.

But the death of Gustavus this year delivered the Sea of Rome The Death of
Gustavus.
from the fear of his Arms. But in regard the Generals that succeeded him
preserved the Advantages they had won, it no way 1633.
cured the Wounds which the House of Austria had received; and France, who
found the convenience of an Alliance with Sueden, made a new Treaty with
Christina, Gustavus's Heiress. Moreover, the Cardinal had much business both at
home and abroad, and so much ado to guard himself from Conspiracies against his
life, that he had not time to think of the Protestants. Never Great Troubles in
the Kingdom.
were known within the compass of one year, so many Changes of Officers at
Court, in the Armies, in the Governments of Towns and Provinces, then were seen
this year. The Reformed made no figure; but for all that, the whole Kingdom was
full of Factions and Cabals. So that these Commotions which could not be
imputed to Heresy, sufficiently justified the Religion upon whose Shoulders
they would have thrown the Occasions and Causes of all the last Wars; and no
less truly the^ apparently fixed the Accusation upon the Wickedness and
Infidelity of the Government. It seemed but reasonable, that the Reformed
should be excused, who had only taken Arms for their Liberty, when the Catholic
Lords, Princes and People had recourse to the same means, for the preservation
of their Privileges and their Dignities.

In the mean time the Presidents Friar and Perissol, and the Advice of the
Commissioners of the Dauphinate upon the Annexes.
Counselors Basset and Calignon, appointed Commissioners by the King in the
Parliament of the Dauphinate to examine the Affair of the Annexes, pli^d the
Commission close, and drew up their Opinions, which they sent to the King the
Seventh of May. They asserted that there were several Places within the
Province where the Exercise was permitted, which were served by one of the same
Ministers; and this they thought could not be prevented, because the Articles
of the Edict upon which the Right and Privilege of Exercise was founded, did
not confi^e 'em to the place of the Ministers Residence, no more then the
Memoirs sent by the King to the Commissioners who looked after the execution of
the Edict. But they presupposed, that under the Pretenses of Marriage, Baptism,
or some other Occasion, the Ministers took the liberty of preaching in places
where they had no right; and that might happen out of a respect which the
Ministers had for the Gentlemen, whose Houses were not precisely qualified for
the settlement of a Right of Exercise. The Commissioners pretended that they
had provided against that Abuse; and advised the King to forbid the Ministers,
and all the rest of the Reformed, under the Penalties of the Edicts. This
Advice was followed in Council, and produced a Decree of the 26th of September,
which copi'd it out almost word for word; which for some time gave some respit
to the Persecutions begun by the Bishop of of Valence.

One thing happened this year which afforded not a little Consolation
Re-establishment of Privas.
to the Reformed. For the Receiver of the Taxes of Vivaretz presented a
Petition to the Council that he might be discharged, because he could not raise
the Money which was laid out upon his Division. Now the principal ground of
this Petition was the ruin of Privas, the Inhabitants of which Town, durst not
venture as yet, either to build their Houses, ^^r to till their Lands, because
they were not yet allowed by Authority to resettle themselves in opposition to
the Rigorous Terms of the Act or Edict of 1629. The Council by (...) Decree of
the 15th of February, referred the Receiver to Mi^n, Intendant of Languedoc,
for his Advice. And Miron's Ad^ice was, To moderate the Severity of the Edict,
and to ^ermit that the Inhabitants of Privas might return to their Habitations,
and resettle themselves in the City; and withal ^o leave the Offices of the
City free without distinction of Religion. He also accompanied his Advice with
good Reasons, of which the chiefest were, That all the Rebels were ^ead, or had
made amends for their Offense; that the greatest part of 'em were slain at the
taking of the City; that a good ^any were dead of the Pestilence that raged for
three years together; that those few that remained had faithfully served ^he
King, and ventured their Lives in his Service against the Lord of the Place;
that the Wives and Children both of the ^ne and the other had suffered enough
to expiate both their Husbands and their Parents Crimes; that the Lord of the
place had bin the only hindrance that obstructed those poor People from
resetling themselves, and that there was no like^ood of finding Catholics anow
elsewhere to repeople the City. The Council was moved with these Reasons, and
Mi^'s Advice was followed and put in execution. But in regard ^ere was nothing
so much preached up at that time as the Con^ncy of the Royal Word, which they
would have had to be ^he Subjects only security, they forgot to be so punctual
as ^hey ought to have bin, in demanding the Revocation of the last ^dict in due
Form: and so the Children were punished in our ^ays for the over-confidence of
their Fathers. They had done ^etter, had they followed the Politic Maxim of the
Cardinal himself, who, to oblige the Duke of Lorrain to give him some assured
Pledge of his Word, told him, He must have other Security then the Word of a
Prince, who was guided by Infusions from without, and had already broken his
Promise. And indeed the King was incensed against the Reformed by so many sorts
of People, and there was so little reliance on the Promises that had been made
in his Name, till the Present time, that it would have bin more proper to have
demanded o^ him verified Letters* Patents for the Security of this
Reestablishment.

But the Ministers of Paris were not so favorably used, by Treatise, intitl'd,
The Eucharist of the Ancient Church.
reason of a certain Book that was published under this Title The Eucharist of
the Ancient Church. This Book was writter by one Aubertin; and he had the
Approbation of his thre^ Colleagues, Mestrezat, Drelincourt and Daille. They
assumed the Quality of Pastors of the Reformed Church, and of Ministers of the
Gospel. Aubertin also, who dedicates his Book t^ his Flock, called 'em the
Faithful of the Reformed Church of Paris Bellarmin and Baronius were styled, as
well in the Title as i^ other Places, Enemies of the Church. Now the Clergy's
Agent bethought themselves of a short way to confute this Boo^ which made a
great noise. For instead of answering the Book, they endited the Author and his
Approvers; and letting alone the Matters of Fact and Reasons, they attack'^ the
Titles of the Book and the Preface, and the Terms (...) the Allowance. Against
Aubertin there was a Warrant give^ out to seize his Body by a Decree of the
Privy Council, date^ July the 14th, importing, That if he could not be taken,
that he should be cited to appear within three short days; and the Approvers
were summoned to make their personal appearance. The Affair made a great noise,
but came to little, being as it were stifled in the birth, and producing for
this time no other the^ verbal Prohibitions. The Book was no longer sought
after so that the Success encouraged the Author to review, enlarg^ and handle
the Matter from the bottom in a Thick Latin Volume, which was never printed
till after his death; nor du^ any of the Impartial Catholic Doctors venture to
refute (...) closely and roundly.

But the Reformed were constrained to look on, and see the Exercises forbid.
Rights of their Exercises violated in more then one place the Year. The
Council took from 'em Saujon, by a Decree of the 18th of November, because the
Lord of the place was a Catholic. Citois, Seneschal of Richlieu, which the King
had erected into a Duchy and Peerdom in favor of the Cardinal, for the same
reason obstructed the exercise at St. Gelin, which is a De^esne that holds of
the said Duchy. And the Cardinal, tho at the bottom he were not so nice as
others in those things, countenanced and approved what his Officer had done.
The Parti^-Colledges.
Colleges also which they of the Religion h^d enjoyed in places of which they
had bin a long time Masters, were miparty'd this Year by a Decree of the
Council of the 23d of July. The occasion of this Decree, was a dividing of
Voices which happened at Castres, upon a Petition of the Catholics of several
Cities, who pretended to make the Edict of 1631, ^or miparty'd Consulships, a
President for the Colleges. The Decree of the Council decided the division of
Voices (...) their Favor, and authorized the Argument they alldg'd.

But the following Year was not so serene nor peaceful for 1634.
^he Reformed: For tho the Cardinal, in a flattering Speech The Continuance of
the Public Oppression.
which he made the King, seated upon this Throne of Justice ^he 8th of January,
acknowledged that Heresy had not bin the ^le Rebel in his Kingdom, yet hardly
any but the Reformed suffered this Year. It Is true, that the King of his mere
Au^hority, without examining their Deeds and Evidences, can^ell d the
Privileges and Exemptions of several Cities that were not liable to the
Vexations of Taxes. The Pretense was specious; for it seemed as if the King had
not used 'em so severely, but to throw upon 'em some part of the charge with
which the others were over-burden'd. But in regard that in process of time it
was apparent, that tho these Cities were made liable to Taxes, and yet the rest
were no way eased, 'twas ^ound that this same change proceeded from no other
design ^hen to reduce the whole Kingdom to a Uniformity, and involve the entire
Body in the same Servitude. As for the Reformed, they were molested for other
Reasons. There was something of Policy intermixed with the Vexations that befell
them. Nevertheless they were never a whit the less real nor incommodious. A
Doctor of the Sorbonne, and a Divine of Lion, printed Pretensions of France to
all Europe.
a Book at Paris, wherein he maintained that the King of France had a Right to
all Europe, and that he did well to make Alliances with the Protestant Princes,
to recover the Usurpations of the House of Austria; which was openly to publish
the Cardinal's Designs. The Spaniards were willing to make the be^ of this
opportunity, to revive the dejected Courage of the zealous Catholics in their
Favor. Thereupon a certain Autho^ who assumed the name of Alexander Patricius
Armacanus, wrot^ Answered.
in their behalf against the Doctor of the Sorbonne. He made it ou^ at large,
That the Alliance of the King of France with Protestants, was contrary to the
Interests of the Catholic Religion because the War with the United Provinces
and that of Germany, were Wars for the sake of Religion. He made use of a^ that
had bin said for the Justice of his Arms, against the King and showed that the
House of Austria was under the same Circumstances in respect of the United
Provinces and Germany. He strenuously made it out, That the King chiefly
employed the Heads of the Reformed for the Conduct of his Armies; (...) that he
then had given the Command of 'em to the Dukes (...) Rohan and Bouillon, and
the Marshals de la Force and Ch^^^lon. I know not how he forgot that he had
bestowed a Marshal's Battoon upon one of the Reformed. Perhaps it might be
after the Author had published his Book. However, the The Duke of Sulli made a
Marshal of France.
Duke of Sulli received that Honor this Year in the Month of September; which
was done, to make him amends for the Employments which the Queenmother had
taken from him: (...) Recompense which he had staid for above twenty Years.
However, he lived seven Years afterward, and in his latter day^ showed some
more marks of Piety then he had done all the re^^ of his life. He had bin
always seen present at the Sermon^ preached in his House, but after a very
indecent manner: for (...) was generally playing with a little Dog that sat
upon his knees* But a young Minister rebuked him by degrees for those ill
Habits; accustomed him to Censures; set up a Consistory in the Church that met
in his House, and made him accept himself ^he Office of an Elder, wherein he
officiated till his death. But to return to Alexander Patricius's Book, it was
thought that there was nothing more proper to ward off the Gashes of his
^renuous Objections, then to vex the remainder of the Reformed with some Acts
of Injustice. But in truth they served to very little purpose; for still the
Cardinal bore the reproach of doing more mischief to the Catholics abroad, then
to the Reformed at home; and that while he took from the one ^ome Church or
Churchyard, he was the occasion that the other lost whole Ci^ies and Provinces.

I do not reck'n among the greatest Vexations of the Reformed, Decrees upon
several occasions.
the Decree of the 16th of March, set forth in the Parmament of Paris against
Foreign Ministers; which under pre^ence that they might hold Correspondencies
with the Enemies of the Kingdom, or preach Doctrines contrary to the ^aws of
the Land, forbid 'em for the future to exercise the ^unction of the Ministry in
France; ordered those that were admitted to quit their Functions, and
threatened the Reformed with heavy Penalties if they went to hear 'em. I also
look upon another Decree of Council dated June 20. as a small thing, tho it
made the same Regulation in particular for Poi^o^; and added Prohibitions to
all the Ministers to preach in Villages, out of the places allotted for their
Exercises. I rank in the same number the Decree of the Parliament of Dijon,
which condemned the Reformed to spread Carpets before their Houses upon
Procession days, or to suffer 'em to be spread at their own charges, excepting
such as were very poor, and not able to defray the Expenses. These were things
that made little noise, neither could they be attended with any considerable
Consequences.

But there was something of greater Importance in the Decree Pre^^^ ^^*adjudg'd
to the Catholic Counselors of the Chamber of Guyenne.
which the Catholic Officers obtained from the Council Febr. 5. which adjudg'd
to the Dean of the Catholic Counselors, tho he were the youngest of all, in
the absence of the President, the Right of Precedence, above the Reformed
Counselors, both in the Court of Audience, in the Council, and in the
Townhouse. It Is true, that the same Decree preserved to every one, in other
Cases, as in all public and private Sittings, at the Visitation of Prisoners,
at Hearings, Examinations, and Confronting of Testimonies, and at the Torturing
of Criminals, the Rank which appertained to 'em by the Antiquity of their
Reception. But for all that, this Decree made a very great Breach in the
Privileges of the Officers of that Chamber. Nevertheless there was a
Declaration of the 29th of The Counselors of the Chamber of Castres, f^rbid to
wear Red Robes.
October, about the Robes worn by the Counselors of the Chamber of Castres.
The Reformed, according to Custom, wore Red Robes and Caps lined with Ermin,
both in the Public and Private Assemblies of the Chamber. But the Parliament of
Toulouse, who could not brook that mark of Equality, had set forth several
Decrees against that Custom, of which the Reformed took little Notice, as
believing their Authority independent from that of the Parliament. Thereupon the
King interposed in the Contest, and put an end to the Dispute by an Edict;
wherein after he had set forth, that the Custom was not grounded upon any
Edict, and that the Thing was done contrary to his Intentions, as he had made
known to those Officers by several Letters under his Privy Signet, he forbid
'em, according to the Decrees of that Parliament, to assume that Privilege,
till the Chamber should be incorporated. Thus the Reformed were deprived of the
principal mark of Honor which was to have bin annexed to their Dignities,
though the Edicts of their Creation ascribed the same Prerogatives to them, as
to the Catholics.

There were many people who took for an Affair of Religion, The pretended
Possession of the Ursulines of Loudun.
the Comedy that had bin Acted for several Years together, at the Vrsulines
Nunnery in Loudun. That Convent was governed by a Priest, whose Name was Urban
Grandi^r, learned, a good Preacher, and pleasant in Conversation. He had also
written a Book against the Celibacy of the Priests, and spoken somewhat freely
of some other Practices of the Romish Church. His Enemies therefore bethought
themselves of Accusing him with Magic and Witchcraft; and particularly of
having delivered some of the Nuns of that House into the Power of the Evil
Spirit. The Credulous People failed not to believe his Story; and so much the
more easily, because that Posses^ons of the Devil and Exorcisms had bin talked
of time out of ^ind. But the Authors of this Farce performed their parts so ^,
and Grandier defended himself so well, that 'twas a long time before Judges
could be found that would be so Complaiant as to determine the Affair to the
good-liking of these Bigots. The Parliament of Paris, that pretends to great
Knowledge in ^e Chapter of Magic, and never Sentence any Body to Death or that
Reason alone, was not thought proper to take Cognizance of that Affair, wherein
persons that were too upright and sincere, were not to be employed. Therefore
they were in a great Quandary what Commissioners to Nominate for the ^earing
and Determining this Cause. For as there was a necessity of having
Ecclesiastics to judge Grandier, so there was the same necessity that his
Judges should be at the Devotion of others. These Difficulties made 'em several
times change the Rediculous Effects of Exorcisms.
Exorcists themselves, who were no way so successfully Ser^iceable as they
ought to have bin to the Designs of those who guided this Affair. There is
nothing which affords more Di^e^^isements then to read in the verbal Reports of
those Exorci^ers, the grand Oversights which those ill-instructed Religious
Dances every moment made; whether it were mistaking one Question for another,
and so making Answers no less absurd, or in pronouncing the Latin words which
they were made to get by Heart, so ridiculously maimed and mangled as they
were; or whether it were in altering some Term, which made 'em stumble into
monstrous Incongruities against all the Rules of Grammar. These Buffonries,
which made all the Spectators ^ugh, put the Exorcists quite beside the Cushion,
who afforded no less Pastime to those that were present by the Excuses which
they alleged in Favor of the ill-prepar'd Demon. However, at length they
found out such people as served their turn to complete The death of a Priest
accused of having bewitched his Nuns.
this Farce. Grandier was Condemned to dye, as being Covicted by his own
Confession, not only of having both Writ and Spoken in Contempt of the Catholic
Doctrine, but of Magic also, by the Depositions of the pretended possessed
Persons. They likewise took for Proof of his being a Magician, the Constancy
which he showed under the Torments of the Rack, and at his Death; as also the
Marks of his Aversion to the Bigotries practiced by the Romish Church upon the
like Occasions, which he testified upon the Ladder. But serious persons, who
saw him do no more then what the Reformed did, when Condemned to the same
Punishment, believed that all his Magic consisted only in this, that he was
half a Heretic; and that he had done no other harm to the Nuns, then to teach
'em a Doctrine little conformable to that of the Romish Church, in reference to
Monastic Vows and Celibacy. And there were some honest people who pitied his
Condition, and murmured that the Life of a Man should be Sacrificed to the
Hypocrisy of some certain Villains that made it their Business to gain by
Frauds of that nature. However they thought fit to keep up some Remains of this
Diabolical Possession for sometime after Grandier's death, lest people should
perceive that the whole Aim of this sacrilegious Play was only to get his
Blood. But at length the Mischief surceas'd; the Nuns appeared no more upon the
Stage; and the Missionarics themselves made little or no more noise of the
Accident, because there happened some things in the carrying on of the Comedy,
the Reproach of which they had not the Impudence to bear.

On the other side, the Persecution began again under the New Vexations about
the Annexes.
pretense of Annexes; and the Bishop of Valence, unwilling to be bauk'd in his
Enterprise, renewed his Violences in his Diocese. The Prior of Aureil also, in
imitation of him, had the boldness by virtue of his own Authority, to Arrest
Apaix, a Minister in those Quarters, who came to Preach in other Places,
besides that of his Residence. He locked him up first of all in his Priory,
from whence the Bishop's Almoner removed him to the Prison of Valence. Nor
could he obtain his Liberty, till he gave Bail for his forthcoming. But at
length he was absolutely released, and his Bail discharged by a Decree of the
Privy Council, dated Novem. 24. Which Decree might have bin taken for an Act of
Justice, had it not bin attended eight days after, by a more rigorous
Declaration then all the Decrees that had bin issued forth upon this occasion.
It was dated from ^. Germans, December. 12. and forbid the Ministers of Languedoc,
and all others to Preach or perform any other Exercise of the Reformed Religion
in any other Places then where they resided; provided that Place too were one
of those where the Exercise ^as allowed. And the Penalty of transgressing was,
to be punished as Breakers and Disturbers of the Peace, and a Fine of ^ve
hundred Livres, which they were to be constrained to pay ^ Imprisonment of
their Bodies, and an Arbitrary A merce^ent. The Pretenses for this Severity
were, that the Tenth article of the Edict of 1561. forbid Ministers to ramble
from ^age to Village to Preach; which as they affirmed, was likewise confirmed
by several Decrees. 'Twas presupposed, that the ^^ight of Exercise did not
belong to those Places, and that the Ministers of Languedoc had broken the
Regulation: And this declaration was sent to Castres, where it was Registered
Jan. 5. ^^ the following Year. Nevertheless, the Declaration afforded a fair
Occasion for the dividing of Voices: For it Revived ^^ Edict which was
cancelled by that of Nantes, which was ^^ pernicious Consequence, in regard
that all the Concessions ^^ that Act might be eluded, by explaining 'em by the
Terms ^^ Other Edicts that were abrogated: And indeed this Method ^as found so
useful and proper to ruin the Edict of Nantes, that they pursued it as far as
it would go. Moreover, the Declaration presupposed that the Annexes were Places
without Right ^^ Exercise; but the Reformed never yielded that to be true.
Nevertheless the Thing being past into a Law, the Ministers ^ere reduced to a
great Straight, from whence they could not ^ee themselves till after several
years Patience under another ^eign. But the most heavy Persecution of the
Reformed this ^ear, was that of the Extraordinary Sessions in Poitou, which An
Extraordinary Sessions in Poiton.
^et on purpose to vex 'em; and whose Jurisdiction extended ^^o Ango^mois,
Aunix, Anjou, Le Maine, La Touraine, Le Li^. and Perigood. This Grand Sessions
was an Assembly consisting of Commissioners chosen out of one or several
Parlaments, which were sent into those Provinces where any public Disorder were
pretended to have bin committed, which could not be suppressed by the Proceedings
of Ordinary Justice So that they were like those Itinerary Parlaments, which
formerly went from place to place to Administer Justice when Necessity chiefly
required it. These Grand Sessions were won to be a Terror to persons in Power,
who had oppressed the people without fear of punishment: So that when this Grand
Session approached any Provinces, all Offenders against whom nobody durst open
their mouths before, began to quake for fe^ of the Punishments which they
deserved. But this Year the Grand Sessions did no harm to, nor terrified any
body but the Reformed. And the manner of their pronouncing Sentence was enough
to put those poor Creatures in fear of being lo^^ past all Redemption. But in
regard that in the main the^ Decrees made more noise then they did mischief,
and the re^ of the Provinces being exempted from this Storm, it may ^ thought
that the Cardinal sought rather to show his Grande^^ and his Power, then the
effect of his Rigor, to stop the mout^ of those that accused him of favoring
Heretics.

This Assembly sat down at Poitiers the 4th of September Affrights^ of the
Churches.
and that of the Audiences the 11th of the same Month; and under pretense of
punishing Offenses that were not pardoned by the Edict, and after which no
Inquisition had bin made by reason of the Troubles, they put all the Churches
of those Provinces in fear of the loss of their Exercises. After they had
ordained the inferior Judges to give Information of all the Violences,
Rebellions, Usurpations of Cures and Priories, to Decree, Seize, and make all
requisite Pursuits and Inquiries, eve^ to the Definitive Sentence exclusively,
the Grand Assizes began to issue forth Sentences more decisive. There was one
of the 6th of September, which contained Nine principal Articles; The first
forbid the Reformed for the future to Bury i^ An Important Decree upon several
Articles.
Catholic Churchyards, under the Penalty of a 1000 Livres and to have the
Corps's dug up again. The second ordained that the Catholic Service should be
reestablish'd in Churches which had bin in the possession of the Reformed. The
third forbid Tolling to Church with the Bells that belonged to the Catholics.
The fourth took from 'em the Privilege of having Schools in places where they
had not leave to erect 'em by verified Letters Patent. The fifth, to oblige
the Reformed Lords of Manors to make choice in which of their Feiffs they
intended to settle their Habitation, and consequently the Right of Exercise.
The sixth ordained, that they should surcease their Exercises in places where
the Lords should become Catholics; ^^^ that they should not perform 'em within
the Feiffs of Catholics, but with their consent. By the seventh, they were to
demolish all Churches built in Churchyards, or near to Churches where the
Catholic Service might be interrupted; ^^ also all those that had bin built
since the Edict, without permisson verified. The eighth forbid Preaching in the
Houses and Habitations of Ecclesiastics; and the close of that Article ^^tended
the Prohibition to Halls and Public Places. The ninth ^ondemn'd the Reformed to
refrain from the word Church, then they spoke of themselves, and to call their
Doctrine by the ^ame of the Pretended Reformed Religion, under the Forfeiture
^^ ^^^ Livres. This Article principally concerned Treaties of Marriage, where
the Persons covenanting called themselves Memo^rs of the Church belonging to
the Places of their Abode. This Nicety went a great way: But I have known
Catholic Notaries, whose Zeal was so scrupulous, that when the rough Draught of
the Contract was brought to 'em, which began, A Treaty of Marriage which by the
good Pleasure of God will be Solemniz^, etc. would needs have the words, By the
good Pleasure of ^^^, blotted out, as doing Heresy too much Honor.

This Decree was properly the substance of all the rest that Another troublesome
Decree about meeting the Sacrament.
^ere made by the Grand Assizes. There was nothing to be ^en but the taking
away of Churchyards, Exercises forbid, ^reaching silenced, Churches pulled
down, and incommodious and vexatious Regulations. Upon the 20th of September, a
Decree ^as set forth, which obliged the Reformed, both Men and Women, to get
out of the way upon Tingling of the Bell, when they met the Romish Sacrament in
the Streets; or if they could (...) to put themselves into a Posture of
Respect: and in regard ^h^ Women had no Hats to pull off, they would needs
enforce them to kneel like the Catholics; and for the Men, tho this Regulation
were renewed almost every year, neither getting out of the way, nor pulling off
their Hats would serve their turns, when they fell into the Hands of the
Populacy. The same Regulation was confirmed by another Decree, dated Nov. 24.

The 26th of October came forth a Decree, which ordered the The Church of St.
Maixant Demolished.
Church of St. Maixant to be Demolished. The Archbishop of Tours, who was Abbot
of that Place, made a Latin Speech to the Grand Assizes, which savonr'd very
strong of the College; but the Cause of an Archbishop against the Reformed was
too Specious to require much Pleading. Nevertheless Omer Talon's manner of
Pleading.
Omer Talon, the Son of James Talon, Advocate General in the Parliament of
Paris, who had the same Employment in the Grand Assizes, pleaded strongly for
the Archbishop. He affirmed openly, that the Reformed were suffered only by
Toleration and Connivance, as men suffer a Thing which they had rather be
without. From which dangerous Principle, he drew a Consequence much worse: That
what concerned the Religion o^ the Reformed, was not to be reckoned among
Things favorable for which the Terms of the Law are wont to be favorably
interpreted; but that in their Cases the Rigor of Expression was to be
observed. The nothing could be said more contrary to the Intention of the Act,
and the Repeated Promises of Lewis XIII but chiefly of Hen. IV. who had
declared more then once, that Ambiguous Expressions ought to be favorably
explained. Besides Talon sought for the Interpretation of the Edict in the
preceding Edicts; which was very strange in a man that made a profession of
Honesty, as he did, and who was too clear-sighted, not to understand that there
was nothing more Unjust, or more Imprudent then to fetch from Laws revoked, the
Explanation of a New Law which Repeals 'em. 'Twas either a great piece of
Injustice, or a manifest Absurdity to seek for the Sense of a new Edict in
those that preceded: Besides, that they must have bin in some measure
conformable to the New one, or else they could never be any way effectual; and
by consequence, they could never be serviceable to pinch and strait-lace
Concessions of a New Law, when they contained Expressions neither so Ample nor
so Favorable.

Nevertheless, upon this Principle it was that Talon leaned, That he might make
a distinction between the Right of Exercise, A distinction between the Right of
Exercise, and the Right of the Church.
and the Right of the Church. For he asserted, that no Churches could be built
but in places of Bailliage; and such whose possession was grounded upon the
Edict of 1577. because the Sixteenth Article of the Edict of Nantes allowed the
having of 'em, according to the Twelfth Article of the Conserence of N^rac.
Fron whence he concluded, that the Favor not being extended in express terms
to New Possessions, established by virtue of the Siege of Nantes, they could
not have places built on purpose to preach in; and that there could be no
preaching but in the Minister's House, or else in one that was hired. But to
say truth, there was enough in the Article it self of the Edict to refute this
Cavil. For that this Article coming after all the rest, which explained the
Foundations of the Right of Exercise, 'twas natural to extend the Permission
for building of Churches, to all places where for the future it was lawful to
preach. The Article of Nerac was not quoted to reduce the Liberty of having
Churches to places where the Privilege of Exercise was purchased from the time
of that Conference; but to testify, that in regard the Treaty of Nerac
permitted the building of Churches, wherever the Exercise was then granted by
the Edicts, it was in like manner permitted by the Edict of Nantes to build, or
have 'em in all Cities and Places where that New Edict established the
Exercise. But though no such thing had bin, yet it may be said that this
Pretension was but a mere Cavil at best, from which there redounded neither
Honor nor Advantage to the Catholics; since in reality, the Exercise being
permitted, 'twas indifferent to the Catholics to see it performed in a House
built on purpose, or in a hired House. It Is true, that the greatest part of the
Churches were built since 1600. but that was no reason why they should be
called Usurpations; for that which hindered the building 'em sooner, was,
because the Reformed had places there where they performed their Exercises
which the Edict obliged 'em to quit; either because they were Houses belonging
to Ecclesiastics, or because they were Structures belonging to Corporations, as
Hal^s, Town-Houses, and the like. The loss of which Buildings made 'em bethink
themselves of having others; and till they could raise Money to build Churches,
they were forced to hire Houses, where sometimes they lodged the Minister
himself.

Nevertheless, upon this Foundation it was, that the Grand Several Decrees of
the Grand Assizes against the Reformed.
Assizes condemned so many Churches: And it is requisite to be observed, for
the better understanding whence it came to pass, that in one and the same
Decree they ordered the demolishing of a Church, and at the same time the
producing of the Tithes and Evidences by virtue of which they claimed the Right
of Exercise. The reason of which double Order was, because they thought that
the Right of Exercise was no Evidence of the Right of the Church, but that the
one might be had without the other. However, to involve more Churches in the
same Inconvenience, they added one more of Proximity or Inconvenience to the
Catholic Churches; and under those Pretenses, besides the Church of St.
Maixant, they condemned the Churches of Cherveux, Chef-boutonne, Mo^gon,
G^nouille, Lusignan, and I know not how many more. There were several Decrees
also which ordered the Restitution of Churchyards to the Catholics; forbid
keeping of Petty Schools; dispossessed the Reformed of some Chapels; gave
Commission to order the Ministers and Consistories of certain Ministers to
produce their Evidences; forbid opening of Shops of Holidays, and to frequent
Public Houses during Mass-time. Cooks also and Vintners were forbid to admit
People into their Houses during that time, or to sell Flesh upon Prohibited
Days. Others forbid blaspheming the Mysteries of the Romish Religion, or to
hinder the Officers of the Places from spreading Carpets before the Houses upon
Procession Days.

These Proceedings continued for some time after the Year 1635.
was at an end; nor were other Places besides those aforementioned, exempted
from as great Acts of Injustice.

Upon the 16th of January the Privy Council issued forth a ^r^e, the
Consequences of which would have bin very Persecution raised by Cacherat
against the Churches of Normandy.
^kward, had it bin put in execution. For Cacherat, Minister of Qu^llebaeuf in
Normandy, was a Man of a mutinous, ^tions, turbulent, insolent and transported
Spirit; always (...) odds with his Church; always quarrelling with the Synod of
his Province. He had created Troubles and Vexations that had lasted above ten
years, and which had bin carried to the National Synods. Among the rest, that
which was held in 1631* had used him civilly; which made him but more proud and
daring. But the Synod of St. Lo suspended him from the Ministry for his
Rebellions; and in regard he refused to appear, he was summoned before the
next. These Proceedings transported him even to Rage; insomuch that he
presented a Petition against all the Ministers of Normandy to the Council,
wherein he accused 'em of intruding into the Ministry without a C^ll; that they
had abused their Functions; that they for^^^k their Pulpits to hold forth at
Meetings; that their Mission was not conformable to the Statutes of their
Discipline; and that they had bin illegally admitted by their Churches, whither
they had never bin sent either by Synods or Colloquies. He de^^r'd they might
be treated as Deserters, and forbid to officiate in the Ministry, and that what
they had hitherto done, might i. e. declared null and void. He complained that
they had loaded him with Calumnies to ruin his Reputation and that they
detained his Salary from him, which they had not paid him in two years. Lastly,
he concluded, that no Ministers might for the future be admitted before they
produced Authentic Acts of their being called, to be viewed by the Advocates
General, or their ^u^stitutes: And that they who took upon 'em at present to
^fficiate, should be obliged within a Month to show their Diploma's and their
Qualifications to the Judges of the Places. These Hairbrain'd Accusations put
the Reformed in great fear at a time when their Destruction seemed to be sworn.
And they made no question but the Bigots would embrace so fair an opportunity
to put all the Churches in confusion; more especially because he was one that
lived still in their Communion, who gave the occasion. Nevertheless, all this
Hurliburly had no other foundation, then the lending of some Minister of one
Church to another, without Chacherat's Approbation; or some Order executed in
his Church against his Will. At length, after a long solicitation, a Decree was
made which dismissed both Parties, but ordered, that for the time to come no
Minister should be admitted without taking the Oath of Allegiance; that they
who had officiated in Foreign Countries, should not reassume their Functions in
France without the King's Permission, and taking a new Oath; and that no
Foreigner should officiate in the Ministry, or in any other Religious Office
without express leave. But the Innovation of swearing Allegiance was that which
most perplexed the Reformed. For they held it much for their Ministers Honor,
that the State was wont to be assured of their Fidelity, without exacting a
solemn Promise; but that the Bishops were obliged to take the Oath before they
could be admitted. Besides, they took this Oath for a forerunner of great
Misfortunes; as being a Custom borrowed from the Reign of Charles the IX. And
lastly, they were afraid that it would prove the occasion of a thousand Cavils,
to engage 'em to swear things either contrary to their Consciences, or
prejudicial to their Liberties. But luckily for 'em this Decree came to
nothing, as being never put in execution. As for Cacherat, he abjured his
Religion; and having obtained a Pension from the Clergy, enough to live upon,
without working for a Livelihood, he never any more disturbed the Peace of the
Churches. Some Memoirs there are that mention an Edict to the same purpose with
the Decree; but I never saw it, and believe it to be an Error of him that
compiled 'em.

But the 18th of the same Month the King set forth a Declaration Precedence
adjudg'd to the Catholic Counselors of the Chamber of Castres.
that gave Precedence to the Counselors of the Parliament of Toulouse that
served in the Chamber at Castres, in the absence of the Presidents, before the
Reformed Counselors, tho never so much their Seniors; so that that same
Chamber was reduced to the same condition with that of Guyenne. Toward the end
of this Month also, the Catholics would needs make the Reformed of Loudun pay
the Costs and Charges they had bin at in exorcising the Vrsulins; for as yet
they had not ^^one with that Farce. The Reformed had erected a College The
College taken from the Reformed of Loudun.
^^ that City, where they were very numerous. The Catholics therefore
meditating which way to deprive 'em of it, presented a Petition to
Laubardemont, deputed Commissioner to take the Informations concerning that
same Diabolical Possession, and much at the devotion of the Ecclesiastics. They
set forth, That ^he Vrsulins house was too little to contain 'em, and for the
performance of those Exorcisms that were requisite; that all the Churches of
the City were taken up, excepting one Chapel which the Guardian of the
Franciscans offered to lend 'em; that the College of the Reformed ought to be
taken from ^em, as being erected without the King's leave; and upon these
Suppositions, they desired that the College might be given to the Catholics;
that so the Vrsulins, or a part of 'em, might be removed thither, for the
better convenience of exorcising 'em. Upon which, the Commissioner gave 'em a
Grant of it with a Proviso, till the King should otherwise ordain. And thus the
Reformed were made to pay the Expenses of a Comedy, wherein they were no
otherwise concerned then to make themselves sport with it, and laugh at it in
private.

The 9th of March the Council put forth a Decree, which Exercise forbid at Paro^
forbid the Public Exercise of the Reformed Religion at Paroi in Ch^rol^is, a
small Village, of which the Abbot and Monks of (...) were the Lords. Cardinal
Richlieu was chosen Abbot of it, and by Consequence he had an Interest in that
little City: so that the Decree could not fail of a solemn execution. But
besides the Interdiction of Public Exercise, it contained also a Prohibition to
keep Schools therein; to sell Flesh upon prohibited days; to work with their
Shops open on Holydays; to meet in Houses to perform the Duties of Catechizing,
Preaching or Prayer; to hinder the Ecclesiastics from visiting and comforting
the Sick; to sing Psalms in the Streets, or so loud in their Houses, as to be
heard; to bury in the Churchyard belonging to the Hospital, or at any other
hours then those that were prescribed by the Edict. It ordered also the
Reformed to keep and spread Carpets before their doors upon Procession days. It
gave leave that the Reformed might send their Children to the College which
the Cardinal had founded, with promise that they should not be seduced to
change their Religion; and that they might be Sheriffs if elected, without any
obligation of being forced to hold. At the same time the Reformed of Chaume, a
Borough depending upon the Jurisdiction of Olon, which belonged to the Marquis
of Royan, lost their Right of Exercise. Nor was there any notice taken of their
Possession well proved; or that they had not only the consent of the Lord, but
an agreement in writing made in the year 16^^* with him, the Curate and the
Catholic Inhabitants, wherein the Lord expressly covenanted to desist from all
opposition against their Right for the future. All the Favor they could have
shown 'em was, that they had the liberty left 'em to make their Addresses to
the King, that they might have some other place allowed 'em without the
Jurisdiction of Olonne.

Now in regard the Declaration of the preceding year in reference Order of the
Intendant of Poitou about Annexes.
to the Annexes, had rendered the Law general, tho it were only set forth for
the Province of Languedoc, the Ministers o^ Saintonge and other places, were
put to a great deal of trouble upon this occasion. Rivet of Champvernon was
deputed to the Court by the Synod assembled at Mauze, to crave some relief
against these Vexations; who brought back a Reference of the 16th of April to
Villemontee, Intendant of Justice in those Provinces. This new Judge was given
to understand, that the Prohibition mentioned in the Declaration, and by the
Decrees, deprived the Reformed of all manner of Exercise of their Discipline,
and exposed all Ministers that preached in any other place then where they
resided, or by virtue of an Order, or Loan authorized by the Synods or
Colloquies, to a thousand Prosecutions: tho those Accidents many times could
not be avoided, by reason of the death, sickness, absence, suspension or
degrading of the Incumbent Ministers, or upon some other urgent Business which
required the Synod to depute Commissioners. They gave him to understand, that
there were Ministers settled by the Synods, to preach alternatively in several
places where they had a Right of Exercise, and ^^ consequence they could not be
accused of preaching out of the places where they were settled. The Commissioner
was apprehensive of these Reasons, and by an Order of the 22d of June, gave the
Ministers leave to preach out of their Residence when they should be sent upon
any of the forementioned Occasions.

However the Reformed of Metz were not so favorably used The Reformed of Metz
forbid to have a College
at the Council. For they had a desire to erect a College in their City; but
the Bishop of Madaure, Suffragan to Metz, opposed it; and the three Catholic
Bodies of the City joined with him. This Business was removed to the Council,
where the Opposers obtained a Decree in their favor, dated July the 25th. That
Decree forbid the Reformed to have either Masters, Regents, Classes, Schools or
Colleges. It only gave leave that they should have Masters in the City, to
^each Children to read and write French; but prohibited those Masters from
taking Pensioners. It forbid likewise the having those Petty Schools without
the City; reserving only the liberty of sending their Children to Catholic
Schools. Now in regard the War began this year between France and Spain, the
Affairs of State afforded some little Relaxation ^o those of the Reformed
Religion: So that there remains The Duke of Bouillon changes his Religion.
^ittle of moment for me to relate, but only what befell the Duke of Bouillon,
Son of the Marshal. He became enamored ^f the Marquess of Berghe's Daughter,
who was indeed a very ^ovely Lady. To marry her, he renounced far greater
Matches, ^o which he might have pretended. And he abandoned himself so entirely
to this Woman, no less a Spaniard by Inclination, then a Zealous Catholic, that
by her Persuasions he quitted his Religion, fell off from the Interests of
France, and reduced his own Family to the Precipice of Threatening ^uin.
Therefore, that I may not be forced to return any more ^o this Subject again
hereafter, I shall speak all together which is to be said of him; That he had a
share in all the Confusions of France; that he admitted the Count of Soissons
into Sedan, who was slain in a Combat before the Town; that at the same time
that his Pardon was granted him for that Rebellion, he entered into the
Conspiracy of Cinq Mars against the Cardinal; that the Plot being discovered,
he was seized in Italy, where he had the Command of an Army conferred upon him,
to remove him from the City, and to be masters of his Person when they pleased.
That knowing well that the Cardinal never forgave twice, he offered to
surrender his City to the King to save his life, and Sedan was the Price of his
Liberty. The Cardinal before his death had the Pleasure of that Conquest, after
which he lived not long. Thus the Father of the Duke having had a Principality,
as the fruit of his siding with the Reformed Religion; the Duke his Son lost it
as the Reward of his turning Catholic. And because his Wife brought him little
or nothing in Marriage, 'twas said of him, That the Dowry which he had with her
was the loss of Sedan. This Misfortune befell him in the Year 1642.

The End of the Tenth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Edict of Nantes. THE SECOND PART. THE 'LEVENTH BOOK.
The Epitome of the 'Leventh Book.
AN Assembly of the Clergy. A furious Speech of the Bishop of Orleans. Odious
Accusations. The first Accusation, of openly violating the Edicts. Daille's
Books attacked by the Bishop. Second Accusation, for having taken a Prayer for
the King out of the 20th Psalm. Avenomous Aggravation. Third Accusation, for
blaspheming the Sacred Things. A fraudulent Question of the Missionaries. The
Bishop's Conclusion. A Dispute upon the second Accusation between Daille and
Muis. An Edict against Blasphemers. Arenewing of the first Accusation. Papers
of the Clergy. Answer to the 16th Article; to the 32, 33, and 26. Interdiction
of particular Exercises at Villiers le bell. Exercises prohibited at Corbigni,
Vitre and Claye. Other Regulations. The Bailliage of Gex. Schools Interdicted.
An unlucky Decree of the Privy Council upon several Articles. Others touching
Patents for Offices. Exercise forbid again at Claye. The House of Charity
interdicted at Paris. The House of the Propagation of Faith; and a piece of
remarkable Injustice. Conversion of Francis Cupif. Regulations of the Reformed
of Pons. A National Synod at Alenson. The Commissioner's Speech, and his
Instructions. Article touching Baptism. Answer of the Moderator. Article of
Annexes; of the payment of the Ministers and Baptism. A Deputation to the King.
Papers from the Synod. The Deputies treated at Court, and their Speeches.
Nomination of General Deputies. Particular Deputies. Milletiere's Projects
condemned. The King puts France under the Protection of the Holy Virgin. The
Death of the Duke of Rohan. A remarkable Order of the Intendants of Languedoc.
A Presia^^l Court erected at Nerac. Sick People tormented by the Monks. Edict
of the Duke of Bouillon in Favor of the Reformed of Sedan. The Birth of the
King now reigning. A new Regulation for Villers le bell, and the Dauphinate.
Statutes of the University of Poitiers. Order of Judge May of Montauban.
Particular Acts of Injustice at Rochechouard, at Vitre and Dijon. Offices.
Exercise forbid at Taulignan. Church yard at Blois forbid to be enclosed.
Croquers. Decree of the Parliament of Pau, forbidding the Exercise where there
were not Ten Families. Exercise forbid at Pivigemet and Beaulreu. A singular
Artifice to oblige the Reformed to call themselves Pretended Reformed.
Blasphemies pretended, and pretended Sacrilege. Division of Voices at Castres,
and the Effects of it. Interdiction of Exercise out of the usual places.
Marriage of Priests converted. The Advocate-General's Plea. Precedence adjudg'd
to the Catholics of the Chamber of Accounts at Mompelier. A new Decree about
meeting the Sacrament. Vexation of some Officers of Castres. Exercises and
Schools forbid. Burials, Blasphemies and Profanations. Offices. Priests and
Monks changing their Religion. The ancient Church at Vitre pulled down.
Exercises forbid at Gex, Sancerre and Chauvigni. A new Cavil about the Right of
Fiefs. Exercise forbid at St. Cere. A Cavil about a Churchyard. Exercise
forbid at St. Savin and Antibe. Distance required between the Churchyards of
the Reformed and the Catholics. Burying violated. A pretended Miracle.
Reestablishment of the Mass at Tonnaiboutonne. Offices. Schools. Blasphemies
and Prophanations. Other Examples. Universities. Books. Acts of Injustice at
Sancerre. Death of the Cardinal. Exercises and Irreverences. Children of a
converted Priest. Visiting of the Sick, and Jurisdictions. The Death of the
King.

BUT the next Year a violent Tempest poured down upon 1636.
the Reformed. The Assembly of the Clergy was sat An Assembly of the Clergy.
own before the end of the Year 1635, and the chief Depu^s on'y spoke to the
King upon the Subject of the Regale, ^^ich the Parliament of Paris went about to
extend to all the ^shopri^s in the Kingdom. But de Nets, Bishop of Orleans,
^^uld not confine himself within those Bounds, when he made ^^ Speech to the
King upon the 17th of February. For he made A furious Speech of the Bishop of
Orleans.
^^e most violent Harangue that had ever bin spoken, against the ^eformed, till
that time. He uttered nothing but Extravagan^s, Ravings and Blasphemies; nor
did he vouchsafe the Reformed any more honorable Epithetes, then those of
Insolent, ^ad, and Frantic. It Is true, that at first, he acknowledged that
(...) the States of the Kingdom had applauded the Design of the ^^ngs of France
to attempt the Cure of the Reformed, to whom (...) gave the Appellation of
Distempered, by gentle Remedies; ^at is to say, by the Edicts of Peace: and to
honor the Cler^^ with a false Moderation, he added, That the Ecclesiastical
^^dy itself would not have bin sorry to have seen stifled and extinguished so
many Fires kindled to reform and punish 'em, and (...) set up in their room
Lights more pure and innocent to illuminate their Consciences and
Understandings. But for all this ^ir Beginning, he failed not to accuse the
Reformed of three ^^ings extremely odious. The first was, for openly violating
Odious Accusations.
^^e Edicts: the second was, for ceasing to pray to God for the ^ing in their
Psalms: and the third, for profaning and blaspheming the Sacred Things.

The great Proof of the first Accusation was drawn from the I. Accusation, for
openly violating the Edicts.
Act of the National Synod in the Year 1631, wherein it was declared, That the
Lutherans might be admitted to the Communion, to intermarry, and present
Children to Baptism. Which he pretended was contrary to the Edicts, because it
tended to the introducing of a new Religion into France; as if by that Act of
Fraternal Communion, the Synod had ever pretended to associate the Lutherans in
the same liberty of teaching their Opinions, and publicly exercising their
Religion, as the Reformed ha^ obtained by the Edicts. Which nevertheless was so
far from the intention of the Synod, that in the Act of the Union itself, (...)
was expressly required, That such Lutherans as should be made choice of for
Godfathers, should promise to teach 'em no other Doctrines then those about
which there was no dispute. How ever the Bishop hung fast upon the Apology for
that Reunion which Daille had published about two years after the Synod broke
up. That same Minister had taken for the foundation (...) Dailles Books.
his Justifications the difference of Errors; of which there were some that
were not so heinous as others; and among whi^^ as there are some that are
intolerable, that brake all communion between the Orthodox and the Erroneous,
so there an^ others that may be born withal, as no way tending to such (...)
Rupture. He alleged for an Example of the latter, the Opinion of the Greeks
about the proceeding of the Holy Ghose which he did not believe to be of that
consequence as to authorize a Schism. He endeavored also to settle general
Rules, to judge what those Errors are that break communion by reason of their
extreme distance from the Truth. This was a very prudent Apology, and the
Author's Principles were managed with so much discretion, that it was
impossible for any person to be offended at 'em, unless blinded either by his
Passion or hi^ Ignorance. The same Daille published the next year a little
Treatise, which he entitled, Faith grounded upon Scripture which destroying the
Authority of Tradition when the Dispute lay about Articles of Faith, proved
exactly the Doctrine o^ ^e Reformed, and gave light to the Rules which he had
pro^'d for the discerning of Errors.

The Bishop attacqued these two Books with extraordinary ^^olence. He could not
endure that Daille should think the ^^nathema pronounced against the Greeks too
severe, only for an (...) considerable deviation from the Doctrine of the
Latins, ^uching the proceeding of the Holy Ghost; and so insisting upon that
Indulgence, and some other Principles that Daille ^^d maintained, he accused
him of teaching, either in express ^erms, or by Consequences necessarily drawn
from his Doctrine, ^at all Heresies would admit of a Dispute, except eight of
the most important. I know not how the Episcopal Charity (...) that Prelat
could accommodate the usual Maxims which ^each up Union, and detest Schism in
such vigorous Terms, ^ith this Complaint of a horrid Attempt of a Minister,
that ^t no more then eight Reasons of Division among the Chri^ans: as if the
grand Interest of public Edification and ^iversal, ought not to make all good
men wish, that ^ere had bin less then eight Reasons of Divorce, if they ^uld
have bin reduced to a lesser number, without doing ^jury to the Truth. But the
Bishop's aim was to indicate, that this was to teach an Indifferency in
Religion ^^n^rary to the Edict, and that according to Dailles Principles, no
Man was bound to quit his Sect, to embrace a better opinion.

The second Accusation was still more malicious. And the II. Accusation, for
having taken away from the 20th Psalm the Prayer for the King.
^etence which the Bishop took for it, was the Alteration made (...) the 20th
Verse of the 20th Psalm, which is the 19th according to the Latin, and begins
with these words, Lord save the ^^ing; and in the French Paraphrase of the
Reformed, thus, ^he Lord hear thy Prayer. It Is true, that this last Verse had
^rmerly bin paraphrased after this manner: Be pleased, O Lord, (...) defend us,
and preserve the King. Be pleased to hear our Prayers, when we cry unto thee.
But the Reformed having made ^everal Alterations in Clement Marot's Paraphrase,
when they ^^ppli'd it to the Public Use of their Devotions, because his
expressions were a little too harsh, too roving, and somewhat to^ slight, and
having made these Alterations at several times, an^ upon several occasions, it
happened that this Couplet of the Psalm was corrected among others, as having
bin translated by the Poet after a manner more conformable to the Vulgar, the^
to the Hebrew Original. Thereupon this Paraphrase was inserted instead of the
former, Be pleased, O Lord, to defend (...) and cause the King to hear our
Petitions. Encounter all our Fears. I make no question, but that when this
Correction was made, the Reformed had a design to have a formal Prayer,
extracted from the Words of the Holy Ghost, to desire of God who governs the
hearts of Kings, that he would incline hi^ to be favorable to their Suits.
Upon that score the^ found this New Paraphrase more suitable to their
Occas^ons, as being in their Opinion more conformable to the Hebrew then the
former. But certainly he must see with the Eyes of a very Irregular Passion,
who sees any thing in the Alteration, with which a Sovereign Prince could be
justly an^ deservedly offended.

Nevertheless, the Bishop found, as he thought, two Gro^ A venomous Aggravation.
Errors in this Correction. The one was, That the Sense was corrupted: And the
other was, That the Reformed had put themselves in the King's room; and that
they had assumed the Prayer to themselves which the Holy Ghost ha^ dictated in
his behalf. This was branded as a piece of Insolence, and an Attempt, which
abolishing the Prayer that ought to be offered for the Preservation of the
King, ravished from him, as much as in 'em lay, the Honor, Fear and Tribute
that was due to him. So that the Bishop would fain have proved from thence,
That had it bin as much in the power of the Reformed to deprive the King of all
the Prerogatives of his Crown, as it was to alter the words of the Psalm, they
would never have scrupled to have done it. And this Accusation was aggravated
with all the Tours, the Dresses and Enamellings of a Quaint Wit, that Propense
Malice and Black Malignity could infuse into a Quick Imagination. Nevertheless,
there is one Reflection to be made upon the Transports of this Outrageous
Bishop, sufficient to ^scover the Injustice of 'em; that this Alteration had
bin made for above Seventy years, and yet never any notice ^d bin taken of it;
and we find at this day the same Correction in the Psalms that were printed in
1560, and 1561. Therefore had this bin such a Crime, it is a wonder that the
^^al of the Catholic Clergy should sleep so long without ^er taking cognizance
of such a Capital Crime. But the times were changed, and the Bishop might say
what he ^as'd against an Unfortunate Party not in a condition to ^s^nd
themselves.

The Third Accusation was grounded upon the Expressions III. Accusation, for
blaspheming the Holy things.
which the Ministers made use of, in speaking of the mysteries of the Roman
Church. The Bishop called Drelin^rt Impious and Blasphemer, by reason of the
disrespect^ Expressions which were to be found in his Writings. That ^nister,
the True Scourge of Controversie-Mongers and Missionaries, and who had learnt
from Moulin the art of finding ^t the ridiculous part of Superstition, called
things by their ^mes with great liberty. For he called the Church of Rome,
^famus Strumpet, and the Idolatrous Babylon. He called the ^^crament which the
Catholics adore, a God of Dow, an ^bomination, a Wafer, which the Priest would
make you believe he has turned into a Deity, after he has blown up^ it four or
five words. He handled the Mass like a piece (...) Farce and Mummery. Moreover,
the Bishop accused him (...) saying that the Virgin was an Idol, and the
worshipping ^^r an Abomination: That the Festivals of the Saints were (...)
mere Superstition; that their Legends, which the Prelate (...) the History of
their Virtues, was a Gallimaufrie of Ex^^a^^gant Romances and Idle Tales. He
complained that the same Minister had called the Pope Antichrist, and Captain
of the Cut-purses, meaning the Bishops and Monks: ^d that he had called it in
question, Whether he were St. Peter's, or Simon Magus's Successor. Above all
things, ^ ascribed to him one thing very Criminal, that he had asserte^ that
St. Lewis at the point of death disgusted the Mass. Upon which we must observe,
that one of the most wicke^ and insnaring Questions which the New Missionaries
starte^ to puzzle silly People, was, Whether they believed, the An Insnaring
Question of the Missionaries.
Charlemaigne, or St. Lewis, or the Reigning King, we^^ damned? 'Twas High
Treason to answer in the Affirm^tive; and it was dangerous to answer in the
Negative. F^ then the Missionary concluded, that men might be saved ^ the Roman
Profession. But usually they got rid of this fradulent Question by answering,
That they made no doubt b^ that all Princes were saved, because that God
enlightened 'e^ at the hour of death, and infused into 'em a good liking ^ the
Romish Superstitions. And this Vulgar Error the Bisho^ laid to Drelincourt's
Charge, because he had said somethin^ like it in some of his Works. However,
these Expressio^ were not particular to himself, for that the greatest part ^
the Ministers kept up the custom of talking of the Guid^ and Practices of the
Roman Church, in such a manner ^ the Catholics deemed not very decent. But He
stuck cl^sest upon Drelincourt's Skirts, because he instructed the People by
his Familiar Writings, and armed 'em with easy an^ short Answers against the
Sophisms of the Missionaries. S^ that he was very odious to this new Order of
Persecutor^ who made it their business for thirty years together, by a^
imaginable ways, to do him one of their good Turns.

The Bishop, after these Terrible Accusations, vaun^ed, The Bishop's Conclusion.
know not by what Figure, for it was very singular, that h^ was obliged to
reserve a Charitable and Judicious Silence i^ reference to the Language of the
Ministers; but though h^ forbore to speak of their Crimes, yet he talked loud
of the Punishment due to 'em, of which he demanded a severe Infliction; that
they should be forbid to pronounce such ^^^nous Affronts and Blasphemies
against the Church, again^ the Sacraments, against the Saints, against the Pope
and hi^ ^relates. That those Paragraphs wherein the Pope was called ^ntichrist,
might be razed out of the Prayers of the Re^orm*d; that the Prayer for the King
might be restored as ^ was. That all Innovations contrary to the Edicts might
^e punished and chastis'd; that Indifferency in Religion ^roach'd by Daille
might be stifled in the Birth; that his Books ^ight be burnt by the hand of the
Common Hangman; and that he might be punish*d severely as a New Arch-Heretic,
together with all those that favored his Libertinism. Which ^a^t Clause had an
Eye upon Aubertin, Mestrezat and Drelin^^^rt, his Associates, who being
appointed by the Synod of the Province to overlook the Books, had subscribed
their Appro^ation of his Works. The Bishop at last protested, That he ^poke not
out of any hatred of Persons, because Charity ^orbad him; but to destroy
Errors, and prevent the Erro^eous from rendering themselves odious to God,
unfaithful to ^h^ King, baneful to themselves, and unprofitable to the Pub^ic.
This is just pursuing the Motions of a sort of Charity, ^ike that of the
Inquisition, which puts People to death after they have repented, for fear lest
if they should let ^em, live they should expose 'em to the danger of a Relapse.

The second Article of Complaints, touching the Papaphrase A Dispute upon the
2d. Accusation between Daille and Muis.
upon Psalm 20. of an Affair of State, became a Business of Criti^ism: D. Muis,
Royal Professor of the Oriental Languages at Paris, ^pheld the Bishop's Cause;
and in a new Version of the Psalms, wherein he followed the Hebrew exactly, and
in a literal Commentary which he added, he thought it best to follow the Vulgar
in the Translation of this Verse. This man wrote against Daille, who defended
himself against the Attacks of the Bishop with as much Vigor as Modesty; and
answered de Muis in such a manner, as to win the more unbiased sort of people
to be of his side, or at least so propitious to him, as to judge that there was
nothing that could give offense in the Alteration which he had made in the
Couplet, or that hindered the Psalm from being an entire Prayer for the King.
But the third Accusation gave such a Blow, that the Consequences of it were
soon felt: For the King set forth an Edict which was verified in the Parliament
Edict against Blasphemers.
of Paris, March 9. and which condemn Blasphemers of God, the Virgin, and the
Saints; For the fourth time, inclusively to redoubled Fines, Forfeitures, and
Penances: For the fifth time, to be Pillory'd: For the sixth time, to have the
Upper-Lip cut off: For the seventh, to lose the Lower-Lip also; And for the
eighth, to have the Tongue pulled out.

'Twas an easy thing to extend the Rigor of this Declaration Effects of that
Declaration.
to the Reformed, who no sooner taught that the Merits of the Saints were of no
benefit to Men, or that God never appointed the Holy Mother of Christ a
Mediatrix for Sinners, nor Queen of Heaven, but they were accounted
Blasphemers. For which Reason it was, that upon the noise of this Declaration,
John de Gap, a Capuchin, going to hear La Faye, a Minister of Loriol Preach,
carried a Complaint against him of the 24th of March, and informed the Judges
of several Blaspemies, which, as he said, that Minister had pronounced in his
hearing. This Affair spun out for above two Years before it was fully
prosecuted; but at last a Capias was issued out against the Minister, and
Inquiry made after his Person, which enforced him to keep out of the way till
the Tempest was over. However Chartier a Merchant's Son of Blois had not bin so
easily acquitted, could they but have caught him. For there was a Complaint and
an Information put in against him upon the 22th of May, for some pretended
Blasphemy which he had uttered against the Sacrament, the same Day that the
Romish Church carries it about in a Pompous Procession. Now in regard he did
not make a voluntary Appearance, but kept himself from being taken, he was
condemned for Contumacy the First of October, to undergo the Amend Honorable
before the Principal Church of Blois, to have his Tongue bored, and his Lips
slit; to be Fined Three hundred Livres to the Poor, and Banished for ever out
of the Balliage and County of Blois. These were the Fruits and Penalties of
this Declaration. But this Violence lasted not long; and tho we have seen from
time to time some Vexation arise from this Fountain; nevertheless ^t was not
the Occasion of so much Mischief as they who set ^orth the Edict expected.

As for the first Accusation, it produced no more then Childish The first
Accusation revived.
Cavils, with which the Missionaries astonished inconsiderable People: Not but
that the Clergy would fain have made a Busi^ess of Importance of it. For the
Bishop of St. Flour, who took ^is leave of the King, in the Name of the
Assembly, upon the ^oth of April, could not forbear talking of the Union with
the Lutherans after a most Envenomed manner. He made a Speech full of Allusions
to the Affairs of the Reformed, more especially ^o the taking of Rochelle,
which he called the Rock that had a share (...) all the Commotions of the
Kingdom, and the Foundation of a Re^igion contrary to that which Christ
established upon the Rock. Among other things he congratulated the King, That
his Power which in other Reigns was limited, now knew no bounds. A Complement
which it is a difficult thing to believe, That Sub^ects who have any Sense or
Understanding, Cordially bestow upon their Sovereigns. The rest of his Speech
rolled all upon ^he Immunities of the Clergy, which as he made the King
be^ieve, were violated in diverse things. Moreover, he presented The Clergie's
Papers.
^o the King a Paper from the Assembly, of which there were ma^y Articles that
concerned the Reformed. The greatest part were Answered by the King, with those
Extensions that carry ^he Concession farther then was desired. Thus the
Sixteenth Answer to the 16th. Article.
Article demanded, That the Reformed might preach no more upon the Lands which
belonged to the Ecclesiastics; nor within 5 Leagues within Cities where
Parlaments sat, nor in Episcopal Cities, nor in Places so near Catholic
Churches, as to disturb Divine Service: That Churches built in such Places
might be pulled down within three Months; and that the old Churchyards might be
reserved to the Catholics. The King granted every thing, and added the pulling
down of all Churches that had bin built since the Edict, without Letters
Patents enregister'd: And in Cases of Difference about the Execution of the
Edict, he summoned the Cause before himself, because at that time there were no
Commissioners. In like manner, as to the Thirty second Article, wherein the
Clergy demanded that the Ministers might not be suffered to Preach in the
Annexes, To the 32d
the King expressed the Prohibition in more rigorous Terms then those of the
Demand; and forbid the Ministers to Preach without the Place of their
Habitation.

Likewise to the Thirty third Article, which required the To the 33d
Executions of Decrees of Parliaments, and Grand Assizes, for the Demolishing
of Churches, the King consented; and withal, added those that had bin set
forth for the Restoration of the Ecclesiastics to their Estates and
Privileges; and upon pretended Infringements of the Edicts committed by the
Reformed. The rest demanded that the Chamber of the Edict, or Party-Chambers
might not take Cognizance of Appeals of Temporal Persons from Ecclesiastical
Courts; That the Reformed might be deprived of such Honorary Privileges as
belonged to 'em in the Churches: And that the Bishop might confer Benefices
instead of Him who had the Right of Patronage. That the Reformed Judges might
not take Cognizance of the Transgressing of Holidays; That the Judges of Courts
possessed in Peerage with the King, if they were Reformed, might be Reimburst,
and Catholics put in their room: That the Commission given out for the
Execution of the Edict in the Dauphinate, might be revoked; That the Materials
of the Fortifications of the Reformed Cities which had bin Demolishd, might be
bestowed upon the Clergy to build Churches: That the Syndics and Promooters of
Diocesses might be admitted Plaintiffs in Suits about Infringements: That the
second Place at all General Assemblies in Town Houses might be allowed the
Bishop's Vicar: That it might be lawful to lay Impositions upon all the
Inhabitants of Parishes, for the building of Vicaridge houses, Reparations of
Structures, purchase of Ornaments, and other Things of the like nature: That
Tithes might be paid by the Reformed, who as they pretended had bin exempted in
some Places for sixty Years together, by the Misfortune of the Wars; and this,
notwithstanding any Contracts, Agreements, or Decrees that had bin made or
issued forth to the contrary. The King granted within a little all these
Demands to the Clergy. Nor do I see but one Article wherein he observed any
Measure of Equity for the Reformed; and that was upon the Twenty sixth Article,
Wherein the Clergy demanded To the 26th
that the Schoolmasters might be Catholics; which the King granted according
to their desire; but without any prejudice to Schools granted the Reformed by
Letters Patents enregister'd.

Now in that ill Humor wherein the Council was at Particular Exercises
forbidden at Villiers se bell.
that time, there appeared several Decrees, which put the Reformed to no small
Trouble. For the Inhabitants of Villiers le bell and parts adjoining, were
accustomed to meet upon Sundays or Holidays in that Borough, when the Season
would not permit 'em to repair to Charenton, which was the nearest Place where
there was any Exercise. The Place of their Meeting was some Private House where
they Rendevouz'd, upon the Sound of the same Bell which Called the Catholics to
Church. But in regard they had no Minister, they only met to hear some Sermon,
or some Chapter in the Scripture read, to sing Psalms, and Pray together. These
private Exercises did no body any harm; nor could the Catholics be disturbed,
in regard the Reformed had ended their Devotions long before the Catholic
Church was done. Yet would they needs have these Assemblies to be a
Misdemeanour, and to render their Prosecutions of those People the more
plausible, 'twas added, that they spoke undecently of the Romish Preachers; and
that they made the Children of the Catholics that were sent to their Schools to
read the Books of the Reformed. Upon which immediately came forth a Decree of
the Privy Council, dated May 16th, by which these Petty Exercises, and supposed
Misdemeanors were severely forbid.

Corhi^ni was a little City, where the Reformed had a Place The Exercise forbid
at Corbigni.
of Exercise by virtue of as clear a Possession as could be in the World; so
that the Commissioners had continued 'em in (...) solemn Ordinance made in the
Year 1600. That Ordinance removed 'em to the farther end of one of the Suburbs
of the City, within the Jurisdiction of Corbigni, with a Proviso, till the
Opposition which the Abbot made to the settlement of the Exercise in the City
should be determined. This Business hung in suspense near Seven Years; after
which, there was a Decree of Council of the 13th of March, 16^7. which allowed
the Exercise, not within the City, but in one of the Suburbs, and within the
Jurisdiction of the City; and appointed that Place for the first Place of the
Bailiage. B^^ in regard there happened since that, an Alteration in the
Proceedings of that Court, and because the City depended upon the Abbey of St.
Leonard's, the Abbot obtained this Year a Decree upon a Petition, which forbid
the Reformed their Exercise in that Place, or upon any Lands, or within any
Jurisdiction of the Abbey. Nor did they, when they took away this, appoint any
other Place for the Reformed; but constrained 'em to sell the Inheritances
which they had Purchas^ in the Suburbs, before they would provide 'em another
Place. 'Twas only told 'em, that the King's Officers should give 'em notice
whither or no there had bin a Place of Bailiage delivered according to the
Edict; that if there were, there might be one allowed 'em. By which it
appeared, that the Decree had bin issued forth without any knowledge of the
Cause; because this Place had bin granted in Right of Bailiage by a Definitive
Decree. But for all that, this Decree was put in Execution, without any regard
at all had to the Opposition which the Reformed made. They also took the
Opportunity to serve this Decree when Monsanglard, the Minister of the Place,
was in his Pulpit; to the end the Thing might make so much the Greater Noise,
and more effectually redound to the Reproach and Affront of the Reformed. This
Monsanglard had bin accused in Court, for having said, That at Rome they sold
Remission of Sins; for which the Judge of the Place Condemned him to the Amend
Honorable, and all the Consequences of that Punishment. But upon his Appeal,
the Minister being removed to the Prison of Paris, called La Conciergerie, and
pleading in his own justification, That he took what he had said out ^ut of a
Book of the Rates of the Apostolic Chamber, Printed at Rome it self, they were
ashamed to Confirm the Sentence, and Dismissed both him and the Process out of
Court.

There is also another Decree to be seen of an uncertain Date, set forth by the
Chamber of the Edict of Rouen, which forbid the Reformed to continue their
Exercise in the Borough of St. S^lvin, because it depended upon the Abbey of
Almeneche. Another Decree of Council ordained, That the Church of ^r should be
pulled down, as being too near the Catholic Church, after they had built
another which should be neither within the Jurisdiction, Signiories, or
Precincts of the Eccle^. The 20th of June, came forth another Edict of the
Privy Council, against the Lord of Claye and Biche, which forbid the Exercise
within the Signiories where the Lord did not actually reside, the presence of
his Domestic Servants not being sufficient to Authorize it. The same Decree
forbid Preaching without the Place of their Residence, upon pain of Corporal
Punishment and Imprisonment. I also find Two Decrees Cited by such as have
Collected those Sorts of Acts against the Reformed; the First of which was
Dated the 15th Other Regulations.
of July, the Other the 12th of December. They Imported, that the Exercises
should not be performed in the Lord's Houses when the Minister should be absent
or sick. The Parliament of Bourdeaux also Signalized themselves by a Decree set
forth A Decree to the prejudice of Paternal Authority
the 4th of July, against the Authority of Parents. For one La ^ee dwelling in
the Borough of Castres, had married a Catholic Wife, by whom he had six or
seven Children, which the Wife, making an ill use of her Husband's Indulgence,
brought up in the Catholic Religion. This Woman happened to die before the
Children had attained the Age of Discretion, and the Father was accused for
constraining the Children to go to the Reformed Church. Upon which the
Parliament interposed, and gave the Advocate-General leave to bring in an
Information: and in the mean time General Prohibitions were sent abroad,
forbidding Parents to force their Children to go to Protestant Sermons.

The Bailiage of Gex was used after the same manner as Bailiage of Gex.
the rest of the Kingdom; where the Prince of Conde, as Governor of Burgundy,
upon which the Bailiage depended, put in execution the Prohibitions forbidding
the Admission of Foreign Ministers, comprehending under that Name the
Inhabitants of Geneva. He also equally divided the use of the Common Pastures
of the Country between the Reformed and the Catholics, though the Reformed were
Ten for One.

The greatest part of the Decrees which I have enumerated, 1637.
were revived again the next year: But there were Schools forbidden.
several to which they added other Articles very grievous and troublesome. The
Parliament of Rouen, by a Decree of the 18th of March forbid the keeping of any
Schools at St. Lo. For the Consistory had set up some according to the
Exhortation of the National Synods, and had also put in Regents, such as those
Synods approved. The Promoter Coutances undertook this Business, and upon an
Appeal from the Sentence of the Ordinary Judge he procured a Decree, which
annulled the Power of the Consistory; forbid 'em for the future to give
Approbation of the like nature; permitted Masters only to teach to write and
read in private Houses, but not to instruct or Catechize, not to say Public
Prayers, or read Lectures, contrary to the Doctrine of A Vexatious Decree of
the Privy Council upon several Articles.
the Romish Church. Upon the 21st of April the Privy Council set forth a Decree
which forbid the Exercise in the absence of the Ministers; as also in any other
Places then those wherein it was lawful for 'em to reside by the Edicts. The
same Decree forbid the hindering of Fathers, Mothers, Tutors, Kindred, Masters,
etc. to send their Children, Relations, Friends, Servants, etc. to Masters of
Catholic Schools approved by the Ordinaries. So that what with taking away from
the Reformed the liberty of having Colleges, what with obliging the
Consistories to suffer the sending of Children to suspected Masters, they who
had Children to bring up, were reduced either to let 'em grow up in ignorance,
or expose 'em to the Snares and Inveagling Persuasions and Allurements of
Catholic Tutors. By the same Decree, the Reformed were also ordered to spread
Carpets before their doors upon Solemn Procession-days: upon neglect of which,
after the first Summons, they were to be spread at their Cost and Charges; and
if they obstructed or opposed the doing of it, they were condemned to
Imprisonment; which was directly opposite to the third private Article of the
Edict of Nantes.

Upon the 28th of the same Month came forth another Decree Another Decree
touching Patents for Office^.
of the Privy Council, the effects of which were still more vexatious. For it
forbid the Bailiffs and Seneschals to admit any Plaintiffs or Demandants in a
Suit, whether Notaries or Advocates, without the King's Letters Patents. For
the Council bethought themselves of inserting into Letters of this Nature the
Clause of the Catholic Religion, on purpose to exclude by that means all the
Reformed from any Offices. But Custom has settled a Remedy against this
Artifice, in regard that in almost all the Jurisdictions of the Kingdom, the
Judges admitted People to the exercise of these petty Employments, upon the
bare resignation of him who had the Letters Patents: so that they passed from
hand to hand without having any recourse to the King; which spared the Reformed
the Affront of a Refusal, the Catholics the Trouble, the Delays, and the
Expense of a Suit; there being none but Employments that were somewhat
considerable, for which they troubled themselves to take out the King's Letters
Patents.

The King was made believe, that it was contrary to his Oath, that there should
be any Offices in the Kingdom which did not depend upon him, and which were
executed by persons that were not invested in 'em by his power. The first
design was to deprive the Reformed of the easy means to maintain themselves in
those petty Employments, which caus^ 'em to be valued in the places of their
Abode, and sheltered 'em from a thousand petty Vexations. But if so fell out,
that this Regulation did as much Injury to the Catholics, as to others; and
that the Name of Reformed served in this, as well as in other things of greater
moment, to involve all the French in the same Restraint. This was Sport for the
Clergy; who exempting themselves from Servitude, sacrificed to their Passion
and Malice against the Reformed, the Liberty of the whole Kingdom.

Upon the 23d of June came forth another Edict from the Exercise forbid a^^tin
at Claye.
same Council against the Lord of Claye. This was the fifth that had bin issued
out against the Exercise in his House, under pretencee that he never resided
there; yet to ward off this Cavil, he had declared at the Sessions House in
Paris, that he had made choice of his House at Claye for his principal
Habitation, and that he intended to reside there for the future: which ought to
have mintain'd his Right of having Sermons in his House, had it not bin the
Maxim of the Council to make use of any Pretense to forbid the Exercise of the
Reformed Religion, and still to uphold the Prohibition when the Pretense was
removed.

The Reformed of Paris had set up a House in the Suburbs ^se of ^^^^ty forbid
at ^^ris.
of St. Marcean, whither they carried their sick People; they had already
furnished it with Fourteen or Fifteen Beds, and designed to have sent in more.
Now it happened that a Cooper's Prentice, born a Catholic, working with a
Reformed Master in the Church Mershes, fell sick, and with his own consent was
carried to this New Hospital; whether he had imbibed any tincture of his
Master's Religion, or whether the Abhorrency which poor Creatures have for the
Hostel de Dieu at Paris, where the Infection is generally mortal to all that
are carried thither, caused him to prefer a House more neat and healthy.
However it were, his removal from one end of Paris to the other, could not
choose but be taken no^e of. Upon which a Commissioner came upon the 19th of
(...) to this New House of Charity, to draw up a Verbal ^eport of the condition
it was i^, and of the use for which was designed. Upon which Verbal Process,
the Privy Coun^ i^a'd forth a Decree of the 30th of June, wherein without so
much as mentioning the Religion, but only supposing that it was ^tra^* to the
King's Authority, to erect Hos, itals without the King's Permission, (as if
there had bin so much need of ^e Authority of Men to exercise Works of Humanity
and Charity so expressly approved of God) and pretending in ^e second place,
that the sick People were not looked after, ^^d relieved in that New
Establishment, as Christian Chari^ required; it was ordained, that all the sick
People which ^ere in the Reformed Hospital, should be removed to the Ho^el de
Dieu, where they should be received upon the first ^ommand; that the Beds
should be put into the hands of ^rustees, to be at the King's disposal to whom
he should think (...) et; and that the Governor should leave the House with all
his Family, upon pain of Imprisonment, and other corporal punishment. This
Decree was put in execution by the Usher (...) the Council upon the 4th of
July, who found no more ^hen five sick, Persons in the place: one of which
finding himself strong enough to provide for himself without assistance, had
his Liberty to go where he pleased. The other ^r refusing to be carried to the
Hostel de Dieu, and naming the places whither they desired to be carried, were
removed without any opposition by the care of the Usher, who did (...) Office
with more Civility then the Rabble would have had him.

There was a new House erected in the Fauburg St. Ger^ The House of the
Propagation of Faith: and a remarked l^ piece of Injustice.
by the Pope's Bulls and the King's Letters Patent, under the name of, The
Propagation of the Faith; which was designed for the lodging of young People
that might be induced to embrace the Catholic Religion. Now one La Fra^r^^
happening to die., left two Daughters with his Wife. One of these having attained
to Thirteen years of Age and the other to Eleven, they were both inveagl'd in^
this House. Their Mother presented a Petition to the Bai^ of the Suburb, who
was then Judge of the Suburb-Cou^ and redemanded her Daughters. The Judge
having examined the matter, and finding it to be a manifest Cheat thought it
his duty to do justice, and delivered the Children back to their Mother. Now
the Pretense which they man use of to gain the good will of the Children was,
that their Mother was married again, and would be sure to misu^ 'em. Upon which
the Governors of the House made (...) most hideous complaint both against the
Father-in-law, and the Baily; accusing the one to have committed several
violences in the House; and the other for coming to the House to take away the
Children by main force, accompanied with several drawn Swords that made a noise
and (...) hubbub before the Door, to the great scandal of the House And
moreover, they positively affirmed, That the Children had many times declared
before their Father-in-law himself that they desired to be bred up in the
Catholic Religion Thereupon the Council made a Decree, which plainly showed
that they were not convinced of the truth of the Relation* For it only decreed,
that the Baily should deliver the Verba^ Process to Thiersaut, Master of the
Requests, to the end that upon farther Examination such order might be taken a^
should be thought expedient. However, the King summoned before himself and his
Council all Causes concerning that House and the New Converts, and forbid the
Baily to take cognizance of 'em for the future. As much as to say, that they
thought it not just to condemn a Judge who had done no more then his duty;
however, they would not leave the Reformed under the Protection of those that
made a conscience of doing 'em Justice.

The Doctors also of the Sorbonne would needs be stickling The Conversion of
Francis Cupif.
this year to display some marks of their Zeal against the Reformed. For it so
fell out, that Francis Cupif, a Doctor of that Faculty, and Curate of Contigni
in the Dio^s of Angers, embraced the Reformed Religion, and set ^th a
Declaration of the Motives that had obliged him to ^ Which Declaration he
addressed to the Bishop of the ^ocess; believing it most proper to give him an
account ^ his Conduct. But the Bishop, either disdaining a Cu^e of a Village as
beneath him; or else, as many times ^als the Prelates, not having Learning
sufficient to answer ^, left the care of being revenged upon him, to the Sor^e.
Whereupon, that College upon the 14th of July ^w up a Sharp and Violent Order,
by which they de^ded Cupif from all his Dignities, and bestowed a thou^d
Maledictions and Curses upon him. But he avoided (...) being far more severely
handled by retiring into Hol^d, where he waxed old in the Functions of the
Mini^y; wherein he acquitted himself in a more edifying man^, then the greatest
part of those that abandon the Church ^ Rome are wont to do.

The Reformed were very numerous at Pons in Saintonge. Regulations against the
Reformed of Pons.
^or could their Adversaries contrive any other way to vex ^, then by bestowing
upon 'em a Regulation dated at Bour^x, December the 5th, upon the Motion of the
Advocate^neral; which forbid 'em to work upon Holidays with ^eir Shops open,
nor to sell Flesh upon days prohibited ^ the Romish Church; nor to throw their
Dirt about the ^oss which the Recollects had erected, nor at the end of (...)
Streets that adjoin'd to their Church. Here it is to be ^serv'd, that those
Monks had erected a Cross on purpose ^ that very place which time out of mind
had bin the ^mmon Dunghill for all the Neighborhood. But the Con^nt being
annoyed by it, bethought themselves of this Ex^dient to remove the Nuisance;
and the more easily to ob^n their Desires, they demanded the Prohibitions only
against the Reformed, to deprive the whole City of a Con^nience; and a Fine of
80 Livres was laid upon all that ^us'd to obey the Decree.

In the midst of these Vexations and Injuries done the Reformed throughout all
the Provinces, they assembled ^ A National Synod.
National Synod at Alanson. Which Assemblies served to (...) other purpose,
then to give 'em an opportunity to bewa^ together the bad condition of their
Affairs, and to ^e^ what Remedy was most proper to be applied to their
Calamities. They were extremely tormented with the presence of the
Commissioners. For when they had drawn up ^ Paper of their Complaints, 'twas
thought a great matte^ well accomplished to receive it back from the hands of
the^ Deputies; nor could they many times obtain the favor (...) an Answer.
Nevertheless, the Court was still jealous o^ these Assemblies; and they were so
accustomed to fear the Reformed in a Body, that they were always alarmed a^
that which was no more then the shadow of their Unio^ And indeed, the Reformed
were as yet considerable ^o^ their number. Their Churches in the Country were
for the most part composed of Nobility and Gentry. There were several, wherein
there were reck'nd fourscore or ^ hundred Families of Gentlemen; which did so
much honor to their Religion, that you might frequently see three^ score or
fourscore Coaches waiting before the Place of their Exercises. They were not
therefore yet so low, but that they were in a condition to put their
Adversaries to trouble^ had their Intentions bin evil. So that the Court, wh^^
knew too well what was in their power to do, were afraid lest the Synods should
take up Resolutions which the Gentry were to put in execution. For which
reason, they were unwilling that any Synods should be held for the future in
any other Place then at Charenton, to the end they might have a near eye upon
those formidable Assemblies. However, there was no danger on that side. For the
Reformed well understood, that they were at the mercy of their Enemies, and
that they had nothing left to preserve and support 'em but the good will of the
Kings pleasure. The Knowledge of this obliged 'em to extend their Obedience as
far as it would reach, for fear of being Exterminated upon the Least pretense,
as Rebels: and the Synods Labored by good Discipline, to remedy the Mischiefs
that might arise from the Persecution.

The Court gave leave for their Synod to be held at Alenson, At Alenson.
^e Small City, where there was little Probability that the Reformed should
attempt any great Matters; nor is it so far remote from Paris, but that upon
Occasion the King might send his Orders thither in four and twenty Hours.
Nevertheless there was a high Value put upon this Favor, as if it had been a
thing of Great Importance. The Brief by which permission was given, and the
Commission was Couched in the ordinary Terms, and breathed nothing but good
Will and Kindness. The Commissioner was St. Mark, a Councellor of State; a
Person as much at the Devotion of the Court as Galand had been. The Synod also
sat down the 27th. of May, and after the Usual preliminary Ceremonies, St.
Mark, having presented his Commission, made an Ingenious Speech before he
proposed The Commissioners Speech.
the Articles with which he was entrusted by his Commission. First of all he
showed, that the Greatest Part preac'h the Doctrine of Obedience; and to
Confirm 'em in their so doing, he declared, that the King had promised
Constantly to observe the Edicts, so long as the Reformed performed the Duties
of Faithful Subjects. He Extolled in a flattering manner the Kings Power, which
the Hand of God that assisted him all along rendered formidable both abroad and
at home. He spoke of the Misfortunes which the Reformed had suffered, while
they had Places of Strength in their Hands; and of the repose which they
enjoyed since they depended Sole^y upon the Kings Favor. He compared their
Condition grounded upon the Kings word, and upheld against the Passions of
People, agitated by too various Commotions, to the Earth that hangs poised in
the Air by the Word of God. He heightened the Confidence which the King had in
'em, as appeared by that Mark of his Favor which he had bestowed upon 'em, by
graciously permitting 'em to assemble in a Time of War: And from all these
Reflections, he concluded that it behooved 'em to regulate all their Affections,
their Words and Actions, by Obedience.

After this, he came to his Instructions, and declared. I That And his
Instructions.
the King forbid all Holding Intelligence, both Domestic as well as Foreign.
The Pretense was, that the King had been informed that the Colloquie of Nimes
and Rousselet, and the Minister, had received a Letter from the Canton of Bern,
with whom although they were in Alliance with the Crown, and of the same Religion
with the Reformed, it was not Lawful to hold Correspondence even in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, because it made the State jealous of a Correspondence
of another Sort; for which reason the Kings Subjects were not allowed to Visit
Foreign Ministers: Whence it followed, that 'twas a Breach of their Duty to
receive those Letters, or else that they ought to have accquainted the Governor
or the Commissioner with 'em. II. That the King was no way pleased to hear that
one Province held Communication with another; as had happened between the
Synods of lower Languedoc and the Dauphinate, upon occasion of the two
Ministers Cregut and Arnaud. The Reason of this Prohibition was, because the
Reformed being no Body Politic, they could not hold Politic Councils.
Moreover that the King would not permit that any Minister should be deputed to
be present in one Synod in the Name of another; nor that Provincial Synods
should Ordain General Fasts. III. That it was the Kings Pleasure the Ministers
should preach Obedience, and that when any thing should be Ordained, which
might seem repugnant to Liberty of Conscience, for want of knowing the Motives
that induced him to it, they should not tax his Conduct with any design against
Religion, the Liberty of which he was resolved to maintain: Consequently, that
He ordered 'em to abstain from the Words, Scourges of God, Martyrs,
Persecution, and other the like Terms. IV. That he forbid 'em to make use of
the Words, Antichrist, or Idolaters, or any other of the same Nature, when they
spoke of the Pope or the Catholics; and to forbear all Sharp and inveterate
Expressions against the Ministers who had changed their Religion, under the
Penalty of Interdiction, or a greater Punishment for the same Offense repeated.
V. That he forbid the Selling Religious Books, whether Printed within or
without the Kingdom, if they were not first Examined and approved by two
Ministers, appointed by the Synods, under the Penalty of Confiscation. VI. That
whereas at Andusa, the Synod had refused to ordain the Benediction of a second
Marriage of a Person, whose First Marriage had been adjudg'd Null and Vacant by
the Sentence of the Magistrate, it was the Kings Pleasure that the National
Synod should enjoin Obedience to the Judges in such Cases, and that what had
been done to the Contrary might be amended. VII. That the Ministers should obey
those Declarations which concerned the Annexes, upon Penalty of forfeiting the
Favors granted by the Edicts. VIII. That they should not make use of the Money
taken out of the Poors Box to pay the Ministers, who were referred for the
payment of their Salaries to the XLIXth. Article of Particulars. IX. That they
should not go a begging from House to House, under pretense of necessary
Expenses, in regard the King gave leave to the Heads of every Church to
assemble, in the Nature of a Consistory, to regulate the Contributions for
payment of the Ministers Salaries; for defraying the Expense of Journeys for
the Colloquies and Synods, for the payment of Academies and repair of Churches,
of which there should be a Roll made up and Authorized by the Magistrate, and
declared to be of as full force as when the Kings Money was to be Collected. X.
That they should Correct the Sentence of the Provincial Synod of Nimes, which
had adjudg'd a certain Sum to Petit, Professor in Theology, out of the
Academy Money, which had been raised upon the three Colloquies, contrary to the
Settlement of the Regulations. XI. That there should be an Emendation of what
had been adjudg'd by the same Synod, touching the Nullity of Baptism
administered by Persons never lawfully called to the Ministry.

The Commissioner, being unwilling to speak any thing of his own Head upon this
last Article, which was a matter of Importance and Nicely to be handled, though
earnestly recommended to his Management, read the very words of his
instruction, which without doubt had been drawn by a Divine of the lower Form.
The substance of it was, that from the Judgment of the Synod there arose an
Opinion of the Anabaptists, who repeated Baptism upon the Question which they
start, whether he who performed the Ceremony, had been rightly called or no. A
new Argument of which that Sect was never wont to make use. That there was an
Ambiguous Interpretation to be made of the Sentence of the Assembly, which
seemed to intimate that the Roman Church approved the Baptism of the
Anabaptists, though she declares their calling to be Illegitimate. That Baptism
was of force Ex opere Operato, according to the Language of the Schoolmen, to
express that Virtue of the Sacrament by which it actually confers Grace upon
those who receive the Outward Symbol, without any Inward preparation to
participate of it, provided they obstruct not the Operation of it by any Mortal
Sin. Now the Roman Church not having any need of Legitimate callings, by the
Confession of the Reformed themselves, 'twas not for them, to invalidate that
Baptism which she Approves, because that in a Case of necessity probably
adjudg'd, all Persons have a Calling to administer it.

There might be curious Reflections made upon this odd Piece of ill contrived
Theology, were they not too remote from my The Moderators Answer.
Subject to make any upon 'em. I shall therefore only say, that all the
Commissioners sweet Words, could not soften a sort of Articles so new, and so
full of Inconveniences that they could not be observed without reducing the
Reformed to a most cruel Confinement. More especially the Third was couched in
Terms that were very Extraordinary: And it was an exacting from 'em, a strange
degree of Blindness, to desire that the Reformed should remain persuaded, that
their Enemies had no other then good Intentions toward 'em, though at the same
time they should see 'em doing things actually prejudicial to the Liberty of
their Consciences. For this is that which was meant at least by that same
strain of Language; When for want of knowing the Motives, it might seem to
them, as if the Proceedings of the Court were prejudicial to that same precious
Liberty. The Synod answered the Commissioners Speech, as people answer when
they tremble. They excused one part of those things which had served as a
Pretense and Groundwork for his Instructions; and as to almost all the Rest,
they made great Protestations of their Ready Obedience. The Moderatour began
with returning Thanks to God, that ^e had inclined the Kings Heart to uphold
the Reformed by his Good Will and Favor; to which he added some kind of
adulatory Complements to the Commissioner. He excused ^he Letters received from
the Switzers, which only concerned ^he Calling of Rousselet to the Profession
of Theology at Neuf^^atel, where he was born; and which had been produced at
^he Synod, in presence of the Commissioners then sitting a^ong 'em. He excused
the Correspondence that had been ^eld between the Synod of Lower Languedoc and
the Dauphi^ate, as necessary for the Enquiry that one Province was ^ound to
make after the Pastors of the Other, according to the ^ethod of their
Discipline. He assured him that Private ^ynods should not set up any more
Regulations, nor appoint any more general Fasts, but that they should submit to
the Go^ernment; that they should keep close to the Confession of ^aith, and the
Word of God: That they should abstain from ^arsh and bitter Expressions against
all Persons whatever; to which he added, that it was the Humble Supplication of
their ^ hole Body to his Majesty, that on his part he would Vout^^^e to
restrain the Aff^onts and Insolences of the Catholics. ^e promised that
nothing should be written without Appro^a^^on, and that they would obey the
Decrees of the Magestrate ^ouching the Dissolution of Marriages: From which the
Pro^ince of Cevennes, which was accused by the Commissioners, ^rotested that
they never had the least thought to de^art.

He enlarged somewhat more, and was a little more reso^^te upon the Article of
Annexes; and told the Commissio^^r, Article o^ Annexes.
that they never preached by force in any Place: That the Edict of 1567. which
was alleged to Authorize these new ^rohibitions, ought not any longer to have
the Force of a ^aw, since it was revoak'd by the Edicts which were afterward
set forth; and more especially by the Edict of Nants: that the Ministers never
preached but in such places where free* Exercise was allowed: That several of
those places also had been Confirmed by the Commissioners who had conside'd
'em, as separate Quarters of the same Body: That the Ministers never preached
out of those Circumscribed Limits, in the Church of another Minister, but in
case of Absence or Sickness, or when some other Lawful Cause required it. That
they had leave by Virtue of the Edict to abide where they pleased themselves;
and by Consequence in other places besides the District of their Exercise, when
they found it for their Convenience. Upon these Grounds, they besought the King
to revoke those Prohibitions which derogated from the Edicts. They besought him
likewise to hinder the Officers of Justice from meddling with Annulling
Contracts made between the Churches and their Ministers, to let the Method
stand without Payment of Ministers.
any alteration for raising the Salaries of the Ministers, and paying the
Schools; and to ratify what had been done in Favor of Petit the Professor, as
being Conformable to Custom. In a word, he justified the Opinion of the Synod
of Nimes, Baptism.
touching Baptism, as being the Doctrine of all the Reformed Churches: He
rejected the Opus operatum of the Roman Church, and humbly implored the King,
since he permitted the Profession of the Reformed Religion, to give leave, that
that same Determination of the Synod might be allowed of.

After this they deputed two Ministers and one Gentleman to be sent to the
King: but when they went about to read the Instructions of the Provinces for
drawing up the Papers which the Deputies were to Carry, the Commissioner
endeavored to have hindr'd 'em, as if it had been matter of Politic concern,
with which the Synod had nothing to do to Meddle. Nevertheless he Suffered
himself to be overrul'd, when they gave him to understand, that there was
nothing of Debate or Consultation in the Case, but only a mee^ collection of
such Complaints and Remonstrances into one Paper, which the Deputies of the
Provinces brought ready Digested. He would also have obliged 'em to set down at
the head of the Paper the Title of Pretended Reformed Religion: but as for that
they excused themselves, by returning him for answer, That the King had never
exacted from his Subjects that they should brand themselves with any such
Appellations, in things wherein they were to speak according to their
Consceiences. So that at length they delivered to their Deputies their Letters,
their Instructions, and their Complaints. Their Instructions recommended to 'em
three Articles in particular: The Point concerning the Annexes; that of
Baptism; upon which they were afraid that the Council would make some untoward
Order; and the Point of being exempted from spreading Carpets before their
Houses, which had occasioned great Vexations over all the Kingdom. As for the
Paper of Complaints it self, it contained Nine Heads: And though the King had
done nothing in consideration of the Complaints of the preceding Synod, yet
they resolved to present 'em, rather that they might preserve to themselves the
Liberty of making their Complaints, then for any hope they had of an answer.

The First Article complained that notwithstanding all the Promises which the
King had made by the Edict of the Year 1629. There were no less then Thirty
eight Places, where they could not obtain the Reestablishment of Free Exercise,
though it had been put forth in 1620. All which places were named in the Article.
Forty seven Others were also marked down in the Second, some in Saintonge, some
in Aunix, others in the Islands of Oleron and Re, and several other Places,
where they had Suppressed the Free Exercise of the Reformed Religion by force,
through the Misfortune of the Times. The Third Article demanded the Liberty of
preaching in the Annexes. The fourth contained three Complaints. That the
Churchyards were not restored to the Reformed, which had been taken from 'em
before the Year 1625. tho* the Restitution were promised 'em in the Answer
returned to their Papers: That in other Places they had been deprived a fresh
both of their Church*yards and Churches: That in other Places they had been
hindered from building Churches: and they named several Places where these Acts
of Injustice had been done 'em. There was one Town among the Rest, where they
were enforced to bury their dead in their own Fields, and where above Three at
a time were forbid to attend the Corpse. The First spoke of Alenson, where the
Synod was assembled; which had had a Suit before the Council, touching the
Right of Free Exercise in that City; and of Burying their Dead in the Suburbs
of St. Blaise, where there was a Church yard. There had been a Decree of the
13th. of May, which put a stop to the Cavils of the Catholics: Nevertheless,
in contempt of the Decree, and during the sitting of the Synod it self, they
had given a new Assignment upon the same Brangle to the Reformed at the
Council. The next concerned the Affairs of the Country of Gex, where Machaut,
by his Ordinances had overturned all ancient Customs of the Province, and the
Regulations themselves which had been made by the Commissioners in the Year
1612. with the Consent of the Bishop, and the Catholic Inhabitants. Which
Regulations had been confirmed in Council, by a Decree of the 13th. of
December, the same Year. But for all that, Machaut anull'd 'em, without giving
notice to the other side. It Is true, they did not mention the Prince of Condes
Name in this Complaint, though he had at least as deep a share in these Violences
as the Intendant; for they were willing to pay that Respect to his Quality. The
Seventh and Eighth complained of some Decrees of the Parliament of Rennes, of
Roven, of Bourdeaux, and of the Council it self, which condemned the Reformed
either to spread Carpets before their Houses upon Processiondays, in places
where that Ceremony was observed; or to contribute toward those things from
which they were expressly discharged by the second Article of Particulars; more
especially as to Fraternities, building or repairing of Vicaridge Houses, or
the Hiring of Houses wherein Mass was to be said. The Places where these
Sentences had been given, were Vitre in Bretaigne; Claye, a Village near Paris;
Harfleur, in Normandy; Bourdeaux, where the Parliament had made a Decreee, though
the Partie-Chamber, which was then at Again, had taken Cognizance of the Matter,
and given a quite Contrary Sentence. The Other Places were St. Ambrois, in the
Diocese of Vsez, Sauve and Peiroles, in Lower Languedoc; and Segues, in
Provence; where Judgments had been pronounced by Inferior Judges. In the
Ninth, they complained of the taking away of Children; for which they instanced
the Daughter of one Ri^on, an Apothecary at Mamers, a small Town adjoining to
Alenson; another of Giles Cou^^^* not above two Years and a half Old, which the
Nuns ^^ ^^^^ir, an Episcopal City of Lower Britanie, had brought ^^ after the
Death of her Father. The Tenth, and the ^^xt Following spoke of Colleges, by
reason of which the Reformed had been su'd, wherever they went about to ^^^ct
any: And more especially, for that the Commissioners, who were appointed to
make a Partition of the Colleges of Royal Foundation, between the Catholics
and the Reformed in the Province of Languedoc, disagreeing upon this, that the
Catholic Commissioner had forbid the Reformed to teach Theology in that part
which was adjudg'd to their share, the Council, deciding the Partition, had
confirmed the Sentence of the Commissioner, though in a Case of the same nature
they had given a Decree in favor of the Academy of Montauban. And the Pretense
for so doing was, for that formerly the Academy of Nimes, was shared between
that City and Mompellier; in one of which they ^aught Human Learning and
Morality, in the other Divinity. But the Synods understanding the Consequence
and Inconvenience of that Division, had reunited to Nimes all the Parts of that
College. And this was enough for the Council to take from the One the new
Privilege it had obtained, without restoring it to the Other. The Twelfth and
Fourteenth spoke of the Ministers, from whom in several Places they had taken
away the Liberty of Residing therein, and whom they had deprived of almost all
the Privileges granted 'em by the Edicts. They were assess'd in the Parish
Rolls, even for those Estates which they had let to farm: And some there were,
that were constrained to pay the Total for the whole Parish. The Thirteenth
made mention of several Places, where the Reformed had been constrained by
Menaces and Violence to quit their Habitations. The Fifteenth renewed their
Importunities, so often repeated, for the Release of those who had been
condemned to the Galleys during the Wars. The Sixteenth made Remonstrances upon
the Attempts of the Parlaments, and which was most Surprising, and a novelty
altogether, of the Intendants upon the Jurisdiction of the Party-Chambers. And
they instanced for Examples of these Attempts, the Parlaments of Aix and
Rennes, and the Intendant of Labress, who together with the Presidial Judge of
the Borough, had given a Sentence quite contrary to the Decree of the
Party-Chamber of Grenoble. In the Seventeenth Complaint was made, that the
Reformed were excluded from all manner of Dignities and Employments,
Doctorships, and Degrees in the Faculty of Physic, and Freedoms of Companies:
Moreover that they were deprived of their Offices which they had in possession,
as had befallen the Notaries and Proctors of the Bailliages, in pursuance of
the Decree of the 28 of April, which forbid the Exercise of any Offices before
the Kings Patents obtained. The Eighteenth Complained of the Parliament of Pau,
which first began to give the Reformed of Bearn, to understand that they were
no longer to enjoy their Liberty. They forbid 'em to toll their Bells
upon-certain days, which was only to give notice of the Hours of their
meeting; to appeal from the Judgments of the Provincial Synods any other where
then to the Parliament; and to appoint Fasts in the Churches of the Province,
before they had obtained leave. Lastly, they desired the Continuance of the
Money paid of his own Bounty; and complained that the Assignments formerly
given were revoked.

By the Complaints renewed in this Paper, it is apparent, Deputies how treated
at Court, and their Harangs.
that little notice had been taken of those that preceded: but for all that the
Deputies repaired to Court, and desired Audience. Ferrand, the Minister, who
was the Chief Person in the Deputatiun, made a most flattering Harangue to the
King. He carried as High as Possibly he could the Kings Independency, whom he
called the First next to God, and the Second after Him: And assured him that
whatever he said of Royal Power, was the Doctrine of all the Reformed, which he
expressed in such Terms as made a Tacit Opposition to the Opinion of the
Catholics upon that Subject. And thus the Reformed became guilty of that
weakness which is Common to all that are in fear. They exalted beyond Measure,
by flattering Aggravations, that Power, which as they began already to be
deeply sensible was abused to their Mischief, not considering that when they
prescribed no bounds to the Power which oppressed 'em, they legitimated, as I
may so say, the Conduct of their Oppressors, and deprived themselves of their
Privilege of Complaining. But all this stood 'em in no stead: For the King
rather chose to remain Liable to the Censures of the Pope, then to be beholding
for his Exemption to the Doctrine of the Heretics. The same Ferrand also made
a Speech to the Cardinal, in most Submissive Language, and in his speeches both
to the King and that Prelate, he made use of the usual wish, very Common in the
Mouths of the Reformed, but much more in use when the Catholics speak or write
to the Pope; wherein they wish that God would cut off something from their own
Years, to make an Addition to the Life of their Pontiff. But notwithstanding
all their Cringing Submissions, they carried nothing back along with 'em but
fair words, and the King wrote as well to the Synod as to the Commissioner
certain Letters which contained the same in Substance that he had said by word
of Mouth to the Deputies. The Chiefest Favor they obtained, was Money to
defray the Expenses of the Synod; but the Answer to their Papers was put off,
till the breaking up of the Assembly.

The Commissioner was very Importunate with the Synod to Nomination of General
Deputies.
break up; and by his Earnest insisting upon their Separation, it was evident
that when the Court beheld the Reformed met together in their Assemblies, she
was sensible of those Fears which their ancient Union had infused into her. And
indeed there were but few Reasons that could oblige the Assembly to sit any
long time; for they had finished their Business, and had appointed General
Deputies: Which Nomination was done with Little Ceremony. The Marquess of
Clermont was continued, and they joined Marbaud with him for his Associate.
They had also written to the King upon this Subject, and he had promised,
according to Custom, to consent to the Nomination, after the Synod was broke
up. Nevertheless the Marquess of Clermont remained alone in the discharge of
that Employment; and neither Galand, who had been appointed by the Preceding
Synod, nor Marbaud who was named by this, were any way concerned with him. But
the Synod no way satisfied that the Court refused to answer their Paper, and
foreseeing also that so soon as they were once separated, their Complaints
would be forgot, were desirous to take some Course that they might not lose the
Benefit of all their Cares. To that purpose they thought it proper to join
Particular with the Particular Deputies.
General Deputies, who might solicit the Answer which was promised to their
Papers, and chiefly take care of three Articles which they jud'gd to be of
Greatest Importance. The Commissioner was desirous to thwart this Resolution,
and pretended that a Deputaion of that Nature was a Politic Affair, with which
an Ecclesiastical Assembly had nothing to do to meddle without Express leave.
But the Synod stood their Ground; and having given him to understand, that
there was nothing of Debate and consultation, that their business only was to
appoint certain Deputies to carry on an Innocent Solicitation, a Liberty which
the Laws allow to all men whatever, and that it could not be displeasing to the
King, who had frequently suffered the same freedom, they then went on with
their Design, and Deputed Angle and Gigord, two Ministers of Great Credit and
Authority in their Provinces.

La Militiere, who had already rendered himself very troublesome Militiere's
Projects Condemned.
by his Projects of Reunion, addressed his writings to this Synod, where they
were condemned: And as for the Behavior and Writings of Daille, who had
refuted this Visionary, they were approved: And they wrote moreover to that
same Reconciler, that if within six Months he did not manifest his Repentance,
by an Authentic Declaration to the Consistory at Paris, they would no longer
look upon him as a Member of the Reformed Churches. But the Greatest Good this
Synod did the Reformed, was their appeasing the Dispute which had made a great
noise for some years, upon the Subject of Universal Grace. Nothing was ever
known more Hot and Violent then the Fury that appeared in the pro 'and con of
this New Controversy: And it had certainly Completed the Ruin of the
Churches, had not the Synod found out a way to calm the Tempest, by obliging
the contending Parties to a Mutual Toleration.

The next Year was not remarkable for any Great Events 1638.
that concerned Religion. However, the Reformed were not a little grieved to
see a Declaration set forth by The King puts France under the Protection of the
Holy Virgin.
the King, upon the 10th. of February, by which he put his own Person and his
Kingdom under the Protection of the Blessed Virgin: The Memory of which, was to
be perpetuated by a Picture set up on purpose in the Cathedral Church of Paris,
commonly called Nostre Dame. This Declaration contained in Substance those
Expressions which the Reformed, persisting in their Sentiments touching the
Object of Religious Worship, could not choose but look upon as Impious: And
that alone was enough to blast all their Hopes of expecting any thing
Favorable from a Prince, whose Zeal for his own Religion transported him to
that excess of New Devotion. For to put his Kingdom under the Portection of a
Creature, though never so Holy, never so Divinely Priviledg'd, was evidently to
vow the Extermination of those whose Principles enjoined 'em to believe, that
in seeking such a Protection, the King renounced the Protection of God.

The Duke of Rohan died this Year of the Wounds Death of the D. of Rohan.
which he received at the Battle of Rhinseldt: Which at first were not looked
upon to be Considerable; or at least there was no body that ever believed they
had been Mortal. Which was the reason that some People believed 'em to have
been poisoned; and that the Jealousies the Court had of him, had given an
occasion to lay hold of this Opportunity, to send him out of the World without
any Noise: And the Chyrurgeons that were sent him, under pretense of being
serviceable to him, were thought to be the Instruments of this black Piece of
Politics. It Is said that the Dukes Journey into Germany, to serve the King in
the Duke of Weimar's Army, whither he went, against the Good liking of the
Court, and where he would not accept of any Command, was the Effect of some
secret Projects, the Consequences of which some People were much afraid of.
Some believ`d that he held a Strict Corespondence with the Deceas`d King
Gustavus; that they had jointly labour`d the Re union of the Lutherans and
Reformed; that their Intreagues in Order to it had produc`d the Act of the
Synod of Charenton: That in pursuance of that Act, the Reformed in Gustavus`s
Army had receiv`d the Communion after the Lutheran Manner, and the German
Lutherans who serv`d under the the Duke of Rohan, in the Country of the
Grisons, had receiv`d after the manner of the Reformed: That those two Aspiring
Genius`s built Great designs upon this Reunion; that the Death of Gustavus,
procur`d by those who were desirous to stop the Torrent of his Victories,
disappointed all the Duke's designs. Therefore it was giv`n out that he was
about to revive the same Corespondencies with the Duke of Weimar, a Prince of
vast Courage, great Experience, and accounted one of the Bravest Captains of
his Time. Nor had the Duke of Rohan any more then one Daughter, who was a
transcendent Match; and therefore `twas verily thought that he had a design, to
the end he might procure a stricter Union with the Duke, to give him his
Daughter in Marriage. But that Prince was by no means belov`d in France,
because he had nothing that was Low or Base in him, and for that he knew how to
render himself redoubted. Besides he had settl`d himself in Germany by his
Conquests, and this Year he took Brisac, more upon his own account then upon
the Kings. A Person of such Importance, Powerful upon the Frontiers, esteem`d
among the Protestants, respected by all Men, would have been too Formidable,
had he been united with the Duke of Rohan, by so strict an Alliance. Nor were
the Reformed in France become despicable as yet; and therefore they were
unwilling they should have a Leader, of that Fame and Authority as the Duke of
Weimar. The Hungarians, on the other side, were grown so strong, that their
Enemies were constrained to grant 'em the Privilege of being a Fourth Estate
in the Kingdom: And it was to be feared, lest the Duke of Rohan, who made it
his Business to advance the Reformed Party in France, should have a design to
procure 'em at least the same Privileges; and that under the Pretense of the
Marriage of his Daughter, he would engage the Duke of Weimar and other German
Princes in such an Enterprise. These Considerations, made it very much to be
suspected, that the Cardinal, who knew very well how to start a great many
others, was desirous to fend off the Blow, by sending the Duke of Rohan into
another World; as knowing him capable to go through with whatever he undertook.
It Is true, that Great Men are seldom thought to die a Natural Death; and it is a
rare thing to see any one depart this Life without searching for the Causes of
his Death in the Politics of his Enemy. However it were, the Duke of Rohan
died in the sixty eighth year of his Age; and his Death was a great Affliction
to all the Reformed, who had a great Considence in him, though such Persons among
'em, who had been gained by the Court, would needs persuade 'em that he had
sacrificed the Public Good of the Churches to his own Interests. But above
twenty years after his Death, they who had seen the Wars which he had managed,
never mentioned him without tears in their Eyes.

The 28th. of the same Month of April, Miron and du A Remarkable Ordinance of
the Intendants of Languedoc.
P^^ Intendants of Languedoc, set forth an Ordinance at Mom^^^^r, which was the
Rule and Model of all those which were afterward issued out against those whom
they thought good to call Relapsers. They took for their Pretense, what happens
but too frequently in Truth, that both Men and Women, who found it for their
advantage to marry Catholics, openly professed the Catholic Religion, when
the Catholics would not so much as hear of the Match upon any other Condition;
but almost as soon as ever the Marriage was Consummated, the Reformed would
return to their first Religion, and then submitted themselves by a Public
Confession to atone for the Crime of Abjuration which they had committed. They
made 'em also undergo the same Punishment, though they had not abjured, but had
only complied so far as to suffer themselves to be married by a Catholic
Priest. The Clergy were doubly affronted by this; in the first Place, beholding
the Mysteries of their Religion pro^^^'d by such a Piece of Inconstancy; and
next to see the uncertainty and vanity of their Conquests. Thereupon they made
the Complaints to the Intendants, aggravating in a most inveterate manner that
Profanation of their Catholic Sacraments. That Bitterness, as well as their
Ignorance in Ecclesiastical Antiquity, chiefly appeared by the Comparison which
they made between the Reformed and the Jews, who were accustomed* said they, in
the Primitive Times, to seign themselves Catholics, and under that Color,
went to Communions, on purpose to break the Images and profane the sacred Host.
They pretended that this Profanation was contrary to all the Edicts, which
never pardoned such sort of Crimes. Upon these Complaints the Intendants
ordered the guilty to be prosecuted. But the Custom was too deeply rooted, and
the Mischief was grown too common to be cured by such a Remedy; nor do I find
that the ordinance wrought any Effect.

In the Year 1629. the King had erected a Presidial Court Presidial Court at
Nerac.
at Nerac, a City in the Province of Albret, where the Reformed were the most
Numerous. The end of which establishment was to strengthen the Catholic Party,
by conferring upon 'em the greatest part of the Offices and Employments in that
new Court. But neither in the City nor in the Province were there Catholics
enough to be found, who were capable to supply those Offices: So that they were
forced to send for Graduates, to officiate for the present time, in expectation
of able Persons that were fitly qualified for their Places. Nor could they meet
with a sufficient Number of Catholic Graduates: But at length the Project was
brought to perfection this Year, by sending for men of Ability from other
Places, and admitting some of the Reformed into Employments which the rest
could not supply.

At this time also, the Sick were continually tormented Sick People tormented
by the Monks.
by the Monks, who made an ill use of their infirmities, to ex^ort from 'em
some Declaration that might pass for a profession of the Catholic Religion. I
meet with one remarkable Example during the sickness of Anne Violette, a Maid
of three or four and twenty Years, who lived at Poitiers. This poor Maid
falling sick, lost her senses, through the Violence of her Distemper: Which is
confessed by the Monks themselves, who wrote the Relation of it, in the true
style of a Legend. An Austin Friar went to Visit this Maid of his own Head, and
caused her to pronounce certain Words, from whence he concluded her willing to
die a Catholic. In the mean time Cottiby Minister of the Place came thither,
and his Meeting with the Monk having occasion`d a loud Dispute between 'em,
drew together a great Concourse of People, always listening after Novelties, and
among the rest ^ame the Mayor, pretending to prevent Disorders. But instead of
having any Regard to the condition of the sick Person, he put all the People
out of the Chamber, and being Master of the Room, caused a verbal Answer of the
Questions propounded to the poor Creature in a Delirium, to be drawn ^p as
before himself, being a Magistrate, to the end report ^ight afterward be made
of it for a certain Truth. However, the Ravings of that unfortunate Creature
ceased not. ^he had till then most dreadful Dreams, and she lay Crying without
Intermission, that she was damned. And upon that it was, that the Friar had
grounded his Conceit, that ^e would be willing to quit her Religion to rid her
self ^f her Fears. But after they had made her talk as long, and what the Monk
pleased, her Visions and Outcries still continued, and her Fears of Damnation
were still the same. Nevertheless the Catholics would not lose this fair
Opportunity to signalize their Zeal, and cried up the Deliri^ms and Ravings of
this poor Creature in a high Fever for a Miraculous Conversion. This happened
toward the end of July.

The last of the next Month, the Duke of Bouillon published An Edict of the D.
of Bouillon in Favor of the Reformed of Sedan.
an Edict in Favor of the Reformed within his Principality of Sedan; and though
it contained no more then eighteen Articles, it was as much to their Advantage
as could be desired. The Three first imported Assurances to uphold 'em in the
free Exercise of their Religion and Discipline in all the Exercises of their
Academy, their College and their Schools; in the Possession of their Churches,
Churchyards* Goods, Houses, Rents, Revenues, Foundations, Donations and
Legacies, which belonged or might belong at any time either to their Churches
or their Poor; in the Administration of those Estates, and in the Enjoyment of
such Funds a^ the Prince was wont to supply 'em withal, for the whol^ both
ordinary and extraordinary Expense, which might depend upon the Exercise of
their Religion, or for the subsistence of their Academy and the Poor: The
Direction also of those Contributions was left to a Council which should always
consist of Reformed Members. The Fourth promised to support that Council in all
the Power and Authority derived from the Primitive Institution of it. The two
next that followed, discharged the Persons and Estates of the Reformed from
whatever might be burdensome to their Consciences; so far as to enfranchise
their Houses from all manner of Vassalages and Subjections that should be
contrary to their Religion. The Seventh dispensed with the Law^ observed by the
Roman Church in reference to degrees o^ Kindred relating to Marriages. The
Eighth gave Liberty to all those who had a desire to embrace the Reformed
Religion, to do it freely, and received 'em under the Princes Protection,
provided they took the Oath of Fidelity as other Citizens did. The Ninth
confirmed all the Marriages s^ solemnized or to be solemnized by Ecclesiastical
Persons, that had quitted the Roman Church, without any Necessity of having
recourse to any other Declaration then what was contained in this Edict. The
Tenth asserted the Right of Parents, and allowed to Fathers all that Authority
which Nature had given 'em over their Children, and ordained that Pupils,
whether Catholics or Reformed, should have Tutors and Guardians of their own
Religion. Disinheriting of Heirs, upon the Account of Religion was forbid, and
declared null and void by the Eleventh Article. The Twelfth permitted the
Printing and Selling of Religious Books, provided they had been viewed and
examined by the Council of Moderators. The Thirteenth maintained the Reformed
in their Right to have a Printer. The Fourteenth and Fifteenth ^ave the
Reformed free Admittance into all Employments, even those of the Civil
Government and Shrievalty, and promised that regard should be had in the
supplying of those which ^ere vacant, to the Number, Affection, Quality and
Merit of the Reformed: Which was, in truth, to assure 'em the possession of all
Employments. The Three last concerned ^he Execution and Stability of the Edict;
that the Prince gave his Faith and Word to see it performed: No less de^ring
that his Successors should make the same Promise upon their coming to the
Dignity; that if they were Minors, their Mothers or Guardians should promise in
their Names, after they had first received the Oath of Fidelity from their
Subjects; and that the Princes themselves should renew that Engagement when
they came to be of Age; that all the ^hief Officers at the time present should
swear to see it fulfilled; and that all that should come to Preferment
afterward should take the same Oath; and that the Edict should be read and
published in all Places where it was necessary. Which Publication was first
made upon the 10th. of September in a General Assembly of the Officers,
Burgesses, and all the Inhabitants in presence of the Duke himself: Upon the
18th. in the Sovereign Council; and in the Chancery upon the 29th. of the same
Month. This Edict was also styl`d in the Preface Perpetual and Irrevocable; nor
was the Religion of the Reformed called the Pretended Reformed, but barely
contrary to the Catholic. However, this Edict as express and clearly couched
as it was, and though set forth before Sedan belonged to France, has proved no
more Inviolable then that of Nantes.

For upon the fifth of September it was, that France beheld The present King
born.
the Birth of the King now Reigning, who has cancelled all these Edicts. Both
the King and Queen had made great Vows to the Holy Virgin, that they might
obtain Children by her Intercession. For which reason it was that they
acknowledged the Succor which she had afforded 'em in answering their
Supplications, by sending most magnificent Presents to the Lady of Lorretto;
and among the rest a Statue of the Newborn Prince of Massy Gold, carri`d by an
Angel in Silver; the whole of a very considerable Value. Certainly the Reformed
had great reason to fear the Effects of such a Gross Piece of Superstition as
this, and that a Prince for whose Birth they were beholding, as they said, to
the Intercession of Saints, would be bred up under a great Antipathy against
those who looked upon the Doctrine of Intercession as a dangerous Error.
Moreover, the Birth of this Prince occasioned the Creating of several Guilds or
Fraternities; and multiplied the Nobility, by ennobling Letters, which were so
couched, that there was not any Clause inserted to hinder the Reformed from the
reaping the Benefit of 'em, to the end the Joy might be general. So that in
regard they met with a thousand Obstructions in the Common ways to advancement,
there were many Persons that took out these, either that they might have the
Liberty to follow their Trades, or to ennnoble themselves. But the Favors that
were done 'em, did not extend very far; nor was the Year 1639. more propitious
1639.
to 'em then the Rest. The Cardinal had embroiled himself with the Court of
Rome, and he had a mind to make himself feared in that Court, as he was dreaded
over all the rest of Europe. There was nothing talk`d of in France but of
creating a Patriarch, and by that means of breaking off all Corespondence with
the Holy See. Searches were made by the Cardinals order, what Quarrels the
Popes had with the Kings of France, and Memoirs of every one were drawn up.
Therefore, to prevent least these Contests should prove a Scandal to the
Catholics, there was no other way then to let 'em see, that there was nothing
of good intended by 'em toward the Reformed.

Therefore the Privy Council, by a Decree of the 18th. of January, renewed
their former Prohibitions to the Inhabitants of Villiers le Bell, forbidding
their Assemblies to sing Psalms and say their Prayers; to work upon Holy days,
or to bury their Dead, but at such Hours as were permitted.

But the Parliament of Grenoble went farther, and rammass'd together in one
long Decree of the 21th. of March, whatever New Regulations for Villiers le
Bell and the Dauphinate.
several other particular Regulations contained of most incommodious and
offensive to the Reformed. It forbid their Ministers to preach in the Houses of
the Lords of the Manor in their absence, or of their Wives and Families, or in
the absence, of the ordinary Chaplain. It forbid the Ministers to preach out of
the Places where they were settled; and all others, as well as Ministers, to
obstruct the sending of Children, Pupils and Servants to Catholic Regents and
Tutors approved by the Ordinaries, under the Forfeiture of two thousand Livres,
confiscation of Fiefs, or Court Jurisdiction; and the penalty of Imprisonment
or other corporal Punishment to be inflicted upon the Ministers. It forbid the
admitting of Notaries or Proctors without Letters Patents, and 'till they had
made it out by an exact Examination, that they were qualified for the
Employment mentioned in their Letters; and such as had not undergone this
Trial, were interdicted. It condemned the Reformed to spread Carpets before
their Doors upon solemn Procession days, and more particularly upon
Corpus-Christi day, and the Assumption of the Virgin, a day which the King had
made choice of to preserve the Memory of his Vow, by virtue of which he had put
himself under the Protection of that Holy Saint; the Efficacy of which, such
was the Persuasion of the People, had obtained the Birth of the Dauphin. And if
the Reformed failed of doing it upon the first warning of the Officers, the
Catholics were authorized to cause the Carpets to be spread, at the Charges of
the Reformed, who were liable to Corporal Constraint, if they refus`d
Reimbursment. It ordered Information to be given of such Hospitals as had been
erected without leave of the King or Parliament, and forbad the Erecting of new
ones, or any other Houses of Retirement, without leave first obtained. 'Twas
mention`d also in the Decree, that the Chambers had bin consulted, but the
Suffrages of the Reformed Counselors were not numerous enough to carry it
against the Catholics.

The University of Poitiers had certain Ancient Statutes Statutes of the
University of Poitiers.
which obliged their Members to certain Devotions; which Statutes had bin
neglected, while the Edict was observed with any thing of Sincerity, because
they could not bring the Reformed to submit to 'em. But when their Destruction
was openly labored, they bethought themselves of Reviving their Statutes, that
they might have an Opportunity to put the Reformed by, when they demanded their
Degrees. The Pretense was, that these degrees were conferred in the Cathedral
Church, where it was presupposed that the Reformed could not take 'em: And
moreover that they could not be present at the Processions which the
University, according to the Statutes were bound to solemnize every Month,
carrying in Pomp to the Church of the Jacobins that which the Catholics call
the Holy Sacrament. These Statutes had bin revived in the years 1619. and 1620.
But that they might have a more specious Pretense to refuse the Reformed their
Degrees, the Bishop this year set forth a Chapter Ordinance, dated April 28.
wherein he declared, that he would no longer suffer the Reformed to take
Degrees in his Church. So that the Ordinance of one single Bishop rendered
fruitless the Edict of a Great King.

The first of the same Month came forth a Decree of Council An Order of Judge
Mage of Mountauban.
which summoned Constans, a Councellor in the Presidial Court of Mountauban,
and Rieuperieux, the Kings Advocate, to be heard upon an Affair which had made
a great Noise; and until they had had their Hearing, they were suspended from
their Employments. The Business was, that Mage the Judge, and the Judge
Criminal of Montauban, had upon the 16th. of January set forth an Order which
Obliged all the Inhabitants of the Jurisdiction, both within and without, as
well Catholics as Reformed, to observe Holy Days, and forbid 'em to expose to
sale either Flesh or Fowl, or Wildfowl, upon such days as were not allowed of
by the Roman Church. In this Order, to make it more authentic, they cited a
Decree of the Chamber of Castres, set forth in March 1634. And an Order of the
Intendant of Guyenne of the 16th. of the same Month 1638. Now when these two
Judges, who pretended that the sole Cognizance of the Civil Government of the
City belonged to them, caused the Order to be read in Court, Rieuperieux
opposed it; and required the Judge Criminal and four Counselors that were
present to do him Right upon his Opposal. But Mage, the Judge, persisting, and
ordaining the Order to be Registered, Constans, who was eldest Councellor, gave
an Injunction to the contrary, and forbid the Prothonotary to Register it. The
Heat of this Contest brake up the Court, and the Judge having fortifi`d himself
at the Council, failed not according to the Maxim observed there, always to lay
all the blame upon the Reformed, to the end he might obtain a Confirmation of
his Order, and a personal Summons for Constans and Rieuperieux, It Is remarkable
that this was a Dispute about Competitorship, or rather sufficiency of Power; a
Trial of Skill to know whether the first Judge could alone of himself make
Orders relating to the Civil Government, without advice of the Counselors, and
without imparting it to the Kings Advocates. But because there was something
more in the Matter which concerned the Franchises of a Protestant City, the
Judges Order was confirmed before any Cognizance had bin taken of the Reasons
for Rieuperieux's Opposition.

The Church of Rochechouard had bin tormented near ten years Particular
Injustices at Rochechonard.
by the Lord of the Feif, who omitted no Invention to ruin it. The People had
always met in the Common Hall of the City, which was a very small Town: But in
1630. the Lord instigated by the Bishop of Limoges, took from 'em the use of
the House by Virtue of his own Authority, without any prosecution at Law.
Nevertheless the Church suffered this Attempt without making any Resistance,
and provided themselves of another House wherein to continue their Exercises.
However, four years after the Lord would needs lay hold of the Opportunity, and
destroy the Church by means of the Grand Sessions that used to be kept in that
Hall; but failing in his design that way, the Business was removed to the
Chamber of the Edict at Paris; where he had not that Success neither which he
desired. This obliged him, because he would not seem to be baffl`d, to remove
the Cause before the Council, where all the Mischief he could do, was, that he
obtained an Order of the 10th. of May this year, for the Reformed to produce
their Original Titles, of which they had nothing but compar`d Copies in the
suit commenced. And the same Order forbid the inserting of any Alterations or
Innovations on either side. The Church having done their Duty, the Lord let the
thing hang for several years, perceiving he could ground no Right upon the
support of undeniable Proofs: So that at last, he let the Business quite fall;
and the Reformed, who enjoyed their Liberty, fearing themselves to molest the
Quiet of their own Privileges, by demanding Judgment, never minded the suing
for any Decree in their Favor. And the Affair still remains undecided,
according to the Custom of the Council, who never did any thing for the
Advantage of the Reformed, but when they were so earnestly pressed to it, that
they could not avoid it: Which cost that Church very dear, as I shall relate in
another Place.

Upon the 16th. of June the Parliament of Rennes condemned the Reformed in
Vitre, to spread Carpets before their Doors upon Procession days; though about
ten years before At Vitre and Dijon.
they had set forth an Edict quite opposite to it: And upon the 14th of
December, the Parliament of Dijon made another, which was no less singular. For
two of the Reformed had had a suit together: The one demanded that his Cause
might be sent back, the Other required that the Cause might be continued.
Accordingly the Parliament judged the continuance of it; and the Pretense was,
that it was a case wherein the Cause of the Defendant was to be favored. They
might have said with much more Justice, that in regard the Dispute was about a
Franchise, he who was willing to wave it, could not so well do it, to the
Prejudice of him that endeavored to make use of it.

The sixteenth of December, the privy Council condemned the Reformed, who
practiced as Proctors in some Jurisdiction or other of Poitou, to produce their
Letters Patents, and to justify that they were qualified for the Employment;
that is to say, that they were Roman Catholics: In the mean time they were
forbid to practice in them. This Practice of Notaries forbid.
was the Language of all the Courts in the Kingdom, who knew the King had by
that means a design to exclude the Reformed from all petty Employments. The
same day came forth another decree which forbid the Exercise of the Reformed
Religion at Taulignan in the Province of the Dauphinate; Taulignan.
and which would not permit 'em to bury but in the dusk of the Evening, as at
Paris, and other great Cities, under the Forfeiture of three thousand Livres. I
meet with also another Decree the same day, which forbid the Chucrhyard at
Blois.
Reformed of Blois to lock up their Churchyard. For the Archdeacon, who is the
chief Clergyman of that City, had presented a Petition to that Effect, wherein
he set forth, that the locking up of the Churchyard would create a Jealousy
in the Catholics: For that the Churchyard being advantagiously seated to
command the City, which was built upon the Descent of a Hill, they might meet
together and fortify themselves in it, to the great danger of the City. Which
was a Precaution that signified very little, at a time when France was already
subdued, and patiently bore the Yoke. So that there were none but the Croakers,
who Croakers.
made a little Bustle in some of the Provinces: For so were the Peasants
call`d, who not being able to bear the Taxes and Imposts with which they were
overwhelmed, nor the Vexations of the Gentry, had taken Arms to defend
themselves. Nevertheless the Council granted those Prohibitions to the
Archdeacon, not because the Reason of the thing deserved it, but because it
would be an Inconvenience to the Reformed, who Burying their dead in an open
Place, would be expos`d to the Affronts of the Rabble.

The next year they continued their Vexations of the Reformed, 1640.
by a thousand Squabbles and Cavils. The Bishop of Oleron, in Bearn, and the
gray Friar Placede his Proctor, attempted to put down the Exercise at Oleron,
St. Marie, Luc and Saucede. And the Parliament of Pau, whither the Cause Decree
of the Parliament of Pau.
was removed, retained it; and in the mean time forbid the Continuance of
Preaching in Places where there were not above ten Families of the Reformed in
all: Grounding their Proceedings upon the Answer returned to the Paper
presented by the Ecclesiastics in 1617. upon which a Decree was made the 23th.
of January. The Parliament of Paris also, by a Decree of the 7th. of September
forbid La Gateliniere to suffer any Preaching in his House at Puigeniet, nor in
any place belonging to the Bailliage of Tours. The same day likewise the
Parliament of Bourdeaux sent the same Prohibitions to those of; Beaulieu in
Limosin, at the same time forbidding 'em to hold a Synod in the City, or to
make use of the Common Bell for tolling to Sermon, under the Forfeiture ^^
10000 Livres. It Is true indeed that this was not ordained but for such a Time,
and till it should be ordered otherwise.

The Schools were the Subject of many Cavils, as Schools.
well as their Exercises. For the Syndic of the Clergy o^ Roven took his
Opportunity when the Council stayed a^ Roven, in regard the Chancellor had
Orders to repair into Normandy, and Command the Forces that were sent against
the Piednuds, or the People that went Barefoot; for so were they called in that
Province, who were named Crokers in other Places. This same Syndic set forth in
his Petition, that the Catholics themselves had not the Liberty to keep
Schools, without leave of the Chancellor of the Metropolitan Church; whence it
followed that the Reformed were not to have that Privilege without Permission.
For this reason, the Council, upon the 6th. of February, set forth a Decrcee
prohibiting Schools to be kept at Roven, or in any other Places where there was
not a Right of Exercise. Upon the 10th. of December the Parliament of Bourdeaux,
at the Instance of du Sault, a Zealous Persecutor, who pleaded in the room of
the Advocate General, by a Decree forbid Ord^ and Grenier, Regents of the
Reformed Schools at St. Fri, to keep 'em open, for that they had intruded into
'em of their own Heads, without leave of the Court. The Fifteenth of the same
Month wrote expressly to the Bishop of Poitiers, to let him understand that
'twas his Pleasure for Decorums sake, that the Schools where Boys and Girls
were taught, should be distinct. Two Months after appeared a Judicial Sentence,
upon a Motion of the Kings Advocate, that all Schoolmasters, as well Catholics
as Reformed, should be bound to take their Licenses from the Bishop; and by
Consequence, to observe the same distinction between the Schools of both Sexes.
Since that, the Law is very much altered; for that by forbidding the Reformed
to have any more then one School in a Place, they have provided against their
Observance of that Distinction: As if the Profession of Heresy were a reason
sufficient to deprive Heretics of their Right to observe the Decorums of
Morality.

The Advocate General in the Parliament of Pau, bethought himself of a rare
Artifice, to oblige the Reformed under that Jurisdiction Singular Artifice to
oblige the Reformed to call themselves pretended Reformed.
to give their Religion the Title of Pretended Reformed. They were wont to
qualify themselves with the Addition of the Religion of the Edict; or barely
Of the Religion: And this they observed in all their Public Acts; even in the
Pleadings of Advocates. But the Advocate General undertook to prohibit 'em that
Custom, and to render this Severity more Tolerable, he was desirous to usher it
in by some Act of Justice. He showed how that the Catholics commonly called
'em Huguenots and Heretics; which might cause great Disorder; besides that the
Reformed were not to be Suffered ^o use such Expressions as frequently came out
of their Mouths. ^n Conformity therefore to this Request, the Parliament set
forth a Decree, forbidding the Catholics to call the Reformed Huguenots or
Heretics; and prohibiting the Reformed to give their Religion any other Name
then that of the Pretended Reformed. But the Catholics never obeyed those
Prohibitions, either in Bearn or elsewhere; and the Reformed avoided, as much
as in 'em lay, the Assuming a Title which they could not own with a safe
Conscience.

Vanier and Mangets, Inhabitants of Nanterre, having let Blasphemies pretended.
^^ip something in common Conversation, touching the Person of the Holy Virgin,
and the Honor due to her, which seemed very remote from the Sentiments of the
Roman Church, whose Disciples never mention that blessed Creature, but with
that Respect which they pay to God himself, the Discourse of those two Men was
looked upon as Blasphemy, and the Judge of the Places ordered 'em to be
prosecuted as Blasphemers. To this they added another Crime as little
understood as the former, and accused 'em of edeavouring to seduce some young
People of the Town from the Catholic Religion. And they inserted that Term
young People, to hedge in the Article of the Edict of Nantes, which equally
forbid as well the Catholics as the Reformed, to practice the Trade of
Seducers. But in reality, these young Men were Persons ripe in Years, and of an
Age which absolutely discharged the Article of the Edict from taking Cognizance
of 'em. The Crime of being Seducers was common to Both, but Vanier, was chiefly
charged with the Blasphemy. For which being convicted, he was Condemned to
undergo the Amend Honorable, and to the Galleys for five Years: The other was
only Sentenced to the First Punishment, and banished the Town and Parish. But
the whole cause being removed to the Chamber of the Edict at Paris: The
Punishment was mitigated; so that Vanier was condemned to Confess in the Court
of Nanterre, with his head bare and upon his Knees, that he had rashly and
Impiously uttered the Blasphemies that were laid to his Charge, and which he
had owned in his Interrogatory. He was also banished out of the Provostship of
Paris, and fined eight Livers. There are two Things in this affair which
plainly make it out, that these pretended Blasphemies consisted only in the
Liberty which Vanier had taken to express in Terms not rightly chosen, the
Doctrine of the Reformed touching Religious Adoration. That is, that he freely
confessed before the Judge what he had said, which was more then a Person
accused of down right Blasphemy, would have doubtless done with so much
Confidence. The other is, that the Sentence pronounced by the Judge of
Nanterre, was mitigated by the Chamber of the Edict; which would not have so
fallen out, had there been any thing of Solid in the Accusation of Blasphemy.
There have and will be seen Examples, by which it is to be observed, that the
Advocate General became the Appellant for a slighter Punishment, when there was
but any pretense for it in the Accusation of the Basphemer, and that the Chief
Judge had not pronounced the Utmost Severities of the Law. This Decree was
issued forth the 1^ th. of September.

Such another Accident happened at Poitiers, upon a pretended A Pretended
Sacrilege.
Sacrilege. For a certain Cross erected in the Highway, near that City, was
found pulled down and levelled with the Ground, upon St. Michael's day. Upon
which there was both Inquisition made and Information given before the Judge of
Poitiers, and the Testimonies charged the Crime upon a Person of the Religion:
And had he been Convicted of the Fact, he had deserved no less then Breaking
upon the Wheel. For People have been burnt alive for Committing certain
Insolences against the Cross, which after their Death, was found where it
stood, to be as ^ound and as free from any Damage, as when it was first
errected. But this supposed Criminal was acquitted at so Cheap a rate, that it
served for a strong Presumption of his Innocence. For he was condemned only to
the Charges of the Trial, to a slight Fine, and to set up the Cross again. And
he rather chose to fulfill the Sentence, then to prosecute the Reversal of it,
fearing to enlarge and Swell his Accusation by an Appeal.

Upon the 12th. of September a Decree was published at Partition of Voices at
Castres* and the Consequences of it.
Castres; the Consequences of which were Tedious and Vexatious. The Advocate
General set forth four Things. I. That the Reformed never put off their Hatts
to the Sacrament, when they met it in the Streets, nor ever fell upon their
Knees. II. That they would not let their Domestic Servants go to Mass. III.
That they would not suffer 'em to be Comforted in their Sickness. IV. That they
constrained 'em to work upon Holy Days: And of all these Abuses he moved for a
Regulation. As for the three last Articles, a Regulation was granted him with a
Nemine Con^ra^^^^nte: And the Reformed were forbid to give their Servants any
Trouble in those Particulars. But they were divided upon the first: The
Catholics, most Zealous Members of the Parliament of Toulouse, were of Opinion
that the Catholics should be ordered to kneel, when they had not time to get
out of the Way. On the other side, it was the Judgment of the Reformed, that
those of their Religion were not bound to Kneel; that it was sufficient to
Ordain that they should retire into their Houses, or any where* else upon the
sound of the Bell; that the Reformed in General had never Violated the Edicts;
and that particular Persons when they had Committed any Fault, had been always
punished by the Chamber, without Dissimulation or Connivance. Upon this
Division of Opinions being carried to the Council, there came forth a Decree of
the 24th. of October, which cofirm'd the Opinion of the Catholics; ordered the
Reformed that could not get out of the way, to put themselves into a Condition
of Respect as Others did: And upon their Refusal, condemned em, for the first
Fault to a Fine of 500 Livres, for the Second 1500, and for the Third 2000, and
Banishment out of the Province. There could be nothing ordered more Expressly
against the Articles of the Edict, which exempted the Reformed from every thing
that was contrary to their Consciences.

Several Contagious Diseases had been very rife in France this Year, and had
made a great Havoc of the People, principally in the Southern Provinces. And
this Contagion having spread it self in several Places where the Reformed had a
Right to Assemble, and perform the Exercises of their Religion, chiefly at
Nimes and the Parts adjoining, they took the Liberty to meet in the Streets, in
the Public Places, and in the Fields; whether it were, because they would not
deprive those Persons of the Comfort of Pious Exercises, for whom it was not
safe to have a free Conversation with Others, that they caused 'em to sit under
the Wind; or because they were willing to prevent the Sound from being
Infected, by suffering 'em to sit among persons suspected of Infection in close
Places: But most certain it was, that they never pretended thereby to make any
Encroachments; and one would have thought, that at a time when such a Terrible
Judgment required the Incessant Applications of Prayer and Devotion, the People
might have been dispensed with the delays of a Regular Address to obtain the
Princes leave. Nevertheless, this Attempt was looked upon as Criminal, though it
had been authorized by a Decree of the Party-Chamber. Thereupon there was a
Decree made by the Privy Council, which forbid any such sort of Exercise; which
reserved to the King the Power of appointing some Place, for the Reformed where
to meet in Case of Contagion, and which ordered Machaut, Intendant of the
Province, to prosecute Du Cross, and others accused of this New Crime: And the
Intendant was authorized to give a final Sentence, from which there should be
no Appeal. Now they who are acquainted with the delays of the Council, and the
Comissioners, to whom such things are referr`d, can never question but that the
design was to reduce the Reformed, either to forbear their Exercises while
those Contagions continu`d; or else to infect one another if they would not
deprive those that were upon Recovery and such as were suspected of Infection,
of the Consolation of their public Devotions, who both of `em stood in the
greatest need of it. This Decree came forth the 30th. of October, but had not
authority enough to serve for a Regulation.

But there was a particular affair, and which made a Marriage of converted
Priests.
great noise adjudg`d by the Parliament of Paris, the 22th. of August. There
was a certain Priest in the Diocese of Nevers, whose name was Sebastian Tridon,
who not conforming to the Roman Religion, and abhorring the Tyranny of
Celibacy, embrac`d the Reformed Religion, and afterward marri`d. The Bishop of
Nevers, to prevent the Noise of this Conversion from spreading any further, and
to brand the Priest with Infamy, set a-foot an Accusation of Lewdness against
him, and omitted nothing of Falsehood or False dates, to color the Calumny. For
which reason the Priest appeal`d from the Sentence of the Bishop, as a Secular
Person from an Ecclesiastical Court, and undertook to prove the Falsehood as
well of the Decree, as of the verbal Report of a pretended Lyingin of the Maid,
whom he was accus`d to have debauch`d. On the other side, three Brothers which
he had, oppos`d his Marriage, and obtain`d of the Judge of St. Peter le
Moutier, Prohibitions to Montunglard the Minister, and all others, to proceed
any farther toward the Celebration of the Marriage, as also to Tridon and Mary
Bruander, who was betrothed to him, to think any more of it. It Is true, it
deeply concern`d the Brothers, as well for that by the Marriage they lost the
hopes of succeding as Heirs to their Brother; as for that Tridon quitted
several rich Benefices, by forsaking the Roman Religion. For it appeared by the
Process, that he was in possession of an Abbey, a Canonship, and a considerable
Vicaridge. Well -- There was an appeal from that Sentence, as also from the
Proceedings of the Official; and the Cause being remov`d into the Chamber,
Tridons Advocate insisted upon the Liberty granted by the Edict, and upon the
long Toleration of several Marriages in the same Case. The Bishops Advocate,
who was also for the Rest of Tridons adversaries, insisted chiefly upon the Vow
of Priesthood, which he pretended was inviolable; and which is worthy
observation, he said nothing of the Challenge, but by the by; only he told the
Court that the Methods he had taken were impertment and false. And at the
Conclusion of his Plea, he put home to the Reformed a Point of Honor, who if
they loved the Purity of their Religion, would never admit any to the
Profession of it, but such who embraced it upon the Principles of Virtue, not
such as became their Proselytes for love of Libertinism, and publicly
abandoned their Continency. As if, not to say any thing of the lawfulness of
Marrige at present, it could be deny, d, that a man who only sought to marry
for no other reason, then to find a Remedy against Incontinency in the state of
Wedlock, were not visibly overrul'd by the Maxims of Virtue. And the Advocate
General, Talon, likewise, tho` he had laid a great stress upon the Opinion of
the Roman Church, which believes that the sacerdotal Character, such as that
she deems to be imprinted by Baptism, can never be lost, nor repeated, could
not forbear to second the Advocates conceit; but the Advocate pretending that
Celibacy was an Apostilick Tradition, deriding as Fabulous the Story of
Paphnutius, who in a full Council had given the Name of Chastity to Conjugal
Society, according to the Relation of Socrates; Talon acknowledg`d the
contrary, that Marriage and Orders were not incompatible by their Institution;
and that Celibacy was only introduced for the sake of greater Purity; but in
the main he asserted, that the Particular Articles were never enregister`d;
though eighteen years before, his Father James Talon had maintain`d the contrary,
and caus`d the Register to be brought into Court: That they contain`d
Privileges and Resignations, irregular from the common Law; which were not
capable of any extended Interpretation, but were to be expounded according to
the Letter: That it was with the Liberty of Sentiments granted by the Edict, as
with the Liberty of Exterior Actions, which are reduced into Laws of the
Kingdom: That Priests might Embrace the Reformed Religion, but not Violate the
General Laws of Celibacy, which were the Laws of the State: That there were a
thousand Inconveniences to be feared if they should be permitted to Marry, more
especially, if the same Priest, after he was Marry`d, should happen to return
to the Roman Church. He cited the Decrees made upon the Marriage of the
Cardinal Chatillon, and the Chevalier de la Ferte Imbaut; and to elude the
Force of the long Toleration of Marriages of the same Nature, he would needs
have it believ`d, that it proceeded from two Causes: First, for that the
Kindred of Marry`d Priests stifled the memory of their Crimes, for the Honor
of their Families, as not being any way bound to reveal `em. The Second was,
that the Ecclesiastics were never eager in the Prosecution of such People,
which was the cause of their Impurity. These were the Advocate General`s
Reasons, which it would have been an easy thing to have refuted, had the other
side been permitted to Answer. For the two Causes from whence he deduc`d the
Toleration of Marriages, of the same Nature with Tridons, were notoriously
False. The Kindred having had always prevailing Reasons to prevent 'em; and the
Ecclesiastics never omitting any Opportunity of persecuting those Priests who
forsook the Roman Church. Besides, that outward Sentiments or Actions were so
far from being restrained within the Bounds of the Laws of the Kingdom, by the
Edicts, that quite the contrary, those Edicts were only promulgated, to exempt
the Reformed not only in respect of Sentiments, but in regard of outward
Actions from the Rigor of the Common Laws as to what concerned Conscience.
Nevertheless, in regard the Time for Interpreting any thing in Favor of the
Reformed, was not yet come, Parquets Conclusions were followed in part, and the
Sentence of the Judge was Confirmed; but they order`d no General Regulation
upon the Matter. However it is true, that a President in adjudg'd Cases, never
fails to have the Force of a Regulation, especially when there is an Antipathy
against the Parties against whom the Judgment is given.

By a Decree of the 30th. of November, the Catholic Precedence adjudg'd to the
Catholics.
Officers in the Court of Accounts, Aids and Finances of Mompellier, were
adjudg`d to precede the Reformed, in all the same Cases, and with the same
Expressions, as Precedencie had been adjudg`d to the Counselors of the
Chambers of Languedoc and Guyenne, by the Decrees which I have set down in
another Place. So that in all the Sovereign Jurisdictions, the Reformed were
despoyl`d of all the Privileges which in pursuance of the Edict, they were
equally to enjoy with the Catholics.

But the next Year produc`d `em those Vexations, of which 1641.
the Consequences were no less afflictive; and the Chamber A new decree about
meetting the Sacrament.
of Castres was the Principal Object of their Cavils. For the Decree of the
23d. of October, touching the Veneration which was to be pay`d by the Reformed
to the Sacrament, and which oblig`d `em to kneel when they met it in the
Streets, having been presented to the Chamber to be register`d, Tzarn the
Prothonotary, being backed by the Reformed Counselors, refus`d to enroll it;
Boyer and Baule`s, Consuls of the same Religion, refus`d the Publication of it.
The reason of their refusal was evident enough; because the Reformed could not
give that Exterior Mark of Veneration to the Sacrament, which they did not
think proper to be ador`d without doing an Injury to their Consciences.
Whereupon the News of this refusal being carry`d to Court, it was there deem`d
convenient to issue forth a new Decree of the second of January, to interpret
the former. There it was Acknowledg`d that the Equivocal sense of some
Expressions was the reason of their requiring the Reformed to kneel; and
therefore to exempt `em from this Injurious Compliance, it was ordain`d that
both Men and Women should get out of the way upon the Tingling of the Bell; and
if they could not, that they should put themselves in a Posture of respect, the
Men by putting off their Hats only. But to the end that this Interpretation
should not be thought an act of Kindness, there was another Decree made the
same day, that the Prothonotary and the Consuls should be proceeded against,
for ^ing to Register and publish the first Decree, and enjoining the Chamber to
allow 'em Commissioners.

In Pursuance of this Decree there was an Information drawn up against the
Parties accused: And when the Chamber met to consult upon it, the Three Parties
presented two Petitions; the one in reference to what Yzarn had done, and the
other relating to the Misdemeanor of the Consuls: And Vexation of some Officers
at Castres.
they desired they might be read, before they entered into Consultation. The
Catholics were for throwing 'em aside without reading 'em, and arguing upon
the Matter of Fact, were for committing 'em to Prison; and ordering 'em to
appear at the Chamber, and to be heard at the Bar as Criminals; that they
should be Iron'd; only that in favor to 'em their Irons should be put on at
the Chamber door, and knocked off again when they went out: And that this
severity should be part of their Punishment. On the other side, the Reformed
were for reading their Petitions which had not bin imparted to the Reporter,
because the Dispute was about the Refusal of Commissioners, and Cancelling the
Informations: That it was but just to consider whether the Commissioners ought
to be Judges: That only contumaci^^s Persons were deprived of the Right of
Refusal, and had their Mouths stopped till they submitted to Justice: That the
Petition was according to law; nor did they insist upon it out of a Spirit of
Contradiction, but as forejudg'd by the Commissioners themselves, who had not
desired the Imprisonment of the Parties; as little designed by the Decree it
self, which was coucht in the mildest Terms that could be conceived in such a
Case. Upon this, the Catholics not willing to submit, the Court continued
still divided; and notice was sent of it to the Council, for them to decide the
Matter. The Reformed deputed thither the President Vignoles; but he was not
well received; and the King wrote to the Reformed Counselors, to let them
understand, that their Deputation was no way pleasing to him: And to exhort 'em
to appear more moderate for the future, when the Dispute was about putting in
Execution the Decrees of his Council and his Commands.

But for fear the Catholics had not gained a Victory complete enough, the 15th
of April came forth another decree, which determining the Division of the
Court, ordained that without taking notice of the Opinions of the Reformed,
they should proceed to pass sentence upon the Parties accused; and forbid any
Division of the Court upon that Instruction, upon Pain of being accounted
Encouragers and Abettors of Disobedience. There could be nothing more unjust
then this Prohibition, nor of which the Consequence could be more dangerous.
For it is well known, that in Criminal Affairs, he that is master of the
Instruction, is also Master of the Sentence which the Instruction prepares. So
that the Reformed not daring to divide upon the Instruction, the Catholics had
the Liberty to expound it how they pleased; and their Associates being no more
then Spectators of the Proceeding, had indeed no voice to give, but only in the
concern of a definitive Sentence. This and Time together produc`d odd
Consequences; and gave the Parliament of Toulouse a great Occasion to Triumph in
this particular, who thereby saw the Downfall of all the Power which the
Reformed had in the Party Chamber. There was a Necessity therefore for the
Consuls to buckle under the Authority of Caminade, the Catholic President, who
had commanded 'em to proclaim the Decree, when all the Authority of the
President Vignoles, who forbid 'em, was not sufficient to excuse 'em. In short,
they were confin`d, amerc`d a hundred and fifty Livres, order`d to beg pardon
for their Disobedience to Caminade, as having done it rashly and erroneously,
to pay the Costs and Charges of the Trial, which the Court was to tax, to give
a Declaration in writing to be register`d, and to be suspended from the
Consulship for six Months, and they were forbid during that time to be present
at the Townhouse, or at any public Assemblies.

This Affair which concern`d the Chamber, was attended by another no less
vexatious to the Consistory; among whom it was a Custom to create Tithing-men,
whose business it was to make up the Rolls of all the Inhabitants of
Molestation of the Consistory of Castres.
the City. These Rolls serv`d for several ends; either to know whether the
Number of the Reformed or Catholics encreas`d or diminish`d; or to see by the
Roll who were most proper to serve as Elders and Deacons, which were frequently
chang`d in the Provinces; or to judge upon whom it was most proper to assess
the Taxes, which were then rais`d by Authority of the Consuls, together with
the Royal Money for the Payment of the Ministers, and for other Expenses of the
Churches. But the Catholics believed, or at least feigned to believe, that
there were greater Mysteries coneal'd under this Custom. This Year therefore
the Consistory having given out certain Orders to the Tything-Men, they made up
three Rolls, of which two contained the Names of the Reformed and Catholics
both together; the Third, the Names of the Reformed only. Upon this, there was
some disturbance made by the Catholics, who refused to tell the Tithing-men
their Names, and complained of some hard usage upon their refusal. This petty
Business, having thus made way for complaints, occasioned a great Hurly-Burly
afterward. There were great Inquisitions upon it, several persons were heard;
the Tithing-men, the Informers, the Ministers, the Elders; and Monitories were
also published in the Cathedral Church. But all that they could gather from
this exact Enquiry was, that an Order had been given by the Informer to the
Tithing-men to make up a Roll within their several Precincts, of such Persons
as were capable of supplying the Place of Elders, because the Time appointed
for a new Election drew near; that it was not usual to give such Commissions to
the Tithing-men; that they were also entrusted with Distributing the leaden
Tokens to such as were to be at the Communion; that whether they had
misunderstood, or whether they had received any other Orders then what
appeared, they had made use of the Name of the Consuls to oblige such as
refused to tell their Names; that one of 'em being asked by some one of his
Tything* whether the Roll were made up in order to any Guard which they were
about to appoint, an answer was made, that Perhaps it might be so: That Sillas,
a Gascoin Gentleman, who came to Castres, where he stayed five or six days,
under pretense of some Orders from the King and the Prince of Conde, had lodged
at the Beadle's House; that during his stay he had obtaind a Capias against a
Servant of his, who as he said, had robbed him in his Lodging. It might appear
by that, that these Rolls concealed no dangerous Mysteries, in regard that all
the Confessions were Unanimous and Ingenious. Nevertheless there came out a
Decree of the last of August, which Condemned the Beadle and the Tithing-men to
several Penalties; forbid the Consistory to make use of Tything-men in the
Execution of their Discipline, only with allowance to employ such other Persons
as they should think fitting; and not to meddle with any thing of Politic
Affairs. As for the Nomination of the Tithing-men, it was reserved to the
Consuls, who were ordered to appoint 'em Party-per-pale. And some there were
among them who had been in that Employment for above Eighteen Years; which was
a Demonstration that the Power of appointing those Officers had been a long
time Vested in the Consistory. But the least pretense was sufficient to deprive
the Reformed of their best Establsh'd Privileges.

The Reformed had Schools at Couhe, which were Govern`d Exercises and Schools
prohibited.
by two Regents, Guillamet, otherwise call`d Torsat, and Champeraut. But upon
the 28th. of February, came forth a Decree of the Council of State, which
forbid the keeping of Schools in that Place, and which order`d the two Regents
to appear, as if they would have made a Crime of their Profession. Several
Places also there were, where the Exercise of Religion was Prohibited. For
Example, a Decreee of the 15th. of March, forbid the Continuance of it at
Bessai, because it was a Catholic Lordship. And as for the Exercise that was
kept at Marevil, it was order`d that Villemontee, the Intendant, should inform
himself by Deeds and Testimonies of the Time when it first began. Another of
the 3d. of April, forbid the Reformed to assemble together at Mombaison,
whither they had remov`d their Exercises, after they were thrust out of
Taulignan; and the same Decree forbad Vulson de la Colombiere, to preach in any
more then one Place. It Is Remarkable also that the Bi^^^^ of Valence and Die,
who was a perpetual Goad in the sides of the Reformed within his Diocese, set
forth in the Pe^^tion upon which he obtained that Decree of Council, that
within three leagues round Taulignan, there were no less then thirty four
Places where the Reformed Religion was exercised. A great Honor for a Bishop,
to have caused the surpression of the greatest Part. There was also a Decree at
Paris, issued out of the Chamber of the Edict, where by, after the Business had
hung nine Years together in suspense, Bournaizeau, was forbid to preach: For
which the Pretense was, that the Lord was a Catholic, and Party to the
Process. However, it is true, that the Decree reserved to the Reformed the Power
to provide themselves of another Place without the Barony. But that was only a
delusive clause which was added to their Decrees, to make People believe that
they did Justice alike to both Paties: To the Lord, by freeing his Manor from
the Exercise of a Religion which was contrary to his own; and to the Reformed,
by allowing 'em the Choice of another Place. But these Prohibitions were
equivalent to an absoute Interdiction; for that when the Reformed demanded
another Place, either it was impossible to agree upon it; or else they wrangled
'em out of it, upon the score of their Right. And if they took possession of a
new Place without asking leave, they were forbid to continue their Meetings, as
not having any Power to assemble without permission. The same Chamber also,
after several Cavils and Decrees, forbad Montaigu, ^^ preach in the absence of
the Lord. And this Decree came forth the 7th. of September.

Burials also afforded a world of Matter for Trouble and Vexation. Burials
For the Reformed were wont to bury their Dead in ^ certain Place of the
Diocese of Noyon, near adjoining to Varennes. But the Bishop Pretended, that
formerly there had stood a Chapel in that Place, and to prevent the Reformed
from carrying their Dead thither, he erected a Cross upon the same Ground. But
the Reformed being nothing terrified at that, the Bishop of his own Authority
caused all the Bodies to be dug up again which had been interred since his
Erecting the Cross. After which he bethought himself of getting a Decree upon a
Petition to the Privy Council, which forbid any more Buryings in that Place.
And to render the pretense of their Prohibitions more Specious, the Bishop
caused a Procession to be made in that Place upon the day which the Catholics
call Corpus Christi day, and set up a Repository for the Sacrament.

Blasphemies and Prophanations were still another pretense Blasphemies and
Prophanations.
of several Vexations. For an Inhabitant of Nanterre, one Mangets, another of
the same name besides the Person of whom I have already spoken, was accused to
have uttered some Blasphemies. The Judge having understood his Duty by the
Decree of the Chamber of the Edict, which had reversed his Sentence the Year
before, pronounc`d another more moderate, and condemn`d the Criminal to make an
atonement for his Fault, by kneeling with his Head bare before the Auditory of
Nanterre, and three Years banishment out of the Jurisdiction. This Business
being removed to Paris, by an Appeal of the Party condemn`d, the Advocate
General was in an ill humor at that time, and mov`d to be admitted an
Appellant as from a Punishment that was too slight. Upon which the Chamber of
the Edict, by a Decree of the 11th. of May, enhansing the Penalty impos`d by
the Sentence of the Judge of Nanterre, condemn`d Mangets to nine Years
banishment out of the Provostship of Paris. Moreover, a certain private Person
of Couhe, was condemn`d to a Fine by a Sentence of the Judge of those places,
upon the 10th. of April, and the Fine was disposed of toward the maintaining a
Light in the Parochial Church: And the pretense was the Profanation of the
Churchyard, into which the same Person was accus`d for having carry`d some
Dung, and to have set up Tenters to stretch his Serges. But all the Crime which
he had Committed in that particular, without doubt was no more, then that being
one of the Reformed, he had not obtained leave of the Curate by some present or
some little Gratuity: In regard there is no Churchyard at this day, wherein the
same Liberty is not to be had at the same Rate.

The Proctors also were persecuted, under pretense that Offices.
they had not Patents for their practice, or because they were not of the same
Religion which was therein expressed. For Example, there liv`d at St. Maixants,
one of the Reformed whose name was Gascon, and who was of the same Profession.
This man was envied by the Catholics that lived by the same employment: And
that was a common thing, in all Places where there were any Reformed Officers;
because they had generally more business then the others; whether it were that
the old opinion of their Probity, caused 'em to be more confided in; or whether
it were that to render themselves more considerable, they strove to be more
exact then others. Which was the reason that the Reformed were more respected
for their own sakes, then for the sake of their Employments. Upon this score
Gascon received the Money due to the Corporation, which vexed the others, who
thought there was something to be got by that Employment: So that they began to
think of getting him out of his Office, that he might no longer be an Eye sore
to 'em. To this purpose, Hardi, a Catholic Proctor in the same Court,
maintained one day, in a Process, wherein he was Proctor for the same side,
that he had no right to plead at the Bar, because he was not duly qualified.
But this attempt not having the desired Effect, the Catholics combined
together against the Reformed, and resolved to exclude 'em every one from those
petty Employments. To which end, they thought it their best way to complain of
'em to the Governor, and to accuse all the Notaries, Sergeants and Proctors of
the Religion of Frauds and foul Practice: And by agreement of the same Assemby
where that Resolution was taken, they gave warning to Gascon not to meddle any
more with the receipts of the Common Stock. Which affair, being at lengh, after
several prosecutions removed to the privy Council, there came forth a Decree of
the thirteenth of December which ordered the Parties accus`d to produce their
Parents, and to justify their being duly qualified, and if they failed of so
doing, to stand interdicted. Which was the shortest way to deprive 'em of their
Employments; for a process upon an accusation of foul Practice, would have bin
redious, and where the Informer had at least bin in as much danger as the Party
prosecuted: But in regard that all Parents expressly mentioned the Profession of
the Catholic Religion, the Binding the Reformed who had no Licenses, to ^o
produce 'em, was to strike a sure blow. The same Council also upon the 19th. of
November, had made a decree of the same nature, against Garaemau, who was a
Proctor in the Marshalsea of Poitiers.

In like manner the Parliament of Rennes signalized their Priests and Monks
changing their Religion.
Zeal against such Priests and Monks as changed their Religion, by a Decree of
the 13th. of the same Month. It called 'em Apostates, as if they* had renounced
their Christianity* and ordered that they should be sent back to their Bishops
or their Superiors, to be punished according to the sacred Decretals, and in
the mean while, it forbid the Ministers to marry `em. The Decree of the
Parliament of Paris was cited in this: a clear demonstration that in such
Decrees passion frequently prevailed above Judgment and Honesty. And in one
decree which made the Change of their Religion liable to Punishment in Priests
and Monks, the Parliament cited another Decree, against which the Advocate
General had maintaind'd that it was lawful for *em to change.

Nor did the Troubles in the Kingdom during the year 1642.
1642. nor the conspiracy of St. Mars, nor the lingering sickness of which the
Cardinal died the 4th. of December, prevent The Ancient Church of Vitre pulled
down.
it from being very vexatious to the Reformed. For they had geat injustice done
`em in reference to their Privileges and Places of Exercise. They had a Church
at Vitre, built upon a Piece of Ground which they had pnrchas`d themselves, and
of which the possession was confirm`d to `em by a peremptory Decree, in the
Reign of Henry 4th. who had written to the Inhabitants by way of Exhortation,
to Five at Peace and Unity one among another. But for all this, after the Duke
of T^imvoille had changed his Religon, the Catholics revived their Old
Grudges, and made new Efforts to pull down the Church, under pretense that it
was too near their Mass-house. The Duke it is true, who left the sole Authority
over his house to the Duchess his Wife, who was very Zealous for the Reformed
Religion, and who had the Courage to bring up her Son according to her own
Sentiments, would have no hand in the Process, in regard the Duchess openly
protected the Reformed: But the Catholics to the end they might have the
Better success, to the Affair of Religion joined certain Complaints of some
Extravagancies which they pretended the Reformed had committed upon
Christmass-day at Night. This same Misdemeanor was, that they had taken some
pieces of the B^eacle, which the Catholics call Holy bread, and given it the
Dogs to eat: To which they added other Requests upon several Articles; so that
after long and troublesome Contentions the Privy Council made a Decree of the
24th. of January, which gave the Catholics full content. For they were ordered
to allow the Reformed another place in the Suburbs, provided it were no
Ecelesiastical Fief, at least three hundred foot from any Catholic Church or
Chapel: That the Catholics should assign the Ground; but that the Reformed
should build the Church like the other; and that when it was finished, and not
before, they should resign their own to the Catholics, to be turned into a
Townhouse, or for any other Convenient use. That the Catholics should be
reimburs'd their Advance-mony out of the common Stock; and that the perpetual
Curate or Vicar should be the first in delivering his Opinion at all meetings
of the Coporation, before any of the Laity; only after the Seneschal, the
Seneschals Deputy, and the Lord High Justiciaries Proctor. As for the
Complaints concerning the extravagancies, they were referred to the Parliament
of Rennes; and the Appeal from the Sentence given by the Senes^hals Deputy, who
had ordered the Tom^stone to be taken away from the Grave where Mommartin was
buried, was referred to the Chamber of the Edict of Paris.

The 12th. of February, came forth a Decree of Council which forbid any more
Preaching in the City of Gex. Exercises forbid at Gex.
Another of the 20th. of June, forbid as well Preaching as other Exercise,
either public or private, in the City of Sancerre; At Sancerre.
which City had enjoyed an uninterrupted Exercise of their Religion ever since
the Reign of Charles IX. It was famous for the long Siege and the Dreadful
Famine which it had endured; and never was any Right or Priveledge more
notorious or better deserved then Here Is. Nevertheless, the Prince of Conde, who
had purchased the Signoru, put a higher value upon the refusal of his Consent
to the Continuation of their Exercises: And that was sufficient to justify the
Violation of a Privilege confirmed by so long a Possession. Alard Minister of
the place, who was personally summoned, upon his appearance was sent back with
a Bundle of Prohibitions: But this was nothing in Comparison of what was
adjudg'd the 21st. of November, at the same Council, in reference to the
Meeting place in Chauvigny. Free Exercise had been there Established according
to the 19th. Article of the Edict of Nantes; nor did there want any thing of
Evidence to prove it. Moreover this very Place was named in the Edict it self;
and the Eighteenth Article contained these express words, the said Exercise
shall be also continued in the said City of Chauvigny. Nevertheless the Council
forbid any Exercises there for the Future; and the Pretense was, that Chauvigny
was the first Barony belonging And at Chauvigny.
to the Bishop of Poiters, and that that same pre-eminence of the Place had
been concealed, when the forementioned Article was obtained: Though there be
nothing more false. For there was a long Negotiation upon this Subject during
the Treaty of the Edict; and the Question about particular Places, where the
Reformed were desirous to preserve their Right of Exercise had given a fair
Opportunity to make known at large all the Qualities and Immunities of this.

Upon the 30th. of July also, the Chamber of the Edict of Paris, made a very
singular Decree upon the Subject of the Right of Exercise. Baudovin, an
Advocate in the Parliament of Paris, was Lord of Champrose, a small Manor in
Brie. Thither he retired a Sundays to refresh himself after his weekly Toil at
the Public Bar, and had a Sermon preach`d before him. But that Liberty would
not be allow`d him, tho* he declared that he never intended to settle any fix`d
Exercise there. But because the express words of the Edict were, That a Lord
abiding in one Place where he suffer`d preaching, might do the same in another
of his Houses, while he stay`d there, Advocate General Talon found out a Cavil
to render that Consideration fruitless to Baudovin; for he pretended that that
Permission was of no force to those who were Housekeepers in a Town, for which
there was a place of Exercise appointed: But only to those who living in the
Country, where they had free Exercise in one of their Houses, went to live for
some time in another; and as every thing was held for good Argument against the
Reformed, this Evasion passed for such. Therefore because Baudovin was a
Houskeeper at Paris, he was forbid to have any Preaching at Champrose, tho, at
the Time that he was there himself; and this at the Instigation of no body else
but his Curate.

The Parliament of Toulouse, by several Decrees, among Exercise forbid at Quercy.
which was one of the 12th. of September, forbid preaching at St. Cere in
Quercy, because it was a Manor belonging to the Duke of Bouillon, who was
become a Catholic. Upon which we must observe, that many Times the Exercises
were performed in the Signories of Lords, without any dependence upon the
Lords, because the Right thereto was obtained by some Article of the Edict. But
every thing was put into a General Confusion, that Occasions might not be
wanting to molest the Reformed. The same Parliament went yet further at the
beginning of the next Year, and not content to Suppress the Exercise, they
dispossessed the Reformed of a Churchyard delivered to 'em by an Ordinance
Cavil about a Churchyard.
of the Commissioners appointed to see the Edict perform`d. For which, the
Pretense was, that having lost their Right of Exercise, they had no Right of
Burial. And yet there were several Places where the Reformed never pretended to
any Right of Preaching, where nevertheless they were allowed Church yards. The
reason of which was, because the Church yards were allowed 'em, not as Places
of Exercise by Virtue of any Possession, or some other Title, but only for
Convenience or Necessity, when they lived in Places too remote from those where
the Exercise was settled.

They were also forbid to preach at St. Savin, and Antibe, because they were
part of the Church Revenues: St. Savin, being comprehended in the Decree of
Chauvigny, and At St. Savin and Antibe.
Antibe, being the subject of another that came forth the 16th. of December,
upon the Petition of Godeau, Bishop of Grass and Valence. It was there also
decreed that the Church yard belonging to the Reformed should lie at a distance
from the Catholics, because the Bishop had set forth in his Petition the near
Neighborhood of those Places as a great Inconvenience, in regard that the
Bones of the Faithful Christians, might happen to be intermixed with the
Distance between Churchyard and Churchyard.
Bones of the Heretics. Which was a kind of nice Precaution at too great a
distance from the last Day, at what time the Divine Judgment was to make the
distinction. They were also forbid to expose their Corp's in Public, to use
any Funeral Pomp, or bury 'em in the Daytime.

There was one Ann Trove, who had spent the greatest Sepulcher violated.
part of her Life in the Catholic Religion, though she had Married her Daughter
to one of the Reformed, with whom she lived. This Woman some-time after she had
received the Communion in the Roman Church, fell sick at her Sonin-Law's House,
died without sending for the Curate or any other Ecclesiastic, and was buried
in the Churchyard belonging to the Reformed at Chaunay. But the Catholics
would needs have it thought that she persever'd in their Religion till her
Death, and that it was through the Fraud of her Son-in-law, and the rest of her
Reformed Kindred, that she was deprived of their Prayers, and of a Catholic
Burial. However, there was no other Proof then Presumption, inferred from her
Receiving the Communion in her Parish before she fell sick. Nevertheless, the
Son-in-Law was condemned to dig her up again, and carry her into the Catholic
Churchyard at his own Charges: And because the Body did not seem to be
putrifi'd, though it had lain about two months in the Ground, they would needs
make a Miracle of it; and to hinder the Miracle from being contested, some of
the Kindred were brought before the Judge, to confess, that they smelt no ill
Smell that came from the Corpse. Which was enough for Catholic Credulity: So
that for Fear the Memory of this wonder should perish, the Forfeitures adjudg'd
against those who had buried the Woman in the Churchyard belonging to the
Reformed, was applied toward the making a Cross which was erected over her
Grave, with an Inscription containing the whole Story. However, it is certain
they never bethought themselves of informing the world of this Miracle till
May* which was a long time after the thing happened. But that which is most
observable is this, that in the Relation of this Accident, they allege for a
most convincing proof of the wonder, that the two Months, during which time the
Body lay in the earth, were the sharpest and most bitter cold Months in all the
Winter: As if it were such a wonder that Frost and Cold should prevent
Corruption; not to speak any thing now of certain cold Grounds where Bodies
will not begin to putrify till after they have lain twenty years together.

Tonnaiboutonne is a place within the Colloquy of St. John Mass restored ^^
Tonneboutonne.
^' Angeli, where Mass had not bin sung for Fourscore and five years before.
But this year the Parliament of Bourdeaux resettl'd it in that Place, by a
Decree of the last of March. The Lords of that Manor had built up a Chapel,
or as the Parliament call it, in their Decree, a Sepulcher, for themselves and
their Family, upon the place where formerly had stood the principal Altar of
the Catholic Church. That decree therefore commanded the pulling of it down,
and took from the Lords whatever had belonged to the Ecclesiastics. Nor did it
forget to condemn 'em to dig up all the Bodies that had bin buried in the
Sepulcher; to the Restitution of the Church yard, the Bells, the Curates house
and the Almshouse, and to rebuild the Church; obliging the Inhabitants to
contribute two thirds of the Charge; and those that had a share in the Tithes,
the other Third: For this was the way to involve the Reformed in the Penalty of
the Condemnation, in regard that almost all the Inhabitants were of that
Number. Besides, that the Edicts had forbid the reviving the Memory of any Acts
of this Nature, and discharged the Reformed from all the Penalties upon
demolishing of Churches before the Edict of Nantes. But the Parliament never
looking upon that Edict as a Law to bind their Sentences, made it openly the
May game of their Passion and their Cavils.

The Reformed also who had got into small Employments, Offices.
were prosecuted this year, as in the Preceding; so that upon the 29th. of
April, the privy Council fet forth a Decree like the rest against Sergeants,
Notaries, Proctors and Commissioners of the Registry. In like manner the same
Council set forth another decree upon the Eleventh of March, which confirmed
all that had bin enjoined by the Bishop of Poitiers about the distinction of
Schools for Boys and Schools.
Girls; and the particular Order of the Judge of the Place, which enforced the
Reformed to get a License from the Bishop, and to show it the Kings Advocate,
before they began to teach.

Pretended Blasphemies and Irreverences were the Occasion Blasphemies and
Prophanations.
of a world of unjust Acts. Four young Men were accused of stealing the Pix
upon New years-day, and of throwing the Consecrated Wafers about the
Churchyard. For which they were committed to the Custody of the Provost, but
they being desirous to decline his Jurisdiction, demanded a Removal of their
Enditement to some Chamber of the Edict. Couche was the Place where the
accident happened, which falling within the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of
Dijon, it was there to be determined, as being the most proper Judicature.
Thereupon the the Parliament sent back the Enditement to the Provosts, who gave
Sentence of death upon all four. But in regard they were only condemned to be
hanged, it is much to be questioned whether the Court had any good Proofs of the
Crime. Othewise had the same Sacrilege bin committed by the Catholics
themselves, they had bin broken upon the Wheel, or burnt alive. And indeed
there is one Relation of the Death of those poor Creatures, which might give us
some reason to believe that the Punishment was mitigated, because they changed
their Religion. But the style of that Relation is so monkish, and it is
interwoven with so many Characters of Falsehood, that the very reading of it is
enough to persuade a man, that the whole business was otherwise carried. For
the Monk that made it represents those poor Creatures invoking the Virgin Mary,
before they had embraced the Roman Faith; and recounts a Miracle wrote in
Favor of one of 'em, who seemed insensible during a very painful Torture of
the Rack, which he attributes to some motions of Devotion which the young man
had for that Blessed Saint. But there is a contrary Relation which attests that
those poor Creatures were Innocent; that the Curate had forged the Crime by the
foul motives of his impious Malice; that it was sworn how they got into the
Church through a hole, which it was impossible for a man's body to pass through;
that the Curate ^ade the hole himself, that he might have some ground for his
Accusation; that he took away the Pix himself, and scattered the Wafers,
whether consecrated or not, about the Churchyard: Of all which things there
would have ^in sufficient proofs, would the Provost have admitted ^em; that the
Parties accused never confessed any thing, or else what they did confess was
extorted from 'em by the Violence of the Torment. That there was no Proof of
the change of their Religion but the Testimony of the Monks, who beset 'em till
their Execution: Or if any of 'em were so weak as to promise it, 'twas only out
of hope to save his Life; that they were not seen at their death to do any
thing that savored of Catholic Devotion; nor to take any notice of their
Crosses and Beads which they continually ^eld to their Lips. But the Monks are
made up of such Calumnies; and it was their usual Course to brand the Reformed
with suspicion of Sacrilege, on purpose to render 'em odious to the People, as
will afterward appear by more then one Example.

The Lord of Chaurai and his Wife were accused of setting their Coach cross the
street where the procession was to pass upon Corpus Christi day. The Bishop of
Poitiers turned Informer; but the Crime which they had endeavored to aggravate
by long Proceedings, and severe Informations, produced no more then a Decree of
the 10th. of May, in the Chamber of the Edict, which condemned the Parties
accused to pay the Bishops charges, and summoned 'em to the Chamber, there to
receive an admonition to behave themselves more modestly according to the
Edicts. A Proctors Servant Maid in Poitiers was accused of having uttered
several Blasphemies in the Abbey of Montierneaf, against the Images of the
Virgin and the Saints: That is to say, that the silly Maid had inconsiderately
asserted that they were Idols. She was convicted of Contumacy, because she had
avoided Imprisonment by Flight: And upon that, sentenced to undergo the Amend
Honorable, to have her Tongue bored, and to perpetual Banishment out of the
Province of Poit^^* which Sentence was excuted upon her in Effigy.

The Bishop of Mompellier and Valence were Conservators of the Privileges of
the Universities of both those Cites. The Bishop of Valence, after several
Decrees, and a long Suit between him and the Members of the University, came to
an agreement with 'em, in pursuance of which he drew up Regulations, of which
the chiefest was to exclude the Reformed from all Dignities. The Purport of
those Statutes was, that high Mass should be said every Sunday, at which the
Rectors, Doctors, Regents, Scholars, Undergraduates* and Strangers admitted
into the Society should be present* that the Bishop, who is also Chancellor of
the University* should preside at all the Acts: That the Vice Chancellor and
Rector should be Priests, or at least Clerks; and that they should take their
Oaths Bare headed and upon their Knees.

Books also had their share of Catholic Severity. For di^ Moulin had published
a small Piece entitled, The Capuchin. Wherein he ridiculed that Institution,
which dazzled the Catholics with such an outside of Zeal. Thereupon with great
Fervency they prosecuted the Condemnation of this Book: And the Chamber of
Castres being divided upon this Occasion, that Division was determined upon the
third of April, and the Book was condemned to be burnt. The Parliament of
Bourdeaux also ordered the same Execution the 3d. of May. This very Book was
also burnt at Poitiers the 12th. of December, by order of the Seneschal,
together with another Book, entitled The Capuchins Journal.

I have already told ye, that the Prince of Conde purchased Books prosecuted.
Sancerre, and that he had suppressed the Exercise in that Place: But his Zeal
stopped not at so small a thing. He caused a Decree of Council to be set forth,
which forbid Burials in the Day time; all manner of Funeral Pomp; the Exposing
of the Bodies before the Doors of their Houses; Nor to misuse the Catholics in
word or deed, nor any of the New Converts, nor those who had a desire to change
their Profession, under the penalty of corporal Punishment. It was fruther
ordained, that no Soldiers should be quartered in Catholic Houses, till the
Reformed had had their ^all share, and that the charges of such Quarter, and
all other Municipal Expenses, should be levied upon the Reformed. That the
Taxes should be rated by three Catholics and one Reformed; but that they
should be collected by three Reformed and one Catholic; that the Reformed
Assessor and Collectors should be chosen by the Reformed; and the Catholic, by
the Catholics. So that every thing was so ordered, that the Catholics, who
were not the tenth part of the Inhabitants, were the Masters of the Rest, and
might at their Discretion command the Estates and Liberties of others: And it is
thought that some Personal Resentments transported the Duke to these unjust
Revenges.

But the Cardinal's Death, and the crazy Condition of Death of the Cardinal.
the King caused a kind of Cessation of all manner of Business, the whole
Government being intent upon the Change that was like to happen so suddenly in
the Kingdom. For which reason the Reformed had a little Breathing time: For I
find but one Peremptory Decree of the Privy Council of the 3d. of March, in
Confirmation of another obtained by the Bishop of Luson upon a Petition the
20th of the Preceding May, which sentenced Gagemont, according to his own
voluntary Offers, to make his Excuses to the Vicar of St. Hilaire de Melle, to
consign sifty Franks into the Bishops Hands, and pay him the Costs and Charges
of the Suit for not alighting nor putting off his hat, upon his Meeting the
S^crament.

Fuzil, Curate of St. Berthelemi at Paris, being retired to Geneva in 1614, was
there married. His Children after his death, went into France, to sue for the
Payment of a Sum of Money due to their Father for the Sale of an Inheritance
six years before his Retirement. But their Kindred by the Fathers side refusing
to acknowledge 'em for lawful Heirs, though born in Wedlock, and in a Country
where it was lawful for Priests to marry, the Advocate General undertook the
cause of the Kindred, and in the Chamber of the Edict, upon the 25th. of
February, obtained a Sentence, that the Children as Bastards in France could
not have the Benefit of Succession.

The fifth of March a Decree was issued out at Bourdeaux against the
Privileges of the Party-Chamber. A certain Recollect of the Mission of
Bergerac, went to Visit, at Sigoules, the Lady of Moulard, pretending he had
bin sent for by her Order, being at that time sick. In the nick of time, in
comes Belloi, the Minister of the Place, and opposes the Monks Design. Upon
which the Monk complained, that Violence had bin offered him, and obtained a
Capias against the Minister, who applied himself to the Party Chamber. Now this
was a cause purely within the verge of that Chamber. But the Advocate General
interposed and caused the Parliament to send for the Cause, who gave him leave
to pursue the Execution of the Decree.

But the Kings death, which happened in May, prevented him from any farther
improving his powerful Zeal against the Reformed. But to show that he was still
the same to his last Gasp, he could not dye till he had exhorted with his own
trembling Lips, the Marshals La Force and Chastillon to turn Catholics.
However, he had the not Pleasure to see extinguished the Party which he had
brought low: For Providence reserved that satisfaction for Lewis XIVth. who
succeeded him.

The End of the Second Volume.
A COLLECTION OF EDICTS, DECLARATIONS, AND Other PIECES: Serving for Proofs of
the Second Part of the History of the EDICT of NANTES.
A Declaration of the King upon the Edict of Pacification, given at Paris, May
22. 1610. and verified the third of June the same Year.
LEwis, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarr, to all to whom these
Present Letters shall come, Greeting. Since the unfortunate and detestable
Assassination of our thrice Honored Lord and Father last Deceased, whom God
Absolve, the Queen Regent, our thrice honored Lady and Mother, though
continually with Tears in her Eyes, and Grief in her Heart, nevertheless has
not forborne with incessant Labor, and with great Magnanimity and Prudence, to
prevent that fatal Accident from doing any Prejudice to our Person and Dignity,
or to our Kingdom or Subjects, holding her self bound to this Duty, not only by
the natural Affection which she bears us, but also because of her having been
declared Regent, and under that Character being entrusted with the Care and
Administration of the Affairs of the Kingdom, by the Votes and Suffrages of the
Princes of the Blood, and the rest of the Princes, Prelates, Peers, Principal
Officers of the Crown, and Members of our Parliament Assembled therein, we
keeping there our Throne of Justice, wherein her Pains proved so successful,
and the Affection of our Subjects who were then about us, as also of the
Inhabitants of our good City of Paris, was so great and sincere toward us, that
we can desire nothing more from their Obedience, and Fidelity, nor from the
good and prudent Conduct of the Queen Regent, our aforesaid thrice honored
Lady and Mother. Being also informed by Intelligence, that comes to us every
day, that in all other Places and Parts of our Kingdom, all our Subjects as
well Catholics, as of the pretended Reformed Religion, of all Qualities, make
it their Business out of a laudable Emulation, to outvye each other in
readiness to Obedience, in Actions and Behavior which give some Testimony of
their Fidelity and Duty; for which we have great occasion to bless God, and to
hope that as he has been pleased to preserve this Kingdom from imminent
Dangers, so as to make it flourish for so many Ages, so he will take into his
Protection our youthful Years, and grant us leisure to grow up in Piety and
Virtue, to the end we may one day employ the Grandeur, to which he has raised
us, to his Honor and Glory. Which with all our Hearts we implore him to
vouchsafe us, and to inspire us always with Councils requisite and necessary
for the well governing our Subjects in his Fear, and causing them to live in
Peace, Union, and Amity one with another; as being the true Foundation, upon
which next after God, depends the Safety and Preservation of the Kingdom.
Experience having taught the Kings our Predecessors, that the Fury and Violence
of Arms had been always, not only of no effect to reduce their Subjects, who
were gone astray, into the Bosom of the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church,
but rather extremely prejudicial; which was the Reason that being swaid by more
happy Councils they had recourse to Mildness, in granting them the Exercise of
the pretended Reformed Religion, of which they made Profession. By whose
Example led, the Deceased King, our thrice Honored Lord and Father, made the
Edict of Nantes, for the Reconciling of all his Subjects together. The
Observation of which Edict, together with the Regulations made in consequence
of it, settled such an assured repose among 'em as has lasted ever since
without Interruption. By means of which, although that Edict be perpetual and
irrevocable, and consequently has no need of being confirmed by a New
Declaration; nevertheless to the end our Subjects may be assured of our good
Will, and that our Intention and pleasure is inviolably to observe that Edict,
made for the good and repose of our Subjects, as well Catholics, as of the
pretended Reformed Religion.

Therefore we Declare, That this Affair having been debated in our Presence by
the Queen Regent, our thrice Honored Lady and Mother, we have by the Advice of
Her, the Princes of our Blood, other Princes, Dukes, Peers, Officers of our
Crown, and several eminent Persons of our Council, said and ordained, say and
ordain, and it is our Will and Pleasure, That the said Edict of Nantes, in all
the Points and Articles of it, together with the rest of the Articles to them
granted, and the Regulations made, and Decrees set forth upon the
Interpretation, or Execution of the said Edict, and in consequence of it, shall
be inviolably upheld and observed, and the infringers shall be severely
punished as Disturbers of the Public Tranquillity. To which Effect, we enjoin
all our Officers to be sedulously assisting, under the Penalty of being
responsible, and being punished for their Negligence with the same Rigor, as
the Disobedience of those that shall offer to Violate it.

In like manner, we command our Beloved and Trusty People holding our Court of
Parliament in Paris, that these Presents may be Read, Published and Registered,
and the Contents thereof to keep, maintain, and observe Point by Point,
according to their Form and Tenor, without suffering or permitting any Breach
thereof in any manner whatever: In Testimony whereof, we have caused our Seals
to be affixed to these Presents.

Given at Paris, May 22. in the Year of Grace, 1610. and of our Reign the
First, Louis.

And upon the Folding of the Paper. By the King, the Queen Regent being
Present, De Lominie.

Sealed with the great Seal of the said Lord, upon a double Label. Also written
upon the side of the said Folding. Read, Published and Registered, heard by,
and Consenting and Requesting the Kings Advocate General. And Ordered that
compared Copies shall be sent to the Bayliwicks and Seneschalships, to be there
also Read, Published and Registered, with all speed by the Advocate General's
Substitutes, who are enjoined to Certify the Court of their doing it this
Month. At Paris in Parliament, June 3. 1610. Signed, Tillet.

A General Regulation, drawn up in the Assembly General of the Reformed
Churches of France, held at Saumur, by the Kings Permission in the Year, 1611.
IN every Province there shall be a Council established, to Consult about the
Affairs of the Church within the Province.

Which Councils shall be continued and changed every two Years, either all or
in part, at the Discretion of the Provincial Assembly: Which Assembly shall
choose out of the Gentlemen, Pastors and third Estate, Persons well known to
all the Province for their Piety, Probity, Capacity and Experience; the number
of those that are to be employed, out of every one of the said Ranks or
Degrees, being to remain at the Discretion of the Provinces.

The Council shall Name the Place, and the Persons to whom Advices shall be
directed, whether General Deputies, or of the Province.

When a General Assembly is to be called, the Council shall give notice to all
the Churches, either one by one, or by way of Colloquies, according to the
Method observed in every one of the Provinces, to Assemble at a certain day,
and send thither their Deputies, either by the Appointment of Churches or
Colloquies.

To which purpose the Elders of each Consistory, shall be careful to give
notice to all the Principal Members of their Churches to meet upon a certain
Sunday at Sermon; at the Conclusion of which the Ministers shall give notice to
the Housekeepers to stay in Order to Consult about Affairs of the Church which
concern 'em.

By the Advice of which Housekeepers, such a number of Persons shall be deputed
from every Church to meet in the Assembly of the Colloquy, according to the
Method observed as above mentioned, a^ shall be chosen by Blurality o^ Voices,
provided there be a mixture of Gentlemen, Ministers, and Men of the third
Estate, as far a^ is possible to be done.

The said Provincial Assemblies shall Debate and Argue by Heads* unless any
Church requires that they shall argue by Churches; o^ that in Places, where the
Assembly meets by Deputation of Colloquies, some Colloquy requires that
Judgment should be given by Colloquies.

No Man shall be admitted into the said Provincial Assemblies, unless he have a
Call, or be employed in Messages.

The Kings Officers and other Magistrates may be present in the said Provincial
Assemblies, when they shall be called by the Method above prescribed, and shall
sit with the Nobility, or with the third Estate, according to their Quality,
unless they shall be admitted to make an Order apart.

The Presidents that are to pre^ide in the said Provincial Assemblies, shall be
chosen out of the Nobility by Plurality of Voices.

There shall not be above five Deputies at most, sent by the Provincial to the
General Assembly, and three shall be the least; which shall be chosen, such as
are the most able Persons in that Assembly, out of the Gentlemen, Ministers and
third Estate, as far as may be done.

The Councils composed as above, in every Province shall be entrusted with the
following Functions, and oversight of Affairs.

To disperse the Intelligence which they receive from the General Deputies at
Court, or from the Provinces adjoining, or other Places, to all the Churches
and Places of the Province, or to such a Governor, Captain, or other Person as
need requires.

Also if the Intelligence reach farther then the Province, whether it be the
general concern of all, or the particular Business of some other neighboring
Province, to give notice by an express and without delay.

And to the end, this Communication of Intelligence may not prove ineffectual
for want of Diligence, the Contiguous Provinces shall take care respectively
for the distributing the Intelligence from one to another, to the end they may
be sent by the shortest way, from what part soever they come. To which purpose
there shall be a Fund deposited in the Hands of one of the Council of every
Province, amounting to about a hundred and fifty Livres, to defray the
Expenses of the said Dispatches, and to reimburse those that shall have laid
out any Money; and the Deputies of the said Contiguous Provinces shall conter
together, to resolve what to do upon this Order before they depart.

If the Intelligence received by the Council be such, that they can look after
it alone, they shall do it speedily and without delay: If not, it is left to
their Prudence and their Judgment to Consult the Advice of such Persons, as
they shall think convenient, as the Case requires, to call to their Assistance.

For Example, in Case of any, notable Breach of the Edict, Sedition, Tumult,
attempt upon any Place, or such other Intelligence of Importance, the
satisfaction for which was neglected, or required a more vigorous Prosecution,
they may require such of the Neighboring Counties, which they think most
proper to assist 'em with three of their Counselors at the least, who upon the
first Summons shall be bound to Meet, in such a Place as the injured Province
shall Assign, one or more of their Council to Consult together and find out all
the good and lawful means to get Reparation for the said Breaches in the
Province endammag'd; and to make it their own Cause and Business, as much as
the injured Province did. Which if they shall not be sufficient to go through
withal, it shall be left to the Prudence of those Provinces, jointly with the
Deputies of their Councils, to advise, whether it be needful to give notice to
all the rest of the Provinces, and to Assign a place where to Meet the
Deputies, in Order to the unanimous Prosecution of that Affair.

All which is most conformable to the General Union of the Churches of the
Kingdom, which obliges 'em to a mutual Resentment of their Grievances: So that
one Province grievously injured may not have recourse of it self to violent
Remedies, as it were by way of Reprisal, or to some other sort of Revenge,
whereby they may be hurried, and consequently all the rest of the Churches, to
extremities, but may partly be restrained by the Prudence of their Councils
within the bounds of Moderation, and partly fortified by their support, for the
obtaining of Justice, and Reparation of their wrongs.

The same Method shall be observed, in Case that any one professing the
Religion, shall attempt any thing rashly, and with a Call, to the prejudice of
the public Tranquillity.

The said Deputies of the Council of the Provinces shall have a regard to the
Kings Service and the Preservation of the Churches, that the Places committed
to the Custody of those of the Religion may be kept in a good Condition, and
that the Governors and Captains, with whom they are entrusted, do their Duty.

And to that purpose the said Governors and Captains are admonished, not to
take it ill, if the said Councils from time to time depute Personages
capacitated among 'em or else out of the Province to vis^^ the said Places and
Garrisons, to the end they may give an accomp^ to the Province. In which
Visitation they shall take care that al^ their Soldiers, for Assurance o^ that
Fidelity, which is principally required from 'em, shall be well known to be of
the Religion, a^^ that they may not be listed out o^ the Original Inhabitants
of those Cities or Suburbs, till there be ^ Necessity of new Reinforcements
Which the aforesaid Governour^ and Captains are required to observe.

And because great abuses have formerly been committed, by Reason of the great
number of Soldiers, which might or ought to have been entertained in the said
Places* which considering the incertainty of these times, might have brought
upon us inconveniences past repair, the said Governors and Captains are
required, for the Service of the King, the Peace of his Subjects of the
Religion, the discharge of their Honor and Consciences, and the freeing
themselves from that blame, which otherwise they may incurr, to conform to that
which follows.

That is to say, that of the sum as well charged upon the Public Account as
payable in ready Money, they take a third part clear, and disengaged from all
charges, and that for the two other third parts, they consent to give the
Acquittances into the hands of such Person as shall be appointed by the Council
of the Province, who shall receive the Money and pay the Soldiers by Bill of
Exchange, and satisfy all other charges; as well of the Garrison as of the
Place.

By the way, it is to be understood that out of the two thirds, there are to be
paid the Governors Lieutenant, if he have any, the Captains and Soldiers
according to the Agreements ordered by the Governors and Captains, the
Sergeant Major, the Drummers, the Canoneers, and other necessary Officers; also
for, Wood and Candles for the Corpse du Guard, where the Inhabitants of the
Cities find none; Matts, Bedding, Ruggs, new Arms, repair of the Watch-Towers,
Bridges, Barriers, Pallisado's, and new Carriages for the great Guns, when the
Council of the Province think it convenient, and are able to do it without too
much prejudice to the ordinary Garrison.

And because it shall be the care of the said Council, or of those whom they
shall appoint for that purpose, to make an estimate, as near the Truth as may
be, of what the Annual Charges may amount to, to the end there may be a Fund
still ready, and not to put upon the Governors and Captains more Men then they
are able to bear: and of all that Administration there shall be an account
given to the said Council, as also of the Charge that shall be laid upon the
said two thirds in the presence of the Governor; nor shall the said
extraordinary charges above mentioned exceed a third or fourth of the said two
third parts for every Year.

If any Fund be given by their Majesty's for the Reparations and Fortifications
of the said Places, the said Governor shall Order, how the Money shall be laid
out, as having more interest in what it ought to be most properly employed, and
best Judges of what is most necessary. Nevertheless the Commissioners of the
Council shall have an Inspection into it, to the end the Disposals,
Proclamations, Adjudications, and Abatements may be duly made, and without
Monopolizing, and that the Business may be done as they desire. Or if the Fund
be otherwise raised for the said Reparations, it shall be managed by him whom
the Council shall appoint, who in the Presence of the Governor shall give an
Account to the Council.

Where there shall be public Magazines they shall take care, that the Corn,
Wine and other Provisions, without any prejudice to the Kings Officers, be
supplied in Time and Season, to the end they may not be empty. Also that the
Powder, Match, and other perishable Ammunition may be dried, refreshed, and
reground, with as much good Husbandry as may be. And in a Word, the Governors
are exhorted not to take in ill part the care which the Deputies of the Council
shall take, as to what concerns the Preservation of the said Places, and to
give all Assistance and Encouragement to those that shall be sent by 'em.

The said Deputies of the Council shall labor, in pursuance of the strict
Union which ought to be between those of the Religion, by all amicable means,
as far as in 'em lies, either by their own Pains, or the Mediation of proper
Persons to prevent and reconcile all Suits, Quarrels, Animosities, that may
arise upon any occasion whatever.

If any of the Captains, or Governors of Places happen to dye, they shall
endeavor that the Regulation, which their Majesty's have been pleased to grant
their Subjects, may be exactly observed in all the Circumstances of it.

The Provinces and their Councils shall hold a strict Correspondence with their
Neighbors, and to the end they may be the better able to keep it up, they
shall be careful to cause their Deputies to Meet at the Provincial Assemblies.

And for the General Correspondence between the whole Body, they shall take and
receive it from the General Assembly, so long as it shall sit by the Kings
Permission: but that, breaking up, they shall have recourse to the General
Deputies, residing near their Majesty's, in Order to the Church Affairs.

And for the upholding a Necessary Union between all the Churches, they shall
meet every Year at a certain Time and Place, and appoint one of the Council of
every Province to be there exactly. To which purpose the Assembly, at their
breaking up, shall appoint the Council that ought to nominate the Day and Place
for the first Year: which shall take care to appoint the most commodious Time
for the Meeting, with the least Noise and Bustle, and to render it the most
Beneficial that may be to the Conjuncture of Affairs. Those few Days of
Conference will soder their Union, revive the common Resentment of their
Interests, and inform one another of their present Condition.

Done, and Decreed at the General Assembly of the Reformed Churches of France,
held at Saumur by the Kings Permission, August 29. 1611.
Answer to the Writing of the Assembly of Saumur, upon the 52. and 53. Article.
Writing of the Aslembly of Saumur. 1611. THe Deceased King Henry having
formerly declared his Will and Pleasure upon a demand of the same Nature in his
Answer to the Writing, March 23. 1602. viz. That what had been altered in the
and Edict, and the Private Articles, which was but a very small matter, had
been done for the general good, and to facilitate the Execution of it, and also
with the Consent of the Principal of the said pretended Reformed Religion, who
were called to the Consultations about it: which was likewise accepted and
executed at their Instances and Solicitation: Therefore the King at present
Reigning, desiring ^^^form himself to the good and Pious Resolutions of the
Deceased King ^^^ Father, is pleased, and his meaning is, that they should be
content with the Edict in the form, as it is verified in his Sovereign Courts,
and as it has since been executed. I. THe Deputies of the Reformed Churches of
France Assembled at Saumur by the Kings Permission, continuing their most
humble Remonstrances, Petitions and Supplications presented from Time to Time
upon several occasions by the said Churches, since the Year 98. most humbly
supplicate his Majesty, that they may fully enjoy the whole Contents of the
Edict, which it pleased the Deceased King Henry the Great of blessed Memory, to
Grant and Sign after a long and solemn Treaty, by the Advice of the Princes of
the Blood, the rest of the Princes, and Officers of the Crown, and other great
and eminent Persons in his Council of State; and in the same form as it was
drawn up at Nantes, and accepted by their Deputies in the said Year 98. and
Presented to the Court of Parliament of Paris, and not according to the Form,
as it was verified by the said Court, as having been altered and pared in
several Articles of great Importance, without the Consent of the said Churches;
who several times since, but more especially by their Deputies sent to his
Majesty at the City of Blois, in the Year 99. and by the Writings drawn up by
the Assembly at Saint Foi in 1601. and answered in March and August 1602. have
declare that they cannot rest satisfied with the said verified Edict, and
humbly therefore supplicate his Majesty to restore and establish that which was
granted 'em before. II. They likewise supplicate his Majesty, that they may
enjoy the full Contents of the Particular Articles, granted together with their
Edict of Nantes, as they were drawn up and dispatched in the Year 98. restoring
the Retrenchments that were made at the Verification. III. To cause the said
Edict and Private Articles, to be verified and registered according to the Form
above mentioned in all the Parliaments, Courts of Aid, Chambers of Accounts,
and other Sovereign Courts of the Kingdom, to the end they may be afterward
registered in all Bailiwicks and Seneschalships. As to what shall be found not
to have been executed, though set down in the Edict of Nantes, verified in the
Sovereign Courts, Commissioners shall be Named by his Majesty to see that the
said Execution be better performed: the one a Catholic, the other of the said
Religion; and in Case the said Execution be left to the Bailiffs and
Seneschals, or their Lieutenants, they shall take an Associate of the same
Religion, according to the Answer given to the Writing answered in August 1602.
IV. That for the Execution thereof, when it shall be necessary, and required by
the said Religion, that two Commissioners be appointed by his Majesty out of
every Province, the one a Catholic, the other to be nominated by those of the
Province: if those of the Religion think it not more Convenient to leave the
Execution of it to the Bailiffs and Seneschals or their Deputies. Who according
to the Answer returned to the second Article of the Writing answered in August
1602. shall be bound to take an Associate of the same Religion, who shall be
nominated by those of the said Religion within the said Bailiwicks and
Seneschalships. Nothing may be altered in the VIIth. Article of the Edict of
Nantes, which it is his Majesty's Meaning and Pleasure shall be observed. V.
That according to the VIIth. Article of the Edict, which permits all Lords of
High Jurisdiction to settle the Exercise of the said Religion, within the
extent of their High Jurisdictions, it shall be lawful for the Communities of
the said Churches to establish the said exercise within the Fiefs and High
Jurisdictions that belong to 'em, or which they may hereafter purchase. The IX.
and X. Article of the Edict shall be upheld and observed. VI. That the said
Exercise may be continued according to the IX. and X. Articles of the Edict, in
all Places where it was in the Years 77. and 97. in such Manner as it was then
observed, even by the Authority inherent in the Jurisdiction, though the Lord of
the Manor may have afterward changed his Religion; or that the Lordship may
be fallen into the Possession of a Catholic, tho an Ecclesiastic, and that it
may be restored, where it has been taken away for those Reasons. The
Commissioners, who shall be sent into the Provinces shall have Instructions to
inform themselves, whether the Exercises of the said Religion, had been settled
in the said Places for so many Years, and why they were not restored, that such
course may be taken as shall be according to Reason. VII. And for as much as by
Virtue of the X. Article the said Service ought to be restored in Reols, Port
Saint Marie Lauserte, Saint Basville, and others of the same Nature, where it
was settled in September 1577. and for that because of the long Discontinuance,
and other Inconveniences, it would be a difficult thing to restore it without
some danger of a Sedition, therefore that his Majesty would be pleased instead
of those Places to grant 'em others, to be appointed by the Synods and
Colloquies of the Province, for the removal of their exercise thither. The King
cannot allow the Petitioners to take any other Title upon 'em, then that which
was given 'em by the Edicts: Therefore his Majesty Orders that in all Public
Acts, they shall use the Terms expressed in the Edict of Nantes, as is set down
in the Answer given to the II. Article of the Writing answered April 8. 1609.
VIII. That they of the said Religion may not be constrained in any Acts either
Public or Private, by Writing or otherwise, to style themselves of the
pretended Reformed Religion. The Deceased King having declared by his Letters
Patents, dated July 5. 1604. that the said Ministers should not be comprehended
in Taxes or other Impositions upon their moveable Goods, their Pensions and
Salaries, but only for their proper Estates: It Is his Majesty's Pleasure, that
they enjoy the Contents of the said Letters, Patents: and strictly forbids all
Assessors of Parishes to rate 'em upon those Accounts; and in respect of their
proper Goods not to surcharge 'em, as they will answer for it in their own
proper Persons: of which the Elu's shall take Care under the same Penalties.
IX. That the Ministers of the said Religion may enjoy, as to the Imposition of
Taxes, Loans Aids, Duties upon Salt, and all other Subsidies, as well ordinary
as extraordinary, the same Exemption which the Ecclesiastics of the Kingdom
enjoy. The XVI. Article shall be observed, and Orders are given to that Purpose
to the Commissioners deputed to see that they of the said Religion enjoy the
Benefit of it, by certifying the Loss of the Deeds and Possessions, which they
held in those Places. X. That by the XV. Article of the Edict, all the Towns
and Places, belonging to the Communities of those of the said Religion, as also
those for the Interrment of their Dead, may be restored 'em. And where they
cannot by Authentic Titles, justify their Propriety to 'em, that the only
Proof of having formerly enjoyed 'em may suffice for their being restored to
the Possession of 'em, in regard the said Deeds were lost during and by Reason
of the Troubles. The XVII. Article of the said Edict shall be exactly observed,
and in pursuance of it, all Preachers, Readers, and others who speak in
public, are enjoined not to use any Words or Discourses tending to excite the
People to Sedition and Animosities one against the other, but to Curb and
Behave themselves modestly, and to say nothing but what tends to the
Instruction and Edification of their Hearers, and to preserve the public
Repose and Tranquillity under the Penalties mentioned in the Edict. XI. That his
Majesty would be pleased according to the XVII. Article of the Edict to inflict
exemplary Punishment upon Preachers, Confessors and other Ecclesiastics, who
move the People to Sedition; Blaming and Forbidding all Society, Acquaintance
and Communication with those of the said Religion, forbidding people to employ,
assist, serve 'em, or nurse their little Children, by teaching that all who
frequent their Company are damned: And where such Preachers and Confessors
shall absent themselves before they can be impleaded, that the Bishops, Curates
and others their Superiors, by whom they were introduced may be responsable
for 'em: Enjoining the Advocates General and their Substitutes to be assisting,
upon pain of being answerable for it in their own Names and Persons, and upon
Penalty of being deprived of their Offices. The XX. Article of the Edct shall
it observed: And Enquiry shall be made after those that shall disobey, but by
the Officers of Justice, wherein the Curates shall not presume to be Parties.
XII. And for as much as the Multiplicity of Holy days, and the Observation of
New ones occasion several disorders, therefore that in such places where those
of the Religion shall require it, that there may be a certain Regulation made
as to the Number of the said Holy Days, by the Commissioners executing the said
Edict, and that the Curates may not be permitted to be accusers for the
non-observance of 'em, nor the Provost Marshals, their Lieutenants, Archers or
other Officers of the Watch, nor the Sergeants without express warrant and
command of the Judges of the Place. The XVII Article of the Edict shall be
observed. XIII. That according to the XVII. Article of the Edict, none of those
of the said Religion may be deprived of the Dignities and Employment of which
they are in possession, whether they made profession of it before or after they
were preferred: and where any of 'em were deprived without observing the Usual
Forms, that they may be restored; more especially such as were provided of
Governments, and Captains Places. The Churchyards ordered 'em by the
Commissioners, who have formerly executed the Edict shall remain in the
Petitioners Possession; and if upon any Occasion they be taken from 'em, they
shall be allowed others by the Commissioners ordained by his Majesty. XIV. That
all Churchyards, that have been enjoyed since the Verification of the last
Edict, and the Execution of it, may remain in their Possession, and that they
may not be taken from 'em upon any Occasion whatever. The Answer given to the
XXII. Article of the Writing answered the last of August, 1602. shall be
observed: And to that purpose his Majesty ordains, that convenient
Burying-Places shall be allowed those of the Religion, by the Commissioners and
Officers of those Quarters, in public Places belonging to his Majesty, or else
to the Bodies of Cities, Buroughs and Villages or Communities; or for defect
of such Places, the said Bodies and Communities shall be bound to purchase
other, toward which those of the Religion shall contribute their Proportion
like the Rest. XV. That in pursuance of the Regulations formerly made; more
especially by the Answer to the XXII. Article of the Writing answered in
August, 1602. all the Royal and Inferior Judges may be enjoined to allow a
Convenient Place, for the Burial of their dead, to those of the Religion, in
some public Place belonging to the King, or to the Communities of the said
Cities, Buroughs and Villages: and where there are no such places, that they
may be purchased at the Common Expenses of all the Inhabitants of the Parish,
those of the Religion contributing proportionably to the Rest. Those Burials
were ordered in the Night time to avoid Commotions and Tumults, and for the
greater Security of those of the Religion who attended the Corpse. But if there
be any Places where they can bury by Daylight, without disturbing the Peace of
the Inhabitants, Orders shall be given to the Commissioners about it. XVI. That
such Places where by particular Regulation they have been constrained to bury
their dead at an inconvenient Hour, they may be Permitted to bury by daylight,
if they think it fitting. The King cannot allow that the Gentlemen of the said
Religion, and others who have Right of burying in C^^rches, shall be there
interred; because the Canonical. Constitutions for^^^; and for that it would be
a (...) contrary and prejudicial to ^^ Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion,
which his Majesty professes; for can it be done without giving great occasion
of Scandal and Dis^^^ent to the Catholics. But his Majesty grants, that the
Commissioners being upon the Place may advise with them, about the means of
preserving the Temporal Right and Authority which they have as Lords and
Patrons of the said Churches, so that no prejudice may be done either to them
or their Successors. XVII. And for as much as in some Places the said Funerals
cannot be solemnized without danger of Commotion and Sedition, and other
Incocveniencies, especially in Places where the Lords, Gentlemen and others of
the said Religion, have right of Burying in the Churches and Chapels of their
Predecessors, and that Orders may be given to the Commissioners proceeding to
the Execution of the Edict, to make so good a Regulation in reference to the
said Enterments, so that no Inconvenience may happen: And in so doing to have a
regard to the Satisfaction of the said Lords, Gentlemen and others, who have a
Right and Property in the said Burying Places. The King grants the said petty
Schools in Cities, within the Suburbs of which the Service of their Religion is
permitted, and that, for one Master in each; and only for teaching to Write
and Read: With Prohibitions to the said Masters to dogmatize, or to admit
above ten or twelve Scholars in each School, of the Neighborhood only, and no
Foreigners. XVIII. That in pursuance of the Supplication addressed to his
Majesty by the Writing answered in August, 1602. and according to the Hopes
given by the Answer made to the sixth Article of the said Writing, it would
please him by an Interpretation of the XXXVIII. of the particular Articles, to
permit 'em petty Schools in all the Villages and Buroughs of the Kingdom, to
teach them Children to read and write, a^^ to instruct 'em in the first
Rudiments of Grammar. The Edict permits 'em to erect Colleges in such Cities
and Places where they have the Exercise of their Religion; to which his Majesty
allows the same Privileges as to other Colleges, received and approved in
this Kingdom. XIX. That in Conformity to the Answer returned to the Writing
answered in March 1602. it would please him to vouchsafe the Academies of
Saumur and Montauban, the same Immunities Privileges and Prerogatives, which
other Academies of the Kingdom enjoy. The Choice of the said Presidents depends
upon the King only; and such Care and Discretion has been used, and shall be
for the Future, that those of the said Religion shall have no cause to
Complain. XX. That the Presidents and ten Catholic Counselors who are to
serve in the Chamber of the Edict of the Parliament of Paris, with the ten
Counselors of the said Religion, be chosen out of the most equitable,
peaceable and moderate Men, according to the XLVII. of the particular Articles;
and to that purpose that it may be agreed upon with the Deputies of the said
Churches; as also for that by the XLVII. Article of the said Edict, it is
expressly said, that the said Presidents and Counselors shall be continued as
long as possible may be. The Number of the said Officers is already so great
over all the Kingdom that there is no need of increasing it. But to the end
there may be no want of Judges in the said Chamber because of the said
Refusals, it is granted that they may judge to the Number of eight as in other
Parlaments, whereas formerly they were restrained to ten. To which end all
Patents requisite shall be dispatched. XXI. That at the request of the Chamber
of Castres, which is composed of a President and Eight Catholic Counselors,
and as many of the Religion, it would please his Majesty to create de novo two
Offices of Counselors, to serve in the Chamber of Nerac, where there are but
six Counselors of the same Religion. Which is the Cause that by reason of
present Refusals, there is not a sufficient Number of Judges in the said
Chamber: And for the said two Offices to provide two Persons gratis, at the
Nomination of the Churches. The XXXI. Article of the Edict shall be observed:
But nothing can be changed in the last Establishment of the said Chambers: And
as to the Election and Nomination of those that are to serve, his Majesty will
provide with such Consideration that they shall have no occasion to complain.
XXII. And considering the great Animosities of the Parliament of Toulouse and
Bourdeaux, which have chiefly appeared since the fatal Accident of the Death of
the King deceased, by the great Number of Divisions of Voices that happen in
the Chambers of Castres and Nerac, which proceeds from hence, that the said
Courts send to his Majesty the Nomination of the Catholic Counselors which
are to serve in the said Chambers, and Employ the most passionate in the said
Courts, it is desired that each of the said Chambers may supply the Number of
the Counselors of the Grand Council, and the Surplusage of the said Courts of
Parlaments of Toulouse and Bourdeaux, who may be chosen by your Majesty, upon
the Register of the said Courts, as was practiced upon the first establishment
of the Chamber of Justice in Languedoc in 1579. and not upon the Nomination
which is made by the said Parlaments. Satisfaction has been given to the
Contents of this Article by the Answer to the IV. of the Articles presented by
those of the Religion in the Dauphirate, in August last: and because the
Parliament of Grenoble has refused to obey it, Letters of command shall be sent
to cause 'em to verify it. XXIII. That in Conformity to what has been granted
to the Chambers of the Edict in the Parlaments of Paris, Toulouse and
Bourdeaux, it would please his Majesty to create de novo an Office of
Substitute to the Advocate General of the Parliament of Grenoble, to serve in
the Chamber, and take his Conclusions as well at the Hearing as in Process by
writing; and to provide one of the Religion Gratis at the Nomination of the
Churches under the Jurisdiction of the said Chamber. The Deceased King being
engaged ^^ Promise, not to make any new Creation, even in the said Province
^^ere is no Reason for granting the present Article. XXIV. And that all the
Officers of the said Miparty Chamber, may be according to the Intention of the
Edict, and practice of the other Chambers, may it please his Majesty to create
de novo two Offices of Secretaries, and an Usher in the said. Parliament of
Grenoble, to serve in the said Chamber, and to provide Persons of the said
Religion Gratis, at the Nomination of the said Churches. Such course shall be
taken that there shall be no occasion for Complaint. XXV. For the same Reason
in regard the two Commissioners of the Registry of the Chamber of Castres are
Catholics, that upon the Death or Resignation of one of the said Officers, one
of the said Religion may supply his Room. The XLVI. Article of the Edict shall
be observed, and the Vshers and Sergeants shall be enjoined to execute all
Decrees, Commissions and Orders issued out of the said Chambers of the Edict,
and of Grenoble, in all places where need shall require, upon Pain of being
suspended from their Employments, and forced to pay the Expenses, Damages and
Interest of the Plaintiffs in the Suits. XXVI. And for as much as to the
prejudice of the LXVII. Article of Particulars, and the Provision made in
consequence of it, by Answers to several Writings, the Courts of Parliament in
Provence, Burgundy and Britany, make daily Decrees against the Ushers, who
within their Jurisdictions execute the Decrees of the Chambers of the Edict of
Paris and Grenoble; so that for that Reason the Royal Sergeants settled in the
said Provinces, refuse to put the said Decrees in Execution, therefore may his
Majesty be pleased to create de novo two Offices of Sergeants Royal in every
Bailiwick and Seneschalship within the Jurisdiction of the said Provinces, to
be supplied by Persons of the said Religion. The Catholics, and those of the
Religion shall be indifferently received into the said Offices; and as to those
places where there are none at present, command shall be sent to those that
Officiate, to receive all Contracts, Wills and other Acts, which they shall be
required to do, by those of the said Religion. XXVII. And for Remedy of the
Inconvenience, which they of the Religion daily suffer both at Paris and other
Places, where there are no Royal Notaries to receive Contracts, Wills, and
other Voluntary Acts, may it please his Majesty to create de novo in every City
two Offices of Royal Notaries, and to supply the Places with those of the said
Religion. The Regulation made at Blois in 1599. shall be observed. XXVIII. That
Attestations sent by the Ministers and Elders, to justify themselves in the
Chambers of the Edict, shall not be opposed nor rejected, unless it be upon a
challenge or exception against the Signing, though the said Attestations are not
made before a Public Notary and Judges Royal. It Is for the King in his Council
to appoint Judges. Nevertheless his Majesty Grants that in Case of Division of
Voices, the Chamber where the Process was divided shall Order the Parties to
repair to the next Chamber, without Addressing to his Majesty. But his Pleasure
is, that in other Things the Orders be observed. XXIX. And to obviate long and
troublesome Suits, which the Parties are constrained to undergo through the
Regulations of the Judges of his Majesty's Council in the Business of
Parentage, Recusations, and things of the like Nature; that the Chambers of the
Edict might send to the next Court, or where both Parties shall agree, the
Processes, wherein the Presidents or Counselors in the Causes, or their
Kindred, within the Degree and Number of the Ordinance, are either Principal
Parties or Garanties; as also the Division of Voices, happening in the said
Chambers, which ought to be referred to the next Chamber, according to the
XLVII. of the Particular Articles. Granted for the time to come, and necessary
Declarations shall be expedited for that Purpose. XXX. That in the Explanation
of the LIX. Article of the Edict, the Chamber of the Edict of Normandy be
enjoined to set forth by way of long Prescription, the Time elapsed from July
1585. till the Month of February 1599. as is practiced in other Chambers of the
Kingdom. The Regulation as to Six Months cannot be altered, nevertheless the
Ecdesiasticks, who have changed their Religion, presenting their Petition to
his Majesty, care shall be taken as Reason requires. XXXI. And because that
instead of making a New Regulation between the Courts of Parliament and the
Chambers, according to the LXIII. Article of the Edict, the said Chambers for
the most part have observed several Regulations made in the Years 78. and 79.
which allow not the Privilege of Appealing to the Chambers, but to those who
six Months before made Profession of the Religion, that the said Limitation may
be taken off from those Chambers where it is observed: and in causing all the
Suits of those of the said Religion to be indifferently heard in the said
Chambers, when they shall require it, more especially which shall embrace the
said Religion de novo. 'Ti^ a Favor to grant it to the Heirs, after the Cause
has been contested with the Decedsed, to whom they have sacceeded. But it is his
Majesty's Pleasure and Command, that such an Alteration of the Judges may not
be made fraudulently: and in respect of such as make over their Estates in
Trust, who have no Right but by a particular Title, their Renouncers having
voluntarily Contested the Point otherwhere, they shall not be admitted any
more, to avoid Abuses and Frauds which may be committed by those who have a
Mind to trouble and vex their Plantiffs unjustly. XXXII. In like manner, that
they of the said Religion who are Heirs, or having a right or cause of Suit
with others, who would willingly have had it Contested in Parliament, may if
they think it convenient, referr their Controverted Points and differences to
the said Chambers of the Edict, notwithstanding the said Contest made by their
Authors; as has been adjudg'd in several particular Cases by his Majesty's
Council. Foreigners, who desire to enjoy this Privilege, shall be bound to
Address themselves to the King, who will take Care as well of the Interest of
his Subjects, as for the Gratification of Foreigners. XXXIII. That Foreigners
Trading and Trafficking within the Kingdom, and Professing the said Religion,
may enjoy the same Privileges, and cause their differences to be removed to
the said Chambers, every one within their proper Jurisdiction. This Article is
granted at to the Instruction, but not to allow a Definitive Voice to the
Associates, what they are to Judge. XXXIV. That in all Informations and
Instructions for criminal Processes and Inditements brought against those of
the Religion, the Judge as well Royal as Inferior, if he be a Catholic, may
be bound to take an Associate of the said Religion who has taken his Degrees,
or at least a Pleader, to be present at all the Proceedings, and who shall have
a Definitive Voice in the Judgment of the Process upon Pain of Nullity: and
this throughout all Bailiwicks and Seneschalships in the Kingdom; and not
particularly in those that are specified in the 66. Article of the Edict.
Nothing can be altered from the Method established by the Edict of Names, to
avoid great delays, trou^^^ and expenses, to which the Parties could be
constrained were they to have recourse to the Chambers, which are ^^^n very
remote one from another: Besides that the same Equality ought to be showed to
the Catholics, as to chose of the Religion in that particular: Unless in
respect of those Pro^^nces where the contrary has been allowed by special
Privilege. XXXV. That what is granted by the LXVII. Article of the Edict to
the Provinces of Guienne, Languedoc, Provence, and Dauphinate, upon the
Judgment of Competitions in the Chambers of the Edict, may for the same Reason
be extended to all those of the other Provinces of the Kingdom. When Fathers
and Mothers have provided, their Will and Judgment shall be observed: Otherwise
the Law ^^d general Custom of the Kingdom: Nevertheless without acting any
thing prejudicial or contrary to the Edict made in Favor of those of the
Religion. XXXVI. That Children, whose Fathers and Mothers died in the said
Religion, without having provided Tutors and Guardians, according to the LVIII.
Article of Particulars, may be put into the Hands of Tutors to be bred up and
instructed in the said Religion. His Majesty will not refuse this Favor to
those of the said Religion for Offices, in Cases wherein he permits we some to
his Catholic Officers, reserving always to himself only, the Choice and
Nomination of the Persons. XXXVII. That it may please his Majesty not to admit
the Resignations of Presidents and Counselors, upon whom Employments have
been conferred Gratis at the Nomination of the Churches, to serve in the said
Chambers, but in Favor of those who shall be named to 'em by the said
Churches. It Is for the King alone to grant Letters of Reprisal, nor is it
lawful for any of his Officers to give 'em. The Judges and Officers may draw up
Verbal Reports to show the Justice of the Cause, for his Majesty afterward to
do as he shall think reasonable. XXXVIII. That the Agreements made between
those of the Religion, and the Catholics of the County of Venisse, may be
fulfilled according to their Form and Tenor; and that according to those,
after the requisite Solemnities, the Officers of the Places may be permitted to
give Right of Reprisal to those of the Religion, to whom Justice has been
denied; more especially to the Lady of Drelandre, not withstanding the
Derogatorie affixed to the Ll. Article of Particulars, which they beseech his
Majesty may be taken away and Cancelled. The Brevets of which the Confirmation
is required shall be presented, and being seen his Majesty will do what is
reasonable. XXXIX. And for as much as there are several Brevets granted to the
Churches, as well in the Year 98. as afterward, which his Majesty confirmed at
his coming to the Crown, they humbly beseech him, that they may enjoy the
Contents of the said Brevets by putting in Execution, what has not yet been
done, and causing amends to be made for what has been done prejudicial to the
said Brevets. Vacancy happening by Death shall be provided for according, and
in Conformity to the said Brevet. XL. To these ends may it please his Majesty,
according to the Brevet of the last of April 1598. to conferr Gratis upon two
Persons of the said Religion, two Offices of Masters of Requests of his
Household, upon the Nomination of the Churches; and to this purpose to erect two
Offices of a new Creation, upon the two first Vacancies happening by Death. His
Majesty is not bound to increase the said Sum. Nevertheless he will consider,
which way to gratify 'em, as far as the convenience of his Affairs will
permit. XLI. And for as much as the Sum of sevenscore and five thousand
Livres, which the Deceased King granted for the payment of the Ministers, is
nothing near sufficient for the payment of all the Ministers that are settled
in the Churches of this Kingdom, may it please his Majesty to provide for the
easing of the Churches, by Ordering a sufficient Fund for the Salaries of the
said Ministers. But as to the Arrears for defect of value, there is no Reason
for demanding 'em, seeing that all the Assigns, in those Years, for what cause
soever it were, have suffered the same Inconveniance, without having since
received any Reimbursement upon that occasion. XLII. And for as much as the
said sevenscore and five thousand Livres were promised without any defect of
value, which has been so ill observed, that there have been great abatements in
the Assignations of every Year, may it please his Majesty that the said
Churches may be reassign'd the sums which those defects amount to, according
to the allowances of the accounts received by the Receivers, and before the
Commissioners deputed by his Majesty. The Places, which have been put into
their Hands for their Security are Named and Comprehended in a Catalogue, dated
May 14. 1598. Signed by the Deceased King, and underneath Neufville, with which
his Majesty is Contented. And as a Testimony of his good Will toward 'em, has
granted 'em the keeping of 'em for five Years longer to Commence from the day
of the Date of the Brevet, which shall be given 'em. And as for those that are
comprehended under the Name of Marriage, the Deceased King having never left
'em to be held under the Title and Quality of places of Security, His Majesty
will not, neither is it his meaning, that they should be comprehended among the
Places of Securtiy; but grants, after the Example of his Deceased Majesty, that
the same Grace and Favor shall be showed 'em, as formerly has been, without
any Innovation: and all those other Places, which they demand, the King cannot
grant 'em. XLIII. They also beseech his Majesty to leave all those Places which
they hold at present in the custody of those of the Religion; and this, for the
time and space of ten Years, to commence from the day that the five Years
formerly granted shall expire, and to cause a new Brief to be given 'em,
ordaining that all the said Places may remain in their hands, as well those
that are specified in the Roll of the Year 98. and those that were comprehended
in others by form of Marriage, as those which belong to the Particulars,
wherein Garrisons were kept, by the Particular Rolls drawn up by his Majesty.
What was promised by the Deceased King shall be effectually made good, nor
shall any thing be innovated or altered: Or if it were done, Order shall be
taken by the Commissioners upon the Places, according to the Instructions which
shall be given 'em for that purpose. XLIV. That it may be expressed in the said
Writ, that in all other Places which they hold, and where there have been no
Garrisons settled by the said Rolls, there shall be nothing innovated or
altered, to the Prejudice of those of the said Religion; and that where any
Innovation or Alteration has been made since the Year 1568. that there may be
full satisfaction given for it. The Deceased King declared his Will several
times to those of the said Religion, in reference to Caumont and Montandre,
from which his Majesty cannot depart: and as for Tartas, and Mont de Marsan,
they shall be provided with Persons of the said Religion, according to the
Deceased Kings Brevet. XLV. That the Towns of Caumont, Tartas, Mont de Marsan,
Montandre, and others, which have been taken from 'em since 98. and which they
shall specify more particularly, may be restored to 'em. The Sum contained in
the Roll of the Deceased King, for the payment of the said Garrisons, with
which those of the Religion have been hitherto contented, shall be pai'd for
the Future, and assigned upon the clearest Money in the Receipts, to the end
they may receive it without Abatements: But his Majesty cannot augment it: the
Sum of 54000. Livers having been abated, ever since the Decensed King lessened
the Garrisons, which were in the Places held by the Catholics. His Majesty
thinking it necessary so to do, to stop the just complaints that might have
been made, when all the Garrisons in the Catholics Cities were lessened, by
Reason of the Peace which the Kingdom happily enjoyed, there should have been
left in the Cities held by those of the Religion, as numerous as they were in
the time of War, and that the Subjects lived in distrust one of another: nor
there being no Reason to demand the Arrears for what was past, seeing that the
Cities and Places for the Preservation of which that Money was given have been
so well guarded, that nothing has fallen out amiss: add to this, that the
Deceased King* for the same Reason had always rejected ^^^^ Demand. And as to
the Pensio^^, his Majesty will Order it, as al^^^^ has been done, to gratify
those of the said Religion, who shall deserve i^ by their Services and
Fidelity; in^^ding also to augment 'em, to show his Afection and good Will, as
he shall give 'em to understand. XLVI. That from hence forward, they may have
their Assignations every Year, upon the first and least encumbered Money of the
Receipts of every Province, where the said Garrisons are settled, or from
neighboring Town to neighboring Town, according to the Brevet of the last of
April 98. for the entire sum of 540. thousand Livers, which was promised 'em
by the said Brevet; and to this purpose, that the Money subtracted from the
said sum, to be laid out in Pensions, may be remitted in the entire sum, and
distribution made of it, according to the Rolls Decreed by his Majesty, as they
shall be presented to him by the Churches; and this without any abatement, or
being employed to any other use. XLVII. And for as much as there have not been
any entire Assignments of the said sum of 540. thousand Livres a Year, and for
that at the same time that they were assigned, they still fell very short to
the prejudice of the said Brevet, may it please his Majesty to cause the
abatements, and what fell short of the entire sum, from the Year 98. till this
day be assigned in full. The Answer to the two preceding Articles may suffice
for this. XLVIII. In like manner, to cause an Assignation for the Garrisons of
the Dauphinate, of the entire sum, which was assigned by the Roll drawn up in
the said Year, 1589. in pursuance of the said Brevet; and to cause a
Reassignation of the Retrenchments and of what fell short since the Year 1589.
The City and Castle of Orange have been restored to the Prince of Orange, ^^
whom they belong, by Virtue of the Peace of Vervins. True it is, that the
Majesty obliged him, upon the sur^^^^ing back of those Places, to declare in
Favor of those of the said Religion, as he has done, with which they of the
said Religion in the said City were well content. XLIX. That according to the
Assurances, which were given by his Majesty at the Assembly of Charellerand in
the Year 1605. that the Castle of Orange should remain in the hands of a
Governor of the said Religion, his Majesty would be pleased to interpose his
Authority with the Prince of Orange, that the said Castle may be put in the
hands of a Governor of the said Religion. Provision was made for this by the
Brevet of April 1598. and what is specified in the Edict and Secret Articles,
has been always observed, and shall be. L. That it may please his Majesty to
grant that the Governors of the Cities left in their Custody, may not
surrender 'em up, but by the Consent of the Churches of the Province. And that
when there is a Vacancy by Death, it may be supplied by his Majesty at the
Nomination of the General Deputies residing with his Majesty. The King will
take care as he shall find most convenient for the good of his Service. LI.
That he would be pleased not to dispose of the Commands of Lieutenants to
Governors, of Captains, of Companies without the Consent of the Governor of
the Place. It Is the Kings Pleasure, that the Edict of Nantes, and what has been
done and ordained in pursuance of it, may be observed and executed, throughout
the Kingdom; and if any breach happen, the Commissioners shall take care to see
it amended. LII. That in all the said Places the exercise of the said Religion,
may be permitted with all Freedom, without any Interruption* and that it may be
restored in such Places, where it has been molested or expelled. No College of
Jesuits can be erected within this Kingdom, but by his Majesty's Permission,
who will take such care in that Matter, that there shall be no cause of
complaint. LIII. That the Jesuits may not be permitted to erect any College,
Seminary, or House of Habitation; nor to Preach, Teach, or Confess, in any of
the said Places held by those of the said Religion; and that his Majesty would
please to confine the said Jesuits to those Places to which they were confined
by their re-establishment in 1603. Care shall be taken about this by the
Commissioners, after they have advised with the Governors, and Lieutenant
Generals of the Provinces. LIVE. That there may be Provision made against the
Inconveniences that may happen by Processions, which are accompanied with great
Trains of People to the Churches and Chapels enclosed within the Castles, left
in the hands of the Religion, and Guarded with very slender Garrisons: And that
the Governors of the said Castles may not be obliged to let those Processions
enter, unless they will restrain themselves to such a number as may be no
prejudice to the Security of those Castles: or else that the exercise of the
Roman Catholic Religion, which is performed in some of the said Castles may be
removed into the Cities. The Gates and Walls of the Cities and Places left in
their Hands for Security shall be repaired at the charges of their respective
Inhabitants, as is usually done in other Cities of the Kingdom; and for the
Levies and Impositions necessary for that purpose, they shall Address
themselves to the Council for the obtaining Letters of Permission. And if there
be urgent Necessity for any of the said Places, upon a Petition to his Majesty,
care shall be taken to do what is ^itting. LV. That his Majesty would be
pleased according to the XLIX. Article of the Writing of Gergeau to allow
necessary Provisions, for the repair and keeping in repair and securing the
Gates, Walls, Fortifications and other outworks of the said Places left in
their hands, which by time and other Accidents are fallen to decay. The
Inventories of the Guns and Ammunition, etc. which were in the said Places, in
1598. and which are there at present, shall be viewed and reported, for Orders
to be made upon 'em; it being his Majesty's Intention, nevertheless to leave
'em as many as they stand in need of, for the Defense and Preservation of the
said Places. LVI. That the Artillery, Arms and other Warlike Ammunition, which
are in the said Places held by those of the said Religion, either garrisoned or
otherwise, shall not be drawn out and removed to another place; that what has
been taken away may be restored, and when the Yearly Distribution of the said
Arms and Ammunition is made, they may have their Proportion as well as other
Cities of the Kingdom. His Will is to allow those of the said Religion to hold
the said Assemblies, when he shall think it proper for his Service; or that
they stand in need of 'em; and they shall be bound to appoint six Deputies, as
was ordained by the Deceased King. LVII. And for as much as the Necessity of
having General Deputies near his Majesty is notoriously known, as well to
acquaint the Churches with his Majesty's command, as to present him their
Petitions, and prosecute their necessary Affairs, and for that the said
Deputies cannot be made, but by a General Assembly of the said Churches; may it
please his Majesty to permit 'em to hold the said General Assembly every two
Years, in such Cities which are in their hands, as they shall think most
Commodious; to the end that the Assembly being by that means become common, may
be the less liable to giv^ occasion of Jealousy and Suspicion: That the
Employment an^ Commission of the said Genera^ Deputies may hold for two year^
and no longer; and that the tw^ which shall be appointed by the said Assemblies
for general Deputies, may be accepted and admitted by his Majesty, to reside
nea^ his Person, as formerly has bee^ practiced, upon their first Institution
in the Assembly of Ste. Foi, and after that, in the Synod of Gap without being
constrained to nominate six, as since has been done. As to the LVIII. and the
following Articles concerning the Churches of Bearn: His Majesty not having
allowed, or approved the Union of the pretended Reformed Churches of Bearn with
those of France, neither can the King allow it now: but upon presenting their
Petitions by their General Deputies separately to the King, he will take care
as Reason shall require. Done and Decreed by the King, being in Council, the
Queen Regent being present, and assisted by the Princes of the Blood, other
Princes, Dukes, Peers and Officers of the Crown, and Principal Members, of his
said Council, at Paris, July 23. 1611.

Signed Phelipeaux.

A Declaration of the King touching the Assemblies of any of hi^ Subjects of
the Pretended Reformed Religion, confirming the Edict of Nantes, and Particular
Articles. At Paris, Apri^ 24. 1612. Registered in Parliament, May 25. of the
sam^ Year.
LEwis by the Grace of God King of France and Navarr, to our Beloved and
Faithful Counselors holding our Court of Parliament at Paris, Greeting. So
soon as it pleased God to call us to this Crown, we resolved to follow the
Method and Form of Government, as we found it settled by the Deceased King our
thrice Honored Lord and Father, whom God Absolve; judging well, that we could
not more safely preserve the Kingdom, which he had left us, then by imitating
his Example, who had raised it from extreme Desolation to the Highest Pitch of
Splendor. Wherein we have so happily succeeded, that no occasion of complaint
has presented it self to us, for which we have not provided, as well to the
Content of our Subjects, as it was possible for us to do, and particularly
those of the pretended Reformed Religion, as well by the Answers which we have
ordered to be given to their Remonstrances which they have presented to us, as
by sending Persons of Quality into all the Provinces of this Kingdom, with
Commission and Power to see executed the Edict of Nantes, the Private Articles,
Regulations, and other Con^essions granted during the Reign of our Deceased
Lord and Father, ^s to whatever yet remained farther to be executed. And by
this means to remove all Apprehensions, under pretense of which any of our said
Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, were Licensed to hold
extraordinary Assemblies without our Permission, which would have raised Fears
and Jealousies in others: against which we are willing to provide, for the
maintaining of Peace, Union, and a right Understanding, happily settled among
'em, and preserved by the said Edict and the exact Observation thereof, with
the Advice, and in the Presence of the Queen Regent, our thrice honored Lady
and Mother, the Princes of the Blood, other Princes and Officers of the Crown,
being fully informed and assured of the good in general of our said Subjects,
their Zeal and Fidelity in their Obedience toward us; and desiring also that
they should be favorably used, have of our special Grace and Favor, full
Power and Royal Authority remitted and abolished, and by these Presents do
remit and abolish the Offense by them committed, who called and were present at
the same Assemblies, held without our Permission in any of the Provinces of
this our Kingom; as also whatever past before and since: We will that they be
wholly and fully discharged of the same, and we expressly forbid our Advocate
General or his Substitutes, to make any Inquisition or Prosecution after the
same. Nevertheless, to the end we may take care that no Assemblies for the
Future be so licentiously called, as being expressly prohibited by our Edicts,
and the Regulations upon these Matters by the Deceased King our thrice Honored
Lord and Father, to which it is ou^ Pleasure, that all our said Subjects should
conform themselves, according to the 82d. Article of the Edict of Nantes, and
the ordinary Article of the 16. of March 1606. together with the Answer made
the 19 of August ensuing, to the Paper presented by the General Deputies of
those of the said Religion, the extracts of which are hereunto annexed under
the Seal of our Chancery, have made and do make Inhibitions and Prohibitions to
all our Subjects of the said Religion for the Future, to summon any
Congregations or Assemblies, to Consult or Treat therein of any Politic
Affairs without express leave first from us obtained, upon Pain of being
punished as breakers of the Edicts, and disturbers of the Public Peace:
Granting 'em nevertheless full Liberty to call and hold Provincial and National
Colloquies and Synods, according to what has been formerly granted 'em: yet so
as not to admit into 'em any other Persons then the Ministers and Elders, there
to Treat of their Doctrine and Ecclesiastical Discipline only, upon Pain of
Forfeiting the Privileges of holding those Assemblies, and answering for it by
their Moderators in their proper Persons and Names. So we send to you that you
cause these Presents to be Read and Registered, and that all our said Subjects
may enjoy the Benefit of what is contained therein; and farther that you cause
these our said Present Letters, to be exactly performed and observed through
the full extent of your Jurisdictions; without permitting or suffering any
Breach or Infringement thereof. Farther we command and enjoin the Governors,
and our Lieutenant Generals, particular Governors and Lieutenants in the
Government of the Provinces and Cities within the extent of your Jurisdiction,
their Mayors, Jurats, Sheriffs and Consuls, to take special care of the same.
And to the first of our faithful and beloved Counselors, the Master of the
ordinary Requests of our Household, Counselors of our said Court of
Parliament, residing upon the Places, and others our Justices and Officers with
the soonest to inform and give us notice of all the said Breaches, and in the
mean time to proceed against the Offenders, by the usual Ways, and according to
the Tenor of the Edicts and Ordinances. For such is our Will and Pleasure.

Given at Paris, April 24. 1612. and in the second Year of our Reigns. LOVIS.

And lower, by the King being in Council. De Lomenie.

Sealed with the Great Seal of Yellow Wax, upon a single Label. Registered,
Heard, and the Kings Advocate moving for it: without the Approbation of the
Cognizance attributed to the Masters of the Requests of the Household, that are
not within the Terms of the Ordinances. At Paris in Parliament, May 25. 1612.
Signed Voisin.

A Declaration of the King in Favor of those of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, confirming the Preceding Declaration of April 24. Given at Paris,
July 11. 1612. and veri^ia August 8.
LEWIS by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr, to all our Beloved and
Faithful Counselors, holding our Court of Parliament at Paris, Greeting.

Thoo we have sufficiently made known by our Letters Patents of the 13th. of
April last past, what our Intention was toward the generality of our Subjects
of the pretended Reformed Religion, of whose Affection and Fidelity we have
always had an entire Assurance: And tho the Pardon and Amnesty contained in our
said Letters, Patents, were not sent, but at the Instance and Supplication of
some particular Persons of the said Religion, who feared to be prosecuted, for
that contrary to the Edicts and Ordinances, they met in Assemblies held
contrary to our Permission, and other Acts since committed, and among others,
the Listing of Soldiers without our Authority; to free 'em from Suspicion and
the Trouble they were in upon that occasion, there being some amongst 'em
against whom Informations have been exhibited in some Chambers of the Edict;
nevertheless we are given to understand, that this Favor has been taken by
some of the Religion, for a desire to lay some blemish upon the Generality of
'em, and not for a Gracious Remedy ordained for particular Persons, who
prudently Judged how much they stood in need of it.

For these Reasons, with the Advice of the Queen Regent, our thrice Honored
Lady and Mother, the Princes of our Blood, other Peers and Officers of the
Crown, and Principal Members of our Council, being desirous to take away all
pretense from all Persons whatever, who may have any evil Intention, and to
satisfy our good Subjects of the Reformed Religion, who adding to their Zeal
for their Religion, that Obedience which is due to us, have no other aim or
design then to enjoy in ^eare and Quiet, the Benefit of the Edicts made in
their behalf. In which number, far the greater, are comprehended those who have
more Power and Authority to be assisting in upholding the Public Tranquillity.

We have said and declared, and once more do say and decla^e by these Presents,
by way of Explanation of what is contained in our said Letters Patents of April
last, that we are very well satisfied and contented with our Subjects of the
pretended Reformed Religion in General: And upon that Consideration, we have
altogether buried in Oblivion the Offenses which the said particular Persons
might have committed contrary and to the prejudice of our Edicts: Nor will we
that any thing be imputed to 'em, nor that upon this occasion any Blame or
Blemish be fastened upon 'em for the Future, provided they continue hence
forward within the Bounds of their Duty, Obedience and Fidelity toward us; and
prove as exact observers of the Laws, Edicts and Ordinances made to the end
that all our Subjects may live in Peace, Repose and Amity one with another. So
we Will and Command, that you cause these Presents to be Read, Published and
Registered in your Registers, that our said Subjects of the said Religion may
fully, peaceably and without any Molestation or Impeachment enjoy the Benefit
of the Contents. For such is our Will and Pleasure.

Given at Paris, July 11. 1612. and the third of our Reign. Signed Lewis.

By the King, the Queen Regent his Mother being present. De Lomenie.

And Sealed with Yellow Wax upon a single Label. Registered, after being heard,
and upon the Motion of the Kings Advocate General. At Paris in Parliament,
August 8. 1612.
A Declaration of the King, and Confirmation of the Edict of Nantes, given at
Paris, December 15. 1612. and verified January 2. 16^3.
LEwis by the Grace of God King of France and Navarr. To all, etc. The extreme
desire we have had ever since our coming to the Crown, for which we continually
implore the Blessing of God, and for which the Queen Regent our thrice Honored
Lady and Mother, has always most sedulously labored, has been to take care to
maintain and preserve all our Subjects in Peace, Tranquillity and Repose, and
in good Friendship, Union and Concord one with another, as being the Principal
Foundation of the welfare of this Kingdom. To this purpose from the Time that
it pleased God to visit us with the fatal Accident that befell us, through the
Death of the Deceased King, our thrice Honored Lord and Father, of glorious
Memory, we resolved to imitate and follow the same Methods which he took, to
attain the same ends: and having observed, that after he had by his Valor
restored this Kingdom to its Ancient Splendor, he with a great deal of care,
Labor and Prudence, and for a Foundation of an assured Repose, and an entire
Reconciliation between all his Subjects; as also to remove from those who
professed the pretended Reformed Religion, all occasion of Fear and Distrust
for the Liberty of their Persons, Consciences, Honor and Families, made and
ordained what is comprised in his Edict given at Nantes in April 1598. by the
Observation of which, and of the Secret Articles he had happily ruled and
governed his People in Peace till his Decease, therefore one of our first
Actions, which we were willing to do in this Kingdom, has been to set forth our
Letters of Declaration of the 22. of May, 1610. containing a Confirmation of
the said Edict, and of the Secret Articles, Regulations and Decrees set forth
by way of Explanation, and for the putting the same in Execution, which we sent
at the same instant to all our Parlaments to be there verified: and sometime
after we resolved to send into all the Provinces of our Kingdom, some of the
Principal Members of our Council, and other Persons well qualified, chosen by
our selves as well Catholics as of the pretended Reformed Religion, to cement
and corroborate the Establishment and Execution of the said Edict, and favors
granted in pursuance of it, having ever since continued to give that Assistance
toward it that could be expected from our Care and Authority. But it has so
fallen out, that our good Intentions have not had that successful Effect, that
we could have desired among all our Subjects: Some of whom, and of those of the
pretended Reformed Religion, through Suspicions too lightly conceived of
adverse Occurrences, are entered into Jealousies and Mistrusts one of another.
Whence it has followed, that they have begun to double their Guards, make
Provision of Arms, Levy Soldiers, hold Assemblies and Councils, and to do
other things quite contrary to the Tenor and Observation of the said Edict. To
which, however we are willing to believe 'em to have been induced by some
^ears, which they have conceived of themselves, and upon ^^l^e Suspicions and
Pretenses, tho rot out of any ill Will or bad Intentions: Having always found
the Generality of those of the Reformed Religion, extremely well affected to
the good of our Service, and firm and constant in that reverence, Fidelity and
Respect which they owe to us. But in regard this Mischief may draw after it
dangerous Consequences, we thought it necessary to provide against it, to
re-establish the good Friendship, Correspondence and Society, which ought to be
alike among all our said Subjects; for the maintaining of their common Repose,
which cannot be done more assuredly then by an exact Observation of the said
Edict, Secret Articles, Briefs, and other Acts made in pursuance of it: As also
by giving new Assurances to all our said Subjects of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, of our good Intentions in their behalf, and of our
Intentions to preserve, maintain, protect 'em, and cause 'em to enjoy all the
Favors and Concessions, which have been decreed 'em, as well by the Edict, as
since that time, as they did in the Lifetime of the Deceased King till his
Death.

For these Reasons, and others Us moving, after we had caused this Matter to be
debated in Council, where was the Queen Regent, with the Princes of our Blood,
and other Princes, several Officers of the Crown, and Principal Counselors of
our Council, with the Advice of them, we have said and declared, and we say and
declare, and it is our Will and Pleasure, that the abovesaid Edict of Names,
together with our Declaration of the 22. of May 1610. with the Private
Articles, Regulations, Decrees, and other Letters set forth in pursuance of
them, either by way of Explanation, or for the better Execution of the same,
may be read de novo, and published in all our Courts of Parliament, and Seats of
Judicature under their Jurisdiction, having to that end, and as much as need
requires confirmed 'em, as we do again Confirm 'em by these presents Signed
with our hand. We Will and Ordain, that the whole may be fulfilled, and
inviolably observed, without any Breach o^ Infringement whatsoever, in any
manner whatever. Also for as much as the Breaches which have been made by some
of our Subjects, have proceeded rather from Suspicions and Distrusts too
slightly listened to, then from any want of Affection, Fidelity or Allegiance,
which they have all along made apparent upon all occasions that have offered
themselves. Hoping also that for the Time to come, they will keep themselves
within the bounds of Duty, under the Observation of the Edicts and Ordinances,
therefore we Will, and it is our Meaning, and our Pleasure, that all Decrees,
Procedures, Acts, and other Letters that have been granted and set forth
against 'em, as well in general as particular, upon any occasion whatever,
shall be null and void, as if they had never been extant; so that upon
occasion, and in pursuance thereof they shall not either in general or
particular, inour any Blame, danger or damage, nor be disturbed or prosecuted
for the Future. And to this purpose, we impose Silence upon all our Advocates
General, their Substitutes and all others; as we also expressly forbid all our
said Subjects, in Conformity to the 77. and 82. Articles of the Edict, to hold
any Communications of Assemblies, to settle or hold Provicinal Councils, or to
make any Levies, Provisions of Arms, or Musters of Soldiers, or to commit any
other Acts directly or indirectly contrary to our Edicts and Declarations, upon
pain of Disobedience, and of being punished as disturbers of the Public Peace.

To this purpose, we command our Beloved and Faithful Counselors, holding our
Court of Parliament and Chambers of the Edict, settled within the Kingdom, that
the abovementioned Edict, the Edict of Pacification, Secret Articles, Brevets,
Declarations, and other Letters Patents to them sent in pursuance of the same,
be ^or^nwith read and published in the usual Places, and that the Contents
thereof be inviolably fulfilled and observed; ceasing and causing to surcease
all Troubles and Impeachments to the contrary.

We further enjoin our said Attorney Generals to be aiding and assisting
thereto; and if any Infringements happen after this, to prosecute the Authors
with Severity; to the end, that Examples of Punishment may deterr others. For
such is our Will and Pleasure. In Witness whereof we have caused our Seal to be
affixed to these Presents.

Given at Paris, December 15. 1612. and the thirteenth of our Reign. Signed
Lewis.
And upon the Folding of the Paper, By the King, being in Council, the Queen
Regent his Mother present. De Lomenie.
Extract out of the Registers of Parliament. This day, the Court, the
Grand-Chambers, the Parlamental Court of Criminal Causes, having seen the
Letters Patents in form of Charters of the 15th. of December last, concerning
the Observation of the Edict of Names, and other Letters and Articles in
pursuance of it, the Conclusions of the Advocate General, and the Matter
brought into debate, have Decreed that the said Letters be Read, and Published,
upon the Hearing and Motion of the Kings Advocate General, and Copies sent to
the Bailiwicks and Seneschalships to be there Read and Published.

Done in Parliament January 2. 1613. Signed Guyet.



A Declaration of the Kings Majority, containing a Confirmation of the Edicts
of Pacification, and Prohibitions of Duels. Dated at Paris, October 1. 1614.
Verified the second of the said Month and Year.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr. To all, etc. It having
pleased God to bless our Reign with so many Favors and Successes, and to bring
the course of our Years to the Age of Majority, to which we have now attained,
as we have at all times all the Reason in the World to commend and be thankful
for the happy Adminstration of our Kingdom, during our Minority under the
Regency and Prudent Conduct of the Queen our thrice Honored Lady and Mother,
we are willing to seek all ways, possible and agreeable to the Duty of a most
Christian Prince, jealous of Gods Glory, and who desires to maintain the
Public Peace and Tranquillity, for the welfare, repose and ease of his
Subjects, whether in causing an exact Observation of the Good and Holy Laws
made by the Kings our Predecessors of most praise worthy Memory, or by new
Laws, which we shall deem proper to make as occasion offers, and upon such
Advice as may be given in the next Assembly of the States General of our
Kingdom, which we shall cause to be summoned; for the attaining of which, and
to the end that all our Subjects may live in Peace, Union, and Right
Understanding in the fear of God, Obedience of his Commands, and Observation of
our Ordinances; so that the public repose and tranquillity, which we desire to
preserve among 'em, may not be interrupted or violated,

We have with the Advice and Counsel of our thrice Honored Lady and Mother,
the Princes of our Blood, other Princes and Lords, principal Officers of our
Crown, and most remarkable Persons of our Council, said, declared and ordained,
and we say, declare and ordain, and it is our Will and Pleasure, in Conformity
to what we have already formerly ordained, That the Edict of the Deceased King
our thrice Honored Lord and Father, given at Nantes in April 1598. in favor
of those of the pretended Reformed Religion, in all the Heads and Articles of
it, together with all the other Articles to them granted, and Regulations made,
Decrees given either by way of Explanation, or for the Execution of the said
Edict, or in pursuance of it, may be fulfilled and inviolably kept and
observed, as has been ordained and performed by our said Deceased Lord and
Father, and that the Infringers may be severely punished as disturbers of the
Public Repose.

And the more to secure the Public Peace and Tranquillity under our Authority
and Obedience, we prohibit all our said Subjects from holding any particular
and private Intelligences, Leagues or Associations, as well within as without
our Kingdom; nor without our Permission to send to any Foreign Princes,
whether Friends or Enemies upon any occasion whatever: And we enjoin all our
Officers to look carefully after it, and to be assisting as need shall require,
upon pain of being responsible, and of being punished for their Negligence,
with the same Severity as the Disobedience of the Offenders.

We also forbid all our said Subjects, of what Estate, Condition or Quality
soever, who receive Estates, Pay or Pensions from us, not to take, accept or
receive any Estate, Pay or Pension from any Prince or Lord whatever; nor to
follow, be present with or accompany any other then our selves, upon pain of
being deprived of the said Salaries, Estates and Pensions.

And for as much as for want of due Execution of the Edict made by the Deceased
King our Lord and Father, concerning Duels, Combats and Encounters, and
afterward by our selves, and for that they have not been obeyed by several of
our Subjects, in Contempt of our Authority, great Disorders and Confusions have
from thence arose, which greatly offend God, and may provoke him to send the
Scourges of his Wrath among us, and upon our Kingdom, if we should not provide
against so great a Mischief; it is our Pleasure, and we ordain, that all the
said Edicts, Ordinances and Declarations made by the Deceased King, and by our
selves, upon occasion of the said Duels, Combats and Encounters, shall be
inviolably observed for the Future, and fulfilled and observed according to
their Form and Tenor, nor shall they who shall presume to infringe our
Commands hereafter, so much as hope or expect from us any Favor or Pardon,
upon any excuse, pretense, occasion or consideration whatever. And we enjoin
all our Officers to proceed against the Offenders with the utmost Rigor of our
Laws, without any Exception of Persons: And our Advocate Generals, and their
Substitutes, to make all necessary Prosecutions against such Malefactors.

Considering also, that the Divine Majesty is greatly offended with Oaths and
execrable Blasphemies, which are uttered daily by several Persons, against the
Edicts and Ordinances made by the Kings our Predecessors, We have ordained and
do ordain, that the said Edicts and Ordinances shall be Published de novo, that
no Body may pretend Ignorance. And we enjoin all our Judges and Officers,
within their several Jurisdictions, upon pain of losing their Offices, to
proceed against the Offenders with the utmost Rigor contained in the same;
with which thy shall not dispense upon any Cause whatever, upon Pain of being
responsible to us in their own Names and Persons. Farther we Command our
Advocates General, and their Substitutes, to use all requisite Diligence in the
Execution of these Presents.

Given at Paris, October 1. 1614. and the Fifth of our Reign. Signed Lewis.

By the King in Council. De Lomenie.

The King with all his Court, repairing to his Palace, sitting in his Throne of
Justice, all the Court of Parliament assembled in their Scarlet Robes, the
Speeches made, the Chancellor pronounced the Decree of Verification, which was
transcribed afterward upon the folding of the Letters. Read, Published and
Registered, upon the Hearing and Motion of the Kings Advocate General. At Paris
in Parliament, the King there sitting, October 2. 1614.
A Declaration of the King, purporting the renewing all the Edicts of
Pacification, Articles granted, Regulations and Decrees depending upon 'em.
Published in Parliament, the last of April 1615.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarr, To all, etc. Immediately
after our coming to the Crown, the Queen, our Thrice Honored Lady and Mother,
then Regent of the Kingdom during our Minority, prudently judged that there was
nothing which ought to be more dear to her, then the Preservation of the
Public Peace, and that for the Enjoyment of this Happiness, and to cause our
Subjects to live in Amity one with another, it was necessary to confirm the
Edicts, Declarations, and all other Writings and Dispatches granted by the King
Deceased, our thrice Honored Lord and Father, whom God Absolve, to our
Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, on purpose to let 'em know, that
she was desirous to follow the Example and Conduct of a Prince, who had so
happily ruled and governed his Kingdom, and advanced so high the Grandeur and
Reputation of it, by his Wisdom and Matchless Valor, that she knew not how to
take a better course or more wholesome Counsel, then that which he made use of.
Which she did by a Declaration Published in all the Parlaments, and in other
Places where it was necessary, taking the same care also to see it Published.
And when she received any complaint of Breaches, that were pretended to be made
to the Prejudice of the same, did all that lay within the Verge of her Power
and Authority to cause amends to be made. This Conduct which she used in all
her Actions, and Deportment in the Government of the Kingdom, having been the
true Cause, next to Gods Assistance, to keep all our Subjects united in
Affection, Fidelity and Obedience toward us and in Friendship one among
another. Which has also moved us, after the Declaration of our Majority, to
beseech her, that she would be pleased to continue with the same Affection and
Vigilance, to assist us with Her good Counsels, in the same manner and with the
same Authority, as if the Administration of the Government were still in Her
hands. In pursuance whereof, by Her Advice, as soon as we entered into our
Majority, we set forth a Declaration, in favor of our Subjects of the
Religion, the same in Substance with the former, to let 'em always see, that
our Intention and Desire, was to promote Friendship and Peace among our
Subjects, and inviolably to observe our Edicts. And being very sorry for the
Contention and Dispute that happened between the Catholic Deputies of the
Chamber of the Nobility, and some others of the said Religion, assembled in the
General States held in our good City of Paris, upon this occasion, that the
said Catholic Deputies had put the Question, and came to a Resolution, that we
should be Petitioned to preserve the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Religion,
according to the Oath, which we took at our Coronation; a needless Proposal, or
rather altogether unprofitable, considering that we our selves profess it with
an unshaken Constancy and Resolution to live and dye in it. So that we must
believe, that the Proposal was not made by them, but only to testify their
Zeal and Affection for the Catholic Religion, and not to give offense to any
Body, as first they separately declared to us, and afterward all together,
protesting that they desired the Observation of the Peace, as Established by
the Edicts: And that we would be pleased to await, and expect from Divine
Goodness, the Reunion of all our Subjects to the Catholic, Apostolic and
Roman Religion, by the means most usual and customary in the Church. Being
fully persuaded by experience of what is past, that violent Remedies have only
served to increase the number of those that are departed from the Church,
instead of teaching 'em the way to return to it: Therefore to take away all
evil Impressions out of the Minds of our good Subjects, of the said Pretended
Reformed Religion, who profess it with a Zeal no less Pure and Innocent, then
remote from all Faction and Evil Design: As also all Pretenses from whosoever
seeks 'em to disturb the Repose of the Kingdom, we thought it our Duty upon
this, to declare what is our Will and Pleasure. For these Reasons, we make
known, that having considered of this matter in our Council, where were present
the Queen, our thrice Honored Lady and Mother, the Princes of our Blood, etc.
We have with their Advice said, declared and ordained, say, declare and ordain,
and it is our Will and Pleasure, by these Presents, that all the Edicts,
Declarations, and Private Articles, ordained in Favor of t^^se of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, as well by our Deceased Lord and Father, as by our
selves, together with the Regulations and other Letters or Decrees, given in
their Favor by way of Explanation, and for the Execution of the Edict of
Nantes, and in pursuance of i^, shall be inviolably kept and observed, and the
Offenders punished with the utmost Rigor of the Laws, as Disturbers of the
Public Peace. To this purpose, we enjoin all our Officers to be carefully
assisting, upon Pain of being answerable, and punished for their Negligence or
Connivance, with the same Severity as the Offenders. The same Injunctions and
Commands we lay upon our Beloved and Faithful Counselors, etc. to see that
these presents be Read, and Published, etc. For such is our Will and Pleasure.
In Testimony whereof, we have caused our Seal to be affixed.

Given at Paris, March 5. 1615. and fifth of our Reign. Signed, Lewis.

By the King. De Lomenie.

Sealed with the Great Seal of Yellow Wax upon a double Label. Read, Published,
and Registered, upon the Motion of the Kings Advocate General, and Ordered to
be sent to the Bayliwicks and Seneschal ships, to be there Published and
Registered, and carefully observed by the Advocate Generals Substitutes, who
shall certify the Court of their Sedulity within a Month, upon Pain of
answering in their own Names. At Paris in the Parliament, April the last, 1615.
Signed Voisin.

A Declaration of the King, upon Arms being taken by some of his Subjects of
the Pretended Reformed Religion, containing a new Confirmation of the Edicts
and Declarations formerly made in Favor of those of the Religion. Given at
Bourdeaux, November 10. 1615. and Published at Paris in Parliament, December 7.
the same Year.
LEwis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr. To all, etc. The
Declarations set forth and reiterated by us since our coming to the Crown, in
Confirmation of the Edicts, Declarations, Brevets, Decrees and Regulations made
in favor of our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, during the Reign
of the Deceased King Henry the Great, our thrice Honored Lord and Father, whom
God Absolve, have been sufficient to make it known, that it has been always our
Intention and Desire to cause them to be inviolably observed, as being Laws
requisite to preserve our Subjects in Peace and Friendship one with another,
and in their Obedience and Duty toward ourselves. Which being well and
prudently considered by the Queen, our thrice Honored Lady and Mother, she,
during her Regency, took great care to see 'em observed, and that the Breaches
and Infringements thereof should be repaired so soon as she received the
Complaints. We have also since our Majority followed the same Counsels, and in
Imitation of Her have accumulated New Gratifications and Favors; many times
also connived at Extravagancies and Violences committed by some of 'em, tho
they deserved very great and severe Punishment, out of an Intention always to
assure 'em of our good Will and favor, and by that means, to render 'em more
inclinable, and more studious to keep themselves within the bounds of their
Duty. To which, would they but have added the remembrance of the kind and
favorable Usage, which they received at the hands of the Deceased King, our
thrice Honored Lord and Father, to whose Memory they owe the Confirmation of
their Liberty and the Exercise of their Religion, which they enjoy with all
Security, they would out of a praiseworthy Gratitude, and the Duty of an
entire Obedience and Fidelity, have acknowledged to our selves all those
Obligations, at a time especially when the Innocence and weakness of our Infant
Years ought to have excited the Virtue, Courage and Fidelity of all our good
Subjects to defend and preserve the Authority which God has put into our Hands,
upon which alone depends the Public Security, and the particular Safety of
every Private Person. Nevertheless, this Conduct, tho full of Goodness and
Mildness, has proved no way beneficial to us, several having betaken themselves
to Arms against us, to favor the Commotion began by our Cousin the Prince of
Conde. Among whom there are some who make use of Religion, as a specious
Pretense to cover and Cloak their Ambition, and furious desire of advancing
themselves upon the Disorders and Ruins of the Kingdom; others have been misled
and deceived by false Impressions and vain Fears, which the former have infused
into 'em, that they were in danger of Persecution, if they did not speedily
join Arms with 'em for their own Preservation; making them believe, the better
to surprise their simplicity, that upon the Marriages with Spain, secret
Articles were made, and a Conspiracy entered into, to expel 'em out of the
Kingdom. To which they too easily giving Credit, have precipitated themselves
into this enterprise, believing themselves to be constrained thereto for their
just and necessary defense; which renders their fault ^^e more excusable, and
rather meriting Compassion then Punishment. But they had not run themselves
into this inconvenience, had they better considered, that this ^ame Impudent
and Malicious Lie, was without any appearance of Truth; there being no Body so
void of Sense and Judgment, that believe, since the Alliances were sought by
honorable ways on both sides, as has been accustomed among great Princes, that
Conditions should have been requested or desired by us, which could not be
fulfilled without plunging the Kingdom into Fire and Sword, and laying it waste
with Depopulation: As questionless it would have fallen out by breaking the
Edicts of Pacification, and so severe and unjust a usage of our Subjects of the
Religion, as they give out by a lie Artificially invented, and with a very
wicked design: For nothing has been done privately in the pursuit, and
resolving upon those Alliances, but every thing has been Public, seen,
imparted, concluded and decreed with our Deceased Cousin, the Count of
Soissons, a wise Prince and of solid Years, and great Experience, with our
Cousin the Prince of Conde, and other Princes, Lords, Officers of the Crown,
and most eminent Persons of our Council then about us. Among whom our Cousin
the Marshal de Bouillon was always present, having altogether unanimously
approved these Alliances, without the least Opposition of any one, every one
being free to think and speak what he thought in his Conscience most profitable
for the good of the Kingdom, without fear of offending us, or incurring our
displeasure; forasmuch as neither the Queen, then Regent, nor we our selves had
the least prejudice in our Minds, but only a desire to be satisfied, what was
most expedient to be done in a debate of that Importance. All Sovereigns, who
think it their Interest to preserve the Ancient Reputation and Grandeur of this
Kingdom, having likewise acknowledged th^se Alliances never to have been made
with any evil design, have had no suspicion or distrust of 'em, after they were
informed that our Intention was, to make 'em serviceable as much as in us lay,
toward the securing of the peace of Christendom, not for any enterprise or
Invasion of the Countries or Kingdoms of any Princes or Sovereigns whatever,
much less to interrupt the Peace and Repose which all our Subjects happily
enjoyed before this Commotion began. Nevertheless they of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, who have taken Arms, forbear not to report and publish, that
there is a private Correspondence between France and Spain, to attempt their
Ruin; being desirous to make all our Subjects believe, that we have so little
Consideration in us, as to approve and consent that France should be the
Theater wherein to play this Bloody Tragedy, in which the differences in
Religion are to be decided by Arms; though we are far remote from any such
Counsel, and rather to believe that the Decision of that Contest ought to be
left to God alone, who knows in his own time, for his own Glory and our
Security, to make use of the most proper, and convenient means to be adored and
worshipped by all Christians, according to the Purity of his Doctrine, and by the
True Church, which we believe to be the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman, of
which we make Profession, an^ in which by his Grace we intend to Live and Dye.
But these Artifices invented, to disguise and cover their Rebellion, have no
way deceived or misled the wiser sort, who being People of worth, profess the
same Religion, only by the Dictates of Conscience, as believing to find their
Salvation therein, and not o^t of any proneness to Faction; who being very
numerous, as well Lords, Gentlemen, Cities, Communities, and other Private
Persons of all Qualities, both blame and detest the Malice and Rashness of
their Attempt, and have publicly declared as well by word of Mouth as by
writing, that it ought to be looked upon as real and flat Rebellion, and not for
any Quarrel about Religion: They having also upon this occasion offered us,
like good, true and loyal Subjects, all Assistance of their Lives and Fortunes,
if they refuse to return to their Duty. To which purpose they admonish 'em
every day, and threaten 'em to join with us, in the Prosecution of their Ruin,
provided we would be pleased to let 'em enjoy the Benefit of the Edicts, and
only deprive them of that Favor who have rendered themselves incapable of it.
But these Remonstrances and Menaces have wrought no more upon 'em, then those
of the Inhabitants of the greatest part of the Cities and Places, which have
been left in their hands, who have done as much, and publicly protested also,
that they would not adhere to 'em in their Rebellion. For instead of quitting
their wicked Design, they have insolently given out, that those of their
Religion, who have not hitherto followed 'em, shall at length be constrained to
do it; for fear that in suffering them to be ruined and destroyed, they do not
weaken and endanger themselves. A Condition and Servitude too hard for Men of
worth, to be constrained to do evil against their Wills, their Conscience and
their Duty, in compliance with those who are only governed by their Ambition,
and Private Interest. However we hope better things from their Virtue and
Fidelity, and that they will remain so firm and constant in their Affection to
our Service, that their Resistance, and the continuance of their Loyalty will
have force sufficient to constrain others to desist from their attempt, tho to
justify and corroborate it, they suppose Resolutions and Decrees of General
Assemblies that never were; but only certain Conventicles, and unlawful
Meetings of particular Persons chosen and suborned by 'em, who without any
Employment or Authority, and many times against the express Will and
Declarations, contained in the Procurations and Injunctions of those by whom
they were deputed, adhere to the Proposals of the Factious, who desire to make
use of 'em to the great damage and prejudice of honest Men of their Religion.
Therefore, it not being any Intention of ours to impute to all the faults of
some particular Persons, We, with the Advice of the Queen our thrice Honored
Lady and Mother, the Princes, etc. and of our full Power and Royal Authority,
have said, declared and ordained, and do say, declare and ordain, and it is our
Will and Pleasure, in Conformity to what we have already formerly and several
times ordained, that the Edict of Nantes, verified in all our Parlaments, made
in favor of our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion by the Deceased
King, our thrice Honored Lord and Father, together with the rest of the
Articles, Declarations and Regulations made, and Decrees set forth either by
way of Explanation, or for the better Execution, and in pursuance of the said
Edict, by him, and during his Reign, or by Us since his Decease, be inviolably
fulfilled, kept and observed, as has been done and ordained to this present
Time. And that i^ in any parts of the Kingdom, there have been Infringements,
they may be absolutely repaired, and satisfaction given for 'em; so that
nothing more may be desired on our Part. Moreover it is our Pleasure, in
Consideration of the Fidelity, which an infinite number of our good Subjects of
the same Religion have made known and observed toward us, among whom are the
most Principal, and Men of greatest Quality, who Merit a singular Testimony of
our good Will, that in despite of the wrongs, which have been done us by those
of the said Religion, who have taken Arms against us, or have assisted and
favored 'em in any manner whatever, they may in like manner enjoy the Benefit
of our Edicts, and be partakers of that Favor, as well as those who have
persisted in their Duty, provided that within one Month after Publication of
these Presents in every one of our Parlaments, they declare to the Register of
the Bailiwick or Seneschalship, under whose Jurisdiction they live, that they
have desisted and quitted the said enterprise to do us Service, according to
their Duty, without any longer adhering to, assisting or favoring in any
manner of way, those who persist in their Rebellion; and that they surrender
back those places which they possess, in the same Condition as they were before
the Insurrection. Which being done, without any new breach of their Duty, we
have taken and put 'em, and do take and put 'em under our Protection. And we
prohibit and forbid all our Subjects of what quality soever to revile and
offend 'em, either in Word or Deed for any thing Past, as also our Advocates
General, to issue forth any Prosecutions against 'em; desiring that what is
past may be buried in Oblivion and Cancelled, and we forget and cancel the same
by these Presents. But if after the space of the said Month elapsed, they
continue in their Rebellion, either by bearing Arms, or assisting in any manner
those that are in Arms, it is our Pleasure that they be prosecuted and punished
as Criminals and Guilty of High Treason, and Disturbers of the Public Peace;
and that the Cities and Communities which adhere to 'em, be declared to have
forfeited all Favors, Privileges and Immunities which they enjoyed, by virtue
of any Charters granted 'em by the Kings our Predecessors, or by our selves,
as having rendered themselves unworthy of 'em. And we command our Advocate
Generals to prosecute 'em with all Diligence, and our Parlaments to proceed
against 'em with their utmost Care and Affection; and our Governors and
Lieutenant Generals to be strenuously assisting in the Execution of such
Decrees and Judgments, as shall be pronounced against 'em: not suffering 'em to
enjoy any Favor or Privilege, granted 'em by the Edicts, made in Favor of
our Subjects of the said Religion; of which they have rendered themselves
unworthy by this Pernicious Rebellion.

So we command our well Beloved and Faithful Counselors, holding Courts of
Parliament, Chambers of the Edict, Bailiffs, Seneschals, etc. that these our
present Letters of Declaration, be Published and Registered, and the Contents of
'em punctually observed, according to their Form and Tenor, etc. Commanding
also our Advocates General, and their substitutes to be assisting, etc. For
such is our Will and Pleasure. In Witness whereof, etc.

Given at Bourdeaux, November 10. 1615. and sixth of our Reign. Signed Lewis.

And below, by the King. De Lomenie.

Sealed with the great Seal in Yellow Wax upon a double Label. Read, Published,
and Registered, upon the Motion of the Attorney General; and ordered that
Copies be sent to the Bailiwicks and Seneschalships, etc. to be there Published
and Registered with all speed by the Substitutes, etc. At Paris in Parliament,
December 7. 1615. Signed De Tillet.

Extract of the Kings Edict, for the Pacifying of the Troubles of his Kingdom;
given at Blois, May 1616. and verified, June 13. the same Year.
Article XLV.

OUr Pleasure and Meaning is, that the Edicts of Pacification, Declarations,
and secret Articles, verified in our Courts of Parliament, as also the Brevets,
and Answers to the Papers, made by the Deceased King, our thrice Honored Lord
and Father, in Favor of the Pretended Reformed Religion be observed and
executed, and that they may enjoy 'em according to their Form and Tenor.

XV. And whereas M. Peter Berger, Counselor in our Court of Parliament in
Paris, who had one of the six Offices, which by XXX. Article of the said Edict
were appointed for those of the Pretended Reformed Religion, has made
Profession since of the Catholic, we have created and erected, and do create
and erect, de novo, an Office and Counselor in our said Court of Parliament at
Paris, with the same Salary, Rights, Privileges, Authority and Functions equal
to any of the Rest. Which Office now by Us created, we appropriate to those of
the said Pretended Reformed Religion, instead of that which Berger held, and
for which we will provide a Person of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, of
ability and sufficiency, according to the Form expressed in the L. of the
Private Articles granted at Nantes to those of the said Religion.

XVI. It is our Pleasure and Meaning, that the Exercise of the said Pretended
Reformed Religion, shall be restored and settled in Places, where it has been
discontinu'd or interrupted, since the said first of July, by Reason of the
Present Commotions, in the same Manner and Form as before.

XVII. And to the end there may be no Question of the sincere Intention of our
Dear Cousin the Prince of Conde, and those who are joined with him, we declare
that we repute and hold our said Cousin the Prince of Conde, for our good
Kinsman, and faithful Subject and Servant, as also the rest of the Princes,
Dukes, Peers, Officers of the Crown, Lords, Gentlemen, Cities, Communities and
others, as well Catholics as of the Pretended Reformed Religion, of what
Quality or Condition soever they be, who assisted him, or joined or united with
him, as well before as after the suspension of Arms, comprehending also the
Deputies of the said Pretended Reformed Religion; though assembled at Nimes, and
present at Rochel, for our good Subjects and Servants. And after we read the
Declaration set forth to us, by our said Cousin the Prince of Conde, we believe
and deem, that what was done by him and the abovenamed, was done out of a good
end and Intention, and for our Service.

LIII. The Secret Articles which have been granted by us, and which will be
found inserted in the present Edict shall be punctually and inviolably
fulfilled and observed, and upon an Extract of the said Articles, Signed by one
of our Secretaries of State, all necessary Letters shall be forthwith given out.

Private Articles granted in the Kings Name by his Deputies, sent to the
Conference at Loudun to the Prince of Conde, and others joined with him, to
obtain the Pacification of the Troubles; after that, seen, approved and
ratified by his Majesty.
I. It Is the Kings Pleasure and meaning after the Example of the Kings his
Predecessors, that the Gallican Church be preserved in her Rights, Franchises,
Liberties, and Prerogatives.

II. What has been done by the Clergy upon the Publication of the Council
Trent, has not been approved by his Majesty; and consequently nothing has come
of it: Nor will he permit that any thing be done hereafter without or contrary
to his Authority.

III. Although that in the Edict it be expressed, that all places which have been
taken on either side during these Toubles, shall be restored, to the same
Hands, and resettl'd in the same Condition as they were before; Nevertheless,
it is agreed, that the Castle of Leitoure, shall be put into the Hands of an
Exempt of the Guards of the Kings Body, or some other of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, who shall be made Choice of by his Majesty to keep it till the
Contest between the Sieurs de Fontrailles and Angelin, about the Captainship of
the said Castle, be adjusted by his Majesty.

IV. That the XXVII. Article of* the Edict of Nantes about the Pacification of
the Troubles, concerning the admitting promiscuously those who do or shall
profess the Pretended Reformed Religion, to all Estates, Dignities, Public
Offices or Employments, Royal, Signioral, or City Magistrates, shall be
followed and observed; and by virtue of this the Sieurs Villemerea^,
Counselor in the Court of Parliament, and Le Maistre, Master in the Chamber of
Accounts, shall be admitted to the Exercise of their Employments as they were
before they professed the said Pretended Reformed Religigion.

V. The Ministers of the Pretended Reformed Religion, shall enjoy the favor
and Exemptions to them Vousaf'd by the Kings Letters Patents of December 15.
1612.

VI. The Sieurs Durant, Louis and Gausin, shall be resettled in the City of
Metz, as formerly they were.

VII. The Inhabitants of the City of Millau, and of the Cities, Boroughs and
Communities of the County of Foix, who were at the Taking of the Castle of
Camera^e, as also some particular Persons of the City of Nimes, shall enjoy the
Benefit of the Amnesties, which were formerly granted 'em, for some Crimes and
Extravagancies therein mentioned, without needing any other Verification then
the Registring of these present Articles, nor shall the said Registring be any
Prejudice to the Civil Interests of the Parties, for which there shall be
provision made according to reason. And as for the City of Millau, the
Catholics, as well Ecclesiastics as others, may make their abodes there, and
securely continue Divine Worship, the King protecting 'em from those of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, who shall be responsible.

VIII. The Lady Dandoux, and the Sieur de St. Foy, together with those who
assisted 'em, shall be wholly discharged from all that may be laid to their
charge by reason of what was done at Belestat, in 1615. Which shall be
extinguished, cancelled and abolished; nor shall they be bound to put
themselves into a Condition, for the allowance of the Favor or discharge which
has been or shall be expedited for 'em; from which they shall be totally
acquitted and Exonerated at the Charge also of the civil Interest, if it so
fall out: And that the Inhabitants who profess the Pretended Reformed Religion,
may abide there with all saftly and freedom, and enjoy the Exercise of their
Religion as is permitted 'em by the Edicts, which shall remain in the Custody
of the Catholics.

IX. The Sieur d' Ardon, shall be restored to the Government of the City of
Vennes, which Reestablishment shall be made good by the Governor and
Lieutenant General of the Province.

X. The Declaration which has been set forth in favor of the Sieur de Borne,
to the prejudice of the Employment of the Grand Master of the Artillery, shall
be revoked, and the said Employment restored back, with the same Authority and
Functions as the Grand Masters enjoyed who Exercised it formerly.

XI. The Sieurs Marquess of Bonuiver and Friaise, shall be released and set at
Liberty, and all Informations and Proceedings against 'em, by reason of the
present Troubles, shall be made Null and of no Effect.

XII. M. Nicolas Cugnois, Provincial Receiver of the Tithes of Burgundy, in
Burgundy, shall be discharged, together with his Bail, and his Ensurers, of the
Sum of 21000 Livers, which he was constrained to pay to the Duke of Mayenne,
being as well the Money of the said Receipt of Tithes, as of the Consignation
which he was forced to pay to the Chatelet of Paris, for the purchase of the
said Office, or the Remainder of the Years during which it was to be enjoyed.
Nor shall the said Cugnois be bound to report any Verbal Process of the said
Constraint with which he is dispensed, according to the Declaration which the
Duke of Maine set forth, acknowledging the Receipt of the said 21000 Livers
from the said Cugnois, and its being laid out in the Affairs of the War; and of
which the said Cugnois shall be absolutely acquitted and cleared as to the
Receiver General of the Clergy of France; as also of the Consignations of the
said Chatelet, and all other Sums, by virtue of the said Duke of Mayennes
Acquittance for the Sum of 21000 Livers, which shall serve for a Discharge to
the said Receivers.

XIII. The Commission for the razing the Castle of Tigny, in Anjou, shall be
revoked, if it be not done already.

XIV. The Duke of Vendosm, with all his Domestic Servants, those of his Troop
of Gensdarms, and of the Troop of light Horse, called the Duke of Mercoeur his
Sons Troop, commanded by the Sieur de la Vacre Chivray; together with the
Sieurs Duission, d' Arabon, Baron de Quernevan, Baron de Vieux Chasteau, and
the Widows and Children of the Sieurs d' Oervaux, and the Sieur de Cammores,
shall have an Appeal for all Processes and suits as well Criminal as Civil,
which they may have as defendants in the Court of Parliament of Rennes, and the
said Processes shall be removed to the Grand Council, and that for a Year; to
which purpose requisite Letters of Appeal shall be expedited: Under the Counter
Seal of which shall be affixed the Cases both of the said Domestics and
Companies.

XV. The King grants to M. the Prince of Conde, as well for himself, as for all
other Princes and Lords, as well Catholic as of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, who joined and united with him, the sum of 1500 Thousand Livers as
well for the Payment of the Levies, keeping afoot and disbanding the Soldiers,
as for the Charges and Expenses of the said War.

Done and Decreed by the King in his Council, the Queen Mother Present, May 16.
1616. Signed LEWIS.
And lower under the Counter-Seal of the Edict, Pothier.

A Declaration of the King upon the Edicts of Pacification; given at Paris,
July 20. 1616. and verified August 4. the same Year
LEwis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr, To all, etc. Though that
since our coming to this Crown we have clearly enough made known our continual
care to preserve all our Subjects in Amity, Union and Concord one with another,
as also those who profess the Pretended Reformed Religion, with all the safety
and freedom that they can desire, as well for their Consciences as for their
Persons, Estates, Offices and Dignities, under the Observance of the Edicts of
Pacification, secret Articles, Declarations, Brevets, and other Favors and
Concessions granted 'em by the Deceased King, our thrice Honored Lord and
Father, whom God absolve, and since by our selves confirmed: To which purpose
we caused to be expedited in their favor several Declarations in express
terms, as well at our coming to the Crown, and our entrance into our Majority,
as upon several other Occasions; upon which we judged that they might desire to
be satisfied of our good and sincere Intentions in that particular:
Nevertheless, considering what has been represented to us, that some among 'em
remain under some suspicion and jealousy, for that since the General Estates
of our Kingdom were last convok'd, and assembled in our good City of Paris, it
was set afoot and resolved, that we should be petitioned to, that we would be
pleased to preserve the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion, according to
the Oath which we took at our Coronation, though they that were there as
Deputies, have since sufficiently given us to understand, that what was done
proceeded rather out of the abundance of their Affection for the said Catholic
Religions, then out of any ill Will which they bear to those of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, We acknowledge at the same time, how necessary a thing it is
to observe the Edicts of Pacification made in their Favor, and how requisite
it is for the Welfare and Tranquillity of the Kingdom; desiring therefore a
fresh, to satisfy our said Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, of our
good will in that Particular, and to the end we may not leave any Scruple
unremov'd upon the said proposals in the Assembly of States General; For these
Reasons, and other Considerations, us thereunto moving, with the advice of the
Queen Mother, our thrice honored Lady and Mother, the Princes, Officers of the
Crown, and principal Members of our Council, about our person, we have said and
declared, say and declare, That we never had any thoughts, by the Oath which we
took at our Coronation, to comprehend therein our Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, living in our Kingdom under the benefits of our said Edicts,
Articles and Delarations made in their favor, which it is our pleasure shall
be always inviolably followed and observed, without the least infringment, and
which as occasion requires we have all along confirmed and by these Presents
confirm. Enjoining all our Officers to prosecute and punish the Infringers
thereof, as refractory Persons, and Disturbers of the public Peace. Thus we
command all our beloved and faithful Counselors, holding our Courts of
Parliament, Bailiffs, Seneschals, etc. that they cause these our present Letters
Declaratory to be read, published and registered, etc. and that the Contents
thereof be inviolably kept and preserved. In Testimony whereof we have caused
our Seal to be affixed.

Given at Paris, July 20. 1616. in the 7th. Year of our Reign. Signed LEWIS.

By the King in Council. De Lomenie.

Sealed with the Great Seal, in Yellow wax, upon a double Label. Read,
published and registered upon the Motion of the Kings Advocate General, and
Copies ordered to be sent to all the Bayliwicks, and Seneschalships, to be
there published and registered, etc. At Paris in Parliament, August 4. 1616.
Signed Voisin.

A Declaration of the King, containing a Confirmation of the Edict of Loudun,
and the Private Articles of it. Given at Paris the last of September, 1616. and
verified October 25. the same Year.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarr, to all etc. As it has
been an extraordinary Grief to us, when we were constrained upon just cause and
consideration, concerning our own and the security of our Kingdom, to order our
Cousin the Prince of Conde to be seized, and on the other side were extremely
overjoyed and contented when we understood that the Princes, Dukes, Peers,
Officers of the Crown and others who withdrew from our Court upon that
Accident, all desired the Peace and Tranquillity of our Kingdom, and to
satisfy us with their Actions; of which having duly informed us, and of the
Occasion of their absence, and being convinced of the reasons that might lessen
the confidence which we had in 'em, We remained so well satisfied, that there
was not the least ill Opinion left in our minds of their deportment:
Nevertheless' forasmuch as by our Letters Patents Declaratory upon the Decree
for the seizing our said Cousin, by reason of the General and particular
Expressions, and Circumstances therein mentioned, it might be otherwise judged
of their Intentions, as also that their Absence and withdrawing from our
Person, might have rendered 'em suspected of things not consisting with their
Duty and the Quality of that allegiance which they owe us; for these Reasons,
being desirous to preserve their Honor and their Reputation entire, we make
known of our own proper motion, full Power and Royal Authority, and with the
Advice of the Queen, our thrice honored Lady and Mother, Princes of our blood,
other Princes, etc. and We have declared, and do declare, that neither by our
said Declaration, nor by any terms, or general or special Word therein
contained, we either meant or do mean to comprehend the said Princes, Dukes,
Peers, Officers of the Crown, Lords, Officers of our Sovereign Courts, or
others of what Quality or Condition soever they be, suspected, and departing
from Paris, upon the day of the Seizure and Detention of our said Cousin, and
since the abovementioned Accident, who have made us sensible of the sincerity
of their Intentions, and their Resolutions still to continue in their Obedience
to us, whom we hold and look upon as our Good, Faithful, and Affectionate
Subjects and Servants, no way consenting nor partakers of the Facts contained
in the said Declaration; and it is our Pleasure that they enjoy our Graces,
Favors, Benefits, Honors and Governments, and that they exercise their
Employments and Offices as they did before, and as belongs to their
abovementioned Preferments, notwithstanding all the Interdictions and Letters
which might have been set forth to the contrary. Moreover, it is our Pleasure,
that the Edict not long since made at Loudun, be maintained, with all the
Articles as well General, as particular and private, granted in pursuance of
the said Edict, and that our Subjects may enjoy the benefit of 'em. To that end
we command our faithful and beloved Councillors, etc. That they cause these
presents to be verified and registered, fulfilled and observed according to
their form and Tenor, for such is our Pleasure.

Given at Paris, September, the last, 1616. and 7th. of our Reign Siign'd LEWIS.
And below, by the King. Mangot.
Sealed with the Great Seal of Yellow wax upon a double Label. Read, Published
and Registered, upon the Motion of the Kings Advocate General; and Copies
ordered to be sent to the Bailywicks and Seneschalships etc. To be there also
published and registered etc. At Paris in Parliament, October 25. 1616. Signed
Du Tillet.

A Declaration of the King against the Unlawful Assemblies of any of the
Pretended Reformed Religion at Castle Jaloux and Bearn. Given at Paris, May 21.
1618. Verified May 25.
LEwis, by the grace of God, King of France and Navarr, To all, etc. Upon
Information given us the last Month of April, that some of our Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion took upon 'em contrary and in contempt of the
Edicts of Pacification, and several Declarations by us set sorth, to summon and
hold unlawful Assemblies, and such as were by us prohibited, and also that they
had appointed one of several Provinces to be held in the City of Chatel-Jaloux
in our Country of Guyenne, we took an Occasion to expedite our Letters Patents
dated April 20th. by which we declared all Assemblies that should be summoned
by our said Subjects of the said pretended Reformed Religion, other then such
as were permitted by our Edicts, and for which they had express leave from us,
to be unlawful, and contrary to our Authority and Service, and as such we
forbid 'em, upon pain of Disobedience; ordering Prosecution against the Authors
of the same, and all those that should go thither and be present there, as
Infringers of our Edicts, and disturbers of the public Peace. Which our said
Letters having bin published and registered in our Court of Parliament at
Bourdeaux, and Chamber of Edict at Nerac, our Officers of the said Societies
had taken such care for the observance of 'em, that the Governor and Consuls
of the said City of Chatel-Jaloux and they who were entrusted with the command
of several other Cities of the said Province held by those of the pretended
Reformed Religion, had obstructed and refused the holding of the said Assembly,
and for that reason would have enforced those that were deputed thither to have
departed. But we have bin informed within these few days, that the more
factious among 'em, finding that by reason of our said Declaration, they could
not with freedom and safety hold the said Assembly, which they had contrived to
be such as they desired to have it, resolved to call it without the
Jurisdiction of the Parliament, in our Country of Bearn, or some other Part,
whither they had invited several of our Subjects from diverse Provinces to meet.
Which being directly prejudicial to our authority, and the good of our Service,
the Peace and Tranquillity of our Subjects, and contrary to our Edicts of
Pacification, and several Declarations set sorth upon that Subject, desirous of
an Occasion to provide against it, and to punish those who carry themselves
with so much disobedience and unbridl'd License, we have said and declared, and
do say and declare, that it is our Pleasure and Intention, that at the
Prosecution and Solicitation of our Advocates General and their Substitutes,
our Judges and Officers of the Places, shall proceed against all those who have
bin the Authors, and shall be found present at the said Assembly by them newly
summoned in our said Province of Bearn, or in any other unlawful Assemblies,
and such as are forbid by our Edicts and Declarations, as Violators of our
Edicts, and disturbers of the public Peace: And to this Effect we will and
require that they be apprehended and taken into Custody where e're they shall
be found hereafter, to the end their Prosecutions may be brought to a
Conclusion. And where they cannot be taken, that they may be proceeded against
for Contumacy, Seizure and Inventories made of their Goods, according to the
Forms in such Cases customary. So we command our beloved and faithful
Counselors, holding our Court of Parliament at Paris, that they give Order that
these presents be read, published and registered, etc. For such is our
pleasure. In Testimony, etc.

Given at Paris May 21st. 1618. And Ninth of our Reign. Signed LEWIS.

By the King, De Lomenie.

Sealed, etc. Read, Published and Registered, at the Motion of the Kings
Advocate General, and authentic Copies ordered to be sent, etc. To the end
they may be read, published, Registered and Executed within their several
Jurisdictions, etc. At Paris in Parliament May 25th. 1618. Signed Du Tillet.

A Declaration of the King, confirming the Edicts of Pacification, and the
Assemblies of Castle-Jaloux, and others approved. Given at Amboise, May 24. and
verified July 5.
LEwis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr, to all, etc. It has bin
always our Intention carefully to maintain and cause to be observed toward our
Subjects professing the pretended Reformed Religion, the Favors, Concessions
and Advantages which the Deceased King our thrice honored Lord and Father
granted 'em by the Edict of Nantes, and by the Brevets and Declarations which
ensued upon it, and which have since by us bin confirmed. On the other side, we
have desired that on their part they would confine themselves to the Observance
of the same Edict, and live under the Protection of it, with the same Fidelity
as the Rest of our Subjects. And when they have given themselves the Liberty to
do any thing contrary to their duty, we have been obliged to let 'em understand
our Resentment, and for that reason to set forth Declarations and other Letters
Patents, such as we our selves thought necessary, upon the Occasion which
presented themselves. As we did in April the last year, being informed that
some among 'em took upon 'em, contrary and in contempt of our said Edicts and
Declarations, to summon and hold unlawful Assemblies, and such as were by us
prohibited, as also that they had appointed one at Castle-Jaloux in Guyenne. We
therefore expedited our Letters Patents of the 20th. of the said Month, by
which we declared the said Assembly and all others that were held by 'em, other
then those that were permitted by us, to be unlawful, and contrary to our
Authority and Service, and as such we forbid 'em under the Penalty of
disobedience. Since that, we have bin informed, that they themselves who had
contrived to hold the said Assembly at Casteljaloux, finding that they were
obstructed by reason of our said Declaration, were resolved to call another
without the Jurisdiction of our Parliament of Bourdeaux, and to appoint it at
Orthes in Bearn, to the end they might hold it there with more freedom. Upon
that we set forth a Declaration dated the 21st. of May ensuing: By which we
declared it to be our pleasure, that upon the Prosecution and Solicitation of
our Advocate Generals and their Substitutes, the Judges and other Officers of
the places should rigorously proceed against such as should be the Authors, or
should be found present in the said Assemby which was said to be called in
Bearn, or in any other unlawful Assemblies forbid by our Edicts, as Violators
of our Edicts, and Disturbers of the public Peace. Which nevertheless did not
prevent the holding of the said Assembly, nor the Removal of it afterward to
our City of Rody; at which we have just Reason to be offended, were it not but
that upon this last Motion, they who met at the said Assembly, acknowledging
that some of our Subjects, desirous to make use of the Name of the Queen, our
thrice honored Lady and Mother, to trouble the Peace of our Kingdom, sought
their Advantages, to the Prejudice of our Authority and the good of our
Service, and that if they had done amiss in meeting to the prejudice of our
Prohibitions, they had no Intention however to disserve us; having sent their
Deputies to us upon this Occasion, to protest and assure us of their Fidelity,
Obedience and Duty to our Service, and to beseech us to honor 'em with our
commands. Which being well understood and considered, we resolved to hear their
Deputies mildly and favorably, and to forget the Offense which they had
committed by reason of that Assembly. Which being desirous effectually to do,
for these causes, after the Affair was set afoot and debated in our Council,
where were present several Princes, etc. With their Advice, and of our own
certain knowledge, full Power and Royal Authority, we say and declare, and it
is our Will and Pleasure, that our said Subjects who met in the said
Assemblies, held in the said Cities of Orthes and Rody, together with those
that were deputed thither, shall not be di^^^rb'd, molested or prosecuted upon
that Occasion; but that they be absolutely discharged, and that they may return
home with freedom and safety to their own Houses and Places of abode;
notwithstanding the Declarations above mentioned, and all Decrees and Judgments
that might be issued forth against 'em. It is our pleasure also that if any of
'em have bin taken and imprisoned, or have had their Goods seized upon the said
Occasion, their Persons shall be acquitted, and their Goods restored; as having
upon the said Considerations, extinguished and buried in Oblivion the
Miscarriage which was committed upon that Occasion. And we impose perpetual
silence upon our Advocates General, their Substitutes and others, whom we
charge and command however to he assisting in the Execution and Observance of
our Edicts and Declarations aforesaid. So we command our faithful and beloved
Counselors, etc. That these presents may be read published and registered,
etc. And that our Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, may enjoy the
Benefit of the Contents fully and peaceably, without suffering the least
Injury, Trouble or Impeachment to be offered 'em. For such is our Pleasure. In
Witness, etc.

Given at Amboise, May 24th. 1619. and 10th. of our Reign. Signed LEWIS.

And below, By the King, De Lomenie,

Sealed etc. Registered upon the Motion of the Kings Attorney General. At Paris
in Parliament, July 15th. 1619. Signed, Gallart

A Declaration of the King against those of the Assembly at Loudun, together
with a Confirmation of the Preceding Edicts of Pacification. Given at Paris,
February 26. 1620. and Published in Parliament, February 27. the said Year.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr, To all, etc. As we have
always held it for an assured Foundation of the public Tranquillity of this
Kingdom, to maintain and preserve our Subjects, as well the Catholics as those
of the pretended Reformed Religion in good Peace, Union and Concord one with
another, under the Benefit of the Edicts and Declarations made and set forth to
that purpose by the Deceased King our thrice honored Lord and Father, whom God
absolve: So we have had a particular care, in causing 'em to be exactly
observed; and that they of the said Religion may enjoy the Favors and
Concessions which were granted 'em by the same. Which also we have not only
maintained and preserved, but also out of our special Grace and Favor have
much augmented and enlarged. And to be the more particularly satisfied of any
Faileurs in the Observance of the said Edicts and Declarations, which might be
commit^ed, and to give out said Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion the
means to inform us of 'em, in imitation of the Deceased King our thrice
honored Lord and Father, we have agreed that they shall have near o^^ Person,
and in our Train, certain Deputies who may inform us of 'em, and exhibit their
Remonstrances to us and our Council, as they shall judge requisite to be
provided against and remedi'd at their Instance and Solicitation, and to the
end those Deputies may be made choice of and appointed, when they have a design
to change 'em, we have for that reason given 'em leave to hold Provincial and
General Assemblies, when they shall give us to understand that they have
occasion for 'em. And although the Principal cause for which we have given 'em
leave to hold those Assemblies, has bin for the Choice and Nomination of the
said Deputies; we have nevertheless thought good, that the Complaints which our
Subjects of the said Religion of every Province may make of the said Breaches
and Violations, shall be exhibited to the said Assemblies, for them to send
their Deputies to present their Papers and Remonstrances to us. For this reason
it is, and upon this only Consideration, that we permitted our Subjects of the
said pretended Reformed Religion, by our Brevet, May 23th. to hold a General
Assembly the 26th. of September ensuing, in our City of Loudun, in which we
were in hopes that according to what is expressed by the said Brevet, they
would have begun to have proceeded to the Choice and Nomination of Deputies,
which they would have had to succeed to those that resided in our Train, in
whose hands they would have entrusted the Papers of Complaints and
Remonstrances which they had to present to us, to the end they might solicit
our Answer, and take care of putting in Execution what should be by us
ordained. But instead of so doing, they would needs send to us, certain of
their Number with a first Paper, containing some principal Heads, to which they
besought our answer, and to cause to be executed what we thought convenient,
till they had compiled their other Papers, which as they said they were
preparing to exhibit to us. Upon which we gave 'em to understand, that when all
their demands should be reduced into one Paper, and that they should present
'em to us all at once, and according to the usual Method and Forms, we would
receive 'em, and give a favorable Answer, and in such sort, that they should
find by the Effects, our good will toward 'em, And though they were also obliged
to cause the said Paper to be presented to us by such as should be made choice
of among them to reside near our Person, and then to break up, as it was the
Practice, while the deceased King lived, of the Assemblies of Chatellerant and
Gergeau, and that it is still observed by all the Assemblies of what Quality
soever they be, that are held in this Kingdom: Nevertheless, we were willing to
do 'em that favor for once, not to draw it into President, as to receive the
said Papers from the hands of those who did present 'em to us on their behalf.
Which being reported to the said Assembly, after several Contests and Delays,
at length they sent us other Deputies, with the General Papers of their
Complaints and Remonstrances, whom we kindly received, giving 'em assurance
that we would labor to return 'em a speedy answer, and by which they should
not only receive the Justice which they demanded, but also as much as they
could expect from our Grace and Favor. Which we gave 'em in charge to report
back to their said Assembly, being also farther commanded to tell them in our
Name, that since they had presented all their Papers, and that their longer
sitting together was to no purpose, but was prejudicial to our authority, and
gave scandal to our Subjects, our Pleasure was, that they should proceed with
the soonest, to the Nomination of their Deputies, that were to reside near our
Person, and then break up. Which done, we promised to deliver into the hands of
the said Deputies, the Answers which we should make to the said Papers, and
within a Month after to proceed to the Execution of those things that should be
agreed upon. But instead of receiving this with that respect and reverence
which is due to us, they replied that the said Assembly was resolved to sit
still, and not to stir, till they had the Answer that was to be made to their
Papers, and that they saw the performance of it. For which though we had just
occasion to be offended, as being an Answer far remote from the Duty which
Subjects owe their King: Nevertheless we contented our selves with laying
before 'em the Fault which they committed, and exhorting them to demean
themselves with that Obedience which became 'em. And however, to the end the
said Assembly might be expressly informed of our Intentions, we resolved to send
to 'em, the Sieurs Le Maine, Counselor in our Council of State, and Gentleman
of our Chamber, and Marescot, one of our Secretaries, to the end that after
they had confirmed to 'em the Assurances of our good will toward 'em in that
particular, they might lay upon 'em the same Command which we had enjoined
their said Envoys to carry to 'em in our Names; which was, to proceed forthwith
to the Nomination of the Deputies that were to reside near our Person, and then
to break up in fifteen Days after, and return home into their Provinces: Which
was pronounced the 10th. of January last. To which they made no other Answer,
only that they would depute Commissioners to us, to reiterate their humble
Supplications to us, as they did, in sending to us afterward some others of
their Society, who repeated the same Instances which others before had done.
That is to say, that we would be pleased to agree to the Sitting of the
Assembly, till their Papers were answered, and that they saw the performance of
those things that should be promised 'em; upon which not having any thing else
to Answer, but what already we had given 'em to understand; and considering of
what Importance it was, that they should rely upon the Assurances which we had
given 'em of our good Intentions to do what should be to their Content, and
that the usual methods in such Cases should be followed and observed:
Considering also that they had sat near five Months, which might breed both
Suspicion and Jealousy in our other Subjects, We ordered 'em once more to obey
what we had given 'em to understand to be our Will and Pleasure. To which we
ordered 'em, after that, to be particularly exhorted, by several Persons well
qualified, and well informed of our Sentiments of these Affairs, who assured
'em of our good Intentions, to give 'em content. Having also sent 'em word in
our Name, that though they had exceeded above a Month of the Time wherein we
prefixed 'em to separate, yet we granted 'em eight Days more for their Return
to Loudun, and eight Days after to Name their Deputies, and then retire: In
which if they failed to give us Satisfaction, we should take care so to provide
as should be most for the good of our Service. But finding that instead of
obeying our commands, they still continued together, covering their
Disobedience with the Pretenses of new Envoys which they sent to us, to
reiterate their Importunities and Supplications: Yet being well informed that
there are several persons in the said Assembly ill affected to the Good of our
Service, and the Peace of this Kingdom, who labor to inveagle others into
their wicked Designs, Therefore being no longer able to suffer this contempt of
our Authority, without testifying our Resentment toward those that are Guilty,
and letting every one know what our Will and Pleasure is upon this Subject: We
declare, that we have had this Matter debated in Council, where were present
some Princes of the Blood, other Princes, etc. With whose advice, and of our
certain knowledge, full Power, and Royal Authority, we have said, declared and
ordained as follows, that is to say, That to testify our good Inclinations in
their behalf to our said Subjects of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, we
have again ordered our said Deputies assembled at Loudun, a Respit of three
weeks after notice shall be given 'em by these presents, to break up the said
Assembly, and to go home to their Houses, During which time they may also
Nominate their Deputies, according to the Number and Method accustomed, for two
to be made Choice of by us, to reside near our Person, and upon their neglect
to break up and Retire after that time expired, We have from hence forward, as
then, declared the said Assembly unlawful and opposite to our Service and
Authority: And all those who shall stay to continue it, either in the City of
Loudun, or in any other Place, guilty of High Treason, and as such excluded
from the Benefit of our Edicts, and other Favors by us granted to those of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, as also of the Appeals which they may pretend to,
to our Chambers of the Edict. We likewise will, and it is our Pleasure, that
they be proceeded against with the utmost Rigor of our Laws and Ordinances, as
well by our Ordinary Judges, as our Parlaments, as disobedient Subjects, Rebels
and disturbers of the Public Peace; as also all such as shall side with 'em in
their Practices, Negotiations and Correspodencies. And as for those among 'em
who shall obey our present command, and withdraw from the said Assembly within
the time above mentioned, as also all others of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, who shall continue in their Obedience and Duty toward us, our Will
and Pleasure is, that they live with all freedom under our Protection, and
enjoy the Benefit of our Edicts, Declarations and other Favors by us granted
in their behalf. And if they of the Assembly who shall obey our present
Commands, whatever their Nunber be, before they quit it, nominate the Deputies
that are to reside in our Train, our Intention is to admit their said
Nomination, and to permit those whom we shall make choice of, to do the Duty of
their Functions near our persons as is usual. So we command our beloved and
Faithful Counselors, holding our Courts of Parliament and Chambers of the
Edict, our Bailiffs, etc. We also enjoin all our Advocate Generals and their
Substitutes, etc. And to the end the said Assembly may have sufficient Notice
of our present Command, and may have no cause to pretend Ignorance, our
Pleasure is, that our Advocate General, or his Substitutes, give speedy notice
thereof to the said City of Loudun, or other Places where such Assemblies shall
be held by the chief of our Ushers, or Sergeants. We also command our
Governors and Lieutenant Generals in our Provinces, to be aiding and assisting
in the Execution of such Decrees and Judgments as shall be given against the
Violators of these Presents. For this is our Will and Pleasure. In Testimony
whereof, etc.

Given at Paris, Feb. 26. 1620. in the Tenth of our Reign. Signed Lewis,

And below, By the King, Phelippeaux.

Registered upon the Motion of the Kings Attorney General; and sent to all
Bayliwicks and Seneschalships to be there Registered, etc. At Paris in
Parliament, February 27. 1620. Signed De Tillet.

A Declaration of the King in Favor of his Subjects of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, who shall remain in their Duty and Obedience. Dated at Fontain-bleau,
April 24. 1621. Registered the 27th.
LEwis by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr, To all, etc. Since we
took in hand to govern the Affairs of our Kingdom, We have found that one of
the most necessary Things to keep our Subjects in Peace and Tranquillity, is
carefully to observe the Edicts of Pacification, and Declarations made in
favor of our Subjects, who prosess the Pretended Reformed Religion, for which
Reason we have all along labored it as much as it was possible; and also, to
the end they might have so much the more Reason to contain themselves in their
Duty, and to rejoice in our goodness, We have often dissembled, and laid asleep
their Disobedience and Oppositions that many among 'em have been guilty of. Or
else we have endeavored to turn 'em aside from the Miscarriages to which they
were inclinable, by Admonitions and Declarations, which we have set forth and
sent, where they were convenient, to let 'em understand their Duty. Which was
that which more particularly we were desirous to put in Practice in October
last, upon Advice that was given us, that our said Subjects were preparing to
call and hold an Assembly, without our Permission, in the City of Rochel. Upon
which we put forth a Declaration to forbid the said Assembly, and to prohibit
all that should be deputed to travel thither, and those of the said City of
Rochel to admit 'em, upon Penalties therein contained. But as it frequently
happens, that they who have the best Intentions, have not always the greatest
Faith among 'em, our Declaration was so far from working any good effect, that
in contempt of it, several among 'em forbore not to hold the said Assembly, and
after that to call and hold others in several parts of the Kingdom, under
various Names and Pretenses; some of which made Decrees and Orders, as if they
had had Sovereign Authority, published Ordinances for keeping the Field in
Arms, committing Acts of Hostility, and taking our Subjects by way of
Reprisals, elected and appointed Chieftains, as well for the Field as for the
Cities, and took other Resolutions so pernicious, that very great
Licenciousness, Excesses and Disorders ensued in a good number of the Places
which they held; having caused extraordinary Fortifications to be raised about
'em, raised Money and Men, Listed Soldiers, cast great Guns, purchased Arms,
held unlawful Assemblies, and committed other Acts altogether Opposite and
Prejudicial to our Authority, and the Obedience which is due to us. For which
we had all just Reason to be offended, nevertheless we were willing to be
patient for several Months, and to consider whether of themselves they would
return to the acknowledgment of their faults, and seek to us for that Favor
which they stood in need of: Nor were we weary all the while of providing
Remedies upon several Articles, for which the Deputies that reside near our
Person, on the behalf of our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion made
Supplication to us. But considering now that the farther things go, the more
Licentiousness and Disobedience augment among the greatest part of 'em, and
that their Audaciousness may increase by our being at a distance, We have taken
a Resolution to make a Progress into Tourain and Poictou, and farther onward,
to visit the other Provinces of our Kingdom, to the end that being so much
nearer the Mischief, we may be the better able to provide against it, with that
Intention which we always preserve, to maintain the Public Peace, and
carefully to observe, in respect of those of the said Religion, who shall keep
themselves within the Bounds of their Obedience, the Edicts and Declarations
that have been made in their Favor, and to promote their Enjoyment of those
Favors and Concessions which have been granted in their behalf: As also to
punish the Refractory and Disobedient. And to the end that our Intentions may
be known to every one, and that our said Subjects of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, who abide in the observance of the Edicts, may have no other cause
then to rely upon 'em, We with the Advice of some Princes of the Blood, etc.
Have said and declared, and do say and declare by these Presents, and it is our
Will, Meaning and Pleasure, that the Edicts and Declarations made by the
Deceased King, our thrice Honored Lord and Father, whom God Absolve, and by
our selves, as well for Security and Liberty of Conscience, and exercise of
those of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, as for the Enjoyment of the
Favors and Concessions, which have been allowed 'em by Virtue of the same, may
be inviolably and punctually observed and kept, according to their Form and
Tenor, toward those of our said Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion,
who remain and shall abide in their Duty and Obedience; whom together with
their Families and Estates, we have taken and put, and do take and put under
our Protection and special safeguard. Therefore we command our Governors and
Lieutenant Generals of our Provinces, and expressly command all Captains and
Governors in our Cities, and strong Holds, Judges, Bailiffs, etc. to see that
our said Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, may enjoy the Benefit of
our said Edicts, and of our Present Declaration, and to take care of their
Safety and Preservation. As we also give command to those who have Authority
and command in the Cities, which are in the Custody of those of the said
Religion, to take the same Care of our Catholic Subjects, who are settled
therein, under Pain, both the one and the other, of being answerable for their
neglect in their proper Names and Persons. It being our Will and Pleasure, that
all Transgressors shall be prosecuted, and punished, as Disturbers of the
Public Peace, according to the utmost Severity of our Ordinances; enjoining
all our Advocates General and their Substitutes, to issue forth all Requisite
Writs to the same purpose. So we command our Beloved and Faithful Counselors,
holding our Courts of Parliament and Chambers of the Edict, etc.

Given at Fountain-Bleau, April 24. 1621. and of our Reign the eleventh. Signed
Lewis.
And below, by the King. De Lomenie.
Sealed, etc. Read, Published, and Registered upon the Motion of the Kings
Advocate General, etc. At Paris in Parliament, April 27. 1621. Signed Du Tillet.

A Declaration of the King, by which all the Inhabitants at present in the
Cities of Rochel and St. John d' Angeli, and all their Adherents, are declared
Guilty of High Treason. With an Injunction to all his Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, to enter into a Protestation not to adhere to any Assembly
at Rochel, nor any others that are held without his Majesty's express leave.
Published in Parliament, June 7. 1621.
LEwis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr. To all, etc. Our
continual Desire to preserve the Public Peace and Tranquillity among our
Subjects, so to prevent the Mischiefs and Desolations that usually attend the
raising of Armies, and the Oppressions and Calamities which the People thereby
groan under, has caused us to suffer and endure for several Months last past,
the Miscarriages, Disobedience and Rebellious Acts committed in several Cities
of our Kingdom, by some of our Subjects professing the Pretended Reformed
Religion; even in those of Rochel, Montauban, and others, where unlawful
Assemblies are still held, who rather make it their Business to form Popular
States and Republics, then to Confine themselves to that Obedience which they
mutually owe to us: Having also engraved a Seal, under which and the Signatures
of the Principal Heads of the said Assemblies, they have set forth several
Ordinances, Decrees, Commands and Commissions, giving Power to particular
Persons to command in Provinces and Cities, seize upon the Money of our Chequer
and Receipts, Levy Men, raise Money, buy Arms, cast great Guns, send to
Foreign Provinces and Kingdoms, with other high Misdemeanors of the same
Nature, the evident Marks of an absolute Rebellion, and open Insurrection
against our Authority; of which having had some Knowledge in April last, and
knowing that they took for the Pretense that hurried 'em to these disorders,
the little Security they had for their Persons, and the Liberty of their
Consciences, We were willing by our Declaration of the twenty fourth of the
said Month of April; to give them all Assurance of our good Intentions in
respect of those that continued in their Duty, and by taking them into our
particular Safeguard and Protection, to let 'em know, that our March into those
Parts for which we were preparing, was rather by our approach near those
Places, where those Disorders were committed, to show and strengthen our
Authority, to the Confusion of those that were guilty, then to make use of any
other more violent Rigor, or of the Power which God has put into our Hands for
the Punishment of such Insolences. But so far was this from opening their
Eyes, in Order to the bringing of 'em back to their Duty, that the greatest
part of 'em continuing in their Duty, are openly broke out into Rebellion, and
commit all manner of Hostilities against those that will not take their part;
giving out that they acknowledge no other Chieftain, then the Assembly at
Rochel, which has now sent for several Soldiers, to St. John de Angeli, raised
under their Commissions, who make as if they intended to oppose our Passage
into the said City, and hinder our Entrance by force of Arms; which obliges us,
seeing the same Disorders are crept into several other Cities of our Kingdom,
to put our selves into a Condition, to chastize the Authors according to their
Demerits; and to make use of for that purpose, together with the Ordinary ways
of Justice, the means which God has put into our Hands for the Maintenance of
our Authority. And to the end that all our Subjects, especially those of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, may not be deceived by the false pretenses of that
Assembly, to draw off from their Duty, and that both the One and the Other may
be informed of our Pleasure and Intentions upon this occasion, We with the
Advice, etc. have said and declared, and do say and declare, That in
Confirmation of our said Letters Patents of the 24th. of April last, we have
taken and put, and do take and put under our special Protection and Safeguard,
all our Subjects of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, of what Quality or
Condition soever, that shall abide and contain themselves in our Obedience, and
under the observance of our Edicts. But seeing the Manifest Acts of Rebellion,
committed in our said City of Rochel, as well by the Assembly, which is still
sitting contrary to our express Prohibitions, as by the Body of the City, both
Burgesses and Inhabitants; as also what is done in our City of St. John d'
Angeli, and the Acts of Hostility which they daily commit against our proper
Person, We have declared, and declare all the Inhabitants and other Persons of
what Quality soever, who are now Residing within it, Refugees, or withdrawn
into Rochel and St. John d' Angeli, and all others who directly or indirectly
adhere to 'em, or hold Intelligence, Association, or Correspondence with 'em,
or who in any manner whatever, own the said Assembly of Rochel, or any other
Assemblies, Circles or Councils of Provinces, or other Congregations, which
hold Correspondence with that of Rochel, and which are held without our
Permission, Relapsed, Refractory, and guilty of High Treason in the highest
Degree, and as such, their Estates to be Forfeit and Confiscate to us. It is
our Pleasure also, that they be proceeded against with the utmost Rigor of the
Law, by seizure of their Persons, taking Inventories of their Goods, and by
other accustomed and usual ways in such Cases. Declaring also our said Cities
of St. John d' Angeli, Rochel, and all others that adhere to 'em, deprived of,
and to have forfeited their Rights, Privileges, Franchises, and other Favors,
granted 'em by the Kings our Predecessors, or by our selves. And to the end we
may discern and distinguish the Good from the Bad, It is our Pleasure, that our
said Subjects professing the said Pretended Reformed Religion, as well
Gentlemen as others, as also the Cities and Corporations of the said Religion,
shall openly make a Declaration in the Presidial Courts, Bailiwicks and
Seneschalships within their Jurisdiction, of their good Intentions to our
Service; and renounce, disavow and protest against any Adherence to the said
Assembly of Rochel, or any other Councils of Provinces, Circles or other
Places, which are held and sit without our Permission; and that they will
oppose themselves in our behalf and jointly with Us against all the Resolutions
that shall be there taken, for which they shall have Acts necessary for their
Discharge. We also expressly forbid all Gentlemen and others to permit their
Children, Servants, or any others depending upon 'em, to go to the said Cities,
or to give 'em any Aid or Assistance whatever, nor to afford Lodging or shelter
in their Houses to those that shall go and converse there in any manner
whatever, under pain of being held guilty of the same Crime. Expressly
commanding all Bailiffs, etc. to proceed exactly and carefully against the
Persons and Estates of those who shall have incurred the said Penalties: As
also all our Advocate Generals, etc. to do their Duties without any regard to
Passports, which might be obtained from Us, by false Misinformation, unless
under the Great Seal.

So we give Command to our well Beloved and faithful Counselors, etc.

Given at Noyon, May 27. 1621. and of our Reign the twelfth. Signed, Lewis.

By the King, De Lomenie.
Sealed, etc.
Read, Published, and Registered, upon the Motion of the Kings Advocate
General; and compared Copies, etc. At Paris in Parliament, June 7. 1621.
A Declaration of the King, containing Prohibitions to all his Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, remaining in Obedience, to stir from their Houses,
either in City or Country, under the Penalties expressed. Given at Beziers,
July 25. 1622.
LEwis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr, To all, etc. Upon
Advice that those of our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, who
persist in their Rebellion against the Commands of God, and their natural Duty
toward Us, have so far forgot themselves, as to solicit and treat with
Foreigners to invade our Kingdom. With whom they are not only desirous to join
themselves, but also by threats and menaces, to force other our good Subjects
of the Pretended Reformed Religion, who have all along preserved themselves in
their Duty under our Obedience, and the Benefit of our Edicts and Declarations,
to take up Arms, and join with them and the said Foreigners, the more to
strengthen themselves in their Designs and Enterprises, and to subdue and
dispose of our Kingdom in pursuance of their Resolutions taken in their
Assembly of Rochel, We deemed it most necessary to apply a Remedy to it, and to
make use of all means that God has pleased to put into our Hand. For these
Reasons, with the Advice of our Council, and of our full Power and Royal
Authority, We have prohibited and forbid, and do prohibit and forbid expressly
by these Presents, signed with our own Hand, all our said Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, of what Quality or Condition soever they be, who
remain in their Duty under our Obedience and the Benefit of our Edicts and
Declarations, to depart from, quit, forsake or abandon their Houses, whether in
our Cities or in the Country where their Habitations, are, to join with those
who are in Arms, or with the said Foreigners, or to afford any Shelter,
Favor, Succor, or Assistance whatever, upon Pain of Forfeiting our Favors,
of being declared Guilty of High Treason, Deserters of the Kingdom, and
Disturbers of the Public Peace; and as such to be Proceeded against with the
utmost Rigor of the Laws and Ordinances of our Kingdom. Promising also, that
while they continue in their Duty under our Obedience, and the Benefit of our
Edicts and Declarations, we will maintain and preserve 'em as our Good and
Faithful Subjects, and preserve 'em from all Violence and Oppression. So we
Command and Ordain, etc.

Given at Beziers, July 25. 1622. and thirteenth of our Reign. Signed Lewis.

By the King, De Lomenie.
Sealed, etc.
Read, Published and registered, etc. At the Parliament in Paris, August 5.
1622.
A Declaration of the King upon the Peace which he gave his Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, confirming the Proceeding Edicts of Pacification.
Given at the Camp before Mompellier October 19. 1622. and Published in
Parliament November 21.
LLWIS King of France and Navarr, To all, etc. As every Christian Prince that
fears God, ought to have in abhorrence the Effusion of the bood of Mankind,
created after the Image of the Almighty, so also is he bound and obliged not
only to avoid the Occasions of Civil and Domestic Wars, but also to seek and
embrace all honorable and lawful means to reunite and cause his Subjects to
live under the Laws of the Kingdom in good Concord and Obedience. And the same
Divine Goodness that has known our heart ever since it has pleased him to call
us to the Government of the French Monarchy, is the Judge of our inward
Thoughts, and every body knows that our Arms have bin no less Just then
constrained and necessary for the support and defense of our Authority: Whether
against those, who from the Beginning, under diverse borrowed Pretenses, have
raised up Troubles during our Minority; or after that, against our Subjects of
the Pretended Reformed Religion, abused and surpised by the Artifices of some
among 'em, who thought to make their advantages as well of their Simplicity, as
of the public Division of our Kingdom; whereas our Intentions never have bin
other, after the laudable Example of our Predecessors of happy Memory, then to
keep 'em all in good Peace and Union, in that Duty and Obedience which is due
to us, under the benefit of our Edicts; and to use 'em as our good and faithful
Subjects, when they contain themselves within the Bounds of Respect and
Submission which are due to a Sovereign: Not having spared any duty of
Remonstrance and Diligence to prevent the Mischief which it was easy to
foresee, before we came to force and violence, to our great Sorrow, for the
preservation of our Royal Dignity, and the Power which God has put into our
hands; to remove all Jealousies and mistrusts of our Sincerity which have been
infused into 'em with artifice and design, though we were never worse then our
words to any person, to prevent the Misfortunes and Accidents that have ens^'d;
and to let 'em understand together with the Principal Authors and Fomenters of
this public Disorder, the real ground of our upright and Sincere Intentions to
Cherish and preserve all in peace, and in the free and quiet Enjoyment of what
is granted and ordained by our said Edicts. And seeing it is so, that our said
Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, have been since inspired with
better thoughts, and acknowledging their Errors and this Truth, have had
recourse to our Clemency and Goodness by most humble Supplications, which they
have sent us by their Deputies on purpose, beseeching us that we would voutsafe
'em our Pardon, and abolish the Memory of what is past; we always inclining
rather to mildness and mercy, then to push forward the Rigor and Justice of our
Arms, though they have gained us signal advantages, sufficient for us to ground
the hopes of a prosperous Conclusion, and being desirous out of respect to
their Submissions and duties, to restore Peace to the Kingdom, and to reunite
our Subjects in amity and concord one among another, and in a general and
Unanimous Obedience toward our selves; and for other important Reasons and
Considerations, us thereunto moving, with the Advice of the Princes, Dukes,
etc. We have said, ordained and declared, and do say, ordain and declare, by
these Presents, Signed with our Hand, and it is our Will and Pleasure, that the
Edict of Nantes, the Declarations and secret Articles registered in our Courts
of Parliament, shall be faithfully fulfilled to our Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, in all their Parts and Clauses, and as they were well and
duly enjoyed in the Reign of the Deceased King our thrice Honored Lord and
Father, and since our coming to the Crown, before the last Commotions: That the
Exercise of the Religion, Catholic, Apostolic and Roman, shall be restored
and resettl'd in all parts of the Kingdom and Countries under our Obedience
where it has bin interrupted, to be there freely and Peaceably continued
without any Molestation; forbidding expressly all Persons of what Quality or
Condition soever, upon pain of being punished as disturbers of the Public
Peace, to molest or disturb the Ecclesiastics in the Celebration of Divine
Service, enjoyment or collecting the Tithes, Fruits and Revenues of their
Benefices, and all other Rights and Duties to them appertaining. In like manner
the Exercise of the Pretended Reformed Religion, shall be established in such
Places, as we shall think good and proper, after we have heard the
Remonstrances of the Deputies of our Province of Guienne. It is our Pleasure
also, that all the new Fortifications of the Cities, Towns, Castles, Forts and
Fortresses, held by our said Subjects of the Reformed Religion, more especially
those raised in the Islands of Re and Oleron, shall be demolished and levelled
with the Ground, the ancient Walls, Towers, Gates, Motes and Counterscarps
still standing in the same Condition, with Prohibitions to the said Cities to
Fortify 'em anew, and for the more faithful Execution of the said
De^^mishments, hostages of the Principal Inhabitants shall be put into the
hands of those whom we shall please to Nominate, to the end the Officers of our
Crown, or other deputed Commissioners, may execute the Contents abovementioned
according to the Instructions that shall be given 'em. And our meaning is, that
all the Cities of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, which in 15. days after
Publication of these Presents, shall submit to our Obedience, and willingly
open their Gates to us, shall enjoy the Contents of this Declaration. And we
expressly forbid all our said Subjects of the said Pretended Reformed Religion,
to hold any General or Provincial Assemblies, Circles, abridg'd Synods, or any
others of what quality or Title they be, under pain of High Treason, unless
they have permission from us: Only Assemblies of Consistories, Colloquies and
Synods, merely about Ecclesiastical Affairs, are permitted 'em. Also our said
Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, shall ^^and discharged from all
Acts of Hostility, and from all Assemblies General and Provincial Circles,
abridg'd and others, and from all other things whatever, generally contained in
the 76th. and 77th. Articles of our Edict of Nantes, from the first of January,
1621. 'till this present Time; comprehending under this Title, the exe^rable
Cases, such as are specified and declared by the fourscore and sixteenth
Article of the said Edict, into which search may be made before the Judges who
have Cognizance of it. And as for what happened at Privas, we will have a
particular Amnesty of it expedited for the Inhabita^^s of that Place, as also
for the Sieur de Brisson. And for the Accomptables and other Officers, as to
what concerns the Trusts of their Management, the 78th. and 79th. of the said
Edict of Nantes shall be faithfully kept and observed. In like manner, for the
Judgments, Decrees and Sentences given against those of the Religion who have
born Arms, our Pleasure is that they shall be discharged of 'em, according to
the 58th. 59th. and 60th. Articles of the said Edict. Also we have Corroborated
and confirmed, and by these Presents do Corroborate and confirm the Judgments
given by the Established Judges and Counselors, by the Chief Commanders in
the Provinces, whether in Civil or Criminal matters and Executions happened
between those of their Party; and the said Judges and Counselors are
discharged from all pursuits in that regard, imposing perpetual Silence upon
our Advocate Generals, their Substitutes and all others pretending claim or
Interest therein. In like manner our Pleasure is, that all Prisoners on both
sides that have not paid their Ransoms, shall be released and set at Liberty
without paying any thing, and all Promises made in reference to Ransoms not
fulfilled upon the Day or Date of these Presents, are declared Null and of no
Effect. In like manner all Persons of what Quality and Condition soever they
be, shall be restored to their Estates, Debts, Titles, Accounts and Actions,
Employments, Honors and Dignities, which they were deprived of during the
present Troubles, notwithstanding any Donations or Confiscations; excepting
Military Employments, the care of which we will reserve to our selves. We also
order that this Declaration be observed and kept by all our Subjects, according
to the Form prescribed by the 82d. Article of our Edict of Nantes; and that
Catholic and Pretended Reformed Commissioners, shall be sent into all the
Provinces to look after the Execution of it according to our said Edict. So we
Command our faithful and well beloved, etc. In Testimony, etc.

Given in the Camp before Mompellier, October 19. 1622. of our Reign the 13th.
Signed LEWIS.

By the King. De Lomemie.

Read, published and registered etc. At Paris in Parliament November 21. 1622.
Signed Du Tillet

A Paper presented to the King by the General Deputies with the Answers.
TO THE KING.
SIR, your most Humble and Obedient Servants of the Religion, being fully
informed of your Majesty's Royal inclinations, for restoring the Ruins of his
poor People, have laden the Deputies which your Majesty has been pleased to
appoint 'em, with infinite Acclamations, Vows and good Wishes, for the
Establishment and sacred Benedictions of this Peace that is so much desired, to
the end, that forasmuch as they find themselves pierced with this Celestial
Benefit, they may seek the Continuance of it, by the constancy of their
submission, and render those Eminent Testimonies by their only Recourse to your
Clemency and Justice, that they aspire to no Security or Refuge which they
value more highly, against the Violence of those that trouble 'em, and
withstand the Power of your Laws, then that of challenging by their humble
Petitions and Supplications the steadfastness of your Inviolable word, and the
Observance of your so authentic Briefs. For seeing that the wrongs which are
done 'em, directly dash against the Reverence of your Protection and divide
that which the Peace and their Obedience ought to rejoin under the Felicity of
your Commands, they most humbly beseech your Majesty to weigh their most humble
Remonstrances in that Balance of Equity, which renders your Scepter Just and
Formidable, and that it would please you to cut off the Violent Breaches of
your favorable Concessions with the Sword that God has put into your Hands; to
the end that in true Confidence and Assurance of Preservation, reposing upon
the Wisdom and Goodness of your Sacred Administration, they may be always
retained in their Fidelity and real Obligations to your pure and entire Service.

THe King has deputed and sent away Commissioners, as well Catholics as of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, to go from Province to Province, where it shall be
judged convenient for the Execution of his Majesty's Declaration of the
twentieth of October last. I. FOr this Reason it is, that for the enjoyment of
an absolute Effect of your Justice, they humbly beseech your Majesty to send
with the soonest into your Provinces, Persons both of the one and the other
Religion, endu'd with that Affection for Peace which is requisite, to the end
they may be the better enabled to put in Execution your Edicts, Briefs and
Declarations. After Satisfaction shall be given, to what is ordained by the
Declaration of the twentieth of October, His Majesty will take Care as to the
Contents of this present Article. II. And in imparting your Compassion and
Clemency to that of your Cities, which has paid you such Obedience, that you
have therefore vouchsafed it Peace: Your Majesty is most humbly supplicated to
Order, that the Garrison, which for so many Months, has been so numerous at
Mompelier, may be withdrawn according to your Royal Promises, considering the
Misery and Mortality which is in the City. The Election of the Marine
Consulship, having been made by a Decree peremptorily set forth in the Chamber
of the Edict at Castres, there can (...) nothing changed or altered. As to the
Election of the other Consuls of the said City, His Majesty means that it shall
be made according to the usual Forms, and as the Franchises and Liberties of
the City require. III. That in Conformity to the Private Brief, which it
pleased your Majesty to grant that City, that there may be no Innovation
introduced into your said City of Mompelier, more especially in that which
concerns the Consulships ^ Consequently that Reparation may be made for the
Innovation in the Marine Consulship, considering the Obedience that has been
paid your Majesty in demolishing the Fortifications, for the Effect of which
the Inhabitants are continually at Work with great Cost, Care and Diligence.
After his Majesty has heard the Report of the Commissioners sent to the said
City of Rochel, he will consider of the Contents of this Present Article. IV.
Also, Sir, for the removing all cause of Distrust and Fear, your Subjects of
the Religion, having fulfilled your Majesty's Pleasure touching the Levelling
of the Forts of Oleron and Re, may it please your Majesty to Order, that the
Fort built before your City of Rochel may be demolished, as your Majesty was
pleased to Promise. The King will order the Prisoners of War, at present
detained in his Galleys, to be released: And for those that are accused of
particular Crimes, let 'em provide for themselves by the Methods of Justice. V.
And as Mercy is all from God, whose Image, Sir, you are, may it please your
Majesty, ^^^ou are plentifully endu'd with that Virtue, to grant your
Comp^ssion to a great number of Persons of all Ages, detained either by the
late Wars, or for the sake of Religion, in your Galleys, Naked, and under
insupportable Severity and hard Usage, to that purpose ordering 'em their
Pardon and their Liberty; as also to those other Prisoners for Accusations and
Prosecutions, occasion'^ by the late Times and Commotions, whether Condemned or
not. Which Favor, Pardon and Liberty is granted 'em by the -- and seventy
third Article of the Edict, which you were pleased to confirm to us. To the
sixth and seventh Articles, the King's Affairs not permitting him to provide
for the Petitioners for what is past, His Majesty for the Future will deliver
to the said Candal good and valuable Assignations for the Relief and Payment of
the said Ministers: As also for payment of the Pensions contained in a small
Roll, which he will cause to be drawn up. VI. Your Majesty, by your Letters
Declaratory, April 24. 1621. were willing that your Subjects, who continued in
their Obedience should enjoy the Favors and Concessions to them granted, as
well by your Majesty, as by the Deceased K. Henry the Great of Glorious Memory;
nevertheless in the last year, 1622. they were utterly deprived of the Money,
which you were accustomed every year to distribute among 'em by the Sieur du
Candal, Commissionated for that purpose. By which means particularly their Poor
Churches are so necessitated, that they are constrained to have recourse to
your Majesty, and to supplicate, as they do most humbly, that you will be
pleased to order Funds to the said Candal for the said Year; at least for the
Payment of the Ministers of the Province who remained in their Obedience, and
who are forced to borrow Money to buy Victuals, and supply their other
Necessities. VII. In like manner we most humbly implore your Majesty, that as
you have been pleased to grant to all your said Subjects, it may please you to
ordain that the said Candal may be supplied with good and valuable Assignations
for the Payment and Relief of their Ministers, during the present Year, as
likewise for the Parties of the Petty Rolls, which he shall be pleased to draw
up; and for Payment of the Places, which you were pleased to leave in their
Custody, which Assignations may be paid without Deductions, as it has pleased
his said Majesty and the Deceased King to grant 'em, by the Briefs which
formerly were dispatched in their behalf. The said Candal presenting a Petition
to the Council shall be taken care of. VIII. And for as much as out of the
Assignations, that have been ordered the said Candal for the Years, 1620. and
1621. there are still due very great and considerable Sums, which the
Receivers and Farmers, upon which the said Assignations are charged, detain in
their Hands, your Majesty is most humbly supplicated to ordain, that all
necessary Injunctions may be delivered him, to the end the Residue may be
paid. The King will provide for the Future, for the Contents of this Article,
according as is above said. IX. The Churches of the Bailiwick of Gex, having
enjoyed the Salary of the Ministers upon the Ecclesiastical Revenues of the
said Bailiwick, as upon the Money of the Princes that possessed it, till the
Year, 1601. and after that for several Years, under the Deceased King Henry the
Great; till it pleased your Majesty by a decree of your Council, dated December
5. 1612. upon his depriving 'em of the said Ecclesiastical Fund, to ordain 'em
the sum of 3600. Livres in lieu of the said Revenues, and to charge the said
sum of 3600. Livres upon the 45000. Livres of Augmentation granted to those of
the Religion; which Money was paid 'em by the said Candal till October 1621.
May it please your Majesty to let 'em enjoy the Effect of the said Order and
Reassignation; and to that purpose to grant necessary Assignations to the said
Candal, as well for Payment of the Arrears, as of what shall become due for the
Future. His Majesty referrs the Restoration of their Church to the Care and
Diligence of the Petitioners. X. May it please your Majesty to show your
Liberality, and to provide a Fund sufficient for your Subjects: professing the
Religion in your City of Paris, toward the Repair and resettling of their
Church, and other structures in the place of their Exercise, burnt, demolished,
and the Materials for the most part carried away; and all this by a Popular
Tumult that happened in the Year, 1621. notwithstanding that your Subjects
remained in their Obedience, and were consequently under your Majesty's
Protection and Safeguard. The Deputies Commissionated for the Province of
Tourain shall provide the Petitioners a Convenient Place, for the Exercise of
the Pretended Reformed Religion. As for the Re-establishment, and Repair of
their Church, his Majesty refers it to the Care and Industry of the
Petitioners. XI. And dealing in the same manner with your Subjects of the said
Profession in your City of Tours, may it please your Majesty to supply 'em with
the sums which your Majesty had granted 'em for the same Reason, and for the
Repair of their Church, the Place and Room of which it is hoped your Majesty
will continue to 'em, as having been adjudg'd to 'em by the Commissioners,
after a Hearing between them, and the Bodies of the Clergy, the Court of
Justice and the Town House. As also for that the said Place and Ground, was
purchased, built, and Peaceably enjoyed, till the Commotion in 1621. maintained
in the said Possession, not only by the Edict of 1598. but also by those of
1610. and 1612. and more especially by your last Declaration. Besides which
Right, the approach of your Castle of Plessis, usually granted to the People of
Tours, would be a Security to 'em. The Commissioners sent into Bress shall take
care of this Article, so far as shall be agreeable to Reason. XII. The same
Supplication is made to your Majesty, for the Repair of the Church of Burgh,
upon the Ruins and Place, where those of the Religion possessed it, by the
Sentence and Decrees of the Commissioners, in the enjoyment of which they are
now disturbed. To the XIII. XIV. XV. Articles, the Commissioners are enjoined
to take care of the Petitioners demands, according to the Tenor of the Edicts,
and the said Declaration. XIII. It is remonstrated to your Majesty, that the
Inhabitants professing the Religion in the City of Villemur, are molested in
the Liberty of their Consciences, deprived of all Exercises of Piety, refused
Public Employments, and very much overburthen'd by the Garrison. Those of
Fontenai Le Comte expelled, interdicted Preaching and Prayers, their Pastor not
being permitted to re-enter; nor can they have their Church restored 'em, tho
almost ruined, not so much as for the Burial of their dead; suffering on the
other side all Excesses of Charges and Free Quarters, upon the complaints sent
to your Council. Therefore, Sir, may it please Ye to deliver 'em from their
Oppressions, and by permitting 'em to enjoy the Fruits of the Peace, to order
the Re-establishment of their Religion, their Churches and Ministers, the
Security of their Burials, and whatever Relief your Justice can afford their
Grievances. XIV. That you would likewise be pleased to order the Restoration of
their Exercise at Lusson, where it is denied to those of the said Religion,
contrary to the Publication of your Declaration, tho they carried themselves
obediently, and that the said Exercise has been continued there for these fifty
Years together, even during all the time of the late Wars, and Government of
des Roches Baritault. XV. Those of the Religion are likewise hindered their
said Exercise at Talmont, the Canon having been levelled against 'em, while
assembled to hear the Word of God. As also at Surgeres, the Lady of the Place
forbidding any Preaching there, though it had been allowed 'em during all the
late Troubles. Also at Baignols, at St. Giles's in Languedoc, at Figeac in
Quercy, Puymirols, and at Vic in Armagnac; from whence Mr. Testas the Minister
is fled, not daring to return, nor being able to abide in safety in the Place.
Whereby your Declaration being violated, may it please your Majesty to command
the Restoration of the said Places, and the said Testas. As also for the Church
of Quilleboeuf, and the Pastor of it, pursuant to the Re-establishment of it a
long time since. The XVI. Article shall be communicated to the Mayor and
Sheriffs of Poitiers, to be by them heard and taken care of. XVI. And for as
much as the Catholics of your City of Poitiers have imposed upon those of the
Religion the Sum of 1200. Livres, for the Guard that had been maintained
during these Troubles, into which they would not admit any of those of the
Reformed Religion; may it please your Majesty, that they may be discharged from
it, as from an unreasonable Imposition. The King will carefully accomplish and
observe, what has, been granted ^^ those of the Pretended Reformed Religion of
Bearn, by the said Bnief ^^ October the last. XVII. They likewise supplicate
your Majesty, that the Edict of Compensation touching the Churches of your
Royalty of Bearn may be punctually effected, as you were pleased to grant by
your Brevet given at Mompelier. And that the Exercise of the Religion, and the
Minister, may be restored in your City of Navarreins. That in Consideration of
the Resignation of other Churches, they of the Religion may be maintained in
the Possession of the Churches, Bells and Churchyards, which were granted 'em
by the Commissioners, or by the Parliament upon their Report. And that the
Colleges and Academies may be restored, and payment made of the Salaries that
belong to 'em. His Majesty intends that the Chamber of the Edict of Languedoc,
which remains only to be resettl'd, shall speedily be restored to Castres,
according to the said Declaration. XVIII. And because Justice is that which
most imports your Authority, and the Preservation of the Peace, may it please
your Majesty to Order a speedy Restoration of the Party Chambers in Places and
Cities where they were wont to be. And in the mean time, may the Courts of
Parliament be forbid to take Cognizance, and Judge of the Causes of those of the
said Religion: and that the Appeals by them brought before the Judges,
Prothonotaries, or the Commissioners executing Decrees and Sentences, may have
the same Effect, as if they were removed by Letters Royal, according to the
XLIII. Article of the Edict, and VI. of the Conference of Nerac. Granted. XIX.
By the sixth Article of the Edict, and II. of Particulars, and other Answers
made to our Papers, they of the Religion find themselves justly discharged from
Contributing toward the Repairing and Building of Churches, and their
Dependencies, as things contrary to their Conscience. Nevertheless, the
Catholic Inhabitants of Arnai le Duc, solicit in your Council a Permission, to
impose in general upon the Corporation, and as well upon themselves as upon
those of the Religion the Sum of six thousand Livres to build a Church for the
Capuchins, which would neither be reasonable nor conformable to the Edicts.
Therefore may it please your Majesty to declare Acquit and Exempted all your
Subjects of the Religion from Payments and Contributions of the like Nature,
and that the abovenamed II. Article of Particulars may be put in Execution. The
said Deputed Commissioners in the said Places are enjoined to take care of the
Contents of this Article. XX. It Is notorious, that during these last Troubles,
they of the Religion have suffered many Violences through the Insolence of the
People their Adversaries: As in the City of Romorantin, where they twice burnt
the Meeting House wherein they performed their Exercise in the Suburbs of the
said City. But what is more strange, that since the Peace which it has pleased
your Majesty to grant your said Subjects, the Church which was long since built
in your City of Gergeau, has been quite thrown to the Ground, and the Ruins of
it removed, by which means they of the Religion have been deprived of their
Exercise. Wherefore, they most humbly beseech your Majesty, that amends may be
made for this Notorious Breach of your Edicts and Declarations; and to order
that the said Church may be rebuilt, and the Exercise resettl'd at Gergeau; as
also that of Romorantin. His Majesty will write to the Duke of Espernon,
Governor and Lieutenant General of Guyenne, to see that the Inhabitants of the
said Cities of Bergerac, and St. Foy be eased, and favorably used upon all
occasions; and that the Soldiers live under such Discipline, that they may do
no wrong. XXI. Your Cities of S^^. Foy, and Bergerac, most humbly Beseech ye,
Sir, that you would be pleased out of your singular Goodness, to discharge 'em
of the Oppressions, which they have suffered so long and so excessive, letting
your said City of Bergerac fully enjoy your inviolable Promises, by hindering so
many Innovations, and the building of the Citadel intended, notwithstanding
that your Subjects of the Religion have kept themselves within the Bounds of a
most humble Subjection and Obedience to your Majesty, out of a desire to Merit
in some measure the Effect of your said Royal Promises, their Liberty, and the
Peaceable Exercise of their Religion. The King will take such Order as shall be
most proper for his Service. XXII. And by your Mildness and Gentleness to ease
your People of the Religion, to bring 'em back to a firm Confidence, and to
Corroborate as much as may be the Peace which you vouchsafe 'em, may it please
your Majesty to obliterate all Marks that are contrary to it. And to these
ends, to disband the Soldiers that are quartered in Lower Languedoc, Cevennes,
and other Provinces, by this Means kept in continual Fears and Apprehensions of
your Displeasure; and beseech your Majesty to hasten the said Disbanding, to
the end that the Effects of their Obedience, which they desire and ought to pay
you, as well in demolishing the Fortifications of the Places, as in all other
things, which you shall be pleased to command 'em, may not be delayed.Signed,
Montmartin Deputy General, Maniald Deputy General. Done and Answered by the
King in his Council, at Paris, March 4. 1623. Signed Lewis. And lower.
Phelipeaux. Compared with the Original, by Me Notary, Counselor and Kings
Secretary. Du Candal.

A Circulatory Letter of the General Deputies of the Reformed Churches.
GEntlemen, We doubt not but you have expected our Letters with Impatience, and
that you did not take it amiss, that we did not send you what passed concerning
the Duke of Rohan. You ought to believe that nothing has so much hindered us
from that, as our fear of putting you to no purpose in uncertain Hopes or
Apprehensions. Now that it may be thought, that we ought to see a little more
clearly, after the Release of the said Duke, we shall tell you that although the
Report of a War, and particularly of the Siege of Rochel be very hot in this
Place, and that from hence it spreads over all the Rest of France, nevertheless
we see no Preparation for open and present War. On the contrary, we have
nothing from the Kings Mouth, and his Principal Ministers of State, but Words
of Peace, and Promises of putting in Execution what has been agreed. As to the
Affairs, which we have managed hitherto, you must know, that having presented
to the King a Paper, containing the Principal Complaints of our Churches, and
other things of which we have the Cognizance and Memoirs in our Hands, we have
obtained Answers, such as you will see by the Printed Paper, which we send you
enclosed; which tho they be dated the fourth of this Month, nevertheless were
not delivered us till the twenty second. At present we solicit the Performance
of the Answers, which are favorable, continuing to demand satisfaction upon
those which are otherwise. Nor shall we fail to give you Advice of the Success,
as also of all that we shall judge proper to come to your Knowledge. As for
News of the Particular Affairs of the Provinces and Churches, of whose Deputies
we have a great number here, we have given satisfaction by particular Letters
to all Occurrences. It remains that you second our Labors with your Prayers to
God, as we earnestly desire you, considering the need we have in such a
difficult time as this. And for our parts, we shall also beseech him to
accumulate his most Sacred Benedictions upon your selves. We are

Your most humble and Affectionate Servants, the General Deputies of the
Reformed Churches of France, near his Majesty.

Paris, March 30. 1623. Montmartin* Maniald.

The King's Declaration, by which it is provided, that in the Assemblies which
shall be beld by the Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, concerning
the Regulations of the Discipline of their said Religion, no other Affairs be
propounded or treated of, then such as are permitted by the Edicts. Given at
Fontain-Bleau, April 17th. 1623. And verified in Parliament, May 22.
LEwis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr. To all, etc. Although by
our Edicts of Pacification, and the Private Articles granted to our Subjects of
the Pretended Reformed Religion, in the Year, 1598. they were allowed to hold
Assemblies concerning the Regulations of the Discipline of the said Religion
pretendedly Reformed, and Places where the Exercise was settled with our
Permission first obtained, and that by several answers made to their Papers,
they have been always forbid to admit into the said Assemblies, other then the
Ministers and Elders, and to treat of other Affairs, then those which concern
the Regulations of their said Religion, upon Pain of Forfeiting this Favor.
Nevertheless we have found, that for some time since, and particularly of late
Years under the Toleration of the said Assemblies, our said Subjects have taken
the Liberty to introduce Persons of all Conditions, as also to treat of
Politic Affairs, from whence have ensued several Resolutions, contrary to the
Sentiments and Intentions of the Generality, and most considerable of our
Subjects of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, and to the Public
Tranquillity; To which there being a necessity of providing a Remedy, and to
prevent for the future the consequences of such abuses, prejudicial to our
Authority, and the Peace of our Subjects, We declare, that for these Causes and
other Considerations Us thereunto moving, with the Advice of the Princes of our
Blood, etc. We have said and declared, and do say and declare by these
Presents, and it is our Will and Pleasure, that in all Assemblies that shall be
held by our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, concerning the
Regulations of the Discipline of the said Religion, there shall be by us, or by
our Lieutenant Generals of our Provinces, a certain Person commissioned and
appointed, one of our Officers of the said Pretended Reformed Relgion, to be
present in the said Assemblies, to see and consider, whether any other Affairs
are proposed and handled then are permitted by our Edicts; and to give a
faithful account thereof to Us. And to the end that our Intention may be
exactly followed, We ordain* that for the time to come no Assemblies shall meet
or be held, unless the said Officer be before appointed, who shall be admitted
into 'em without any or Let or Scruple. So we command our Beloved and
Faithful, etc. we also command our Governors, etc. In Testimony, etc.

Given at Fountain-Bleau, April. 17. 1623. and 13th. of our Reign. Signed LEWIS.

And below, By the King. De Lomenie.

Read, Published and Registered, etc. At Paris in Parliament May, 22. 1623. Du
Tillet.

A Declaration of the Kings good Will toward his Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed Religion. Verified in Parliament November 27. 1623.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France, and Navarr, To all, etc. Though it
has always been our Intention, as still it is, to cause an Exact observance of
our Edicts of Pacification, and Declarations last made in Favor of our
Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, that for this purpose we have
Commissionated and deputed Commissioners in the several Provinces of our
Kingdom to repair and re-establish the Breaches which the Wars and last
Troubles had produced, having omitted no care nor Sedulity to make the lives of
our Subjects easy in good Peace, Amity and Concord; Nevertheless we have been
Informed that some of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, Enemies of the
Publik Repose, and such as desire to make their advantage of Trouble,
pretending to belong to our Cousins the Dukes of Rohan and Soubize, (which we
can hardly believe, by reason of the assurances which our said Cousins have
given us of their Fidelity and Affection to our service, and observance of our
Peace,) have some time since made several Journeys, and into several of our
Provinces; also to some Assemblies held by virtue of our Edicts by our Subjects
of the Religion, with Letters of Cr^dence, under false Pretenses to stir up our
said Subjects, to infuse into 'em Fears, Jealous^es and ^eigned Distrusts, and
to instigate to raise Money, Fortify the Places which they hold in their
hands, purchase Arms and make their Preparations contrary to the Public Peace:
And though we are unwilling to believe that our said Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, considering the singular Favors which they have so lately
received from our Clemency, are any way inclined or disposed to hearken to any
such pernicious Propositions, much less to deviate from their Fidelty and
Obedience to which they are obliged, Nevertheless, being desirous to stop the
Course of such Proceedings, and the dangerous Consequences that may attend 'em;
to hinder our Subjects from being abused by these evil Practices, and not to
leave any one in doubt and uncertainty of our good and sincere Intentions
toward 'em, with the advice of our Council, where were present the Queen
Mother, our Thrice Honored Lady and Mother, the Princes, etc. We have said and
declared, and do say and declare, that it is our Will and Intention to maintain
the Public Peace, Repose and Tranquillity, and to employ our Authority, and our
accustomed Care and Vigilance, to cause our Subjects as well Catholics as of
the Pretended Reformed Religion, to live in good Union and Concord under their
Obedience to us. And to this purpose we Will and Ordain, that our Edicts of
Pacification, and last Declarations in Favor of our Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, be inviolably kept, observed and maintained, and that the
Commissioners deputed in our several Provinces, abide and reside there, till
they be perfectly and absolutely fulfilled. As we also make strict Prohibitions
to all Persons, of what Condition or quality soever, to speak, write, suggest
or persuade, give ear or listen to any thing contrary to this our good and
upright Intention, and to the Tranquillity of our subjects, nor to travel or
send into our Provinces, or to any Cities or Assemblies that shall be held by
those of the Pretended Reformed Religion to that Effect, nor to raise Money,
bear or buy Arms, Furniture or preparations for War, under pain of
Disobedience, and being punished as Disturbers of the Peace. It is our Pleasure
also, that the Offenders be informed against, and prosecuted with the utmost
Rigor of the Law. So we command our faithful and well beloved Counselors,
etc. For such is our Pleasure. In Testimony, etc.

Given at Paris, November 10. 1623. and 14th. of our Reign. Signed Louis.

And below, by the King. De Lomenie.

Read, published and registered, etc. At Paris in Palament, November. 7. 1623.
A Declaration of the King against the Sieur de Soubize and his Adherents,
containing a new Confirmation of the Edicts and Declarations formerly made in
Favor of his Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, who remain in their
Duty and Obedience. Given at Paris, January 25. 1626. and verified the 18. of
February.
LEWIS by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr, To all, etc. Every one
knows the Favor and Clemency which we have extended to our Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, that formerly rose in Arms against our Authority,
and how when our Arms had all the Advantages over 'em, we spread open our Arms
to receive those that came as well in general as Particular, to implore our
Mercy, and turned the just Resentments of our Indignation into a Benignity
natural to a King, the Father of his People, toward Subjects submissive and
penitent, being desirous by our Declaratory Letters of October 20. 1622. to
forget and forgive their past Faults, and voutsafe 'em Peace with the
continuance of the Benefit of the Edict of Nantes and other Declarations. In
pursuance of which we sent Commissioners into several Provinces of our Kingdom,
to reunite the Affections of our Subjects, as well Catholics as of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, divided by reason of the preceding Troubles, and
to re establish what the Fury of War might have interrupted in the observance
of our Laws and Edicts, wherein by the Benignity of Heaven our careful Toil so
happily succeeded, that our Kingdom for these last two Years, enjoyed a most
profound Peace, our Subjects in general Extolling the Divine Goodness of the
Almighty, for that after so many past Calamities and Tempests, they rested in a
Tranquillity so serenely Calm, and so assured under our Authority and Obedience.
But when we thought this Peace most solidly secure, and that good Order
reestablished in our Kingdom had given us leisure to apply all our Cares to
the assistance of our Neighbors, and to readvance the Ancient Reputation of
the French Name in Foreign Coutries, and that we were (as we are still) upon
the point of reaping the Fruits and notable Advantages of it, for the Glory of
this Crown, the Comfort of our said Confederates, and the Public Benefit, we
have received several Informations of the Practices and Contrivances, which are
weaving in several of our Provinces, to withdraw our Subjects of the said
Pretended Reformed Religion, from that Obedience and Fidelity which they owe
us, and to persuade 'em, in the present Conjuncture of Affairs to rise against
our Authority, while we are busied out of our Kingdom in the Protection of our
Allies, and Trouble the Tranquillity of the State. Now being fully informed of
the Designs and contrivances that are forming against our Cities and strong
Holds, the Peparations that are making to raise Soldiers without our
Commission, the sitting out of Ships, as well in the Ports and Havens of our
Kingdom, as in other Places, without our leave, or the Orders of our Admiral,
in contempt of our Laws, and the secret Practices and Correspondencies held
with Foreigners. To all which we have been much troubled to give Credit,
considering the good and favorable usage our said Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed received. And when we understood that the Sieur de Soubise, we the
Head of his Faction; he who has tried the Force of our Authority, and the
softness of our Clemency upon several occasions; this was the reason that we
were willing to wink at his first Practices and Proceedings, in hopes that by
our Patience we might reduce him to his Duty. But our goodness and forbearance
having augmented the Audaciousness of the said Soubise, we understand that
within these few days he has put to Sea with some Vessels having Soldiers
aboard; that he has robbed our Merchants Ships, made attempts upon some of our
Islands and principal Places, and upon the Vessels that were in the Roads and
Harbors belonging to 'em, and in these Actions committed several Enormities,
Violences and Acts of Hostility against our Subjects. Now in regard that all
these Enterprises and Attempts of the said Soubise, discover (to our great
sorrow) an evident and manifest Rebellion against our Authority, and a design
laid betwixt him and some particular Adherents to disturb the general Peace
and Tranquillity of the Kingdom, without any lawful reason or cause: on the
other side we are extremely well satisfied to understand from our dear and well
beloved Cousin the Duke of Tremouille, and the Sieurs de la Force and
Chatillon, and other Persons of Quality, as also from the General Deputies of
our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion refiding near our Person, as
also by the Deputies of the Pretended Relion at Charenton, and those of our
Cities of Rockele, Nimes, Vsez; as also to see by an Act in writing which the
said general Deputies have presented us, with express injuctions from our dear
and wellbeloved Inhabitants of our City of Moniaban, how much they renounce and
disown his Actions, as unworthy of that Fidelity and Affection which true
Frenchmen owe their Sovereign; considering they can tend to nothing else but
the subversion of this State and their own Ruin. Whereupon, being desirous to
make known what our good Intentions are, the Protection which we are willing to
grant to the Faithful and Obedient, and the Rigor which we intend to use toward
Rebels, if they persevere in their Contumacy, We make known, that for these
Causes and other weighty Considerations us thereunto moving, with the Advice of
the Queen, etc. and of our certain knowledge, full Power and Royal Authority,
we have said and declared, and say and declare, by these Presents, Signed with
our hand, and it is our Will and Pleasure, that all our Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, who shall continue in that Fidelity and Obedience
which they owe us, without adhering to any Factions and Conspiracies against
the Kingdom, shall fully and Peaceably enjoy in freedom and safety, the
Exercise of their Religion, together with all the Favors to them granted by
the Edicts and Declarations made in their Favor, as well by the Deceased King,
etc. as by our selves, which we resolve to have inviolably kept and observed,
according to their Form and Tenor; putting all our said Subjects, together
with their Goods and Families, under our special Protection and Favor. And as
for the said Soubise and others, who are entered into open Rebellion against
us, having attempted to disturb the Tranqaility of our Kingdom, we have hereby
declared, and declare all those that shall adhere to and Favor him, directly
or indirectly, of what Quality or condition soever they be, and who shall hold
Intelligence, Association or Corespondence with 'em, both disobedient and
Guilty of High Treason: As also we declare the Inhabitants of our Cities that
shall Countenance or adhere to the Rebellion and Disobedience of the above
named, or shall give 'em any Harbor, Retreat, or Quarter among 'em, or shall
suffer 'em, or assist 'em in any sort or manner whatever, guilty of the same
Crimes, and to have forfeited all their Rights, Franchises, Immunities and
Privileges granted either by the King our Predecessors or by our selves: And
for that our Intention is always to prefer Clemency before the Rigor of
Justice, and to afford 'em the Means and Leisure to acknowledge their Faults,
before they althogether plunge themselves in Faction and revolt, we say and
declare, that if within one Month from the day of the publication of these
presents in Parliament, the said Soubise, or any others who have been guilty of
the Actions above expressed, shall return to their Duty, lay down their Arms,
disband their Soldiers which they have mustered together, and submit themseves
entirely to the Obedience which they owe us, we have, and shall from this
present Time and for the Future, forgiven, pardoned and obliterated, forgive,
pardon and obliterate, by these Presents, all Acts and attempts which they may
have made or designed in this last Insurrection, and taking of Arms, contrary
to our Authority and Service, without any enquiries or prosecutions either now
or hereafter, in any sort or manner whatever; as having pardoned and restored
'em to their former Condition, and to all Honors, Privileges and Immunities
which were granted 'em, by Us or our Predecessors, under the Exact Observation
of our Edicts. But if after that time expired, they persist in their Rebellion
and Disobedience, our Pleasure is, that they be proceeded against with all the
Rigor of our Laws, by Imprisonment of their Persons, Seizure of their Estates,
demolishing their Houses, and other usual Courses in such Cases; and that they
lose the Benefit of our Edicts and Appeals to the Chambers. So we command, etc.
In Testimony, etc

Given at Paris, January 25. 1625 and fifteenth of our Reign. Signed LEWIS.

And Below, by the King. De Lomenie.

Read, Published and Registered, etc. At Paris in Parliament, February 18. 1625.
Du Tillet.

A Writing given by the English Ambassadors to the Deputies of the Churches to
make the King of Great Britain Guarranty of the Peace, in 1626.
WE Henry Rich, Baron of Kensington, Earl of Holland, Captain of the King of
Great Brittan's Guards, Knight of the Order of the Garter, and one of his
Majesty's Privy Council: And Dudley Charlton Knight, one of his Majesty's Privy
Council, and Vice Chamberlain of the Household, To all, etc. Whereas the Sieurs
de-Mommartin, and de Maniald, General Deputies of the Reformed Churches of
France, and other Particular Deputies from the Dukes of Soubise and Rohan, as
also others from several Cities and Provinces, which joined in Arms with the
said Lords, have made a Peace with the most Christian King, by our Advice and
Intercessions, agreed and consented to by the King their Sovereign, and for
that the said Deputies have released many things which they thought of great
Moment for their security, and altogether Conformable to their Edicts and
Briefs, which they were expressly charged to get by the Treaty of Peace, and
upon which they would have insisted more earnestly, but in deference and
respect to the express Requests and desires of the most Serene King of Great
Britain, our Master, in whose name we advised and exhorted 'em to condescend to
the Conditions offered by the abov-nam'd Peace, for the good of this Kingdom,
and the Satisfaction and succor of all Christendom; For these Causes, we
declare and certify, That in the words which were agreed upon between us, in
order to the accomplishment of the said Treaty, and which were uttered in the
presence of his most Christian Majesty, by the Chancellor, upon the Acceptance
of the Peace, to this purpose, that by long services and continued Obedience
they might expect from the Kings Goodness, what they could never obtain by any
other Treaty, in things which they esteemed most necessary, as to which in time
convenient their Supplications might be heard, supposing 'em to be presented
with respect and humility, there was a clearer Interpretation on his Majesty's
and his Ministers Part, of which the sense and meaning was, That they were
meant of Fort Lewis before Rochel, and to give assurance of the Demolishing of
that Place in time convenient, and in the mean time of ease and relief in other
things, which by the said Treaty of Peace continue prejudicial to the said City
of Rochel: Without which assurance, of the demolishing the Fort and withdrawing
the Garrison, the said Deputies protested to us, that they would never have
consented to the letting that Fort stand; being enjoined and resolved to have
maintained their Right to demolish it, as they do by the present Declaration;
with assurance that the King of Great Britain, will labor by his Intercessions
in Conjunction with their humble Supplication, to shorten the time appointed
for demolishing the said Fort; for which we have given 'em all the Royal words
and Promises they can desire, having assured 'em that they ought and might rest
satisfied and contented. For the Faithful performance of which, and of what is
abovmention'd, we have Signed and Sealed these Presents, and caused it to be
under-sign'd by one of our Secretaries.

Given at Paris the 11th. day of February, 1626. Signed Holland. D. Carlton.


And below, Augier.

An Edict of the King upon the Peace which his Majesty pleased to give his
Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion. Given at Paris, March 1626. and
Published in Parliament April 16.
LEWIS by the Grace of God King of France and Navar, To all, etc. In regard
that Sovereign Authority is no less Illustrious in Acts of Grace and Clemency,
then in of those Justice and Arms, and for that to know how to vanquish and
pardon, are the highest Marks of Grandeur, for the same reason we ought to
esteem that Prince most worthy of Honor and Glory, who having letn loose the
fury of his Arms against those that drew his Provocations upon 'em, and subdued
'em to their duty, is contented to exercise his Clemency toward 'em, and to let
'em reap the public Fruits of it, by restoring 'em to Peace; whence it comes
to pass that God is called upon and served in all Places, that the Royal
Authority is reverenced and acknowledged by all, that the Laws are religiously
observed, the People eased from their Oppressions, and that the Body of the
State uniting Forces together becomes more puissant for their own Preservation,
and for the Succor and Protection of their Confederates; These considerations
which we have always had before our Eyes, have been the reason that we have
used so much Moderation, to lay asleep and extinguish the Commotions that have
so many times, like so many Convulsions shak'n this Kingdom, making use of
Favor toward those who had over inconsiderately engaged themselves, as we have
exerted our Vigor, resolution and diligence, in suppressing and chastizing,
when we have been thereto constrained. As to the present Affairs, our Conduct
has been such, as having employed both Threats and Punishment, in Places that
openly stood out in their Disobedience; and Mildness, Patience and
Remonstrances, toward others that continued in their Duty; so that we have
restrained the bursting forth of that Trouble with which this Kingdom was
menaced by reason of a Civil War, and preserved the best and greatest part of
the Religion, in that Fidelity and Obedience which they owe us. Who have no
less clearly seen and understood, that our Intentions have always been, as
still they are, to maintain 'em in Peace, Concord and Tranquillity, and to cause
'em inviolably to enjoy the Favors bestowed upon 'em by our Edicts and
Declarations. All which they who' have taken Arms, and the Cities which sided
with 'em, having lately well considered, and having understood the Nature of
their Crime, the Public Indignation, the Ruin and just Punishment which they
drew upon themselves, by continuing to Trouble the repose of the Kingdom, they
had recourse to our Goodness, as their only safety and Refuge; and by their
Deputies have several times besought us with all the submission that Subjects
could pay to their Soveragn, to pardon 'em, to bury things past in Oblivion,
and to afford 'em Peace. Upon which, We enclining rather to Mildness and
Clemency, then to the Ruin and Desolation of our own Subjects; having also a
regard to their most humble Supplications, in the Name of those of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, who have remained within the Bounds of their Duty,
since we had accepted the submissions of the rest, to pardon them for their
sakes, and to reunite 'em all in Peace and Concord under that Obedience which
they owe us, protesting and assuring us, that they will never swerve again from
the same upon any pretense, occasion or cause whatever, We make known that for
these Causes, and for other great and weighty Considerations Us thereunto
moving, with the Advice of the Queen our thrice Honored Lady and Mother, the
Princes, etc. We have said and declared, and do say and declare by these
Presents, Signed with our Hand, and it is our Will and Pleasure:

I. That the Edict of Nantes, the Declarations, and secret Articles, Published
and Registered in our Courts of Parliament, shall be inviolably kept and
observed, to be enjoyed by our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, as
they were well and duly observed in the Time of the Deceased King our thrice
Honored Lord and Father, whom God Absolve, and since our coming to the Crown,
before these last Commotions.

II. That the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion, shall be restored and
reestablished in all Parts and Places of our Kingdom, and Countries under our
Obedience, where it has been interrupted during these last Commotions, to be
fully, peaceably and freely exercised. And we expressly forbid all Persons of
whatever Quality or Condition soever, upon Pain of being punished as Disturbers
of the Public Peace, not to trouble, molest or disquiet the Ecclesiastics in
the Celebration of Divine Service, and other Functions of the Catholic
Religion, enjoyment and Collecting the Tenths, Fruits and Revenues of their
Benefices, and all other Rights and Duties that belong to 'em; and that all
those who during the said last Commotions, had made themselves Masters of the
Goods and Revenues of the Churches belonging to the said Ecclesiastics, shall
deliver up to 'em full Possession, free and peaceable enjoyment of the same,
according to the III. Article of the Edict of Names, and restore 'em such Goods
as shall be found in specie.

III. That the Exercise of the Pretended Reformed Religion shall be
reestablished in Places where it was settled, according to our Edicts and
Declarations in the Year 1620. And our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed
Religion shall be restored to the said Places, as also to their Churchyards in
Places which have been allowed 'em, or others, such as the Commissioners who
shall be by us deputed, or Officers of the Cities shall judge most convenient.
And where it shall happen, that for any Reason of great Importance, the
Churchyards cannot be restored in such Places, which they possessed in the
Year, 1620, others as convenient shall be allowed 'em at the expenses of those
who shall require the change.

IV. And to give a Public Testimony of the value which we have for our
Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, who abide in that Fidelity and
Obedience, which they owe Us; and for the remarkable Proofs, which some among
'em have given us of both, in those employments which they have had in our
Armies, as well within as without our Kingdom, We have at their most humble
Suit, having also a regard to the Submissions of others who have swerved from
their Duty, and of our special Grace, full Power and Royal Authority,
acquitted, forgiven and Pardoned, and do by these Presents acquit, pardon and
forgive all raising of Arms, enterprises and acts of Hostility, committed by
our said Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, of what Condition or
Quality soever they be, as by the Cities that have sided with 'em, and the
Inhabitants of the same, both by Sea and Land, since the first of January,
1625. and the Commotions preceding, till the day of the Publication of these
Presents, comprehending and including whatever might have happened in the
interval, between the Signing of the Declaration of October 20. 1622. and the
Publication of this in our Courts of Parliament, from which they shall be fully
and perfectly discharged; as also from all General and Provincial Assemblies,
Circles, Insurrections, Popular Commotions, Excesses, Violences, Breaches of
Letters of Protection, and all other things in general whatever, comprehended
in the LXXVI. and LXXVII. Articles of the said Edict of Nantes, although they are
not here particularly expressed and declared; without any Inquisitions,
Prosecutions or Molestations hereafter for the Future to be made or offered,
except in reserved Cases, such as are specified and declared in the LXXXVI. and
LXXXVII. Articles of the said Edict of Nantes, after which Inquisition may be
made before the Judges, who have Cognizance of those causes.

V. As for the Money that shall be imposed, levi'd and taken upon our Subjects,
or our Receipts, Managements or Administration of the same, and discharges of
the Persons accountable, together with what concerns the Commonalties on both
sides, as to Debts by them created and not paid, the LXXIV. LXXV. LXXVIII. and
LXXIX. Articles of the Edict of Nantes, shall be observed and kept.

VI. To this purpose, all the Seats of Justice, Audits of Receipts and Offices
of the Finances, that may have been removed by Reason of the Present
Commotions, since January of the last Year, and more especially the Office of
the Court of Election at Rochel, shall be restored in the same Condition as
they were; in like manner the Cities which remain in the Hands of our Subjects
of the Pretended Reformed Religion, shall enjoy the same Privileges,
Franchises, Immunities, Fairs and Markets which they formerly did. The Election
of Consuls, shall be after the accustomed Form; and in Case of Appeal, the
cause shall be removed to our Chambers of the Edict.

VII. It is likewise our Pleasure, that our said Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, shall be absolutely discharged from all Judgments,
Sentences, and Decrees given against 'em, upon occasion of the Present
Commotions, according to the LVIII. LIX. and LX. Articles of the said Edict,
imposing as to the whole, perpetual Silence upon our Advocates General, and all
others concerned to take care of such Prosecutions.

VIII. We ordain that all Prisoners of War, detained on both sides, that have
not paid their Ransoms, shall be released and set at Liberty without paying any
thing; declaring all Promises made or caused upon Ransoms, not discharged
before the Date of these Presents, null and void; yet so as that the Ransoms
already paid, shall not be repaid again, though demanded. Also all our said
Subjects of the Reformed Religion, seized by warrant of Justice, detained in
our Prisons, or in our Galleys, by Reason of the last or preceding Commotions,
even those that were taken at the enterprise of Port Lewis, shall be enlarged
and set at Liberty, immediately after the Publication of these Presents,
without any let or delay.

IX. In like manner it is our meaning, that the XXVII. Article of the said
Edict of Nantes, concerning the Admission and Receiving of our said Subjects of
the Pretended Reformed Religion into Offices and Employments, shall be observed
and kept; and that all those of the said Religion of what Quality or Condition
soever they be, who by Reason of the present Commotions may have been deprived
of their Offices, Employments, Dignities, Houses, and Habitations, since the
first day of January 1625. shall be restored and resettl'd therein: As also to
their Goods, Titles, Accounts, and Actions, seized as well during the Preceding
as the late Troubles, notwithstanding any Patents for Offices, Grants,
Consiscations, Reprisals, Payments and Acquittances. Permitting the Creditors
to take out Execution for their Principal Stock, notwithstanding all Sentences
and Decrees, unless upon a definitive Decree in our Council, or in our Chambers
of the Edict, or that the Particular Persons have been other where reimburs'd.

X. Our Pleasure is, that these our Present Letters Declaratory, be observed
and kept by all our Subjects, according to the Form prescribed by the LXXXII.
Article of the Edict of Nantes; and Commissioners shall be sent into all parts
where occasion shall require, to see that the Contents thereof be executed.

XI. In regard, that our said Subjects professing the said Pretended Reformed
Religion, may not for the Future hold any General or particular Assemblies,
Circles, Councils, Abridgments, or any other of what Name or Quality soever,
without express Permission by Letters, or a Brief particularly Signed by Us,
and subscribed by one of our Secretaries of State, yet the Assemblies of
Consistories, Colloquies and Synods are permitted 'em for Affairs that Purely
concern the Regulations of the Discipline of the said Pretended Reformed
Religion, conformable to our Letters Declaratory of April 17. 1623. set forth
upon the Holding of Synods and Colloquies, with express Prohibitions to treat
of Politic Affairs. Nor shall they for the Future raise any Fortifications of
what sort soever they be, to enclose our Cities, without our express Permission
by our Letters Patents. Nor shall they raise any Money upon our Subjects, upon
any occasion whatever, without a Commission under our Great Seal. All this,
under the Penalty of High Treason, and forfeiture of our Present Favors.

XII. It is our farther meaning also, that the Articles by Us decreed, which
concern the City of Rochel, the Islands and Country of Aulnix, be observed and
put in Execution without delay; and that the Cities and Castles which shall
have been taken by those of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, since the
present Troubles, shall be surrendered up into our Hands within fifteen days
after the Publication of these Presents: Declaring all such of our said
Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, who shall scruple to submit
themselves to this our Will and Pleasure, deprived, by just Forfeiture, of the
Benefit of this our present Favor.

So we command, etc. And to the end that this may be for ever firm and stable,
we have affixed, etc.

Given at Paris in March, 1626. and 17th. of our Reign. Signed Lewis.

And below, De Lomenie.

Registered, April 13. 1626. Du Tillet.

A Declaration of the King against the Sieur De Soubise, and other Adherents to
the Party of the English. Confirming the Edicts of Pacification, in favor of
those who should continue in their Duty and Allegiance. Given at Villeroy,
August 5. 1627. and Published in Parliament the twelfth of the same Month.
LEwis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr. To all, etc. Since it
has pleased God to call us to the Government of this State, our Conduct has
made it manifest, with how much Care we have labored to preserve the Public
Peace and Tranquillity, either in observing and preserving a sound Amity, good
understanding and correspondence between this Kingdom and Foreign Princes,
either by employing, as we have done several times in diverse parts, and upon
various occasions, our Royal Mediation to lay asleep and extinguish the
Contentions and Differences arisen between the said Princes; or by giving
Assistance and Protection to our Ancient Confederates, when we thought it
necessary to re-establish or maintain 'em in those Rights and Properties that
appertained to 'em, in order by that means to stop the ill Consequences of
those Troubles which the Innovations happ'ning in their Dominions might
produce. Wherein if our Intentions were looked upon as good and sincere, we also
judge, those which we have had, being grounded upon the same Considerations of
the Public Tranquillity, and of the Establishment of the Repose of our Kingdom,
in contracting several Great Alliances by the Marriage of our dearest Sisters,
are worthy of a higher applause. But we cannot but observe, without a most just
Resentment, that the last which we have made with England, has not hitherto had
that good success, which we expected from it: But that instead of knitting
faster, as we promised to our selves, the knot of that ancient Amity, which has
long continued between the two Crowns, it should so fall out, that the
notorious Breaches on the Part of England, of the Articles of Marriage of our
Dearest Sister with the King of Great Britain, the English should come to
invade us, and Land in the Isle of Re with a numerous Fleet and Army without
any cause, any Ground, any Pretense or Declaration. And in regard we see, that
in order to second their unjust Designs, they have already treated with some of
our Subjects, have sent the Sieur De Soubise into our City of Rochel, to
persuade the Inhabitants to join with their Party, and that they continue the
same Artifices and Practices with others of our Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, to draw and engage 'em under several. Pretenses and vain
Hopes to unite their Arms with theirs (though we are willing to believe, that our
said Subjects will have so much Constancy and Judgment, as not to suffer
themselves to be deceived by such sort of Artifices; and for that considering
that they peacefully enjoy the full Liberty of the Exercise of their Religion,
the Benefit of our Edicts, and whatever else has been promised by Us, they will
conclude that this enterprise of the English, has no aim or end, that really
tends to the good of their Religion, but that it is a voluntary Invasion of our
Dominions, in Enmity to our Crown, and the Honor of the Nation* in the Defense
of which, all true French Men, as well Catholics as those of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, are equally obliged to venture their Lives and Fortunes;)
Nevertheless, that our said Subjects may be rightly informed of our Intentions
upon the present Occurrences, and that they may not be circumvented by the
Artifices that are made use of to withdraw 'em from their natural Duty, We
declare that for these Causes, and other weighty Considerations Us thereunto
moving, We have with the Advice of the Queen, our thrice Honored Lady and
Mother, our most Dear and most Beloved only Brother the Duke of Orleance, the
Princes, etc. said and declared, and do say and declare, by these Presents, the
Sieur de Soubise, and those of our Subjects, of what Quality or Condition
soever they be, who shall adhere to or join with the English, or shall favor
or assist 'em directly or indirectly, or that shall keep Intelligence,
Association, and Correspondence with 'em in any sort or manner whatever, or
shall otherwise depart from that Obedience which they owe us, Rebels, Traitors,
and Perfidious to their King, Desertors of their Country, Guilty of High
Treason in the highest Degree: And as such we declare their Goods, as well
Moveable as Immovable, their Offices and Employments, Forfeited and
Confiscated to our self; and all the Inhabitants of our Cities, who shall
adhere to the Enterprises, Rebellion and Disobedience of the above named, or
who shall afford 'em Entrance, Passage, Retreat or Quartering, or shall aid 'em
with Arms, Victuals, Ammunition, or any other necessaries, guilty of the same
Crimes, and under the Forfeiture of all Decrees, Honors, Privileges,
Franchises, Immunities and Rights, which may have been granted to 'em, either
by the Kings our Predecessors, or by our Selves, past all Hopes of being ever
regained. It being our Will and Pleasure, that they be proceeded against, with
the utmost Severity of the Law, by Imprisonment of their Person, Seizure of
their Estates, Demolishing their Houses, Cutting down their Woods, and that
they shall lose the Benefit of our Edicts, and of all Appeals to our Chambers,
created by the same; Unless within eight days after the Publication of this
Declaration upon the Coasts of Poitou, Saintonge and Aunix, they do quit their
Rebellion, and make their Appearance before our Officers of the Cities of
Saints Niort, Fontenay, Brouage, and others more remote, with the usual
Submissions, and that the Cities make their Declarations such as are required
in the like Cases at the same time. And whereas we have found, during the late
Troubles, that some of our Subjects of the said Pretended Reformed Religion,
siding with the Rebels, were wont to send their Children, or else permit 'em to
go and bear Arms together with 'em, they themselves staying at home to avoid
the Rigor of our Prosecutions; It Is our Pleasure, that for the Remedy of such
abuses, that the Fathers or Masters of Houses and Families, shall be held and
reputed to adhere to the Enemies Party, and that they shall suffer Corporal
Punishment, together with all the Penalties mentioned in these presents, if
their Children or other Relations, usually abiding in their Houses, and having
no other habitation then that of their Fathers, or Kindred, shall be found
siding with the Enemy, in actual Arms. Unless the said Parents or Masters of
Houses or Families, actually serve us in our Armies or other where, and make it
so much their endeavor to regain their Children or Kindred out of the Enemies
service, as to convince us that 'twas no Fault of theirs. And as for all our
other Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, that shall continue in their
Obedience and Fidelity to us, without adhering to the Enemies Designs, and
other Practices, Factions and Conspiracies against us, our Authority, Service
and Repose of this Kingdom, our Pleasure is, that they shall freely enjoy the
Liberty of their Exercise, and all Favors and Concessions to them granted by
the Deceased King and our selves; which it is our full meaning and Intent to
preserve inviolably; putting all our said Subjects of our said Pretended
Reformed Religion, their Families and Estates, so long as they remain within
the Bounds of their Duty, under our special saseguard and Protection. So we
command, etc. In Testimony whereof, etc.

Given at Villeroy, August 5. 1627. and 18th. of our Reign. Signed Lewis,

And below, By the King. De Lomenie.

Read, Published and Registered, etc. At Paris, in Parliament, August 12. 1627.
Du Tillet.

A Declaration of the King after the taking of Rochelle, to his Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion. Given at Paris, December 15. 1628. and verified in
Parliament January 15. 1629.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr, To all etc. We have by
several Preceding Declarations exhorted our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, to forsake and desist from the Factions and Rebellions wherein they
were engaged against our service, promising 'em all that could be expected from
our Favor, in case that within the time prescribed they returned to their
Duty, and subscribed such Declarations as were requisite before our Judges.
Which several having done, have experienced our Good Will, lived peaceably and
at Liberty, in the enjoyment of their Estates, and Exercise of the Pretended
Reformed Religion. Several Cities also and Paticular Men, led away by the
Artifices of Factious and seditious Spirits, have still continued in the same
Rebelion, into which their Engagement with the Inhabitants of the City of
Rochel had participated 'em. For which reason, now that it has pleased God to
reduce that City under our Obedience, and to take from 'em that Pretense, we
are willing to hope that they will the more readily return to their Duty, by
new Exhortations, and freeing 'em from the Fear of being Liable to the
Penalties mentioned in our Preceding Declarations. And being desirous to let
'em see our Paternal Affection toward 'em, and to excite 'em out of a
Consideration of their own good and Preservation, more or less to their
Benefit, as they shall continue more or less Obstinate in returning to their
Obedience; And which is that which we are willing so much the rather to hope,
that now that by the Reduction of our said City of Rochel under our Obedience,
they have manifestly understood our singular Goodness toward the Inhabitants of
that Place, whom we received upon their Surrendering to us with the assurance of
their Lives, Estates, and Exercise of the Pretended Reformed Religion, and of
the integrity of which agreement they enjoy so religious a performance, that
all their Fears are turned into Consolation, and have proved a sufficient
Convincement that the Apprehensions which the Factious Boutefeaux of Rebellion
infused into 'em, were but Artifices without any Foundation, to hinder 'em from
seeking in our Obedience that true Tranquillity and Liberty which they now
enjoy; For these causes we make known, that upon mature debate of this Business
in Council, of our full knowledge, full Power, special Grace, and Royal
Authority, We have enjoined, and by these Presents do enjoin all our Subjects
of the Pretended Reformed Religion, of what quality or Condition soever they
be, who shall now be found engaged in the Rebellion and bearing Arms, or
holding out Towns and Cities against our service, and contrary to that
Obedience which they owe us, or adhering to those that hold 'em out and enjoy
'em, that they forthwith lay down their Arms, return to their Duty, and
Subscribe such Declarations as are usually requisite, before our Courts of
Parliament or Presidial Seats, within 15 days after Publication of these
Presents. And as for the Cities, that they send their Deputies to us, to
receive our Gracious Will and Pleasure, in pursuance of their Submissions.
Which doing, we will receive 'em into our Favor, and maintain 'em in the
Enjoment of all their Goods and Estates, and free Exercise of the said Reformed
Religion, and look upon 'em as good Subjects, worthy to partake of our benefits
ard Favors, no less then the rest who have continued in the Fidelity which
they owe us. All which we promise upon the Faith and Word of a King to keep,
observe and fulfill inviolably. But in case that continuing in the obstinacy of
their Rebellion they scorn the Favor which we offer to 'em, and do not
satisfy the Contents of these Presents within that time, We have, and do
declare 'em from this time forward to have incurred the Penalties mentioned in
our Preceding Declarations, and guilty of High Treason in the Highest degree,
and unworthy of all Grace and Mercy. In which case, after the time prefixed is
once past, our Pleasure is that they be proceeded against in their Persons,
Goods, Houses, Inheritances, and whatever else belongs to 'em, with the utmost
Rigor of the Law. So we command, etc. In Testimony, etc.

Given at Paris, December 15. 1628. and 19th. of our Reign. Signed Lewis.

Below, by the King. De Lomenie.

Read, Published and Registered, At Paris in Parliament etc. January 15. 1629.
Du Tillet.

An Edict of the King upon the Grace and Pardon granted as well to the Duke of
Rohan and the Sieur de Soubize, as to his Rebellious Subjects of the Cities,
Flat Countries, Castles and Strong Holds, of the Provinces of Upper and Lower
Languedoc, Cevennes, Gevaudan, Guyenne, Foix, etc. with the Articles. Given at
Nimes, in July 1629. and verified in the Parliament of Toulouse, August 27. 1629.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr, To all, etc. The Love
which we bear our Subjects, and our Compassion of he Miseries which they have
sustained, by reason of the Wars, and Divisions wherewith this Kingdom has been
so long afflicted, has touched us so deeply, that laying aside all
Considerations of our Health, and the Inconveniences of the weather, we ^^ve
made use of all means to reduce under our Obedience, those who having thrown it
off, had been the Occasion of all their Calamities. We were in hopes that the
Cities which surrendered to our Obedience, in the Years 1620. 21. and 22. would
have moved 'em to the same acknowledgment of our Authority. But finding that
either Obstinacy would not permit 'em, or that the Violence and Artifice of the
Faction retained 'em, we invited 'em by our Declarations to return to their
Duty, by all the most favorable persuasions that the cause would bear. We also
raised Great and Powerful Armies to reduce by force, those whom their Obstinacy
in Rebellion rendered deaf and blind to all the Reasons and Occasions of their
Duty: wherein it has pleased God so far to bless our Endeavors, that the City
of Rochelle has had the first Trial of our Puissance, as is mentioned in the
Edict which we set forth upon the Reducing of that Place. The City of Privas au
Vivarets, which trusting to her Situation, rugged and inaccessible as she
thought, in her Fortifications, and her Stores of Provision and Ammunition,
puffed up with long Prosperity, adventured to withstand the Batteries of our
Cannon and the Efforts of our Arms, and contemning the gentle Exhortations of
our Goodness, the hatred of her Inhabitants was such, that they rather chose to
abandon their Habitations and their Goods, then to seek for Preservation in our
Clemency which was assured 'em: They deprived themseves of the Hopes of
receiving it, and could not prevent the Conflagration and the fury of the Sword
which God sent among 'em: And therefore in reference to them we have otherwise
provided by our Declaratory Letters set forth apart; nor are they comprehended
in these presents. But this Punishment making others wiser, has been the reason
that nor only all the Upper and Lower Vivarets, but also several other Cities
and Fortresses are returned to their Duty, have Sworn to us the Oath of
Allegiance, while we on the other side have pardoned their Rebellion, and
ordained 'em our Letters of Oblivion, only causing their Walls and
Fortifications to be demolished. Which serving as assurances to others, brought
upon them all the Miseries they have suffered. Several Gentlemen also smitten
with the Happiness which they met with in our Clemency, sought and received it,
and quitted their Rebellion. The City of Alets, extremely strong by Situation,
by Fortifications, and whatever human Invention has studied, to make Bulwarks
and Ramparts of Earth serviceable to Nature, made as if she would have stopped
the Career of our Progresses. But finding her self begirt with our Army, and
our mounted Canon ready to make a Breach, durst not expect the first shot, but
submitted to the Laws of War that are usually practiced in the like Cases,
threw her self at our feet, and implored our mercy, which she obtained. And as
we were ready to carry our Victories yet farther, the Duke of Rohan, the
Inhabitants of Anduse, Sauve, Levigan, Florac, Mervez, and all the rest of the
Strong Holds in Cevennes, Nimes, Aymargues, Vsez, Milhau, Cornus, St. Frique,
St. Felix, St. Rome de Taon, Pont Camarez, Viane, Castres, Rogue, Courbe,
Revel, Montauban, Caussade, Mazeres, Saverdun, Carlat, Le Mas d' Azil, and
generally all the strong Holds and Places in the Upper and Lower Languedoc,
Cevenes, Gevaudan, Guyenne, and Foix, the Gentlemen and others, who held out
against our Service, sent their Deputies to testify their Repentance for
having fallen into that Rebellion, promising to pay us for the future, that
Obedience and Fidelity, which all good and Loyal Subjects owe their Prince;
beseeching Us to pardon 'em, and to grant 'em an Amnesty of their Rebellion,
and of all things that happened by Reason of it; offering to dismantle all the
Fortifications of the said Cities, to the end they might neither give any
distrust of their Fidelity, nor serve as a Temptation for any Body else to
swerve from it; and for farther Assurances to give us such Hostages out of the
said Cities, and in such number, as we should demand. To which we were so much
the more readily inclined, because we were desirous by so rare an Example of
Clemency, after so many Relapses, the most advantagiously that might be to gain
the Hearts of our Subjects, to spare the shedding of Blood, the Desolation of
the Province, and all other Disorders and Calamities of War; moved to it by
our sole Compassion of their Miseries, and Love of their Welfare. Which puts us
in Hopes, that so manifest an Experience of the mere goodness, that opens our
Breasts to our Subjects, will cause their return to be more sincere, and serve
for a perpetual Cement, to keep 'em for ever inseparably united to our
Obedience; till the Grace and Mercy of God touching their Hearts, and
enlightening their Minds, shall restore 'em all to the Bosom of the Church, and
dry up the Fountain of our fatal Divisions. For these causes, after we had
received Hostages from the said Cities, and disposed of 'em in Places ordained
for that purpose, till the Fortifications of the said Cities were effectually
and completely demolished; as being desirous to provide for disorders past, and
to prevent any for the Future, We make known, that upon mature debate of these
things in Council, with the Advice of the same, and of our certain Knowledge,
special Grace and Royal Authority, by this our perpetual and irrevocable Edict,
signed with our hand, We have said, Decreed and Ordained, say Decree and
Ordain, and our Will and Pleasure is,

I. That the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion, shall be restored and
resettl'd in all the Cities and Places of those Countries, from whence it had
been expelled; and all the Ecclesiastic Churches, Goods, and Houses, within
the said Provinces, shall be restored to those to whom they belonged, without
any Prosecution for the Revenues received or taken. In which Churches, and in
all the said Places, the Exercise of the said Religion, shall be freely and
peaceably Performed, without Let or Molestation. Nevertheless we ordain, that
in all the Monasteries within the said Cities returned to our Obedience, there
shall not be put in or settled any other Monks, then such as live exactly in
the observance of their Order, according to the Letters which they shall
receive from us.

II. And desiring nothing more then a perpetual Union between our Subjects, as
we are desirous, and as it is our Intention, to maintain those who profess the
Pretended Reformed Religion, in the free and Peaceable Exercise of it, we
cannot but desire also their Conversion, for which we continually offer up our
Prayers to God. For which Reason, we exhort all our said Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion to lay aside all Passion, that they may be capable
of receiving the Light of Heaven, and be fitted to return to the Bosom of the
Church, in which for these eleven hundred Years together, the Kings our
Predecessors have lived without Change or Interruption: Not being able in any
thing whatever to give them a greater Testimony of our Paternal Affection, then
to admonish them to observe the same way to Salvation, which we observe and
follow our selves.

III. We ordain, that all the Parishes of the said Country be provided with
good, sufficient and capable Curates, by those to whom the Patronage of the
same belongs, and that things be so ordered, that they have all a sufficient
revenue to maintain 'em with Reputation in the Discharge of their Functions, as
is set down in our Ordinances of January last; or other means more commodious,
as shall be adjudg'd proper by the Commissioners, by Us deputed to that end.

IV. We have forgiven, pardoned and buried in Oblivion, and do forgive, pardon
and bury in Oblivion to the said Duke of Rohan, and to all the Inhabitants of
the said Cities and Places, as also to those of the Flat Countries, who adhered
to 'em, all things past from July 21. 1627. to the Day of the Publication, in
every Seneschalship, of the Articles of Grace, which we granted 'em the 27th*
of June last. We have discharged 'em, and do discharge 'em of all Acts of
Hostility, raising of Arms, hiring of Soldiers, enterprises as well by Sea as
Land, General and Particular Assemblies, more especially the Assembly of Nimes,
seizure of Ecclesiastical Rents, Royal or Private Money, Coining of Money of
what Alloy or Stamp soever, Printed Libels, Popular Tumults and Commotions,
Riots, Violences, Enterprises upon the two Cities of St. Amant, and Chasteaux
du Seigneur; the taking of Chasteau, St. Stephen, Va^ Franchesque, and Florac:
Also the Murders and other Accidents, i^ppening at the taking of St. Ger^^ter,
and Castres, in January las^. Also the Inhabitants of Vsez, for the Murder of
the Sieur du Flos: And the Consuls of the said Place, for the Decrees put forth
against 'em by the Parliament of Toulouse, and Chamber of the Edict at Beziers:
Also the Sieurs Da^bais, Jacques Genvier, Paul Saucier, and Andrew Pelissier.
For the Nomination and Designation made of their Persons, to be Consuls of
Nimes, in 1627. and their executing the Office during that Year: Together with
all the Consuls and Political Counselors, and the Prothonotary of the
Consular House, for the Prosecution against 'em by reason of the said
Consulship of Nimes, as well in our Council, as in the said Court of Parliament,
Chamber of the Edict, and Court of Aids at Mompellier: Also the Inhabitants of
Anduze, for the Murder of the Sieur de Mantaille, and the Condemnations of the
said Consuls, and particular Inhabitants of the said City during these
Troubles. The Inhabitants of Millaud, for what was done against the Sieur de
Roquefavas, and discharge 'em of the Restitution of 4000. Livers taken from the
Jacobins. The Sieur de (...), for encouraging the Inhabitants of Alets in their
Breach of (...) Conducts, Impositions and raising of Money, establishment of
Courts of Justice, Officers and Counselors through the Provinces, and
executing of Sentences past in those Courts, in Matters Civil and Criminal, and
Regulations of Municipal Constitutions, and their executing their Offices in
the said Cities when they were in Rebellion; together with the Advocates, that
practiced in their Employments, before the said Judges, Officers, and
Counselors set up in the said Cities: Also those who had no permission from
Us, to reside and practice in the said Cities during the said Time. All Voyages
to, and Intelligences, Negotiations, Treaties, Contracts, held and made with
the English by the said Cities and Inhabitants; and by the said Duke of Rohan,
and Sieur de Soubize, as well with the said English, as with the King of Spain,
and Duke of Savoy, and Letters written to the Protestant Cantons of
Switzerland: Also the Sieurs Clausel and Du Cross, who were employed thither:
Sales of moveable Goods, whether Ecclesiastical or others, cutting down of high
Trees, Demesne Woods or others. Taking of Booties, Ransoms, or any other sort
of Money by them taken by reason of the said Troubles, melting of Artillery,
seizing of Ammunition, Dismantling and Demolishing of Cities, Castles and
Towns: Also the taking of Mervez Aymargues, and other Burnings of Churches and
Houses by Order and Authority of the said Duke of Rohan; and from all Criminal
Prosecutions by Reason of the same; not being prejudicial to the Civil
Interests of the said Religious Ecclesiastics, in respect of which they shall
apply themselves for Justice to the Chamber of the Edict. We discharge 'em also
from all Leases and Farms, of all Ecclesiastical Benefices and Estates, of
which the said Ecclesiastics were deprived by the Chieftains, who had the
General Command. Our Pleasure in like manner is, that they enjoy the full
Contents of the Preceding Amnesties, and of all that has been acted and
negotiated since the abovementioned Time, notwithstanding all Proceedings at
Law, Decrees and Sentences issued out against 'em in the mean time; even the
Decrees themselves of the Parliament of Toulouse and Bourdeaux, and Chamber of
Beziers and others, against the said Duke of Rohan, to whom we will, that all
his Honors and Dignities which he enjoyed before shall be preserved,
prohibiting all Prosecutions in the Cases aforesaid. In respect of which, we
impose perpetual silence upon all our Advocates General and their Substitutes;
excepting always those execrable Cases reserved and excepted by the Edict of
Nantes, and others subsequent, of the Civil Interest, by Reason of the Fact
committed at Vozenobre and Tournac, and of the movables which shall be found
in specie taken from those who were under Obedience to the King.

V. And in pursuance of our Intentions, to maintain all our Subjects professing
the Pretended Reformed Religion in the free Exercise of the said Religion, and
in the Enjoyment of the Edicts to them granted, Our farther Pleasure is, that
they enjoy the Benefits of the said Edict of Nantes and other Edicts, Articles
and Declarations registered in our Parlaments, and that in pursuance of the
same they have the free Exercise of the said Religion in all Places where it
has been allowed 'em.

VI. That all Churches and Churchyards, that have been taken from 'em or
demolished, shall be restored 'em, with Liberty to repair 'em, if there be any
necessity, and that they deem it convenient.

VII. We ordain, that all the Fortifications of the said Cities, shall be razed
and demolished, only the enclosure of the Walls, within the space of three
Months, by the sedulity of the Inhabitants: In whom we more especially
confiding, forbear to secure the said Cities either with Garrisons or
Cittadels. The said Cities also shall be demolished by the Management and
Orders of the Commissioners by Us deputed, and according to the Orders and
Instructions which we shall give 'em: And in the mean while, for the greater
Security, the Hostages sent by the said City, shall remain in such Places as we
shall appoint, till the said Fortifications shall be fully demolished.

VIII. Our farther Will and Pleasure is, that all the aforesaid Professors,
etc. shall be restored and resettl'd in all their Estates and Goods, Moveable
and Immovable, Accounts and Actions, notwithstanding all Condemnations,
Grants, Confiscations and Reprisals made or decreed, excepting the Fruits and
Revenues of their Goods, the movables which shall not be found in specie,
Woods cut down, and Debts which have been received till this present time,
actually and without fraud, after judicial Prosecutions and Constraints.
Nevertheless our Pleasure is, that the Preceding Declarations given upon the
Fact of the said Reprisals, till the present Commotions, Peremptory Decrees,
and Proceedings and Agreements made upon them, shall take place, and be
executed, notwithstanding all Decrees to the contrary. Our Will also is, that
the Heirs of the Deceased Sieur de Mormoirac shall be restored to their Goods.

IX. We permit the Professors, etc. to re-enter their Houses, and to rebaild
'em if there be occasion; and as being our good and faithful Subjects, we
permit 'em to reside and inhabit in such Cities and Places of our Kingdom, as
they shall see convenient, except in the Islands of Re, and Oleron, Rochel and
Privas. We also permit the Inhabitants of Pamiers, who were not in the said
City at the Time when it was taken, to return and enjoy all their Goods, after
they have submitted themselves, and taken the Oath of Fidelity before such
Persons whom we shall appoint.

X. Our Officers residing in the said City, who have not paid the Annual Duty,
shall be admitted to pay it within two Months, as well for what is past as for
the present Years. And as for such as are Deceased, having paid the said
Annual Right, the Offices which they held shall be preserved to their Widows
and Heirs. And as for those Officers whose Offices we have supplied by Reason
of the Troubles, they shallbe continued in their said Offices, notwithstanding
the Patents given to others, and their being settled therein. Our Pleasure also
is, that the Officers of particular Lords, who were admitted upon dear
Purchases, and put out by Reason of the said Troubles, shall be restored to
their Employments.

XI. All the abovementioned shall be discharged, and we hereby discharge 'em of
all Contributions, Quartering of Soldiers, as well in the preceding, as
present troubles. Also the said Communities and particular Members thereof are
discharged from all Obligations to indemnifie and save harmless all Reparations
of Damages, which may be pretended against 'em, by Reason of Imprisonments,
Executions and Expulsions out of the said Cities, by order of the said Duke of
Rohan, or the Councils of the said Cities, or any others by him set up as well
during the present as preceding Troubles. And as for Taxes and other Money laid
upon the Country, in Case the Sums fall short, for want of Payment by the
abovementioned, the Receivers of the said Countries shall not prosecute the
abovementioned: Reserving nevertheless a Power to prosecute the Syndic of the
Country, to the end the Abatement may be laid upon the Generality of the
Province.

XII. In like manner, we discharge the Consuls and Private Persons, who obliged
themselves during the troubles of the Years, 1621. 1622. and 1626. and in the
present Commotions, for the Affairs of the City, to pay the said Obligations,
notwithstanding all Clauses inserted in the Agreements: Saving to the
Creditors, the Power of prosecuting the Consuls of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, who shall be in Office, who shall be liable to Condemnation, and to
pay their shares of the Sums.

XIII. They shall be also discharged from prosecuting the Catholic Inhabitants
and others, for the remainders from them due for the rates of the preceding
Years, notwithstanding the discharges they had obtained by our Letters Patents,
as by the Decrees of the Court of Aids at Mompellier: As also from all that
remains to be paid of Taxes and Impositions, assess'd upon any of 'em, the
Catholics being exempted by the Orders of the Governors of the Provinces, or
others our Commanders in Chief, during the preceding and present Troubles.

XIV. The Inhabitants of Castres also shall be discharged from Restitution of
whatever they took by force of Arms in Opposition to our Service.

XV. The charges which shall be laid upon the said Cities, shall be equally
born by all the Inhabitants of the same, according to the Custom at all times
usual. Only that the Debts contracted by the Catholic Inhabitants, shall be
born by themselves alone; and those contracted by those of the Pretended
Reformed Religion by themselves.

XVI. Sentences past by those who have been Commissioned for the Administration
of Justice in the said Cities, whether in Civil or Criminal Matters, shall take
place, excepting Appeals to the said Chambers, in Cases which have not been
adjudg'd by the Provosts, or at a Council of War.

XVII. The Order observed in the said Cities, as well touching the C^^s^^ship
as the Municipal Government, and the Meeting of the said Consuls and City
Councils, shall be kept and observed, as before the Troubles.

XVIII. The Assemblies of State in the Country of Foix, shall be held after
the accustomed Manner, and all the Cities shall be summoned that were usually
present.

XIX. The Consuls, Receivers, Collectors and Commissaries, that managed the
Public Money during the Preceding and Present Troubles, shall be acquitted and
discharged, they bringing into the Chambers the Accounts which they have given
of it; nor shall the Chambers pretend to any Fees, nor to require a review of
the said Accounts. And as for the Inhabitants of Nimes, who pretend themselves
not obliged to carry in their Accounts into the said Chambers, our Will is,
that the ancient Custom shall be observed.

XX. The Seats of Judicature, Audits of Receipts, and other Offices, removed by
Reason of the present Troubles, shall be restored and settl*d in the Places
where they were before: Also the Election newly created to be settled at
Montauban, but removed to the City of Moissac by reason of the Troubles, shall
be returned to Montauban, after the Fortifications are demolished.

XXI. Also the Chamber of the Edict, now sitting at Beziers, shall be restored
to the City of Castres, after the Fortifications are demolished; and shall
remain in the said City, according to the Edict of Nantes, notwithstanding our
Ordinance of January last, and the Decree of the Parliament of Toulouse, upon
the 111th. Article thereof: Which Chamber his Majesty will have maintained in
all things allowed it by the Edicts and Regulations.

XXII. All these Graces and Concessions, it is our Will and Pleasure, that the
abovementioned enjoy, that were in Arms upon the twenty seventh of June last.
And as for the Cities and Persons that submitted to our Obedience before that
day, they shall particularly enjoy the things contained in the Letters Patents,
which have ordered 'em for that purpose.

So we command our Faithful and Beloved Counselors, in the Parliament of
Toulouse, etc. And for the more firm and stable endurance of these Presents,
etc.

Given at Nimes, in July 1629. and twentieth of our Reign. Signed, Lewis.

And below, by the King. Phelipeaux.

Read, Published and Registered, etc. At Toulouse in Parliament, August, 27.
1629. Signed, De Malenfant.

The End of the second Volume.
A TABLE OF THE MATTERS.
A.
ACcusations odious, 521. For violating the Edicts, Ibid. For taking away the
Prayer for the King in the 20th Psalm, 523. For blaspheming the Holy Things,
525. Acts of Injustice at Vitre, Dijon, Taulignan, 424, 370, 465. Particular
Acts of Injustice, 465. Affairs, Foreign of France, in what Condition, 314.
Aggravation venomous, 524. Air Bishop of, his violent Speech, 249. Albert de
Luines, his Original, 260, 261. His Confidents, their Character, 262. He
Marries into the House of Rohan, 264. He Fools the Queen, and the Duke of
Rohan, 319. His notable Artifices to gain Lesdiguieres, 382. More of the same,
384, 385. Made Constable, 388. Alets reduced, 459. Alliance French with
Gustavus King of Sweden, 471. Alliance double with Spain concluded on, 17.
Ambrune Bishop of, his Speech to the King, 339. Amelot, Commissioner in Poitou
and Santonge, 383. He ruins the Churches under the appearance of Honesty, 384.
d' Ancre Marquess of, hated by the Princes of France, 153. They unite against
him, 154, etc. His Death, 263. St. Angeli Besieged and Reduced, 309. The
Privileges of the City abolished, 310. An attempt upon it, 122. Prevented by
the Duke of Rohan, 123. Annexes the occasion of great Injustice, 469, 489.
Annexes of the Dauphinate, 495. Advice of the Commissioners of the Dauphinate
upon 'em, 498. New Vexations about 'em, 505. Order of the Intendant of Poitou
concerning 'em, 516. St. Antonin taken by Assault, 334. Apology of the General
Assembly, 424. Arminians favored by the Court, 372. Arnoux, the Jesuit,
invective against him, 301. His Dilemma, 302. Banished the Court, 319. He
succeeds Cotton, 272. Artifices of the ancient Enemies of the Reformed, 41. To
undermine the steadiness of the Assembly of Saumur, 53. Artifices against
Chamier, 66. Assemblies, why they refused to break up before their Papers were
answered, 303. Assembly of the Clergy began at Paris, removed to Poitiers,
thence to Bourdeaux, 320. Assembly of the Clergy at Paris, 406. Of Notables,
433. Assembly at Anduse, translated to Nimes, 459. Of the Clergy at Paris, 464.
Assembly of the Clergy, 521. Assembly general allowed for Chastelleraud, 22.
Removed to Saumur, 23. Assembly at Saumur, and the Quality of the Deputies, 26.
Commissioners from this Assembly to the King, 44. The Assembly sends Deputies
to the Court, 47. Gives Reasons for not choosing six Deputies, 52. In which
they persist, 53. Nominates Commissioners, 60. The Assembly resolves to break
up, 65. They draw up Regulations, 69. Assembly at Castle-jaloux, 92. Assembly
at Rochel, 138. General Assembly leave to hold one at Grenoble, 160. Assembly
of the Clergy at Paris, 183. Assembly at Grenoble, 201. Sends a Deputation to
the King, 203. Removes to Nimes, 212. They mistrusts the Lords, 214. They send
Deputies to the King for a Peace, 232, etc. Removed to Rochel, 235. They send
Deputies to Loudun, 236. Assembly of Rochel send Deputies to the King, 264. And
receive an Order to break up, 265. Assembly of the Clergy at Paris, 274.
Assembly at Castle-jaloux, and Tonneins, repair to Orthez in Bearn, and are
proscribed, 308, 309. Assembly of Orthez, removed to Rochel and breaks up, 322.
Another Assembly at Loudun, Ibid. etc. Assembly of the Clergy at Blois, 330,
etc. Constancy of the Assembly of Loudun, 335. Assembly at Anduse, 357.
Assembly at Gergeau, 358, etc. Other Assemblies in Anjou and Bur. gundy, 360,
etc. General Assembly at Milhau, 361, etc. Assembly at Rochel declared
unlawful, 365. Assembly at Rochel, 380. Duplesses and Moulin solicit the
breaking of it up, 390. Affairs of the Assembly of Rochel, 393, etc. Defends it
self in Writing, 410. Replied to by the Jesuits, 413. Irreparable faults
committed by 'em, 417. The State of it, 428. Assignations ill paid, 375.
Attempts upon the Cities of Security, 300.
B.
BAilliages established with little exactness, 270. Basnage the Reformed
Minister, 482. Bearn forced Conversions there, 433. the King will have Bearn
treat separately, 47. Articles in favor of Bearn, 85. The State of Bearn
falsely represented, 276. Reunion of it to the Crown, 279. An Argument upon the
Reunion of it, 280, etc. Answer to it, 285. The Edict of the Reunion published,
286. The Bearnois endeavor to ward off the Blow, 289. The State of Religion in
Bearn, 290. Their Writings answered, 297. Their extreme despair, 307. More of
the Bearnois, 313. The whole form of the Government altered, 346, etc.
Violences committed there after the Kings Departure, 348. The Affair of Bearn
crossed a thousand ways by different Artifices, 351. All manner of Succors
refused to their Deputies, 352. Bearn subdued, 405. Bellujon censured by the
Assembly, 56. Beraud, Minister of Montauban, 481. Berger a Reformed Counselor
at Paris turns Roman Catholic, 162. Breticheres, his Politic design, 328.
Bishops of Languedoc side with the Duke of Orleans, 492. Bishops of Albi and
Nimes degraded for Rebellion, 493. Bishop of Orleans's Speech to the King, 521.
The Bishop of St. Flour's Speech, 529. Bishop of Mompellier, his Rights over
the University, 152. Blasphemies pretended, 427, 440. The occasion of a World
of unjust Acts, 448, 450. Bodies of the Reformed dug up again, 402. Books
prosecuted, 451. Books that made a noise, 85, 87. Bouillon Marshal, his Letter,
313. He treats with Count Mansfield, 340. His Proposals to the Duke of Rohan
about it, 341. Publishes an Edict in favor of the Reformed, 417. Bouillon Duke
of, the Son changes his Religion, 517. He ruins himself for Love of a Lady,
Ibid. Bouillon the Father soon gained at Court, 8. He endeavors to gain the
Prince of Conde, 17. Gained by the Queen, 23. His Inconstancy about
Presidentship, 28. Discontented, seems reconciled to the Duke of Sulli, and
Interests himself for Senevieres, 30, 31. Dangerous Counsel imputed to him, 55.
His strange Advice, 58. Made a Commissioner by the Assembly, but refuses it,
60. Breaks with the Duke of Rohan, 118. Reconciled, 150. He seeks to be
revenged upon the Queen, 180. He labors with the Reformed to join with the
Reformed, 182. Writes to the King, 412. He refuses the Place of General, 416.
Buckingham Duke, jealousies between him and the Cardinal, 416. He compleats the
Ruin of the Reformed, 418. Burials disturbed, 439. The Right of Burial
violated, 446. Of Gentlemen Founders of Churches, 431.
C.
COcherat, Minister of Quilleboeuf, 513. Candal Duke of, embraces the Reformed
Religion, 215. Castres, Vexation of Officers there, 435. The Consistory
molested there, 437. Refuses to admit the Duke of Rohans Deputies, 429. The
Counselors of the Chamber there forbid to wear red Robes, 504. Catharinots
murder du Cross, 335. Sedition against the Catholics by them raised, Ibid.
Catholics, their enterprises at Rochel, 387. Of the Queen of Englands Household
indiscreet, 417. They Triumph at Campredons Death, 423. They endeavor to
involve the Ministers in the Duke of Rohans treaty with Spain, 424. Great
rejoicing among 'em, 450. Their Cruelties and Insulting, Ibid. Cavils upon the
Right of Donations and Legacies, 393. A shameful Cavil, 495. Chalas,
Commissioner in Poitou and Saintonge, 383. His Compliance, 386. Chambers of the
Edict, their Severity, 115. At Paris reverse a Sentence of the Judge of
Orleans, 152. Character of the Reformed, 31. Charenton, the Church there burnt,
325. Exercise of Religion confirmed there, 10. Charles, Prince of Wales
designed to Marry the Infanta of Spain, 389. Courted by Richlieu for a Daughter
of Henry IV. 390. The Match concluded, 391. His Complance for the Catholic
Religion, 392. Chatillon, dismissed by the Circle of Lower Languedoc, 327. The
Reasons why, 328. Surrenders Aiguemortes to the King, and is made a Marshal of
France, 346. Engaged in the Interests of the Court, 214. Deals under hand with
Montmorency, 378. Chatillon the City, dishonest Proposals to surprise it, 329,
330. Children forced away, 305. Two Examples of it, Ibid. 409. More of the
same, 370. Churches of the County of Foix reduced to Misery, 268. And those of
Provence ill used, 269. Churchyards, Catholics dispensed with allowing 'em at
their own Charges, 307. Churchyard at Blois, 425. Cavil about one, 445.
Distance between Reformed and Catholic Churchyards, 446. Cities Catholic,
several take, Arms, 42. Cities of Security yield to the King, 158. Clairac
Besieged and taken, 315. Cruelties used to the Garrison, 316. Clergy grant
Money with an ill will, 407. The Clergies Papers, and the Kings answer, 529.
Their Prevarication, 172. Their Paper presented to the King, 173, 174, etc.
Colleges, all Hugenots imparty'd, 501. College of Loudun taken from the
Reformed, 515. College at Charenton, the Erection of it opposed by the
Catholics, 329. Conde joins with Car. de Retz, etc. 329. His Cruelties to the
Reformed, 345. Quits the Court and retires into Italy, 353. His unjust dealings
at Sancerre, 451. Affronted at Poitiers, 157. His unequal Temper, 173. Conde
loses his Authority by the Prevarication of the Clergy, 180. He begins new
Intreigues, 181. He prepares to hinder the Match with Spain, 184. He invites
the Assembly of Grenoble to join with him, 201. Proclaimed a Rebel, 231. His
Condition when Peace was propounded, 232. He Signs the Treaty, 237. He makes
two new demands, after all the rest were granted him, which much perplex the
Queen, 248. Imprisoned by the Queen, 249. Set at Liberty, 321. He deceives the
Reformed, 334. His wholesome Advice, 341. He and others fail in their Garranty
to the Reformed, 361. The Kings Declaration against the Cities of Rochel, and
St. John d' Angeli, and the effect of it, 422. Consistory at Begle continues
the Public Exercise of their Religion, 223. Opposed by two Advocates, 224.
They cite the Advocates, who appeal to the Parliament, 225. And the proceedings
thereupon, 226, etc. Constable his Death causes great Alterations at Court,
329. Consuls, indirectly chosen, 491. Consulships of Alets, 495. Conversions
forced at Aubenas, 433. and St. Amands, 434. Pretended of a Person that died of
a Fever, 452. Of Soldiers taken Prisners, 456. Cornulier Bishop of Rennes, his
passionate Speech, 320. Corpse of a Reformed Gentleman dug up again, 116.
Cotton the Jesuit disgraced, 272. Councils Provincial, their Functions, 70.
Court recover their Affairs, 406. The Answers given by the Court to the Papers
of the Reformed, satisfy no Body, 64. Makes use of the Doctrine of Patience,
120. The wiles and injustices of it, 121. Has no regard for the People, 184.
Disingenuity of the Court, upon Sulli's account, 237. Break their Words with
Lescun, 280. Dilatory and Delusive, 303. Craft of the Court in reference to
Renards ill success in Bearn, 310. Croakers, 425. Cruelties of the Kings Army
at Foix, 401. At Privas, 455. Cupis Francis, his Conversion, 538.
D.
DAille's Books, 526. His dispute with Muis, 527. Deagean, a signal wile of
his, 386. etc. Declaration against Rohan and Soubise, 396. The Kings
Declaration upon Soubise's taking Arms, 397. Declaration confirming the Edict
of Nantes, 8. And remarkable Expressions in it, 9. Declaration of the twenty
fourth of April, opposed by the Deputies General, 97, 98. New Declaration, July
11. 112. Of the fifteenth of December, and remarks upon it, 141. Declaration of
the Marriages resolved upon with Spain, 144. Of the Kings Majority, 167.
Declaration of the King upon the Nobilities proposing to Petition him to
maintain the Catholic Religion, according to his Coronation Oath, 179.
Declaration of the Court upon Conde's treating with the Assembly of Nimes, 218.
New Declaration of the King, Ibid. Decree about meeting the Sacrament; 434.
Decrees upon several occasions, 503. A troublesome Decree about meeting the
Sacrament, 509. For demolishing the Church of St. Maixant, 510. Forbidding
public Exercise at Paroi, and containing several other things, 515. Other
Decrees against the Reformed, 533. And to the Prejudice of Paternal Authority,
Ibid. A Vexatious Decree of the Privy Council upon several occasions, 534. A
Decree touching Patents for Offices, 535. He will not allow the Ministers to
make a separate Body in Councils, 73. A Decree authorizing the Jesuits to
preach in Mompellier, 277. For restoring confiscated Estates, confiscated in
Bearn, 278. Deputies General nominated, 487. Obtain favorable answers to their
Papers, 18. Their Power limited, 49. Well received and flattered at Court, 50.
Afterward deceived, 51. Threatened, 52. New Deputies General appointed, 60.
Deputies of the Provinces, at Patis, sent back with disgrace, 96. Dominic de
Jesus Maria, his Story, 322. Dort, Imposture put upon the Synod there, 374.
E.
Ecclesiastics seized upon at Montauban, 371. Edict new, confirming all the
rest, 414. Edict of Grace, 460. Contents of the Edict, 461. Against
Blasphemers, 528. The Consequences of it, Ibid. Edict of Blois, 238.
Ambassadors English importunate for the Peace of the Religion, 411. They sign
an Act ill drawn up, 413. England declares against France, 438. English Land in
the Isle of Re, 439. Defeated, 442. Set forth two Fleets more, 443. England
makes a Peace with France, Ibid. 457. Espernon Duke of, Mortally hates the
Reformed, 216. Makes War against Rochel, 252. His pretense to take Arms, 253,
etc. Espernon Duke of, sent into Bearn, 402. Examples of Injuries done the
Reformed, 306. Exercise forbid at Puigenier and Beaulieu, 425. Out of the usual
Places, 431. At St. Sabin and Antibe, 446. Prohibited, 438. At Gex, Sancerre,
and Chauvigny, 444. At Quercy, 445. The Right to 'em cavill'd at, 468. Forbid,
490, 495. Forbid, 500. Forbid at Paroi, 515. At Villiers le Bell, 531. At
Corbigni, Ibid. At St. Silvia, 533. In other Places, Ibid. At Clay, 536. Forbid
in several Places, 301. Exorcisms, the ridiculous ^ss^cls of 'em, 505.
F.
FAvas's Interest, 365. Favorites new Intreignes against 'em, 337. Fenouilles
Bishop of, violent against the Reformed, 335. Remarks upon his Speech, 337.
Beholding for his Preferment to the Duke of Sully, yet a bitter Persecutor of
the Reformed, 152. Ferrand the Minister flatters the King, 410. Ferrier
retires, 67. Heavy Accusations against him, 102. Quits the Ministry, and is
received a Counselor at Nimes, 146. More of him, 148, etc. His end, 150.
Flatteries excessive, 362. Foix, Desolation of the Church there, 338.
Fontrailles put out of Leitoure, 364. La Force corrupted by the King, leaves
the Reformed, 333. La Force Governor of Bearn, 279. His unequal temper, and
the effects of it, 292. France Plays foul play with the Confederates, 416.
Makes a League with Queen Christina, 497. Her Pretensions to all Europe, set
forth by a Sorbon Doctor, 502.
G.
GAland Augustus a Commissioner, 371. Admitted into the Synod, 372. His
Intreigue against the Duke of Rohan, 442. In vain opposes the Union of the
Churches of Bearn, 483. Gex, the Bailliage how used, 534. Commissioners sent
thither, 93. Great Alterations there in the State of Religion, 107. Governors
of the Towns of Security basely self-interested, 423. Grand Assizes, several of
their Decrees against the Reformed, 512. Grievances a large Memoir of 'em, 430.
Gustavus King of Sweden his Death, 497.
H.
HArdy put in Marrialds Room, 427. House of Charity forbid at Paris, 536. House
of the Propagation of Faith, and a remarkable piece of Injustice, 537.
Huguenots, whether to be admitted in the Kings Army, 441. Hust, the Original of
the Word, 349.
I.
JAcobins turned out of Mompellier, 275. James I. of England, his Compliance
for the Catholic Religion, 390, 391. His coldness as to the Affairs of the
Palatinate, 391. Jeannin. his remarkable writing, 330. His Answer to the Duke
of Bouillon, 181. Jesuits receive a great Mortification, 93. Impudence of the
Jesuits Aubigni and Cotton, 13. Inclinations of the Great Men, 314.
Independency of Kings from the Pope maintained, 169. Rejected by the Court and
Clergy, and why, 170. Injustice, extraordinary against the Reformed, 435.
Instructions of the Commissioners, 421. Answered by Chauve the Moderator, 422.
For the Provincial Assembly, 23. Continuations of the Instructions, 26.
Invectives against the Synod of Aletz, 357. Joseph a Capuchin, his draught of
the Reunion, 474.
K.
KIng of England in what sense Garrantee for the Protestants, 413. Offers his
Mediation for a Peace, 234. Refused by the Council of France, Ibid. Knight of
Malta Married, 432.
L.
LAnguedoc, Lower, in Confusion, 328. Continue unquiet, 234. The Circle of it
Assembles at Limel, 376. League powerful against Spain, 410. Legacies
perverted, 432. Lescun Counselor in the Sovereign Council of Bearn, 279. His
Remonstrance, 290. Lesdiguieres, pretends to the Constables Sword, and
intercedes for Peace with the Protestants, 334. He endeavors to hinder the
removal of the Assembly of Grenoble to Nimes, 212. Engaged in the Interest of
the Court, 214. He falls out with the Assembly of Rochel, 381. His small
Affection for Religion, Ibid. etc. Will not hearken to his Friends, 386. He
remains at Court, 388. Lessius put to Death, 354. Letter Satirical dividing the
Reformed into three Orders, 29. A Letter from Court Authorizing the Inferior
number against the greater, 56. Letter supposed to be written in the Duke of
Montbazons Name, 366. Lewis XIII. Marches into Guyenne, 314. Returns to Paris,
330. Leaves Paris, 332. His success in Poitou, Ibid. And Guyenne, where he
treats with La Force, 333. He suspects the Duke of Tremoville, and seizes
Tulleburg, Ibid. Hastens into Languedoc, 334. He forbids the Reformed to quit
their Habitations, 339. He makes use of Foreign Catholic Soldiers, 342. He
puts his Kingdom under the Protection of the Virgin Mary, 413. Returns to
Paris, 358. His particular Insidelity to the Rochellers, 363. His Death, 452.
His Letter to the Queen about the Peace, 463. The Court surpised at the Kings
Death, 1. The Penetrating into the Causes of his Death avoided, 14. His Temper,
260. His unexpected Journey to Bearn, 343. He arrives at Pau, and takes in
Navarreins, returns to Pau, and takes the Oath to the States, 345. He goes
unexpectedly from Paris, and removes the Offices of the Receipts, 401. Lewis
XIII. born, 419. Lion, an unfortunate accideent there, 326. A new Sedition
there, 451. Loudun, Assembly there justified, 301. which produced several
Complaints and Apologies, 302. Answered by the King, 303. The Place appointed
for the Conference which procures Peace, 235. Luson Bishop of, made a Cardinal,
360. His Character, Ibid. His Speech to the King, 173. He withdraws from the
Queen, 272. He writes against the Ministers, 274. His ill Counsel, 341, etc.
M.
MAcon the Bishop of, his Speech to the King, 274. Proves ineffectual, 277.
Remarks upon it, 317. Mage, the Judge, 422. Maine Duke of, his Death, 322.
Mandamus Final to the Sovereign Council of Bearn, 311. Attended by Decrees of
Council, 312. Maniald dies, 427. Mansfield Count, treats with the Reformed,
340. Gained by the Court, 341. Contrary to the Bishop of Alberstads
Inclinations, Ibid. Marans Count, of his Hostilities against Sancerre, 268.
Marets, Minister of Alets, put to Death, 494. Marriage of Converted Priests,
431. Masuyer's false dealing, 423. His Character, 373. He writes to the King,
374. More of him, Ibid. etc. Mediation of the Dukes of Rohan and Trimoville,
ruined by Favas, 389. Metz, the Reformed forbid to erect a College there, 517.
Milletiere, a writing of his, 373. His Project about Reunion of the
Protestants and Papists, 477. Refuted by Daille, 478. Turns Catholic through
Necessity, Ibid. Ministers Foreign, a Declaration against 'em, 436. Decrees
against 'em, 503. Ministers Pensioners, 121. Allowed to assist at Political
Assemblies, 270. Ministers of Charentons Answer, 273. The Treachery of some
punished, 354. Miron, President, his Character, 172. Missions and Missionaries,
467. Mombazon Duke of, his care of the Reformed, 324, 325. Mompellier besieged,
344. Holds out stoutly, 352. The Kings Infidelity to Her, 358. A Citadel built
there contrary to the Treaty, 377. The building of it opposed by Maniald, Ibid.
Innovations there, 436. The Foundation of it by whom, Ibid. Monks converted,
their Rogueries, 271. Monsanglard Minister his Process, 532. Montauban defended
by La Force, 318. The Siege raised, 319. Reduced, 463. Moulin in danger of
being secured, 390. His Letter to James I. of England miscarries, 391. From
which the Jesuits seek an opportunity to ruin him, 392. Muce Marquess of,
condemned by the Parliament of Rennes, 355.
N.
NErac a Presidial Court erected there, 416. Negrepelisse taken by Assault, and
great Cruelties there exercised, 334. Nomination of General Deputies permitted,
426. The Synod desires to be exempted from it, Ibid.
O.
OAth of Union, 377. Renewed by the Assembly of Tonneins, 165. Offices, 441.
The Catholics combine to exclude the Reformed from 'em, Ibid. 448. Omer
Talon's manner of Pleading, 510. His Distinction between the Right of Exercise
and the Right of the Church, 511. Oppression continued, 501. Orleans Duke of,
commences a Civil War, 492.
P.
PAmiers City of, goes to Law with Bishop, 392. Papers of the Reformed General,
366. Answers to 'em, 367. Of the Clergy of Saints, 385. Full of Malice, 386.
Calmly answered by the Court, 402, 404. Papers answered by the Court, 113.
General Paper of the Assembly of Grenoble, 207. Answered, 208. Papers of the
Clergy favorably answered, 291. Parlaments encroach upon the Jurisdiction of
the Chambers, 114. The Parliament ordains the continuance of the Exercise of the
Reformed Religion, 224. Their Acts of Injustice, 302. Parpailler, the Original
of the Word, 347. Pau, the Parliament there forbid the Exercises, 425. Payment
of Ministers, 406. Peace, Proposals of it renewed, 342, The Court would have
the King grant it to have a Lord and Master, Ibid. Three several Persons give
their Opinions upon it, 343. Peace agreed before Mompellier, 352, 353.
Honorable for the Duke of Rohan, 355. All the Cities accept it, 357. Ill
observed by the Court, Ibid. Peace discoursed of, 401. Concluded between the
King and the Reformed, 411. Peace made with the Reformed, 459. Perron Cardinal,
his Harangue to the third Estate, 171. Petit's Project about the Reunion, 476.
Du Plessis, his Death, 379. Elected President of the Assembly of Saumur, 30. He
fortifies Saumur, 44. His wise Counsel, 58. Trick put upon him to get Saumur
out of his hands, 421. Politics Bloody, of the Catholic Clergy in France,
315. Pons, Regulations there against the Reformed, 539. Pope, his Brief to
Lewis XIII, 316. Precautions to prevent disorder, 4. Precedence adjudg'd to the
Catholics, 434. To the Catholic Counselors of the Chamber of Guyen, 503. To
the Catholic Counselors of the Chamber of Castres, 514. Priests and Monks
changing their Religion, 442. Priest converted his Children, 452. A Priest put
to Death for bewitching his Nuns, 505. Privas Besieged and Betrayed, 454. The
Kings Declaration upon the taking of it, 457. Reestablished, 498. The Castle
retaken, 377. Puimirol, laughed at for his Loyalty, 314. Puisieux a new
Favorite, Adviser of Horse proceeding against the Reformed, 359. His Favor
short, 360. His Promise to the Nuncio, 363.
Q.
QUeen Mother hates Cardinal Richlieu, 460. Withdraws into Flanders, 471. Queen
Regent, Characters of Her, 30. Offended with the Duke of Rohan, 124. She
Consents to the removal of Rochebeaucour, 137. The Princes discontented with
Her Regency, 153. She prepares to Assemble the General Estates, 166. She takes
a Progress with the King, 203. She escapes from Blois, 319. Her scruples, 339.
She forms a powerful Party, 340. Her Forces defeated procure a Peace, 343.
Question to ensnare the People, 526.
R.
REconciliation of the great ones Projected, 132. Regency given to the Queen,
5. Reformed unfortunate every where, 315. Quitt their Habitations, 326. Accused
of Piring the Bridges of Paris, Ibid. Of Firing the Gaol of Lion, 327. They
reassume fresh Courage, 332. Disarmed, 350. The exercise of their Religion
forbid, 368. A singular Artifice used to oblige 'em to call themselves
Pretended Reformed, 369. Their Condition impared by the Commissioners at
Gergeau, Remorentin, and Tours, 382. The Reformed dissatisfied with the Kings
answers, 405. They send Deputies to the King, 427. Who remonstrate, Ibid. And
return with the Kings Answer, 427. In great Consternation, Ibid. Feared at
Court, 488. Faithful to the King, 493. The Condition of the Reformed, 5. Who
are dreaded and yet afraid, Ibid. They fall into a fond Opinion of safety,
deceived by the Court Artifices, 10. They take part with the House of Guise in
a Quarrel, 94. They abhor the Name of Pretended Reformed, 109. Their Strength
in the County of Avignon, 110. They obtain Gergau instead of Grenoble, but
dissatisfied desire Grenoble again, 182, 183. Reformed disarmed at Bourdeaux,
223. Inclined to the Queen Mothers Service, 328. Their faults and the cause,
344. Begun to be used as Rebels, 366. All manner of Justice refused 'em, 377.
To be destroyed root and branch, 397, etc. The Peaceable Reformed disarmed,
419, etc. Regulations for Villiers le Bell, and the Dauphinate, 420. Regulations
of Union, 72. Relapsers, remarkable Orders against 'em, 415. De Retz Cardinal,
329. Reunion projected, 472. Inclinations of the Ministers toward it, 475. And
of the People, 476. Difficulties that obstructed it, Ibid. The issue of it,
479. The Truth of it, Ibid. Richelieu Cardinal, his Maxims, 388. His designs,
of which he is forced to delay the Execution, 410. Jealousies between him and
Buckingham, 416. His backside, 417. Conspiracies against him, 419. He takes a
Journey into Italy with the King, 453. His Project of Reunion, 473. He
oppresses the Public Liberty, 491. Much a do to guard himself from
Conspiracies, 497. His Death, 451. Rieuperieux summoned by the Council, 422.
Rochechouard, particular acts of Injustice there, 423, 468. Rochel hard pressed
by Land and Sea, 351. The Privileges of it disputed, 400. Excepted by the King
out of the Peace, 408. The ruin of it sworn, and the King strives to put
particular Laws upon it, 408, 409. Accepts the Conditions somewhat mollifi'd,
411. The Condition of it, 420. Still blockt up, 437. The Irresolution of the
Inhabitants, 440. They intercept a Packet of Court Letters, Ibid. Rochel
Resolves and Publishes a Manifesto, 441. Surrendered, 443. Refuses to submit to
the English, 444. How the Inhabitants were dealt by, 446. General Assembly
convened at Rochel, 255. The Circle of Rochel sends Deputies to the King, 257.
Rohan Duke of, 317. Detained Prisoner at Mompellier, 363. Released, 364. He
advises the Reformed Cities what to do, 366. Meditates great designs, 395.
Enterprise of Rohan and Soubife, Ibid. His Politic Devotions, 398. Seconded by
his Wife, 399. He Publishes a Manifesto, 441. Personal Enmity, between him and
the Prince of Conde, 451. Decrees and Declarations against him, 453. He treats
with Spain, 457. He retires out of the Kingdom, 463. Accused of the ruin of the
Churches, 467, Serves the King in Italy, 494. Breaks with the Duke of Bouillon,
118. Differences between him and Rochebeaucour, 131 His high Pretensions, 136.
Reconciled to the Duke of Bouillon, 150. Engages in the Queens Party, 338. His
Death, 413. Royan surrendered to the King, 332.
S.
Sacrilege pretended, 428. Sancerre seized by the Reformed, 250. Saumur, an
Attempt of the Sheriffs of that Place, 151. Scholars of the Academy of Saumur
run themselves into a Praemunire, 496. Forbidden, 534. Schomberg Marshal, 329.
Schools, forbid at Rouen, 426. At St. Foi, Ibid. Ordered distinct, Ibid. 448.
Sedition at Paris, 324. At Orleans, 347. At Lion, Ibid. The Violence of it,
349. At Paris, 89. At Rochel, 133. At Milhau, 173. At Belestar, 174. Sedition
at Pau, against Renard the Kings Commissioner, 309. At Tours, 406, etc.
Sessions, Grand Sessions in Poitou, 507. They put the Churches into great
affrights, Ibid. And make an important Decree, Ibid. Sick People tormented by
the Monks, 416, 417. Visited by the Priests, 452. Soubife defeated, 332.
Solicits for succor in England, 351. His succor cast away in the Harbor,
352. Meditates great designs, 395. Betrayed by Nouailles, 396. He disingages
himself, 397. His success alters the face of Affairs, 398. His Manifesto, 399.
Answered, 400. He prospers, 402. Spanish Fleet before Rochel, 444. States
General of France meet, 168. The third Estate oppressed* by the Nobility and
Clergy, Ibid. St. Mark, Commissioner in the Synod of Alenson, 401. Substance of
the General Cahier of the Assembly of Saumur, and of the Answers to it, 73,
etc. Sulli Duke of, made a Marshal of France, 502. He takes false measures, 6.
He is advised to look to himself, 7. His disgrace, 19. Removed from the
Exchequer and Government of the Bastille, 20. He writes to the Queen, 21. His
Affair examined, 25. An anonimous Answer to his Discourse, 27. His Speech to
the Assembly, 48. Synod at Alenson, 401. The Commissioners Speech there, Ibid.
And his Instructions, 402. The Moderators Answer, 404. Their Deputation to the
King, 407. The Deputies how treated at Court, 410. Nomination of General
Deputies, 411. They make particular Deputies, 412. They condemn Militieres
Projects, 412. And approve Daille's writings, Ibid. They appease the Dispute
about universal Grace, Ibid. Synod National at Charenton, 370. Send
Commissioners to the King, 372. Their Obedience, 375. Proposals made there by
Galand, Ibid. They send a new Deputation to the King, 376. Synod National, 420.
Synod of Realmont, 422. An Article drawn up in that Synod for discovery of all
such as had a hand in the Spanish Treaty -- it offends the Churches -- and is
disowned by the National Synod, 425. The National Synod names General Deputies,
428, 429. And come to diverse Resolutions, 429. National Synod at Charenton,
480. The Commissioners Speech, Ibid. Answered, 482. They send Deputies to the
King, 485. Their Papers, Ibid. The Deputies favorably received, 487. Important
Resolutions taken by the Synod, 488. Synod National at Alenson, 540. Synod at
Blois, 90. Synod National of Privas, 99. Complaints of the Synod of Blois, 103.
Care of the Synods for the Reconciliation of the Grandees, 105. National Synod
at Tonneins, 158. Synod National at Vitre, 266, etc. Synod National at Aletz,
349, etc.
T.
TIerache, the Reformed Inhabitants there treated favorably, 117. Titenus
writes against the Assembly of Rochel, 308. He answers Milletiere, 373.
Tonneboutonne Mass resettl'd there, 447. Tonneins derided for her Civility,
314. Treatise entitled, The Eucharist of the Ancient Church, 500. Tremoville
Duke of, submits, 313. Troubles in France renew'ed, 394, 129. Troubles end,
143. Troubles of Privas, 354, etc. At Nimes occasioned by a Jesuit, 376. New
Troubles in Bearn, 402.
V.
VAlence's Credit, 365. Valence Bishop of, persecutes the Foreign Ministers,
469. Vatan, the Lord of it dies, 94. Vendosm Duke of, foiled before Britesse,
346. De Vic, 329. Vieville, his ingratitude and ill success, 388. Villarte a
Monk sent to Foix, and his Behavior there, 338. Attestations given him, Ibid.
His Triumph but a Chimera, 402. Vitre, the Church there pulled down, 443. Union
signed and sworn, 100. Treated of between the Prince of Conde and the Assembly
of Nimes, 216. United Provinces send succor to France, 438. University of
Poitiers, the Statutes revived, 421. University regulated, 450. Voices and
Opinions divided in the Court of Castres and the Issue of it, 429. Ursulin's of
Loudon, the Farce acted upon 'em, 504.
W.
WAtons besieged and taken, 379. Retaken and restored, 380. War against the
Reformed, the Reasons for it prevail, 332. The success of it in many Places,
346. Civil War, new Seeds of it, 470. War new in France, the Presages of it,
378. William de Hugues, his Negotiations in England, 390.
A TABLE of the Edicts, Declarations, etc. Serving for Proofs to the Second
Part of this Work.
THe Kings Declaration upon the Edict of Pacification, May 22. Page 455.
General Regulation drawn up in the Assembly of Saumur, August 29. 1611. 458.
Writing of the Assembly at Saumur, Anno 1611. and Answer. 462. A Declaration of
the King touching the Assemblies of any of his Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, confirming the Edict of Nantes and the Particular Articles.
At Paris, April 24. 1612. Registered in Parliament May 25. of the same Year.
482. A Declaration of the King, in favor of those of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, confirming the Preceding Declaration of April 24. Given at Paris,
July 11. 1612. and verified August 8. 484. A Declaration of the King, and
Confirmation of the Edict of Nantes, given at Paris December 15. 1612. and
verified, Jan. 2. 1613. 486. A Declaration of the Kings Majority, containing a
Confirmation of the Edict of Pacification, and Prohibiting Duels. At Paris,
October. 1. 1614. Verified the 2. of the same Month and Year. 489. A Declaration
of the King touching the renewing of all the Edicts of Pacification, Articles
agreed, Regulations and Decrees in pursuance of the same. Published in
Parliament the last of April, 1615. 491. A Declaration of the King upon Arms
being taken by some of his Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion,
containing a new Confirmation of the Edicts and Declarations formerly made in
favor of those of the said Religion. Given at Bourdeaux, November. 10. 1615.
494. An Extract of the Kings Edict for the Pacifying the Troubles of his
Kingdom; given at Blois May 1616. Verified June 13. the same Year. 499. Private
Articles granted in the Kings Name by his Deputies sent to the Conference at
Loudon, to the Prince of Conde, to obtain the Pacification of the Troubles;
after that, seen, approved, and ratified by his Majesty, 500. A Declaration
about the Edicts of Pacification, given at Paris, July 20. 1616. And verified
August 4. the same Year. 503. A Declaration of the King containing a
Confirmation of the Edict of Loudun, and the Private Articles of it. Given at
Paris the last of September 1616. and verified October. 25. 504. A Declaration of
the King against unlawful Assemblies of any of the Pretended Reformed Religion
at Castel-jaloux and Bearn; given at Paris May 21. 1618. and verified May 25.
506. A Declaration of the King, confirming the Edicts of Pacification, and the
Assemblies of Castel-jaloux, and Orthes approved, dated May 24. 1619. 508. A
Declaration of the King against those of the Assembly at Loudun, together with
a Confirmation of the Preceding Edict of Pacification. Dated Feb. 26. 1620.
510. A Declaration of the King in Favor of his Subjects of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, who shall remain in their Duty and Obedience, dated April
24. 1621. 514. A Declaration of the King by which all the Inhabitants and other
Persons within the Cities of St. Angeli and Rochel are declared guilty of High
Treason. Published June 7. 1621. 517. A Declaration of the King containing
Prohibitions to all his Loving Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion
remaining in their Obedience, to stir from their Houses either in the City or
Country, under the Penalties therein expressed, dated July 25. 1622. 520. A
Declaration of the King upon the Peace, which he gave his Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, confirming the Preceding Edicts of Pacification.
Dated October 19. 1622. 521. A Paper presented to the King by the General
Deputies with the Answers, 524. A Circulatory Letter of the General Deputies of
the Reformed Churches, 535. The Kings Declaration providing against the
Propounding or Treating of any Affairs in the Assemblies of the Pretended
Reformed Religion, but such as are permitted by the Edicts. Dated April 17.
1623. 536. A Declaration of the Kings good Will to his Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion. Verified in Parliament, November 27. 1623. 537. A
Declaration of the King against the Duke of Soubize and his Adherents. Given at
Paris, Jan. 25. 1626. 539. A writing given by the English Ambassadors to the
Deputies of the Churches to make the King of England Garranty of the Peace in
1626. 542. An Edict of the King, upon the Peace which it pleased his Majesty to
give his Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion. Dated March 1626. 543. A
Declaration of the King against the Sieur de Soubize and other Adherents to the
Party of the English, etc. Given at Villeroy, August 5. 1627. 548. A
Declaration of the King after the taking of Rochel to his Subjects of the
Pretended Reformed Religion. Given at Paris, December 15. 1628. 551. The Kings
Edict upon the Grace and Pardon granted, as well to the Duke of Rohan, and the
Sieur de Soubize, and to all his other Rebellious Subjects of the Cities, etc.
Given at Nimes in July 1629. 553.
FINIS.

