An Impartial HISTORY OF THE LIFE AND DEATH OF GEORGE Lord JEFFREYS LATE Lord
Chancellor OF ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey, 1689.

TO GEORGE Lord JEFFREYS LATE Lord Chancellor of England.
My Lord,

I Know not to whom I could more properly Dedicate a Treatise of this Nature,
than to your Lordship; who lately was Lord Chief Justice of England, and have
set such remarkable Copies to inferior Magistrates. What is here offered may
serve as a Mirror, in which future Administrators of Public Justice would do
well to look; for you may remember, my Lord, (if your Lordships present
Afflictions have not made you forget as much Law as you ever learnt) Common Law
runs much upon Presidents: And if a Man happen to have none of the best
Physiognomies, there is no reason why he should straight grow angry, and fling
stones, to break all the Looking-glasses he meets with, only because they
represent the true Figure of the Object.

My Lord, The following Treatise is a true Account of your Lordships Life and
Actions, (most of which are ready to be attested upon Oath) of your unheard of
Cruelties and barbarous Proceedings in your whole Western Circuit: In which all
may see at what dear rates our Western Martyrs purchased their Religion, and
how that it cost those glorious Sufferers that so lately went off the Stage
(under your Lordships Sentence) both Whippings and cruel Imprisonments, and the
most exquisite Tortures which none could invent or inflict but your Lordship,
(whose good nature is sufficiently experienced) nor any endure but they whose
gallant and noble Souls were born up with heavenly Cordials, and a Power from
on high. But, my Lerd, rest assured, that their Blood still cries for
vengeance, and will be a lasting Monument of your Lordships Cruelties, whilst
History can speak or transmit to incredulous Posterity the Remarkables of
elapsed Ages; for Hang, Draw and Quarter, and Try Men afterward, (Witness Sir
Thomas Armstrong's death, etc.) has been your peculiar Talent. But your
Lordship will now at last do well to remember that King Alfred caused forty
four Judges in one year to be hanged as murderers, for their false Judgments.

I hope your Lordship will pardon this present Address, seeing it is a
privilege we modern Authors hold by prescription, to put any great Body's Name
in the Front of our Book: Princes have not been able to exempt themselves or
their Families from the Persecution of Dedications; nor ever was there (I
humbly conceive) any Rule made in your Lordships Court to forbid them.

Suffer then, I beseech your Lordship, this Address to remain a Monument to
Posterity, of the sentiments this Age has of your Lordships Conduct and Merits;
and Witness to all the World how much its Author is

Your Lordships Most humble Servant,

James Bent.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF GEORGE Lord JEFFREYS.
REader, Think it not strange if I present you with the memorable Life and
Actions of a Person, so well known in this great Kingdom: And peradventure Fame
has not been silent in other Countries, especially since he has been advanced
to be a Chief Minister of State, and sat as it were steering at the Helm of
Government. Various indeed are the Changes of worldly Affairs, and the Actions
of Human Life, which have been more particularly exemplified in the Rise and
Fall of the Person, the Subject of this Discourse; who from almost a mean
obseurity, soared to the lofty Pyramid of Honor; where, for a while, like an
unfixed Star, he appeared to the Eyes of the wondering Nation, giving an
imperfect luster; 'till by the sudden turn and change of unsteady Fortune, he
dropped headlong from his Sphere, and lost at once his Grandeur and his Power. To
let Mankind see how little trust there is to be given to the smiles of
flattering Greatness, especially when attained by violent and pressing motions:
I now proceed to trace this unfortunate Favorite in the sundry Capacities and
Stations that have hitherto made up the Series of his Life.

He was born at Acton near Wrexam in Denbighshire, in Wales, about the Year
1648. his Fathers name was -- Jeffreys, being reputed a Gentleman in that
Country, though of no large Fortune or Estate; however he lived very
comfortably on what he had, improving his yearly Income by his Industry; and
gained by his plain and honest Endeavors a good repute amongst the Gentry of
those Parts; insomuch that it was not long before he, upon the recommendation
of some Person of Interest and Ability, gained a Wife of a good House; and they
lived very comfortably together in their rural Habitation, being sar from
Ambition, or striving for Court-favour; but contented with what God had blessed
them with, and the fruits of their own Industry, they found a solid Happiness
in that Contenment. Nor had they lived together any considerable time, but
amongst other Children, the fruits of Wedlock, God was pleased to bestow on
them the Person who is intended the Subject of this Discourse, who was in due
time Baptized by the Christian Name of George; whether he had Godfathers, etc.
it does not occur; however, he under the care and diligence of his industrious
Parents grew up, and appeared to all that studied him, of a very prompt and
ready Wit, active, and striving for Preeminence, even among his Compeers in his
tender Age, which lively demonstrated that an Air of Ambition was inherent to
his Person.

As soon as he was capable to receive Learning, he was put to a Country School,
where he was furnished with such Education as that afforded, which was not
extraordinary; yet his Natural Parts set it off to the best Advantage; and
growing to years of somewhat a ripe Understanding, and not very tractable, his
Father by the Advice of some of his Confidents, caused him to be brought to
London, and finding him not inclinable to any Trade, but rather addicted to
Study, he entered him, or by his procurement he was entered into the Free School
of West minster, where he profited much; so that he was, by the care of the
worthy Master. thereof, soon enabled to understand the Languages, or at, least
so many of them as were convenient for the study of the Law, which above other
things he aimed at; though his Father seemed not very pliable to his desires; for
perceiving in his Soul a more than ordinary Spark of Ambition, fearing it might
kindle into a flame, and prove one day his ruin, he labored to hinder the
ways he conceived most likely to bring it upon him; and is reported to say
(when he found he could not dissuade him from what he purposed, gently clapping
him on the back,) Ah George, George, I fear thou will dye with thy Shoes and
Stockings on: What he meant by that Expression, I determine not, but leave the
Reader to interpret.

Upon the Coming in of King Charles the Second, and the restoring the Face of
Affairs in the Kingdom, the Law revived again, and began to flourish; the
Practitioners lived in much Credit and Reputation, and many of them purchased
large Estates, which served to wing the desire of this Person with impatience;
and some say he was the rather incited to it by a Dream he had whilst a Scholar
at Westminster School, viz. That he should be the chief Scholar in that School,
and afterward should enrich himself by Study and Industry, and that he should
come to be the second Man in the Kingdom; but in conclusion, should fall into
great disgrace and misery. This is confidently reported; and some say himself
told it to sundry Persons, since when he found the second part of it was
fulfilled, by acquiring the Chancellourship, and standing high in the Favor of
his Prince.

However, We find the latter part did not deter him from his purpose; for
having entered himself in the Inner Temple House, one of the Chief Inns of
Court, after his performing such things as are conformable to the Customs of
the House, we find him called to the Bar, by the Interest he made with the
Benchers and Heads of that Learned Society, earlier than had been usual,
leaping over the Heads of elder Graduates.

This happening about the Twentieth year of the Reign of King Charles the
Second, and the City of London beginning to raise her self out of her Ashes,
more stately and magnificent than before she sunk in Flames, a Sacrifice to the
Revenge and Malice of the Papists, as by the late Inscription on the Monument,
and upon Record it appears: This great City, I say, regaining her Trade, her
Privileges and Customs were kept up with great exactness, so that in the
Courts at Guild Hall there was much Business; which being considered by this
Person as more beneficial than that at Westminster, by reason of its frequency,
and being carried on briefer, and with less difficulty; which induced him to
give his Attendance, as also at Hixes-Hall, and other inferior Courts and
Places; insomuch, that he being of a bold Presence, and having naturally a
fluent Tongue, an audible Voice, and good Utterance, he had not pleaded often
before he was very much taken Notice of; and gained so much Credit with the
People, that they preferred him before any of the younger fort of Barristers; by
which means he found his Stars begin to smile upon him; so that he was in a
manner Courted to take Fees, and had Breviates thrust into his Hand frequently
in the middle of a Cause by Persons, when they perceived it went ill on their
sides, and was like to go against them.

Thus flushed with success, he now thought of nothing more than how he might
climb; nor did he want an Opportunity; for the next Station we find him in, is
that of Common Sergeant, to the great and honorable City of London; and so
much Fortune favored him at this time, that Alderman Jeffreys the great
Smoaker, having often observed his Discourse and Actions, took such a liking to
him, that being of the same Name, though not in the least any Relation, he backed
him with his Purse and Interest, which was not inconsiderable; and thereby not
only enabled him to carry on his Grandeur, but to purchase as he found a
convenience or advantage, in order to his keeping it up in the World.

These, I say, being the Degrees by which he was climbing the slippery stair of
Honor, to contract a firmer alliance, he Addressed himself to a brisk young
Widow, Daughter to Sir Thomas Bludworth, then one of the Aldermen of the City,
and who in the time of the dreadful Conflagration had the Chair, as being then
Lord Mayor; and so far prevailed upon the Lady and her Father, that he gained
both their Consents, and the Contract was made, the Nuptials solemnized, And
soon after he had the pleasure to behold the Fruits of her Labor. Sir John
Howel the Recorder of London giving place, the Recordership became vacant,
which made this Person lay hold of that Opportunity, to use his own and the
Interest of his Friends, to acquire that Place of Trust and Honor: nor did his
Measures fail him, for by the powerful influence he had by this time gained
over sundry Persons, who were best able to promote him to what he so earnestly
labored to arrive at, he was chosen and confirmed Recorder of the Honorable
City; taking upon him the Charge and Care of the Writings, Papers, etc. that
belong to so great a Charge and Trust, as that of a Recorder of the City of
London.

By this means being become (as himself declared) The Mouth of the City, and as
we may term him, Capital Judge in the Guild Hall, in Controversies at the
Sessions held there, etc. and the Power of breathing forth Sentences of
Punishment being put into his hands, he found his Ambition enlarged, aiming at
nothing more than to become a Court-Favourite: Nor was it long before an
Opportunity offered it self, to make him to be taken notice of: For so it
happened, that some Persons had imprinted a Psalter, and Entitled it. (the
better to shadow the Injury they had done to the Company of Stationers, by
invading their Property) The King's Psalter, which occasioning a Dispute, it
was referred to a Hearing before the Council at Whitehall, the King being
present, and the Company the better to make out their Title and Claim, carried
with them this Person as their Counsel, who in the opening of the Case, and
making the Complaint of the apparent Injury done to the Company, in printing
what was really their Propriety, he had this Expression, viz. They have teemed
with a spurious Brat, which being clandestinely midwiv'd into the World, the
better to cover the Imposture, they lay it at your Majesty's door, etc. This,
though the King might have taken it (for sundry Reasons) as a Reflection upon
his Royal Person, yet he was so far from resenting it that way, that he only
turned to one of the Lords that sat next him, and said, This is a bold Fellow
I Will warrant him. And indeed the Stationers had the Matter declared by the
Honorable Board in their Favor.

About this time the Popish Plot being discovered by Dr. Otes and others, the
Nation was for a while in a Ferment, and matters run extremely high in Disputes
and Controversies, and he sailed with the Current, declaring with much heat and
violence against the Priests, Jesuits, and others of the Conspirators and
Romish Faction; as appeared not only by his vehement expressions in pleading
against him, but the alacrity and little concern that was visible in his
Countenance, when at any time, as Recorder of London, he past sentence of Death
upon any of them; which he frequently did with more or less reproach, and
became in a manner the terror of that Party. But no sooner he perceiving the
wind tacking at Court, and that there was some misunderstanding between King
Charles the Second and his Parliament, but he began to fall off, and grow cold
in prosecuting the ends of the Government, being frequently at Court, and
laboring as much as in him lay to draw the Magistracy of the City after him;
as appears more especially by one passage, viz. The King being recovered of an
Indisposition, that had for some time put the Kingdoms in a fear and doubt of
his Life, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen went to congratulate him upon his going
abroad; after which, and a favorable reception, it was proposed by this
Person, that they should in like manner wait upon his Royal Highness, then Duke
of York, who was not long before returned from Flanders; but perceiving no
forwardness to be seconded, he only with his Father-in-law stayed behind to
gain that Access. These and other Proceedings created in the City a Jealousy,
that he had espoused an Interest to their prejudice, which wrought so strongly
in their Conceits, that it was concluded in the Council Chamger at Guild Hall,
that he should resign his Recordership; and accordingly they sent to him to
deliver back the Papers and Writings they had entrusted him with, which
accordingly was done, and Sir George Treby constituted Recorder in his stead.

This so netled him, that he now openly declared himself to be what before was
only suspected, indulging his thoughts in nothing more, than how he might
revenge it upon the Dissenters, to whose influence on the Court of Aldermen he
attributed his dismission from the Recordership, and used his Endeavors to
blacken them as much as he could: Yet all his Honor was not sunk, for he had
prevailed for the Removal of Sir Job Charleton from the Chief Justiceship of
the County Palatine of Chester, and by the importunity and interest of his
Party at Court, gained it for himself; and took the first Possession of that
Charge in much splendour, paying at that time his Father a Visit with a numerous
Train, which, as it is reported, put the old Gentleman into such a fret, for the
drinking up his Cider, and devouring his Provisions, that he charged him with
the undertaking to ruiue him, by bringing a whole Country at his heels,
commanding him never to attempt the like Prodigality again with hopes of
success.

Many Petitions being put up upon the dissolving the Parliament in 1682. by
most of the Counties, and Buroughs, and Corporations of England, for the
speedy calling another, to redress the Grievances of the Nation; and the King
showing some dislike of that manner of proceeding, this Person further to
endear himself to the Interest of the Court, declared in his station as
vehemently against them, by saying, He abhorred that Petitioning, etc. from
which, and the discountenancing the Petitioners as much as in him lay, he
gained the name and Epithet of an Abhorrer; and upon the burning the Pope in
Effigies at Temple Bar, upon the Birthday of Queen Elizabeth, amongst other
Figures, the Arch-waggs had set one on Horseback with his Face to the Tail, and
a Paper on his back, viz. I am an Abhorrer.

During these Transactions, the Parliament being called, met at Westminister,
and amongst others, this Person was called before them, for attempting to
entrench upon the Rights and Privileges of the People, etc. and obliged at the
Bar of the Commons House, (after having been heard what he could say in defense
of his Proceedings by his Council) to make his acknowledgment upon his Knees,
and receive the Reprimand of the Speaker; whereupon, with some sharp Rebukes,
as the Censure of the House, he was discharged.

To comfort him in this affliction, that was not by a man of his haughty Spirit
a little stomacked, this Parliament being dissolved, and a call of Sergeants
had at the Kings-Bench-Bar, Westminister, he was the first in the Roll, and
consequently the Kings Sergeant; and as it is usual to present the King with a
Ring on that occasion, the Motto he agreed to was, A Deo Rex, a Rege Lex, viz.
The King from God, and the Law from the King. And now the Popish Party playing
their Cards with more security, Edward Fitz-Harris, who had been impeached by
the Commons, and stood charged by them of High Treason; being nevertheless,
upon the Dissolution, tried at the King-Bench-Bar, this Person was the
principal Stickler against him, and by his Rhetorical and florid expressions,
wrought so powerfully with the Jury, who were somewhat in doubt what they
should do in this Case, that they found him Guilty, and the Impeachment in
Parliament set aside, he was executed as a Traitor at Tyburn: and soon after
this, the Dissenters losing of their Esteem in the eyes of the Court-Party, and
some Justices of Peace of Middlesex being sharp upon them, this Person was
chosen Chairman at the Sessions at Hicks's-Hall, where he had an opportunity
to make them as he found his time, see the resentments of his anger; but this
place being held too low for a Spirit winged with so large an ambition, he
aimed at higher things, resolving like Icharus to be near the Sun, tho at the
hazard of melting his waxen Wings, dropping headlong into the Sea of inevitable
ruin: Whereupon perceiving some hot Contests in the City of London, about the
Election of Magistrates and Officers, he turned the Edge of his Fury that way,
insomuch that a Quo warranto came down against the Charter of the Honorable
City of London, and in fine, after much pleading and argument, pro and contra,
the Charter was surrendered, at least in consent, by those that were in Power,
and the King suspending the Execution of the Judgment obtained, caused such
Orders to be observed as he thought most convenient, which being so well known
to the Citizens of London, it would appear a presumption in me to enter upon
particulars; yet the chiefest Cavil against the City was, taking the Toll of
Markets, collecting Money to build Cheapside Conduit, etc. Nor was it long
after this, and the Trial of several Persons for Rioters, who attended the
Election of Sheriffs and Mayor, and the Fines passing upon many worthy Citizens
as Rioters on that occasion; in promoting which, this Person as a Counselor by
his florid Rhetoric was mainly instrumental, by giving the Court an account of
their respective abilities, the better to settle the Fines: but the Lord Chief
Justice Saunders dying, he succeeded him as Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench; in which station he was scarcely settled, but he admitted the
Popish Lords to Bail, that lay under an impeachment in Parliament, and whose
bailing had been refused by the Judges his Predecessors; and now it was that he
began more particularly to remember former affronts, an example of which take
in the Case of Elias Best a Hop-Merchant in Thames Street, viz.

It so happened when this Person was Recorder of London, that a Jury, of which
Best was one, having contrary to his mind, acquitted a Party indicted at the
Sessions of Peace in Guild Hall, for Printing and Publishing a Pamphlet, he in
much heat declared, that they had gone contrary to their Consciences, and stuck
not to upbraid them with Perjury; for which, as a high affront put upon the
Juries of London, they prayed the Court at the Old-Bayly, that they might
prefer an Indictment against him; and herein Mr. Best was the most active; but
the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs then upon the Bench, after it had been a long
time argued and debated, told them, that the Sessions being almost at an end,
it could not be tried, and therefore he would desire them to refer it to the
next Sessions, for the Recorder being a Person of Quality, he could not suffer
him to lie under the imputation of an Indictment so long; but in the interim,
he resigning his Recordership, the business fell, and came to nothing; but soon
after, it seems, Mr. Best had drank an Health to the pious Memory of Stephen
College departed, meaning the Joyner that was executed at Oxford, for which he
was indicted upon an Information, and found Guilty; yet he being at large,
thought fit to withdraw himself to avoid the rigor of the Fine, etc. when so
it fell out, that this Person going the Circuit as Lord Chief Justice,
accompanied with a great many on Horseback, Mr. Best came by, and asked one of
the Company what Judge that was, who replied, the Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys,
and he unadvisedly told that Party his name was Best, and desired him to
remember his Service to his Lordship; upon notice of which, he immediately
caused him to be fetched back, and committed him to York Goal, from whence he
was brought by Habeas Corpus to the King's Bench, and Imprisoned for a Fine of
500 l. etc. And other instances of the greatness of his Stomach, tho in another
nature, is that which so remarkably happened at Kingstone upon Thames, at the
Midsummer Assizes held there for the County of Surry, 1679.

At this Assize being Counsel in a Case upon Nisi prius, before Sir Richard
Weston, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and desiring to ingross all the
Questions, without suffering those on the other side to ask the Witness what
was convenient in carrying on, and managing the Cause; he was desired by the
Judges to hold his Tongue, etc. upon which some words passing, this Person told
him, He did not use him like a Counselor, curbing him in the managing his
Breviate, etc. to which the Judge fiercely replied, Ha! since the King has
thrown his favors upon you, in making you Chief Justice of Chester, you think
to run down every body; if you find your self aggrieved, make your complaint,
here is no body cares for it. And this Person replying, That he had not been
used to make complaints, but rather stopped those that were made: when being
again commanded to hold his Tongue, he sat down and wept for anger, etc. And
here by the way it will not be amiss to let the Reader have a taste of some
passages that happened on the public Stage of business, in the Jocular part of
this great Man's Life, and the Repartees he met with, of which I shall instance
a few:

Once it happened upon a Trial, that a plain Country Fellow giving Evidence in
the Court, and pressing it home, moved this Person, who was Counsel on the
other side, to pick a quarrel with the poor man's Leather Doublet, and amongst
other Interrogations, bawled out You Fellow in the Leather Doublet, pray what
have you for swearing? The man upon this, looking steadily on him, replied,
Truly Sir, if you have no more for Lying than I have for Swearing, you might
wear a Leather Doublet as well as I. This bluntly retorted, moved at that time
much laughter, and filled the Town with the Discourse of it.

Another time it so fell out, that some Musicianers brought an Action against a
person, at whose Wedding they had played, for the money they were promised or
expected, when in the midst of the Evidence, this Person called to one of them,
viz. You Fiddler, etc. at which the man seeming to be disgusted, he again, upon
the Parties alleging himself to be a Musicianer, demanded What difference
there was between a Musicianer and a Fiddler. As much, Sir, said he, as there is
between a pair of Bagpipes and a Recorder. And he then being Recorder of
London, it was taken as a suitable Repartee.

Being at a Country Assize as Judge, an old Man with a great Beard, came to
give Evidence before him, and not doing it to his mind, he began to cavil with
his Beard, and amongst other expressions told him, That if his Conscience was
as large as his Beard, he might well swear any thing. This so netled the old
Blade, that without any respect to his greatness, he briskly replied, My Lord,
If you go about to measure Consciences by Beards, your Lordship has none. Many
more of this kind might be mentioned, but not being greatly to the purpose,
they are willingly omitted.

But to return to the third of this Discourse; passing by his vehement and
pressing Discourse to the Jury against William Lord Russel, on his Trial at the
Old-Bayly, which some say greatly influenced them to find him Guilty; and add,
that he did it out of a pique, in remembrance he was one of the Members of the
Parliament before whom he was brought on his Knees. We find him by this time
Trying of Dr. Titus Oats upon two Informations, upon the account of his
Swearing to the White-Horse Consult, and Ireland's being in Town; and after a
long Debate, wherein many sharp Repartees passed, the Jury made a shift to find
him Guilty; as to the Circumstances, I refer you to the Trial; but the Sentence
was severe, and of its effects few are ignorant; wherefore I shall pass it
over, as also that of Mr. Tho. Dangerfield, another of the Evidences in
discovering the Contrivances and carrying on of the Popish Plot, which the
Papists by these manner of Proceedings accounted to be effectually stisted. And
now before any thing remarkably happened, the Kingdom was alarmed by the
Landing of the late Duke of Monmouth at Lyme in Dorsetshire, and the Earl of
Argyle in Scotland; but however these two unfortunate Gentlemen miscarrying,
and losing their Lives, left a great many of their miserable Followers to feel
the severity of Punishment; and as for the gleanings the bloody Fields in
England, they came to the sifting of this Person, who with others, going down
with a Commission to Try them, all the Indignities the Diffenters had put upon
him came fresh into his remembrance, so that he made them find the Laws more
cruel than the Sword, and wish they had fallen in the Field, rather than have
come to his handling; for he breathed Death like a destroying Angel, and
sanguined his very Ermins in Blood, a large Account of which you shall have in
its proper place.

But by the way, for the sake of the West-Country Reader, I shall here add a
true and impartial Narrative of the late Duke of Monmouth's whole Expedition
while in the West, seeing that was the Prologue to that bloody Scene that you will
hear by and by, was acted by George Lord Jeffreys, (the Subject of our present
Discourse.)

To begin then, May 24. Old Style, We left Amsterdam about Two of the Clock,
being Sunday Morning, and in a Lighter sailed for the Texel, our Vessels being
sent before us thither; but meeting with extreme cross Winds all the way, we
arrived not till Saturday Night, and then went all on Board. Here our Man of War
with about 32 Guns, (where the Dukes Person was) was under an Arrest by order
of the States of Amsterdam, on the complaint of our Envoy, they presuming we
had been clear, but we broke through our Arrest, and Sunday Morning at break of
Day, set sail for England. We had in all three Ships; that of 32 Guns carried
most of our Men, the other two were for our Ammunition. We met with exceeding
cross Winds, most part of the time we spent on the Seas, and Arrived not at
Lime till Thursday, June 11. so that from Amsterdam to Lime, we wanted but two
days of three Weeks.

We Landed without any the least Opposition, and were received with all
expressions of Joy imaginable; the Duke, as soon as he jumped out of his Boat
on Land, called for silence, and then desired we would join with him in
returning God Thanks for that wonderful preservation we had met with at Sea,
and accordingly fell on his Knees on the Sand, and was the mouth of us all in a
short Ejaculation, and then immediately well Armed, as many as we were, entered
the Town.

Friday, the whole day was spent in Listing of Men, which flocked to us so
fast, that we could scarce tend them with Arms.

The like on Saturday also; and then about ten of the Clock at Night, 300 of
our Men were sent to Bridport, about six English Miles off, to Storm that Town
betimes in the Morning, which we did accordingly, taking many Prisoners out of
their Lodgings; and had not our Soldiers been a little too eager of Plunder, we
had made a good days work on it; but there lying about a Wood some of the Kings
Forces, we were forced to retreat, losing three or four Men, and killing
several of theirs, and taking Eight Prisoners; this was the first Action which
he had.

Sunday also was spent in Listing, and Monday Morning; but in the Afternoon we
marched out of Lime for Axminster, a little Town four Miles off; our Party was
near 2000, Foot, and 300 Horse, though we Landed not full an hundred Men, and
all these in the space of four days: About two Miles from Lime we espied the
Duke of Albermarle, with about 4000 Men, designing that Night to quarter in the
same Town, which we had news of in the way; yet we marched on in good order,
and came into the Town, lined all Hedges, Planted our Fieldpieces, and
expected nothing more than that we should give 'em battle, they being not an
English Mile from the Town; they made toward us as soon as they heard that we
were there; but the Duke of Albermarle finding his Men to be all Militia-Men of
the County of Devonshire, and that they had no stomach to fight against
Monmouth, Retreated, when he came within a quarter of an English Mile of the
Town. He came from Exon with these Forces, intending to lay a siege against
Lime, presuming we could not be ready in so short a time; but finding us so
well prepared to receive him, he wisely retired his Men, being in great
disorder and confusion, supposing we had pursued them, which was Debated; but
the Duke said, It was not his business to fight yet, till his Men had been a
little Disciplined, but rather to make up into the Country as ast as possible,
to meet his Friends, not questioning, but there would have been in several
parts of the Kingdom some Action, on the News of his Success: But this in the
end proved fatal to us; for had we but followed them, we had had all their
Arms, several more men, and might have marched in two days with little or no
opposition, to the very Gates of Exon, the County-Troops resolving not to fight
us; and several came to us that Night with their Arms. But missing this
opportunity, we marched on for Taunton, Lodging at several small Towns by the
way, which still received us as kindly as possible, and all the way met with
the loud Acclamations of the Country, praying God to succeed our Arms.

Thursday we came to Taunton, about twenty Mile from Lime. To give a particular
Account of our Reception here, would be too tedious; the Streets thronged with
People we could scarce enter, all endeavoring to manifest their Joy at his
coming, and their Houses, Doors, and Streets garnished with green Boughs, Herbs
and Flowers, all the Emblems of Prosperity.

The next day, Twenty six young Gentlewomen, Virgins, with Colors ready made
at the charge of the Townsmen, presented them to his Grace; the Captain of them
went before with a Naked Sword in one hand, and a small curious Bible in the
other, which she presented also, making a short Speech, at which the Duke was
extremely satisfied, and assured her, He came now in the Field, with a design
to defend the Truths contained therein, and to Seal it with his Blood, if there
should be any occasion for it. Nothing now could content the Country, but he
must be proclaimed King, which he seemed exceeding averse to; and really I am
of Opinion, from his very heart.

They said, The Reason why the Gentry of England moved not, was because he came
on a Commonwealth-Principle; This being the Cry of all the Army, he was forced
to yield to it, and accordingly, Saturday Morning he was Proclaimed: In the
Afternoon came out three PROCLAMATIONS, one setting a Sum of Money on the Kings
Head, as he had done before by the other. The Second, Declaring the Parliament
of England, A Seditious Assembly; and if they did not separate before the end
of June, to give Power and Authority to any that would attempt to lay hold of
them as Rebels and Traitors. The Third, To declare the Duke of Albermarle a
Traitor, (who now lay within six Miles of us, having had time to Rally his
Men,) if he laid not down his Arms; forthwith a Message also was sent to
command him, but he sent word, That he was a Subject to JAMES the Second, the
late Kings Brother, and that he knew no other Lord.

We tarried here till Sunday Morning, and then marched for Bridge-water, seven
Miles from thence: We were now between four and five thousand Men, and had we
not wanted Arms, could have made above ten thousand. We were received here as
in other places, but did little more than Read our Declaration, which we did
also in all other Towns, the Magistrates standing by in their Gowns; and
likewise our Proclamations, and so marched forward for Glassenbury; from
Glassenbury designed for Bristol, three days March from that Place, designing
to Attaque it: Accordingly, we arrived at Canshum-Bridge, a little Town three
Miles English from Bristol, intending to enter next morning, the Duke of
Beaufort being there with a Garrison of about Four Thousand Men, being here
lodged in the Town, we were on a sudden Alarmed with the noise of the Approach
of the Enemy, being in no small Confusion on this unsuspected News: The Duke
sent one up the Tower to see whether he could discover them marching; as soon
as he came up, he saw them at the very entrance into the Town fighting with our
Men. Here we had a small Skirmish, our Men being in the Fields adjoining to the
Town refreshing themselves; but it lasted not long, for before he could bring
word, they were fled, being not above sixty Horsemen: They did us mischief,
killed and wounded above twenty Men, whereas we killed none of theirs, only
took four Prisoners and their Horses, and wounded my Lord Newburg, that it was
thought mortal; they came thither, thinking it had been their own Forces; and
had not our undisciplined Fellows been a little too eager, and suffered 'em to
come a little farther on, they would have entered the Town, and we must have had
every man of them; their Infantry was following, but on their Return came not
forward. These Forces being so near, and Bristol being so well manned also, the
Duke was loath to pass the Bridge for Bristol, though some Gentlemen that came
over with us, and were prescribed upon the account of the former Plot, being
Bristol-men, and knew the hearts of the Townsmen, begged him heartily to
proceed toward it, offering themselves to go in the Head of them into the
Town, by some private ways which they knew, assuring him, They would make no
Resistance, but could not persuade him; which had we been Possessors of, we
could not have wanted Money nor Arms, the only things needful for us in that
Juncture; for had we but had Arms, I am persuaded we had by this time had in
the least twenty thousand Men; and it would not then have been difficult for us
to have marched to London, with the Recruit of Bristol, the King not being able
to make 7000 Men for the gaining of so many Kingdoms. But God saw it not fit
for us, and overruled our Consultations to our own ruin; for this was in the
top of our Prosperity; and yet all the while, not a Gentleman more than went
over with us came to our assistance.

So we marched on to Bath, we lay before it in the Afternoon, and sent in our
Trumpeter to demand the Town, but they refused to give us Entrance, having a
strong Garrison, it being a stout People and a strong place. Having no mind to
spend time in laying Sieges, we marched on that day to a little Town called
Phillips-Norton, and there lay that night, being now Sunday the 26th of June,
Old-Style, Saturday Morning preparing for

From, We were drawing out our baggage for our March, and on a sudden were
alarmed with the appearance of the Enemy, who had entered the Town, and had
lined all the Hedges, and began to fire on us: Here began the briskest
Rencounter we yet had, and for an hour or more we had a brisk Skirmish; but at
last we beat them back, killing about thirty which lay in the place, and we
lost about ten in all, and a few wounded: They retreating with their whole
Army, pitched within a mile of the Town; and we went out also and pitched near
them, but out of Musketshot, playing Cannon one on another for some hours; they
killed us but one man all the while, but with ours we did great execution,
having the advantage of the ground; so at last they retreated, and I have been
told lost some hundreds of men in the Battle, both killed and wounded: So we
marched on for From, a Town where we were as beloved as at Taunton, where we
wanted for nothing but Arms, which were by a Stratagem taken from them a few
days before our entrance. Here came the unexpected News of Argyle's being
defeated, and likewise of the advance of the Kings Force from London with
considerable Baggage, and thirty Fieldpieces. This News, together with our
want of Money and Arms, (not seeing which way to avoid these Forces) we were at
a stand, and not a little non-plus'd. 'Twas at last agreed on, that we that
came with the Duke should get good Horses that Night, and so for Pool, a little
Seaport Town not far off, where we were to seize a Ship, and set forth for
Holland again, leaving our Infantry to the mercy of the Country.

This was much like that Resolution of the Hollanders in the time of the Civil
War with Spain, being as we then were, in despair of making better Terms, and
not daring to enter Salisbury Plain, because their Horse being so much better
than ours, their Men being all Disciplined, ours not, we could not face them in
so plain and open a Country, so that we retreated backward, in the mean time
resolving to see what London would do, having a good opportunity offered them:
The Soldiers being called forth, and not two thousand Men to be had for their
defense if they had but attempted any thing; this disheartened our Men, and
several of them coming home to their own Country, having felt by experience the
hardships of War, withdrew from us.

We came well back again to Bridgewater, and were received with wonted Love; we
arrived here on Friday the 3d of July, and resolved here to fortify, so as to
hold our ground till we heard from London. Saturday in the Afternoon news was
brought of the Approach of the Kings Forces within a Mile and a half of the
Town where they had encamped, the Duke went up into the Tower and there took a
view of them, and seeing them so careless, and their Horse at some distance
from the Army, in a little Town, the Infantry being in Sedge Moore. He called a
Council on it, and it was concluded on, that we should fall on them in the dead
of the Night, accordingly having a Guide to conduct us on in a private way, we
marched out at about 11 of the Clock in the night, and about one fell on them
in their Tents. There was a Ditch between us, and the Guide promised to conduct
'em over an easy fordable place, but our Men seeing the Enemy just before
them, ran furiously on and lost the Guide, so that while they endeavored to
recover over that place the Enemy got on their Legs, and put themselves in
Order, and now began as fierce a Battle as perhaps ever was fought in England
in so short a time; our Foot fought as well as ever Foot fought, but not a
Horse came up; had our Horse but assisted, we must have beaten them out of the
Field. But our Horses would not stand at the noise of Drums and Guns, so that
we soon lost two of our Pieces of Ordinance, and we had but four in all, and
then but one more in the Field; our Foot flung most of their Shot over, so that
the Men for the most part were killed in the Rear, and that run, but the Front
stood still; and had we done as much execution in the Front as we did in the
Rear, the day had been our own; but God would not have it, their time was not
yet come: By this time their Horses came up, and having six or eight hundred
good disciplined Men, well mounted and well armed, ours neither; our Foot
having shot away all their Ammunition, and our Baggage being not then in the
Field, they were forced to retreat, being all in confusion.

Having no Money left, and our Party thus unexpectedly repulsed, the Duke seeing
he could not hold it any longer, fled with my Lord Gray.

The Duke's Party was said to be about three thousand Foot, and a thousand
Horse; we had more, at least five thousand Men and Horse, but not well Armed,
yet in the Field. It Is said we lost not above three hundred, and they Foot; but
after when we were routed in our retreat lost a vast many more; though they
pursued not in some hours after.

The most remarkable Persons that were taken in this total Rout, were Colonel
Holmes, Major Perrot, the Constable of Crookhorn, and Mr. Williams, Servant to
the late Duke of Monmouth.

After the Field was clear of the Dukes Men, the Earl of Feversham marched with
five hundred Foot and a Party of Horse and Dragoons to Bridgwater, where he
found the Dukes Forces that were left there, fled and dispersed into several
Places: When his Lordship having left these Men in the Town, under the Command
of Colonel Kirk, and hearing the late Duke of Monmouth was fled with about
Fifty Horse, the greatest number of the Dukes Men that were left together, he
sent out diverse Parties in pursuit of him and others that fled the Field. When
on the 7th of July, about five in the Morning, some of the Lord Lumly's Men
seized the Lord Gray and another Person near Holt-Lodge in Dorsetshire, four
Miles from the West of Ringwood; and the said Lord Lumly making further enquiry
among the Cotts, was informed by one Anna Ferrant that two men went over a
Hedge, proving to be the Out-bounds of many Enclosures, some of which were
overgrown with Fern, others with Pease and Oats; but Guards being set upon the
Avenues, after diverse attempts to escape, the Brandenburgh, one of the Parties
observed to enter the Ground, was taken on the 8th of July, about five in the
morning, who confessing he departed from the late Duke of Monmouth about One of
the Clock that morning in the Out-bounds, diligent search was made; when about
Eleven of the Clock the same morning he was found, by one Henry Parking, hid in
a Ditch, covered with Fern, who calling others to assist him, the said late
Duke was in the end taken, and together with the Lord Gray, and the
Brandenburgh, with a strong Guard brought by easy Journies to Whitehall, where
they arrived on the 13th of July, and after some examination were committed to
the Tower, when on Wednesday the 15th of July, the late Duke of Monmouth,
pursuant to a Warrant signed for his Execution, upon his attaindure of
High Treason, was delivered to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, about Ten
in the Morning, and conducted to a Scaffold erected on Tower Hill, where after
about half an hours continuance, he laying down his Head, had it stricken off
by the Executioner, the which, together with his Body, being put into a Coffin
covered with Velvet, were carried away in a Velvetcovered Hearse, in order to
his Interment.

After the Duke was beheaded, many Prisoners taken, and those that fled by
Parcels up and down, secured in diverse Goals, in order to their Prosecution, as
was said according to Law; which was the occasion of this great Man's shevving
his parts at that Degree as he did, no one else fit to be made a Tool for such
a Bloody Tragedy as he acted.

The Trials were deferred (for some time after the Fatal Blow given to the Duke
of Monmouth, on Tower Hill, which was the 15th of July following) because of my
Lords being at Tunbridge; but the latter end of August, he with a Special
Commission of Oyer and Terminer, assisted with four other Judges, set forward
with a Party of Horse, he being made by special Commission their General. The
first place he came at was Winchester, where were diverse Prisoners on
Suspicion; but here began the Tragedy; for the Lady Lisle was there Arraigned
for High Treason, in harboring Mr. Hicks and Mr. Nelthrope, that had been
concerned with the Duke; the Lady being on her Trial, the Jury were
dissatisfied once and again; but my Lords Threats and other Managery, so
disposed the Jury, that at last they brought the Lady in Guilty; on which he
pronounced the Sentence of Death on her, as usual in such Cases; but she had
the favor of being Beheaded; their other Prisoners were carried to Salisbury;
and this was the most remarkable thing at that Assizes.

From thence they set forward for Salisbury, where were many Prisoners that had
been picked up and down the Country, then in the Goal, the which, with those
that were brought from Winton, were ordered to be carried to Dorchester, there
not being Evidence enough to accomplish what was then designed by my Lord; so
that little of moment passed there, but to pursue the matter, proceeds from
thence to Dorchester, where he with his Assistants, Gown-men, and Swordmen,
arrived on the 3d of September, on which day being Thursday, the Commission was
read. Friday morning was an excellent Sermon Preached before their Lordships,
by a worthy Divine, Chaplain to a worthy Person of that County, much tending to
Mercy: It was observed, that while my Lord Chief Justice was at Church in
Prayers, as well as at Sermon, he was seen to laugh, which was so unbecoming a
Person in his Character, that ought in so weighty an Affair as he was then
entering upon, to have been more serious, and have craved the help and
assistance of God Almighty.

The Sermon being over, their Lordships repaired to the Court, which by order
of the Lord Chief Justice was hung with Red Cloth, a Color suitable to such a
succeeding bloody Tragedy, being accompanied by a numerous Company of the
Gentry of that County, as well as the Flovver of the Neighboring Countries of
Somerset and Devonshire, and then proceeded to give his Charge; in which
Charge, by reason of the Severity of his Sentiments, and Positions laid down to
make discoveries of all such as were Abettors, Aiders or Assisters to the late
Duke of Monmouth, on pain of High Treason, which was a great Surprise to all
the Auditors, and so vehemently urged, and so passionately expressed, as seemed
rather the Language of a Romish Inquisitor, than a Protestant Judge; and then
Adjourned until Eight of the Clock next Morning, when was a Bill found against
Thirty Persons, charged for High Treason, for Aiding and Assisting the late
Duke of Monmouth; who put themselves on their Trials, notwithstanding my Lord's
Threatening, That in Case any did put themselves on Trial, and the Country found
them Guilty, they should have but a little time to live. And at the same time
insinuated, That it were better to plead Guilty, if they expected any favor.

These Thirty being on Trial, the Evidences being sworn and examined before the
Jury: Upon the whole, by the violent Deportment of the Lord Chief Justice, and
sharpness of the Jury, they found Twenty-nine Guilty, though some of them were
very hardly dealt with, and not so Criminal as my Lord and their Country
imagined. Particularly amongst the Twenty-nine, were Mr. Matthew Bragg of
Thorncomb, and Joseph Speed of Culliton, in the County of Devonshire, and Mr.
Smith, Constable of Chardstock, in the said County, and George Steward of
Culliton aforesaid. The Circumstances of each of these, and the severity of
their being found Guilty, etc. shall be showed in its proper place, before we
take leave of this Town, and proceed on in this Western Expedition.

The said Twenty-nine being found (as before) Guilty, my Lord immediately
pronounced Sentence of Death on them all, as usual in Cases of High Treason,
and did the same Night give a Warrant to the Sheriff, for the Execution of
Thirteen of the Twenty-nine on Monday following; which accordingly was done,
notwithstanding great Application was made to the Lord Chief Justice by
Gentlemen of the best Quality, in this and the Neighboring Countries, for a
Reprieve of Mr. Bragg, to all which he was Deaf, and not to be prevailed upon;
though he was assured of his Honesty, and true Conformity to the Church of
England, yet it availed nothing. At last, it was only requested for Ten days
Respite, yet that had no better effect; but on Monday, he with Twelve more of
that number, were accordingly Executed at Dorchester.

In the mean time, this Proceeding was designed to shorten Business, and to
wheedle the rest that were to follow to a Confession, which without it, the
tenth part of them could not be proved Guilty. A Method was also taken without
President, to entrap many poor ignorant people, by a couple of Officers that
were sent into the Goal, to call over, and take the Names of the Prisoners; on
promise, if they confessed, they might expect Mercy, otherwise not; which many
did. And this was written so, that had they pleaded Not Guilty, these two were
designed to have been Evidences against them from their own Confessions, which
so disposed the remaining great Numbers, that all, except a very few, Pleaded
Guilty, which put an end to any further Trial.

The only thing remaining, was the pronouncing of Sentence on them, which were
in Number 292. who received Sentence of Death all at once. One Mr. Lawrence put
himself on Trial, but by the Jury found Guilty, whose Case was hard, his
Circumstances being so small to be condemned to die; and had actually suffered,
had not Application been made to my Lord's Favorites, and with the payment and
securing of 400 l. preserved him from Execution.

This Matter being adjusted, and Execution awarded to about Eighty, which were
Executed, and their Quarters sent up and down the Country to the dread of their
Spectators, as well as the Annoyance of the Travelers; his extraordinary
Whippings, though unmerciful, are not to be taken notice of; so we leave this
place, and proceed toward the City of Exon: In their way thither, lying at an
Honorable Gentleman's House, diverse of the Neighboring Parishes made their
Petitions to the Lord Chief Justice in behalf of some Relations concerned. It
happened, that through some disorder amongst his Servants, some Pistols were
fired in the Night, which gave him a Suspicion, or at least he took it, of some
design upon him; on which at parting, he said, Not a man of all those Parishes
that were of that Vicinitude, if found Guilty, should escape. And so we proceed
and arrive at Exon, where to the number of 243 Prisoners being in Custody for
assisting the said Duke of Monmouth, one amongst the rest, Mr. Four Acers
pleading not Guilty, he being found by the Jury, the said Lord Chief Justice
immediately pronounced the Sentence upon him, and immediate Execution, which
was done to terrify the rest, who all Pleaded Guilty; so that these
unfortunate People had not time to have the fairness of Trials allowed them,
which is a right due by the Laws of God and Man. The remaining number he all
condemned; and here was a little sparing; not so many ordered Execution as was
in the other County, but those that were executed, were hung up and down in
most Towns of the County, and their Quarters and Heads scattered up and down
the Highways and public places. An extraordinary Sentence of severe Whipping
was pronounced against Mr. Samuel Staple of Thorncomb in the said County; but
these are Trifles, and we shall endeavor to pursue our Design, and make as
quick dispatch as we can, that time may not be lost, the King served, and this
Miscreants thirst quenched with Protestant Blood, which is always well-pleasing
to Inquisitors, and so proceed to the Town of Taunton. At which place being
arrived, it was thought fit by the Lord Chief Justice to be as expeditious as
might be; so that late in the Afternoon the Court sat, where the Commission
being read, he proceeded to give the Charge, which was so very keen and full of
sharp Invectives, as if the Country it self had not been able to make Expiation
to his Lordship, to quench his Thirst in the Blood of those that ventured their
All in Defense of the Protestant Religion; and here we enter upon the bloodiest
part of the Tragedy. In this Town, and at Wells in the said County, were more
than 500 Prisoners.

To begin at Taunton: The next Morning after the Charge given, the Assizes
began, where some fevv put themselves on Trial, who were found Guilty, and
immediately ordered to be Executed; of which number one Mr. Simon Hamlin was
one, who was a zealous worthy good Man, and his Case no way dangerous, but
on the contrary, had he had to do with a Judge of another Stamp. To proceed to
the rest: This first Cruelty caused the rest to plead Guilty in hopes of
favor, which was only a few days to live, which those that pleaded had not.
Amongst these, at Taunton were diverse eminent Persons that had been taken in
the West, and carried to London, and brought down there to complete the Bloody
Tragedy in those parts: Mr. Parrot, Mr. Hewling the Elder, Mr. Lisle, Mr.
Jenkins, Mr. Hucker, and diverse others were very eminent. To take notice of
every particular in this Matter, will alter our Design, and swell the Book to
too great a Bulk, being any designed for a Pocket Companion, and useful it may
be to see the Cruelty of men when in their Power, and how the Devil stirs up
his Instruments, to pursue those that adventure for the Cause of God and
Religion. Here were in this County Executed 239. the rest that were Condemned
were Transsported, except such as were able to furnish Coin, and that not a
little; for an account was taken of men's Abilities, according to which, the
purchase for Life must be managed by two of his Favorites, who had a small
share, the rest went into his Lordships Pocket; according to the Actions of
Rome, where Sins of any kind may be pardoned for money. This indeed was a
glorious Design in the Eve of Mother Church, to root out Heresy by Executions
and Transportations, to make room for a pack; here Expedition must be made to
conclude at Wells, for that a great Man being fallen, our great Judge designing
his Chair, which in short, he had has the Reward of fo eminent and
extraordinary a piece of Service as he did for the Advancement of the Roman
Catholics Interest, which is cruel always where it prevails.

Thus we leave the Town of Taunton, after awarding Execution to many there, and
their Quarters to be scattered up and down the County, and so we proceed to
Wells, where diverse Prisoners that had been carried from Goal to Goal, in
expectation of Evidence against them, were in Carts removed to Wells; in which
place, to finish this Expedition, the same Method as was at the former Assizes,
was also taken here by a severe Charge, affronting the Gentlemen of this
County, as he had done in all the Counties before, terrifying the Juries (when
any pleaded) to make them to bring in the persons Guilty; some of which being
overawed, and it is doubted, contrary to their Judgments, which if so, the Lord
forgive them.

Here were many eminent and worthy persons that received the Sentence of Death,
but the Executions of the County being put together, as you have before seen,
we make no particular Division of the Number here, and the Number at Taunton,
the whole being recited before: We shall therefore endeavor to be as brief as
we can, to give you what we think material, and truly matter of Fact; my Lord
now being come to conclude this extraordinary Commission, and in haste to be
elevated, makes all manner of dispatch to repair to the King then at Windsor,
to give an Account of his Transactions, and to receive the Reward of his
meritorious Service in this Butchering of Protestants, which is so acceptable
to his Holiness, and his bigoted Disciples, as nothing can be more; and
indeed, if you will believe them, a Work that merits Heaven at last, besides
what Temporal Preferments are thought fit in this World. If this cruel Judge
were a true Protestant, his Case is much the worse, being made use of as a Tool
to destroy, and carry on Popish Designs. Thus the Affairs being ended, the
Country filled with Heads and Quarters of those that were Executed, the rest
that had not wherewith to purchase their Lives, left in Custody in order to
Transportation; My Lord being come to the King to give an Account of his
Affairs in the West, the Great Seal being to be disposed of by the Death of the
late Keeper, he kissed the King's Hand for it, and was made Lord Chancellor,
which was only an earnest of his Desert for so eminent and extraordinary a
piece of Service; so now that which remains, is to give an Account of diverse
that had fled, and hid themselves up and down in Holes and Privacies, whose
Friends made all Application to some great Men or other to procure their
Pardoms; some to this, and others to such as they thought Favorites of the
King; but the Rewards must be assertained before any Application could be made:
Diverse Lists being sent up, and the Rewards assertained, which amongst many of
them put together, did amount to considerable, so that it was now, who could
find a Friend to relieve his distressed Relations, which were forced to wander
up and down in Caves and Deserts, for fear of being taken: But this Misfortune
attended the Agents, that unless my Lord Chancellor were used, by his
Creatures, that were allowed by him so to do; other Applications commonly met
with Disappointments, which caused an Emulation among the great Men; one
supposing to have deserved the King's Ear as well as the other, which caused
other Measures to be taken, though some were wheedled out of their money. At
last came out a General Pardon, with Exceptions, very few, if any of those that
were solicited for, not being excepted, were of course pardoned; but however,
diverse Sums of Money having been paid, no Restitution to be had, for from Hell
is no Redemption. A worthy Western Gentleman's purchase came to fifteen or
sixteen hundred Guinea's, which my Lord Chancellor had. Amongst the Exceptions
were a parcel of Taunton Girls, some of which were Children of Eight or Ten
years old, however, something was to be made of them, if these Ladies were
judged Guilty of Treason for presenting the Duke of Monmouth with Colors, etc.
and for to preserve these from Trial, they were given to Maids of Honor to
make up their Christmas Box; so that an Agent of theirs was sent down into the
Country to compound with their Parents, to preserve them from what might after
follow, if taken; so, that some according to Ability, gave 100 l. others 50 l.
all which however did not answer the Ladies first Expectations; yet it did
satisfy, and they were accordingly pardoned. Thus we have given you an Account
of what has happened on this Occasion, being in every Point truth: We might
have farther Enlarged, but that would have spoiled the Design, and swollen our
Pocket Companion to a Volume too big.

We shall therefore next proceed to give you a true and exact List of all them
that were condemned, and suffered in the West, in the year 1685. under the
Sentence of my Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys. With the Names of the Towns where
every Man was executed.

Bathe 6.
WAlter Baker Thomas Clotworthy Henry Body Thomas Collins Gerrard Bryant John
Carter.
Philipsnorton 12.
Robert Cook Henry Portridge Edward Creaves George Pether John Caswell Thomas
Pierce Thomas Hayward John Richards John Hellier John Staple Edward Beer John
Smith.
Froome 12.
Francis Smith John Humphrey Samuel Vill alias Vile George Hasty Thomas Star
Robert Man Philip Usher Thomas Pearl Robert Beamant Lawrence Lot William
Clement Thomas Lot.
Bruton 3.
James Feildsen Richard Bole. Humphrey Braden
Wincanton 6.
John Howel William Holland Richard Harvey Hugh Holland John Tucker Thomas
Bowden.
Shepton-Mallet 13.
Stephen Mallet John Hildworth Joseph Smith John Ashwood John Gilham, Jun.
Thomas Smith Giles Bramble John Dorchester, Senior Richard Chinn John Comb
William Cruise John Groves.
Pensford 12.
Roger Cornelius Henry Russel John Starr George Knight Humphry Edwards Robert
Wine William Pierce William Clerk alias Chick Arther Sullway Preston Bevis
George Adams. Richard Finier.
Wrington 3.
Alexander Key Joshua French. David Boyse
Wells 8.
William Mead John Sheperd Thomas Coade Abraham Bend Robert Doleman William
Durston Thomas Durston William Plumley.
Uivelscomb 3.
William Ruscomb Robert Comb. Thomas Pierce
Tuton upon Mendip 2.
Peter Prance William Watkins.
Chard 12.
Edward Foot Abraham Pill John Knight William Davy William Williams Henry
Easterbrook John Gervis James Dennett Humphry Hitchcock Edward Warren William
Godfrey Simon Cross.
Crookern 10.
John Spore Nicholas Adams Roger Burnoll Richard Stephens William Pether Robert
Halswell James Evory John Bushel Robert Hill William Lashly.
Somerton 7.
William Gillet George Cantick Thomas Lissant Robert Allen Williom Pocock
Joseph Kelloway. Christopher Stephens
Yeovil 8.
Francis Foxwell William Johnson George Pitcher Thomas Hurford Bernard Devereax
Edward Gillard Bernard Thatcher for concealing Bovet. Oliver Powel.
Netherstoe 3.
Humphrey Mitchel Merrick Thomas. Richard Culverell
Dunster 3.
Henry Lackwell William Sully. John Geanes
Dulverton 3.
John Basely Henry Thompson. John Lloyd
Bridgewater 12.
Robert Fraunces Joshua Bellamy William Moggeridge John Hurman Robert Roper
Richard Harris Nicholas Stodgell Richard Engram John Trott Roger Guppey Roger
Hoar Isaiah Davis.
Ratcliffe-Hill at Bristol 6.
Richard Evans John Tinckwell Christopher Clerk Edward Tippot Philip Cumbridge
John Tucker alias Glover.
Illmnister 12.
Nicholas Collins, Sen. Stephen Newman Robert Luckis William Kitch Thomas
Burnard William Wellen John Parsons Thomas Trocke Robert Fawn Western Hillary
John Burgen Charles Speak
Stogersey 2.
Hugh Ashley John Herring.
Wellington 3.
Francis Priest Philip Bovet Robert Reed.
Southpetherton 3.
Cornelius Furfurd John Parsons Thomas Davis.
Porlock 2.
James Gale Henry Edny.
Glasenbury 6.
John Hicks Richard Pearce Israel Briant William Mead James Pyes John Broom
Taunton 19.
Robert Perret Abraham Ansley Benjamin Hewling Abraham Matthews William Jenkins
Henry Lisle John Dryer John Hucker Jonathan England John Sharp Pierce Murren
John Freake John Savage William Deverson John Williams John Patrum James
Whittom William Satchel John Trickey
Langport 3
Humphrey Pierce Nicholas Venton John Shellwood
Axbridge 6.
Isaac Tripp. Thomas Burnell Thomas Hillary John Gill, Senior Thomas Monday
John Butcher
Cutherston 2.
Richard Bovet Thomas Blackmore
Minehead 6.
John Jones alias Evens Hugh Stark Francis Barlett Peter Warren Samuel Hawkins
Richard Sweet.
Evilchester 12.
Hugh Goodenough Samuel Cox William Somerton John Masters John Walrand David
Langwell Osmond Barret Matthew Cross Edward Burford John Mortimer John Stevens
Robert Townsden
Stogumn^r 3.
George Hillard John Lockstone Arthur Williams
Castlecary 3.
Richard Ash Samuel Garnish Robert Hind
Milton-port 2.
Archibald Johnson James Maxwel.
Keinsham 11.
Charles Chepman Ricard Bowden Thomas Trock Lewis Harris Edward Halswell Howel
Thomas George Badol Richard Evans John Winter Andrew Rownsden John Phillelrey.
Suffered in all. 239

This Bloody Tragedy in the West being over, our Protestant Judge returns for
London; soon after which Alderman Cornish felt the anger of some body behind
the Curtain; for it is to be Noted, that he was Sheriff when Best prayed an
Indictment might be preferred, and was, as well as Sheriff Bethel, earnest in
promoting it; in alleging, that it was no ways reasonable that the Juries of
London should lie under such a reproach, etc. But passing this over, we now
find this Person Arrived at the Pinnacle of Honor; the Purse and Mace were
reserved for him, vacant by the Death of the Lord Keeper North, and he advanced
to the Lord Chancellourship of England; raised by this means, as one might
think, above the Envy of the Crowd; and it might be wished, in so dangerous a
height he had looked better to his Footsteps; for now being created Baron of
Wem, we find him in a High Commission, or Ecclesiastical Court, Suspending the
Honorable Lord Bishop of London from performing the Episcopal Office and
Function of that See, and for no other default, than not readily complying with
the Kings Letter in Suspending Dr. Sharp, Dean of Norwich, for Preaching a
Sermon in the Parish Church of St. Giles in the Fields, at the request of the
Parishioners, showing the Errors and Fallacies of the Romish Religion; the
better to confirm them in the Faith and Doctrine of the Church of England. Nor
was it this good Bishop alone that was aimed at; for Magdalen Collede in Oxford
was next attempted, and in that very Mother of Learning, and Chief Seminary of
our Church, such alterations made, as startled the Kingdom; by whose Counsel I
undertake not to determine; but in the midst of Liberty of Conscience, as twice
declared. The Church of England had a Test put upon her Sons, which seemed such
a Paradox that has been rarely heard of, viz. To Read the Kings Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience in the Churches, during the time of Divine Service, and a
Mark, and Penalties threatened to the Refusers; which was evidently
demonstrated, by the Imprisonment of those pious Patriots of their Country, and
Pillars of the Church: His Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord
Bishop of Bathe and Wells, Ely, Peterborough, Chichester, St. Asaph, and
Bristol; who for showing their Reasons, why they could not comply with this
Command, by way of Humble Petition, were sent to the Tower, and afterward
Tried upon Information of High Misdemeanour, at the Court of King's Bench; where
their Innocence appearing in a large manner, they were acquitted, to the
scandal of their Accusers: yet Orders were sent into all parts of England, to
return an account to the Lord Chancellor, of those that refused to Read the
Declaration, that they might be proceeded against, for a Contempt of what their
Consciences would not permit them to do, and for a time they were extremely hot
upon it. Much about this time there was a considerable Suit depending before
him in Chancery, between a great Heiress and others, which was sufficiently
talked of in the World; not without loud and deep reflections on his Honesty
and Honor: for having given the Cause for the young Lady, he very speedily
afterward married her to his Son; with this remarkable Circumstance, She being
a Papist, to make sure Work, he married them both ways; both by a Priest of the
Church of Rome, and a Divine of the Church of England. And here I think we may
place the Height and Acme of his Honor and Happiness, where he is not like to
tarry long; for on the News of the great Preparations in Holland, and that the
Prince of Orange was certainly designed for England, the determined Councils
cooled, and then quite ceased, so that the Church of England-men, whose Cause
the Prince had espoused, were restored again to the Commissions and Trusts they
had (by what Justice I know not) been lately deprived of; and amongst other
Charters that were on this occasion restored, was that of the City of London;
and that which makes it more memorable, was, that it was brought to Guild Hall
by this Person, tho he was not attended with the Shouts and Acclamation he
expected, nor seemed so florid or frolicksomas heretofore, which some looked
upon as a bad Omen; and it is reported, soon after he being asked by a Courtier,
What the Heads of the Princes Declaraion were? he should answer, He was sure
his was one, whatever the rest were.

The Court by this time beginning to scatter, and the Prince of Orange
approaching, the King thought fit to withdraw himself, upon notice of which,
the Lord Chancellor betook him self to Wapping, disguised like a Seaman, in
order to his escape to Hamborough, in a Collier; but being And behold thou art
taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody Man, 2 Samuel 16. v. 8.
discovered, he was brought before Sir I. Chapman, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, in a strange disguise, very different from the Habit in which he
formerly appeared: And by reason of the Lord Mayors Indisposition, he not being
able to Commit him, he offered to go to the Tower, to be out of the hands of
Rabble, who there in great numbers with clubs and staves, threatened him with
present destruction: But having a Guard of the Train'd-bands to conduct him, he
got thither safe, and soon after was charged in custody by a Warrant of
Commitment from the Lords at Whitehall, where he continued under much
affliction and indisposition; having since moved for his Habeas Corpus to be
bailed, but was not able to attain it. Thus he continued for some months in the
Tower, his Chronical Indispositions, the Stone, etc. increasing very fast upon
him.

The ingenious Dr. Lower was his Pysician: But Nature being now tired out by a
tedious Combat with his Disease, and the Guilt of his former bloody Life, we
hope it touched his Conscience. He having besides, by his intemperate Life,
notoriously known, contracted an ill habit of Body, he at last very happily for
himself, if not his Relations too, died in the Tower -- the -- Morning, about
Nine of the Clock, An. Dom. 1689. -- Thus, Reader, you have seen the Rise and
Fall of this unfortunate, Great, Ill Man; And so, at present, after we have
endeavored at his Character, we take our Farewell.

Jeffreys's Character.
HE was of Stature rather above a middle sort than below it; his Complexion
inclining to Fair; his Face well enough, full of a certain briskness, though mixed
with an Air a little malicious and unpleasant. He was a man of tolerable Sense,
and had, as of necessity he must by so long practice and going through such
public Places, got some Law, though as little as 'twas, more than he had
occasion to make use of; since the Dispensing Power having as good as seated
all Law in the Kings Breast; he by that found out a more compendious method of
attaining it than was formerly known. He had a pretty large stock of Ill
Nature, and Wit, in which lay his greatest Excellency, tho a very unenvied one.
But in fine, His Brow and his Tongue wereabsolutely the two best
Accomplishments he was Master of -- By the help of which, and that before
mentioned, by his brisk, sudden, and sharp Interrogatories, he sometimes put
falsehood, and perhaps oftener, the truth it self, out of countenance. But that
ill-favored Wit which he had, lay all of the wrong side; muchlike that of
those unlucky Animals, all whose Wit lies in tricks and mischief. He spoke many
pleasant things, but very few handsome ones, disgracing all with intolerable
Railing, mean passions, and perfect Billingsgate, and would commonly even upon
the Bench it self, fall into Heats both as to words and actions, not only
unworthy of a Judge, but even of any prudent man. He seemed, without wronging
him, to have a great deal of baseness, and cruelty in his Nature, having a
particular delight, and relish in cruelty and blood, and such things as give
horror and aversion to all the rest of mankind. He was in this case worse than
even Nero; for whereas that Monster had once so much good Nature, or at least
pretended it, that when he was to sign a Warrant for the execution of a
Malefactor, he is said to have wished, he had never learnt to write: Jeffreys
on the other side, then only seemed in his Element, when in the midst of
Destruction and Murder. For his Religion -- What a sort of one 'twas, his Life
past sufficiently tells us; tho he and his Good Brother Commissioner the
Balswagger of Chester, maliciously. persuade the world, that they were of the
Church of England; that after they could do it no more mischief with their
Lives, they might disgrace it by their Deaths, pretending both to die in that
Communion. -- But it is mean to follow 'em any further, unless with a wish
somewhat like that handsome one History leaves us, That all K. William and Q.
Mary 's Enemies were as honorably buried -- Or, in the inspired words of a
greater Person, -- So, O Lord, let all thine Enemies perish.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the
Poulrey, over against the Compter.
1. A Continuation of Morning Exercise, Questions and Cases of Conscience
practically resolved by (31) Reverend and Learned Divines in the City of London
in October. 1682. Printed in a very large Quarto. Price bound 10 s.

2. A New Martyrology; or, The Bloody Assizes: now exactly methodized in one
Volum. To this Treatise is added the Life and Death of George Lord Jeffreys.

There will speedily go to the Press a very useful Book, entitled, The
Character of a Christian Exemplified, in all the Degrees of Perfection
attainable on this side Heaven. Written by Drawde Rekoohh Author of that most
excellent Treatise, entitled, Divine Breathings.

3. Reformed Religion; or, Right Christianity described in its Excellency and
Usefulness in the whole Life of Man: Giving an Impartial Character of a Right
Christian in general, of a Right Christian Minister, of a Right Christian
Magistrate, of a Right Christian Subject, of a Right Christian Worship, of a
Right Christian Parliament, and of a Right Christian Soldier. Written by M.
Barker Minister of the Gospel, Price bound 1 s.

4. Mr. Baxter's Directions and Persuasions to a sound Conversion. The 4 Edit.
Price bound 2 s.

5. Mr. How Is Sermon at the Funeral of that Faithful and Laborious Servant of
Christ Mr. Richard Fairclough. Price 6 d.

6. Mr. Lee's Joy of Faith; or a Treatise opening the true Nature of Faith; its
lowest Stature and Distinction from Assurance; with a Preliminary Tract
evidencing the Divinity of the Sacred Scriptures. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

7. Mr. Slater's Sermon preached upon the Death of that Faithful and Laborious
Servant of Christ Mr. John Oaks. Price bound 1 s.

8. -- his Sermon preached to young Men the 25th of December last, at that
which was Mr. Oakes's Meeting Place. Price 6 d.

9. Mr. Jay's Discourse (Rector of Chinner in Oxfordshire) entitled, Daniel in
the Den, or the Lord President's Imprisonment and Miraculous Deliverance. Price
6 d.

10. Mr. John Dunton's Discourses, (late Rector of Aston Clinton in
Buckinghamshire) entitled, The House of Weeping, or, Man's last Progress to
his long Home; represented in several Funeral Discourses, illustrated with a
lively Emblem of a Funeral Solemnity. The second Edition. Price bound 1 s.

11. Mr. Dolittle on the Sufferings of Christ from the Garden to the Grave;
being a second Part to a former Treatise on the Lord's Supper, with his
Effigies done to the Life. Price bound 2 s.

12. Mr. Shower's Sermon preached upon the Death of a young Gentlewoman, Mrs.
Anne Barnardiston, Daughter of Nathaniel Barnardiston Esquire late of Hackney;
together with her Exemplary Life and Death. Price 6 d.

13. Mr. Rogers's Sermon preached upon the Death of a young Gent. entitled,
Early Religion, or, The way for a young Man to remember his Creator. With an
impartial Account of the young Gentleman's Life and Death. Price 6 d.

14. Mr. Increase Mather (Rector of Haruard-Colledge in New England) his
Sermon, occasioned by the Execution of a Man found guilty of Murder, preached
at Boston, March 11th, 1686. together with the Confession, last Expressions,
and solemn Warning of that Murderer to all Persons, especially to young men to
beware of those sins which brought him to his miserable end.

15. Mr. Cotton Mather's Call of the Gospel, applied unto all men in general,
and unto a condemned Malefactor in particular; In a Sermon preached on the 7th
of March, 1686. at the request, and in the hearing of a man under a just
Sentence of Death.

16. Mr. Joshua Moodey (Minister in Boston) his Exhortation to a condemned
Malefactor, delivered March 7. 1685. These three Discourses (all printed for
John Dunton whilst he lived in New England) are usually sold altogether at 12
d. bound.

17. Mr. Willard's Child's Portion, or, The unseen Glory of the Children of God
asserted and proved; together with several other choice Sermons. Price bound 1
s. 6 d.

18. -- -- his Sermons on the Prodigal Son. Price bound 3 s.

19. England's Vanity, or The voice of God against the monstrous sin of Pride
in Dress and Apparel. Written by a Compassionate Conformist; illustrated with a
very large Copper-Plate. Price bound 1 s.

20. A Sermon, entitled, Truth will out. Written in the Year 83. by a
Presbyter of the Church of England. Price 6 d.

21. The dying Pastors last Legacy to his Friends and Parishioners; illustrated
with Seven Copper Plates. The second Edition. Price bound 3 s. To which is
prefixed the Authors Life, Death, and Funeral Sermon.

22. Early Piety (with a Prefatory Epistle of Mr. Matthew Mead) exemplified in
the Life and Death of Mr. Nathaniel Mather, who having become at the Age of
Nineteen an instance of more than common Learning and Virtue, changed Earth for
Heaven, Oct. 17. 1688. Whereto are added some Discourses on the true Nature,
the great Reward, and the best Season of such a Work with God, as he left a
Pattern of. The Second Edition. Price bound 1 s.

23. The Pilgrim's Guide from his Cradle to his Deathbed. The second Edition.
To which is added The Sick-man's Passing Bell; with Eight Copper Plates. Price
bound 2 s. 6 d.

24. Useful Observations on the most remarkable Passages of the O. and N.
Testament, with the Addition of several Dialogues and Divine Poems. The second
Edition; Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

25. The Bloody Assizes; or, A Complete History of the Life of George Lord
Jeffreys from his Birth till now. Comprehending the Cruelty of his whole
Western Circuit; with Maj. Holmes's dying Speech, and several others, never
published before. The second Edition. Price 1 s.

26. The dying Speeches, Letters, and Prayers of those eminent Protestants who
suffered under the Cruel Sentence of the late Lord Chancellor. The first Part.
Price 6 d. The second Edition carefully corrected.

27. The second and last Collection of the dying Speeches, Letters, and Prayers
of these eminent Protestants who suffered under the Cruel Sentence of the late
Lord Chancellor. Price 6 d.

28. A Discourse of Honesty and Plain Dealing. The second Edition; Price bound
1 s.

29. Mr. Keach (Author of Sion in Distress) his Travels of true Godliness, in
an apt and pleasant Allegory. The 7th Edit. Illustrated with six lively Cuts.
Price bound 1 s.

30. -- Progress of Sin, or, The Travels of Ungodliness, in a delightful
Allegory. The third Edition. To which is also added six lively Cuts. Price
bound 1 s.

31. The Complete Tradesman, or, The exact Dealers daily Companion; instructing
him thoroughly in all things absolutely necessary to be known by all those who
would thrive in the World, and in the whole Art and Mystery of Trade and
Traffic. The second Edition; with a lively Cut, and many large Additions.
Price bound 1 s.

32. The 2d Part of the Complete Tradesman. Price bound 1 s.

33. The Life and Martyrdom of that pious Nobleman W. L. R. with his Effigies
drawn to the Life. Written by Dr. Sland. Price bound 1 s.

34. A small New Years Gift in Duodecimo, being the Travels of a Person of
Quality over most parts of Europe. To which is added a lively Cut. Price bound
6 d.

35. The Amazement of future Ages; or, Several Historical Remarks on the
present Times. Written by T. R. Gent. Price bound 1 s.

36. Poems on Several Subjects never handled before: Written by on Oxford
Scholar. Illustrated with a large Copperplate. Price bound 1 s.

37. An impartial Histroy of the Knavery and Cheats of most (...) in the City
of London, Illustrated with about 75 (...) Cuts. Price bound 1 s.

38. The Blessed Martyrs in Flames, with their Dying Expressions, applied to
the present state of Affairs in England. To which is added four Copper Plates.
price bound 6 d.

39. A true History of the Life and Actions of Innocent XI. the present Pope of
Rome, with his Picture drawn to the Life, price bound 1 s.

40. The Petition of the Widows and Fatherless Children in the West of England
against George Lord Jeffreys, presented to the present Parliament, price 1 d.

41. A Relation of a late Barbarous Assault of the French upon the English near
the Downs, March 12. 1689. attested by the Captain, Officers, and several of
the Passengers, price 1 d.

43. Poems upon the Death of that great Minister of State, Anthony Earl of
Shaftsbury, price 1 d.

44. A Friendly Dialogue between two London Apprentices: Written in the year
82. by J. C. Gent. price 1 d.

45. The Arraignment of Mr. P -- -- on, printed in Quarto; Illustrated with 8
Copper Plates, price 1 s. 6 d. This Book was never thoroughly published, 2000 of
'em being burnt by an unhappy accident in the year 83.

46. A necessary Companion for a serious Christian, directing him aright
through the whole course of his Life; Written for public Good, in 24o. To
which is added the Deathbed Council of a late Reverend Divine to his Son an
Apprentice in London.

47. A complete History of the Life and Military Actions of Richard Earl of
Tyrconnel, wherein, (among other things) is related the Skirmishes, Battles,
Sieges, and remarkable Transactions which have happened under his Government.
Dedicated to the Officers of his Majesty's Army. To which is added the Life and
Memorable Actions of Father Petre, price 1 s.

The Booksellers Advertisement to the Reader.
Courteous Reader, Understanding that many of these Books now recited have been
much enquired for during my late Travels into America and the Low Countries,
etc. these are therefore to acquaint thee, that several of them that are now
out of Print will speedily go to the Press; and as for the Rest, they are now
to be bought At the Black Raven in the Poultry, over against the Compter: Where
you may be very kindly used for all manner of Bibles, Bible-Cases, Histories,
School-books, new Pamphlets, and all sorts of Practical Books.


