THE ORIGINAL OF Kingly and Ecclesiastical GOVERNMENT.

By T. B. Dr. in Divinity.

Mat. 22.21. Da Caesari quae sunt Caesaris.

King James' Bas. Dor. Sublato Episcopo tollitur Rex.

Printed for Robert Clavell, and William Hensman, 1681.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. GOd himself was the first founder, and the first that instituted the
Office of Kings. Chap. II. The people cannot make an Anointed King. Chap. III.
The meaning of the Anointing of Kings. Chap. IV. The reason why they are called
the Lords Anointed. Chap. 5. Bad Kings are the Lords Anointed as well as good.
Chap. VI. It is not lawful upon any pretenses whatsoever to depose, or so much
as touch the Lords Anointed. Chap. VII. What is meant by touching the Lords
Anointed. Chap. VIII. That Kings now adays are to be had in the same veneration
and esteem as the Kings of Judah and Israel were, notwithstanding our Christian
liberty. Chap. IX. That a King failing in his duty, and not performing those
things which he has sworn unto at his Coronation (so solemnly) yet the people
are not dis-obliged in their obedience unto him. Chap. X. Touch not mine
Anointed, Psalm. 105. meant by Princes, and not otherwise. Chap. XI. The
Objection of the ten Tribes revolting from Rehoboam, answered. Chap. XII. The
Objection of Jehu slaying his Master Joram, and taking the Kingdom upon him,
answered. Chap. XIII. A Discourse concerning the necessity and excellency of
Monarchy. Chap. XIV. That there is no such thing as a free State in the World.
Chap. XV. A Discourse concerning Episcopacy, proving it to be Jure Divino.
To the Reader.
Good Reader,
WE have lived to see our profession of Christianity, to have yielded some men
arguments for their taking up Arms against their lawful Sovereigns and
Government, certainly there has been some violence used by them herein, or else
this holy Religion could never afforded them such a Topic. Submission to our
lawful Governors, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience Sake, is the
great duty and glory of our profession, whilst evil Religions prompt men to
rapine, blood, and violence, Religio Christiana nil suadet nisi justum and
lene. The Original and power of Kingly Government has of late been much
disputed, whether it be (as our Savior spoke of St. John's Baptism) from God
or from men; this Author (I think) has evinced the former, and if so,
subjection is our duty; it is not male administration or persecution (as some men
call it) can ever warrant the Subjects Arms against his Prince. The Christian
Church gives no Example, nor our Religion any precept for such undertakings; If
it then be Religion (as some men would have us think) they fought for, why do
they use unlawful weapons? must prayers and tears be turned into Pike and
Musket because a Nero is thy Governor? The Church of God knows no such usage,
the legal dispensation it self, which will be acknowledged somewhat harsh in
respect of the Gospel, will not permit a holy David, tho a man after Gods own
heart, to build his Temple, for that he was a man of battle and his hands were
bloody; peace, meekness, charity, and submission to our lawful Government, are
the effects and true signs of real Christanity, the other is but spurious and
Apocryphal. To inform our Reader of the rise of Kingly Government is the design
of this pious Author, and to persuade us to subjection to our Civil as well as
Ecclesiastic Governors, is the main intention and scope of his undertakings;
which I hope (good Reader) by a due perusal of this small Book may be well
attained as the thing it self is well made out by the Author, and so I leave
thee to the use of the Book.

THE ORIGINAL OF GOVERNMENT.
CHAP. I. Who was the first Founder, or the first that instituted the Office of
KINGS.
WE, say some People, were the first that desired them, and moved for them,
and had them, and chose them. And all the people went to Gilgal, and there they
made Saul King before the Lord in Gilgal. 1 Samuel 11.15. 1 Samuel 8.5.

Soft and fair, good people; do not mistake your selves; you desired, and moved
for, and would have, and had a King, but God gave him you: I gave thee a King,
O Israel, in mine anger, and I took him away in my wrath, Hosea 13.10, 11.
According to this we read Acts 13.21. They desired a King, and God gave unto
them Saul, etc. And for your making of a King at Gilgal, your making was but
approving, and applauding him, that was made already; for Saul was both made a
King, and confirmed King, and executed his Office, before the people are said
to have mad^ him King in Gilgal: He was anointed King over Israel, 1 Samuel 10.1.
he was confirmed by signs, 1 Samuel 10.2, 3, 4, etc. he executed his Office, 1 Samuel 11.7, 8.

God first, sent.

And s^condly, showed.

And thirdly, chose.

And fourthly, anointed.

And fifthly, found them out a King, before ever it is said, they made him.

First, God sent him; I will send thee a Man out of the Tribe of Benjamin, and
thou shall anoint him to be Captain over my people.

Secondly, God showed him; for neither the people, nor any of the Saints, nor
the Elders of Bethlehem, no, nor Samuel himself, knew not where to find this
first of Kings, 'till God said, This is he, he shall reign over my people, 1 Samuel 9.17.

Thirdly, God chose him himself; and Samuel said to all the people, See him
whom the Lord has chosen, 1 Samuel 10.24. If the people had made him themselves,
or could make him, what needed they to have come unto Samuel, to bid him, make
us a King to judge us? 1 Samuel 8.5. and to say, give us a King? Which
deprecation was indeed no otherwise, than as if they should have desired Samuel
to have asked a King for them of the Lord; for so it seems by the sequel, for
immediately hereupon Samuel went unto the Lord, and declared their importunity,
and the Lord said, that he should hearken unto the voice of the people in all
that they said unto him, verse 7. and this most certain and agreeable unto 1 Samuel 1. where Samuel tells the people; Ye have this day rejected your God, etc.
and have said unto him, set a King over us

Fourthly, God anointed him; Samuel took a violl of Oil and poured it on his
head, and kissed him, and said, is it not because he has anointed thee to be
Captain over his Inheritance, 1 Samuel 10.1.

Fifthly, God found him out for them, where he was hidden from them; for when
all the Tribes of Israel were come together, and the Tribe of Benjamin was
taken, and the families of that Tribe drew near; and the family of Matri was
taken out of those families, and Saul the son of Kish from thence: 1 Samuel
10.20, 21. (the smallest Tribe, the least family, the poorest Benjamite, as
showing us that Kings were not to have derivation from the mighty people but
from the almighty God: 1 Samuel 9.21.) the people sought him but they could not
find him, so that they were fain to enquire of the Lord for him, and the Lord
showed them where he had hid himself in the stuff; 1 Samuel 12.22. so that all
that the people of Israel had to do, either in the Election, Institution,
Nomination, Creation, or Invention of their first King, was (when God had done
all this) to shout, and say, God save the King, 1 Samuel 10.24, and for their
making a King, after all this in Gilgall, ^ it could be no otherwise than their
approbation of him, who was thus made by God already.

Neither was God only the founder of the first King of the Jews, but of all the
rest also: He was David's founder too, I have found David my servant, with my
holy Oil have I anointed, him, Psalm. 89.20. It was well for David, for he
should have been but a poor King, if he had been but of the peoples finding;
and it may be they would not have known what to have made of him when they had
found him. David was not silius populi, but Dei, the son of God, not of the
people: Psalm 89.26. He was neither exalted of the people, nor chosen of the
people, I have exalted one chosen out of the people, said God, (verse. 19.) but
the exaltation was Gods, and the choice not of, but out of the people.

Kings are not children of the most voices, but children of the most high,
Psalm. 82.6. yet the approbation of the people may serve ad pompam, but not ad
necessita^em; it may ad^ something to the solemnity, but nothing to the essence
of the constitution; what was divinely given, may be humanely received, and so
are Kings.

Neither will we speak of the King, or the first of the Kings of Judah or
Israel, but we will go along with the first King that e're was read of (if
there be not Books ancienter than the Books of Moses) and that was Melchisedec
King of Salem: this Melchisedec is said to have neither Father nor Mother; it
could not be said so in regard of his person, for we all know who he was, and
who his Father and Mother were; he was Sem, the eldest Son of Noah, but it was
said so, in respect of his Office; showing us, that Kings, they are not the
offspring of men, but an emanation from the Deity, and teaching us, that as
Kings are not of the Peoples making, so they ought not to be of the peoples
marring, and as they are not the founders, so they ought not to be the
confounders of them; cujus est instituere, ejus est abrogare, they that
institute, may abrogate, they that make, may unmake, what thou buildest thy
self, thou may lawfully pull down; thou may diruere edificare mutare,
quadrata rotundis, but if thou destroyest that which another has built, thou
may chance to be sued for dilapidations: If a Limner draw a picture, he may
alter and change it, and if he dislike it, race it out at his pleasure; or if a

Carver or Ingraver mislike his one handiwork, he may destroy it when he
pleases; but if God makes a man after his own Image, and creates him, after his
own similitude, we offend God in a high degree, when we cut off, or deface the
least part, or member of his handiwork.

Now Kings are lively representations, living statues, or pictures, drawn to
the life, of the great Deity; these pictures, for their better continuance, are
done in Oil, the colors of the Crown never fade; they are no water colors; as
Kings with their own statues will not be angry, though time and age devour
them, yet they will not suffer them spitefully to be thrown down, or shot
against; so God, though he will suffer Kings to die like men, and fall like
other Princes; yet he will not suffer his Character, spitefully to be raced, or
his Image defaced; but though he will have them dye like men, yet he will have
them live like Gods. And if all this be not proof suicffient, you shall hear
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost affirm as much. God the
Father plainly affirms* John 10.34. Dixi dii estis, I have said ye are Gods;
but if the stroke had been in the People, then it should have been, Nos diximus
dii estis, we have said ye are Gods. God the Son told Pilate, Thou should
have no power except it were (data desuper) given from above; but if the people
had given him that power, then it should have been, Thou should have no
power, except it were (data desubter) given from beneath; and I am sure the
Holy Ghost tells us, per me Reges regnant, by me Kings reign; but if they
reigned by the suffrage of the People, then it should have been per nos,
according to the modern dialect, they Reign by us, and as long as we think fit,
and when we think it fit no longer, they shall reign no more; they received
their authority from us, and we may recall it when we please, and depose them
when we list; for they are but proxies and Atornies, of the people, see Buch.
de jure Regni, Fickerus, and Renecherus, etc. little thinking how by this
powerful doctrine of theirs, they (quite contrary to the word of God) destroy
the higher powers, and give the whole Trinity the lie at once: and if these
testimonies are not sufficient, I know why they are not, because they never
were confirmed by Act of Parliament

CHAP. II. Whether the People can make a King or not.
IF the Question be asked, whether the people do make the King or not? I could
no more grant it, then I should grant, that the people made heaven; but if you
ask me, whether the people can make a King (such a one as they use to make) if
they have not one already of Gods making, they may; such are Kings and no King;
not Reges but Regentes ad placitum: Kings by Election, are allways Kings upon
condition, an^ where the condition is so little worth, the obligation is the
less, and but small security will be required: for my own part I should be
ashamed to ware a Crown on my head, when the people must reign, and the King
stand under the penthouse: an^ I had as live they should make me a jack a lent,
for apprentices to throw their cudgels at me, as to make me a King to be
controuled by their Masters, and every Tribune of the People; for as an
invitation to a dinner where there is no meat, is but a distasteful banquet, so
the name of a King without its adjuncts, is but a favourless renown; and in
deed such as they are not Actu Reges, they do but agere Regem, they are not
actual Kings, they do but act the part of a King, and J hold him that acts the
part of a King an hour upon the stage, to be as real a King for his time and
territories as the b^st King by election, who is chosen but for his life;
herein consists the difference, as the one must act his part as the Poets
please, so the other must act his part as the people please; they must have
their parts given them, they must act it accordingly* they must not so much as
tread the Stage awry; their subjects are both spectators and judges, and it
lies within the favor of the next society, whether or no the Son shall come to
act the Fathers part. Such Kings as these the people may make, but to make a
sacred and Anointed King, an established and successive Monarch, a King that
has this Hereditatem in him, a King that has this Noli me tangere about him;
whose Writs were always termed Sacri apices, whose commands divalis jussio,
whose presence Sacra Vestigia, whose Throne is the Lords, whose Scepter is his
Rod, whose Crown is his favor, and whose representation is of himself; the
People can no more make such a deity then so many tapers can make a glorious
Sun, or so many sparks of sprey and faggots, can make a firmament of Stars*

CHAP. III. What is meant by Anointing of KINGS.
ANointing, in several places of Scripture, betokens some spiritual grace, as
Jam, 5.14 Call the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over the sick,
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: which the Roman Catholics call
extreme unction, though now adays, we only make use of the extremity and leave
out the unction: and therefore some will have the anointing of Kings to
signify some spiritual grace also, which shall enable them with Religion and
aptness to govern well; which when they cease to do, their anointing falls
off, and they cease to be Kings; if they be not good, they are none of Gods
anointed, and if they be not his anointed, they care not whose they are. This
doctrine has cause^ the shedding of more blood than there is now runn^ng in
the veins of living Christians; whereas the truth is, it is neither Religion,
nor virtue, nor grace that is me^nt by this Royal Anointing; Cyrus was
Chr^^tus Domini* as well as Josias, and Saul as well as David: If Religion were
that that did the deed, then Cyrus had not been the Lords Anoyn^ed* if virtue,
then no Saul; if grace, neither: If Religion make Kings, then there should have
been of old no Kings; but those of Judah; and now no Kings, but those of
Christendom. It is Jus regnandi that he meant by this Royal Anointing; and
Unction confers no grace, but declares a just title only; unxit in regem, he
anointed him King, includes nothing but a due title, excludes nothing but
usurpation; gives him the administration to govern, not the gift to govern
well; the right of ruling, not of ruling right: Kings are anointed with Oil, to
show, that as they have Thrones to signify that they are the Cistern of
Justice, and Crowns to signify that they are the Fountains of honors, and
Scepters to signify that the hands which hold them, are the Magazines wherein
the whole strength and ammunition of Kingdoms are reposed: So anointing is a
sacred signature betokening sovereignty, obedience to the Throne, submission ^o
the Scepter, allegiance to the Crown, and supremacy to the Oil must needs be
given, for Oil will have it: pour Oil and Wine, and Water, and Vinegar, or what
other liquor you please together, Oil will be sure to be uppermost: the three
first ceremonies make him but high and mighty, and puissant, but the last only
makes him sacred, and therefore some have maintained that a King is mixta
persona cum Sacerdote, whether he be so or no I will not here insist; but sure
I am, that there is much divinity in the very name, and essence of Kings; which
duly consi^ered and belived* that Kings are thus sacred (as we ought, and Gods
word informs us) we would take heed how we touch, take warning how we tear and
rend in pieces, as much as in us lies (with those leaden Messengers of Death
(with their gunpowder Commissions) to fetch the higher to the lower powers, and
make the King a Subject to the subjects wills,) the sacred person of so great
Majesty; whereas the cutting off but a piece of the lap of ^auls garment,
has checked a greater spirit, then the proudest riser up against his
Sovereign: We would not speak so despicably of the Lords anointed; what is the
King? he is but a man, he is but one he has a soul to be saved as well as
others; for though all this be true, yet the end for which all this is said, is
most false and a^ominable, for though it be true that the King is but a man*
yet it is also true, that that man is the light of Israel, 2 Kin. 8.19. We must
take heed how we put it out. And though it be true, that such a piece of
silver, is but a piece of silver, yet as it bears Cesars Image and
superscription upon it, it is more significant; and if thou either pare or
impare it a jot, if thou art found either clipping, or diminishing of it in the
least degree, thou do it to the prejudice of thine own life; so though a King
be but a man as in himself, yet as he bears representation of God, and has his
character stamped upon him, he is somewhat more, if you will believe him that
said Ye are Gods, Psalm 82.6. and therefore we must take heed how we debase or
detract from them who represent so great a Deity, who by reason of their
proximity and nearness unto God in some respects are most commonly of more
discerning spirits then ordinary men: for Mephibosheth, when his servant had so
grieviously slandred him to David, he makes but a short complaint. My servant
has slandred me; but (as if he should say, I need not tell thee much, thou
have wisdom enough to find it out) My Lord the King is as an Angel of God, do
therefore what is good in thine own eyes: Therefore because thou art as an
Angel of God, and thy self art a good intelligencer, as all Angels are, do
what is good in thine own eyes; as if he should have said, if thou do only
that which seems to be good in other men's eyes, it may be they will persuade
thee that the thing was true, wherein my servant slandred thy servant poor
Mephibosheth, and he huffer wrongfully. I am of opinion that God gives to every
King to whom he communicates his name and authority, this extraordinary gift of
discerning; but because they do not some times make use of it to the end it was
bestowed upon them, viz. (the better government of their several Dominions) but
are contented to see and discern with other men's eyes; and to have false
spectacles put upon their noses, whereby many a good man suffers: God in his
justice gives them over* that in their own particular, and wherein their own
greatest good is chiefly concerned, they shall make least use of their own
judgments and advice, and wholly give themselves to be overswayed by the
advice of those, whose judgments perhaps is not so good as their own, and
whose intentions (it may be) are no better then they should be.

It is written that the hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord, and he
disposes them as seems best to his heavenly wisdom; certainly I would take
a little advice from that heart, that is so directed by that hand; the Kings
head never plotted treason against the Crown, and no man can wish better to his
Majesty then the King. I speak not this in derogation either of the Great or
Privy Council (for it is written, in the multitude of counselors there is
safety) but in defense only of these sons of Oil, who are Supreme in both. And
as it is true that the King is but one man, so it is also true, that one man is
worth ten thousand of the people; Thou art worth ten thousands of us (though
all his worthies were in place) 2 Samuel 18.3. And though it be true, that the
King has a soul to be saved as well as others, yet it is also true, that he
should have no body to be crucified by his Subjects, out of their dis-esteem of
his person, the ceremonies of State (as Anointing, sitting in Thrones, holding
of Scepters, and coronation it self) being to be exploded now a days; and who
looked for it otherwise, when the lawful and decent ceremonies of the Church
were called relics of Popery, and rags of the whore of Babylon: was it
otherwise to be expected, but that they would call these ceremonies of state,
theatrica pompa: See Buch. de Jure Reg.
Stage plays, Toys: tush say they, what need all these Popperies, a Kings
Throne is his justice, his Crown his Honor, his Scpeter and heifest strength,
the peoples hearts; his holy Oil is his Religion, and zeal to Gods Glory; and
so it is, what then? may we not have the signs, and the things signified also?
because the true receiving of the Communion, is the receiving of the body, and
blood of Christ by faith; therefore shall we have no bread and wine? Or because
that true Baptism is the washing away of original sin, with the la^er of
regeneration; therefore shall we have no water powered on the Child? we have
Scripture for these ceremonies, and I am sure we have no Scripture for the
abolishing of them, but rather Scripture for their continuation for ever. Reges
in solio collocat in perpetuum: God establishes Kings upon their Thrones for
ever, Job. 36.7.

CHAP. IV. Why they are called the Lords Anointed.
THe Lords Anointed, is as much as to say the Lords Christ, and Christi
signifies Anointed ones: In the Hebrew you shall read it, who shall lay his
hand upon the Lords Messiah? for the Lords Anointed. 1 Samuel 26.9. In the Greek,
who can lay his hand upon the Lords Christ. Kings are taken into the society of
Gods name, Dixi dii esti^, I have said ye are Gods; and here into the society
of Christ's name, and all to terrify subjects from lifting up their hands
against the Lords Anointed, as much as if he were God or Christ himself.

Again, Kings are not termed uncti Domini (for that were no prerogative to them
at all) but Christi Domini, for not only persons, but things also, were
Anointed under the Law; not only Kings, but Priests and Prophets likewise;
neither did it rest there, but it extended to the Tabernacle it self, and ran
down to the vessels thereof, even to the very Fireforks, Ashpans, and Snuffers:
but unto whom said he any time, tu es Christus meus, Heb. 1.4, 5. but unto
Christ, and Kings? to Christ once, Luke 2.26. to Kings thirty two times
throughout the Bible; four times by God himself; Kings are called Christi mei,
mine anointed; six times to God, Christi tui, thine anointed, ten times of God,
Christi ejus, his anointed; twelve times in terms terminant, Christi Domini,
the Lords anointed: and therefore the ol^ Translator observed it rightly, when
in the same word, in the Hebrew, and the Greek, he speaks of the priest, he
translates it unctus; but when of the King (always) Christus.

And as they are not uncti, but Christi, so they are not Christi populi, but
Christi Domini; not the peoples Anointed, but the Lords Anointed; there may be
a master of the ceremonies, but there must be no master of the substance; they
are the Lord's Christ's, and they hold their Kingdoms under him, in Kings
service: neith^r are the Kingdoms of the Earth any bodies else but Gods: The
Kingdoms are Gods, Dan. 4.17. neither are they at any man's disposing but his,
He gives them to whom he pleases, (loco citato) therefore for whose they are,
they are the Lords; and for what they are, they may thank him and none else.

Secondly, They are the Lords, because that by him, an^ in him, and through
him, they have their Dominion, and regiment; from him they have their Crowns;
from his hands their Coronation: Di^dema Regis in manu Dei, Esaias 60.3. The
^oyal Diadem is in the hand of God, and out of that hand he will not part with
it so much, as for another, to place it upon the Kings head; but it must be tu
posuisti (tu Domine) Thou, O Lord, have set a Crown of pure Gold upon his head,
Psalm. 21.3.

The Emperors used to stamp their Coin with a hand coming out of the clouds,
holding a Crown, and placing it upon their heads; We have no such
Hierogliphicks in our Coin, as a hand coming out of a cloud; but we have grace
from Heaven, D^i gratia, so that there is not a King but may say with the
Apostle, Gratia Dei sum qui sum, by the grace of God* I am that I am; and
indeed Kings are Kings, as Paul was an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but
by God.

Thirdly, they are the Lord's Christ's; because, not only their Crowns are in
the hands of the Lord, but he puts the Scepter into theirs: nay, the Scepters
which Princes hold in their hands, are Gods Scepters, being there, virga D^i in
manibus ejus, It is Gods rod that is in their hands, Exodus 17.9. and therefore
right is the Motto (and reason is it that they should be esteemed the Lords
Anointed*) DIEV ET MON DROIT, GOD AND MY RIGHT; none else have to do with it,
the Scepter of a Kingdom, in the hands of a King, is the livery and seisin
which is given him by God, of the whole Mili^ia, within his Dominion: they that
take away that, put a reed into the hand of Christ's Anointed: and why should it
be expected that they should deal otherwise with Christ's Anointed, then they
did with Christ himself, first put a Reed in his hand, and afterward a Spear
into his heart.

Fourthly, Kings are the Lords Anointed, because they sit upon his Throne:
sedebat Solomon in Throno Dei, ^olomon sat upon Gods Throne: 1 Chro. 29.23.
but if Solomon should have lived in these our days, instead of his six steps to
his great Throne of Gold, and Ivory, he should have six steppers to his Throne,
for the Gold and Ivory sake; instead of having a footstool of Gold under his
feet, he should have much ado to keep a Crown of pure Gold upon his head:
instead of hands to stay his throne, he should have hands enough to pull it
down, and cast it to the ground: and instead of two, and twelve Lions fixed on
cach side as a guard unto his Throne, he should have found many Lions, without
regard, running up and down, seeking how they might destroy him.

Lastly, Kings are the Lords Anointed, because they are Anointed with his own
oil* Oleo sancto meo, with my holy Oil have I anointed him, Psalm. 89.20. It is
not with any common, or vulgar Oil, or Oil that any lays claim to but himself:
but it is Oleo meo, my oil, neither is it oil, that was fetched out of any
common Shop, or Warehouse, but it is Oleo sancto, with holy oil, oil out of the
Sanctuary: And no question but this is a main reason (if they would speak out)
why some have such an aching tooth at the Sanctuaries, because they maintain in
them, oil for the anointing of Kings; but if the Alablaster box were broken,
the ointment would soon be lost: If they could persuade the King out of the
Church into the Barn, they would soon pull a Reed out of the thatch, to put
into his hand instead of a Scepter; or if they could get him to hear Sermons
under a hedge, there would not be materials wanting to make a Crown of thorns
to plat it on his head. Thus you see the reasons why Kings are called the Lords
Anointed, because the Lord has appropriated them unto himself, not in a common
and general way, but in a particular and exclusive manner: my King, my Kingdom,
my Crown, my Scepter, my Throne, my Oil, where is there left any place for
claim? Pride may thrust down Angels out of Heaven, and violence may crucify
the Son of God; But (all these things considered) who can stretch forth his
hand against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9.

CHAP. V. Whether bad Kings be the Lords Anointed, or not.
THey are: for they are of the Lords sending, and appointment as well as the
good. I will set an evil man to rule over them (says God) and I gave them a
King in mine anger, Hosea 13.11. which King was Saul, which Saul was a Tyrant,
which Tyrant was the Lords Anointe^ when he was at the worst. You cannot have
two better witnesses then David, and the Holy Ghost, 1 Samuel 26. Cyrus was a
Heathen Persian, and one that knew not God, yet for all that, Haec dicit
Dominus, Cyro Christo meo, Thus says the Lord to Cyrus mine Anointed; Esaias
43.4. Nero was no good Emperor, but a Monster of mankind, yet Saint Peter, in
whose days he wrote his Epistle* commanded all Christians to submit to him* 1
Pet. 2.13.

Hasael, whom the Lord foresaw, and fore-shewed unto his Prophet Elisha, to be
the destroyer of his people of Israel, and one, that should make them like the
dust by thres^ing, 2 Kings 13.7. one that will set their strong holds on fire,
slay their young men with the sword, dash their children against the wall, and
rip up their women with child; insomuch that it made the Prophet weep to
foresee all the miseries that should happen, 2 King. 8.12. insomuch that it
made Hasael himself (when he was told thereof) cry out, is thy servant a Dog,
that he should do all these things? verse. 13. yet for all this, Go^ will have
him to be King, and it be put to scourge his people, the Lord has showed m^
that thou shall be King over Syria* verse. 13.

Julian when from his Christianity, he fell to flat Pagani^m, yet this
Anointing held, no Christian ever sought, no Preacher ever taught to touch him,
or resist him in the least degree; for whilst the cruel and bloody Emperors
were persecuting the poor Christians, they were fitting their necks for the
Yoke, and teaching one another postures, how they might stand fairest for the
stroke of Death. And this was not quia deerant vires, because they could not
help it; for the greatest part of Julians Army, and the most part of his Empire
were Christians: For says Tertullian in his apologetical defense of the
Christians of those times, una nox pauculis faculis, etc. One night with a few
firebrands will yield us sufficient revenge, if we durst, by reason of our
Christian obligation, and shows how they neither wanted forces, or numbers and
that neither the Moors, or the Persians or any other Nation whatsoever, were
more mighty, or more populous than they: and how they filled all places, Towns,
Cities, Imperial Palaces, Senates, and Seats of Judgment; and that they could
do any thing, in their revenge, if it were any thing lawful; but this Anointing
was the thing that kept the swelling down, and hindered the corrupt humors from
gathering to a head: And therefore it is not as Stephanus Junius, Franciscus
Hottomanus, Georgius Buchananus, Ficklerus ^ Renecheru^, with the rest of the
pillars of the Puritan Anarchy, do answer (being gra^el'd at the practice of
the primitive Chri^tians, an^ those precepts of the holy Apostl^) that the
Church then (as it were swathed in the bonds of weakness) had not strength
enough to make powerful resistance; and therefore, so the one taught, and the
other obeyed, but if this doctrine were allowable, then would inevitably follow
these two gross absu^dities.

1. That the pen of the holy Ghost (which taught submission even to the worst
of Kings) was not directed according to the equity of the thing, but the
necessity of the times.

2. That either the holy Ghost must turn Politician, and become a timeserver,
or else the Church must lose the means of its being, and substance. Whereas we
know the contrary so well, that when Acies Ecclesi^e, was so far from its been
ordin^ta, that when all the Soldiers fled, and the Lifeguard ^outed, the Lord
of ^ost (the General himself) taken Prisoner, yet then, like the Sun looking
biggest in lowest estate, so the son of righteousness, think ye not that I can
pray unto my Father, and he will send Legions of Angels; and rath^r than Gods
children shall be oppressed by a company of Egyptians (if it be his pleasure to
deliver them) he can, without the drawing of one Sword, turn Rivers into blood,
produce an Army of Froggs to destroy them: and rather than they should be
necessitated for lack of means, send swarms of Flies, that may serve them in
the stead of so many rescuing Angels, and therefore it was not any necessity,
that the Church was, or could be in, that procured in the Apo^tl^s, or the
first Christians, either that doctrine, or that use; it was not disability, but
duty; not want of strength, but a reverend regard of the Lords Anointed, that
wrought these effects in both: Let the people be never so many and mighty, and
the Princes of the people never so wicked and cruel, mos gerendus est, we must
obey them; not in the performance of their unjust commands; but in submission
to their just authority; if not by our active, yet by our passive obedience: if
not for their own sakes yet propter Dominum, for the Lords sake; if not for
wrath, yet for conscience sake, Romans 13.5. If it goes against thy conscience,
say, as the people were wont to say, when they fell down before the Ass that
carried the Image of the God^ess Isis, upon his back, non tibi sed Religioni;
if thy conscience condemns thee, God is greater than thy conscience, and we
must look what he commands, as well as what she dictates; the one may be
mislead, the other cannot mislead; sacrifice may be either pleasing, or
displeasing to the Lord, but obedience was never faulty; thou may offer the
sacrifice of fools, when thou think thou do well: but upon how sure
grounds goes he, who can say with the prophet in all his actions, If I have
gone a stray, O Lord, thou have caused me to err? never deviating from the
express of his word. Now God gives us express command, that we should not touch
his Anointed what condition soever they are of: Nolite Tang^re Christos meos,
touch not mine anointe^; an^ where Gods rules are general, we must not put in
exceptions of our own; for the wickedness of a King can no more make void Gods
ordinance, of our obedience unto him, then man's unbelief can frustrate Gods
decree in us, Romans 3.3. Let Saul be wicked, an^ let wicked Saul be but once
Anointed, David states the question neither concerning Saul, nor* his
wickedness, but whether he being the Lords anointed (there is the business) it
is lawful to stretch forth a hand against him ( Who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords Anointed and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9.

CHAP. VI. Whether upon any pretenses whatsoever it be lawful to depose,
murder, or so much as to touch the Lords Anointed.
1 Samuel 24.5.
THere was the first time that ever it was put to the Vote, whether a King might
be put to death or not, but it was resolved upon the question in that
Parliament; Ne perdas, destroy him not; it is well that David had a negative
voice, or else it had been but a bad president for Kings; it is well that the
men with whom David had this parley, would hearken unto reason, and let that
sway them, otherwise David might have been forced to fly as fast away from his
own men as he did at first from Saul: for there wanted no Lay-preachers then,
to preach the destruction and slaughter of Princes, under the pretenses of
wicked Government and tyranny; who had the trick then, as well as now, to couch
their foul meaning in good words and Scripture phrase, with a dixit Dominus,
when the Lord said no such thing; as David's Zealots, 1 Samuel 24.5. This is the
day whereof the Lord said unto thee, I will deliver thine Enemy into thine
hand, and thou shall do unto him (what?) as shall seem good unto thee, that is
thou shall murder him, that was their meaning: though the word was a good word;
and we do not read where the Lord said any such thing at all: So Abishai, 1 Samuel 26.8. God has delivered thine enemy into ^hine hand: what then? Therefore
let me smite him; no such matter; David denies the consequence, as if he should
have said, God has delivered him into my hand, but I will make no such bad use
of his deliverance, I had rather hereby show him his own error, and my
innocence* then any way stretch forth my hand against him, for he is the Lords
Anointed, and when sleep had betrayed Saul to David's power in the trench, and
made the King a subject for David's innocence, he esteemed himself but as a
Patridg in the Wilderness, when he might have caught the Eagle in the Nest: he
pacified Saul's Anger, by inabling his power to hurt, sent him his spear (it
seems he did not think it fit to keep the Kings Militia in his hands) and
humbly beggs, Let not my blood fall to the earth; when, if it had not been for
David, Abishai would have smiten Saul unto the earth at once, so that he needed
not to have smitten him the second time, but David would not: destroy him not
says he, and his reason was, Quis potest? Who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless?

Another most Notable demonstration of David's innocence, and subjection, unto a
hard Master, a most tyrannical King, cruel Saul; we have, 1 Samuel 24. When in
the Cave of Engildi, David might have cut off Saul's head; like precious
ointment, he descends only to the skirts of his garment, and with a Quid feci?
checks himself, and beshrews his heart that he had done so much, and upon a
little looking back of Saul (as if he had put on rays of Majesty) David bows,
and stoops with his face to the earth to him, when he might have laid his
honor in the dust; called him my Father; when that Father came to sacrifice
him upon the mountains, and ( Isaac-like) nothing but See my Father, when he
could see nothing but fire, and sword, and himself also the lamb, ready for the
sacrifice, A true Isacc (though many young men staid behind with the Ass) will
after his father, though he have fire in the one hand and a knife in the other,
ready for to sacrifice his follower; A right David, and he that is a man after
Gods own heart, though he could bite to death, and know into the very bowels of
his Sovereign, yet he will assume no farther power to hurt, than to the biting
of a Flea; after whom is the King of Israel come out? After a Flea? Afte^ whom
does Saul pursue? After a dead Dog? When he might have caught the Lion in the
toil. I could easily be endless in instances of the like nature, as our
Savior Christ's obedience to the death, under the reign of Tiberius; his
Disciples un^er Nero, Claudius and Caligula, whose governments were opposite to
the propagation of the Gospel, as themselves were enemies to the propagators of
it; yet we see they neither attempted the alteration of the one, or the
destruction of the other; yet Christ could do much if he pleased, and if the
Napkins of Saint Paul, and the shadow of Saint Peter could cure diseases; if a
word out of their mouths could strike men and women dead in the place; if an
oration at the Bar, could make a King tremble on the Bench, then surely you
will confess that his Disciples could do something: Yet nothing was done or
attempted against those wicked, cruel, and pagan Emperors, one instance shall
suffice for all: what mischief or injury could be done more to a people, then
Nebuchadonozer King of Babylon did unto the Jews, who slew their King, their
Noble, their Parents, their Children, and kinsfolks; burn^d their Country,
their Cities, their Jerusalem, their Temple, and carried the residue (who were
left alive) Captives with him to Babylon. And now behold (then) Nebuchadonozers
good subjects: will you hear what advice the Prophet Daniel gives them for all
this? Baruch 1.11. Pray you for the life of Nebuchadonozer King of Babylon, and
for the life of Balthazer his son, that their days may be upon earth, as the
days of Heaven, and the Lord will give us strength; (what to do? to wage War
against him?) and lighten our eyes (what, with new Revelations how they may be
revenged? O no) that we may live under the shadow of Nebuchadonozer King of
Babylon, and under the shadow of Balthazer his son, and that we may serve them
many days and find favor in their sight, truly showing that a King is Alkum,
Prove. 30.31. one, against whom there is no rising up; that is, not upon any
pretenses whatsoever: there can be no pretenses whatsoever more fair and
specious; then those of defending the Church, and redressing the Commonwealth.
For the first; if Religion be any thing pushed at, think you that Rebellion
will keep it up, or that it ever stood in need of such hands? when God refused
to have his Temple built by David, because he was a fighter of the Lords
Battles; think you that he will have his Church defended by fighters against
the Lords Anointed? to defend Religion by Rebellion, were to defend it by means
condemned, by the same Religion we would desend; an^ to reform or redress the
Commonwealth, by Insurrection and Rebellion, were to rectify an error with
the greatest of all mischiefs; no government worse than a Civil War, and the
wor^^ Go^ernour is always better than the best Rebellion: Rebellion is as the
sin of witchcr^ft, and stubborness is as Idolatry: and how perilous a thing it
is, for the Feet to judge the Head, the subjects to chose wha^ government and
Governors they will have; to condemn what, and whom they please, to make what
pretenses and surmises they have a mind to, this Kingdom by woeful experience
has had sad resentments. Imbecillities and weaknesses in Princes, are on
arguments for the chastisements, deposing, or murdering of Kings; for then
giddy heads will never want matter or pretenses to cloak their Rebellion: Shall
Moses, because Pharaoh was an oppressor of Gods people, and had hardened his
heart, and would not let the Israelites depart, therefore inflict punishments
upon Pharaoh, or so much as depart without his leave? Though Moses could
inflict punishments upon the whole Land, yet his Commission never went so far,
as to touch Pharaoh, in the least degree; though swarms of Flies came into the
house of Pharaoh, and Frogs entered into the Kings chamber; yet we read not that
they seized on Pharaohs person; there were Lice in all their Quarters says the
Psalmist, and there became Lice in man and beast, upon the smiting on the dust,
but none were smitten of the person of the King: Boyls and blains were upon all
the Egyptians and upon the Magicians, so sore, as they could not ^^and in the
presence of Pharaoh, but they were not on Pharaoh, that he could not stand
himself; Pharaoh his eldest son may die, but Vivat Rex, Pharaoh must not b^
touched. Did bsalom do well to conspire against his Father, though he defiled
Vriahs bed, and cloaked adultery with murder? should the Priest, Peers,
Prophets, or People, offer to depose Solomon, because he had brought strange
Wives into the Land, and as strange Religion into the Church? shall Elias
entice Ahabs subjects to Rebellion, because he suffered Jezabel to put Naboth
to death, and killed the Lords Prophets? shall Peter take vengeance upon Herod
because he put him in prison, beheaded John the Baptist, and killed James?
shall Reuben be no Patriarch, because he was unstable as water? shall Simeon
and Levi lose their Patriarchal dignity, because they were brethren in
iniquity, and instruments of cruelty, because in their anger they slew a man,
and in their self-will dug down a wall? shall Judah be depose^ from his rule
and government for making a bargain with an Harlot upon the high way? shall
Issachar not be numbered amongst the other twelve, because he was none of the
wisest? no reason; they were Patriarchs as well as the rest, which was the
immediate government before Kings; and (indeed) were princes themselves:
Princeps Dei es inter nos, Genesis 28.6. Thou art a mighty Prince amongst us: and
thus much shall suffice (and I hope sufficient) to show, that no faults or
pretenses whatsoever, can make it lawful to depose, or so much as to touch the
Lords Anointed.

CHAP. VII. What is meant by touching the Lords Anointed, or stretching forth
the hand against the Lords Anointed.
NOt dare to touch the Lords Anointed, is an awful reverence, and a supposed
difference to be kept, between every subject and his Sovereign; esp^cially in
point of violence. A Mother doubting the discretion of her Children, and being
to leave some curious looking* glass in a place, does not command her Children
they should not break it, but that they should not touch it; knowing full well,
that if they have the liberty to meddle with it in the least degree, they make
break it before they are aware, and destroy it when they think least of any
such matter. So God is very chary of his King, wherein he beholds the
representatio^ of himself, and ^nowing him to be but brittle and though the
most refined Earth, yet bu^ glass: he commands his people that they should not
touch his Anointed; knowing that if they were permitted but to tamper with him
in the least degree, their rude hands may break it in pieces, when they do but
think to set it right.

A touch is but of one man, though but with one of his fingers, yet this must
not be; Nolite tangere, it is not said ne tangere, wherein only the act of
touching is forbidden, but Nolite tangere, whereby the will is also prohibited:
how wary should we be in touching, when the Lord is so cautious in his
prohibition?

Now stretching forth the hand may signify a combination of many into one
confederacy, the hand being a part of the body, composed of five members (one
and all) but this must not be: a most unhappy instrument is that hand that
turns it self into the bowels of its own body; if the head break out by chance,
the hands must not presently be in the head clawing, with invenomed nails, the
corruption there, lest that itching desire, turn into smart in the end* lest
when the peaceable day springing from on high, shall happily visit you, that
now sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, we then see our bloody hands,
and this (once happy) kingdom, the only pillow, whereon peace had laid her
head, streamed (like the Egyptian River) all with blood. In a word, by touching
the Lords Anointed, or by stretching forth the hands against him, is meant any
kind of violence that is used against sacred Majesty, and the signification
thereof is of a large extent* for we stretch forth our han^s when we do but
lift up our heels in scorn against him; Who so lifts up his heel, Psalm. 41.9.

Secondly, We stretch forth our han^s against the Lords Anointed, when we do
but raise up Arms in our own defense; Whosoever resists the power, resists
the Ordinance of God, and draws Damnation upon himself. Romans 3.

Thirdly, We stretch forth our hands against the Lords Anointed, when we
stretch not our Tongue and Voice, when we hear of any Traitorous plots or
conspiracies against the Lords Anointe^, and so bring such conspiracies to
light: It is a foul thing to hear the voice of conspiracy, and not to utter it:
Lev. 5.1. as good lay thy hand upon the Lords Anointed, as lay thy hand upon
thy Mouth and conceal the T^eason.

Fourthly, We stretch forth our hands against the Lords Anointed, when we do
not stretch forth our hands for the Lords Anointed, when we see him assaulted
with any danger, or Traitorous opposings. Should a man see his Father fiercely
assaulte^, and should not presently run to his rescue, but should suffer him to
be slain before his face, would we not equally exclaim against him with the
murderers, Qui non Vetat peccare Quum potest, jubet; he bids, that does not
forbid with all his power (like a true son) such outrages and violences, to be
committed against the Father of his Country.

Fifthly, We touch the Lords Anointed, when we touch his Crown and Dignity;
entrench upon his Regalia; hol^ or withhold his sons or daughters, kill or take
prisoners his men of War* We must take heed of ^efacing the garment, as well as
of hurting the person, for they are both Sacred; the precious Oyn^ment, wet not
Aarons head alone, but it ran down upon his Beard, and down unto the skirts of
his garment, making all Sacred that was about him; such touchings t^erefore are
worse, than when we touch the person with the greatest violence; for then the
Ano^nte^ are most touche^, when they are touch^d where the Anointe^ is, which
is their ^tate and Crown, dearer to them than their lives; touch bot^, ^^e
mur^er of the person, is but a consequence to the d^posement of the dignity.

Sixthly, we touch the Lords Anointed, when we take away h^s re^enue and
li^el^hood from him, the Devil thought that he ha^ stretched forth his hand
excee^in^ly against Job, touched (and touch^d him to the quick) when he had
procured Gods permission, that the Sabeans and Caldeans should take away his
Oxen and Asses, his S^eep and Camels, and plundered him of all he had; God
called this a destraction unto Jo^, Job 2.3. and that before ever a hand was
stretched forth to touch either his bone, or his flesh.

Seventhly. Is there no stroke but what the hand gives? Yes, the tongue can
strike as well as the best: Jer. tells us so, Venite percutiamus cum lingua:
come let us smite him with the tongue, Jer. 18, 18. and David said, His tongue
was a two edged sword: There is, (says Solomon) that speaks (and that
waits too) like the piercing of a sword: It is bad enough in any, or against
any man, but worst of all against the Lords Anointed; for it is said Thou shall
not revile the Gods, nor speak evil of the Ruler of the People: Saint Paul, but
for calling of a High Priest, painted wall, (though) when he caused him to be
smitten Contrary to the Law, yet he eat his words and confessed his error; and
now many, that would seem to be followers of Paul, are revilers of Kings and
make no bones thereof. The same God that commanded Laban, in respect of his
servant, Vide ne quid lo ^uare durius, see thou give no ill language, certainly
expects that ^ubjects should set a watch before their mouths, to keep the door
of their lips, lest they offend with their tongue, in speaking ill of Princes.

Eighthly, As the tongue can strike without a hand, so the heart can curse
without a tongue: Eccl. 10.2. Curse not the King, no not in thy heart, for a
Bird in the air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall ^^ll the
matter. The hand implies both; never was the hand stretched forth to any evil
act, but the heart was the p^ivy Counselor, and the tongue the chief p^rswader
unto such enormities; therefore it is goo^, obstare princi^iis, to cru^h the
cockatrice egg, kill it in the heart, lest those pravae cogi^ati^^es want room,
and then out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and persuades
the hand to be the destruction of the whole body: If hand, and heart, and
tongue, and pen where thus regulated, we need not long look for peace, or
despair of an accommodation, but whilst the hand is up, and the heart is set at
liberty, and the tongue says, Our tongues are our own, we, ought to speak, who
is Lord over us? and every pen is a ready writer in matters pertaining to the
King: in vain it is to seem Christians, whil^t we are such Antichrists: the
Bible under our arm, falls to the ground, whil^t we stretch forth our hand
against the Lords Anointed: why do we take Gods word into our mouths if we let
it not down into our hearts, to do as that directs us? Christian liberty never
cut the string, that tied the tongue to those observances. Of these things
there might be applications made, but lapping as they go along is best for
dogs, where there are Crocodiles in the River.

It seems by the story, that Kings may be coursely dealt withal if men make no
bones of being guilty; they stand like the forbidden Tree, in the midst of the
Paradise of God, m^n may touch them, but they had better let them alone; if God
had placed (at the first) Cherubims, and a flaming sword, turning every way to
defend the tree, how could there have been a trial of Adams obedience? So if
God by some instinct, had chained the hearts of men, and tied their hands, and
bound them to the peace, so that they could neither in thought, word, nor deed,
have committed violence against his Vicegerent, how could there have been a
trial of the Subjects duty? the Tree had no guard, nor fence about it, but
only, thou shall not eat thereof, if thou do, thou shall surely die the
death, Princes have no better security for themselves, than the Almighties
command for their preservation, ^olite Tangere, etc. Touch not mine Anointed;
to break the First, was but death, the second is damnation; if thou resist the
higher powers, you resist the highest God, and he that resi^teth shall be
damned, Romans 13.2. The commandment concerning the Tree of Paradise, was only
thou shall not eat thereof; but we are forbidden to touch so much as a leaf of
our forbidden tree, much less to shake down all his fruit; there is hopes of a
tree, says Job, that if it be cut down, yet it will sprout again, but not only
a finger, a hand, but an axe must be laid to the root of the tall Cedar of our
Libanus; yea, they must be rooted up like the names of Taronius; they will not
leave so much as a stump of Nebuchadnezzers tree chained to the earth; up must
all root and branch, till all the royal branches lie like sprey upon the
ground: these men had rather be destroyed themselves, than say the Lords
Anointed is not to be destroyed. Go ye blind Zelots, hearken to your Wives, and
let them persuade you to disobedience, and the Devil them, as Eve did Adam, and
the Devil her: behold the objects she presents unto your view; how good they
seem, how fair they look, how pleasant they are to thine eye, how wise you
think you sha^^ ^e, how full of knowledge, when poor wretches, you shall find
all these promises tu^ned into Fig Leaves, to hide your nakedness: all these
golden Apples of Palestine once touched, evaporated into stench and blindness,
and that your disobedience has given you nothing but curses, and brought you
nothing but sorrows and Death upon your selves and children, and profited you
nothing but the turning of an Edom into a Wilderness, till you be glad to eat
the herbs of the field, and by the same fault, fall into the same punishment
with our neighbors of Germany, dye with grass in your mouths. These things
fell upon Adam for his disobedience unto God, and the like will fall upon us
(the sons of Adam) for our disobedience unto Gods Anointed. O then let us not
by any means lift up our hands against the Lords Anointed, lest (like Adam) we
fall from our state of innocence, and be guilty: guilty of all the blood that
has, and shall be spilt upon this Land, guilty of the tears of so many
fatherless children and widows: and if we will not be obedient unto a Prince
of men, guilty of all the eternal thraldom and submission unto a Prince of
Devils: take then the advice of the wise Solomon, Prove. 30.32. If thou have
done foolishly in lifting up thy self, or if thou have thought evil, lay thy
hand upon thy mouth: Fear God, honor the King, have nothing to do with them
that are subject unto charge, for their destruction comes suddenly; and so
will yours. Let no man deceive himself, he who is not good in his particular
calling, can never be good in his general calling. He is no good man, that is
no good servant, and if he be no good subject, he is no goo^ Christian, he that
honors not the King, does never fear God; and except he obeys both, he obeys
neither.

CHAP. VIII. Whether Kings now adays are to be had in the same veneration and
esteem, as Kings were under the Law, by reason of our Christian liberty.
CErtainly the murmuring of Co^ah, Dathan and Abiram, with their accomplices;
Thou seek to make thy self altogether a Prince over us, the Lord is among
us, we are all alike holy unto the Lord, (and therefore Moses and Aaron must be
no more excellent than the rest of the people) was no prophecy to be fulfilled
in these our days; for if it had, surely our Savior would never have paid
tribute for himself and Peter, Mat. 17.27. which was a symbol of their
subjection to heathen pagans; for this cause pay ye tribute, Romans 13.6. we have
those who are apt enough to mak^ arguments with our Savior, bearing this
conclusion, then are the Children free, Mat. 17.26. but few that will imitate
his peaceable example, to fish for money, rather than offend the higher powers,
Mat. 17.27. And if you conjecture that our Savior did this merely for
quietness sake, behold the question^ rightly stated* Is it lawful to give
tribute to Caesar or not? Mat. 22.17. seriously propounded ( Master we know
that thou art true (an^ therefore we hope thou will not deceive us with a lie)
and teach the way of God in truth (and therefore thou will not cause us to
err through the deceiveableness of unrighteousness) neither carest thou for any
man (and therefore thou will not be afraid to speak the truth) thou regardest
not the persons of men) therefore fearing only God, thou will boldly, and
faithfully without partiality, or fear, plainly tell us, whether it be lawful
or not) clearly determined and concluded upon; Da Caesari quae sunt Caesaris,
Mat. 22.21.

If Christian liberty, should loose the reigns of Civil Government, then Christ
would never have acknowledged Pilates power to have been of God, John 19.11. If
subjection unto Kings were a hinderance to the propagation of the Gospel, then
Saint Peter would never have exhorted the Christians to submit themselves to
every ordinance of man. 1 Pet. 2.9. We have too many submitters now-adays unto
every Ordinance of men, but they are not unto such Ordinances, whereof the King
is Supreme, 1 Pet. 2.13.

Object. It is better to obey God than man, and therefore for his sake we
cannot obey every ordinance of man.

Sol. The Apostle does not in this place discourse of obedience, but of
submission: obedience is to be given to things, only lawful; submission is to
be given to any ordinance whatsoever, though not for the things sake, which is
commanded, yet propter Dominum, for the Lords sake who does command, so
absolute submission: where God commands one thing, and the King comman^s
another thing, we may refuse his will, and there is perfect obedience; when God
commands one thing, and the King commands the contrary, we may not resist his
authority, and therein is true submisson; and this the Apostle does not only
assure us to be the will of God, but puts this well doing in the stead of
knowledge and wisdom, whereby the ignorance of foolish men may be put to
silence, 1 Pet. 2.15. when fre^dom stan^s on tiptoes, her coat is too short to
cover her maliciousness, therefore the Apostle exhorts us to behave our selves
As free, but not using our liberty, as a cloak for maliciousness, 1 Pet. 2.16.

If Christian liberty did break the School of civil Government, then Saint Paul
would never have been such a Schoolmaster to the Romans, Romans 13. Let every
Soul be subject to the higher powers: an excellent rule for our obedience,
every soul, no exemption by greatness, or holiness, or any by-respect
whatsoever, but if he have a soul, let him be subject to the higher powers: if
two powers clash one against another, here we know which to stick to in our
obedience, that is, which is highest (and that Saint Peter plainly t^lls us is
the King, whether to the King as Supreme, 1 Pet. 2.13.) There is no power but
of God, the powers that be, are of God, whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation, v. 2. What Christian then can have his conscience so
misled, as to resist those powers out of conscience, when the Apostle plainly
tells us, v. 1. We must needs be subject, not only for wrath (that is, for fear
of them) but also for conscience sake, because God commanded it.

There were Anti-monarchists, and Anti-dignitarians even in the Apostles time,
but if it had been laudable, or agreeable to Chri^tian liberty, then Saint Jude
in his Epistle v. 8. would never have called the despisers of Dominion and evil
speakers of Dignities, filthy dreamers and defilers of the flesh (as he put
them, so we find them both together) he never would have compare^ them to bruit
beasts, v. 10. he never would have pronounced woes unto them, as unto the goers
into the ways of Cain: greedy runners after the error of Balaam, for reward;
and perishers (as in the gainsaying of Corah) v. 11. he would never have
compared them to clouds without water: carried about with wind: to fruitless
wretched Trees, twice dead, plucked up by the roots: to raging waves of the
Sea, foaming out their own shame: wandering stars, to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness forever, ver. 12.13. he never would have described them
unto you so fully, to be Murmurers, Complainers, walkers after their own lusts,
wide mouthed, speakers of great swelling words, having of men's persons in
admiration, by reason of advantage, separatists, sensual, (and though they
pretend never so much unto it) having not the spirit, v. 16.19.

Christian liberty frees from the ceremony of the Law, not from the substance
of the Gospel: whereof we see submission and subjection unto Kings, is a great
part thereof. The Roman yoke, and the Romans hands which held the plough
ploughing upon the Christians backs, and made long furrows, and for a long
time, were both adverse to the propagation of Christ's Gospel; yet during all
that time, neither Christ, nor any of his Disciples, ever attempted either the
change of the one, or the displaying of the other; and shall we think our
selves more wise than he, who is the wisdom of the Father? Or better advised
than by him, who is the everlasting counselor? Or that any man's doctrine can
settle us in more peace and quietness than he, who is princeps pa^is, the
Prince of peace? will you have more Orthodox Fathers than the Apostles? or the
Children of this generation to be wiser than the Fathers of old? Christ and his
Apostles with all the ancient Fathers taught, and subscribed to this doctrine.
First, Christ, Da Caesari quae sunt Caesaris: then Saint Paul, Render to all
their due, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor, and all to Caesar: Then St. Peter, submit your
selves, etc. Fear God* honor the King, etc. Sic passim in Scripturis.

Dear Christians, are we better pleased with the glittering tin^el of a painted
Baby from a Pedlers shop, than with the rich, and inestimabl^ Jewels of Divine
truth? will we suffer our s^lves to be cozene^ with the g^lded slips of error?
and what Enthusi^smes every pretended spirit, if not ev^ry ^obler, Weaver,
Groom, or Coachman, shall dictate, who are but velut ign^ae, and velut status,
as it were of fire, or as it were a mighty an^ ^ushing wind, but nothing
sensible, some hot exhalations of the brain set on fire, by the continual
motion, an^ agitation of the tongue. Goo^ God, have we thus learnt Christ? Is
this the fruit of so clear a Gospel? and the retu^n of all our holy mothers
care, and pains for Education? shall we take Gods word into our mouths and
preach Sedition, Rebellion and Insur^ection, contrary to that word which we
pretend to preach? to maintain Religion by Insurrection, is to maintain it by
means, condemned by the same Religion we would maintain.

CHAP. IX. Whether a King failing in his duty and not performing those things,
which he has sworn unto at his Coronation (so solemnly) the People are not
disobliged in their obedience unto him, and may, thereupon, depose or put him
to death.
IF Kings held their Crowns by Indentures from the People, then were the People
disobliged to their obedience unto him, upon his failing (in those things
whereto he has been sworn) on his part, but if they receive their Crowns
immediately from God, and that by him alone Kings Reign (as has been heretofore
proved at large) then all the failings that can be in a King* can but make him
a bad King; but still he must remain a King; the Oath assures us of his being a
King, not of his being a good King; for he was King before he took it:
Coronation is but a ceremony, and his Oath is but at his Coronation; the issue
of ceremony, must not dis-inherit the right heir, of all that substance: King
and Kingdom, are like man and wife, whose marriages are made in Heaven, who are
betrothed by God himself; Now as in the ceremony between man and woman, the
husband in the presence of God and Angels, and all the Congregation promises
(which is as solemnly binding as any Oath) that he will live together with her
after Gods holy Ordinance in the sta^^ of matrimony, that he will love and
cherish her, maintain and keep her, and forsaking all other, keep himself only
unto her: Now if he perform all these things, he does well, he is both a good
husband, and a good Christian (considering the vow that he has made) but if he
does not live with her according to Gods holy Ordinance, nor love, nor cherish
her as he should, nor maintain and keep her as he ought; Shall it be lawful for
a man to put away his wife for every cause? Mat. 19.3. much less can it be
lawful for the wife to put away her husband upon every distaste; It was God
that made them male and female: Mat. 19.4. and therefore it is fit they should
continue together so; They twain are but one flesh; Mat. 19*5. therefore they
cannot be divided; God joined them both together: Mat. 19.6. therefore no man
can put them assun^er. Now to apply this to the King wedding himself to his
People at his Coronation; the King (solemnly) takes his Oath at his Coronation
before all the People, that he will live together with them according to the
Laws of the Land, that he will protect and defend them to the uttermost of his
^ower, with all other protestations contained in the said Oath; which if he
does perform, he does well, and is both a good man, and a good King; but if he
should not govern them accordingly to the Laws of the Land, and if he should
not cherish and defend his People, shall it be lawful for his wife ^o make away
this husband? God forbid! God made him King, them Subjects, therefore they must
continue so, like man and wife, for better for worse, they two are both one,
the head may not be divided from the body, and quae Deus conjunxit, nemo
separet; there have been Bills of divorcement given unto these King-husbands in
former times: but of those Bills, I may say, as our blessed Savior said of the
Bills of divorcement which Moses commanded; it was propter duri^iem cordis,
Mat. 19.7. Deuteronomy. 24.1. for the hardness of men's hearts; and then again, this
durities cordis, never went so far as that the woman might put away her
husband, but only the husband his wife* and that only in the case of Adultery;
and if it had been otherwise, it had but a late beginning, a bad foundation:
for our Savior says, Mat. 19.8. In principio autem non erat sic, It was not
so from the beginning; and a hard heart is but a bad foundation for a good
Christian to build upon. I will conclude this application with words not of my
own, but of Saint Paul, which words are a commandment, Neither is it I (says
the Apostle) 1 Cor. 7.10. but the Lord, that gives you this commandment, Let
not the wife depart from her husband; no, if she be an heretic, or which is
worse, a heathen; If the woman has a busband which believes not, i^ he be
pleased to dwell with her let her not leave him: 1 Cor. 7.13. If I would resist
my Sovereign in any kind, it should be for my Religion, but when my Religion
tells me that I must not resist him in any case; then I think I should but do
(in doing so) like the boasting Jew, Romans 2.13. who boasted of the Law, and
dishonored God through breaking of that Law, which he had boasted of: What if
some did not believe, shall their unbelief make the faith of God of none
effect? says Paul* Romans 3.3. God forbid: no more can the wickedness of a King,
make void Gods Ordinance of our obedience unto him: our obedience must look
upon Gods command, not upon the Kings good behavior; God does not command
things because they are fitting, but it is fit that we should obey, because he
commands them; neither ought we to have respect so much unto the goodness, as
unto the Authority of a King; for Kings do not consist in this, that they are
good, but in this, that they are Kings; for as it is possible for one to be a
good man, and a bad King, so it is often seen, that a bad man may be a good
King; and it is an observation here at hom^, that the best Laws have been made
by the worst of Kings. It is an observation, that diverse Kingdoms have long
continued in peace and happiness under bad Laws, and worse Governors. Well
observed; when unwarrantable attempts to better both, and inconsiderable
courses to mend all, has brought all to ruin and confusion. He that sets a
Kingdom in combustion, to advance his own opinion, and prefer his private
judgment, does but set his house on fire to roast his Eggs.

God makes Kings of several conditions, sometimes he gives a King, whose wisdom
and reach in Government is like Saul's, head and shoulders higher then all the
People: And then when we have wise Kings, and learned Judges, Psalm. 2.10. we
shall be sure to have all those Breakers of their bonds asunder, and those
casters away of their cords from them; v. 5. to be bruised with a Rod of Iron,
and broken in pieces like a Potters vessel; v. 9.

Sometimes God will send us a little child, sometimes a child in years,
otherwhile a child in understanding, which of both it be, Vae regno (says
Solomon) cui puer dominabitur; woe to the Kingdom, over which a child Reigns,
for then the whole Kingdom is sure to be put upon the rack. Sometimes God in
his judgment sends a Tyrant amongst us, I will set an evil man to rule over
them, says God himself, and then we are never in hope to be from under the
lash; and sometimes in mercy he sends meek and mild Princes (like Moses) who
carried his People in his bosom, one that shall only make use of his
Prerogatives, as Christ did of his miracles in cases of necessity; one who
shall say with the Apostle Saint Paul, I have no power to do hurt, but to do
good, to edification but not to destruction: one who shall continue his Reign,
as Saul began, Videre ne quid sit populo, quod fleat, who will hear and ask why
do the People cry? deserve well and have well; shall we receive good from the
hands of the Lord, and shall we not receive evil Princes? though they be amarae
sagittae, yet when we consider that they are e dulci manu domini emissae, we
should not refuse them, but be contented with whomsoever his mercy or his
justice sen^s* or throws upon us: Never was there a bad Prince over any People,
but he was sent by our heavenly Father for a scourge to his chil^ren; and shall
we kiss, or snatch the Rod out of our Fathers hand? To conclude, there is
nothing can disoblidge the people from their King, because bis Authority over
them is a domino, from the Lord, but their obedience toward him is propter
dominum, for the Lords sake; though in himself there be all the reasons that
can be given to the contrary, many will be glad to hear the Father of their
Country, say, I and the Lord will go, and to be sole elect, and to hear his
Father tell him, deus providebit, as Abraham said to his Son Isaac; but if he
takes fire and sword in hand threatening his follower, how many followers will
he have? I had rather, with Isaac, follow my Father I know not wherefore; and
with Abraham, obey my God, contrary to my own nature, and beyond all hope, then
to serve so great a God and his Vicegerent by rules drawn by my own fancy and
reason.

CHAP. X.
Psalm. 105.15. Touch not mine Anointed, meant by KINGS.


BY the words, Touch not mine Anointed, is meant Kings and Princes: neither can
any other interpretation, whatsoever, be obtruded upon this Text, without a
great deal of impudence and ignorance; If there were no other argument to be
used but this, to a modest man, it were sufficient, viz. That not any Church,
nor any Churchmen, nor any Chri^tian, nor any Father, nor any Expositor
whatsoever, did ever give it any other interpretation, before such time as the
Jesuit and the Puritan, and they both at a time, and that time bearing not
above an hundred years date neither, began to teach the world that it was
lawful to murder Kings; and no marvel if this found some querk or other to
turn the stream of Scripture sense, out of its proper channel, and constant
course; the two Birds of a Feather, persecutors of one another, like two
fighting Cocks who quarrel amongst themselves, being both of the same kind, and
yet both agree in taking counsel together against the Lord, and against his
Anointed: or like Pilate and Herod, they could not agree but in the principles
of condemning the Lords Christ.

But it is objected, that as a little child upon a Giants shoulders, may see
farther then the Giant himself; so a weaker understanding coming aft^r those
Fathers, and taking advantage of such helps, getting up upon the shoulders of
time and learning, may see more then they did, or has been seen in former
ages; and therefore it is no wonder, if a man without aspersing himself with
the least immodesty, may pretend to see more, then all those who went before
him had observed, and what has this child pick-a-pocket spied? a Birds-neast
can there be a simpler thing imagined* whereby to give impudence the chair, and
throw all the Ancient Fathers flat upon their backs, then this so common, and
so much approved of instance to usher innovation, not only into the Church, but
also into the very soul of Scripture it self? for what if it be granted, that a
child upon a Giants shoulders sees further then does the Giant himself, does
the child know better what he sees then does the said Giant? must not the child
ask the Giant what is what, of all that he beholds? must not the child be
informed by the knowing Giant, of the difference between the mountains and the
valleys, the water and the sky, a cock and a bull? if the child be thus
ignorant, what does the child's getting up upon the Giants shoulders advantage
the child in points of controversy? except it be such a child as Saint
Christopher had got upon his shoulders, that was Judge of all the World: if the
child be not so simple, but understands all these things; then believe me he is
no chil^ in understanding; but a Giant himself in knowledge, an^ so the
similitude, the child, and the Giant come tumbling all down together; seat a
child never so high, he is but a child still, and sits but at the feet of a
Gamaliel, when he is upon the ^houlders of a Giant; no child was ever thought
worthy to pose all the Doctors, but the Child Jesus.

Now to clear the Text from those blots and blurs that are thrown upon the
words, going before this Text of Scripture, Touch not mine Anointed, viz. I
have reproved Kings for their sakes, Ergo, the word Anointed could not betoken
Kings, because Kings were reproved, for their sakes who were the Lords
Anointed: now say they, the word Anointed must necessarily signify the people
of God, for whose sake these Kings were reproved, and so it does; but yet my
Corahmites, Dathamites, and Abiramites, you must not think to be all alike holy
unto the Lord, as that ye are all concerned in this nolite tangere: There is no
question but that in some sense the elect of God are anointed ones of the Lord,
but not peculiarly the Lords Anointed: they are filii olii, sons of oil, as the
Prophet terms them, but not Christi mei, or Christi tui, or Christi ejus, or
Christi Domini, which were attribut^s that were never given by the holy Ghost
to any but to Christ, and Kings: the Priests who were anointed (really) never
were termed in Scripture the Lords Anointed, an^ the prou^e^t, and most
rebellious people that ever ^ere, whose arrogance claimed an equality with,
never (in sacris) strove to be above their Prie^s. Now if you expect clearness
in the fountain, do not ye trouble the waters, an^ you h^^ behol^ the springs
of truth arise; 'twas the elect and chosen of the Lord that were here meant by
anointed, and it was the fee^ of Abraham, and it was not Kings that were meant
by this word anointed in the Text* But it was not all the elect of God, that
must not be touched, it was not all the seed of Abraham who have this noli me
tangere about them, but it was Abraham, Is^a^ and Jacob, for whose sake God
reproved Kings, as they are plainly nominated in the same Psalm, and none else;
if there be mention made of the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were the seed
of Abraham; who were else mentioned? and though we cannot comprehend these
three under the notion of nominal Kings, yet we may be pleased to consider them
as real Princes, Principi Dei es enter nos, as it was said to Abraham, thou art
a mighty Prince among^t us, so Kings may be reproved for their sakes; they may
be Kings too, and yet the Lords Anointed, for whose sake Kings were reproved:
for we do not dispute about the name, but the thing. Now wheresoever you find
this word nolite tangere, you shall find this word, saying, going before it,
which of necessity must have some reference to some other place of Scripture to
which it must allude, and in reference to which it must be spoken: for the
word, saying, makes it rather a question of some Author, then the Psalmist's
own, this allusion you may easily perceive, Genesis 26.11. where it is set down,
how that God touched the heart of Abimelech King of the Philistims, in the
behalf of Isaac, one of the three named in the Psalm; so that King Abimelech
charged all his people, saying, He that touches this man, shall surely die: So
Abimelech and King Herod were both reproved for Abraham's sake: Genesis 12.10. And
to what place of Scripture can this nolite tangere be more aptly applied, then
to this, where we find the same words reiterated? Or what clearer testimony can
be given of the Scriptures alluding to this saying, Touch not mine Anointed,
then to Gen* 16.29. where totidem verbis, it is said to Abimelech in the behalf
of Isaac, We have not touched thee thou blessed of the Lord; what difference
between these words, And touch not mine Anointed.

Besides the Marginal notes of all our Bibles directs us to Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, as to the Anointed of the Lord, and as the Princes of Gods people, which
must not be touched and for whose sakes Kings were so much reproved; the word,
King, in the Text, does not exclude those who were Princes, but it only
includes those Princes who were called Kings, and were reproved for their sakes
who were Kings themselves re, though not nomine: so that all the ground that
will be gained hereby, will be, that one Prince was reproved for another,
though not called Kings.

To conclu^e, as no Christians ever interpreted this place of ^cripture but of
Kings and Princes, until Jesuits and Puritans, un^ertook that it is lawful to
murder Kings: So no English Author ever interpret^d it otherwise, till within
this seven or eight years; when Presbyters and Independents began to put this
doctrine in execution: and if the former of these two would wash their hands in
innocence, as relating to this last unparalled act of Regicide, let them
remember CHARLES the Proto-Martyr of Gods Church, and People, His own words, in
his Book of Meditations, wherein He tells them, How vain is the shift of their
pleading exemption from that aspersion, to grant Commission for shooting of
bullets of Iron and Lead in his face, and preserving him in a Parenthesis of
words.

CHAP. XI.
Objection.
REhoboam hearkened unto young men which gave him evil counsel, and would not
hearken unto his sages which gave him good advice, but answered the people
roughly; wherefore they renounced the right they had in David, and the
inheritance they had in the son of Jesse, fled to their Tents, and Crowned
Jeroboam King: Ergo, we may do the like upon the like occasion, having a
president from the word of God, and warrantable, because God said, This thing
was from the Lord, 1 King. 13.8.

Answer.
All this proves only that such a thing was done, not that it was well done;
for if it be a sufficient proof to prove out of Scripture, that such a thing
was done* and thereupon conclude that therefore we may do the like, then this
is as good an argument as the best, Judas betrayed Christ, therefore it is
lawful for a servant to betray his Lord and Master; first, the Scripture blames
him in a most pathetical climax, 1 Kings 11.26. Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the
servant of ^olomon, whose mothers name was Zeruah, even he lifted up his hand
against the King, showing how he had desperately run through all those
obligations, and ties that were upon him; Secondly, he and all his adherents
are called Rebels for their pains, not only by Abijah his enemy, but also by
the holy Ghost, who is enemy to none who are not Gods enemies, 2 Chronicles. 10.19.
And Israel Rebelled against the house of David unto this day; his adherents
were termed in Scripture vain men, and sons of Belial, they were punished with
a destruction of five hundred thousand of them, which was one hundred thousand
more then there were true Subjects for the slaughter; the Scripture says, God
smote Abraham, v. 5. If it be objected, that the thing could not but be well
done, because God says, 1 Kings 14. I exalted thee from among the people, and
made thee Prince over my people Israel, and rent the Kingdom from the house of
David, and gave it thee: then it could not but be well do^^ ^^nts of Rehoboam
(by the same reason) to ans* the people as he did: for it is written, that
Rehoboam hearkened not unto the people, for the cause was from God, that he
might perform the saying which he spoke by Abijah unto Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, 1 Kings 12.15. Both were passive, and neither of them could resist the
will of God; but these places of Scripture are often times mistaken, and
misapplyed, and interpreted either by those who are not well acquainted with
the nature of Scripture language, or else by those who wilfully, and wickedly
laid hold of such a meaning as the Scripture may seem to give them leave, for
all these and the like places of Scripture we must not take as Gods been
placence or approbation, but only for his permission; for otherwise we should
make a mad piece of work of it, for God said, 1 Samuel 12.11. I will raise up
evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before
thine eyes, and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie with them in the
sight of the sun: does this justify Absalom for lying with his Fathers wives
and concubines in the sight of all Israel? Is there any evil that I have not
done it, says the Lord? therefore did the Citizens do well to do evil, because
the Lord said, I did it? God did it, that is to say, he caused it to be done,
as the evil of punishment, not as the tolleration of evil, so this thing was
from the Lord, that is to say, the Lord suffered such a thing to come to pass
as a punishment of Solomon for his Idolatry on his posterity, and yet ^^ay no
way approve of any such Rebellious courses: neither was Rehoboam so much to be
blamed for his answer, as may be supposed, nor the people justified in their
Rebellion neither, for they grounded their discontents upon a false ground, for
the people complained when there was no cause, and deman^ed that which was not
reason; hear the whole grievance, and consider it a little, 1 Kings 12.4. Thy
father made our yoke grievous (that was false) do thou make it light: (no
reason for that) for the people never lived happier neither before nor after,
then they did in this Kings Fathers time, and might have done in his time, if
they had known when they had been well, and Gods judgments would have suffered
them to have seen it. For,

1. They were a populous Nation, as the sand on the Sea for multitude, 1 Kings
4.20.

2. They lived merrily, eating and drinking, and making merry.

3. The Nation was honored abroad, for Solomon reigned over all the Kings that
were round about him, v. 21.

4. They lived peaceably, they had peace in all sides round about them v. 24.

5. They lived securely and quietly, every man under his own Vine, and under
his own fig tree.

6. They had much Trading in his days, and much merchandise, 1 Kings 10.15.

7. He was very beneficial to those Merchants, for he gave Solomon, not only
large wisdom, but largeness of heart, and let those Merchants have commodities
from them at a price, v. 28.

8. He maintained a brave fleet at Sea, 1 King. 4.21.

9. He made silver and gold to be in Jerusalem as plentiful as stones, and
Cedars as Sicamore-trees, 2 Chronicles. 1.16.

10. These felicities were not only in the Court, or among the Nobility, or
between the Citizens, but they were universal, even from Dan unto Beersheba.

11. They were not for a spurt and no more, or at one time and not at another;
but all the days of Solomon.

O me prope lassum juvate posteri. Neither does the Scripture make any mention
of any such hard yoke at all, only the margent of the Bible directs us from the
complaint of the people, to look upon the first Chapter of the Kings, v. 7. and
there you shall only find how Solomon had twelve Officers over all Israel,
which provided victuals for the King and his household, each man his month in a
year, but here is but a very slender ground for a quarrel, when the immediate
verse after the naming of those twelve officers tells us, that the multitude of
people as numberless as the sand upon the ^ea shore, were as merry eating and
drinking as the King, and this place unto which we are directed (and no other)
to find out this grievousness, appears by the context of the same Chapter, to
be mentione^ as an expression of Solomon's glory and wisdom, rather then of any
tyranny, or polling of his people: for the whole relation ends with an
expression that as the people were as the sand of the Sea for number, so the
largeness of the Kings heart extended as the largeness of the Sea for bounty,
all were partakers of it, 1 Kings 4.29. Pardon me therefore if I think that
Rehoboam had more reason to answer the people as he did, then the people had
just reason to complain. O alti^udo! O the unsearchable ways of God! where God
suffers his people to be a rod to visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children, he permits them to take a wrong cause in hand, that he may also cast
the rod into the fire.

I pray God the Merchants of London be not too like those Merchants of
Jerusalem, who Traded so long, until they brought over, together with other
Merchandise, Apes and Peacocks, and the Traders begin to be too like their
traffic, Apes for manners and behavior, Peacocks for pride, and rusling
until the Apes grow to be so unhappy, as to be brought to their chains, and the
Peacocks, so vainglorious, as to loose their feathers: and so I leave them
both, tasting the fruit of their own follies. CHAP. XII. The Objection of Jehu
slaying his Master Joram, Answered.
Objection.
THus says the Lord God of Israel, I have Anointed thee Jehu King over the
people of the Lord, even over Israel, and thou shall smi^e the house of Ahab
thy, Master, that I may avenge the blood of all the servants of the Lord at the
hands of Jezebel: Ergo, if a King, be thus wicked, we have Gods warrant, for
the deposing and putting such a one to death.

Answer.
But stay until you have this warrant, and then we will allow it to be lawful;
for though every one is apt enough to be a Jehu in his own case, yet every one
is not a God-almighty, we must not clap his Seal to our own ^arrants; what God
commands at one time, we are not to make it our warrant to do the like at all
times, this is a prerogative of the Almighty, no privilege of a Subject; God
may command Abraham to slay his son* but we must not go about to murder our
children; God may command the Israelites to spoil the Egyptians, but we must
not Rob and Cosen our n^ighbours; Christ may give order for the taking away of
another man's goods, because the Lord has need of it, but we must not make
necessity our pretense for Arbitrary power; these acts of the Almighty are
specially belonging unto him, and we must have his special warrant before we go
about any such thing.

But setting all such plea aside, I utterly deny that either Jehu did, or that
God gave Jehu any such authority as to slay King Joram, Jehu slew Joram, but
Jehu did not slay the King, for Jehu by the Lords immediate appointment was
King himself, before ever he laid hand upon Joram; Joram was but then a private
man, for in the verses going before, it is set down how that Jehu was Anointed
King, how he was so proclaimed, and accordingly how he took the state of a King
upon him and executed the Office. 2 Kings 12.13. before ever any mention is
made of Jehu slaying Joram, v. 14. therefore here is no regicidium, as yet here
is but plain manslaughter, and a lusty warrant for that too: again, we must
not only take heed of unwarrantable actions, but of false warrants, the private
spirit is no sufficient warrant to lay hold on such a public Magistrate: as
there are false Magistrates so there is a false spirit: for an erroneous spirit
may as well con^emn a good Magistrate as a bad Magistrate may be condemned by a
good spirit: but there may be a higher mistake then all this, and I wish it
were not too common amongst us now adays, to mistake the works of the flesh,
for the fruit of the spirit: Let us compare them both together, as the Apostle
has set them in order.

The works of the flesh.
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness Laciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings.
The fruit of the Spirit.
Love, Joy, Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance.
By which of these two was CHARLES the First's Head cut off?

CHAP. XIII. Of the Necessity and Excellency of Monarchy.
A Jove principium. Let us begin with Heaven, and behold its Monarchy in the
unity of the blessed Trinity; though there be three persons, yet there must be
but one God: for the avoiding of that which we are fallen into, a confounding
of persons, and dividing of substance. Descend lower, and consider the Angels,
and you shall find one Archangel above the rest, as the Angels Monarch. Lower
yet, to those senseless and inanimate Rulers of the Day and Night, the Sun and
Moon, and you shall not find (or so much as the appearance of such a thing)
more Suns or Moons in the same firmament then one; without a prodigy or
portent, of some dire, and direful event. Come down to the Regions and you
shall find in the head of the highest Region a Prince of the air. Come to the
lowest, and you shall find amongst the wing^d inhabitants thereof, the
Sovereign Eagle, as the King of Birds. Come amongst the Beasts of the field,
and the Lion will soon let you know, that there is a King of Beasts. Run into
the Sea, and their is a King of Fishes. Descend into Hell and there is a Prince
of Devils: and shall only man be Independent? Do we not observe the d^lving
Labourer what pains he takes to join house to house, and land to land, till
th^re be no more room for any competitor within his Dominions; and when he has
wrought his petty dunghils into a mixen, he thinks it Law and Reason, that the
place should not a^mit the Dominion of more Cocks then one, this man dies a
Monarch in his own thoughts, and his son lives to enlarge his fathers
Teritories, but at last dies big with thoughts of a principality, his son lays
hold of all the advantages that may help him to the accomplishment of his
hereditary desires, Juno, Lucina fer opem obsecro, he is a Prince, Coelo
timendum est Regna ne summa occupet qui vicit ima, he must be an Emperor,
Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet, he must have all or none, none but
Jupiter must share with him. Mundus non sufficit un^s, when he has all, and
when all is done, the Empire after that it has disimbogu'd an^ incorporated
into it self, all the Kingdoms of the earth, terminates in an everlasting
Kingdom, that shall never be destroyed; quam primum appropinquaverit regnum
Coelorum, as soon as the Kingdom of Heaven shall be at hand: and what is all
this but to show us that not only nature, but God himself, who is the God of
Nature, affects Monarchy. The further off any government is to Monarchy, the
worse it is, the nearer the better, the reason's thus, that Government which
avoids most the occasion of differences, must be most happy, because most
peaceable; and peace only consi^ts in unity: now where there are many
Governors there must be differences: where there are few, there may be
differences: where there is but one, there cannot.

The Romans* when they shook off their Government by Kings, and were distasted
with their Government, for their Governors sake; tried all the contraverted
Governments of the world, of two by their Consuls, of three by their
Triumvirat, of ten by their Decemviri, of ten thousand by their Tribunes: when
they found that the farther off they departed from Monarchy, the Center of all
Government, the more they lost themselves in the circumference of their own
affairs, they began a little to look back upon the Government from which they
had deviated all the while, but yet with squint eyes; first, a King, and no
King, a thing that was like a King, but not a King; a thing that was so re, and
tempore, but not nomine; he must be only so, pro una vice, unoque anno, such
were their dictators: at last this sucking Government gathered strength, and
grew to be perpetual, which perpetuity in one begot an everlasting Monarchy in
all ages, which is to continue unto the end of the world* for the Proph^t
Daniel tells us, that at the end of the la^^ and fourth Monarchy, which was the
Roman, Christ should sit upon his everlasting Kingdom that should never be
destroyed; therefore my Enthusiasticks, must either leave dreaming of pulling
down all Kingdoms, and Empires in the world, or else think themselves the
Kingdom of Christ, that we have prayed for all along.

Neither is it unworthy of your observation, that as soon as ever this Monarchy
was restored, there was universal peace over the whole world; and the Savior
of the world, who was Princeps pacis, vouchsafed not to come into the world,
under any of the forementioned governments; but Imperante Augusto natus est
Christus, who was the first Emperor of the Romans. He who affects parity, let
him begin it in his own house, and as he likes it in the model, so let him
attempt it in the fabric: for my part, I have read their arguments, and am so
far from being evinced by any of them, that I do not believe that there is any
such thing: ^ have been in all the Commonwealths in Europe, and I could not
find any such thing as a Free State, I could find the word Libertas, fairly
written over their Gates, but within their Walls the greatest Bondage and
arbitrary power that could possibly be imagined in any part of the world, but
no Liberty at all that I could find, but only some few there were, who had
liberty to do what they would with all the rest. Geneva may of six, Genoa may
have seven, Venice may have eight, the Hollanders nine or ten, England may have
five Members or Leading-men as they call them; but what is all this but taking
the Government from off its shoulders, and putting it in some hand? And when
you have done, it is ten to one but you shall find one of the fingers longer
then all the re^t, and if you please you may call that King, and all the rest
subjects; what is this but a change from a Monarchy with one Crown, to a Tyranny
with so many heads? If it were so that all Free-States, as they call
themselves, had all equal power, it would be so much the worse, all these kinds
of Government have their continuation and subsistence upon this only ground,
viz, that necessity and craft drive them to come so near to Monarchy, and
sometimes to an absolute Monarchy, when you reckon your Hogan Mogan only by the
pole, and not by the polar star, that commonly is fixed amongst them, about
which, all the rest move and turn. But what do we talk of Monarchy or
Aristocracy or Democracy, behold a well regulated Parliament, such a one as
ours might have been, and ought to be; has the benefit and goodness that is in
all these three kind of Governments, of Monarchy in the King, of Aristocracy in
the Peers, of Democracy in the House of Commons, where the acerbities of any
one is taken away by their being all three together, but if one will be all,
then all will be nothing. This stupendiously wise* and Noble way of Government
had its dissolution by inverting the course it took in its original. When the
first William had conquered the Nation, the Normans would not admit that any
Laws should be observed, or rules obeyed, but only the will of the Conqueror;
and why so? but because thereby the Conqueror might take away the Estates of
any Englishman, and give them to the Conquering Normans; But in process of
time; when these Normans became English, they began to insist a little upon
meum and tuum, and would know the what that was belonging to the King, as a
King, and to themselves as Subjects; for by the former rule the King might as
well take away the Estates from one Norman, and give it to another, as he did
formerly from the English, and give to his Normans; wherefore they would have
no more of that, but jointly and unanimously Petitioned the King to the same
effect, the King thought it reasonable, condescends to their desires,
consultation was about the premises, the result of the Consultation was, that
the King should issue out Writs to the Lords Spiritual (who in those days were
thought the wisest and most Conscientious) to reason with the King, and advise
with him, as well concerning the bounding of the Ocean of Sovereignty, as
bridling in the petty Rivers of private interest. These Spiritual Lords thought
it a work of too high a nature for their private undertakings, wherefore they
supplicated his Majesty, that the Lords Temporal might be also summoned by
Writ, and join with them in the same Authority; 'twas done accordingly; being
done, they both thought it a business so transcendent, and of so universal
concernment, that they found a way to involve the whole Nation in a joint
consent, which was, that all Freeholders in the Kingdom, in their several
precincts, might by the election of two in every County, disembogue all their
suffrages into theirs, and to remain the Countries proxies, to Vote for, and to
be directed by their several Countries; and thus the Commons were brought in:
but behold the Viper, that eats through the sides of its own Parents behold the
Asses foal, who when she has done sucking, kicks her own dam.

The King brings in the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Spiritual bring in the Lords
Temporal, both bring in the Commons, the Commons destroy both, both destroy the
King. Neither was Kingship (as they call it) and Episcopacy better rewarded,
for being the principal, and so zealous Reformers of the Gospel, to have both
their Crowns and Miters broke in pieces by the same hammer of reformation; and
the walls of their Palaces mingled with Abbey dust, casting thereby such a blot
upon the very name of Reformation, that it will scarce be legible by
Christians, except what went before, and what may follow after, may help the
future ages to the true sense and meaning of the word: thus Rivers run
backwards and drown their own Head; thus the monsterous Children who are born
with teeth in their mouths, bite off the nipple, and starve themselves for lack
of sustenance; thus blind Sampsons revenge themselves upon their enemies, by
pulling down the house upon their own heads; thus the forms of the most
glorious government of a Church and State, are wounded to death through the
sides of Reformation: If you are not, I am sure you will ere it be long be
satisfied, that all the specious pretenses of popular Government, Free State,
Liberty of the Subject* are but figments and delusions of the people, obtruded
by vain-g^orious and haughty men, who knowing that they could not be that one
Governor of all the rest, yet they hope to be one of many; thus foolish
children set their fathers barns full of Corn on fire to warm their hands, when
they are ready to starve for lack of bread: who had not rather live under a
Government wherein a man is only bound to submit to him, whom it is honor to
obey, then to live under a Government where every man is a slave, because every
one is a Master? Finally, my opinion is this, I had rather have my liberty to
kneel before a Throne, then to be the tallest man in a crowd, and should think
it more for my ease and honor.

CHAP. XIV. That there is no such thing as a Free State in the World.
IF by a Free State, you mean a people who have shook off their Allegiance to
their Prince, there are many such Free-States to be found, but a beggars-bush,
or a company of Gypsies (who propound to themselves new Laws) renouncing the
old, and yet choose a King and Queen amongst themselves, pleasing one another
with a self-conceited opinion of a thing they call Liberty, which is no
otherwise then an ignoble bondage of their own choosing, preferring the
correction of a bundle of rods (because their own hands have made them) before
the sway-meant of a Scepter, which God himself has put into their Sovereigns
hand) is as good a Commonwealth, or Free State as the best: but if you mean by
a Free State, a freedom from Tyranny, you will be as far to seek for any such
thing in rerum natura, as for a reason why tyranny may not be in many, as well
as in one: But if you mean by freedom an exemption from all such tyrannical
oppressions as are expressed in the Petition of Right; I see not why such a
Free State may not be under a Monarchy: certainly I have seen such Petitions,
and insistances, during the late Kings Reign, as having relation to Freeborn
people of England, and should think that the Magna Charta defended by one, who
had power to make it good against the infringement of many breakers, and by a
Parliament of many, authorized to the same purpose against the pessundation of
it by any one, be it by the highest, may not be as good a way to make, preserve
and keep a Nation free, as well as the intrusting of a Nations freedom into the
hands of a few, whose Independency deny all remedies to be either above them,
or below them. It may be it will not be thought tedious, if I entertain your
eye and consideration with some Observations of my own, in those Free-States of
Christendom (as they call themselves) wherein I have been. I shall begin with
the Free State of Genoa, wherein I have been resident some time, and the
rather, because whilst England was a Kingdom, they could not have the face to
stand in any competition with us; but now the Kings arms were cut off as well
as his head, how should we do to make a distinction between them and us? for
both the State of Genoa, and the State of England give the very same Coat of
Arms, and St. George is both our patrons: Certainly England must give the
Halfmoon as the younger brother; and why should not the Moon Crescent follow
after, now the Turkish Alcoran is come before?

When the overspreading Roman Monarchy, like Nebuchadnezzars overgrown and
lofty Tree was brought only to a stump chained to the ground, and when the Keys
of Heaven and Hell had so well fitted the locks belonging to the Gates of Rome,
as to give way to the entrance of that high Priest into the Imperial seat,
then was Genoa a lop of that great fall: and soon after it was wrought into a
bundle or faggot of a Commonwealth, until such time as Charles the Great
recovered all his Right in Italy, saving only the Holy Land, whose Princely
sword could never strike at the already cloven Miters, but at Helmets.

Amongst other Counties whose subduements, acknowledged Charles to be the
Great, Genoa was one; which City was no less happy then famous, in affording a
man who honored her Walls, with making it known unto the World, that he came
out of them under the name of Andreas Dory a Genose; this famous Andreas Dory
was a zealous Common-wealths-man, and one of the new Gentlemen, as they called
themselves, (for you must understand, that when these Statesmen had shook off
the yoke of Sovereignty, they expelled all their Gentry or Nobility; which no
sooner done, but they made a new Gentry or Nobility amongst themselves) and
being a deserving man, the Emperor Charles the fifth, willed this Andreas Dory
to ask and have what he desired of all that he had Conquered: he asked Genoa,
the Emperor gave it him, to do with it what he pleased, he gave it the
Citizens, together with all their Liberties, and former Freedoms upon this
conditions, That they should recall the old Gentry in again, and settle them
again in all their rights and privileges, which being assented unto, Genoa
became a Free State again; but behold the Freedom, or rather the power and
bonds of love and gratitude, neither the old or new Gentry, nor the Common
people, would allow of any thing that was said or to be done, but what this
Dory should command or say: nor was there a more absolute and powerful Monarch
upon the earth then he; and whilst he lived he did continue so, because the
people would obey: who being once dead, the people soon found they did obey,
because they must: Yet still it must be a Free State, because Libertas was
written over the Senate House, and City-gates, but neither within their Senate,
or their Walls, was there ever such Tyranny over the common people, or the
Citizens, then has been all along, and is at this day practiced by some few,
who spit Monarchy in the face, and make no bones to swallow down all its
adjuncts? Exercising their several Tyrannies with this justification, that they
are the Supreme Authority, whilst they deny Supremacy; gulling the people into
a scottish belief, that they are not suppressed by one hand, because it has
many fingers.

I shall instance unto you one particular, which was done whilst I was there,
whereby you may easily Judge in what Free State their Commons live: There was a
substantial Citizen, between whom, and a Noble Genoese there was some grudge,
this Senator studies a revenge, and thus he intends it to be put Execution.

He gives command to one of his Braves (for so they call their Executioners) to
kill this Citizen: this Slaughter-man (being by reason of some former
Obligations) struck with some remorse of doing so high an act of ingratitude to
one, who had so well deserved at his hands; discovers the whole plot to his so
much acknowledged patron, who very much ackowledges and commends the ingenuity
of this discoverer; bids him to follow him where ^e leads him over a trap,
where the leader knew full well how to order his steps, so that he might
advance safely over the place, but the followers (ignorant of these
Observations) must needs fall down a precipice, no less terrible, then
destructive; the poor man is slain: this persidious murderer watches his
opportunity of meeting this designer of his death, in the Merc^ato, and gently
takes him by the arm, and desires him that he might speak a word with him; they
withdraw themselves out of the walk to a private corner: the Citizen tells this
Nobleman that his servant had betrayed him, in discovering his design to him on
whom it should be Executed; in detestation of which, perfidiousness, he had
given him the reward of a Traitor (declaring the manner and form as is
expressed) and desired in all humility that he would be pacified and that
whatsoever differences were between them, that he would bepleased to be his own
Judge whereupon they both became friends, no less satisfaction being
acknowledged by the one, then ingenuity on the other party.

Such shifts as these, are these Freeborn people fain to make to appease the
wrath and fury of their Lords and Masters: In a word, as their Territories is
no otherwise then a continued breach of three hundred miles along the
seashore, so the Inhabitants live no otherwise then do the fishes in the Sea,
the greater fishes devour the less so where there is no King in Israel, every
man does that which is good in his own eyes: it cannot be otherwise.

From thence I went unto the Free State of Lucca, and there I found the
Freemen to have six Princes every year; and the Senate choosing six men, whose
elect a Prince for the Commonwealth every two months; this Prince ascending
his Throne up these six steps, acts what he pleases: nor have the common
people any more liberty, then the most rigid Calvinist will allow a Papist,
free will: Neither is their any other difference between this Government of the
Free State of Lucca, and the Empire of Germany; but that the one have so many
Prime chusers, and the other so many Prince Electors, the one keeps it within
the House of Austria, and the other keeps it out of the House of the Medices.

I went from thence unto the ancient Commonwealth of Venice, whose Government
(if in any) I should approve of, because they never revolted from a better: but
yet I must tell you, that at my first entrance into that City, I found the
people full of complaints, of the heavy Taxes, exorbitant Power, and Arbitrary
Government, which seized upon all their Plate, and what other goods of value
they had, for the use of State, toward the maintenance of a War, which was both
foolishly begun, and most carelessly run into by their Trustees, or
Representatives; for the Pope of Rome had certain intelligence that the Turk
was preparing to make War against some part of Christendom, the Pope sends to
all the Frontier Princes of Christendom, advising them they should all agree as
one man to make it their own case, and that they would assist one another, on
what part of Christendom soever the storm should fall, and that the several
Ambassadors would take it into consideration, about proportioning every Prince
or State according to their abilities, for their several supplies of men and
money; to which they all soon condescended, except the Venetian, who told the
rest, that there was a League between the Grand Seigniour and the Venetians,
and therefore they were not to fear any such War to be intended against them;
to which it being demanded that if the Turk prevailed against other parts of
Christendom round about the Venetian^, whether they though the would let the
Venetians alone at last? or whether the Venetians thought so or no, whether
they di^ ^ think themselves bound in honor, and Christianity to defend their
neighbor Christians against so common an Enemy? To which it was answered by
the Venetians, that the very entering into such a league and covenant with them,
were enough to break the Peace between them and the Turk, whereupon the Juncto
was dissolved, and every tub was fain to stand on his own bottom; but it fell
out that (by the Machiavillianism of the Card. Richlieu, who taught and
persuaded the Turk to break the League between him and the Venetians, because
he would not have the Venetians to lend the Emperor so much money, but would
find them ways how to disburse it otherwise) the Turks waged War only against
the Venetians, and none else, whereupon they were fain to endure the whole
brunt of the War themselves, and had no body to help them: this being so
grievously found fault with by the common people, and their goods taken away ad
placitum, their persons pressed de been esse, whether they thought so or no: I
would fain know what liberty these people had, who could find such faults
without remedies, and lose their goods without redress? what liberty is there
in having freedom in the State, and none in the condition? I shall part with my
children with tears in mine eyes, and through the same water behold the word,
Libertas, written upon the Rialto; what am I the better for this freedom? Am I
robbed of all my money, because one thief takes it away? and am I not robbed
because six or seven lay hold upon me? believe it, I never heard such
complaints neither in the King or Parliaments time, of oppression and tyranny,
as I heard in this City during the time that I was there; and this not only
during the War, but also in the times of Peace, five or six men Rule the whole
State, and it may be the Prince none of them neither. I shall relate unto you a
story of one Loridan a Noble Venetian, who keeping a Courtisan, on whom he was
intended to bestow a favor, he went into a rich Shop for to buy her some cloth
of gold to make her a Gown, the Prentice was only in the shop, whom he
commanded to cut out so much of such a piece as the Tailor gave directions,
which done, he willed the Prentice to tell his Master that he would be
accomptable to him therefore; the boy excused himself, he being but a servant,
and not having any such directions from his Master, not doubting, but that if
his Master were there, he would willingly trust him for what he should be
pleased to command; the Noble Venetian takes his leave, willing the Boy to tell
his Master, that he should rue the day that ever he kept such a ^awcy Boy to
give him such an affront, and so departed in great fury: the Master of the Shop
presently coming in, and hearing the relation of what had happened, tore his
hair, wrung his hands, s^ampt upon the ground, and like a madman cried out,
that the Boy had undone him, and all his posterity; takes the whole piece with
him, follows this Noble Venetian to his Curtisans, offers to bribe the Curtisan
with the whole piece, if she would intermediate for him which with much
difficulty, and many pleadings she so appeased his wrath, that he was
satisfied: and this was as common for a Senator of Venice to do, as for a
Parliament man to pay no debts.

Neither is their any Law or Justice to be had against any of these Statesmen:
There was a Nobleman who was an Austrian both by Birth and Family, who being a
Traveller, chanced to cast his eyes upon a fair and virtuous Lady, who in every
respect were deserving of each other: This Nobleman had no sooner made his
mind known unto his Paragon f^r beauty, but he was soon obstructed with a
corrival, who was a Nobile Venetiano; who perceiving his Mistress affections to
this Stranger to be more liberally expressed than unto him, contrives his
death, and soon effect it, she loving her Martyr more than either others
conceived, or she her self could brook, so great a cross concerning them,
studies revenge, and being an Italian, found her self easily prompted by her
own natural inclination, she pretends much love, that she might the better put
in execution her greatest hatred, she gets him into a Chamber, where she prays
him to rest himself in a Chair, wherein he was no sooner sat but his arms and
thighs were caught with springs, and being thus fastened, she murders him with
her own hands, and flies for sanctuary to the next Nunnery within the Popes
Dominions, leaving behind her, by the murdered, these words, written with her
own hand in a piece of paper, Because there is no justice to be executed
against a Noble Venetian, I have been both Judge and Executioner my self. Men
may talk what they will, and fancy what they please, but there is no more
difference, in point of freedom between a Monarchy and a Free State (as they
call it) than there is between a High Sheriff of a Shire, and a Committee of a
County; Utrum horum mavis accipe

Now for the Free State of our Neighbor Netherlands, otherwise called the
States of Holland (who have sprung up (as all other Free-States will do at
last) from the submissive and humble stilings of the distressed, to the High
and Mighty). The particulars which occasioned their revolt from their Sovereign
the King of ^pain, I shall not insist upon, but refer you to the Spanish and
Netherland Histories; only I shall hint upon the main inducements to their
Rebellion; viz. Religion and Freedom.

For the first, There is not a People amongst whom the name of God is known, to
whom Religion is a greater stranger, than unto these stilers of themselves,
Reformed Protestants, for if this Free State, who allow all Religions both of
the Jews and Gentiles, whose several Churches own, in Capital letters over
their doors, the several sects of Religions, to which each Libertine is
inclined, be Religious, than the Pantheonists were as truly Reformed and
Religious as the Amsterdamiams; but as he, who sacrificed to all the Gods in
general, must needs have sacrificed unto the true God, and yet know him not,
because he joined others with him, who was to be worshipped alone: So that
Country which embrace^h all Religions, happily may have the true Religion
amongst them, and yet have no Religion, because they admit of many, being there
is but one: This I speak in reference to the Country, not to particular men.
Neither is there a sort of Christians in the world who are less servants unto
Christ, if it be enough to make them so, to be the greatest prophaners of his
day: for the Sabbath is only distinguished from other days, by a Sermon in the
Church, and the Alehouse being full of Mechanics, drinking and carousing from
morning until night; the shops are open, and buying and selling all the day
long, excepting half the window, which is to distinguish the day, but the door
is open to let in the buyers, and the other half of the window is open to let
in the light: and wonderfully strange it is, and remarkable to consider how
these people, who shook off their Allegiance to their Prince upon pretenses of
Reformation, should be so besotted, as to fall into such a strange and unheard
of profaneness of him, and the day whereon Christ himself is to be worshipped,
as in their Metropolls, or chief City, to have a dog-market kept to the utter
scandal of true Religion and Christianity it self, this is no more than what I
have seen, and if it were not true, it were easily returned upon my self as the
greatest impudence that could be imagined; but O the partiality of the
Picture-drawer, when he receives large wages for a similitude! he insults over
his own work only because it is like, when the face it self is most abominable.

Now for the freedom from Tyranny and oppression; if the Turks or Tartars had
conquered them, they never would (nor never did where ever they extended their
Dominions) impose such Taxes and Rates as they have imposed on one another,
incredible; even to the full value of the several commodities, which run
through their natives hands; but you will ask me, how it is possible they
should live then? To which I answer you, by sharking and cosening of strangers:
Let any forraigners come there and ask for a dinner, and for such a dinner as
they may well afford for eight pence a-piece, they will ask you five shillings
a man; find but the least fault with them, and they will demand twelve pence a
piece more for fouling of linen; and if you seem angry at that, you shall mend
your self with the payment of six pence a-piece over and above for fouling the
room: and seek a remedy, and you shall be told, the Prince of Orange himself if
he were there could not help it: altom all, is all the reason they will give
you; if in sadness you shall complain of such abuses to indifferent Judges,
they will tell you, that the States do lay such heavy Taxes upon the
Inhabitants, that they are fain to fly to such shifts for their subsistence;
thus men pleased with the itch of Innovation, are contented to scratch the
blood out of their own bodies, till they feel the greatest smart; rather than
their Physician should let out a little spare blood, to cure the disease, and
preserve them in good health; but you will say, that for all this, they thrive
and prosper abudantly, so do the Argiers men, but with what credit and
reputation in the eye of the World? I believe both alike: It was not their
strength or policy, which brought them to this height and flourishing
condition: but it was our policy of State, in emulation to other Princes, which
helped these Calves to Lions hearts, teeth, and claws, until the High and
Mighty Butter-boxes stood in competition with the Crown: and I am afraid the
siding with such Rebels, has turned Rebellion into our own bosoms, as a just
judgment from that God who is a revenger of all such iniquities, they may call
it the School of War, whilst wanting a good cause, it could be no otherwise
than the Christians shambles: I should be sorry that Holland should be the
English-mans Looking-glass: a spur for his feet, or a copy for his hand, I hope
the hand of Providence will cure us, like the Physician, who cured his Patient
by improving his disease, from a gentle Ague to a high Fever, that he might
the better help him:

CHAP. XV. That Episcopacy is Jure Divino.
IN this Discourse I shall not trouble my self, nor you with Titles, Names and
words of Apostles, Evangelists, Archbishops, Bishops, Patriarchs, Presbyters,
Ministers, Angels of Churches, etc. which were all from the highest to the
lowest, but terms reciprocal; and were often taken in the Church of God, and
in the Scripture it self, for one and the same; for if any man, though never so
mean, a Minister of the Gospel converted any Nation, the Church ever called
him, the Apostle of that Country; as Austin, though but a Monk, was every where
termed the Apostle of England: and St. Paul, being an Apostle, styles himself
a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: Paul bids Timothy being a Bishop, to
do the work of an Evangelist; and therefore no wonder if Bishops and Presbyters
be often mentioned for one and the same: but it is a great wonder that any
manner of men, should make this a ground for any argument against Episcopacy;
these kind of arguments instead of striking fire that should light the candle,
they do but pin napkins over our eyes, and turn us round, until we know not
where we are; and then we grope for we know not who, and lay hold of we know
not what: he that will cut down this overgrown up-start-tree of error, must
first clear his way to the root, and brush away all those brambles, and briers,
which grow about it; we must not leave any thing standing, that may lay hold of
the hatchet, and deviate the stroke, turning the same edge upon the feller,
that was intended for the tree: if we should insist upon names and titles, we
should make but a confounded piece of work, and run our selves into a most
inextricable labyrinth and Mazes of error; where we might run and go forwards
and backwards, and round about, and never the near: Christ's are Kings, Kings
are Gods; God is Christ, and Christ is Bishop of our souls; Bishops are
Presbyters, Presbyters are Ministers, a Minister is an Apostle, an Apostle is a
Minister: and so if you will quite back again. I must put off these, as David
threw away Saul's Armor, non possum incedere cum iis; I love to knock down this
m^nstrum inform ingens cui lumen ademptum, with a blunt stone taken out of a
clear River, which with the sling of application may serve well enough to slay
this erroneous Philistine, though he were far greater than he i^.

In the first place therefore let us understand what is meant by Jus Divi^um;
if any man means that Episcopacy is so Jure Divino, that it is unalterable, and
must continue at all times, and in all places, so that where it is left off,
there can be no Church, he means to give much offense and little reason; for
there is no question but the Church may alter their own Government (so that it
be left to themselves to alter) as they shall think most convenient, as well as
alter the Sabbath from the seventh day to the first of the week, or as well as
they changed immersion into aspersion of the baptized, and many other things
which carried as much Jus Divinum with them as Episcopacy, and yet were
changed. The Jus Divinum that is in Episcopal Government, does not consist in
the Episcopacy, but in the Government, be it Episcopal or what it will; but
where the Government is Episcopal, no question but there Episcopal Government
is Jure Divino, because a Government; and if it were otherwise, that Government
into which Episcopacy degenerateth, would be Jure Divino, as well as it,
provided that none touch this Ark of the Church but the Priests themselves; for
if the hand which belongs to the same body, pull the hat from off the head, the
man loses not his right, only he stands in a more humble posture, but he is in
a^ strong possession of his own right, as when 'twas on his head, but if
another hand should chance to pull it off, the party stands disgracefully
deprived of his highest Right and Ornament. So if Episcopal Government of the
Church be put down, or altered by Churchmen themselves, the Jus Divinum is but
removed from the Supremacy of one, and fastened in the stronger hold of many
members, for this is a Maxim that admits no postern, power never falls to the
ground, neither in Church nor State, but look what one lets fall, another takes
up before ever it comes to ground, wherefore losing nothing, they keep their
own; but whether this power in Church or State in the point of convenience be
better in the hands of one or many, let whose will look to that, that is not my
work; neither the names of Governments nor the numbers of Governors shall ever
be able to fright away this Jus Divinum out of the Church Government, be the
Government what it will, been visum fuit spiritui sancto and nobis, keeps in
the Jus Divinum, be the Government never so altered, whereas forbidden and
improper hands, actions, as unusual, as unwarrantable, lets out this Jus
Divi^^^* when they have changed it to what they can imagine, now whether or no
it be proper for a Lay-Parliament, or a Representative of Laymen, by the power
of the Sword, declining the Kings Authority, will and pleasure, who was
appointed by God to be a nursing Father of his Church, to alter
Church Government, so Ancient, so begun by Christ himself in his own person
over so many Apostles, so practiced by the Apostles over others, so continued
all along, I mean Episcopacy, that is to say, one Minister constituted an
Overseer of many, and to lay hold upon tumults and insurrections, to pull down
these Overseers, and for men who in such cases should be governed by the
Church, to pull down the Church Government without any the least consent of the
Church Governors; I leave it for the World to judge; only my one opinion is
this, That any Government thus set up, or by such practices as these altered,
must needs be so far from being Jure Divino, that it must needs be Jure
Diabolico. But it may be objected, that if they should have stayed until the
Bishops had altered themselves, they might have styed long enough; to which it
may be answered, that had the Bishops been but as poor as Job, there would have
been no such have to change their clothes. The Ark was a type of the Church,
and whatsoever was literally commanded concerning the type, must be
Analogically observed in the thing typified; God sat in the Mercy-Seat that
was over the Ark, the Ark contained within it Aarons Rod, and a pot of Manna,
so the Church contains the Law and the Gospel, the killing letter and the
reviving spirit; others interpret the Rod to signify the Government and
Discipline of the Church, as the Manna the Doctrine of Christ, and food that
came down from heaven: I take it to signify both, and both answers my purpose;
if both be therein contained, neither must be touched but by the Priests
themselves; neither must we confine this prohibition to the Priests of the Law
only, but we must extend it also to the Ministers of the Gospel, both which
were typified by the two Cherubims, or Ministering Angels of the Almighty: these
Ministers or Angels, though opposite to one another, yet they both looked alike,
and neither of them upon one another, but both of them upon the Ark that was
between them, there was mutuality in their looks, and their wings touched one
another; so though the Ministers of the Law and the Gospel seem opposite in the
Administration of the same grace, yet they must come so near as to touch one
another in the manner of the Administration; exempli gratia, as there was in
the old Law High Priests, Priests and Levites, so in the new Law, Bishops,
Pres^yters and Deacons; as none but Priests were to touch the Ark, so none but
the Ministers should reform the Church.

Thus much for Government; Now for Episcopacy; the question then concerning
Episcopacy, will be, whether or no, Jure Divino, one Minister (which answers to
all names and sorts of Churchmen, and Church Officers whatsoever) may not
exercise jurisdiction and power over many Ministers within such a place or
territory? If this be granted, the Bishops ask no more: if it be denied, how
then did Christ Jesus, Bishop of our souls, give orders and directions to his
twelve Apostles, and taught them how they should behave themselves throughout
this Diocese the whole World? How did St. Paul exercise jurisdiction over
Timothy and Titus, who were both Bishops? and how did these two Bishops
exercise jurisdiction over all the Ministers of Creet and Ephesus? was not this
by Divine Institution? If I find by Divine Writ, that Christ laid the
foundation of his Church in himself alone being over all the Apostles, and if I
find that these Apostles, every Apostle by himself (in imitation of our
Savior) accordingly exercised jurisdiction and authority over many Ministers
which were under them, and commanded others to do the like, as Paul, Timothy
and Titus, and if I find the practice of the Church all along through the whole
tract of time, to continue the like Discipline; shall not I believe this
Discipline to be Jure Divino, except Christ sends down a new conje deslier from
heaven, upon the election of every new Bishop? Christ lays the foundation, we
build upon it, he gives us the Model, we follow the Pattern, the Church is
built; is not this by Divine Right, because he does not lay the several stones
with his own hands? Christ promised that he would be always with his Church,
and that he would send his holy spirit amongst them, which should lead them
into all truth, so that the gates of Hell should not prevail against it; but if
Episcopacy ^e Antichristian, then the gates of Hell have not only prevailed
against it a long time, but all along. As all Judgments are given in the Kings
Name, and all Records run Rege praesente, though the King be not there in
person, but in power; so the universal and un-interrupted and continued and
generally received Discipline of his holy Catholic Church (which Church we are
bound to believe by the Apostolical Creed) is Christo praesente (Ergo Jure
Divino) though Christ be not there in person, but in power; which power he
conferred upon those who were to be his Successors, which were called
Apostles, As my Father sent me, so send I you: and he that hears you, hears
me; and lo I will be with you always unto the end of the world: surely this
Discipli^^ of one over many, call it what you will, is to descend and continue
unto the end of the World.

Object. But it may be objected, How can you prove that Christ commanded any
such thing, or that Christ gave to the Apostles any such power, as to make
Successors in their steads, with a warrant for it to continue from age to age?

Sol. Where do you find that Christ gave the Sacrament to any but his
Disciples? drink ye all of this, but they were all Apostles to whom he said so?
where did you find that Christ administered the Sacrament, or commanded it to be
administered unto any Laymen, or women? therefore is not the Sacrament given
unto them Jure Divino, because the words were left out in the conveyance? When
there grew a disputation concerning Divorcements, Christ sends us to the
Original, Sic autem non fuit ab initio, if Christ's rule be good, then the
Bishops are well enough, for they may say concerning Episcopacy, I mean one
over many (and that safely too) sic erat ab origin. Some are very unwilling
that this Episcopacy should be entailed by Christ upon his Apostles and their
successors, out of these words, Mat. 28.20. I will be with you always to the
end of the world; they will not have it to mean in their successors; but the
meaning to be this, I will (...) with you always unto the end of the world;
that is to say, in the efficacy, and power of my word and Gospel, to all ages;
why may it not signify this, and that too: that it does one, is no argument
but that it may do both: God made all things, in number, weight, and measure,
and will you slight his word? shall sensus factus thrust our sensus destinatus
out of Scriptures? the first Ministers of the Gospel must be ad^equate to the
first Minister of the Law, and behold the same Method observed in both their
Institutions: what difference is there between Christ's words to his Disciples,
I am with you always unto the end of the world, Mat. 28.20. and Gods words
unto Aaron at his setting him apart for the High Priests Office? This shall be
a Statute for ever unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, Exodus 28.43.
Certainly if the Gospel be nothing else but the Law revealed, and the Law be
nothing else but the Gospel hidden; whatsoever is written or said of the
Ministers of the one; must needs have reference to the Ministers of the other:
and I shall desire you to look a little back upon the words which God said to
Aaron; when God speaks of the seed of Aaron, he only makes mention of the seed
after him; but when he speaks of the Statute, he says it shall be for ever: if
I do not flatter my own judgment, that tells me, that this Statute of High
Priesthood, or Episcopacy, call it what you will, must have heirs after the
seed of Abraham is expired, and did not the Catholic Church all along call the
receiving of the Holy Ghost, the order of Priesthood? did ever any record
above seven years date, call it making of Ministers? and why are they angry
with the word Priest? Is it because the Prophet Isaiah, Prophesying of the
Glory of Christ's Church tells us, we shall be named Priests of the Lord, but
that men shall call us Ministers of God? Isa. 61.6. If the Ministration of the
Law be glorious, shall not the Ministration of the Gospel be much more
glorious, 2 Cor. 1.3. and shall the Ministers of the same Gospel be less
glorious? When you see a man that cannot abide to see another glory, you may
be sure he is no kin to him, or very far off; so you may be ass^red that these
are no true sons of the Church, no^ ^o right Children, who think a Chair too
great state for their Fathers to sit in. In the Apostles time these Bishops, or
if you will, Superintendents (which are all in one signification, only a good
Greek word changed by Mr. John Calvin, into a bad Latin word) were styled
Ambassadors of the Almighty, Stars of Heaven, Angels of the Church, etc. but
now these Ambassadors are used like Vagabonds; these Stars, are not Stars but
fallings; and the Angels are no where to be found but ascending and descending
Jacobs Ladder; whilst this reputation was given unto the Church, and its
Officers, the Stones of its building were in unity, but as it is now, it seems
no otherwise than as a Corpse kept under ground seemingly entire, but once
touched, soon falls to dust and ashes. Never was there such a Monster as this
ruling, and thus constituted Presbytery, the Father of it Rebellion, the Mother
Insurrection, the Midwife Sacrilege, the Nurse Covetousness, the Milk Schism,
the Coats Armor, the Rattle Drums, a Bloody Sword the Coral, Money the Babies
that it delights to play withal, it grows up to be a stripling, and goes to
School to a Council of War, its Lesson is on the Trumpet, its Fescue a Pistol,
its going out of School in Rank and File, its Play-daies the days of Battle,
and Black-munday the day of Judgment; it comes of age and is Married with a
Solemn League and Covenant, it begets Children like it self, whose blessing
upon them is the power of the Sword, and whose Imposition of hands are broken
pates; This Monster cries down this truly Ancient Catholic and Apostolic
power which the Bishops exercised; and then takes it up again, and uses it
themselves in a higher nature than ever any Bishops or Apostles themselves did
or durst have done, even to the Excommunication and Deposement of their Kings
(to the delivering of them up unto Satan, and to Hang-men, if they stood but in
their way) to whom the Apostles taught submission, (how faulty so ever they
were) and if not obedience, yet submission, to every one of their Ordinances,
if not for their own sakes, yet for the Lords sake, and for Conscience sake:
these men cry down the same authority as Popish, whilst they exalt themselves
above all that are called Gods, in a higher manner, than ever any Pope of Rome
ever yet did. We will begin with this Monster in the very place of its
Nativity, and so observe him all along through the whole tract of time; we will
consider how it dealt with the first Prince, under whose Dominions it
pullulated, which was under the Prince and Bishop of Geneva, and these two were
both nullified in the same person, as they were both here in England by the
same Parliament; verifying that Maxim of ours (with that fore-running of
theirs) No Bishop, No King; and then we will show you how they dealt with our
Princes here at home, where ever they had a power, viz. with Mary Queen of
Scots, and James and Charles the First Kings of England and of Scotland both,
and then usurp a power themselves, higher than Popes or Kings. Calvin with his
gladiators, having expuls'd the Prince and Bishop of Geneva, set^ up a
Government so high and unexpected, that the people would have nothing to do
either with him, or his Government: and thereupon they banished him the City;
Calvin (in exile) bethinks himself how he might appease their fury, and give
them satisfaction, and be invited in again; Calvinus de tristibus thinks it his
best course of endearing himself unto the people, to make them sharers with him
in the Government, whereupon he invented his new fangle of Lay Elders, and so
all parties were agreed; In comes Mr. John Calvin (whilst he was scarce warm in
his seat) I shall present you with a story of him and of his demeanor of
himself toward the temporal Throne: There was a Nobleman of Italy, who liked
the Reformation which he had begun so well, that he forsook his Religion and
Country, sold his Lands and Fortune, converted all into money, and took
Sanctuary in Geneva; as soon as he came there, great rejoicing and insulting
there was, that their cause was honored with so high a Convert: The grand
Seigniour falls a building; directing his Masons, he found one of them
something more saucy than to what his Lordship (in his own Country) had been
accustomed, little thinking that where there was promised so large a respect of
souls, there had been so little respect of persons: this Nobleman hereupon
gives this Mason a gentle tap upon the head, the Mason flies upon him like a
Dr^^^^* (...) shakes him by the (...): my Lord not being used to such course
salutations, stabs him with his Dagger, thinking nothing less, but that so high
a provocation would have pleaded his indemnity; no such matter, my Lord was
soon laid hold on, and brought to his Trial: Calvin upon the Tribunal, not as a
Temporal Judge in such cases (take heed of him) but only to be asked his
opinion in cases of Conscience; the Delinquent pleads for himself, tells them
how insolently he was provoked, and wonders, considering such provocation, he
should be questioned for so vile a varlet: Hereupon Mr. Calvin soon starts up,
and tells him, that with God (whose seat they held) there was no respect of
persons, and for ought he knew, that man whom he despls'd to death, was as near
and dear to God and his favor, as himself: their Laws knew no such distinction
as Manslaughter and Murder; but they were regulated by the Divine Law, that
told them, that the man that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed;
that there was no exemption by greatness, nor buying it off by favor; the
Nobleman replied, that he had not been long enough amongst them to be
acquainted with their Laws; it was answered, that the Law of nature did forbid
that, of which he could not be ignorant (all this was well enough.) My Lord
told them how hard a case it would be that a man out of his love and liking to
the place and manners, should seek to it as a sanctuary for his conscience, and
so soon find it his grave: that he was heartily sorry for what he had done, and
would give any satisfaction to his wife and children that the Court should
order, or his estate allow; he intended the man no hurt, before such rough
hands shook him out of himself, that he knew not what he did, and therefore he
humbly begged their pardon, assuring them for the future, that his ways should
be so directly answerable to those paths they walked in, that he would not by
Gods grace hereafter step aside. The Temporal Judges, won with his humble and
submissive behavior began to relent, and desired Mr. Calvin to abate a little
of his rigor, for the reasons before mentioned, assuring him that his case was
no common case, and therefore it ought to have respect accordingly; hereupon
there grew a hot dispute between the Spiritual, and the Temporal Judges: Calvin
remained st^ff in his opinion, and would not be bent to the least mercy; the
Nobleman thought to throw one grain of reason more into the balance, that
should turn the scales, and that should be taken out of a consideration had of
their own good: for says (...), if you shed my blood hand over head, without
any the least respect had to my years, to my birth, to my education, to the
little time I had of being acquainted with your Laws, nor to the provocation it
self, nor to the suddenness of the action, nor to the surprise of all my
senses, nor to the satisfaction I would have given, nor to the repentance of my
very soul, who will come amongst you? what Lord or Gentleman will live within
your walls? Wherefore if you will have no consideration of me, yet consider
your selves; consider what a blow it will give to your Religion, how many this
very thing will stave off from ever having any thing to do with you; by this
time they were all prone to mercy, but Calvin alone, who stands up, and cries
fiat justitia, ruat Coelum; neither could he be brought to give his opinion,
that the Jury (as we call them) might not pass upon him; but out went the Jury,
and contrary to their own Law, hearing the Noble-mans plea, and observing well
the inclination of the Bench in general, they brought in their Verdict, not
guilty; whereupon the Nobleman was acquitted: hereupon John Calvin rises from
the Bench, and whilst the rest proceed to their matters, calls all the
Ministers within the Walls and Liberties of Geneva, who appear before the
Judgment Seat, with white Wands in their hands, which they laid down, telling
them, that with those wands they laid down their Offices, protesting that they
would never Preach the Gospel to a people whose human Laws should run contrary
to the Laws Divine; and suddenly turned about and took their leave: which being
acted with so much gravity, wrought so much upon the beholders, that they
presently sent for them back again, and hanged the Nobleman. This story I have
read in their own History in Geneva, than which my thoughts were then, as they
are still, that never any Pope of Rome, did act as Pope of Rome, or so much as
claim half that Authority over the Civil Magistrate, as this Antipope did
virtually act; and yet was not ashamed to make lesser matters than this the
ground of the quarrel with the Bishop, who also was their Prince, when in his
own person he acts the part of both.

Now we will see how these kind of creatures have played the Masters of mis-rule
among our Princes here at home. King James in his Discourse at Hampton Court,
tells us how the Presbyterians became Lords Paramount in his Kingdom of
Scotland, and how they used his Mother the Queen of Scots, viz. Knox and
Buchanan, and the rest of that gang, came unto Mary Queen of Scots, and told
her, that by right, no Pope nor Potentate whatsoever, had any superiority over
her in her own Dominions, either in cases Civil or Ecclesiastical, but that she
her self was Supreme in both, and constituted by God as the only nursing Mother
of his Church, within her Dominion, and therefore conjured her to look about
her, and not to let the Pope of Rome, or any of his agents, to have any thing
to do within her Territories, and to have care of Christ's Evangel, as she would
answer it at the dreadful day of Judgment; she gives them her ear, and at last
her authority, they make use of it in the first place, to the pulling down of
the Bishops, and exalted themselves in their room; when the Queen looked for an
absolute Supremacy, behold all the Supremacy that these men would allow her,
was not so much as to have one private Chapel for her self, nor one Priest
whereby she might serve God according to her own conscience; she finding her
self so much deceived, labors to recall her Authority, they kept her to it; she
takes up Arms, they oppose her, fight her, beat her out of her Kingdom; she
flies into England, they follow her with invectives, thrust jealousies into the
Queen of Englands bosom concerning her, she is imprisoned, and after a long
imprisonment put to death. King James having related this passage in the
forementioned discourse unto Dr. Renolds, and Knewstubs and the rest, turns
unto the Bishops, and closes his Discourse with this Animadversion; Wherefore,
my Lords, I thank you for my Supremacy, for if I were to receive it from these
men, I know what would become of my Supremacy. The shining light of the Gospel,
and the burning zeal of the Ministers thereof, may fitly be compared to fire,
which if it be not in every room confined to one hearth, and limited to one
tunnel, that may convey out of this so comfortable and necessary a blessing,
all that may be destructive, and offensive in it, up toward the highest region,
but is suffered like wildfire to run up and down the house, it will soon turn
all to flames and high combustions; so the government of the soul seems to be
of so transcendent nature to what the government of the body and goods is, that
if it be not overtopt with superintendency or Episcopacy, and so disimbogued
into the Supreme authority, this comfortable heat if limited, as it turns to
our greatest benefit, so neglected and boundless, soon converts it self into a
sudden destruction and ruin. If you will hear how these men dealt with King
James, her Son, and Father to Charles the First, you shall find it in his
Basilicon Doron, Crebrae adversus me in tribunitiis Concionibus Calumniae
spargebantur non quod crimen aliquod designassem, sed quia Rex eram, quod omni
crimine pejus habebatur. Are these men good Subjects? did they not convene him
diverse times before them, school him, Catechize him like a Schoolboy? did he
not protest unto his Son Henry, that he mislik'd their proud and haughty
carriage ever since he was ten years of age? did he not say that Monarchy and
Presbytery agreed like God and the Devil? and have we not found it so, if we
consider the behavior of our new made Presbyterians in England, to Charles the
first, his Son? O but the Presbyterians had no hand in it, they Prayed and
Preached, and Writ against it, tasted and prayed for a diversion of all such
intentions: but I pray, who took the Scepter out of his hand, in taking away
the Militia, of which it was an Emblem, that should have defended him, was it
not the Presbyterians? who cast down his Throne, by taking away his Negative
voice, was it not the Presbyterians? who took off his Crown, the fountain of
Honor from off his Head, by denying those honor on whom he had conferred it
without them, was it not the Presbyterian? Who took away his Supremacy,
signified by the Sacred Unction wherewith he was Anointed, in not allowing him
the Liberty of his own Conscience in the point of Episcopacy and
Church Government, was it not the Presbyterian? Who would not Treat a minute
with their King before they had made him acknowledge himself guilty (as they
say) of all the blood that had been spilt throughout his Dominions, was it not
the Presbyterian? Who (notwithstanding all the Concessions on his part that
could be granted, even to the very grating his Princely Conscience, when he bid
them ask flesh from off his bones, and he would not deny it them, if it might
have been a benefit unto his people, prayed that he might keep his Conscience
whole, it was the Queen Regent of all good men's actions, and he hoped there
were none would force this Queen before him in his house, as Ahasuerus said to
Haman) voted not satisfactory so long, until the Independent Army came from
Edenborough, and surpised and murdered him, was it not the Presbyterians? He
that said the Presbyterians held him down by the hair, while the Independents
cut off his Head, said true enough, they murdered him as a King, before ever
they murdered him as a man; for what may the Independent say to the Presbyter,
if you will take off his Authority, we will take off his Head; if you will make him no
King, we will make him no Body: if you will make him a man of blood, we will use him
accordingly; therefore at your doors, O Presbyterian Hypocrites, do I lay his
innocent blood, it is but like the rest of your actions, committed by your
Ancestors to former Princes al^ along.

One thing I pray you well observe; There was never any Reformed Church in
Christendom, but when they shook off their Bishops, they made their Apologies
to all the Christian World, how they were necessitated to alter that Ancient
and best form of Government of the Church by Bishops, in regard that they could
not be drawn off from their obedience and dependence on the Pope of Rome; and
if possible they would retain that laudable Government as most convenient; but
never were there any Reformers in the World, but ours, that ever held
Episcopacy to be unlawful and Anti christian before; and will you know the
reason? which is only this, the Bishops what they receive they lay down at his
Majesty's feet, as acknowledging him to be Supreme in all cases, when they
would have him to be Supreme in no case, as Buch. de jure Regni plainly tells
us, that Princes are no more but the Proxies and Attorneys of the people; and
yet for all this, the Authority which they hold, to be as Antichristian in the
Chair, they practice as most Christian on the Bench, and much improve it. These
Monsters that they may the better cry down the Divine Right that is in
Episcopacy, and descended to them from the Apostles; tell us, that the calling
of the Apostles was extraordinary, and died with them: to make answer to which
assertion, we must consider how many ways a thing may be taken to be
extraordinary, and if we find that it may be taken so many ways, if we can
prove a thing extraordinary one way, we must not take it to be extraordinary in
every respect; exempli gratia; Saul was extraordinarily called by God, because
immediately by him, but this does not make the calling of Kings to be an
extraordinary calling, for that succeeded; so the Apostles were extraordinarily
called by God, as not being called out of the Tribe of Levi, nor taken from the
feet of Gamaliel, nor brought up in the schools of the Prophets, yet this does
not follow, that the calling of the Apostles should be extraordinary, for they
had their successors: It may be extraordinary a part ante; but not a part
post, only in regard of the manner of their election, but not in regard of the
nature of their commission, they were called Apostles in regard of their
Mission, not in respect of their Commission, which which was no more but what
Bishops had, neither does the word Apostle signify so great Authority as does
the word Bishop, the one betokening but a Messenger, the other an Overseer, and
therefore there is no extraordinariness hitherto, that they should not be
extraordinary.

2. A man may be said to be extraordinary, in regard of some extraordinary
gifts and endowments which God has given unto a man, as unto the Apostles the
gift of tongues, of healing, etc. but this does no way make the calling
extraordinary, for then it would follow, that if God Almighty should give unto
any ordinary Minister, extraordinary gifts, then his calling should be
extraordinary, or that the calling of Kings should be an extraordinary calling,
because God bestows on some Kings the extraordinary gift of healing.

3. It may be further urged, the calling of the Apostles was an extraordinary
calling, because they were penmen of the Holy Ghost, and in regard that the
Holy Ghost sat upon each of them; no, that does not make it extraordinary quoad
nos, that it should not descend, for other Divines and Evangelists, were
penmen of the Holy Ghost as well as they, therefore what was not extraordinary
to themselves, cannot be extraordinary to us.

4. For their receiving the Holy Ghost, it is no otherwise but what all
Bishops, Pastors, and Curates do receive, when they receive Orders, Receive ye
the Holy Ghost, only the difference is this, they received it by the sitting of
cloven tongues, and they by imp^sition of hands, but still the extraordinaries
consist in the manner, but not the matter of the thing received, so that all
the while there is no reason why this calling of the Apostles should be so
extraordinary, as that it should not descend: If Christ promised to be with his
Apostles unto the end of the World, and they did not continue unto the end of
the World, surely I should think without any straining at Gnats, or swallowing
of Cammels, that the meaning of our Saviors words should be this, that he
would be with those in the assistance of his holy spirit, that should succeed
the Apostles in their Offices of supervising his Church, and propagation of his
Gospel, except I should see more reason than I do yet, why the Apostles calling
should be so peculiar, that it must not descend, or that the Government of one
over many, be so inconsistent with the Church her good in after-time, more than
in the beginning, that Episcopacy should be so abominable.

Briefly I can compare these Presbyters pulling down the Bishops, to no other
thing, than to a company of unhappy boys, who being not tall enough to reach
the fruit, and wanting a Ladder, for the fruit sake, lay hold upon the
branches, and break down a bow, making it thereby no part of the tree; so ^hese
men, wanting merit to taste the fruit of learning, and not having capacity
enough in themselves to reach those preferments which the Church holds out to
those who are deserving, they render that which was part of the Church, as
severed from the Body, which is the highest kind of Sacrilege, not only in
depriving the Church of part of its goods, but part of it self.

Lastly, if there be no other reason to be given, if not for the Divine Right
of Episcopacy, yet for the lawfulness thereof, but this one topical argument
which I shall use, raised out of the continued practice of the Church in all
ages, to men whose faces are not bra^'d so thick, that it were reason proof, it
were sufficient in my understanding, viz.

Suppose all the arguments which were for Episcopacy, were as weak as so many
straws to support a cause, yet though four straws are not able to support a
table, yet fourteen thousand bound up together in four bundles, will hold it up
as firm as so many props of Iron; so though some few practices of some few men
within some few places, are not able to make an argument for Episcopacy, that
shall be evincing, yet the practice of the Church all along for fourteen
hundred years, in fourteen hundred Dioceses, and throughout forty ages, makes
good the argument against any few Jack Straws, or Wat Tilers whatsoever.

Ob. But there were no Diocesan Bishops in the Primitive times.

Sol. Was not Christ a Diocesan Bishop? and was not the World his Diocese? were
not the Apostles Diocesan Bishops, when the whole World, divided into twelve
parts, were their twelve Diocese? were not Timothy and Titus Diocesan Bishops,
when Creet and Ephesus were allotted to be their Diocese?

Ob. There were no Lord Bishops in those days?

Sol. Those who ruled well were to be accounted worthy of double honor, and
will you not allow them a single Lordship?

Ob. The Lords of the Gentiles exercised Dominion, but so shall not you.

Sol. No, not such dominion as they exercised, there is a great deal of
difference betwixt dominion, and domineering, betwixt Lordship, and lording it
over God's Inheritance; a Paternal Government was never accounted intolerable
but by unruly Children; if this were not to be allowed of, how did Christ rule
his Apostles? Paul, Timothy and Titus? both these, all the Ministers in Creet
and Ephesus?

Ob. St. Paul labored with his hands that he might not be chargeable to the
brethren.

Sol. So might the Bishops if they needed no more to study Divinity than did
the Apostles, but if any Benefactor had bestowed large Revenues upon St. Paul,
I see no reason why he might not be a keeper of Hospitality, as well as he
advised Timothy so to do: but now Julians persecution is revived; Do not (says
Julian) destroy the Christians, but take away the maintenance of the Church,
and that will bring their Ministers into contempt, and so destroy their
Religion; and now they are at it; Libera me, domine (says St. Augustine) ab
homine impio, id est, libera me a me, so we had need to pray unto Almighty God,
that he would save his Church out of the hands of her Churchmen, for she now
lies upon the ground like the tree that complained, that she was rent in sunder
by wedges made out of her own body.

FINIS.

