AN ARGUMENT, SHOWING That it is Impossible for the NATION to be Rid of the
GRIEVANCES Occasioned by the Marshal of the KING'S BENCH, and Warden of the
FLEET, without an Utter Extirpation of their present Offices.

WITH PROPOSALS FOR A New Constitution Of those Offices.

By way of Letter to a Member of Parliament.

Cuncta prius tentanda; sed immedicabile vulnus,
Euse recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur.
Ovid Met. Lib. 1. London, Printed for Richard Standfast, Bookseller, near
Temple Bar. MDCXCIX.

TO Sir William Duncombe, Bar.
SIR,
THOUGH I have not the Honor of an Acquaintance with you, yet since I found your
Name in the Printed Votes, as a Petitioner for Redress, against the Warden of
the Fleet, and that you were so great an Instance, of the Oppression which the
Gentry of England, as well as the Tradesmen, and Commonalty, labor under; I
presumed to Affix your Name to these Papers, which I Am sure are wrote with no
other Design, than to Advance the Public Advantage, by endeavoring to
Suppress a Nest of Pestilent Vipers, who have Stung, and been equally
Pernicious, to all Ranks and Degrees of Men, except only those who have nothing
to lose. The Riches of England consists in Land and Trade, which are the
Pillars of the Government, and must be Maintained and Supported, but both are
Weakened, and Terribly Shaken, by the Defect in Execution of the Legal Process;
Lands have lost their Ancient Value, and do not Answer the Profits as formerly:
For how many Knavish Tenants do continually decline to pay their Rents, or go
off with good round Sums in their Pockets, and when their Landlords call 'em to
Account, and fling 'em into the Country Gaol, the next News they hear, is of a
Habeas Corpus, to Remove 'em to the King's Bench or Fleet, and in a Fortnights
time, down they come, and take another Farm next Hedge to their former
Landlords. As for the City (where Trade does chiefly flourish) That Suffers
infinitely more, for as Differences on Contracts and Bargains do arise, so
there are more frequent Opportunities of Repairing to the Law for Satisfaction:
And one would think that an honest Debt for Goods Sold and Delivered, should be
Paid, but unless a Man will be a Law to himself, (which we can hardly hope for
in this degenerate Age) there is no Money to be had; the Creditor may Arrest
him, and have Judgment against him, and Charge him in Execution; and what then?
Why then he comes Abroad, and there is an end of the matter.

-- pudet haec opprobia nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
I ever thought that Trade had been the Darling of the English Nation, and
shall we tamely see such Rapes* and Violences Committed on her, who ought
certainly to be Cherished and Improved with all the Tenderness and Care
imaginable? 'Twas the Policy of our Ancestors to respect her as the
Guardian-Angel of their Island; and shall the present Fathers of our Country
now look on with Vnconcern? Can they behold these Horrid Violations, and not at
all be moved! Certainly they cannot Imagine but that such Wretched Treatment
must mightily Discourage Trade: It cannot but strike a Damp upon the Careful
Merchant, and the Industrious Tradesman, when they Consider, That after all
their Pains and Sedulous Application, the Labors of some Years may all be lost
in fewer Moments: For they are forced to seek Returns by Sale of their
Commodities with reasonable Profit, and for this, Credit must necessarily be
given: Now if they happen to Trust a Knave, (as, modestly speaking, it is two to
one but they do) their Prime Cost is also gone and sunk, for it is plain there is
no Remedy to Recover it; what is this but a Stab into the very Heart of Trade?
I Am told it was a regard to Trade which was one of the principal Motives, that
induced the Parliament to Suppress the late pretended Priviledg'd Places, where
the Law was Cramped in the Execution, and consequently Trade received a vast
prejudice: But it is in vain to destroy some Nusances, if they leave others
still remaining, which are worse, and more Dangerous: As the Wounds of Friends
strike Deeper, and are more Fatal than those of Open Enemies: And as Extortions
by Color of Offices and Justice are greater Offenses than downright
Exactions; for that they pretend Law (the greatest Blessing of the Subject) for
the Countenance of Villainy and Wrong.

But I hope the Parliament will take this particular also into Consideration,
That the White-Fryars and Mint are not Crushed, so long as the Prisons of the
King's Bench and Fleet are in Being; for it is now become a Common Practice for
Bankrupts and Cheating Knaves themselves to run into one, as they did into the
other for Shelter and Protection.

I am, SIR, Your Humble Servant, J. B.

An ARGUMENT, showing, That it is Impossible for the Nation to be Rid of the
Grievances Occasioned by the Marshal of the King's Bench, and Warden of the
Fleet, without an Utter Extirpation of their present Offices. With Proposals
for a New Constitution of those Offices, etc.
SIR,
SINCE I am informed that the Grand Inquest of the Nation has Resolved (once
more) to take the Abuses of the King's Bench Prison, and Fleet, into
Consideration, I thought it my Duty, as an English Man, who by Birthright am
Intitul'd to all the Benefits of the Noblest Constitution in the World, to
offer my Sentiments, in Order to have these Grievances Redressed; which have so
long Eclipsed the Glory of it, by depriving us of the Fruit and Execution of
the Law; which Consequently must Languish and Expire, since it is Wounded in
the Vital Part, for Executio Legis est Anima Legis. And without the Soul, the
Letter of it is but a Dead Carcass, which cannot preserve, nor be preserved from
Ruin; so that a Failure of Justice it self must necessarily follow, than which,
there cannot be a greater Scandal and Reproach to Government: I shall Entertain
you no longer upon a Subject which is so Obvious to Common View; neither shall
I recite to you the particular Villainies and Oppressions of the Marshal and
Warden, for to Rake into Dunghills and their Prisons are the same thing, naught
but Stench and Noisomeness can thence arise; besides we ought to take those
Matters for granted, since the late Act of Parliament does expressly set forth
in the Preamble:

That by reason of the many grievous Extortions, and ill Practices of such
Persons, who have for several Years last past respectively Executed the Offices
of Marshal of the King's Bench, and Warden of the Fleet, both Creditors and
Debtors have been notoriously Abused, and the good Intents of the Law wholly
Eluded.

And, Sir, I am sorry to say such a Fatality attends those Prisons, that even
the good Intent of that Statute seems also to be wholly Eluded, as well as that
of the Common Law: The Complaints of this Sessions do abundantly testify the
Truth of this Assertion, for though in pursuance of that Statute some Persons
have Recovered Judgments in Actions of Escapes, against those Officers, yet
here also they are come to their Journeys end, and after all their Tedious and
Expensive Travel, find naught but Labor for their Pains: So that all those
excellent Provisions against those Grievances are rendered Useless and
Insignificant, and all the mighty Advantages which that Act was thought to
Produce prove Imperfect and Abortive, and our great Expectations are Dwindl'd
into Air.

Thus I have given you a short State of this Malignant Distemper, which has so
long raged in the Bowels of the Body Politic, a Distemper not in its Infancy,
it has been growing on us for some Ages past, and is arrived now to its full
Strength and Vigor, it seems to be Radicated in the Blood, and dares Maintain
its Post Bravado like, and bids Defiance to the feeble Acts of vulgar Physic;
so that the Common Law having been baffled by this Potent Enemy, the
Legislature must be called upon for Aid. And nothing under Heaven but the Power
and Wisdom of an English Parliament can stop the Progress of so Inveterate a
Canker to the Common Wealth: And I submit it to their Consideration whether
they must not now pursue the same Methods in this mighty Cure, as some
Physicians use in Chronical Diseases, where all the Nervous Juices, and the
whole Mass of Nature are Corrupted (Viz.) a Thorough Flux, that the whole
Malignancy may be rooted up, and a new Stream of Blood run in fresh and
untainted Channels. And therefore unless there be an Entirely New Constitution
in these Offices, unless their Old Bottom and Foundation be not only Shaken,
but totally Destroyed; I am of Opinion that all other Remedies will be but
patching, we may be Eased a while from Pain, but the rank Poison still remains,
and will soon get Head again in spite of all those Temporary Applications.

Now, Sir, to come to the main Point, in Order for a Redress, I take the First
Step toward it, to be an Enquiry into the Cause of this Mischief, and for this
we must Trace the Original Fountain, from whence these Offices proceed: And I
take it that in their Primitive State they were derived from the King, who
being Entrusted with the whole Executive part of the Law, thought fit to Grant
those Offices by Letters Patents, either for Life, as Henry the Fourth did to
William Finborough, 2 Roll. Abr. 152. Or in Fee-Tail, as Henry the Sixth did to
the Duke of Norfolk, 39 Hen. VI. 34. Or sometimes for a Term of Years, as King
James the First did to Sir James Elphinstone, though this was adjudged a void
Grant, 9 Rep. 96. And last of all, these Offices were Granted in Fee-Simple:
And the First Grant of this Nature of the Marshal's Office that I have met
with, was by King Charles the First, to Sir John Lenthall, under whose Title
the present Proprietors Claim. What I Observe from these Grants is this, That
those who first advised the Kings of England to Grant such Estates in those
Offices to Private Persons, might be good Courtiers, but I am sure they were
but indifferent Patriots, they Consulted their Princes Profit, and perhaps
raised a good Sum for the present, but they forgot their Countrey's Interest,
and had no regard to Posterity, for by Granting such long and absolute Estates,
great Inconveniences to the Public have Ensued.

As First, That such Estates being Inheritances, the Owner may make 'em Subect
to Judgments, Mortgages, and other Encumbrances; from which Two Mischiefs do
arise: One, That this Office may be under continual Distraction, always tearing
to Pieces by the several Creditors, by which the safe Custody of the Prisoners
must be neglected: And the Other, That no Creditor knows against whom to bring
his Action for an Escape, for that those Encumbrances are made in Secret, and
always Shifting from one to another, industriously to Cheat the Plaintiff, so
that the Profits of the Office cannot possibly be reached; and it is no answer
to say, there is a Marshal and Warden constantly Sworn, whose Bodies are liable
to the Plaintiffs Action; for the Body when in Prison is no Satisfaction, but
only a Pledge for the Debt till it be Satisfied: Besides the Bodies also of the
Marshal and Warden are Priviledg'd from being taken in Execution; and so it was
Resolved in Sid. Rep. 68.

And I would put this Case, Suppose the Warden of the Fleet, who has his
Office in Fee, Dies, his Son and Heir being at that time Imprisoned there, and
the Office descends to him, being in Prison, now the Law Judges him to be
immediately at Large, though he has Fetters on his Feet, because he cannot keep
himself in Prison. There Is another Case in Plowden, fol. 37. And that is, Where
a Woman is Warden of the Fleet by Descent or Purchase, and one in Prison
Marries the Feme, who is Warden, the Law Adjudges him out of Prison, for he
cannot be in Ward to his Wife, (though perhaps some others are) so that here is
also a Lawful Escape, though it seems a little Odd that Right and Wrong should be
the same thing, and joined together: Yet it is so here, for an Escape is
certainly Tortious and Unjust, and yet for an Inheritance to Descend, and for a
Woman to Marry is surely rightful and just: Then for the Declaration in this
Action of Escape against either of 'em, it must be a Special one indeed, for
the Plaintiff Declares; That the Son or the Husband, being in Custody, did so
negligently keep himself that he did permit himself to go at large against the
Plaintiffs consent, etc. Ay, and against his own Consent to, for the Law would
have it so, whether he would or no: The Son was only Passive, and suffered the
Inheritance to Descend upon him; and it is hard a Man should be punished for
having an Estate. The Husband indeed was Active and pushed forward to
Matrimony, but it is as hard that he should be punished for a Righteous and Holy
Act.

I have dwelt the longer upon these Cases, for that I conceive they give a
lively Instance of the Difficulties which the Grants of those Offices in Fee,
have brought upon the Common Law, which are no less than the Subversion of
Fundamentals, for the very Definition of the Law it self is destroyed; Lex est
Sanctio sancta jubens honesta and prohibens contraria, by these Examples the
Law forbids honest things, and commands unjust and absurd things; that is, not
to Marry, nor to have an Estate of Inheritance Descend upon the Heir, what is
this but Jargon and Contradiction to the last Degree?

These, and many other Defects were Incorporated with the first Institution of
these Offices, upon the Foundation of Inheritance, but as in other Cases, so in
this, Ex uno dato absurdo mill sequuntur; and certainly a thousand Tricks,
Frauds, Shams and Rogueries, with a long Train of Oppressions, Extortions,
Rapines, and unheard of Cruelties have been Occasioned by that Fatal Grant,
Witness so many hundred Families of English Freeborn Subjects, both of
Creditors and Debtors, who by these Merciless Harpies have been Compelled, much
against their Wills, to Agree in the same Funeral Pile of Common Ruin; so that
if there can be any Motives from the Topics of Honor, Justice and Compassion,
sufficient to Engage the Fathers of our Country for an Effectual Redress of
all these Wrongs, certainly they are to be found here, or no where in the
World: I am very sensible that the Parliament has already Interposed, as
appears by the Act made in the Eighth and Ninth of His present Majesty. But my
Complaint is, That the Incomparable and Excellent Design of that Act is
altogether frustrated, the Remedy is not advanced, nor the Mischief at Common
Law suppressed: And therefore it is, that I pray a Melius Inquirendum, That our
Great and Wise Legislators, would Indulge us with a Bill of Review, in Order to
Re-examine the whole Matter, and to make a strict Enquiry into the Grounds and
Causes upon which so Noble a Design Miscarried: And this leads me to the
Consideration of the late Act of Parment.

First, It is Enacted, That all Prisoners, who are, or shall be Committed to
the Custody of the Marshal of the King's Bench Prison, or Warden of the Fleet,
shall be actually Detained in the said Prisons of the King's Bench and Fleet,
or the respective. Rules of the same. And if the said Marshal or Warden shall
permit and suffer any Prisoner, Committed to their Custody, either on Mesne
Process, or Execution, to Go, or be at Large, out of the Rules of their
respective Prisons (except by Virtue of Habeas Corpus, or Rule of Court, which
Rule shall not be Granted but by Motion made, or Petition read in Open Court)
every such going, or being out of the said Rules shall be Adjudged and Deemed
to be an Escape.

I am at a loss what is meant by these Rules; neither can I find one of the Old
Law Books, that will furnish me with an Exposition of that Word, in reference
to Prisons: Indeed the Rule of Law is the Measure and Standard of it, which is
grounded upon the most solid and refined Reason imaginable, a Reason acquired
by long Study, Observation and Experience: But the other sort of Rules are the
Reverse and Antipodes of the Rule of Law; the one is an Opposite and flat
Contradiction to the other: There is so vast and wide a Difference between
them, that they are no more to be Reconciled than the North and Southern Poles,
for the Rules of these Prisons do plainly Trample upon all the Rules in Law.

Sir, I will only give you a few Instances, for I labor to be short, and am
afraid to exceed the bounds of an Epistle: I shall first quote to you the Case
of Sir George Reynell in my Lord Coke 9 Rep. 97. where it is Resolved by the
Judges, that this very Office of the Marshal of the King's Bench Prison, was an
Office of great Trust, annexed to the Person, and concerns the Administration
of Justice, and the Life of the Law, which are to keep those who are in
Execution, in salva and arcta Custodia, to the end that they may the sooner pay
their Debts, etc. And in the same Book, fol. 87. it is said, That every Keeper
ought to Secure his Prisoner in salva and arcta Custodia, so that such Prisoner
by the Common Law, shall avoid a Descent, Cast, or Fine Levied, during his
Imprisonment, because the Law presumes in respect of his strict Ward, he cannot
have Conusance of the Disseisin, or Fine to Command an Entry, or Claim to be
made; and so are the Old Books, Bracton l. 6. 3. f. 436. Britton 116. and Fleta
l. 6. c. 52, 53. Now let us consider the Nature of the Rules of those Prisons,
and make our Application: Those Rules then do contain such a particular Space
of Ground Adjacent to the Prisons, as the Rules of the King's Bench do
Comprehend; The Park, St. George's-street, and some other Places: And the Rules
of the Fleet, Ludgate Hill, the Old Bailey, etc. In any of these Places, it is
Lawful for the Prisoners (if they may he called so) of either of those Prisons
to Reside: And in Fact abundance of 'em are, to the great Expense and Vexation
of themselves and Creditors, Lodged up and down within these Rules: First, to
their own Expense, for that they not only pay Rent for their Lodgings with
their Landlord, but they must also give Extravagant, and Excessive Rates for a
Chamber, which they are supposed to have within the Prison. Indeed the late Act
has reduced the Old Exorbitant Rates to Two Shillings and Six Pence per Week,
and that not to be Paid neither, unless they are in actual Possession of such
Chamber, within the Prison; and if the Marshal, or Warden, demands any greater
Rent, he Forfeits Twenty Pound: One would have thought, that these Words being
so plain and express, this Mischief had been Redressed, but it is still the
same, the Name is only changed, for the poor Prisoner must pay according to the
Ancient Rate, only now, no Rent is demanded, but all is Sheltered under the
Notion of Civility-Money, and if he does not Discharge this Acknowledgment, the
Mirmidons will quickly Dragg him into the real Prison, and teach him better
Manners. This Contrivance puts me in mind of the Old Romish Priests, upon whom
my Lord Coke has this Observation, That for some Ages together, they still
found some Evasions to Creep out of the Statutes of Mortmaine: But Henry the
Eighth took a true Method to Obviate this, and other Mischiefs, which those
Locusts in the Common Wealth had introduced, by pulling 'em up, both Root and
Branch. Then as to their Creditors, it cannot but be a mighty Vexation to them,
to think that after all their Trouble and Costs at Law, to Charge their Debtors
in Execution, by which they proposed only the Confinement of their Bodies; that
yet notwithstanding all their Endeavors, they should in spite of 'em have
their Liberty, it cannot but Teaz an honest Tradesman to his Soul to see his
Debtor, under Condemnation, Strut it with his Sword, and Nose him at his very
Door: That this is Fact no Body can deny; for it is the Daily Practice of all
those pretended Prisoners in the Rules, to walk where they please in all the
several Parts of the Town, and to be sure they will Cross the Street on purpose
to put their Creditors on the Fret, and Brave it to their Faces: Besides some
Creditors on Ludgate Hill are so unfortunate, as to have their Debtors come and
Live next Door to them; perhaps the Creditor and Debtor may Lodge in the same
House, and this is worse than only losing the Debt, for he is Laughed at to boot:
Can this Creditor think any thing, but that the Law is a Jest? He cannot think
it in Earnest sure, when it calls his Debtor's Lodging there an Imprisonment,
and his Debtor a Prisoner; for by the same Parity of Reason the Creditors
Lodging is also a Prison, and the Creditor himself is become a Prisoner: He may
well cry out, this is a Dream, or else we live in an Age of Miracles and
Contradictions.

But, Sir, that which I insist on is, That not only the Going of these
Sham-Prisoners out of those Places they call the Rules, but also their Living
within 'em, out of the Prison, is an Escape in Law, But I must not be
understood to mean, that their being out of the Prisons of the King's Bench and
Fleet only is an Escape, if they are in any other Prison it is well enough. I
know it was Adjudged in Cro. Car. 210. that the King's Bench Prison was not
Local, but any Place where a Man is Restrained of his Liberty is a Prison, and
in the same Book, fol. 266. It is Resolved, by all the Judges of England, That
the Wardon of the Fleet, and the Marshal of the King's Bench, may keep their
Prisoners in any other Place of the County: But then they ought to be kept as
Prisoners, Sub salva and arcta Custodia: Whereas in our Case, it is not
pretended that they are in Custody within these Rules, nor that there is any
manner of Keeper with 'em, they have the same Freedom and Liberty of Egress and
Regress with other Persons, to Go, and Come when they please, without any
manner of Guard du Corpse attending of 'em; perhaps some of the more Cautious,
when they are to go Abroad amongst their Creditors, will now and then take a
Follower with 'em; but however in point of Law, this will not do neither, for it is
Adjudged in Boyton's Case, the 3 Rep. 44. and so is my Lord Dyer 278. and Hub.
202. That if the Sheriff suffer the Prisoner to go abroad with a Bailiff or
Keeper, yet this is an Escape, for that he ought to be kept in Safe and Strait
Custody, which cannot be said when his Arms and Legs are at Liberty, with his
Sword by his Side, and only one Scoundrel to Attend him.

There are Multitudes of Authorities, which show the Strictness and Severity of
the Law, as to the Confinement of the Prisoner's Body: And the Political Reason
of this Rigorous Usage is, That the Prisoner, being uneasy under it, might the
sooner be induced to regain his Liberty, by Discharging his Just and Honest
Debts. So that since the Rules of these Prisons do directly Subvert the Good
and Ancient Maxims of the Common Law, it will certainly be worth the Enquiry of
the Committee, to know when, and by what Authority these Rules were first set
on Foot; and whether the present Use of 'em does Answer to their Original
Institution, I Confess I have Endeavored to Trace 'em to the Fountain, from
whence they first Sprung; but the first and only Book where I find the Rules
taken Notice of, is in Sid. Rep. 384. where it is said by my Lord Chief Justice
Keeling, That by reason of the Removal from other Prisons, there being more
Prisoners than the King's Bench Prison could contain, therefore the Prison was
Enlarged, by the Direction of the Court, which Enlargement is called the Rules,
which are Houses Adjacent, Hired by the Marshal.

So that here the Authority appears, by which they were introduced, (viz.) by
the Direction of the Court, and I don't see any harm in this Direction, if it
was only to Enlarge his Prisonhouse, or to keep the Prisoners in another
House, and Place, provided they are kept in Safe Custody. But what if these
Rules of late Years are Degenerated, and are quite of another Nature, from
those which were at first Allowed? For now the Rules are not Hired Houses by
the Marshal, nor any part of a Prison, they scorn the Scandal of that
opprobrious Name, the Gentlemen only take Lodgings for their Convenience,
within certain Places called the Rules. And what if these Rules, as they are
Established upon this new Bottom, should also be Approved of by the Rule and
Direction of the Court? Why truly, if the Case should be so, I take it clearly,
That this Rule, and Direction of the Court, is against the Law of England. This
may seem a little roundly Expressed, and perhaps may look somewhat Peremptory to
those who don't Consider, That the Judges are but Men, and Humanum est Errare,
says my Lord Coke, the great Oracle of our Law, who himself could not escape
being Censured, especially in the Zenith of his Court Preferments: So the Lord
Chief Justice Keeling was mistaken in Point of Law, when he Fined, and
Committed some of the Jury to Prison, for not giving a Verdict to his Mind,
which Error he acknowledged upon his Knees at the Bar of the House of Commons:
So it appears, in 1 Sid. 218. that the whole Court of King's Bench, mistook the
Law, when by their Rule they Imposed a Watch and Ward in Westminster, and laid
a Tax upon the Inhabitants, to defray the Expense of it; This was indeed a
pretty bold Stroke, or certainly a Prodigious Mist clouded their
Understandings, for every vulgar Eye might at first Glance discover the
Weakness of that Rule, which was made in direct Opposition, of the great
Privilege of Parliament, and I wonder they escaped the severest Censure of it:
But my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs had not so good luck, for one of the Articles
of Impeachment against him was, for that he had caused an Illegal and Arbitrary
Rule, to be Entered in the Court of King's Bench, against the Printing of the
Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome; 'twas his Misfortune, but the Nation's
Happiness, that he lived at a time, when the Parliament would not suffer the
meanest Englishman to be Oppressed with Impunity: It was that Immortal and
Prophetic Parliament, commonly called the Exclusion Parliament. And since I
chance to mention that Generous and Heroic Senate, I cannot forbear making this
short Observation: It was, Cassandra-like, theirs, and the whole Nation's
unspeakable Calamity, not to be believed; for which Stubborn, and vastly
Pernicious, and only not Fatal Blindness of the Church, (for there it went)
What a Chain of Horrors, Darkness, and Confusions did Ensue? What a Scene of
Tragical Tyrannies and Depredations, were every where Displayed throughout the
British Isle? Our Civil Rights were Lost, and entirely Swallowed up by that
Voracious Monster, called, Prerogative of the Crown, and our Religious ones,
were reduced to the very Brink and Precipice of Destruction: But when the
Church looked down and saw the great Abyss in which they were Eternally to
sink; then they Cried out for help, and Providence brought 'em an Assistance,
which has ('it is true) Redeemed us, but not without the Expense of Millions of
Sacrifices Offered up, not of Beasts, as those of the Ancients were, but of the
Noblest Human Blood and Treasure.

But after this small Digression to pursue the Thread of my Discourse, I was
giving you some Instances, where the Courts in Westminster Hall have given
Signal Proofs of their Fallibility: And what I infer from hence is; That the
Rules of Court ought not to be taken upon Trust, nor as if they were
undoubtedly Legal, because they are Rules of Court: And therefore if any such
have been made, in respect of the Rules of the Fleet, and King's Bench Prisons,
it may be reasonable for a Parliament to Enquire into the Justice and Validity
of them. And this brings me to Consider that other part of the Enacting Clause,
where it is said,

That no Prisoner shall be suffered to go at large, except by Virtue of some
Habeas Corpus, or Rule of Court; which Rule of Court shall not be Granted but
by Motion made, or Petition read in Open Court, etc.

So that if there be a Rule of Court for it, a Prisoner now may lawfully go
abroad: This is, I Confess, an Extraordinary Clause, and looks as if a Judge
himself, or at least some Body who was pretty sure of being one, had Penned it,
for it gives the Court an Arbitrary, or which Tantamounts, a Discretionary
Power, to Release all the Prisoners in England. I don't say, or believe, that
they will ever Exert it to such a height: But why should the Court have a Power
to do it if they please? Why should the Debtors Restraint any more than the
Creditors Liberty be Precarious? Since the same Laws are the Measures of both,
and a Violation of the one may soon be followed by a Violation of the other;
for they who have an Absolute Power to give Liberty, may in time pretend to
that of Restraint. It Is true, we are Secure from all Apprehensions of this
Nature, during the present Government, who may doubtless Challenge all the
Reigns since the Conquest, to produce a more August and Reverend Bench for
Learning, Temper and Integrity: So that it seems the peculiar Happiness of His
Majesty's mighty Genius, to be Blessed with Council at Home, equal to the
Success of his Arms Abroad, that he might Triumph both in Peace and War.

But it is Posterity that I am laboring for: What if in process of time a
Deluge of Oppression, and Tyranny, should again Overwhelm us? What if such a
Set of precious Judges should be trumpt up as the late Reign produced? Some of
which were the Scum and Refuse of the Law, a Disgrace and Scandal to the Robes
they Wore, and all (but one) were base Deserters of their Countrey's Cause, and
were culled out for no other End, but to put the great Machine of Arbitrary
Power into Motion, which they did effectually Perform, by prostituting the
Laws, Religion, Honor, and Justice of the English Nation, to the Vile Lust of
a Superstitious and Despotick Monarch.

But as I was Observing, how Dangerous would it be to Entrust such a Power in
the Hands of Renegado and Apostate Judges, who might Raise Vast and Immense
Sums, by Granting such Rules of Enlargement? If the late Lord Chief Justice Sir
Robert W. had been Invested by Act of Parliament with such a Discretionary
Power, he might in his great Wisdom have thought it an Easier, and more
Honorable Way of Supplying his Necessities; than by Mortgaging his Estate a
Second time, and adding Perjury to the Bargain, by making an Affidavit, that
'twas free from all Encumbrances; besides, he might have thought this Power a
Perquisite to his Place; and that he might Justify this Method of making up
the Loss of his Sallary, the greatest part of which went on the other side of the
Hall.

I know it may be Objected, That never such a General Rule of Enlargement was
made, nor perhaps ever thought on before, or since the making of the Act (though
I shall quote one by and by, which was made long before that Act, and comes
pretty near it) and that this Rule of Court, which is Excepted in the Act, is
commonly understood of Day-Rules, and that only such are Granted: Though I should
acknowledge this to be true, yet it admits of an easy Answer; for I am only
Arguing that the Court May Grant a General Rule of Enlargement, by Virtue of
this Act, and so they May Grant other Rules by Virtue of it: As for Instance, I
don't see but the Court may now Grant a Rule to bring up a Prisoner to be a
Witness at a Trial at Bar, or to carry him to York, to be a Witness at a Trial
there, or upon any other Occasion the Court shall think proper: Whereas before
the late Act, I do not think such a Rule was sufficient, to Secure the Keeper
from an Action of Escape. There is an Authority to this purpose in 1 Sid. 13.
That if a Habeas Corpus ad testificandum be directed to a Jailer, to bring up a
Prisoner, who is in Execution, to be a Witness: If the Jailer by Virtue of this
Writ brings the Prisoner, yet this is an Escape, for which he is Answerable,
and why should a Rule of Court have a greater prevalence, and force, than the
King's Writ, which has been Established by the Common Law, time Immemorial.

But pray let us Consider a little the Nature of these Day-Rules, and how far
they will stand the Test of a Legal Examination. This Rule, it seems, is made
every Day in Term, upon Motion, or Petition, in which it is Suggested by the
Prisoners, that they have Extraordinary Occasions to go Abroad, to Direct their
Attorneys, and Advise with Council about their Business, and the like: Upon
this the Court makes a Rule for them accordingly, but it is supposed they are to
have a Keeper with 'em, though if they have, that will not alter the Case. But
the question is, Whether the Common Law does Allow, that a Prisoner in
Execution may be permitted in any Case to go, and Advise with his Council, though
it may be about Matters which relate to the Cause of his Imprisonment? And I
conceive that the Common Law does not Indulge any such Liberty: And for this, I
rely on Two Substantial Authorities; The First is in Plowden's Commentaries
360. where it is said, that a Man in Prison, has not liberty to go at Large, to
make his Entry or Claim, or to seek Council. The Other is in Co. Lit. 259.
where it is also said, That a Man Imprisoned shall not be bound by a Descent,
for that by the Intendment of Law, he is kept without Intelligence of things
Abroad, and has not Liberty to make his Entry or Claim, or to seek for
Council. I Will quote one Case more, and that is Mostin's Case, in my Lord Dyer
297. which was this, Mostin being in Execution in the Fleet, the Lord
Treasurer, and the Barons of the Exchequer, Commands, by their Order, or Rule
of Court, that the Warden should let the Prisoner go at Large, accordingly the
Prisoner was let loose; but the Warden in those times paid for it in an Action
of Escape, brought against him in the Common Pleas, where his Justification
under the Rule of Court was not Allowed. So that here is a President of a
General Rule of Enlargement; and what has been done, may be done, especially
when the Statute has by so strong an Implication, given the Court Power and
Authority, to make such another Rule, if they think fit.

I shall Conclude this Head, with an Observation, how much this Modern Practice
of letting Prisoners go at Large by Day-Rules, differs from the Ancient Usage,
for in the Year-Book of the 39 Hen. VI. 33. is this remarkable Passage, That
the Court of King's Bench, used every Term, Once, or Twice, to send the Coroner
to the Marshal's Prison, to see all the Prisoners, and if any of them were
wanting, he Marked their Names in a Book, and Informed the Judges of it, and
upon this, the Court would ask the Marshal what was become of his Prisoners,
and if he could not show a sufficient Cause, to Excuse himself, the Court did
Record the Escapes of every one of 'em upon him. A very laudable Custom, and if
it were Revived at this Day, we need not be ashamed of the Old Fashion.

But this would Redound too much to the Marshal's disadvantage, who, by these
Day-Rules alone, may easily get Two Hundred Guinea's a Term, for though the
Prisoners have a Rule, (which the Marshal himself is very Solicitous to procure
for 'em) yet there is no Stirring without coming to some Agreement with him;
and suppose the Bargain to be struck up for a Hundred Prisoners, at Two
Guinea's a Head, it comes to that Sum, and all that he pays out of these Vast
Perquisites, is only a few New-Years-Gifts, and such like Trifles; perhaps the
Clerk of the Rules may also have a small Acknowledgment for his great Favors.

Sir, by this time I hope you are satisfied, That the Commencement of this Act,
has but an indifferent Aspect, and for this reason I do not expect any great
Benefit from the other parts of it; for we have this Maxim in the Law, Quae
malo inchoata sunt Principio, vix bono peraguntur fine; and I doubt this will
Appear too Obvious, when we come to consider the Conclusion of this Act. But by
the way, I cannot but take Notice of that Clause, by which all Conveyances, and
all Trusts, and Declarations of Trusts, etc. any way relating to the Offices of
Marshal or Warden, are to be Enrolled: The Mischief at Common Law was, that
there were so many Secret Trusts of those Offices, such frequent Shiftings, and
Transferrings of the Mortgages, and other Securities, to which the Profits were
Subject, that 'twas Morally Impossible, for the Plaintiff to know, against whom
to bring his Action, or to have any Remedy: And there were always Private
Articles between the Superior Marshal or Warden, or the Person who had their
Interest, and the Temporary Marshal or Warden, who did actually Officiate; by
which the Rents, and Profits, were totally Reserved to the Superiors, and the
others, were Obliged upon all Occasions to follow their Directions, and to give
up and Surrender at Command: So that these Underlings have all along been only
Servants, and mere Tools, nothing but Statues set up to receive the Shot of the
Creditors, and to Skreen their Masters from any harm; and when one is Pierced
through and through, down he Tumbles, and another such Logg is Advanced in his Room.

But besides there is this to be Considered, That though the Plaintiff does know
who is the Superior Warden or Marshal, or to whom the Profits of these Offices
are Subject, or Conveyed in Mortgage, or in Trust, etc. yet whether this
Knowledge would now better his Case, in respect of any Action to be brought, or
of his having any other Remedy?

It Is true, the Stat. of Westminster. 2 Car. 11. is express, That where the Inferior
Officer is not sufficient, his Superior shall Answer for the Escape of the
Prisoner; and that was the Duke of Norfolk's Case, 39 H. 6.34. But against whom
shall this Action be brought? If against the Superior, you will have the same
Effect, as if it were against the Inferior; for the Proverb is here Inverted,
it being Like Man like Master; you can have nothing but Bones (if you can have
that) from either of 'em, Briggs and Lenthall are of the same Leanness, though
one seems Plumper in the Face than the other; for the Reversion of these Offices
is not so Clear and Free, as it was in the good Days of Henry the Sixth: It has
been long since Loaded and Encumbered with Mighty Burdens, it is ready to Sink
and Expire beneath the Weight of 'em.

So that the Superiour's Interest being so far involved in Mortgages and other
Encumbrances, let us see whether you have any Remedy against the Persons who
Claim under those Titles, and I conceive there is none; for in your Action of
Debt against any of them, you must Declare according to the Statute, That since
the Custos Gaolae non habeat unde solvat respondeat superior suus qui Custodiam
hujusmodi Gaolae sibi Commisit, etc. But the Mortgagee, or Trustee, is not the
Superior Marshal or Warden, neither did they know who Committed the Custody of
the Goal, for they concern themselves only for the Profits, and not about him
who actually Officiates: Besides this would be Confounding Jurisdictions, and
Mixing the Courts of Common Law and Equity together, for Mortgages and Trusts
are the proper Objects of a Court of Conscience: And indeed, as I conceive,
Estates in Trust were not Subject to any Judgment, Statute, or Recognizance at
Common Law, until the Statute of Frauds and Perjuries, by which it is Enacted:

That the Sheriff may make and deliver Execution of all such Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, as any other Person or Persons be in any manner of wise
Seized or Possessed, in Trust for him against whom Execution is Sued, as the
Sheriff might have done, in Case the Party himself had been actually Seized,
etc.

So that since this Statute, if any Person had been Seized of the Reversion of
these Offices, in Trust for the Superior Marshal or Warden, no doubt but it
would have been liable to Execution, as well in the Hands of one as the other:
But this is not our Case, for the Trustees here are Seized in Trust for the
Mortgagees, or other Persons who Claim under the several Encumbrances, with
which these Offices are Charged, by the Superior Marshal or Warden. So that
though these Titles are Enrolled, yet they afford the Creditor but a Melancholy
Prospect, since they are wholly Exempted from, and in point of time Prior to
his Action, and consequently must Command Precedence.

And for the same reason, the mighty hopes of speedy Justice, which People had
Conceived of the Sequestration Clause, are also Vanished: The words of it are
as follows:

The Judges shall, after Oath made that the Judgment was obtained without
Fraud, upon Motion, Sequester the Fees and Profits of the Office of Marshal and
Warden, and in the first place apply the same toward Satisfaction of the Debt
or Debts, due from the Prisoner who Escaped.

This indeed, as well as the last Clause I mentioned, would have been of
excellent use in Diebus illis, when the Sky was Serene and Clear, and no Clouds
Overshadow'd any part of the Office: But now since the whole is covered with
Mists, and Obscure Intreagues, the Scene is quite Altered, the Judges are at a
loss where to find the Profits, or if they are found out by the Inrollment, yet
they must be Excused, for they are Pre-ingaged, and all Pre-ingagements must in
Justice, as well as Honor, be Allowed of: And therefore though the former part
of the Statute does positively Affirm, That the Fees and Profits shall, in the
first place, be Applied toward Satisfaction of the Prisoner's Debts; yet the
latter part does as positively Deny it: For that Saves all the Rights, Titles,
Interests, and Securities of Johnson, Boulter, Norwood, etc. which they have in
the said Offices, or the Profits thereof.

And now Their Demands must be first Satisfied, so that this Unfortunate Act of
Parliament Commits a Violence on its self, seems to be a Felo de se, and by a
Fatal Contradiction, gives its own Heart a Mortal Wound. And after all, Suppose
the Judges should Sequester the poor Remnant of the Profits (if any such there
be, when all the Pre-ingagements are Discharged) I would then ask this single
Question, by whom shall the Marshal or Warden, who does Officiate, be paid his
Sallary? (for the poor Creature must have a Livelihood) I doubt the Court will
want their Officer, unless they can suppose that one Skeleton may live upon
another; for by this time both the Office and Officer must be reduced to a
mighty thin Contexture. I have now done with this Famous Act of Parliament, of
which we were so big with Expectation, and I Am sorry it should be said at last,
Parturiunt Montes.

Having thus made the Way Clear, and I hope given you Convincing Proofs, Drawn
from the Sacred Repositories of our Law, that the present Foundation, as well
as Management of these Offices, is Diametrically Opposite to the reason of the
Common Law, and wholly Inconsistent with the Noble Frame of the English Happy
Constitution; I come now to Offer my Humble PROPOSALS to the Parliament for a
New and Regular Establishment of these Offices, which in themselves I own are
an Essential part of the Common Wealth.

I. That the present Officers of the King's Bench and Fleet, the Marshals and
Wardens, Superior and Inferior, with all the Train of Rubbish which Attends
'em, may be Dismissed their further Service; and though these Miscreants have
been such Unprofitable Servants to all Mankind but themselves, and by their
Crimes have undoubtedly Incurred a just Forfeiture of all their several
Interests, yet that even those who Purchased their Places for Valuable
Considerations, should be Reimburs'd their Purchase-Money, though this is a
Favor which they cannot pretend a Title to; and that which, perhaps, no other
Power upon Earth, but an English Parliament, would Indulge.

II. That all Mortgages, and other Securities and Encumbrances whatsoever,
which have been made really, and bona fide, upon Valuable Considerations, may
be Paid Off, and Discharged, with Principal and Interest; which otherwise would
have lain an Eternal Dead Weight on the Offices: For to be sure the Marshal and
Warden would have kept all Encumbrances still on Foot, on purpose to Secure the
Profits thereof from being touched. So that until these Obstacles are Removed,
all Endeavors for an Effectual Relief must be Vain, Fruitless, and
Insignificant: And I am informed, That the whole Charge that will be requisite
upon this Occasion, will not Amount to above Thirty or Forty Thousand Pounds; a
small Recompense for a National Benefit; no more than some single Regiments of
the Army are to have before they are Disbanded.

III. The Stage being Clear of these Vermin, like Snails let 'em carry their
Houses and Prisons with 'em, for indeed they are not large enough to Contain a
Tenth Part of the Prisoners; which I take to be a strong Argument against the
possibility of the present Prisons answering the Ends of the Law, (viz.)
Confinement, etc. And therefore, as to the Foundation of this New
Establishment, in the first place, I Propose the Builing of Two Large and
Capacious Prisons, which may be contrived to Contain Three or Four Thousand Men
apiece; and in each of these New Prisons a Workhouse, to be set apart, which
cannot but turn to a very good Account; for not only our Manufactures might be
thereby Improved by so great a Number of Hands, but also abundance of Miserable
Wretches, who are in a starving Condition, and forced to Beg through a Grate,
would find a Comfortable Subsistence: And besides, there would be this
particular Advantage to the whole Nation, That whereas now by the 43 Eliz. c.
2. the Justices of the Peace of every County and Corporation in England, are
yearly to Rate every Parish toward the Relief of the Poor Prisoners of the
King's Bench; all this constant Charge and Expense, which has been paid already
for near a Hundred Years, will be taken off, which otherwise might continue
upon us, as a Rentcharge, to the End of the World; so that the Nation will
Discharge a Debt by this Means. Indeed I have often wondered that there have
been no Provisions hitherto made for the Setting poor Prisoners for Debt at
Work, and why they should be looked on as Useless and Rotten Members of the
Common Wealth, any more than poor Prisoners Committed to Gaol for Felony, and
other Misdemeanors, for whom by the 19 Car. II. c. 4. the Justices of the Peace
at their General Sessions are to Provide a Stock of such Materials as they
think convenient, and sit Persons to Oversee and Set them to Work.

Now for the Charge of these New Buildings, it may be so Managed as not to cost
the Nation a Farthing; for I do not question, but there are Five Hundred
Persons in this Town, who would gladly Undertake the Building of these Prisons,
on the Terms of being Reimbursed by part of the Profits, which may Arise within
the Walls, either by Chamber-Rent, or from the Prisoners Work, or other
Methods, as shall be thought fit by Parliament.

IV. And in Order to Reduce the Number of the King's Bench and Fleet Prisoners,
by preventing the Removal of Prisoners from the Country Prisons: That no
Habeas Corpus may be Allowed, unless it be upon some Affidavit made of the
Fact, by which it may appear to the Court, or the Judge, what the Nature of the
Cause is, for which he was Committed, and if it appears to have been upon any
Mesne Process, or Execution for Debt, Damages or Costs, etc. that either the
Habeas Corpus may be Denied; or if the Matter be doubtful by reason of Cross
Affidavits, that the Prisoners may be brought up, and after Examination, be
Remanded, as is usual in Criminal Cases: And I cannot see what Occasion there is
of this Habeas Corpus, when the Prisoner may be as well Charged by a Copy of
the Declaration delivered to him, or the Turn-Key in the Country Prison.

V. That the Right of these Prisons may be Vested either in the Crown, under
such Limitations and Control of Parliament, as shall be thought proper: And
that every Year the Judges should present to the King, the Names of Four Good
and Substantial Persons, in the same Manner as they Present the Sheriffs, out
of which the King may Choose One, to be the Marshal of the King's Bench Prison,
and another to be Warden of the Fleet. Or, since the old Right which flowed
from the Crown has been Unfortunate, and it may be thought by some, a little
Ominous, to have the New one derived from the same Fountain: That then the
Fee-Simple of these Offices may be Vested in the Mayor and Commonalty of the
City of London, as Superior Marshal and Warden, and that their Sheriffs may be
Deputy Marshal and Warden; and may appoint the Keepers of the King's Bench
Prison, and Fleet, in the same Method as they do now the Keepers of their
several Prisons within the City: So the Mayor and Citizens of London have the
Shrievalty of London in Fee, and the Sheriffs of London are Guardians under
them, and Removable from Year to Year. And in this Case the Sheriffs of London
are Guardians of the Prisons and Gaols, and the Mayor and Citizens are their
Superiors; and if the Sheriffs are not Solvent to Answer Escapes, the Mayor and
Citizens are responsible for them, and this Appears in the 2 Instit. 382. And I
take this to be the best and most excellent Model, as having so certain and
undoubted a Fund, to Answer all Escapes which can possibly happen: And I am apt
to believe, That the greatest part of the Citizens (who doubtless have suffered
most by the Mismanagement of the present Officers) would be very willing of a
New Constitution upon this Bottom, and would no more fear the Danger of
Escapes, than they do at present; one of which does hardly happen in an Age out
of any of the City Prisons.

VI. Since there must necessarily be a great Expense to the Marshal and Warden
within the Prisons, in Servants and other Conveniences, and also the Danger of
Answering Escapes out of 'em; I doubt there must be a Considerable Allowance,
sufficient to Encourage a Person of Worth and Substance to so great an
Undertaking; I presume it must be Two Thousand Pounds per Annum, at least, for
each Officer: But the particular Sum, and the Methods of Raising it, must be
left to the Debates of Parliament.

VII. That no Marshal or Warden shall hold his Place above One Year: These
Offices are of such Vast Importance to the Welfare of the Public, and the
Trust Reposed in those Officers Hands, is of such Inestimable Value, it being
no less than the Life of the Law it self, that I think no Man can pretend to
Conduct and Integrity enough, to be Entrusted with such a Treasure for his
Life: There Is no one can say, but in a long Series of Years, as his External
Goods are Subject to the Turns and Strokes of Fortune, so the Constancy of his
Mind, may, by continual Attacks, at last be shaken: But in a Years time there
may be few Temptations Offered; and who would Embrace 'em, and draw upon
himself and Family an Age of Trouble and Misfortune, for a small Gain, which
cannot last above a Year?

VIII. That if this Right be Invested in the Crown, the King shall not Nominate
any Person above the Degree of a Baronet, to be Marshal or Warden; and for the
more effectual preventing of any pretenses to any Privilege of being Exempted
from Actions, etc. no Marshal or Warden shall be capable of being Chosen a
Member of Parliament; Two such Trusts at the same time seem Incompatible; at
least they are too Weighty to be Managed by one and the same Person, to the
general Satisfaction: Besides, as it has been lately Observed by a Judicious
and Learned Author, All Wise Governments endeavor, as much as possible, to
keep the Legislative and Executive parts Asunder, that they may be a Check upon
one another.

IX. That Annually at Christmas, (or any other time) certain Persons of known
Honor and Integrity, may be Commissionated under the Great Seal of England, to
Inspect the Management of these Offices, and to Examine into all Abuses and
Irregularities of the Marshal and Warden, or any of their Inferior Officers,
and to make their Report of the same at the next Sessions of Parliament (if
there be none then in being:) And it may be well worth the Consideration of our
Legislators, Whether a Triennial Visitation in this Nature throughout the
Realm, of all Temporal Officers and Ministers, who are concerned in the
Administration of Justice, and Execution of the Laws, would not produce mighty
Blessings and Advantages to the Public, We should not then hear such Grievous
Complaints against the Corrupt Judgments in Inferior Courts, and the
Abominable Extortions of their Officers: Nor should our Ears be Pierced with
the Sighs and Groans of a Thousand Poor Unhappy Wretches, who Daily fall into
the Clutches of the Little Petty-Fogging Solicitors, and Bailiffs.

I shall Conclude with a Recital of part of that great Lawyer and Statesman Sir
Nicholas Bacon's Speech, which he made to both Houses of Parliament, as appears
in Sir Simon Dew's Journal 152.

Now to the Execution of Laws made by you, and the rest heretofore by others, I
am to remember you, That those Labors, Travel, and Pains taken about the Laws,
are all in Vain, and Labor Lost, without the due Execution of them; for a Law
without Execution, is but a Body without Life; a Cause without an Effect; a
Countenance of a thing, and indeed nothing: Besides the making of Laws without
Execution, does very much harm, for that breeds and brings forth Contempt of
Laws, and Lawmakers, and of all Magistrates; which is the very Foundation of
all Misgovernance, of all Injuries and Injustice, and of all Disorders and
Unquietness in the Commonwealth.

Thus, Sir, I have Ventured through Untrodden Paths, though it is indeed matter of
Astonishment to think, That not one of all our Patriotical Lawyers should have
Engaged long since, this great and terrible Leviathan, who thus Disturbs our
Peace, and Cracks the Sinews of the Body Politic: (for it is a true
Observation, That the Laws are the Sinews of Peace, as Moneys are of War.) For
my part, all that I can hope for from this poor Attempt, is, That some Strong
and Abler Pen may be Encouraged from these small Hints, to undertake the Cause:
There cannot be a Nobler Field to Exercise all the Faculties of the Mind, and
Body; for Wit, Judgment, Manly Strength, and Courage, must all be Summoned to
our Aid, against this Great and Common Enemy to the whole People of England:
And after all, I Am afraid he will prove too hard for any particular Body of Men,
who dares wage War against so many Millions. We must at last beg the Assistance
of the Legislature, and though even that, at the first Onset, may give a little
Way, and I doubt has actually received a Foil: Yet I hope it is but
Antaeus-like, to rise with greater Force and Vigor, and to Correct this daring
Insolence of Villainy, that could pretend to Grapple with Almighty Power; for in
respect of our Inferior Orb, such is the Power of an English Parliament.

Sir, I shall Sum up all with this short Addition, by way of Corollary: That
it is Visible to the whole World what Prodigious Things our Parliaments have
done, since the Happy Revolution: They have fixed Matters of Religion upon a
sure, and lasting Foundation; and, to a Miracle, Reconciled the Feuds and
Animosities Raised upon that Score: They have Retrenched the Exorbitances of
the Prerogative, and Rivetted the Liberties of England, by the Bill of Rights;
which, as a Second Magna Charta, deserves to be wrote with Characters of Gold:
Our Properties have likewise been taken Care of, by several good Acts, and in
particular, by that which Reforms the Coin: They have Carried on a War, and
Procured a Peace, to the Surprise and Admiration of Europe. But after all these
great and wonderful Performances, unless we can Enjoy the Fruits of Peace by a
due Administration, and Execution of Justice, they have not finished Half their
Work; for the Intestine Tumults and Commotions of a Distempered State, are more
Intolerable than a Foreign War. Therefore I am clearly of Opinion, That the
Mischiefs, and Distractions, which Daily Arise from these Infernal Offices, are
not less Dangerous to our Constitution, than a Standing Army; and since your
House is so Unanimous to Disband the One, I cannot but think, that upon a
serious and due Consideration, they will be as Zealous to Dissipate and
Confound the other. And I hope this Parliament will have the Honor of so Great
and Glorious a Reformation.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Richard Standfast, next Door to the Three-Tun-Tavern, near
Temple Bar.
THE Debates at Large, between the House of Lords, and House of Commons, at the
free Conference held in the Painted-Chamber, in the Session of the Convention,
Anno 1688. Relating to the Word Abdi^^ted.

Adventures of Convent-Garden: In imitation of Scarron's City Romance.

Love and a Bottel: A New Comedy.


