THE Count of Amboise; OR, THE GENEROUS LOVER. A NOVEL. Written Originally In
French by Madam * * * AND Rendered into English by P. B. Gent. Dedicated to the
Dauphiness of France. PART I.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes in Russet-street in
Covent Garden. 1689.

TO Mrs. Elizabeth Slingsby.
Madam,
YOUR natural Inclinations, your Ingenuity, and your Virtuous Education, have
such an affinity with that which rendered this Heroine so accomplished, as she
is here represented, that I thought I should wrong her Memory, and your Merits,
in not dedicating to You this Story of her Amors, as to the fittest Person, to
vindicate and defend from the envious Censure of Malice, that Management which
she used in so nice a Cause, in which mere Chance and her own Misfortune had
involved her. She, like You, had an entire dependency on her Mother's grave
Counsels and Advices, such a Mother, as like yours, was endowed with all the
Prudence and Discretion, that was requisite to govern so accomplished a
Daughter; She, like You, had an exquisite Judgment, to discern Persons, before
entering into any Engagement, further than what the modest Converse of a decent
Visit would afford. She, like You, had such reservedness in all her Actions,
and so strict a Watch over her Desires, that nothing but the fatal mistake
through which she gave to a worthy Person that Heart, which was designed for
another by a discreet Mother's Choice, could have produced that mischief, which
proved the unhappiness of her whole Life. May the Comparison terminate here,
Madam, and you never have occasion to act any further her Part, by keeping such
a constant Guard on your Heart, as may (...) it from all Surprises; such a
(...) can never be too carefully preserved, while there are so many men that
would leave no ways unattempted to the possession of it, even by the advantage
of such an unfortunate mistake, by which Madmoiselle of Roye lost hers; and
when the Time which the Heavens; have appointed for the change of your
Condition is come, in lieu of such a Disaster, may you be blessed with a Person
worthy your Affections; that is, with one accomplished with all the Gifts of
Nature, and the Superstructure of Arts, with such a Person as would be the
Object of the Vows of every one that knows your Merits. Amongst the Crowd of
those your Admirers, I beg for admittance, in Quality of,

MADAM, Your most humble Servant, P. Bellon.

TO MADAM THE DAUPHINESS.
Madam,
THE favorable Reception, which you have been pleased to afford to my first
Novel, makes me hope the same Favor for this, I have now more need of your
Protection than ever: I compose the History of a Man, who is so Generous to
yield his Mistress to his Rival, and now there being but few Men capable of
such great Things, and that Persons are rarely moved but with such things
toward which they have some disposition, I have cause to fear the success of
this Book. But, Madam, great and lofty Sentiments are met with in Royal Souls.
Above all, they are in yours in the Superlative, and peradventure in that
respect the Count D'Amboise may please you. If I durst entertain that Hope, I
should have no cause to complain, seeing that those who would not be fit to
relish it, would at least be capable of having a Respect for your Gusto. But it
is not in that single Vow, Madam, that I take the liberty of presenting You
with it, it is to have the Ambition of rendering You once more an Homage which
is so justly due to You by your eminent Qualities, and above all by your
Bounties. I am with a profound Respect,

MADAM, Your most humble and most obedient Servant * * *

TO THE READER.
IT has been observed, that in my first Novel there were some places in which
Nature was not well enough copied, and that partak'd more of Conception than of
Sentiment. Though I am not ashamed of that Reproach, I have however endeavored
on the Remarks that have been made me, to carry so far my Inspections, as to
mark the difference of a real Passion, from that which is but an over-studied
Idea of it. And I hope that this History will be found more natural than the
other in the Sentiments. It will also be found more extraordinary in the
Action; and I believe not that it is a defect; for though that Persons of an
ordinary Gusto, are accustomed to fancy every thing ridiculous that is not
common, great Wits find a disgust in things that are mean and low. They fancy
always to see the same Romance, because they always meet with the same strokes.
I flatter my self, that this Turn has not yet been seen; and I have not any
thing at all to fear, except that it is not very likely a Lover should be
generous. Those Discourses which are daily made of Lovers, gives place to this
Scruple; but after all it is but a Scruple, on which I pass in favor of that
which is great in the Idea. Peradventure that some may complain that I reward
not the Count of Amboise's Virtue, but I design to punish his Passion, I have
already declared in the Preface of Elenor of Yvree, that my design was to
represent none but unfortunate Loves, that I may combat as much as in me lies,
that tendency which we have for that Passion.

THE Count of Amboise. A NOVEL. PART I.
THE Reign of Francis the Second appeared in its beginning very agreeable and
happy. The Queen his Wife, was one of the most beautiful and most ingenious
Persons in the World. His Court was composed of part of those Illustrious
Persons that had formed that of Henry the Second, and the Ladies had as great
shares of Agreements, as the Men had of Valor. The Count of Amboise, and the
Marquess of Sansac did distinguish themselves in it. Their Families had always
been of opposite Interests; and though they were not declared Enemies, they had
a certain Emulation which seemed to have some Consequences depending. They were
both equally well made, nothing could be disputable in the one, but by the
other; and it verily seemed as if they were to contest all things betwixt them.

The Countess of Roye being a Widow, had retired her solf at two Leagues
distance from Paris to a Country House, where she received no Visits but from
some particular Friends. She had a Daughter perfectly beautiful, who had not
yet appeared. She did design to marry her before bringing of her to Court, and
she made choice of the Count of Amboise from amongst all those that were
proposed to her. That Marriage, which was equally advantageous to him and to
Madmoiselle of Roye, was concluded on, even before they had had an Enterview;
but she having the Repute of being a great Beauty, Monsieur of Amboise did
flatter himself very much with the thoughts that she should be his; and it may
be said, That desires and hope did already form in his Heart the beginnings of
a Passion, before he had seen its Object.

Though Madmoiselle of Roye might have been possessed with that kind of
insensibility, which Solitude usually gives, the quickness of her Apprehension
did make her to recieve and entertain the first impressions that were given
her, and what she heard her Mother say of the Count's good Mien, Wit, and
Generosity, did create in her an Esteem, which disposed her toward the
receptions of farther impressions.

That day in which he was to give her the first Visit, she had dressed her self
with more care than usually, and she was of a Beauty to charm all those that
beheld her. It was in one of those agreeable Summers days that invite to take
the Air. The Sun that had not appeared that day, gave place to a delicious
Coolness; and Madmoiselle of Roye was walking in one of the Avenues of the
House with two Ladies of her Mother's acquaintance, who were come to dine with
her. It being early enough yet not to expect the Count of Amboise, and Madam of
Roye was busied about some Conserves, she was well pleased that the Walk did
divert them during that time which she was to employ in business. They were
already come to the end of a Walk, where there was an Arbor open on every
side, very pleasant, and in which they were going to enter to seat themselves,
when they perceived a Cavaleer, who alighting from his Horse, left his
Followers behind him, and advanced toward them. Still as he approached, she
observed his shape and Air, which appeared worthy of all the attention that she
afforded them. She doubted not but that it was Monsieur of Amboise, he came at
the appointed day, his earnestness could not displease her. The good Mien of
that Person that she saw, did correspond to that Idea which she had framed in
her self of the Count. Those Ladies that were with her did not know him, as
belonging not to the Court. They had learnt that he was expected that day, and
they also were of opinion that it was he. They bestowed Praises on him, which
added the more to prepossess her in his behalf.

Madmoiselle of Roye found her duty very easy, and it may be that she hastened
her self a little too much to observe it; Monsieur Amboise was the Person that
was to inspire her with that Joy which is given at the first encounter of that
Object which ought to please; but it was in favor of the Marquess of Sansac
that she had been made sensible of it. Chance had conducted him there, he was
coming from a Lady of his Relation, and having found himself near to Madam of
Roye's House, some discourse which he had heard of her Daughter's Beauty, did
make him take that occasion to give them a Visit. He had not seen Madam of Roye
since the death of her Husband; she lived in so close a Retirement, that none
had yet attempted to disturb her; but he thought that after a year of Mourning,
she would make no scruple of receiving him.

He approacht the Ladies, and though he knew them not, he said all that
Politeness and Gallantry could inspire him with in that rencontre, but he
presently did distinguish Madmoiselle of Roye from the rest; of truth, though
one of them was young, and beautiful also, the Beauty of Madmoiselle of Roye
was so perfect, that one could not behold any other but hers, in any place
where she appeared; she found I know not what of pleasing in this Adventure,
which gave her an inclination to continue it. She entreated the Ladies not to
tell her Name, and knowing that those Concerns, which detained her Mother,
would not be so soon ended, she proposed to the Company to go seat themselves
in the Arbor.

That Road which the Marquess of Sansac had taken, would not let him doubt but
that it led to Madam of Roye's; he went not about to conceal that design, and
those Ladies confirming themselves in the opinion, that he was Monsieur of
Amboise, did put diverse nice Questions to him on Madmoiselle of Roye's account,
which gave him to understand, that they took him for that Count, who he knew to
be on the very point of marrying her. They asked him, whether he had not
wherewith to accuse himself for amusing with them, when he was on the point of
seeing so beautiful a Person. She blushed at this, after a manner which helped
to persuade him, that he was not deceived in the thoughts that she was
Madmoiselle of Roye.

The place where he met with her, and her extraordinay Beauty, had already
given him great suspicions of it; but then he doubted of it no longer, and
guest by what was told him, that she had not yet seen the Count of Amboise, and
that he was expected. The Adventure pleased him in his turn, that Error caused
him to be favorably looked upon by a beautiful Person, he took upon him not to
answer positively, that he might not undeceive them, and to take off all blame
from him, when they should come to know him. There cannot be had a greater Idea
of Madmoiselle of Roye's Beauty, than I have, said he; Yet it is hard for me to
believe that she is above that which I see here, added he, looking on her in a
manner which did persuade her that he was taken. She took a most sensible
delight in all that passed there, and was highly pleased with the sudden effect
of her Charms, in a manner which still conduced to render her favorable unto
him, who gave her to understand that he was sensible of their Power. They had
already been an hour in that Arbor, when a great shower of Rain besieged them.
No body was sorry for it, the Conversation was so pleasing, that it was not
possible for them to compute the time that they stayed there. Monsieur of
Sansac had an incomparable agreement in his Person, and in all that he said,
and his natural Briskness was the more heightened by all that was of surprising
in that rencounter.

Madmoiselle of Roye was ravished to find him so worthy of her, their Eyes met
more than once after a manner which caused her to blush, and which afterward
made her to avoid those of Monsieur of Sansac. Of truth, though she believed
him to be the Count of Amboise, and that she was to marry him, she was sensible
of I know not what that was independent of her Duty, which she was loath to
unravel. She had all the leisure to abandon her self to an Error, which was to
prove so fatal to her in the pursuit: for the storm did not cease, and they
could not stir out of the Arbor. At last Monsieur of Amboise came, and
perceiving Ladies in the Arbor, he went toward it, taking them to be Madam
and Madmoiselle of Roye.

He found not there that Countess which he had seen at Court; but he presently
knew her Daughter by the Picture that had been made him of her, and on the same
grounds which had before given the Marquess of Sansac to understand that it was
she; so that he addressed his Compliments to her. Yet considering that he might
be mistaken, and the presence of so many Persons retaining him, he advanced
nothing which could precisely mark that he was the Person which they expected.

He deserved no less than the Marquess of Sansac to entertain that Company, an
agreeable shape above the common, a noble Air, I know not what of fine and
passionate, did render him most capable of pleasing. The Ladies did him all the
Justice which he deserved; but Madmoiselle of Roye was troubled to be
constrained to doubt which of the two was her Lover: She looked on both of
them, as if to ask which it was that she was obliged to love, but it was with a
certain difference, which seemed to mark that she would gladly have had him to
be Monsieur of Sansac.

The Eldest of the Ladies, who perceived the consusion in which that young
Person was, thought fit to cause it to cease. Madam of Roye's Women having been
forced to retire into the Arbor also, because of the Rain, she sent one of
them to ask the Name of Monsieur of Amboise, from his people, and having learnt
it, she had Madmoiselle of Roye informed of it.

That young Lady could not forbear looking on him with more coldness than she
naturally ought to have had. The briskness of the Conversation had enlivened
her Face, and increased her Beauty; Monsieur of Amboise did consider her with
the interest of a man for whom she was designed; and in spite of that Idea,
which he had conceived of her, he still found occasion of being surprised; but
the manner with which she received him, did not afford him a relish of those
Charms which the birth of a Passion usually excites in the Heart, and Love did
even deny him that very first satisfaction.

She beheld Monsieur of Sansac without reflecting on it with less Caution than
before, as if she had bid him Adieu with that Look, and that she were become
more bold when she was to divest her self of all Hopes, than she had been a
moment before, when she thought that she might have produced the same in him.

Monsieur of Amboise had his Eyes too much fixed upon Madmoiselle of Roye, not
to follow hers; it may also be, that the natural opposition of Sansac and he;
did promote his fears; in fine, he mistrusted part of the truth.

The storm still continued, and Madam of Roye, who had made an end of those
businesses, which had detained her, came to fetch them in her Coach. She did
not expect to find the Marquess of Sansac there: However she was not backwards
in showing him much respect. That Countess set forth to Monsieur of Amboise all
the Esteem which she had for his Merit, and the joy she was in to see him; but
those Civilities diverted him not from that disagreeable Idea which he had
taken against his Will.

Madam of Roye did lead them into her Apartment, and the diverse agitations
which disjoynted that Company, created in it some kind of uneasieness. The
Count of Amboise, who naturally loved not Sansac, did think that Marquess's
Visit too long. It wanted not much of Monsieur of Sanac's thinking the same of
the Count of Amboise, though he was not ignorant of the design that brought
him, but at last he was forced to quit the place to him.

The Ladies departed also, and the Count of Amboise remained the last. He
informed Madmoiselle of Roye how much the advantage of being designed for her
did charm him; but he told her at the same time, that if he was not so happy as
to touch her Heart, he found himself in a condition much to be pitied.
Madmoiselle of Roye made answer, that she had no Heart to give, but only a Duty
to follow. The Air with which she pronounced those words, was not proper to
give Hopes to a Lover. She took little care of keeping up the Conversation, but
she showed enough of Wit to finish that which her Beauty had began, and to
create difficulties enough to the possession of her Heart, to render the
Count's Passion most ardent from that very day.

When Madmoiselle of Roye was alone, she remained in a profound study, and
though she did not yet unravel her Sentiments as to Monsieur of Amboise and
Monsieur of Sansac, she however fancied this last to be the most amiable.

For his part, he had been struck with Madmoiselle of Roye's Beauty. He had
observed, that his Conversation did not displease her, and that she had
received the Count of Amboise with some coldness, insomuch that he carried none
but agreeable and pleasing Ideas back with him.

He spoke of her at Court with such great Elogies, that the Queen grew
impatient to see her, and he having learned from Madam of Roye, that they
should not return so soon from the Country, he informed the Queen thereof, who
seemed to be sorry.

Sansac, who wanted but some pretense to return to Madam of Roye, obliged
himself in going to inform her of the Queen's thoughts: He did see Madmoiselle
of Roye a second time, he fancied that he discerned some satisfaction in her
Eyes; he said a thousand things to her, which those dispositions, in which she
was toward him, did make her easily to apprehend, and that at the same time
could not be displeasing to Madam of Roye. The Count of Amboise, who had right
to visit them often, came in the time that Monsieur of Sansac was retiring. A
second Visit of that Marquess did trouble him. His disturbance which discovered
it self to Madmoiselle of Roye, caused her to fancy him whimsical, which made
an end of losing him in her Esteem.

She felt in her self an indifferency for him, before she knew that Sansac was
the Cause of it. Those Cares which the Count did render her, grew uneasy, and
presently gave her an aversion toward him, which she opposed in vain. Any man
for whom one is obliged to have some regard, does always make himself hated,
when he causes not himself to be beloved.

The Count of Amboise did easily perceive that Madmoiselle of Roye loved him
not, he mistrusted the Cause of it, and according to the Custom of unfortunate
Lovers, he sought to inform himself more particularly of that knowledge, of
which he had not sufficiency enough yet to make him entirely miserable.

One day that the King was walking, followed by the whole Court; this Count
perceiving that Sansac was at some distance from the Crowd, drew near him to
speak of Madmoiselle of Roye. But though they both had equal desires, neither
of them could resolve to begin. At last, Amboise followed his design, he
praised her highly, and Sansac said but little, as much it might be, not to be
of his Rival's opinion, as for fear of discovering his Love. Mean time the
Count of Amboise was not in a condition of receiving any satisfaction, he had
been uneasy, if the Marquess of Sansac had too much admired Madmoiselle of
Roye, and he was so likewise, because he would not praise her sufficiently.

Few hours after his Jealousy was entirely confirmed. That night, at the
King's Apartment, the Conversation being fallen on the Beauty of some Ladies of
the Court, the Marquess of Sansac, who was no longer restrained by the presence
of Monsieur of Amboise, could not forbear praising highly Madmoiselle of Roye's
Beauty, he was speaking of it with great Transport when the Count came in. The
King perceiving him at distance, Here Is Sansac, said he to him, raising his
voice, who says more wonderful things of Madmoiselle of Roye's Beauty, than you
ever told us. These two Rivals blushed at those words: that redness was
observed; they were played upon for it the rest of that night, and they had
occasion of all their Wit to oppose the Railleries, they both knew more
particularly in that occasion, what either of them had of Parts, and they
esteemed each other, but to hate the more.

The Count of Sansac, Father to the Marquess, had some thoughts to marry his
Son to Madmoiselle of Anebault, whose Beauty might have rendered happy a man
that had not loved Madmoiselle of Roye; he durst not oppose himself openly to
his Father's Will, but he retarded that Marriage, and he had a great repugnancy
against it. Madam of Roye at that time did bring her Daughter to Court, where
she received all the Applause that she merited.

She gained both Lovers and Enemies. The Countess of Tournon was of the number
of those to whom her Beauty caused some discontent, and who did the best
dissemble it. The Count of Sancerre did find her perfectly lovely, but durst
not own that he loved her, because he did not suspect that Monsieur of Amboise
could be hated. Soon after, he took a Journey, which helped him to conceal his
Passion, but not to cure it.

Madmoiselle of Roye stayed not long without knowing that the Marquess of
Sansac was to be married to Madmoiselle of Anebault; she was surprised at this
News, and much more to find her self so concerned at it against her Will. She
applied her self coward that Lady about it, and to find defects in him.

Monsieur of Amboise's Marriage was on the point of being concluded, when that
there happened some difficulties in it, which had not been foreseen. The King
had some knowledge of an Insurrection which the Prince of. Conde was promoting
in the Kingdom, and because the Count was particularly linkt to him, it was
believed that he had a hand in it, though there was no proof against him, it
was sufficient that there were some distrusts to have a strict Watch kept on
his Actions. There was no Policy to let him marry a Kinswoman of the Prince of
Conde, before his Conduct were cleared.

Diverse things passed during that Retardment, Madam of Roye not knowing any
thing of Sansac's Sentiments toward her Daughter, did receive him, as she did
other Persons of the Court. Her Daughter did inform her self with too much care
about the Marriage of Madmoiselle of Anebault, to be ignorant of the resistance
that he made against it, and it was not difficult for her to find that she had
more than ordinary concerns in it. That Interest which she had for all the
Actions of that Marquess, did every moment confirm her in an opinion, that she
had made him sensible. She did follow that tendency with some scruple, but
still she followed it.

Sansac did every day observe some little effects of Madmoiselle of Roye's
passion, which charmed him; mean time, in those Terms that she was with
Monsieur of Amboise, he durst not speak openly to her, for fear of losing those
marks of her tenderness, if he should force her to unravel them; but he
entrusted Madmoiselle of Sansac his Sister, with the Sentiments, which he had
for Madmoiselle of Roye, and he entreated her to contract, if she could, a
strict Friendship with her, and to endeavor to destroy Monsieur of Amboise in
her opinion, that the Count's Marriage, which was already retarded through
Policy, might be so likewise by that indifferency which she might have for him.

Madmoiselle of Sansac was at first troubled in being obliged to render some
ill Offices to a Person for whom she had a singular Esteem; but that very
Esteem did insensibly lead her to act against his Marriage: She being very
ingenious, and Sister to Sansac, it was not difficult for her to enter into a
very close Commerce of Friendship with Madmoiselle of Roye, who did not conceal
from her the sorrow she was to see her self designed for an Husband, for whom
she had so little inclination. She would do Justice to his good Parts and
Qualities, but it was with a kind of reservedness. His Merit was a kind of
secret Reproach to her of that indifferency she had for him; She hated him
because he loved her, and because he deserved to be beloved.

Madmoiselle of Sansac, who was Maid of Honor to the Queen, and who was the
best treated by her, offered her all her Services toward that Princess, to
bring her to speak to Madam of Roye, that that Marriage might be broke off.
Madmoiselle of Roye, who feared displeasing of her Mother, did at first oppose
it with some earnestness; yet she gave her opportunity to see, that if the
thing could have been done without concerning her self in it, she had been
pleased at it.

There needed no more to oblige Madmoiselle of Sansac to serve her. She was to
go to the Spaw-Waters for her Health, and she would, before she took her
Journey, mention it to the Queen, not to lose any time in obliging her Friend.
Though Madmoiselle of Roye was far from owning to her the inclination that she
had for her Brother, it was much that she forbore speaking of him at all.

The Count of Amboise's hatred to Sansac, did increase extraordinarily.
Madmoiselle of Roye, unknown to her self, did afford to this last some marks of
a most particular Esteem, which could not escape a Lover's penetration; and he
would sometimes wave on the deliberation of what Party he should take. It was
unpleasing to him to marry a Person who was prepossest by an inclination for
another Person; Reason did oppose it self to that design, but still he was in
Love. How was it possible to lose the hopes of seeing her his own? After diverse
irresolutions, he perceived that he was not capable of fixing on any thing.

The Marquess of Sansac did show so much indifferency for Madmoiselle of
Annebault, that she her self endeavored to avoid the marrying of him, so that
that Marriage was broke off. Madmoiselle of Roye conceived so great a Joy at
it, that she was not able to conceal it from Madmoiselle of Sansac, unto whom
her motions were not indifferent. She did frequently see the Count of Amboise
at that Friend's house. She had found him as lovely as unfortunate, and
insensibly pity had led her into other Sentiments She still engaged her self
more strongly in her Brothers Interests, and she did even think that in some
measure she did serve Monsieur of Amboise in preventing him from marrying a
Person that hated him.

The Count of Sansac her Father, was moved by her to desire that his Son might
marry Madmoiselle of Roye, which was not thought a difficult matter in the
present Juncture. The Family of Amboise had never managed the Sansancs in any
occasion. The Sansacs, whom Favor emboldned, had frequently sought after some
means to displease them, so that nothing did detain them, and Madmoiselle of
Roye was so considerable a Party, that they undertook to have some body speak
about it to Madam of Roye; at first they required but a Preference, in case
that Monsieur of Amboise's Marriage was not concluded. Madmoiselle of Sansac
entreated the Queen to enter into this business. That Princess did promise she
would, and Madmoiselle of Sansac went to the Spaw. After that Promise had been
obtained, the Queen was not long before she kept her Word; she made some
Propositions to Madam of Roye. She gave her to conceive, that Monsieur of
Amboise's adherence to the Prince of Conde, did render him still suspected, and
that there were more advantageous Parties to be had through the King's Favor
and Friendship; but Madam of Roye was one of those exact Women that keep their
words. The Count's good Qualities had given her a Friendship for him, which was
increased by his misfortune. She entreated the Queen to permit her to keep her
Word with Monsieur of Amboise, and that she might hope that the King would find
him guiltless, and that he would restore him to her Favor again.

The Queen, who endeavored to oblige Madmoiselle of Sansac, did press Madam of
Roye more home still, and omitted nothing of that which could favor the
Sansacs; at last she desired her Promise for the Marquess, in case she should
break off with the Count of Amboise. Madam of Roye was uneasy at the
Propositions (...) they would have her consent to, at the time that she was
engaged with a man whom they loved not, which appeared, in that they so soon
seized on an occasion to insult on his disgrace. She told the Queen that she
was strangely troubled, that she could not promise her any thing on that
account, because that her Daughter had some Antipathy against the Marquess of
Sansac; not that she did really believe any such thing, but to draw her self
out of that troublesome business.

That ill success did put Sansac into a strange Chagrin and confusion; Though
Madmoiselle of Roye's Looks had diverse times assured him that he was not hated,
he durst no longer trust to them. In fine, he was certain of Madam of Roy's
hatred, though he might still remain in doubt of that of her Daughter, and he
began to lose the hope of ever being happy.

Madam of Roye would not inform that young Person of what had passed, not to
divert her from those Sentiments which she ought to have for the Count of
Amboise. She also thought fit that he should be ignorant of it, for fear that
at this time that he was not looked upon favorably at Court, he should come to
some unfortunate extremities with a man whom the King loved. The next day she
brought back her Daughter into the Country, to an House at a further distance
than the former, in expectation of some Change in the Count's Affairs, unto
whom she showed that the Air of Disgrace in which he was, should bring no
alteration unto those Sentiments that she had for him.

But what did those Sentiments avail to the Count of Amboise? He was almost
certain, that his Mistresses were contrary to him. He resolved to satisfy
himself in that Point, and to bring it about, so that Madmoiselle of Roye
should find her self engaged by his entreaties, or by her own interest, to
confess a thing, of which the very suspicion appeared so fatal to him, that the
very Certainty it self could not be more. If Madmoiselle of Roye was prepossest
with another inclination, it were better for him to be once assured of it, than
to remain continually in fear. Mean time he had some occasions to inform
himself thereof, but he had not the power of making use of it; and when he was
on the point of being satisfied, he would avoid it.

Madmoiselle of Roye did so suddenly return into the Country, that Sansac could
not get an opportunity of speaking to her. The difficulties which he found
(...) knowing her mind did not (...) him; he was netled with those words that
Madam of Roye had said to the Queen, and Love joined to Spite, did put him on
finding out all manner of means to clear the business. Madmoiselle of Sansac
was too far distant to serve him toward Madmoiselle of Roye. He cast his Eyes
on Madam of Tournon; she was the most subtle and the most insinuating of all
Women. She had found out the way of gaining Madmoiselle of Roy's Esteem and
Friendship, and they had always been in a strait conjunction. Monsieur of
Sansac thought that he might go to Madam of Roye with her, and that he should
find some means of speaking to Madmoiselle of Roye. He gave Madam of Tournon
diverse Visits, which she received with great satisfaction. Though she was not
in the very prime of her youth, she was still lovely enough to flatter her self
of being beloved; and the Count of Tournon, whose Widow she was, had left her
such considerable means, that the thoughts of being able to make that Marquess
a vast Fortune, did assist her in seducing of her self in his behalf.

She might have guest, that those Civilities which he rendered her* had not the
right stamp of Love upon them; but Persons are apt to mistake in such Niceties.
That application which usually is brought in such examination, is almost a
certain way of mistake. That made Madam of Tournon to give unto all Sansac's
actions, that sense which best agreed with those Sentiments that she
entertained for him.

But she did not enjoy her Error long; he left her the sorrowful leisure of
making distinct Reflections; she perceived the difference of his proceedings
with hers. Finally, he having but small application unto the Countess's
actions, and fancying that they proceeded but from Friendship, because he felt
no more within himself for her; after some days were passed, he proposed to go
along with her to Madam of Roye. That Proposition caused Madam of Tournon to
open her Eyes, and she rested satisfied that he was in Love with Madmoiselle of
Roye, after he had once mentioned that beautiful Person's Name. The shame of
having deceived her self, the sorrow to love in vain, and the spite to see
Madmoiselle of Roye, whom she hated, to triumph over her, could not rest
without some effects in Madam of Tournon's Heart; mean time her natural
dissimultation did prevent her from flying out. She promised him to make up
that match which he proposed; but she had already perceived, that Madam of Roye
had some unkindness for the Sansacs. She writ to her, that the Marquess had
entreated her to bring him to her. Madam of Roye, who after the Propositions
that had been made, and what she had answered the Queen, finding that she
should be perplexed with that Visit, presently answered Madam of Tournon, and
did engage her to divert Sansac from that Design. Madam of Tournon, who in
writing to Madam of Roye, had had no other design but of getting such a kind of
Answer, showed the Letter to Sansac, as to a Friend from whom she had no Secret
to conceal.

Sansac, who this ill Success had disgusted, consulted no longer the Countess
on a thing of which it was nor seasonable to discover the motives, he did go to
Madam of Roye, but he saw not her Daughter, though he enquired after her. He
was told, that she was ill; he returned there a second time, and he was again
refused seeing of her, on pretenses which appeared very unlikely to him. He
learnt that Monsieur of Amboise was with her, insomuch that ashamed of the
small success of his Visits, and despairing for having a Rival more happy than
himself, he took the resolution of leaving Paris, and went to one of his Houses
at a great distance from thence.

Madmoiselle of Roye, who had been all along concerned at the precipitation
with which she had been hurried into the Country, and who saw with sorrow that
she was prevented from receiving Visits from Sansac, did fancy that
peradventure Madam of Roye had discovered her Sentiments toward him, which
produced in her a mixture of shame and trouble.

Monsieur of Amboise did let her observe how much he was afflicted to see her
in that melancholy, yet without complaining, and without giving her the least
notice that he could in part read her mind; so respectful a Conduct did touch
Madmoiselle of Roye, and Pity succeeded to her Hatred, but Love succeeded* not
to that Pity.

He was too unconcerned in the Prince of Conde's Conspiracy to remain long
accused of it, and by that time he was almost quite cleared* Madmoiselle of
Roye was sensible that she was on the point of marrying him, he acted after
such a generous manner, which deserved some kindness of her part, and she
thought that her duty* would be a supply to the defects of her Heart.

One day, that the Count of Amboise's sorrow was extraordinary* she told him
more obliging thing than she had ever done before, bu^ they did but redouble
that Lovers affliction: Alas! Madam, said he, force not your self, those
affected outsides render me not less miserable, you affect showing me some
kindness, how happy should I be, if you had enough to endeavor to conceal it!
That Discourse put Madmoiselle of Roye into some disorder, it was sufficiently
grounded to cause her some trouble, she was a long while without answering, and
Monsieur of Amboise being emboldned by her silence, or rather confirming
himself in those Suspicions, had no longer any power to resist their breaking
forth. Madam, said he to her, I perceive but too well that I am indifferent to
you, why would you not let me see it? At least be sincere, if you cannot be
tender. I am reduced to that condition of being obliged to you, if you but
confess to me that you love me not. Those words were followed with tears:
Madmoiselle of Roye was sensibly moved at them. Why this eternal Constraint?
She was not yet his Wife. Such a discovery could be of no other use than to
disingage her, and to set her in a liberty of following her own Sentiments.

Is that the greatest Esteem that ever was? said she; No, Madmoiselle, he
interrupted, all your Esteem cannot afford me any Consolation for your
indifferency: But, added he, being pressed by his Jealousy if any thing could
sweeten it, it would be a confidence without reservedness, it may well be due
to me to recompense me of all that which you detain from me. What is that
confidence which you require further? said Madmoiselle of Roye, I think I
express much. Ah! Madmoiselle, said he, that is not yet enough, let me know
more, though it be a punishment for my Curiosity, all the Favor which I ask
you, is, that you should inform me of my whole misfortune. Have I no Rival?
Confess it to me. Ought you to doubt but that I am indifferent, said
Madmoiselle of Roye, seeing that you that was designed me, have not rendered me
sensible? Alas! Madmoiselle, said he, your Heart might be prepossest --
Prepossest? replied Madmoiselle de Roye, did I know any one before I was
engaged to you? Alas! Madmoiselle, said he, interrupting her, being transported
by Jealousy, had you not seen any body before me? There needs but one moment
to create Love.

At this word, which did so precisely mark what passed in Madmoiselle of Roye's
Heart, such a redness covered her Face, that Monsieur Amboise doubted no longer
of his Disgrace; he leaned on a Seat, not being able to support his Sorrow.
What do you make me to see, Madmoiselle? said he. How much must you be
respected to show you any moderation, at the discovery you have made of having
for another Person those Sentiments that were due to me alone on the account of
that violent passion which I have for you? Madmoiselle of Roye, who was pierced
to the very bottom of her Soul with those words, could not withold her Tears,
and she expressed so deep a Sorrow, that Monsieur of Amboise, notwithstanding
his Despair, was concerned at the condition he had put her in. He looked on her
with all the timidity which the thought of having displeased her did suggest
him, and he seemed by his silence to repair his having said too much. At last,
he asked her Pardon for what he had said, or rather for what he had seen.
Madmoiselle of Roye was in an extraordinary disorder. Her trouble and her
redness had so cruelly betrayed her, that she could not look on Monsieur of
Amboise without the highest confusion imaginable; so that not knowing what to
answer, and being vexed at him, she withdrew into her Closet, desiring him to
leave her at quiet, and to forget her.

What resentments had not Monsieur of Amboise against that Person who deprived
him of his Mistresses's Heart, if he had followed its fury, he had been brought
to cruel extremities against him; but he thought that in such an occasion, a
flying out would draw on him all Madmoiselle of Roye's anger and hatred, and
that he was not to prostitute a Secret, of which she had her self discovered
part to him, and which she had let him penetrate wholly into. He represented to
himself those Tears which he had seen her shed, and that Idea did retain his
Revenge though it increased his Sorrow.

They remained some time with out seeing one another; The Count of Amboise
being certain, that he could not be pleasing to Madmoiselle of Roye, and having
in some sort offended her, durst not appear before her, Madmoiselle o^ Roye did
no less fear receiving o^ his Visits. There is no man more troublesome than a
jealous Lover when he has cause for it, and right to show it.

Madam of Roye perceiving that Monsieur of Amboise came no more to her House,
asked the Reason of it to her Daughter, and distrusting by that young Person's
confusion, that there had been some Debate betwixt them, she told her that she
would have him to be respected, set before her what he should certainly be to
her one day, and even ordered her to have the Count informed by one that was a
Friend to both, that she should be very glad to see him. Madmoiselle of Roye
was forced to obey, but she was the more incensed against him for it.

Monsieur of Amboise was sensible that he ought not to penetrate any further
than the appearance which was favorable to him; though he feared to see
Madmoiselle of Roye, he went however the next day to her House with
earnestness. He found her alone in her Chamber, leaning her head on one of her
hands, and in so profound thoughts, that with much ado she drew her self out of
it at the noise which he made at his entering. His belief that it was the
Marquess of Sansac who possessed her to that degree, did renew the Count of
Amboise's Jealousy. Madmoiselle, said he sighing, how happy are those Persons
whose Concerns can put you into so deep a Consternation, and how much is one to
blame when one is --

Madmoiselle of Roye was vexed to hear him begin that Discourse Madam of Roye's
Command had put her in a peevish humor, so that looking on him with some kind
of spite; I have nothing to answer you, said she, all that (...) should tell
you would be suspicious* but I foresee those evils which your distrusts prepare
for me. Prepare evils for you, Madmoiselle, said he is it to me you speak? Yes,
said she, I must not slatter my self, you have had some beginnings of
Jealousy, which peradventure I have increased by my fault, I can no longer
think but that you hate me.

Alas! Madmoiselle, said he, it is not my hatred that you fear, you fear
nothing *but my Love; and seeing I cannot please you, I find my self no longer
worthy of you, it suffices, I shall no longer constrain you, but will fly from
you, seeing that it is the only mark of Passion in me that can please you, I
shall still love you with a violent Passion, but shall never see you more.

Madmoiselle of Roye did not expect so much from him, but the Sorrow in which
she had seen him, and the disposition in which he appeared to be, of
disingaging himself, gave her the boldness to propose it. She represented to
him with mildness, that it was henceforward impossible for him to be happy in
marrying of her, and that seeing he had once entertained suspicious thoughts of
her, he would never be without some, and that she esteemed him too much, to
make him so unhappy. In fine, little by little she endeavored to bying him to
withdraw his Word which he had given to Madam of Roye, He was in such a Despair
as permitted him not to answer. His Eyes were fixed upon Madmoiselle of Roye,
from whom he expected a more favorable Answer. Do you think well, Madmoiselle,
said he, on what you desire of me? Do you think that I love you, and is the
greatest effort of my Love due to the most cruel Trial of your indifferency?
You may refuse me, said Madmoiselle of Roye with Sorrow: Can I disobey? said
he, rising from his Seat, your Heart consents not to my happiness, and can I
have any without its consent? Yet at least, Madmoiselle, guess at the excess of
my tenderness, by what it makes me to do against my self.

After that he returned to Paris whence he writ to Madam and (...) Madmoiselle
of Roye, to bid them eternally farewell. He entreated Madam of Roye to pardon
him for going without seeing her, and for (...) answering so ill to those
intentions that she once had in his Favor, but that distance that Madmoiselle
of Roye was from him, did put so invincible an obstacle to it, that Marriage
could not make him happy, except it also rendered that Person happy which he
loved; and that he was going to carry his Grief into some remote place, to cure
himself, if it was possible, through absence. In short, some days after, having
fully justified himself from being in the Prince of Conde's Conspiracy, he went
over into England with the King's permission.

Madam of Roye was very discontented, that a Marriage which ^he had so
earnestly desired, should meet with such obstacles. She had (...) perfect an
Esteem for Monsieur of Amboise, that she thought there ^as none but him worthy
of her Alliance. She spoke to her Daughter very sensibly, and told her she
deserved not to be beloved by the Count, and that she should be deservedly
punished for her indifferency to him, in marrying some Person that should be so
to her. She wiped off her Mother's anger with some vexation, but her
Threatenings did not much affright her; She thought that Sansac would take
advantage of that Liberty in which D'Amboise had left him, but she did not know
what had already passed on that account.

Madam of Roye brought her back again to Paris, and the noise being spread
abroad of her breaking off with Monsieur of Amboise, all those that could
pretend to her, did endeavor to obtain her.

The Count of Sancerre, who had had some inclinations toward her from the
first instant that he had seen her, was not then in France The Marquess of
Sansac, ignorant that Monsieur of Amboise had disengaged himself, was still at
his Father's House, but it was not long before he heard of it. Amongst those
who thought on Madmoiselle of Roye, the Viscount of Tavanes was the most
earnest, and he made some Propositions to marry her. So soon as she was at
Paris, Madam of Tournon did assist him with all her power. It was a business of
great import to her to have that Marriage fixed, before Sansac should know that
the Count of Amboise pretended no longer to Madmoiselle of Roye. She
represented to Madam of Roye all the advantages of that Match. The Viscount of
Tavanes had a vast Estate, and was still seeking to increase it, so that he
considered more Madmoiselle of Roye on the account of those means which were
designed her, than on that of her Beauty.

Madam of Roye, who had no concealment from Madam of Tournon, had entrusted her
with all the Count of Amboise's Conduct toward her Daughter, and had entreated
her to discover, whether that young Person had not some secret inclinations.
Though her distrusts had at first lighted on the Marquess of Sansac, the
refusal which she had made of him, did put her so out of condition of patching
it up handsomely again, that it made her wholly decline that Marriage.

Madam of Tournon did so certainly believe, that if Sansac loved Madmoiselle of
Roye, he was also beloved by her, that she went not about to confirm her self
in it. Mean time she told Madam of Roye, that upon the Examination of her
Daughter, she had found in her an indifferency for all men, and more
particularly for Sansac; that it was likely, that too much Love in the Count of
Amboise had made him to decline the marrying a Person who was so incapable of
passion, as not to know or discern the Sentiments that were had for her. In
fine, she advised her to accept of the Viscount of Tavanes for her Son-in-law.
The business was treated with much Secrecy, and it had been quickly dispatched,
if the King's Sickness had not suspended all things.

He was seized, while he was Hunting, with such a violent pain in his Head,
that from the very beginning the consequences of it were dreaded. That danger
he was in recalled back to Paris all those that were concerned for his life.
The Marquess of Sansac returned in diligence; The Count of Amboise, though he
was scarce arrived in England, returned into France. That Sickness proved as
fatal as it had been sudden. The King died within the space of eight days, and
his Death gave a new face to all things. Queen Mury of Scotland lost all that
Authority which she had acquired. Catherine of Medicis was declared Regent
during the Minority of Charles the Ninth, and was absolute. The Prince of
Conde, who had been arrested for that Conspiracy of which he was thought to be
the Chief, was set at Liberty; he still had a great Esteem for Amboise, and
though he could not prevail with him to enter into his Interests, he had not
loved him the less.

The Marquess of Sansac did speak with Madmoiselle of Roye the next day that he
came to Paris; she was at Madam of Tournon's, where there was great store of
Company, and she was somewhat at a distance from the rest, so that he found a
means to place himself near her, without being opposed in it by Madam of
Tournon.

He asked Pardon of Madmoiselle of Roye, for those Propositions which he had
caused to be made to her Mother, before he had consulted her; he accused
thereof the violence of his Passion, and he told her, That what he had heard of
her hatred toward him, and Madam of Roye's refusal had sufficiently punished
him for it. Madmoiselle of Roye was surprised at that Discourse. You learn me
such new things, said she, that I am troubled how to answer, and I am as
ignorant of the hatred that you say I have for you, as of all the rest.

Madam of Tournon, who perceived him very busy in Discourse with Madmoiselle
of Roye, feigning not to see it, called to her to draw near, telling her, that
she was at too much distance from the rest of the Company.

When Madmoiselle of Roye made reflections on what he had told her, she believed
that those Propositions had been made that very day, and that some Reasons of
Interest or of Hatred had determined her Mother on a refusal; so she concluded,
that she should not marry Sansac at the same instant that she was certain of
being tenderly beloved by him.

Mean time this Marquess was gathering fresh hopes, he perceived that he was
not hated. He further comprehended, that perhaps Madam of Roye, in refusing him
so cruelly, had sought no further than to keep her Word with Monsieur of
Amboise, and that things being now changed as to that Concern, a second Attempt
might succeed. He would have engaged his Father the very next morning, to
mention it to Madam of Roye, but he found him so pierced with sorrow for the
Death of the King, whose Governor he had been, that he would not so much as
hear him.

This Marquess was too amorous not to fear being prevented by his Rivals. He
knew Madam of Tournon's power over Madam of Roye; he declared to her his Love,
and did conjure her to speak in his behalf, till his Father could enter on that
business. Madam of Tournon was offended at this confidence, but she took upon
her to dissemble, and she did not much fear but that it would succeed. She
assured him, that it should not be her fault if he was not happy. He believed
her, and in that belief he went to see Madam of Roye that very day, but many
things had passed that he knew not of.

So soon as Monsieur of Amboise was returned from England, he had waited on
that Countess, who had received him with great affection; She had but newly
informed her Daughter that she designed her for the Viscount of Tavanes, and
that News had given her so great a trouble, that she had had no more time but
to answer, that she should always obey her, and had gone out of her Mother's
Chamber to give a full vent to her Tears.

When she perceived that she had avoided to marry the Count of Amboise, but to
be delivered up to the Viscount of Tavanes, she was inconsolable. His Person
had always displeased her, and his design rendered him odious; She believed that
that perfect Esteem which she had for the Count of Amboise, might supply, the
place of Love, and that it had been easier for her to become his, since she had
no longer hopes of marrying Sansac, than to be the Viscount of Tavanes's. In
fine, the passed danger did no longer appear an evil to her, and she gave that
name but to the present.

Madam of Roye, desirous to let Amboise know he had not lost her confiance in
him, made no Secret to him of Monsieur of Tavanes's Marriage with her Daughter,
and she spoke to him of it, as a thing that would be very soon concluded. What
did not that News produce in Monsieur of Amboise's mind? Madmoiselle of Roye
was going to marry a man whom he knew that she did not love. The thoughts of
losing her for ever, and to see her in the possession of an Husband, who had so
little deserved her, did excite at once his despair and his indignation.

He begged the permission of Madam of Roye of seeing her Daughter, and he
immediately went to find her in her Apartment. She was in such a sorrowful
condition, that he stood not in need of his discourse of Love to be sensibly
moved with it. Her Face was covered with Tears, which did not diminish her
Beauty. You are Witness of my Sorrow, said she, (finding that she could not
hide her Tears) and you will soon learn what has caused it. I know, it may be,
but too much already, replied he, and I dare say, Madmoiselle, that I am more
sensible of those evils that you feel, than of all those that you have made me.
How cruel is your goodness to me, said Madmoiselle of Roye, whose Sorrow forced
to speak! Conceal it from me in compassion, that I may less know the value of
what I have lost. What do you tell me, Madmoiselle? said he, I have not
acquired so much indifferency, as to hear quietly those words from your mouth.
I seek not to flatter you, said she, but it is certain that I shall repent my
self all my life time of the proceeding that I have had with you, and that I
shall find my self most unfortunate in marrying the Viscount of Tavanes. Ah!
Madmoiselle, said he, I cannot complain of my disgrace, since it draws from you
such obliging words in my behalf; is it possible for you to prefer me to any
one? I had never known it, had you not forced me to renounce my pretenses to
you; but what obstacles soever I have put to my happiness, it were not
impossible for me to overcome them, if you consented to it. You would have my
consent much more easily, if that signified any thing, said Madmoiselle of
Roye, who saw nothing yet but the torment of marrying Tavanes. Monsieur of
Amboise was so transported with the Joy which those words gave him, that he had
no prospect of what could trouble her. The Suspicions which he had had of
Sansac, were blotted out of his mind. He found that he had taken them on light
Suspicion. Madam of Roye had spoken to him of Tavanes's Marriage as a thing
very far advanced, but not wholly concluded. He went to the Prince of Conde, he
conjured him to speak to Madam of Roye, for he had been in too great a
confusion in speaking to her himself, because of the irregularity which he had
shown in his proceeding. That Prince who had so far condescended as to enter
into the Particulars of his Amors, so soon as it had began, seized on that
opportunity of doing him a good office. He went to see Madam of Roye, and he
easily engaged her to re-enter into her former Friendship with the Count of
Amboise, whom she had always valued more than all the rest: She told her
Daughter, that if it was true that she had no inclinations toward the Viscount
of Tavaues, she would proceed no further with him, but take up again her first
Engagements with Monsieur of Amboise.

Madmoiselle of Roye, who had at first only thought of not marrying Tavanes,
perceived that she had but changed her misfortune; this of truth, was the least
of the two, but it was sufficient to bring her to despair. In fine, 'twas her
own doing, there was no ways left for her to avoid it, wherefore she told her
Mother, that she would obey her without any repugnancy.

Madam of Roye did raise some difficulties about the Marriage of the Count of
Tavanes, and having not yet engaged her Word to him, she broke off the Match,
as if she had not designed any such thing.

Madam of Tournon, who was too deeply engaged in her Friendship, to be ignorant
of what passed, did offer Sansac's Propositions to her; after she had found
that there was no hopes left for him, which made him be refused a second time.
That Countess informed him of it, with all the malice that she was capable of.
She made him a confidence of Tavanes's Designs, and of their Progress, telling
him besides, that Madmoiselle of Roye could not bear the thoughts of being any
body's else but Amboise's; that a small thing having made them to differ, their
Accommodation had been easy; and that she had her self engaged her Lover to
get some body to speak to her Mother about it. The thing was true in
appearance, she told it in the same manner to some Persons, that it might be
reported again to Sansac. He entered into a violent Fury against Madmoiselle of
Roye; he accused her of having deceived him by her false Kindness. He accused
himself of having designed to deceive himself. He examined how feeble those
things were which had flattered him. In fine, he abandoned himself to despair,
as easily as he had given himself up to hope, and at last ceased from seeing
Madmoiselle of Roye.

She had taken up a resolution, which she had much to do to keep, her Sorrow
was excessive, and Amboise was not so happy as not to discern it. All those
Suspicions which he had entertained of Sansac, returned into his mind, yet the
preference which she had given him to the Viscount of Tavanes, and the
flattering things which she had told him on that Subject, did buoy him up
against his Suspicions; and though those reflections might disturb that good
Fortune which he waited for, it did not hinder him from expecting of it.

All things did dispose themselves in order to his Marriage. Madmoiselle of
Roye had a great regard for him; but when she was alone, she would compensate
Sansac with a Deluge of Tears. She looked upon her self as the Cause of his
Sorrows. She had never seen her self so ready to enter into an Engagement,
against which her whole Heart did revolt. She was not able to support those
various agitations, and she fell sick.

What a trouble was this to Monsieur of Amboise! he could not doubt but that
her sickness was the effect of that vexation which she had of marrying him. He
thought himself obliged to visit her every day, and he found her full of
Respect for him. Notwithstanding the Grief which she caused him, he esteemed
her the more, and he loved her not less, on the contrary, Admiration and
Compassion joining with his other Sentiments, did render his Passion the
stronger, but at the same time more capable of Reason. How could he find in his
heart to force a Person, who constrained her self for his sake? He found that
he must disingage himself a second time, but then in restoring Madmoiselle of
Roye to her self, he should put her into the hands of his Rival. That thought
would make him tremble, and he resolved on nothing.

Mean time Madmoiselle of Roy's sickness increased daily. He then was sensible,
that he loved her to that degree, as not to dispute her any longer to his Rival
at so dear a rate as her own life. He found that she could not be but unhappy
with any other. He thought he might obtain so much over himself. He even
flattered himself with the thoughts, that peradventure an extraordinary Action
would produce an extraordinary Effect, and that if it did not bring back
Madmoiselle of Roye to him, by doing that for her which another were not
capable to do, he should at least render all other men unworthy of being
beloved by her. Finally, out of the Shipwreck of all his Hopes, he did frame to
himself a new kind of Hope. At least he thought that he should sower his
Rival's happiness, in resigning his Mistress to him. But after all, these were
but Ideas. His heart could not relish those Reasons, and it was easier for him
to perform the business, than to resolve it.

The next day he went to see Madmoiselle of Roye. He found her weeping, though
she endeavored to conceal her Tears, and to show a serene and clear
Countenance. It is difficult to represent the condition he found himself in.
The strugglings, the constraint, which was made in his behalf, did lead him
unto that which he was to do on himself. Love, Compassion, Despair did produce
a thousand Combats in his Soul. He remained a long while without speaking; but
at last, beholding Madmoiselle of Roye with Eyes bathed in Tears; Madmoiselle,
said he, you have hitherto had more strength than I, I tremble at my Project,
but yet I may execute it. You set before me an Example of dying, if it must be
so, through constraint. Well, the business is done, I will tear me from my
self, conceal not from me your Sentiments for Sansac. I will undertake any
thing to make him enjoy an Happiness, of which you judge him more deserving
than me; for can I be more unhappy than I am already? At least I shall please
you in giving you to my Rival. He observed, during this Discourse, an
impression of Joy on the Face of Madmoiselle of Roye, which he had never before
seen. He was in a Despair at what he was going to do, and yet did not repent
it. There are certain moments in which one seems to act by a superior Power;
what he was doing did more partake of the Hero than of the Lover, and at the
same time did render him worthy both of Envy and Compassion. I am going,
Madmoiselle, said he, about a Design which will not be finished, if retarded,
and all the Favor that I require of you, is, not to forget, wherever you see
me, that I am the most miserable of all men for Love of You. Madmoiselle of
Roye was not able to resist the diversity of emotion that she was in. Surprise,
Fear, and Shame did agitate her Heart, insomuch that her Fever redoubled in an
instant, so considerably, that it was thought her Life was going to be in very
great danger. There needed not so much to fix Monsieur of Amboise in his
resolution. He run to Madam of Roye's Apartment, he informed her of the danger
in which her Daughter was, and of the Passion which had seized her Heart. He
conjured her to have no further regard for him, and to think of nothing but of
Madmoiselle of Roye. That Mother did really love her Daughter. That young
Person's sickness did put her in a wonderful agitation, and any thing that
could contribute to her Cure, did seem pleasing to her. She expressed to
Monsieur of Amboise how sensible she was of his Generosity, and gave him
Praises, of which he was very insensible. He found that he succeeded too easily
in that which he had undertaken. He left Madam of Roye, and went home, where he
shut himself up, and abandoned himself unto all that Despair can represent us
of horrid. When he found that he had no more to do, he thought on what he had
done. He leisurely looked on the Marriage of Madmoiselle of Roye with the
Marquess of Sansac, against which there were no more obstacles to remove. He
found that he himself had delivered her unto him, whom of all other men he
should most fear should possess her, and he was a thousand times on the point
of punishing him for what he had already done for him, to prevent him by his
death, from obtaining a good which he had newly abandoned to him. After that,
he represented to himself that condition in which he had seen Madmoiselle of
Roye. That Idea would retain him, but then he would consider to what an excess
of misery his Compassion had brought him. He appeared as newly come out of a
Dream, and he had much ado to believe the Reality of that which he had the
power to perform. He fansied that Madmoiselle of Roye would forget what he had
done for her, and how much it had cost him, through the Joy that she should
receive of being possessed by a man whom she tenderly loved. That reflection
rendered all things unsufferable to him; he fancied that he could hate
Madmoiselle of Roye as much as he did Sansac, and he believed that he would
never see the one nor the other.

Madam of Roye did employ one of her Friends, who was Friend also to the
Marquess of Sansac, to let him know that Monsieur of Amboise was wholly
disengaged from Madmoiselle of Roye, and that if he made any steps toward
obtaining of her, he should no longer meet with any obstacles. That Marquess
was too deeply in Love, to make any reflections on those Refusals which he had
twice already received. Those Advances which Madam of Roye now made him, were
sufficient reparations, but he was desirous to know her Daughter's Sentiments.
He went to that Countess's; where he did see Madmoiselle of Roye, unto whom Joy
restored that Health, which Sorrow and Grief had taken from her. It was not
hard for him to perceive that he was beloved; he partly apprehended it by those
things which she let escape, and more yet by those which she avoided to tell him.

The Marquess of Sansac informed his Father of the favorable Change to his
advantage, which had been made in Madmoiselle of Roye's mind, but he found that
he was no longer in the same dispositions for her Alliance. That refusal which
she had made of her Son, had so irritated him, as never to be reconciled; but
other Reasons besides did join themselves to that. The Count of Sansac was
hated by Catherine de Medicis, because he had been Governor to Francis the
Second, who she had never loved. She complained that that Governor had brought
him up in a great independency in regard of her, and she had some disgust even
against his Son also, on that account. She had had occasion to observe when he
dyed, how much her Sentiments had been respected by all the Court, except the
Sansacs. The Body of the late King was carried to St. Denis without any Show.
Messieurs of Guise, the Uncles to the Queen his Wife, waited not on the Corpse,
and that the Count of Sansac alone, with his Son, did accompany him. The Queen
Regent was not long without showing her resentments toward the Count of Sansac
on diverse occasions. He was no longer seconded by any Person, he found that he
had occasion of being supported.

Madmoiselle of Roye, and even Madam of Roye also, who troubled not her self,
but with what concerned her Daughter, having always followed the Court of Mary
of Scotland, more than that of Catherine de Medicis, were not proper Persons to
restore him again into Favor. He had other Vows, and he told his Son, that
after the disobliging refusal which Madam of Roye had made of receiving him for
her Son-in-law, he ought to be ashamed of desiring still to become so, and
declared, that he would never give his Consent to that Marriage. That Lover did
cast himself at his Father's feet; he told him, that the happiness of his whole
life depended on marrying of Madmoiselle of Roye, but he could not make him
alter his Design.

The Marquess of Sansac rebelled against his Father at that Severity, his
Mother had left him great means, and though those of his Father were
considerable, he sacrificed them all without reluctance to his Love. He drew
two of his Uncles to his Party, who made all the steps which were to be made
toward Madam of Roye, and whose Propositions were received, but on condition
that the Marquess of Sansac should reconcile himself to his Father again,
before the Marriage should be finished, and that their Treaty should remain
secret till then.

Mean time that Marquess had the liberty to visit frequently Madmoiselle of
Roye, whose health did daily strengthen, and whose Beauty did still increase,
since her heart had been at ease. She sensibly did feel what she owed to the
Count of Amboise. She would gladly have shown him, how much she was concerned
at it, and have given him some satisfaction in her acknowledgment for those
Sentiments which she could not have for him; but she could not see him to do
it, because he took care to avoid her. Mean time he learnt that her Marriage
with Sansac was not suddenly to be accomplished; but though those thoughts
might in some measure alleviate his grief, hey took it not away.

Madmoiselle of Sansac returned to Paris, she learnt with no small pleasure
Amboise's Action, and she continually did speak of it to Madmoiselle of Roye.
One day that they were walking together in the Gardens of the Louvre, they met
with him all alone, raving so profoundly, that he was near Madmoiselle of Roye,
without perceiving it. He would have continued his Walk, but that she stopped
him. You will let me, said she, make advantage of these opportunities which
mere Chance affords me, of letting you know my Sentiments, I have long sought
after them in vain. Why, Madmoiselle, said he, it would be cruel to desire to
see me still, I am of no use to you. And making her a profound Reverence, he
retired, without looking once on Madmoiselle of Sansac. They were surprised at
this flight. Madmoiselle of Sansac was vexed that he had not so much as taken
notice of her. Madmoiselle of Roye knew by the Count's Sorrow, and by his
sudden Retreat, how strong his Passion still remained, and how extraordinary
his Generosity had been. She had a most sensible Grief, for having rendered so
worthy a man so miserable.

He was very much troubled for having left her so abruptly, he feared having
offended her, and that she should come in time to hate him. In short, he had
still felt some satisfaction in seeing her. He had deprived himself of that
content for fear of abandoning himself too much to it; but he found that his
Reasoning had been too cruel, and what could happen to him of greater Sorrow,
than to be hated by Madmoiselle of Roye, and of never seeing her? Yet he would
not go to her House, but he found that it would be a great satisfaction to him
to meet her.

Sansac did find the retarding of his happiness so unsufferable, that he was
not much less afflicted, than when he was uncertain of being beloved. It was in
vain that he pressed Madam of Roye to consent that he should marry her
Daughter, but notwithstanding the Marquess of Sansac's vexations, she would not
consent that he should lose part of his Estate by making too much haste. That
Esteem which that Countess had for D'Amboise, did make her wish that he might
still remain in the number of her Friends. Mean time, though she was vexed that
she no longer had any Commerce with him, she durst not reproach him of it, but
having occasion to employ him in a considerable business, she let him know it,
and he could not dispense from going to her. He returned thither with some
trouble and with some satisfaction. He found Madmoiselle of Roye all alone in
her Mother's Chamber, and he was so surprised and seized at the sight of her,
that he remained without motion.

Madam of Roye was in her Closet with a Person of Worth, when he came in. They
being busy in a particular Concern, she met him, and entreated him to remain
one moment with her Daughter in her Chamber. Madmoiselle of Roye was at first
sight disturbed at the presence of a man unto whom she was so infinitely
obliged, and whom she judged, by what had lately happened, that even her
acknowledgment might trouble. Monsieur the Count of Amboise's trouble was
extraordinary, he found himself again near a Person who he had been forced to
abandon, but who he still adored, and yet would no more declare it, though he
wished she did know it; in fine, with a Person who raised in him a most cruel
Jealousy, and who inspired him with extreme Respect. They both kept silence
for a time, and she first broke it. I cannot hinder my self from rejoicing at
the sight of you, said she, though you appear not to be pleased with being
here. Madmoiselle, replied he, is it possible that the presence of a Miserable,
whom you have forced to renounce you, should not be displeasing to you? I have
not constrained you to it, said Madmoiselle of Roye, you have made me a
voluntary Sacrifice. Alas! Madmoiselle, you were dying, if I had not made it.
You could not bear the thought of being mine; I was depriving you of that
Person without which you cannot live. You say a great deal, replied Madmoiselle
of Roye, blushing. Alas! Madam, why all this constraint and reservedness?
Confess that you love my Rival. I know it, and I can perceive it, against my
will, and that reservedness of which you make use, is a refinement of
tenderness, of which I am more jealous, than of all other things which you
could signify to me, that you had for him. But what am I telling you,
continued he, why do I let you see these things? I beg your pardon, I love you,
I shall love you all my life. I could not so master my self, as not to speak to
you once of Sansac, but I shall mention him no more. I respect you enough, to
respect even your Passion. I shall incessantly constrain my self, and I shall
never entertain you of mine. And the only Favor that I demand of you, is, that
you would consider me, as something more than a Friend. I even look upon you,
replied she, as something more than a Lover. You have done for me things so
little common, that I cannot have for you any common Sentiments.

That Count's Conduct had been so worthy of Admiration, and Madmoiselle of Roye
was so obliged to him, that she thought she ought to speak to him with
mildness, yet after such a manner, as should not flatter his Love; therefore
those words did cause him to sigh. Madam of Roye came in as she was ending.
That Countess informed Monsieur of Amboise in what he could serve her, and he
promised to obey her punctually in what she desired. They were of some Concern
to Madmoiselle of Roye, and he found himself pleased with the pleasure of
serving her. Her Civilities, or rather her Sight, had reestablish'd a kind of
Softness in his Soul, though she had not said any thing to him which favored
his Passion. It was still much, that she had for him all the Esteem which he
deserved, and that she had given him notice of it.

The business in which Madam of Roye had employed him, did oblige him to return
more than once to her House. He no longer did avoid Madmoiselle of Roy's
Company, and he began again to accustom himself to speak to her. It may be also
that he found in his heart some tendency toward hope. The obstacles which
opposed the Marriage of the Marquess of Sansac, might last long. It was not
impossible but that a submissive and disinteressed Conduct might acquire a
particular good Will from Madmoiselle of Roye toward him, and that he never
mentioning his Passion to her, yet still letting her perceive that it was not
extinct, should not gain at last some advantage on those Sentiments which she
had for a Rival, who deserved them less than he.

Madam of Tournon was strangely vexed that she could not prevent the conjunction
of Sansac with Madmoiselle of Roye; she sought after some means, at least, to
break it, and the Count of Sancerre, who about that time returned to Paris,
appeared fit to serve her in that Design, he was her particular Friend, but he
had never informed her of his inclinations toward Madmoiselle of Roye, and she
had discovered it but through that application which she had always had for any
thing that concerned that lovely Person; he had ever had much to do to own a
passion to her from which he hoped so little, that he had concealed it even
from the Person who had caused it.

The Count of Sancerre was well made, he was subtle, dextrous, and witty. The
Countess had prevented him as much as she could from loving Madmoiselle of
Roye, and she had contributed much in making him undertake that Journey which
he had made partly to avoid her. But Love caused her to change her Designs, she
sacrificed the Jealousy of Love unto that tenderness which she had for Sansac,
and she did assure the Count of Sancerre, that she should compass her Ends in
making him to marry her, provided he would exactly follow that conduct which
she should prescribe to him. She advised him to endeavor to insinuate himself
in her mind, under the notion of a Friend, and to conceal from her his real
Sentiments, till the fit time to let them break forth with success. Sancerre
did approve of an Advice which did so well agree with his Humor and his
Interest.

Madmoiselle of Sansac could not bear with that indifferency which d'Amboise
had for her, she began to treat him ill, and to be almost rude to him, which
from a rational Person could not be but so many marks of a passion. He
understood, with trouble, those Sentiments unto which he could not answer, and
of which his own misfortunes did invite him to have some compassion.
Madmoiselle of Roye perceived in what a condition the heart of her Friend was,
by those odd kind of Complaints which she incessantly made her of that Count.
She feared every thing, from a disposition like that of Monsieur of Amboise;
sometimes she did hope that Madmoiselle of Sansac's tenderness would move him;
she would have mentioned it to him, but when she reflected on the independency
of inclinations, that which she felt in her Heart of that Nature, caused her to
tremble, in the behalf of her Friend.

Madmoiselle of Sansac remained in a Melancholy, which prevented the return of
her health. She had asked leave of the Queen to withdraw her self from Court,
and she lived with her Father very retiredly. Madmoiselle of Roye did share in
her troubles, and she was so just as to remain obliged to her for it. That
indifferency which Madmoiselle of Roye had for D'Amboise, did flatter
Madmoiselle of Sansac, and hindered her from hating of her. She endeavored to
soften her Father's mind on Sansac's Marriage with Madmoiselle of Roye, and
despaired not of accomplishing it; but there happened new Causes of Sorrow,
which prevented her from executing that which she had proposed.

One day that they were together in Madmoiselle of Sansac's Coach, they
perceived Amboise in his, carried away by his Horses with so much violence,
that his life was in danger. Madmoiselle of Sansac grew pale, and bid her men
to drive her Coach cross their passage to stop them. She spoke in such an
earnest and pressing manner to them, that notwithstanding the danger which they
run in themselves in obeying, they followed her Orders, which was done with so
much good Fortune, the Horses, whose first fury began to relent, meeting with
the others in Front, passed no further.

As he was going to return thanks to those who had put themselves in danger to
save him, he perceived Sansac's Liveries, he thought it was his Rival, and was
strangely troubled to owe him his life. Mean time, not to let him see any
ingratitude, which he naturally had not, he advanced toward that Coach, but
perceived in it nothing but Women. Madmoiselle of Roye did present her self
first to his sight, Madmoiselle of Sansac had found her self so ill through the
disturbance which that Adventure had caused in her, that she had been obliged
to lean on one of her hands. He was beginning to return thanks to Madmoiselle
of Roye, in terms in which his Passion did express it self against his Will;
but she told him, that he owed the whole obligation to Madmoiselle of Sansac;
and though he was vexed to have deceived himself in a thing that had so much
pleased him, he could not dispense himself from returning her thanks with great
acknowledgments; he left them to let them continue their way.

After he had left them, Madmoiselle of Sansac finding her self with
Madmoiselle of Roye; You have seen my weakness, said she, it is no longer time
for me to distinguish it. I have always denied my self the satisfaction of
complaining to you, that I might not entertain a Sorrow which I condemn. Take
pity on me, and afford me some consolation. You are not guilty, answered
Madmoiselle of Roye, no person is exempt from passion, it is sufficient for us
to oppose them. I would that the confidence which you show me, might be of use
to you. She embraced her in saying these words. Madmoiselle of Sansac perceived
with Sorrow, that they were come to that place where they were expected. That
Conversation did please her, and she entreated Madmoiselle of Roye to come the
next morning, if she could, to walk with her in a pleasant place, where her
little shar^ of health obliged her to take the Air every morning.

Madmoiselle of Roye saw onc^ more that day the Count of Amboise at Madam of
Tournon's. The Company was at Play, they were the only two Persons that did no^
so. Madmoiselle of Roye drew near to the Window, to speak to that Count. She
was desirous to know after what manner he would resent that which Madmoiselle
o^ Sansac had done for him. I ha^ some delight to think that it was to you that
I owed my life, said he Madmoiselle, but you will not (...) much permit me to
enjoy an Error which may be pleasing to me. What do you tell me, replied
Madmoiselle of Roye, interrupting him? (...) should be very sorry that you
should always have such Sentiments (...) should give you occasion of not being
well pleased with me, and that gave me cause also of not being well pleased
with you. Madmoiselle, answered he, I did not think to trouble you. I require
no passion of you, added he against his Will, leave me mine, that is all I
require of you. I cannot consent to it, said she, that consideration that I
have for you opposes it self to it, and if you did but know in what an
extremity one finds one self when one is full of esteem, of acknowledgments,
and if one dares to say it, of pity, for a Person that would merit something
more, I should not peradventure appear to you less to be pitied than you your
self. Upon this they both kept silence; Then Madmoiselle of Roye representing
to her self earnestly the condition in which she had seen her Friend, could not
resist the desire that she had to make a Merit of it toward the Count; She
designed to render him sensible of the pleasure of being beloved by a beautiful
Person; She made him a sensible representation of Madmoiselle of Sansac's
Sentiments. In fine, she knew that she hazarded nothing in making him such a
confidence. The Count's discretion was known, and it was certain, that if he
gloried not in his Conquest, however he would not make any boast of it. He
could not answer to that which she had said, because that Madam of Roye, who
had left off play, did rise to be gone, and took her Daughter along with her,
even before that she had finished what she had to say, but he thought of
nothing but to prevent her from believing that he had made any reflection on it.

Madmoiselle of Roye would not inform Monsieur of Sansac, that the Count of
Amboise was not yet become wholly indifferent, for fear of exciting him against
a Person to whom he was obliged for yielding up his Right to him. She owed that
weak consideration unto the Count, in consideration of those extraordinary
things which he had done for her. Those Sentiments did not hurt her Passion.
She was far from taking any other for Monsieur of Amboise than those of
Compassion; and if she was divided betwixt those two Lovers, it was that she
pitied the one, and loved the other.

D'Amboise had found out a Pretense to go the next morning to Madam of Roye,
but he met her at the Gate of the Louver. He told her that he had had that
Design, and that having diverse things to say, he would do it when she were
returned. He asked one of those Women that accompanied her, the Reason why
Madmoiselle of Roye was not with her Mother. Who told him, that she was gone to
walk, and named to him the place. But she told him not that it was with
Madmoiselle of Sansac, because she was following of Madam of Roye, and wanted
time to do it.

Monsieur of Amboise run to the place, without examining any further. It was in
one of those fine places, which credit their Masters by being seen. Persons
came to it two different ways; he came into the Garden, where he found at first
none but Madmoiselle of Sansac. Madmoiselle of Roye had been detained by Madam
of Tournon, who having met her, would have accompanied her, so that she had
feigned to go elsewhere, that she might be alone with her Friend.

D'Amboise, who had been perceived by Madmoiselle of Sansac, could not avoid
speaking to her. She told him, that she was expecting Madmoiselle of Roye, and
that she was weary of staying for her; so that he could not leave her. till her
Company was come. They were both in a disorder, the Count did fancy that
Madmoiselle of Roye seeing him with Madmoiselle of Sansac, would fancy that he
might have made some reflections on what had been said the night before, and he
had left her abruptly, had he not been detained with a desire of seeing
Madmoiselle of Roye. Madmoiselle of Sansac was not in a less perplexity. She
had not been sorry that he had known some part of her Sentiments, and she had
been in great disorder in declaring them to him her self.

The End of the First Part.
THE Count of Amboise; OR, THE GENEROUS LOVER. PART II.
AT last Madmoiselle of Roye did join them; they were not far from the
Garden-door, and they went to meet her so far. She joy'd the Count for being in
so good Company, with a design of obliging him to say some kind thing or other
to Madmoiselle of Sansac, but he presently took upon him to justify his
intentions after a manner which caused Madmoiselle of Roye to fear lest he
should disoblige her Friend; She made a pretense of immediately returning, took
Madmoiselle of Sansac with her. I will, said she to Monsieur of Amboise, take
her from you, to punish you of your dissimulation. Ending these words, she got
into her Coach with so much haste, that he had not time to answer.

He was very much troubled to see Madmoiselle of Roye's obstinacy in persuading
her self in an opinion, which he knew however would not trouble her; whether he
feared giving her the least subject of Jealousy, or of giving her none, he
could not be pleased at it, the trouble, satisfaction, or the indifferency of
that fair Creature, were equally cruel to him.

He was in the mind of running after her, and of not leaving her till he had
wholly justified himself; but the pretense which she had taken of returning,
giving him some reason to believe that she would not be so soon at her House,
he went to wait on the King, and he left against his Will those two Lovers at
liberty.

When they were returned to Madmoiselle of Roye's, and got into her Chamber,
she found her self in some disorder. That little success which she foresaw as
to Madmoiselle of Sansac's Passion, did make her fear entering on that Subject;
yet she perceived that her silence was a greater trouble; so that she invited
her to speak, that it might ease her mind, though it afforded her no comfort.

If one durst ask you, said she, by what means the Count of Amboise could
produce in you for his Person, such Sentiments as he is so unworthy of -- I
know that I am in the wrong, replied Madmoiselle of Sansac, interrupting her;
yet I can in a manner excuse my self, I unseasonably did see Monsieur of
Amboise with you: I thought him amiable on the very account of that zeal with
which he loved; I was charmed with his tenderness. You loved him not; and
though this knowledge gave me a private satisfaction, I did blame your
injustice, and I went too far in going about to avoid it. When I spoke to the
Queen, to prevent your Marriage with him, I thought to engage my self in it for
your sake, or for my Brother's; but I have since found that it was my own
interest that pushed me on; Madam of Roye did render all my Projects useless,
in her stedfastness to her first Sentiments for the Count; I was troubled for
not having succeeded better. You returned into the Country, the Count went
frequently to visit you; I did scarce see him after that, which gave me to
understand how dear he was to me; I would have opposed my self to my
inclinations, but it was in vain, and at the very time that I endeavored to
call back my Reason; I continually did think on him, and so made an end of
losing it.

She remained silent during a while; then she continued, perceiving that
Madmoiselle of Roye did not speak; I did feel distinctly a Jealousy; I had
some regret for having offered to take you from the Count, seeing that thereby
he was not the more mine: but I fell in a Despair when he thought a second time
of marrying you, and I found no quiet, till by an extraordinary excess of Love,
he had resigned you to his Rival. That Action did highly increase my Esteem, in
my opinion it did authorize that which I felt for him, and even that which I
had acted against him; and tho* that Example of Generosity did condemn me, I
could not see the difference of his proceeding and mine; I thought that my
Conduct was justified sufficiently by that unconcernedness and your
indifferency; but in effect, it was but a little hope which did justify all.
Alas! I was not long in that situation, If I had some moments that were less
disagreeable, they were but moments still, you can tell whether I have had any
occasion to flatter my self.

Madmoiselle of Sansac could no longer continue such a Discourse, and pouring
forth a Torrent of Tears, she obliged Madmoiselle of Roye to speak to her. I am
more miserable than you, said she, I feel all your troubles as you do your
self, and I have besides the trouble of having caused them; It is through my
means that you have particularly known the Count of Amboise; It is perhaps
through his Love to me, that he enters not into those Sentiments which are due
to your Merits. In fine, it is my indifferency toward him, that has given
place to your pity; all turns to poison to you, I dare not undertake any thing,
and after I have caused all your Sorrows, I have the trouble of not being able
to bring you out of them; You ought not to have any more friendship for me; You
consider me as a Rival; perhaps that you hate me. No, replied Madmoiselle of
Sansac, it is-Amboise that must be hated, and not you, but I cannot have so
much as the satisfaction of hating either of you. What has he done to me? he
has not betrayed me, seeing that he never loved me. Alas! must that be the
Cause that must take me off of complaining?

Here her redoubled Tears did force her a second time to silence, and
Madmoiselle of Roye perceiving some alteration in her Face, feared that she
should not be well, and obliged her to lay her self on the Bed; after which she
went into her Closet to speak with one of her Servants, it was to tell her from
Madam of Roye, that the Count of Amboise was to come, and that she should
receive him, if he came before her return. He came in that very instant; and
having seen no body in the Antichamber nor in the Chamber, because that
Madmoiselle of Roye had ordered her Women, when she came in with Madmoiselle of
Sansac, to go into her Closet, which was at some distance, that they might not
interrupt their Conversation: he was going out, but Madmoisele of Sansac having
turned her self to see who it was, she had made a little noise, he drew near to
the Bed, whose Curtains were half drawn. He knew her not, she had part of her
Coifs over her Face; he took her to be Madmoiselle of Roye who was resting on
the Bed; so that having still his mind filled with the Adventure of the Garden,
and fearing also to lose the opportunity of speaking to her. Madmoiselle, said
he, I cannot defer one moment justifying of my self, could you be so
hard-hearted to belive that I could love Madmoiselle of Sansac? I had not
yesterday leisure to answer you, on what you would have had me to think of her
Sentiments; but was there any occasion for that? If that your indifferency
could not make me change, all the passion that can be had for me, could do no
more.

Madmoiselle of Roye, who apprehended that some body was entering, and who also
was advertised another way, that it was Monsieur of Amboise, returned in the
Chamber, and said to him with a loud voice, That a Lady of her Friends was
sleeping on that Bed, and that she would receive him in another Chamber, but
she knew not that he had said too much already.

Madmoiselle of Sansac had been struck by it as with a Thunderbolt, and that
last misfortune was so horrid, that nothing but death could take from her the
shame and the sorrow of it. She remained on the Bed of Madmoiselle of Roye
overwhelmed with diverse different thoughts, without coming to any resolution.

Monsieur of Amboise was with Madmoiselle of Roye; he was telling her the same
things, which he thought that he had told her before, when he had spoken to
Mdamoiselle of Sansac; but she let him see that she took no delight in hearing
them, and if any thing was capable of moving her, it could be nothing but those
Sentiments that he should take up for her Friend. He was troubled at that
indifferency, and he remained seized with so great a Sorrow, that he desisted
from speaking to her. Madam of Roye returned sooner than she had thought to do,
and Madmoiselle of Roye went to Madmoiselle of Sansac, whose Despair increased
by her Presence. She made a loud and sorrowful Out cry when she saw her: Ah!
you have betrayed me, said she, I at least thought that the Count was ignorant
of my weakness: but there wanted something more to perfect your Victory, you
have found some satisfaction in that Sacrifice that he has offered up to you of
me. I beg your pardon for distrusting you in this thought; but why did yon tell
him that I loved him, seeing he loved you? She had not the power to proceed,
her Tears did run abundantly down, and she could do nothing but weep.

Madmoiselle of Roye apprehended part of what had passed, she had nothing to
answer her, and it was then a fit time to justify her intentions, when she was
guilty through such sad Effects; all that she could say or do, was to assure
her that it would be easy to take off of the Count the thoughts of being
beloved; but the Remedy was not yet according to Madmoiselle of Sansac's mind:
No. said she, let him know it, and I shall never see him more. Upon this she
did rise from the Bed, and went from Madmoiselle of Roye, with the design of
never returning there again; and the next day she went to one of her Father's
Countryhouses, which was near the City of Tours. There she did endeavor to
forget all the World, she abandoned the design of pursuing the Marriage of her
Brother with Madmoiselle of Roye, though it might have been of use to have
revenged her self of Amboise; and all her Sentiments yielded to her shame: Thus
she left to that Friend nothing but the vexation of having lost a Person, unto
whom she entrusted her Sentiments, and of preserving still an unhappy Lover.

Monsieur of Amboise's Constancy was so cruel to Madmoiselle of Roye, through
its Consequences, that she began to fancy it a Crime in him; she would no
longer speak to him, but with a kind of sharpness, against which he was not
prepared. He had not thought that she would ill treat him, because he could
love none but her. There entered in that new rigor a kind of injustice and
contempt, which seemed to him not to be born withal; he fansied that he could
live without loving a Person, whose ingratitude deserved his hatred, or rather
his forgetting of her, and he began to shun her more than he had ever done.

Sansac was desperate at his Sister's absence; he had no longer any body near
his Father that spoke for him; so that after he had writ to Madmoiselle of
Sansac all to no purpose, he went to seek her where she was. He did all he
could to oblige her to return, but he obtained nothing from her, and he could
not put her one moment out of that deadly grief in which she was plunged.

Madam of Tournon, who saw him extremely afflicted, and who thought of some
means of reclaiming him from Madmoiselle of Roye, feigned a new Earnestness of
Concerns for his Interest; she told him, that one of her Friends that had a
full power over the Count of Sansac's mind, would soon be at Paris, and that
she would employ all the Credit that she had in that Friend, to bring about the
Marquess's Designs.

Sansac was sensible, that of truth that Person, of whom she spoke, was a
considerable Person with his Father: What a pleasure is it to behold a means to
attain unto that Happiness which he had so long waited after! The strength of
his Sentiments gave him again some friendship for that Countess. He promised
her an eternal acknowledgment, and he frequented her with assiduity.

She had introduced the Count of Sancerre at Madam of Roye's: He was of a
Character of mind to please all those that he frequented with; he went
fequently there, and his Love did daily increase, through the particular
knowledge which he found of Madmoiselle of Roye's Wit; that Passion was even
inflamed by that which he knew she had for the Marquess of Sansac. It often
happens that a Lover sets a value on the Merit of a Mistress, which makes, that
when he cannot cause her to be hated, he causes her to be infinitely beloved.

Though Monsieur of Amboise did avoid Madmoiselle of Roye, it was not possible,
but that he should sometimes meet her, and it was above a month since he had
seen her, when that he found himself near her Person one day that the Queen
Regent was receiving of Spanish Ambassadors. So soon as he perceived
Madmoiselle of Roye, his first Design was to have changed place; but she
saluted him after a manner, which though indifferent, had a Charm by which he
found himself detained; mean time he durst not speak to her, but when the
Ceremony was ended, the men gave their hands to the Ladies to lead them to
their Coaches. The Marquess of Sansac was obliged to take that of Madam of
Roye, and Monsieur of Amboise said to Madmoiselle of Roye, that he durst not
offer her his; she answered nothing, and offered her hand to him with Civility.

Never had Madmoiselle of Roye been so adorned, and so beautiful: Those
Applauses which she had received, caused a modest Joy to appear on her Face,
which would have excited Love in the most insensible Hearts. Though Sansac's
Passion was arrived at that height, that it could not be increased, he had felt
a new pleasure in beholding her that day. D'Amboise remembered the first time
that he had seen her; which forced from him a profound sigh, and he beheld her
with Eyes bedewed with Tears.

There being great Apartments to go through, and diverse Persons having stepped
in between Madam and Madmoiselle of Roye, he had full leisure to entertain her.
I am ashamed, Madmoiselle, said he, to let you know that your scorns and your
hatred cannot hinder me from loving you: What further means will you attempt?
they will all prove useless, there is nothing but death can rid you of me. You
had promised me, said Madmoiselle of Roye, that you would use no more such
discourses to me, what would you that I should answer you? Nothing,
Madmoiselle, said he with an offended countenance, I have deserved but your
indifferency. Well, added he, quite transported, return me that, since I am so
unhappy, as to think that your anger is yet a greater evil to me. But, said
Madmoiselle of Roye, ought you to be surprised at my resentment? You are the
cause that I have lost my Friend. What of Madmoiselle, interrupted he, can you
accuse me? Did I ever go about to touch her Heart? Was it possible for me to
love any one but you? No, Madmoiselle, added he, as beyond himself, you owe me
no tenderness, I detest mine; but I love you, and I am worthy of your pity.
Complain not then, said Madmoiselle of Roye, I have given you what I could give
you, and setting aside Love, you have had all my other Sentiments, I promise
you the continuance of them, and let us no longer reproach one another.

The Count' had no cause to be contented, but he had no right to complain. He
put her into her Mother's Coach, where Sansac was waiting. The two Lovers
saluted one another with a smile, which expressed all the Sentiments of their
Hearts. Amboise, who had feigned not to look on Madmoiselle of Roye, had
however taken notice of it, and he was pier'd at it with a mortal Sorrow; then
did his evil become extreme, when he resolved to cure himself. He found that he
should always be exposed to seek Madmoiselle of Roye, to meet her, and to
suffer all that a desperate Love and Jealousy have that is most dreadful; so
that seeing it was necessary he should quit Paris; he went to an Estate which
he had near Reims, and promised himself never to return, till he had
extinguished all the remainders of his unfortunate Passion. Thus was
Madmoiselle of Roye delivered for a time from a Lover who began to be
troublesome to her, because she had some considerations for him, and that she
durst not ill treat him.

But the Count of Sancerre and Madam of Tournon, from whom she had never feared
any thing, were the Persons who were to cause all the evils and misfortunes of
her life. Sancerre designed to get into her Favor, before he declared himself
her Lover; so that he had began to enter into some Engagement with her, in
speaking frequently of Sansac, and in favor of that Name he rendered himself
amiable; she entertained him with a satisfaction which was even suspicious to
Sansac, he feared to find a Rival in a man who appeared formidable, and who was
assiduous at Madmoiselle of Roye's; he owned his Suspicions to her, but she
assured him so firmly, that he was but a Friend, and she was so well persuaded
of it her self, that she even made no reflections on Sansac's disquiets. Of
truth, he had so much reason to assure himself of Madmoiselle of Roye's
inclinations, that he was willing at first to submit his Jealousy to her.

Madam of Tournon, who by the Promises which she had made him of employing her
self in the behalf of his Marriage, had thereby engaged him to be obliging to
her, caused to be spread abroad by the Count of Sancerre, that the Marquess was
fallen in Love with her. Though Madmoiselle of Roye was advertised of the
Reasons he had to manage her; That Countess was still brisk enough to produce
some uneasy thoughts in a Rival.

Madmoiselle of Roye informed Sansac of what was said of him, he remained in a
Surprise, which appeared very natural; he answered her after so tender a
manner, and he did love her so sincerely, that he could not fail of being soon
justified. He offered to break off with Madam of Tournon, but they both thought
they had the same interest to preserve her their Friend. She at last desired
him not to alter his Conduct, and assured him, that she should never be
concerned at it.

Her Jealousy appeared so tender to her Lover, that in that very instant he
lost that which he had had of Sancerre; he was even so ashamed, for having
mistrusted of infidelity so nice a Heart, that he feared putting her in mind of
those fears which he had expressed; but that quiet lasted not long, Madam of
Tournon designing that they should both at one and the same time entertain
Suspicions one of another, gained to her Party that Woman of Madmoiselle of
Roye's, in whom she put the greatest confidence; she gave her a Letter which
was directed to Madmoiselle of Roye, but she entreated her not to show it to
her, and so to contrive the business, that Sansac might read it, without any
sign that there had been any design he should see it.

Chance did favor her intention some few days after, and the business was
punctually done. Sansac came one Enening to Madam of Roye's, she was not there,
some of her Friends waited some time for her return, but that day she was to
sup with her Daughter at Madam of Tournon's; mean time this Woman seign'd as if
she knew nothing of it, she told Sansac that they would soon return, and she
would have him to go into Madam of Roye's Apartment, of which she had
designedly mislay'd the Key, to have occasion of leading him in that of
Madmoiselle of Roye's. She had newly carried that Letter there, with which she
had charged her self; it lay on the Table unsealed, and seemed as if it had
been forgotten. She left the Marquess alone, who read the Letter which was of
the Count of Sancerre's hand, whose Writing Sansac knew. Sancerre by that
Letter did confess to Madmoiselle of Roye, that he had a long time thought to
be no more but a Friend to her; that therefore he had disguised his real
Sentiments under that notion, but now he could no longer forbear letting her
know them. Sansac read it with the same vexation, as if in learning the Count's
Love, he had also learned that he was beloved.

That Woman returned into the Chamber, when she thought he might have read the
Letter, and she told him that Madmoiselle of Roye had newly sent back her
people, and that she should pass that Evening at Madam of Tournon's. He
immediately went thither, not doubting but that Sancerre would be there; yet
having at a distance observed his Liveries at the door, he was struck at that
sight, as if he did not expect it. He went into Madam of Tournon's, to see in
what manner Madmoiselle of Roye would govern her self with her new Lover; but
she having not seen the Letter, which could inform her of this Count's
Sentiments, she therefore altered not her former Conduct toward him.

Sansac was almost mad to see her in her usual Gayety; his Jealousy did
persuade him that it was rather increased: Never had he found those things
which Sancerre said, so unfit to please, and he never did so much fear lest
they should please; at last he went out in the most furious trouble that he
ever had been in his life. The next day he could not see Madmoiselle of Roye
alone, and the day following they set forth for Reims at the Coronation of
Charles the Ninth.

A considerable time had already passed since the death of Francis the Second;
Pleasures began to spring up again at Court, and of truth they had scarce
discontinu'd, because it was the Queen Regent's pleasure, who would be
absolute, to keep all things in Idleness and Wantonness; she graced every day
with some Festival; and being always followed by the most beautiful Women, who
made their Lovers to act according to their Will, she reigned with a full
Authority by the means of Gallantry.

Madam of Roye, whom a slight indisposition did oblige to stay at Paris, would
have retained her Daughter with her, but the Queen desired not to deprive her
of a Person who adorned her Court; so that she entrusted Madam of Tournon with
her, who she still believed to be the most sincere of all her Friends. Her
Daughter had not told her the distrust which she had of that Countess; for fear
she had found them too little reasonable.

During the Journey Madam of Tournon did observe Madmoiselle of Roye, and on
the pretense of Friendship, did not leave her one moment: That Letter which
Sansac had read, having not been writ to any other end, but that he should see
it, Madmoiselle of Roye had not heard one word of it. Sancerre was still
cautious of giving her any Suspicion that he loved her. His Rival was first to
be destroyed, and he was contented in laboring jointly with Madam of Tournon
to sow a discord betwixt those two Lovers, and in preventing them from coming
to a right Understanding.

Madam of Tournon had told Sansac, that though she was willing to serve him in
his Marriage near his Father, she would not enter with Madmoiselle of Roye in
the confidence of his Love, and that it was not convenient for her to act in
any thing of that nature with a young Person. He could not blame her for it,
and he the less suspected that she were capable of, taking another Interest in
him, than that of Friendship. This Marquess continued to entertain a Jealousy
in his Bosom. He saw that Madmoiselle of Roye did not break off with Sancerre,
and he already judged her too guilty, to merit his reproaches, but he expressed
an extraordinary coldness toward her; she attributed it to his new passion for
the Countess, and she preserved a secret spite at it, which appeared not at
first but by her coldness, but it was impossible for them to remain long in
that condition. They were mutually suspicious of one another, which must have
turned into Certainties, or they must have cleared themselves of their doubts:
There happened an Adventure which made an end of confounding them.

The Queen gave a Ball at Reims the night of Charles the Ninth's Coronation. It
being the time of Masquerading, she gave the design of a Masquerade; she
ordered that a Troop of Gypsy men, and another of Gypsy women, should come
separately to tell the young King's good Fortune; that afterward each man
should take his Gypsy woman, and that they should dance together, as rejoicing
for having hit so right in speaking pleasing things to the King.

The Countess of Tournon, and Madmoiselle of Roye, were of the Masquerade;
their height was pretty equal, their Hairs were of a brown very approaching,
and their small difference could not be discerned by the light of Flambeaus,
those Gypsies Dresses were ordered after a manner as made no distinction
betwixt any persons that had never so little likeness; long flying Gowns did
cover all their Necks, and descended to the ground, without any distinction in
height; their Hairs, which were loose on their shoulders, were tied up with a
world of Ribands, and the Ladies made their Lovers partakers of those which
they were to wear that Festival-day, because the Queen, who would entertain
every thing in Gallantry, had desired it should be so, that those who had
Mistresses might dance with them. Madmoiselle of Roye found her self uneasy in
that Juncture, that coldness which was betwixt Sansac and her, gave her some
repugnancy against doing him that favor; mean time it was impossible for her
to afford it to another, that favor appeared to her little considerable in it
self, and it produced an occasion for her to accuse him, which she would not
neglect; She sent him some of her Ribands, and writ to him with so much spite,
sorrow, and tenderness, that this Letter had assuredly produced a clearing
bebetwixt them, had not Madam of Tournon's Artifice prevailed.

The Note that she had writ, having passed through the hands of that Woman that
Madam of Tournon had gained; she had a sight of it, and found out some way of
playing a new Trick to those two Lovers; she kept Madmoiselle of Roye's
Ribands, and sent others in the name of that young Person, they were of those
that she her self was to wear. Her intention was to deceive Sansac, and to pass
for Madmoiselle of Roye, under the favor of the disguise, to put that Mistress
in the highest indignation against Sansac, to prevent them as much as she
could, from clearing themselves, and that the mistake of the Ribands might be
thrown on the Woman that served them, should they go about to examine the
matter. Mean time, she her self found the design but course, and expected no
great success from it; but she had began to sow a misunderstanding amongst
them, all was to be hazarded that could increase it; and their hearts being
already prepossest with Jealousy, the least appearance might add something to
their general Revolt. Sansac received Madam of Tournon's Ribands, which were
sent him as from Madmoiselle of Roye, and he writ to this last with so much
Love and Jealousy, that Madam of Tournon, unto whom that Letter was showed,
did at the same time fear and hope of Success; she entreated that Woman, whom
she had gained, to have Sansac informed, that Madmoiselle of Roye would speak
to him the Masquerading night, and she had resolved to tell him under the
shelter of her Mask, such things as would convince him that his Rival was
beloved; the Letters which they writ to one another were intercepted, and
Madmoiselle of Roye was only told, that Sansac was most obliged to her for her
Ribands; that slight which she had so little deserved from him, put her into an
unconceivable Anger. She was at first surprised with that strange way of
proceeding, though her mind had long since been disturbed by the extraordinary
indifferency which he had showed her, for all things appear seemingly true to
Jealousy. How often did she accuse her self of lowness of Spirit, for having
made an Advance so ill received; that which had at first appeared so
indifferent, did then seem most terrible to her; and her grief had prevented
her from appearing at the Masquerade, if she had not had a desire to see after
what manner he would govern himself there.

The Maskers did dance, each Gypsy woman with that man who bore her Colors.
Madmoiselle of Roye saw a person who wore hers, and at first she did not know
him to be the Brother of Madam of Tournon, who was to dance with that Countess,
but she easily observed that it was not Sansac that danced with her.

That Marquess was not made after a manner that could be confounded with the
rest, he was taller than all those that were of the Masquerade; so that she
perceived him dressed with Madam of Tournon's Colors, which she could not but
know, because they had dressed together, Sansac, who took her for Madam of
Roye, deceived by the Ribands, which had been sent him as from her, continued
to dance with her, and she so well affected the Air and Dancing of her whom she
would imitate, that the Marquess, who had no Suspicion of the Cheat, was wholly
mistaken.

Madmoiselle of Roye felt the greatest vexation that she ever had in her life;
she did believe that the Countess had also sent some of her Ribands to Sansac,
to have the pleasure of seeing her self highly preferred before the other; in
the disposition she was, she needed not so much to convince her, that Sansac
and Madam of Tournon were in a perfect Intelligence, and the trouble of her
mind did make her dance with so much disorder, that no body could imagine that
it was she.

After she had made a review of all the Persons of the Masquerade, she found
that it was with the Brother of Madam of Tournon that she had danced, she did
not examine whether Sansac had designed to deceive her in putting some body in
his place, or whether he had only thought of shifting himself out of business;
but either way she thought her self treated in so ill a manner, that the Love
which she owed to her self, was almost as much offended, as was her tenderness
to Sansac.

So soon as the Masquerading was ended, she privately got toward the door, and
went out, without being perceived but by Sancerre only, who had always had his
Eyes upon her, and who knew her by the Ribands which Madam of Tournon had
intercepted and had showed him. He followed her out to give her his hand, and
she was obliged to him for that Civility; she told him, that she should not
return again, so that he conducted her home. He had too much interest not to
learn what passed in her Heart as to Sansac, wherefore he fell on that
Discourse, believing that in the disorder she was, it was the fittest time for
him to give his Rival the last blow; he feigned with a kind of a mysterious
Countenance, that he was not wholly surprised at what had happened; that was
enough to engage Madmoiselle of Roye, even against her inclination, to make him
diverse Questions, unto which he answered after a manner which did infinitely
increase her Jealousy and Sorrow; though she had entertained a thousand
Suspicions, she still accused her self of having shut her own Eyes, and for
having remained in too great a tranquillity at the very instant that she was
betrayed. She could not be weary in continually making him new Questions, and
he remained longer with her, than she would have permitted him to do, had she
been less disturbed.

After that Sansac had done dancing with Madam of Tournon, whom he had all the
while taken for Madmoiselle of Roye, he led her to a Corner of the Hall to
speak to her; she did not pull off her Mask, which was fastened to her
Head-dress, so that he could not undeceive himself. He told her, that he was in
a world of Sorrow at the hearing that Sancerre had writ to her, and dared to
acquaint her with his Passion, that he found she had not ill treated him for
it, that on the contrary, she beheld him with delight; and finally, that he
could no longer live, if she continued to have the same regard for him. Madam
of Tournon counterfeiting the accent of her Voice, told him that it was
difficult for her to break with a Friend of her Mother. Ah! Madmoiselle, said
he, what is it that you tell me? Why do you alarm your self? said she with a
Tone more disguised than before. Though it should be true, that Sancerre should
have other Sentiments for me, than those of Esteem and Friendship, you ought
not to believe that I should have any others for him. How? Madmoiselle, replied
he, is it possible that you should have some Esteem and Friendship for a man
who declares himself your Lover? I am lost, if you do not unsay those words
again. I shall not unsay them, said Madam of Tournon, there would be injustice
in what you demand. That is too much, interrupted Sansac, either deceive* me
quite, or make an end of undeceiving me, I cannot remain in that uncertainty I
am; say that you love Sancerre, that you cannot break off with him, and I shall
no longer trouble you with my Jealousy and my reproaches. Madam of Tournon
made him no Answer. I understand you, Madam, said Sansac transported with Fury,
you shall no longer be troubled with my Complaints, but in vain must you expect
any moderation in my Conduct, and so long as I have life, I will prevent my
Rival from being more happy than my self. Upon that he roughly quitted her, and
she made no offers of retaining him.

Madmoiselle of Tournon was in an excessive Joy, she could never have hoped for
such a Success, and all her Arts were so fortunate, that they gave her no
remorses. Though the Masquerade was ended, the Ball did continue; Madam of
Tournon, after she had changed her Apparel, returned into the Hall, where they
danced; Sansac was gone in to seek after Sancerre, and to oblige him to fight,
but he found him not there, and he learnt that Madam of Tournon had said, that
Madmoiselle of Roye was retired with a most violent Headache. Of truth,
Madmoiselle of Roye had given it out so, that none should be surprised at her
not appearing at the Ball. This Marquess, not finding Sancerre, did believe he
might have followed her, and it was impossible for him not to seek to be
satisfied in it. He went to Madmoiselle of Roye's, under the pretense of
inquiring after her Health, and having learnt by Sancerre's folks that he was
there, he demanded to see her, with a design to make her, maugre his Promise,
all the reproaches which he thought she deserved; but that Anger Madmoiselle of
Roye was in, hindered her from receiving him, she sent him Word that she could
not speak with him, because of her Headache, at the same time she dismissed
Sancerre; but he apprehending that Sansac had seen his Servants, and fancying
that peradventure his Rival would have the Curiosity to learn whether he should
be long with Madmoiselle of Roye, he remained in the Antichamber on purpose
with that Woman, which Madmoiselle of Tournon had gained, Madmoiselle of Roye
not knowing but that he was gone, nor so much as once thinking that he would
remain there.

Sansac stayed for him in his passage, agitated with all that Fury could
suggest to him of most horrid; he perceived the Count of Amboise coming, and in
the trouble that he was, he could not forbear speaking to him. D'Amboise having
been obliged to repair to Reims about the King's Coronation, he had heard that
Madmoiselle of Roye was ill, and he had found himself still sensible enough in
what concerned her, to come with earnestness to inform himself of her health.
You see a man that is desperate, said Sansac so soon as he did see him, you
have plunged me into that Abyss where I am, and you have drawn your self out of
it; You have yielded to me a Person, which causes all the misfortune of my
life; she loves Sancerre, he is at this present with her, and she refuses
seeing me. I have nothing to answer you, said Monsieur of Amboise, I forgot
Madmoiselle of Roye when I yielded her to you. Upon this D'Amboise perceived
the Count of Sancerre coming out the House, which made him too hastily leave
Sansac, for fear his Looks should betray what he had newly said.

Into what an odd kind of Jealousy did that Count enter? He fancied that
Madmoiselle of Roye had a second time proved inconstant to him, she had been
forced by her inclination to love Sansac; D'Amboise did begin to believe that
she would always love that Person, whom she had from the beginning preferred to
him, and that had in some manner allayed the first heat of his Sentiments; but
that Change did awaken them, and kindled in him new desires, spite, and
transportment. He believed that she might be inconstant, and he esteemed her
the less, but he acquired new fires by it, he found himself full of earnest
desires to revenge himself of that Person who went about to deprive him of a
good, which he thought to be already lost, but he also fancied that there was a
kind of satisfaction in revenging ones self, which did not agree with a man who
had never been beloved, he was ashamed that he was concerned at the Quarrels
which were betwixt Sansac and Sancerre for Madmoiselle of Roye, which made him
to return into the Country that very moment.

Sansac having informed Sancerre that his design was to fight with him, they
went at some distance from that place, for fear of being prevented: they fought
with an equal fierceness, and they had ended their quarrel with their lives, if
that their Servants, whom they had forbid to follow them, had not distrusted
their intentions, and given notice of it to some of their Friends, who came and
parted them.

Madmoiselle of Roye was some days without going out of her Chamber, under the
pretense of an Headache, so that she would not see Sansac. This Marquess's
Combat with Sancerre made much noise at Court, but the Subject of it was not
known; Sancerre had great reason to conceal it, so long as he was not firmly
established in Madmoiselle of Roye's Favor. Madam of Tournon insinuated het
self with Sansac on that account, and engaged him to Secrecy, saying, that he
ought to have some regards for a Person whom he had loved so long, but in truth
it was to prevent Madmoiselle of Roye from diving too deep into the business,
had she known what share she had in it. Sansac did follow that Countesse's
Advices, though his Anger against Madmoiselle of Roye was not diminished. He in
vain did endeavor to suppress his Passion; he hated Madmoiselle of Roye, yet
he incessantly thought on her. It is by forgetting that Love is cured.

Madmoiselle of Roye having inquired of Sancerre the cause of his Combat with
Sansac, he told her that the Marquess had quarreled with him on a very slight
pretense, but that the true cause of his Quarrel was his meeting him too often
to his mind at Madam of Tournon's, for whose Person he could not be persuaded
that one could entertain so little as a single Friendship. Madmoiselle of Roye
swallowed down that Poison without resistance, nothing now could defend Sansac
in her heart against those surprising News, and she was easily brought to
believe any thing of him on Madam of Tournon's account, which gave a great deal
of hopes to his Rival.

Madam of Tournon, still continued to express the same Friendship to
Madmoiselle of Roye, as formerly, but it was received with a great deal of
coldness. Those two Rivals would no longer mention the Marquess of Sansac in
their Discourses, and it was but the affecting of not pronouncing his Name,
which was a trouble to them.

The Count of Sansac, Father to the Marquess, was Governor of Touraine; he was
sick at Tours, and in that Age which no longer will afford any hopes of Cure.
The Reversion of his Government was at that time conferred upon his Son,
through Madam of Tournon's means; he, knowing not that she was the cause of all
the troubles in his Amors, was willing to acknowledge that obligation to her,
but he was obliged to be absent, he told her the necessity that he had of
flying from Madmoiselle of Roye, and the Countess did not oppose his design of
going to Tours. Absence was the means to prevent him from clearing any Points
with Madmoiselle of Roye, and of curing himself of his Passion toward her.

This Marquess went suddenly from Reims, and some few days after the Court
returned to Paris. Madam of Tournon took great care to have Madmoiselle of Roye
informed of the great share which she had had in Sansac's late Preferment, of
truth he wanted a Person that had a great interest in the Queen, to engage her
to show any Favor to that Family.

Madmoiselle of Roye was returned into her Mother's hands, unto whom she learnt
that Madmoiselle of Tournon was her Rival, and that she had betrayed her. Madam
of Roye was something troubled at Sansac's Change; the Engagement in which
diverse Persons knew that he was with Madmoiselle of Roye, had put by a great
number of Pretenders, and his infidelity could not but do her some prejudice.
Madmoiselle of Roye did sensibly feel the Affront, and could not consolate her
self for not having loved Amboise, who had so real a Passion for her, and whose
great Qualities and Constancy ought to have diverted her from that inclination
which she had for Sansac.

The Count of Sancerre, who still was with her under the notion of a Friend,
did think it a favorable season to declare his Passion, though not fit to make
any advantage of his long concealment of it; but he resisted the desire of
making it a merit. He feared bringing on himself that Anger which she had
against Sansac, if he should let her know that he had all along been his Rival,
and of making her to suspect those things which he had said of him; so that he
feigned the beginning of a Passion, which the opportunity of daily seeing a
beautiful Person that had no Engagement, had produced.

Madmoiselle of Roye had found her self too much disobliged by Love to admit it
a second time; and if her Heart could ever be moved with it again, it could not
be but an acknowledgment on Monsieur of Amboise's account; she answered
Sancerre with that indifferency, which a Lover thinks more unsufferable than
Anger it self. And from that very moment he did dread all the ill that he might
expect from it; however being not quite dashed out of countenance, he spoke to
her more than once.

Her Love was tired with constraining it self; he importuned, if he could not
please; so that Madmoiselle of Roye was obliged to let him know, that if he
continued his Discourses, she should never see him more. She told it him with
such a calmness of mind, that he doubted not but that she would make good her
Threatening, and he was so vexed at it, that he would see her no more.

In vain did the Count of Amboise seek in the Country for a quiet, which he had
failed of the first time, a new reason of curing himself did but increase his
pain: The Count of Sancerre, Madmoiselle of Roye, and Sansac, did incessantly
present themselves to his imagination, and tormented him. He returned to Paris,
drawn thither by his unquietness, and without knowing to what purpose; he did
not presently go to Madam of Roye's, and he was absolutely resolved to avoid
seeing of her Daughter; mean time having inquired what she did, he learnt that
Sancerre had desisted seeing of her, and he was told at the same time, that it
was because that Count was fallen in Love with her; that his Passion had been a
trouble to her; and that in fine, she had in a manner banished him. As things
indifferent are seldom concealed, Madmoiselle of Roye had confessed the truth
of that business to some of her Friends, who had inquired after the Reasons
that Sancerre did see her no more; and D'Amboise, who sought after the
knowledge of those things, could not fail of being informed; by that means he
lost all Suspicion as to the Count of Sancerre, by whom he had been more
alarmed, than really made jealous; he believed that Madmoiselle of Roye had
only designed to fret Sansac, but not to betray him, when she refused to see
him after the Masquerading at Reims, and when she had received Sancerre, that
it might only be the consequences of a Love-quarrel, which he might not have
heard of, and it was but too easy to him to turn all his Anger upon Sansac;
but he soon learnt also, that that Marquess was fallen in Love with Madam of
Tournon, and that News did produce in him diverse agitations, in which he went
no further at first than to know what Madmoiselle of Roye's thoughts were on
that Subject; after which he returned to her House with much earnestness.

Madam of Roye received him with her usual Civilities, and Madmoiselle of Roye
appeared melancholic, but civil and full of regards; there being some Persons
in the Chamber, he could not enter into any particular Conversation with her
that day, but however she observed that he loved her still; she made some
reflections on his proceedings, and on those of Sansac; she opposed the
Constancy of the one to the Inconstancy of the other; and though such
advantageous thoughts in the behalf of D'Amboise, did not yet carry along with
them Madmoiselle of Roye's Heart, it was much however that she allowed him so
entire a preference in her mind.

The first time that he saw her alone, he would have spoken of Sansac; but she
presently avoided the Discourse by a secret confusion, which she was in at her
being abandoned by a man whom she had preferred before him; mean time he let
her understand, that he was not ignorant of what was said of Sansac's Change,
and it was after a manner, that in some degree did qualify Madmoiselle of
Roye's disorder: She sufficiently esteemed this Count to oblige her to be
sincere with him. Take the pleasure of revenging your self of me, said she, I
ought to let you enjoy that Triumph; Well, it is true, I know that Sansac does
leave me for Madam of Tournon. Is it possible, Madmoiselle, said he, can that
be? Though it has been told me, though you confirm it, I too much know the
impossibility of ceasing from loving you, to be brought to believe it. There is
nothing more true, said she; but what is therein that is incredible? There are
nothing but Examples of Inconstancy seen. Madmoiselle, said he to her, do you
see none other? Do you not know a Lover despised, hated, and still constant? I
know him not despised, nor hated, said she again, with an Air that he had not
yet seen, I begin to make a difference betwixt him and all other men; I was
designed it may be to do him justice one day, and that day may be come. Alas!
Madmoiselle, deceive not your self in it, this day is still one of those which
you give to Sansac; and he would be the more happy for it, if he could be
sensible of his Happiness; though you would make me useful in your revenge, it
would be without any favorable thoughts for me; Sansac is very dear to you,
seeing that his Crime does engage you to say some flattering things to his
Rival. Thus did the Count of Amboise give Madmoiselle of Roye to understand,
that she had less design to make him sensible of her acknowledgment, than of
causing some further displeasure of Sansac: Yet Hope was creeping again into
the Count's Heart; it was a great Point got, not to have any longer to fear any
tenderness toward a Rival, and to have none to combat but that of Madmoiselle
of Roye, which she her self did oppose.

Madam of Tournon did still continue a Commerce of Letters with that Marquess,
she had got insensibly so far, as to make him apprehend, that she would
willingly have afforded him some comfort for Madmoiselle of Roye's infidelity,
he had seized on that opportunity to endeavor to forget her, the desire which
he had so to do, did sometimes make him hope that he should succeed in it, and
give a certain lively Air to his Letters, at which Madam of Tournon was very
well pleased. Mean time he did much less mind to persuade her that he loved
her, than to convince Madmoiselle of Roye of it, which he durst not yet see.

The Count of Sansac, his Father's sickness, was a reason that might detain him
at Tours; he did write to his Friends, that he was in Love with that Countess,
and they no longer did mention Madmoiselle of Roye to him, because he had
desired them to forbear, without giving any reason for it. During the time that
Sancerre was still numbered amongst Madmoiselle of Roye's Friends; Madam of
Tournon had writ to him, that they were in a perfect Intelligence, and since
that time no body had informed him to the contrary. This Countess, which
frequently received Letters from Sansac, because she writ to him every day, did
cause the most passionate of them to be shown to Madmoiselle of Roye, as if
they had been surprised.

Madmoiselle of Roye did enter into an unconceivable Anger at them, and
Sansac's inconstancy did work more advantageously for Monsieur of Amboise, than
all that Lover's Services could do. The Count of Sansac dyed about that time,
and his Death did set his Son at liberty of finishing his Marriage with
Madmoiselle of Roye; but he took no advantage of it, Madam of Tournon, who no
longer could perceive any other obstacle to it, than those which she produced,
redoubled her Artifices; she caused to be spread abroad, that she should marry
that Marquess so soon as he should return to Paris, where he was suddenly to
be, to receive the King's Orders. Madam of Tournon's Design was to engage
before that time Madmoiselle of Roye to fix on some other Person. Madam of Roye
could not bear the Affront which was offered her Daughter, she told her that it
concerned their Honor to prevent Sansac's Designs; Madmoiselle of Roye was the
most irritated, and sought after nothing but Revenge. The Mareshal of Cosse, at
that juncture of time, did cause some Propositions of Marriage to be made to
her; but the disproportion of their Age did oblige Madam of Roye to be in a
Suspense, notwithstanding the great Advantages which she might expect from that
Establishment. The Count of Amboise did still entertain the same Passion for
Madmoiselle of Roye which he ever had, though he had more than once given over
that pursuit. But those Reasons which had obliged him so to do, were no longer
existent, nothing was more proper for that beautiful Creature, than a Person
who had always loved her most tenderly, and whom she esteemed above all other
men. Madam of Roye did ask that Count's Advice, as of a Friend, on the Mareshal
of Cosse, at which he was seized with such a Trembling, as hindered him from
answering. I perceive with a Surprise, said she to him, that whatsoever
concerns my Daughter, is not yet become indifferent to you, mean time all that
you have done already, did give me occasion to believe that you might see her
without trouble to marry another; You know that I had designed her for you, and
that I had preferred you to all other men, if you would have taken advantage
from thence. I have nothing to answer you, Madam, said he, you cannot be
ignorant of the dispositions in which I shall persist all my lifetime for
Madmoiselle of Roye; I know not whether there are; less obstacles against me in
her Heart, but I flatter my self with it, and there needed not so much to
render my Passion extraordinary: If you had any thoughts that way, permit me to
consult Madmoiselle of Roye on that subject for the last time. Well, pray do
so, said the Countess, I have the same Consideration for you that I ever had.

That Conjuncture was something nice for the Count of Amboise to act in, he had
twice already engaged himself with Madmoiselle of Roye, a third time ought to
make him tremble, but the Mareshal of Cosse's concurrence did but him on
marrying Madmoiselle of Roye, to take her from him; he went and cast himself at
that fair Creature's feet. Madmoiselle, said he, you behold the most amorous of
all men, you know that all your rigours have not hindered me from being so, and
what have not your Civilities done? Notwithstanding that I ought to think you
would never love me, and yet they have given me some hopes, or at least they
have stood me in place (...) some good Omen, so long as you have been your own;
but you can no longer avoid being some bodies, and fear that you tremble at it.
It is no Engagement that shall make my fear, said Madmoiselle of Roye, it can
be only those Persons with whom I should be obliged to engage my self. How!
Madam, said he, are you in a Condition of making any differences? I fear lest
some vexatious remembrance should render the Choice of an Husband disagreeable
to you, or at least indifferent; all will be equal to you. But added he, Why
should I press you to declare your self? Your Bounties give me not boldness
enough to make me believe, that if you were capable of distinctions, they might
be in favor of me; You have too much accustomed me to be unhappy, to let me
gather any hopes.

You offend me, said she, by those remembrances which you would bring into my
mind, yet I am willing to answer you precisely on the rest; You have merited
enough to invite me to speak my thoughts plainly to you; and seeing that I
cannot dispense my self from entering into some tie, I should be sorry if it
were not with you. What a word was that for Monsieur of Amboise? Could he make
any Reflections contrary to his Happiness? He entreated Madmoiselle of Roye to
prefer him to the Mareshal of Cosse; and she having a great tendency to it, her
Marriage was a third time resolved upon. It then seemed to that Lover, that he
had nothing more to fear, and that he was above all his misfortunes: No more
Rivals: No more Obstacles. He was going to be united for ever unto a Person
whom he had long loved, and by whom at last he believed to be beloved. His
misfortune had lasted so long, that he would no longer retard his Happiness; he
entreated Madam of Roye not to let the Ceremonies of the Nuptials be any longer
deferred. Madmoiselle of Roye, who through Esteem for Monsieur of Amboise, and
through a secret spite against Sansac, was resolved upon that Marriage, made
no difficulty to consent that it should suddenly be ended, which was done two
days after.

When it was concluded on, Sansac's Friends had writ to him of it, not as a
thing which concerned him, but as News. What a Clap of Thunder was this for
him? And what Sentiments did rekindle in his Heart? He felt that Spite, Time,
and Absence had done no more but lulled them asleep a little, and that it had
not weakened them in the least. He did not conceive that she could ever have
loved Sancerre, and so soon marry D'Amboise, and that Reflection did sensibly
lead him to doubt, whether she had ever loved the first of them; mean time he
believed that she had in a manner offered it to him by her silence, he had seen
Sancerre go out of her House, when the entering into it had been refused him;
and though all these Circumstances, being recalled into his memory, did cause
him to shiver, he told himself that they were no Certainties, that peradventure
something that he was ignorant of, had given place to those Irregularities, he
again did afford an Esteem for Madmoiselle of Roye in his thoughts as often as he
feared to lose her; all that which could justify her came into his mind, as
formerly all that could render her guilty had presented it self there; that
oddness of her marrying of Amboise, at that time that she should have married
Sancerre, if she had loved him, did put him out of all measures, and made him
to believe every thing possible, even not to have been betrayed. He already
accused himself, for having peradventure given too soon some Jealousy to
Madmoiselle of Roye of Madam of Tournon Amboise, who he had always thought so
far from being beloved by Madmoiselle of Roye, did not appear to him capable of
having made himself Master with so much haste of an Heart which had always been
refused him; at other times he fansied, that the same Inconstancy which had led
her to love Sancerre, might also lead her to love Amboise; but that Idea
appeared so cruel to him, that he would presently cast it off: In fine, he
could unravel nothing, only he found that he could not suffer that any one
should be made happy by marrying of Madmoiselle of Roye. He did not think that
her Marriage should be preform'd with so much precipitation, and he still hoped
to put some stops to it; mean time he could not return to Paris, as he desired
to do, because that the Huguenots, with whom a Treaty of Peace had been
concluded, yet without effect, had made themselves Masters of diverse Cities,
and had Troops also not far from Tours, so that it was not possible for him to
leave his Government; but he would not defer to let Madmoiselle of Roye know
the condition in which her Marriage was going to reduce him, though he was
ignorant of the Dispositions in which she was for him. He went to Madmoiselle
of Sansac, his Sister, who was but two Leagues from thence; he told her of that
Marriage, which he knew would concern her as much as him, he did conjure her to
go immediately thither, to give a Letter to Madmoiselle of Roye, which he had
writ, and to use all the means that could prevent her from marrying the Count
of Amboise.

Madmoiselle of Sansac's Passion was of those that nothing can cure, she was
seized with Wonder and with Sorrow; and though she did endeavor to conceal
those motions, she assured her Brother, that he might rely upon her as to the
care of the business, which she would bring about, if any could do it, and that
she would omit nothing that could do him Service. Upon this Assurance he
returned to Tour's, and she thought of nothing but keeping her Word with him.

She was not long about choosing the quickest way, and that which seemed to her
the most sure; she thought that it would be in vain to have Madmoiselle of Roye
persuaded of Sansac's tenderness, and that though she should again take up her
first Sentiments for him, they would be useless, because that her timidity
would always prevail over her inclination, and that it would be more easy to
cast into Amboise's mind some Scruples, which should oblige him to take that
Party, which he had done already more than once, than to use any other means to
break off that Marriage; that after all, it would be no ill Fortune to him not
to marry a Person, which had been so long preposiest in the behalf of Sansac;
that there was not scarce any occasion to doubt but that her tenderness for him
would awaken again, when she should once see him return to her again.

Madmoiselle of Sansac writ to Monsieur of Amboise, and she also sent him the
Letter, which Sansac had writ to Madmoiselle of Roye; she disguised her own
Hand, that it might not be known: those Letters came from her, and she followed
them some moments after, to learn what effects they might have produced.
D'Amboise received them the day after his Marriage, and when he thought that
his Happiness should never be troubled more, he opened that from Madmoiselle of
Sansac, the Character of which he knew not, and which was conceived in the
following words.

LETTER.
I Am not ignorant of your Nicety in your marrying of Madmoiselle of Roye, you
believe your self Master of her Heart; I give you a means to assure your self
whether you are or not, here is a Letter which Sansac writes to her: since he
loves her still, he may also be beloved by her, consult her on that Letter; if
she receives it with indifferency, you will have the more quiet in your
Marriage; and if you perceive that her Passion is not yet extinct, you may
avoid an Engagement, which can never be happy for you.


After this he read that of Sansac, whose Writing he knew, in which he found
these words:

To Madmoiselle of Roye.
I Am informed that you are going to marry Monsieur of Amboise, and that
News-makes so deep an impression on me, that I cannot forbear writing to you,
though I have so much cause of complaining against you, I am not in a condition
of making you any reproaches; I love you, and I lose you, I am to justify my
self, and to crave your pardon; I have feigned loving Madam of Tournon, with a
design either to cure, or rather revenge my self, but I have done nothing all
that while, but keep up my Passion by that hope. Peradventure also that my
Conduct has displeased you. May be it has hastened that resolution which you
take. Alas! I flatter my self, I should be still too happy in having a share in
the reasons of your Marriage, as fatal as it is to me. No, you love Amboise, as
you have loved another. I ask your pardon, if I offend you; though I desire to
offend you: Cause that reproach to cease, if it is too sensible to you; cause
that inclination to revive again with which you once did flatter me, and which
you said was to last for ever. What? convey it to D'Amboise, after your Heart
had distinguished me from him in so obliging a manner; I oppose my self to your
Marriage, by the right which your first Sentiments have given me over you, and
if there remains yet any thing of them, I love you enough to pretend to recall
them all back again. You formerly believed that we were born for one another;
Why part we while I love you still? Ah! leave the thoughts of entering in a new
Engagement, if not, fear the fury of a Lover who will lose all, rather than
lose a good which he has merited both by his tenderness and yours.


What an effect did the reading of those Letters produce in Monsieur of
Amboise's Heart? He found himself constrained to doubt whether he was beloved
at the time that he possessed that Person which he loved. What an horror did
present it self to his imaginations? He remained suppressed with that Idea, and
his Marriage became the most grievous of all his evils. So long as he had been
but a Lover, the entire assurance of not being beloved, had appeared less cruel
to him, than that certainty to which he saw himself reduced; if he had never
loved so passionately, neither had be been so sensibly touched with Jealousy,
to attain to the very last degree of ones Wishes, and to behold all ones
Happiness cast down through unsufferable Conceptions, through such Doubts as
could not be clear, not incapable of abandoning, nor of hating the Countess of
Amboise, nor to love her neither, was the condition he found himself in, and
unto which there was no Remedy.

The Countess of Amboise took notice of his coldness, and of his trouble; she
asked him the cause of it after a manner that ought to have settled him; but her
kindnesses were suspicious, or rather he thought that he enjoyed them but by
Surprise; he was diverse times on the point of showing her the Letter from
Sansac, that he might no longer doubt the evil which he feared, and to
establish on that, if it were possible, a most sorrowful quiet; but he as often
stopped his hand, and he felt that he had still the certainty of it to fear: He
answered the Countess in such terms as did not satisfy her, and which put her
into extraordinary disturbances.

When Madmoiselle of Sansac came to Paris, she learnt that Monsieur d'Amboise
was married to Madmoiselle of Roye; She feared all the disorder that the
Letters which she had sent might have done, and the vexations at her
imprudence, joined to those which she had at that Marriage, made her that very
day take the resolution of going into a Monastery, to avoid reproaches from her
Brother, and to have the power of overcoming a Passion, which had seized her
Heart: She writ to the Marquess of Sansac before she went into it, and informed
him, that Madmoiselle of Roye was married; She also confessed, that in a design
to serve him, and not knowing that the Count of Amboise was already beyond the
condition of making use of these Advices, which were given him, she had sent to
him that Letter which he had writ to Madmoiselle of Roye, with a Note in an
unknown Character, which might have brought him once again to have broken that
Marriage: Finally, she prayed that Marquess to leave her at quiet, and never
more to mention that fault to her, which she was going to expiate all her life
time.

Sansac received not that Letter at Tours, because that the Prince of Conde's
Troops, who had had a design to surprise that City, and that had been prevented
by the Governors vigilance, were got into Orleans, and gave him the
opportunity to return to Paris. He learnt so soon as he was got thither, that
Madmoiselle of Roye was married, and he was as surprised as sorrowful at it;
though he had feared that Marriage, he could not persuade himself that it could
be done; and his Reflections on it had but softened his Heart the more, and
rendered it more capable of feeling his loss; far from preparing it to bear his
misfortune, he abandoned himself to all that Despair has of most horrid: But he
was not long in that trouble, Amboise was decreed to dye with grief in the
midst of his Happiness, and it was soon spread abroad in what danger that Count
was. Monsieur of Amboise could not bear the diverse agitations of his mind, a
Fever did seize him with such an extraordinary violence, that from the very
first day his Life was in danger: The Countess of Amboise was incessantly by
him, bathed with tears; the affliction which she showed him, and the Cares
which she took for his preservation, did sensibly move him, but this put him in
Despair when he thought that he durst not take them for Tokens of Love; yet he
could not but be sensible of them. He perceived that Madam of Amboise was
worthy of an infinite Esteem, and that if he could not reach her Heart, he was
to dye without complaining of her, he felt that he had but few days to live,
and he resolved not to mention to her those Letters, which caused his Death,
for fear of showing some Jealousy, and of taking from her by that means the
liberty of following her own inclination, when he should be no more. That
strain of Generosity did cost him dear, his Sentiments were not sufficiently
weakened, not to oppose himself to a resolution which was so contrary to them;
and his Deliriums did sometimes discover that which he would have concealed.

Madam of Amboise, who by all means imaginable did endeavor to find out the
Cause of his affliction and of his sickness, perceived at last that a Jealousy
did torment him; the Love and Esteem which she had for her Husband, and that
which she had for her self, would not permit her to let him live or dye, with
such disadvantageous thoughts of her; She more than once did cast her self at
his feet, telling him, that the slight which he had showed her in depriving her
of his Confidence, was unsufferable. Madam, said he to her, what do you seek to
know? Believe that that tenderness which I have for you, is the Cause of that
Secret you seek after. You cannot understand me, added he sighing, and I lose
all the satisfaction which I should have in deserving from you by this last
Sacrifice, but it is to leave you more at rest and quiet.

Those words did still increase Madam of Amboise's Curiosity, and caused her to
redouble her entreaties, insomuch that at the last the Death of that Count
being no longer uncertain, and the Physicians having declared it to his Wife,
the extraordinary Sorrow which she showed him all the time, and the manner
after which she pressed him, had the power to tear out of his Bosom, what he
had concealed there till then. It is believed that your Sickness increases,
said she, embracing of him, doubtless your disquiet of mind contributes to it.
I mention not mine to you, you have discovered to me, against your mind, part
of that which you had a mind to conceal from me; I know you have unjust
thoughts of me, you will not give me place of justifying my self, and you
neglect being satisfied of a Person that you no longer love; I have, with the
fear of losing you, the assurance of having already lost your Friendship and
Love: but I have already told you, I go not about to move you by my Sorrow. I
have no other concern in it but your own, complain of me to give your self
ease, and express your thoughts to put your self more at quiet. Perhaps that
you may not find me guilty, if you cause me to speak. Well, Madam, said the
Count of Amboise, seeing that my ravings have began to betray me, and have
troubled you, I must inform you of all, and repair those evils that they have
done. Read these Letters, said he, presenting her those that he had received,
this is it that causes my grief, I could not live, and doubt whether I was
beloved by you or no; I die to leave you to another, that will never love you
as I do, but with whom you will be more happy, because that you will love him
more.

Madam of Amboise did tremble at the imprudence or malice of those who had sent
the Letter of Advice to her Husband; she did not guess at them, and she was so
taken up to see him dye for her, that even at that moment the Letter from
Sansac made not the least impression on her mind; Monsieur of Amboise, who was
employed contrary to his Design, in examining the motions of her Face, did not
perceive her to change color; Well, Sir, said she, you have thoughts that I
could not receive a Letter from Sansac, without entertaining again such
Sentiments as would be displeasing to you; I wish it had been given me, I had
put it into your hands, as I do at this present: Ah! if this be true, Madam,
said he with a Transport, which shortened his days, must I die? What? You can
have forgotten Sansac, said he, with Eyes in which Love was not yet extinct? I
am ashamed, said she, that I must give you new assurances of it, but I shall be
satisfied, if they do but put you out of that condition you are in. No, Madam,
said he to her, I die with as much satisfaction as regret: but when all is
done, your first Sentiments have been for Sansac, I am neither unjust nor
tyrannical, it is much for me to have extinguished them one moment during my
life, they will rekindle after my death; I murmur not at it, oppose not my
memory to them, you knew that so long as I could, I have preferred your
happiness to mine, and I see with some kind of Joy, that you will be perfectly
happy, without making me unhappy. No sooner had he ended those words but he
swooned; The Countess of Amboise was led out of the Chamber, notwithstanding
her Tears and her Outcries. Madam of Roye, who was not much less afflicted at
the condition the Count was in, did however endeavor to comfort her, as much
as she could possible.

Monsieur of Amboise came out of his Swoon, he ordered that his Wife should be
desired not to come into his Chamber any more, that she might spare her self
the trouble which the sight of him would cause her, and because that the sight
of her did make him leave this life with too much unwillingness; he dyed the
next day.

Madam of Roye did lead the Countess of Amboise into a Monastery, where she
stayed a fortnight, and after that they went into the Country. That Widow's
affliction did not grow moderate, she thought that she should never consolate
her self for the Death of her Husband; She knew the full value of that
Affection which he had had for her, and how much his Heart and his Merits were
above that of other men; She was even in an admiration of him, and she was far
from distrusting that she should ever have any Sentiments of Love for any Body;
She even thought that she had never had any so sensible as for him; She did
avoid thinking on Sansac's Letter; She thought she did it through indifferency,
but she did incessantly think on the Generosity which her Husband had had of
consenting at his Death, that she should marry him, though she had no design of
taking any advantage of it.

Sansac had taken up new Hopes by the Death of Monsieur of Amboise, but he
understood that it would be long before he durst see the Widow, and he returned
to Tours, when she went into the Country, where she remained three months,
without receiving any Visit; mean time her businesses obliged her to return to
Paris, and he returned also at the same time so soon as he heard of it, though
he durst not go to her House, he did seek after all solitary Walks with a
design to find her there. He was not long without receiving that satisfaction,
and without causing himself to be observed. The Countess of Amboise found her
self disturbed the first time that she saw him. She thought that the presence
of a man that had offended her, might be the cause of that trouble, she being
then with a Lady of her Relations to whom she would not give any notice of
having observed Sansac, she was obliged to go on her way. Sansac did follow her
still; and in fine. she went off so soon as she could possible.

When she was returned home, she went into her Closet, where she could not
forbear reading that Letter of the Marquesse's, which Monsieur of Amboise had
given her, and which she had kept; she found it full of Passion, and she read
it over again, after which she was seized with profound thoughts, in which she
could not distinguish her own Conceptions.

Some days after, Monsieur of Sansac having gained some of her people, to
discover in what place she would go walk, he was there before her, because she
came but late; and when he met her, he saluted her after a manner that was full
of Sorrow and of Respect, which gave her a greater disturbance than the first
time had done, she was got out of the Coach to take the Air; but so soon as she
had saluted the Marquess, she hastily got into it again: mean time she had not
gone far, but her Coach broke; it was late, she was a pretty way from Paris,
and she found her self in a great disorder.

Monsieur of Sansac, who saw at distance the disorder which had happened to her
Equipage, drew near; and not daring to speak to Madam of Amboise, he entreated
one of those Women that accompanied the Countess, to offer her, as from him,
his Coach to carry her back. Madam of Amboise could not dispense her self from
answering that Civility, she returned him thanks, and told him, that some of
her people were going for some body to mend her Coach, and sent immediately
about it: He told her, that he was very unhappy to be refused in such an
occasion, where it was almost impossible not to accept of that which he
proposed; That Madam of Amboise's Coach could not be in a condition to go
before night were far advanced; That he would wait the return of those which
she sent, and that perhaps necessity would overcome that repugnancy which she
had of doing him that Favor. Madam of Amboise did endeavor to answer him
without rudeness, but also without promising to make use of his assistance;
they insensibly got into a Conversation, Monsieur of Sansac found out the Art
of making it last, in saying things to Madam of Amboise which caused her to
give him some Answers. Those persons that had been sent for to mend the Coach,
came and said, it was impossible to bring it back to Paris that day.

Madam of Amboise was in a strange confusion, night was began, Sansac offered
to give her his Coach, and to stay there till it were returned; there had been
some rudeness to leave him there alone: mean time she had a great task to
resolve her self to go in the same Coach with a man that had loved her, and
whom she feared was not yet quite indifferent to her. At last necessity obliged
her to entreat him to bring her to the first Houses, while she should send for
a Coach to Paris. Those Houses being at a great distance, she could not with
decency leave him in the fields, and he found too much pleasure in accompanying
Madam of Amboise, to avoid it one moment, so that he carried her with two of
her Women into the next Town. What Charms for him to find himself with her! He
durst not tell her but indifferent things, but he spoke to her, did see her,
and did hope that that Rencontre would not be without some Consequences; the
very Air of Mystery which did happen accidentally in this Adventure, did afford
him a great deal of delight.

The same Reasons that created that Lover's Joy, did alarm Madmoiselle
Amboise's Severity, she was so agitated with different thoughts, that she said
nothing but in disorder. The Marquess, who perceived it, did not draw any ill
Omen from it, neither durst he ask her the permission of seeing her any longer,
after he had set her where she desired to be, but he hovered about that place,
till she was gone from thence.

The next day he writ to her to ask an hours Audience before he went to
Chartres, where the King was sending him with a Reinforcement of four thousand
men, who were got into the City, which the Huguenots had besieged.

That Countess was puzzled about the Conduct that she should observe in that
occasion; she had been busied all the night with the thoughts of the Rencontre
which she had made, Sansac had appeared more amorous than ever, but she durst
not find him as lovely; mean time he was almost justified in her mind, in
regard of Madam of Tournon, by his Letter, which she had read diverse times
over. Monsieur of Amboise far from fearing that she should marry him, had in
some manner enjoined her to it at his death, yet she thought that that was not
sufficient to invite her to marry him; but that she might see him without
scruple, she was to speak to him, and to learn who it was had sent to Monsieur
of Amboise those Letters which had caused so much disorder. In fine, she was to
inform Sansac of the resolution that she had taken of remaining a Widow; in
those thoughts she let him know that he might see her.

With what Joy did he go to her House, and found himself at liberty to speak to
her of his Passion; he thought that her Beauty was yet increased, her Mourning
and the Emotion which appeared on her Face, did add a thousand Charms. He cast
himself at her Feet, without pronouncing one single word, and even without
thinking what he did.

Madam of Amboise did oblige him to rise, with such a serious Look, as did kill
him with fear, he took a seat as she had ordered him to do, and he was a long
time without daring to life up his Eyes toward her; that Respect did move her
more than the Transport of his Love had done.

I have had the boldness, Madam, said he scarce looking on her, to ask to see
you, but I am sufficiently punished for it, and your Air denounces me those
Evils, which I had avoided to prevent. Madam of Amboise made him no Answer. You
say nothing to me, Madam? added he, speak, reduce me to despair, those harsh
things that you will say to me, will be less cruel than your silence. I shall
speak to you, answered she, I had not let you come, if I had not had a great
deal to say, and I am only troubled where to begin. I believe that I ought not
to rejoice, Madam, said he, at what you have to say to me; it is easy for me
to foresee, that it will not prove advantageous to me, and you take off much of
the Favor you do me, which had been too great, had you had nothing to do but
to hear me. I shall not make any difficulty to confess to you, said she, that I
have seen that Letter you writ to me on the account of my Marriage, and which
was sent to Monsieur of Amboise, I must know of you to whom you had given it,
and how so ill and unfortunate a business for me, through the death of Monsieur
of Amboise, was carried.

Sansac related to her, that it being impossible for him to return to Paris,
because there was some fear of an Attempt by the Huguenots upon Tours; he had
trusted his Sister with the Letter, who promised to put it into her own hands;
that Madmoiselle of Sansac being as ignorant as he was, that they were already
married, thought that the best way was to prevent it, by sending those Letters
to Monsieur of Amboise: But, Madam, added he, I find that their ill success is
imputed to me, and that though my Letter had been seen but to your self, I
ought not to have expected any thing but your anger from it. No doubt of that,
said she, seeing that I was Monsieur of Amboise's Wife; but I had reason to
believe that Madam of Tournon would have comforted you of my Marriage, or at
least that it had not afflicted you so much. Madam of Tournon, cried he, Is it
possible, Madam, that you can think she could consolate me one moment for your
loss? Madam of Amboise could not forbear speaking to him of the deference which
he had given to that Countess the Masquerading day; but he did protest to her
with so much integrity and ingenuity, that he thought he had danced with her,
and of the Conversation which he also thought he had had with her, on the
account of Sancerre, confounding them both for a while; at last they unravelled
it, and found that Madam of Tournon had played them both. Truth did manifest it
self to them, while they discoursed it; they found that they were both
innocent; a pleasing Joy which they had not felt of a long time, took again
possession of their Hearts.

When they had no more Complaints to make, they looked on one another a while.
But, Madam, replied the Marquess of Sansac, what avails it to me, that you have
not loved Sancerre, if I am grown indifferent to you? You ought, at least, to
be so to me, replied Madam of Amboise; I have married an Husband, the most
worthy to be beloved that ever was, this last words deserved that I should ever
be prepossessed by him. I was resolved to make it a Secret to you, but I find
my self engaged to tell it you, to mark to you the better the obligation I have
to love him ever. She gave him an account of the Conversation that Monsieur of
Amboise had had with her on that subject, softning a little those Terms which
might flatter him too much, yet that Lover remained charmed with that
confidence that she had showed him. Ah! Madam, said he, casting himself once
more at her feet, perform the last Will of Monsieur of Amboise; I have merited
to succeed him, seeing that I am chosen by him so to do, your indifferency only
can render me unworthy of it. But, added he, why should I be indifferent to
you? I have not ceased one moment from being the most amorous of all men; I am
authorized to tell you so much, and you ought to make no scruples, but of not
loving me. I perceive that I have told you too much, said she blushing, and
obliging him to rise with more mildness than the first time, it is no longer
time to dissemble with you, added she, know that my inclination is not quite
extinct. That ^ad I but sooner learnt your innocence. I had not been Monsieur
of Amboise's Prise, he had not died, and nothing had prevented me from being
yours; but since I have married him, I owe him one Sacrifice for all those that
he has made me, for this reason I have framed the design of remaining a Widow;
and should I have so much weakness as not to perform it, I should not be happy
in marrying you: What friendship soever I should have for you, my reflections
would prevent me from the enjoyment of yours, and peradventure would deprive me
of mine also at last. Ah! Madam, said he, with a Despair in his Soul, I find
you have never loved me. I wish it were true, said she to him sighing. Alas!
Madam, answered he, if it is so, why tell you me such cruel things? and why
would you have me to renounce you? I cannot do it, it is easier for me to die*
What, said she, you cannot make an effort to leave me to my self, as Monsieur
of Amboise has done to leave me to you. No* Madam, said he, propose to me no
Examples, I have too much Love, only to think of losing you; and if you deprive
me of hope those dangers in which I am going to engage, and where I shall not
manage my self will deliver you from a Lover who is to passionate to overcome
his Sentiments, or to conceal them. Answer me once more, Madam, my life and
death are in your hands. What do you tell me, said Madam of Amboise, with Eyes
swelled with Tears, Why will you have me to determinate? at least leave me
unresolved, seeing you have already shaken my resolution. Sansac would have
engaged her to have given him her positive Word to marry him, but she fixed to
what she had said. He was obliged to take leave of her, and he went to Chartres
with the four thousand men which he was to conduct there.

When he was gone, Madam of Amboise did perceive how far she had gone already;
that the Suspicions which Sansac had dispersed, were become in some manner
meritorious toward her, and that she had found a great occasion of praising
him, in having not had as great an occasion of complaining of him; she thought
that she had gainsaid her self too easily and too soon; and that when he should
make any reflections on that Conduct, he would have less esteem for her than
Love; that thought did vex her, she told her self, that such an Husband as she
had had, did merit a Wife with high Sentiments, and stedfastness; that in fine,
the pleasure of thinking on him, and of being contented with her self, ought
for ever to possess her.

But soon after she made other guess Reflections, Monsieur of Sansac was killed
before Charters, in sallying forth on the Huguenots; and she had so cruel a
Sorrow for it, that she guessed it had been impossible for her to have merited
long his esteem at the cost of that tenderness which she had for him; she
returned into the Country, where she passed the rest of her days, filled with
those diverse afflictions, and without daring ever to unravel them, for fear of
knowing which was strongest.

FINIS.

