TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND, Now sitting at WEST MINSTER.

A Representation of the Outrages and Cruelties acted upon the servants of
Christ, at two Meetings at Sabridgworth in Hartford-shire.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

WHile ye declare for a Commonwealth, and the just Liberties of all persons as
men and Christians; and while other people in the Nation (though enemies to
such a Government) have freedom to worship after their manner; the true friends
of Christ (that cannot be enemies to good Government) many of whom have
ventured their lives in the late War, for the Rights and Liberties of the
people, being awakened to Worship the Lord in Spirit and Truth, are not only
slandered and reviled with all manner of evil sayings, but most cruelly
buffeted, beaten and stoned to the shedding of their blood, in several dark
places of the Land, which are full of the habitations of cruelty, as if their
lives were at the mercy of the worst of men, and they were only to be used as
sheep for the slaughter; An instance whereof we shall present you with (in
stead of many) what was acted in two several Meetings at Sabridgworth in
Hartford-shire, the third and one and thirtieth of the fifth Month, on the
third, day a multitude of the sons of Belial boys and men stormed the house
wherein Gods people were met together in meekness and fear, with stones, dirt
and other things of offense, and breaking in upon them did very much abuse
them, especially as they went away, no Officer appearing to keep the Peace, and
endeavor to suppress the tumult, though two Constables and a Churchwarden
lived hard by, and a Justice of Peace Sir Thomas Hewet so called, was at the
place of his worship, within hearing of the clamor and shouting, to whom also
the suffering people showed themselves in such a pickle, as would have moved
any person of common humanity to pity, and interpose his utmost power, for
their rescue; but his answer to their mild complaints was frowns and checks,
biding them go for remedy to them that gave them their Liberty; and saying,
such usage was as lawful as their Meeting, whereupon the rude rabble took
encouragement to abuse them before his face; and that day month being more
numerous, they were much more fierce and cruel, striking horse and rider as
they came thither, pulling down some and wallowing them in the mire, daubing
others with dirt both faces and clothes, and filling their hats therewith, and
clapping them on their heads; and afterward assaulting the place (where near
300 were met together) with shouting and flinging of stones, they brake down
the tiles, boards, windows and walls of the house, and did fling in at the
breaches such showers of stones, dirt, rotten eggs, man's dung and water, that
few or none could escape the marks of their fury, and they cut off great part
of some men's coats, and did tear off a very good scarf from about a woman's
neck, which still is kept from her, laid some for dead and sorely bruised, and
battered others, and so annoyed all with their continual throwing for the space
of three hours, that one side of the house being broken down, they were forced
to quite the place; and as they attempted to escape were stopped, and not
suffered to pass without renewed tokens of inhumanity, for the mad crew neither
restrained by authority (the Constables absenting again on purpose, and Clement
Buck a Churchwarden slighted the admonition of a Justice of Peace there
present, who warned him to keep the Peace, and the rest to take heed they did
not break it, and was used as coursly as the rest for his pains; and their
Neighbor Justice bearing with (if not a betting) their madness, for his men
were the first that brake in upon them the former Meeting, and one of them was
present at the latter, encouraging the Tories;) nor their violence resisted the
harmless people taking all patiently, encouragement was taken to act over their
cruelties with repeated aggravations, and that without respect to Age, Sex or
Condition, so that aged persons, children and women with child, fared alike
with others; yea, as if nothing could satisfy but the lives of the innocent;
they did lay in wait and pursue some of them with stones and dirt almost two
miles from that place.

Now though it cannot be denied, that this has been the entertainment the best
of Gods people have met withal in the world, from the enmity of the serpents
seed, which is always higher, as the Spirit of glory shines brighter upon the
woman's seed; and therefore crucified the Lord of Glory. And though it is given
to Gods people not only to believe, but also to suffer: yet seeing that which
is done to them is reckoned as done to himself, and not knowing what the
passing by of such an example of violence, especially at this time may produce;
for preventing as much as in us lies (the shedding of innocent blood, which
pulls down the heaviest judgments upon a People or Nation that are guilty
thereof.) We have laid this foul business before you, to whom it belongs to do
Justice, and execute judgment in the midst of us; and this is not to keep a
day unto the Lord, neither are these fruits worthy a good Government or a right
Reformation, being scarce to be found where there is any Government;
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a shame for any people. It is a
great shame to the Magistrate, Minister and the whole Nation, that such
outrages should be committed, but much greater that they should be permitted.
Look to it therefore O ye Rulers of the Land, and bear your Testimony against
such wickedness, least otherwise you appear consenting thereunto, and there be
found among you the blood of the poor innocent, and so the fierce anger of the
Lord break forth upon you, and there be none to deliver: If the sufferings of
the innocent in France, Germany and Ireland are matter of lamentation, with
them that have any thing of tenderness and compassion, these cruelties so
newly acted, and so very near, must needs affect you: It is high time to do
something to stay the hand of the Lord that is stretched out for such
abominations. This last Tragedy was acted the immediate day before the
intended insurrection, and the Actors expressed great confidence of the success
thereof, saying, That there is no Parliament, and that King Charles would not
allow such meetings. You have yet power in your hands to prove them liars, yea
to vindicate your authority [which was trampled upon in this action] and to let
them know, there is a Parliament that abhors such barbarisms, and is indeed
resolved to defend the honest interest and people of the Nation against all
bloody adversaries whatsoever: So will you be a terror to evil doers, and a
praise to them that do well, and your hands, and the hands of them that are
with you may be strengthened to do excellently for the land of your nativity.

Robert Berd Henry Stout John Bresbon Sammuel Rud John Goodman John Odel John
Reynolds John Winchester Daniel Halden John Pain Abel Walston John Mighel
Jeremiah Plummer Thomas Everrard, etc.


POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the writing hereof, one of the persons that was most abused at the above
mentioned meeting John Goodman by name (one of whose eyes were almost put out
in the house, with stones and dirt, wherewith he went bleeding away, and yet
was set upon by three of these bloody men who knocked him down, and in
likelihood had taken away his life, but for some women that cried out and
caused them to leave him) hearing they were so far from repenting of their
wickedness, that they threatened to deal worse the next oppertunity, had a
Justice of Peace his warrant to bring them three, etc. before him or some other
Justice in the county, now the Constable willing to gratify his neighbors, did
go with them before Thomas Hewet aforesaid, where they were sure to have favor
in this case, who (when they were come before him, together with many witnesses
and others that came to hear and see how things were carried) asked them what
was the matter; John Goodman answered, there was cause enough, for he was
knocked down, the Justice replied, if you come for justice, behave your selves
as before a Justice [meaning they should be bare] and presently before the said
Goodman could say any more, the Justice gave the word, and his servants that
stood ready, thrust him and them that came with him out of doors; And this was
all the right the Justice could afford him, for the wrong he had suffered; Now
whether this be to act the part of a Justice of peace, or to minister Justice
and true judgment; Let all sober men judge, he has done very much herein to
strengthen the hands of evil doers, by justifying the wicked, and condemning
the innocent; And as it may well be concluded from whence this barbarous tumult
received their encouragement; so it may as easily be known where the blood that
might, or hereafter may be shed by this party is chargeable; And whether it be
for the honor and safety of the Commonwealth, that men of bloody principles
be continued in commission for the peace in a time of reformation, It is left
to the serious consideration of the present Authority of the Nation.

THE END.

