THE FEMALE PRINCE; OR, FREDERICK OF SICILY.

In Three Parts.

LONDON, Printed for H. Rodes next door to the Bear Tavern near Bride Lane in
Fleetstreet. 1682.

TO THE Right Honorable THE COUNTESS OF CONWAY.
Madam,
IT is now become so general a Custom to Devote things of this nature to some
eminent Patronage, that such as appear in the World without a considerable
Protector, seem like men abandoned by their good Genius, run a kind of
Gauntlet, and lie exposed to the lashes of every Satirical Wit. Thus, Madam,
having found so much Innocence and Beauty in this Story, as made me think it
Merited a better Destiny; I have presumed to make an Offering of it to your
Ladyship, in hopes that the entertainment it may afford, will both atone for
the confidence of this Address, and engage your Ladyship to allow it your
Favor and Countenance. I was easily made sensible, that it could be no where
so sure, as in such a Sanctuary, since so many Illustrious, even Divine
Qualities conspire to the Composing your Ladyships Character, that it would be
a kind of Profanation to attach it, when owned by a Person of your Fame and
Merit. For it is not only, Madam, all the advantages of Wit and Beauty, of
Alliance and Extraction, that have procured you that Universal admiration in
the World; your Ladyship is as much renowned for the Qualities of your Mind, as
you are for those of Body and Fortune, insomuch that all the Incense the Age
can afford is not sufficient to Celebrate so much Merit and Virtue, nor am I
able to express the respect and Devotion with which I am,

Madam, Your Ladyships most Humble and most Obedient Servant F. S.

THE FEMALE PRINCE; OR, FREDERICK OF SICILY.
PART I.
SIcily enjoyed great Satisfaction in the Reign of Menfroy; that Prince having
all the Qualities which obtain the Admiration of the People. He had rendered
himself formidable both in Spain and Italy, and though he had no other Enemies
than those his Valor had occasioned, he had already given several Battles; and
it is certain, that he conquered as often as he fought. Queen Cassandra, his
Wife, Daughter of Roger King of Naples, was likewise an accomplished Princess,
having all the Virtues that can be wished for in a Great Queen; and the King,
who loved her with an extraordinary Affection, would have had nothing more to
desire, if Heaven had not deprived him of several Princes whom the Queen had
brought into the World. This misfortune of their Family, made a great part of
their Lives very afflicting, Daughters not being capable of Succeeding in the
Crown, that Kingdom must inevitably have fallen into the hands of Berranger,
King of Majorca, Minorca, and Terra Nova, his Cousin-German, and greatest
Enemy. These two Kings being extraordinarily animated against one another,
would never have suspended the Effects of their Hatred, if Prince Ordogne,
Count of Barcelonna, and their Allies, had not made them agree to a Truce,
which they represented to be necessary for the Repose of their People. The King
of Sicily, notwithstanding the Advantages he had over Berranger, was prevailed
with to consent to this Proposition; for indeed, continual Victory does almost
as much weary the Conqueror as the Vanquished; and the King of Majorca being
brought into Despair, through the ill Success of his Arms, accepted though with
Repugnance, all the Conditions that the King of Sicily imposed upon him,
hoping, that by the Length of the Truce, he might the better put himself in a
Posture of resisting the Forces of Menfroy, who had almost exhausted all those
of his Kingdom. Those kind of Treaties that are made out of Necessity do not
put an end to Quarrels, they only help to foment them, and the Moment of seeing
them revived, is impatiently expected. Such were the Sentiments of Berranger,
and which he endeavored to inspire, as much as possible, in young Amaldee his
Son, and the young Camilla, as soon as they came out of their Nurses Arms. The
King of Sicily being returned to Messina, the place of his usual Residence,
found the Queen his Wife ready to lie in. This Princ^ss, who through the loss
of her Children, was become insensible of any Joy, received the King with all
the Tenderness she was capable of, but with a Languishing and Dejectedness that
cannot be conceived. The King made it his Business to divert her Grief, putting
her in hopes that Heaven would be more favorable to them, and that it would
perhaps conserve the Child with which she went; but, if by Misfortune she was
delivered of a Girl, he was resolved to conceal her Sex, and to bring her up as
a Prince Majeur, a Name consecrated in Sicily, as the Prince of Wales in
England, for to exclude Berranger from hopes of succeeding in his Crown. The
Queen did willingly agree to this Design; and some days after, she was brought
to Bed of a Princess, who was called Frederick, a Name famous in Sicily. The
Nurse, Governess, and the Lord High Admiral, were the only Persons who had the
Secret of this important Mystery. The Queen dyed some time after, whose Loss,
occasioned a public Affliction, the King being infinitely grieved, and
received no Consolation, but what the sight of Frederick afforded him; of whom,
he took a most particular Care. And indeed, never was Prince better bred than
this; his Natural Endowments being polished by a good Education, quickly
rendered him the most accomplished of all those of his Age. He was a Prodigy of
Beauty; but his Wit surpassed the Charms of his Person, whereof, he gave early
and considerable Instances.

The young Prince of Naples, called Leon, who was brought up with Frederick,
walking one day with him, and seeing a Number of fair Ladies, attended by a
Throng of Courtiers, they continued their Walk, with great Indifference as to
those who followed them; which Prince Leon taking notice of, You must confess,
said he to Frederick, that we are no great Gallants, since we are so solitary
in the Presences of so many Beauties. You are in the right, replied Frederick;
we might at least agreeably employ our Eyes, though our Hearts are not yet in a
State of being sensisible; but it is perhaps, the little Peril we should
thereby run, that makes us so negligent of pursuing it. The Truth is, dear
Cousin, said Leon to him, with an Ingenuity altogether charming, I am very far
from running any such Danger; and hitherto, I find in my self so little
Disposition to Love, that it would require a great deal of time to prepare me
for the least Sense of it. There needs no more, replied Frederick gallantly,
than two Eyes, and perhaps not so many Years, to make you change your Style.
But you, said the Prince of Naples once again, Do not you find something
surprising in what they tell us of Love, whom they describe to us as an Infant,
and however, would persuade us, that he is a dreadful Enemy? I know not what to
think of it, said Frederick to him, but perhaps we shall find him more
formidable when we are less childish. It was thus that those two lovely Princes
entertained themselves at the Age of twelve Years. In the mean while,
Endeavors were used to inspire Frederick with as much Indifference as was
necessary for the Personage he was to represent; and more particularly, they
insinuated into him, that to reign peaceably upon his Throne, it was requisite
he should reign over his own Heart. The King his Father had taken Care to
instruct him betimes with the Reasons of his Disguise; and had made him
promise, that during his Life, and that of Berranger, he would never discover
what he was, for the depriving his Enemy of the Hopes of succeeding him in
Sicily. Frederick embraced these Sentiments, and knew no other Passion than
that of reigning. At length, having attained to the Age of seventeen Years, he
was instructed in all the Exercises that are in use with Men; wherein, he so
excelled, that he seemed the most accomplished Prince of his Time. His Stature,
though tall for a Woman, was middle seized for a Man, but so full of Sweetness,
that it was impossible to forbear being charmed with it. His Eyes were black,
sparkling, and sweet, mingled with a Flame, and an engaging Languishing: in
short, all his Person was composed after such a manner, as was capable of
inspiring the most insensible with Affection. Having attained to that Season
wherein Love commits so many Disorders, he began to observe himself more
strictly, well knowing, that if that Passion was so much to be avoided by all
People, it was much more so for him, who would be obliged to keep very
perplexing Measures with those should have rendered him sensible. He saw daily a
number of handsome Princes, and having examined himself, he did not yet find
any Motions, which he could be any ways apprehensive of. Besides, he imagined
that his Disguise sheltring him from the Gallantries of Lovers, would likewise
secure him against the Attempts of Love: but therein he was mistaken in his
Accounts. He quickly perceived by the Conquests that his good Mien had made,
that a Passion may be produced without the help of another. Several Beauties
sighed for him in secret, and some, openly enough to make themselves
understood; insomuch, that the Crowd of his Mistresses importuning him, he
imagined, that his best Course would be to dissemble an Intrigue, by which
means, he would deprive them of their Hopes, and by Consequence, divert the
Designs they might have upon his Heart. Besides, being persuaded that Gallantry
is very becoming a young Prince, he was willing to affect a Passion, whose
Appearances could be no ways troublesome.

Yolanda, the Lord High Admiral's Daughter, seemed the most proper for his
Design, she was aimable enough to imagine her self beloved, upon the least
Declaration, and young enough not to distinguish a real from a feigned Passion.
Nor was he deceived in all these Conjectures. Yolandeck loved him in good
Earnest, and all those who might have been capable of pursuing any Designs
against the Liberty of this Prince, and who had made too much have to present
him with their Hearts disengaged themselves as soon as they perceived that he
paid his Vows to this Lady. Only Amedea, the Lord Admiral's second Wife, whom
her Husband had never acquainted with the Cheat that was put upon all the
Earth, was deceived therein as well as others; and likewise, observed more
Charms in the Person of Frederick, since her Daughter-in-Law had seemed to her
to have a Kindness for him. She saw him every day; and finding his way of
loving very delicate, she endeavors to divert Vows that were only imaginary.
She was beautiful, and had not yet attained to thirty Years, which is not an
Age to discard Lovers: And though her haughty and imperious Carriage would have
discouraged all those whom her Beauty had made her Conquests; she imagined,
that by abating something in Favor of the Prince, she would make him the more
value what she did only for his sake; wherefore, her Eyes spoke, but spoke to
no purpose. When Love does not make it self known to a Heart, it is Death to
the Language of the Eyes: there wanted a Clearer Explication with Frederick,
who was free from any amorous Impression. But, the Admiral's Lady was not of a
Humor, to proceed so far; and her Passion being constrained to contain it self
within the too narrow Bounds, which her Haughtiness prescribed, it manifested
it self by cold and despising Looks, which she had the Confidence to treat that
Prince with, when he came to pay her Visits out of Devoir, that he might see,
at the same time, her Daughter-in-law, whom she had ever in her Eye, since the
Discovery she had made of her Amor with Frederick.

In the mean while, the passionate Yolanda was forbidden to look upon the
Prince of Sicily as a Lover: But, she chose rather to deprive her self of so
dear a Sight, han to consider as an other man, the Person whom her Heart had
found so excelling; and went to a House her Father had, some Leagues from
Messina, where sheltring her self from the Persecution of her Mother-in-Law,
she imagined, that by a little Absence, she should the more inflame the Passion
of her Lover.

In the mean time, the Prince of Sicily seeing how easy it was for him to
engage Hearts, he now grew willing to spare them out of Pity. He had no other
Intrigue during the time of Yolanda's absence, having too little Acquaintance
with Love to amuse himself any longer with such kind of Follies. Hunting was
his greatest Divertisement, wherein, Prince Leon was his constant Companion. As
they were one day returning from running a Stag, they saw a Vessel strangely
battered by the Winds and Waves, which having forced it several times against
the Rocks, notwithstanding the skill of the Pilots, it was going infallibly to
suffer Shipwreck; whereupon, they sent their Servant, who with Boats took up
some Persons from the Wracks of this unfortunate Ship; and Frederick* having
informed himself concerning them, with an unusual Curiosity, he was told, that
they were apparently Persons of Quality, which their Air did sufficiently
bespeak them. Frederick, by I know not what Instinct, being moved and concerned
at their Misfortune, beseeched the King his Father to send for them to Court.
Immediately, they were provided with all things necessary; for all they had
been able to do, was only to save their Lives, and their Baggage was lost with
the rest of their Train. Leon came to the Palace a little before they arrived
there, and having found out Frederick, they were discoursing of the Pleasure
they had had in Hunting, when they saw two persons come in equally well made,
who drew their Eyes, and those of all the Court, being a man of a very high
Appearance, accompanied with a very beautiful Lady, who, notwithstanding the
Sadness and Grief that their Shipwreck had caused in them, failed not to give
Birth to far greater Dangers than that they had newly escaped. Leon was
dazzled, and struck with the Beauty of so charming a Person; and looking upon
Frederick, he observed in his Eyes the same Trouble with which he was agitated;
he imagined to have found at the same time, a Mistress and a Rival; insomuch
that Jealousy and Love did together make their entrance into his Heart. We may
say, that the Princess of Sicily found at the same moment, what rendered her
both tender and uneasy, she saw a man so well made, that he might in some
manner justify the surprise of her Senses; He had the Noblest and finest shape
that ever was, and above all, he had a Majestic Air, which the Princess
entertained a design of vanquishing; but coming to cast her Eyes upon the Fair
One who accompanied him, she could not forbear letting loose a Sigh. It was the
first she had started, that was shared between Spite and Love. This Lady had
almost all the Features of him we have spoken of, but her white Hair, and her
languishing Countenance, did hinder at first the Company's taking notice of the
Resemblance that was between them. How did that passionate Air, inspired in all
probability by him who began to please the Princess of Sicily, appear to her an
ill Omen, and how restless began she to be from that time! On the other side,
the Princess of Majorca, for it was she and her Brother, who had newly escaped
drowning, was sensible at the sight of Frederick, of a certain tender motion
which she could not defend her self from. In short, those three Hearts which
were taken in that same moment, seldom met in the sequel. Menfroy received them
with all imaginable Civility. But they did not think convenient to make
themselves known, before they were well acquainted with the Humors of those
Persons who treated them so obligingly; they contented themselves with giving
to understand, that they were of considerable Extraction, but that they were
constrained by considerable Reasons to conceal still, for some time, their
Names and their Fortune. They imagined, that they two only of all the Company
being saved, they could not easily be discovered, and that their Ship having
been sunk, the Sicilians had not had the leisure to take notice of the Colors.
They found it no hard task to gain Credit in all they said of their Extraction,
their Carriage and their Air did sufficiently show it: People only suspected
there might be some Gallantry between Persons whose Union was only occasioned
by their Birth. But it is time to give an account how they were conducted into
the Territories of Sicily.

Prince Ardalin Count of Barcelona, being passionately in love with the
Daughter of Berranger, whom he had seen at Majorca, where he had resided some
time. He procured her consent to become his Wife: the Princess Camilla having a
great Esteem for him, and being engaged in no Passion, received his Vows with
great Civility; which Ardalin's Passion made him take for something more
delicate. Being at length obliged to return to Barcelona, he made her promise
to be mindful of the Sentiments he had for her; and in a short time after, his
Ambassador demanded her in Marriage of the King her Father, who finding the
Match advantageous, did willingly give his consent. The Ceremonies that are
usual being performed, they embarked, and Prince Amaldee being desirous to
conduct his Sister into Ardalin's Dominions, embarked in the same Vessel that
was newly cast away upon the Coast of Sicily. Ardalin was expecting with great
Impatience, so dearly beloved a Bride, while that the Caprice of Fortune and of
Love possessed her elsewhere. Camilla was at first sight charmed with the
Beauty and good Mien of Frederick, and thought it would be Injustice to refuse
him, what she called Esteem. The Hatred of their Family, which she had from her
Birth, ought to hinder her from entertaining any thing too interessing; for
which Reason, she abandoned her self to Motions, which she imagined were in no
wise to be feared: and besides, being defended by her natural Coldness, which
had hindered her from making any other Returns to Ardalin's Passion, than what
mere Good Will afforded; she could not be persuaded that it would make any
greater Progress: but, Time made her know, that the Esteem she had for
Frederick, was too particular for to be only mere Esteem; and comparing the
Sentiments she had for him, whom she durst not so much as wish for her Lover,
with those she had for the Prince who was to be her Husband, she found therein
so great a Difference, that it amazed her. How! said she, shall the unfortunate
Camilla leave her Heart in Messina, while that she goes languishing and
desolate to spend her Days at Barcelonna; that must not be. Let us endeavor at
least, to defer so fatal a Marriage; let us implore the Friendship of a
Brother, without discovering to him, however, what ought to be concealed from
us our selves. Whereupon, she arose to go to his Apartment, when Prince Leon
came into here is, with Design to prepossess her in his Favor, by preventing his
pretended Rival in his Declaration, whom he fancyed to have ever eluded, by
besieging her continually. He found her so thoughtful and so dejected, that he
had not the Power to speak to her; and these two unhappy Lovers, remained in a
Silence, that would have melted with Pity all those who should have observed
them; yet whereof they themselves did hardly take notice.

Prince Amaldee diverted them from it by his Arrival. He came to confer with
his Sister about ^^e means of facilitating their Departure: Leon being hindered
by his Presence, from pursuing his Design, deferred the Declaration thereof,
expecting a more favorable Juncture.

But the Princess of Sicily being alarmed and confused, to find I know not what
new Motions in her Heart, which she could in no wise approve of, did all that
was possible, to render them secret. That young Princess being accustomed to
feign what she had not yet been sensible of, found it difficult to conceal this
real Affection. All the Court did quickly observe this Change of her Humor,
which was imputed, with great Probability, to Yolanda's Absence; who, upon the
Rumor of so tender an Effect, was willing to put an end to their mutual
languishing, by restoring to him her Sight, and enjoying his: the Course she
was, however, to steer was pretty nice in the Conjuncture of things. The
Admiral's Lady, whom Frederick's Sadness did put very much out of Humor, was
more to be feared than ever; but a Mistress does little value the Displeasure
of a Mother in Law. Besides, a Friend she had at Court, who had given her
Notice of the Condition the Prince was reduced to, proposed to her a secret
Interview between them, which it was easy for her to procure: whereupon, she
returning to Court, did heap up Troubles on the miserable Frederick, who had
too many Misfortunes of his own, for to be in a Condition to pity those of
others. The Princess of Sicily did easily perceive, that notwithstanding the
Complaisance of Amaldee, he had a terrible Aversion for all the Nation, and
which this Princess did not fail to apply to her self in particular, through
the singular Interest she took therein: though she looked upon Camilla as her
Rival, she failed not to pay her Visits very often, that she might see there
her Lover, who notwithstauding his Indifference, appeared to her very lovely.
She came once thither just as Prince Leon, in Despair of having found Camilla
so ill disposed to hear him, was rising for to be gone. Camilla changed color
at the sight of Frederick, who blushed at the sight of Amaldee, and Leon,
out-raged to see all this Disorder, resolved to stay there still, that he might
observe Motions that put him upon the Rack. Amaldee alone had so satisfied an
Air, that the Princess of Sicily thought him the most happy of all men; and
after a light Coversation, her Heart full of Sighs, which she found difficult
to stifle, and her Eyes moist with Tears, which she could no longer contain,
she went away, not being able to support the sad Reflection she made upon
Amaldee's Happiness. But, the Princess Camilla had other Sentiments of this so
precipitated Departure; and, having well observed the Disorder of Frederick in
the Presence of her Brother, she imagined, and applauded her self in secret,
for being the Cause of it. Amaldee being left alone with his Sister, for Leon
went away a Moment after Frederick, proposed to her the continuing of their
Voyage, and told her, that they had remained too long in an Enemies Country,
that it was requisite they should be gone with the soonest, and that too
toward Barcelonna, where Prince Ardalin impatiently expected them. Camilla
trembled at this Discourse, and putting all in practice for the deferring
still, for some Time, that terrible Departure, she made him consent, though
with great Repugnance, to all she had a Mind.

In the mean while, he resolved to dispatch, privately, some one to the King
his Father, for to give him notice of all that had happened since their
Departure; and going out something dissatisfied with his Sister's Change of
Humor, he went to walk alone in the Palace Gardens.

Immediately, he heard some confused Voices; and approaching something nearer,
he distinguished that of Frederick, and that of Leon, who were parleying
something sharply. I congratulate, said the Prince of Naples, your having made
a Conquest, without being at the Trouble of the least Advance; your Vows are
received before they are declared; and there is no pretending to any other than
the Quality of an unfortunate Lover, if a Man had a mind to engage in Sicily.
Frederick had too many Affairs in his Mind to think of undeceiving him;
insomuch, that he replied with some Sharpness, As you did not consult me about
the Choice of your Engagement, I do not think my self obliged to give you an
Account of the Progress I shall make in mine; but believe me, let us continue
Friends, a strange Lady should not disunite us; you ought not to understand me
all together, but you shall know the rest, when it is fitting for me to tell it
you. Then he quitted him for to go into a gloomy. Alley, where, letting a Loose
to his Melancholy Humor, he remained in a certain Situation, wherein, the
Soul, as it were, being preyed upon by it is Lanquour, is rendered almost
insensible, wherein we fly, if I may so say, from our selves, to give our
selves up to the beloved Object, the Crowd of Thoughts, hindering us from being
able to distinguish any one, and by having too much to resolve on, we resolve
on nothing.

In the mean while, the Prince of Majorca imagining that the two Princes* were
his Sisters Lovers, he went to inform her of it, without thinking, that such
Advertisements do ever further an amorous Passion instead of preventing it.
Sister, said he, gallantly to her, You ought to be upon your Guard, the Princes
of Sicily, and of Naples, have felt the Power of your Eyes; if I am not
deceived, their Amor will put you to some Trouble. Brother, said Camilla to
him, with a little Blush, if my Eyes could revenge us of all the Desolation
that the Sicilians have committed in our Territories, why are not you willing I
should employ them against the Prince of Sicily? Ah! Sister, said Amaldee to
her, How zealous are you to take up a Quarrel, whose Vengeance ought not to be
your Province* and in all Probability, How weakly would you defend your Heart
against an Enemy, whom your Eyes are willing to attach? I confess, replied the
Princess, hurryed away by her Passion, Frederick appears lovely to me, and if
he was sensible -- Ah! it is too much interrupted, Amaldee, let us get out of
the Hands and Dominions of a Prince, whose Merit is fatal to the Liberty of a
Princess, who is to command elsewhere. It is no longer time to think of that,
said she to him, all in Tears, I am no longer Mistress of my Heart, and all the
Favor I demand of you, is, to prevent my becoming Princess of Barcelonna. Ah!
Sister, said he to her, your Reason is asleep, when you ought to think of
defending* your self; it is yet time enough, the first Motions are easiest to
vanquish, Absence may secure your Resistance, content your self with the
Delight of seeing the Power of your Charms, and do not employ them against your
self. This was the Counsel of a Prince, whose Experience was but small in Love.
For, we cannot stop there, we are willing to enjoy the Fruit of a Conquest, and
to what Purpose is being beloved, if we have not a Design to love? Camilla was
well acquainted with these Maxims, she was not ignorant of her Tenderness, and
only aimed at being beloved, that she might not love in vain. How tender and
moving an Idea did she represent to her self of the Sweets of a reciprocal
Love! and notwithstanding the little Repose that these agreeable Thoughts
afforded her, how beautiful did she appear the next Day to the amorous Leon!
This Prince not knowing what to comprehend of Frederick's Discourse, came to
inform himself of his Mistress, and to repair the Occasion he had failed of the
Day before. Camilla had too tender Thoughts to keep up that haughty Air, which
makes the boldest Lover tremble: there appeared so much Sweetness in her fair
Eyes, that the Prince imagined that it was a fit Occasion to declare himself:
he wavered more than once to speak through the inseparable Respect of a great
passion; and through the Address of Camilla, who knowing his Thoughts, diverted
the Conversation of them with all the Liberty of a contented Mind. She proposed
to him to go a walking, which he durst not refuse; and Prince Amaldee, at his
Sisters Desire, kept them Company. They came to a place where was an admirable
Echo, and Amaldee prevailed with his Sister, to sing a Tune she had made some
time before; whereto, the Words were as follow.

Vnmov'd, I saw a thousand Charms each Day:
But when a Heart like some young tender Deer,
Careless and wanton, here and there does play,
That it is in Danger, one has Cause to fear.
So soon as Love it is Innocence perceives,
He straight employs all his enticing Art;
Each Instant him some new Advantage leaves,
And at the last, it gives him all the Heart.
When she had done singing, she heard another Person likewise exercising his
Voice, which was Frederick, who was entertaining his Melancholy; and without
having heard Camilla, was singing these words at some distance.

When that a Heart under fierce Flames does faint,
T'affect being gay and brisk, and most at ease,
Is a severe, a hard, a sad Constraint;
But when with strict est Bonds, Love does it seize,
It Is Tyranny is likewise to restrain*
By soft Complaints to ease it is cruel Pain.
Camilla imagined, that she had so great a Share in what he sung, as obliged
her to make an Answer; so that very seasonably remembering some Verses that
Prince Ardalin had formerly learnt her, and which suting admirably well with
the Subject, she sung them as they were couched, in these Terms.

Though that a Heart is seen all on a Fire,
And that it is secret Martyrdom is sure,
There still remains to perfect the Desire,
The sweet Delight, it to be begged to Cure;
Which, when deferred, who can, alas, endure!
Amaldee did but too well know the Vivacity of this so just Application which
his Sister made, in Answer to Frederick's Verses; and Prince Leon imagined,
that she had made them at that very Instant; Frederick alone, understood
nothing of this Mystery; he was so possessed with his Pensiveness, that nothing
but the Cause was capable of diverting it. They approached him by little and
little, and the Prince of Majorca having some Indulgence for his Sister, whom
he saw was forced to love by her Star, was willing to render her an Office that
he would have done himself, if he had known what had passed in the Heart of
Frederick; insomuch, that he dexterously drew aside Leon, though with terrible
Violences.

Camilla had immediately an agreeable Transport to find her self alone with the
Prince of Sicily; but he made but ill Returns, and she maintained much better
the Character of a Mistress, than he of a Gallant. His Eyes followed Amaldee,
and pursued him by languishing Looks, which endeavored to draw the Prince of
Majorca to him* Leon was ever casting his Eyes toward Camilla, who took little
Notice of his amorous Actions: neither knew she what to think of Frederick's
Procedure, and was upon the Point of preventing what he ought to have said to
her, and encourage by her Kindness, that Lover whom she could only accuse of
too much Circumspection. Her Haughtiness, whereof Women have little when they
are in Love, would not have been sufficient to have made her keep Measures; she
would have spoken, if Prince Leon had not had too much Tenderness for to suffer
hers to take it is Course. Being become knowing in a short Time, he was easily
inclined to think that Love had a great share in their mute Conversation; and
believing that he had but too long permitted his Rival to enjoy what he
imagined to merit, as much as he, his Return was something precipitated. This
Incivility did not at all amaze Amaldee, but Camilla did sufficiently let him
know her Displeasure, to hinder him another Time from such Importunate
Interruptions, if Lovers can be ever more circumspect.

Though Frederick was overjoyed at his being so happily freed from so perplexed
an Encounter, yet he fell immediately into an other of no less Intricacy.
Yolanda, as we have already said, being concealed in Messina, gave him notice
that same Evening of her Arrival, conjuring him to meet her in an Arbor, which
her Friend had judged proper for the Assignation. Frederick was obliged to go
thither, and knowing the Afflictions of an ill-rewarded Affection, he was not
willing to be the Occasion of suffering them. Well, Prince, said Yolanda to
him, at his coming, are not you full of Acknowledgment for the Sentiments I
have ever entertained of you, and of the Troubles your Absence has given me.
Frederick by deceiving her agreeably, being willing to give a Loose to his own
Passion, made Answer, Yes, my dear Yolanda, I have been tormented since your
Absence, by all the Cruelties of Love; and I never knew what Grief was, till
after I had been deprived of the Delight of seeing you. He was going to
continue, when he heard at a little distance the most lamentable shriek that
can be. Camilla, whom her ill Destiny had conducted just to the Place of the
Rendevouz, which was not far from her Apartment, had heard the Princess's
Voice, and discovered a Rival, at a time when she was so tenderly possessed
with the sole Idea of Frederick, she was not able to support this Reverse, and
fell into a swoon just at the place from whence the Voice came: Frederick ran
thither, and Yolanda withdrew, not being in a condition to give help to others,
that might have hazarded her own Reputation, she only gave notice to her Friend
of what had passed, who came thither in all haste, tho however too late.
Berranger's Daughter had received, without knowing it, that assistance from the
most cruel of her Persecutors; he took Water from a Fountain that was hard by,
and having sprinkled some of it upon her Face, he made her easily come to her
self. Perhaps that the Delight which her heart, tho in despair, felt at the
approaches of the Person who had rendered her sensible, did contribute very much
toward the making her recover the Use of her Senses; she opened her Eyes, and
seeing her self in the hands of a Person who caused all her trouble, Vexation
seized her soul, and following her first motion, she withdrew something rudely,
and got to her Apartment, without turning toward him, who had newly rendered
her that good Office, Where Love is outraged, it often takes every thing for
Affronts. In short, the Princess, of Sicily being left alone, with her Mind
full of its own Disquiets, she made but a Moments reflection upon all these
capricious Incidents, which she also did with relation, that to her the like
might happen, What a Night did Camilla pass! all the torments of Jealousy
presented themselves to her Imagination; and tho her Choler had no Object to
fix it self upon, she entertained a thousand Designs, against whomsoever it was
that usurped from her that Heart which she had thought her self in possession
of; then repenting on a sudden, she felt all those touching Motions that a
generous and an afflicted Soul can be sensible of, How? said she, is my
Affection less violent for being concealed? and ought it to be ill rewarded for
being produced something later than that, which my Ungrateful is so fond of?
Mad that I am, added she, Shall I disturb the Peace of two Lovers, whom Heaven
had united before I dreamed of being engaged? No, let us leave them to enjoy
all those Delights which I had vainly figured to my self, and let us not one
moment divert them through the compassion of Miseries that I have drawn upon my
self by having been too credulous. All these doleful thoughts kept her company
as long as the Night continued; Day appeared before that her Mind could find a
moment of Repose. Amaldee came, as he often did, to see her in her Chamber, and
he having been the innocent cause of her Tears, at the sight of him she could
not forbear redoubling them. Ah! why have you seduced me by the deceiving
Appearance of being beloved by the Prince of Sicily? Why, by making me
apprehensive of his Tenderness, should you render it so dangerous to me? Ah!
continued she, seeing he made no Answer, Why did you not keep that Silence that
would have spared me so many Tears? Why did you pronounce that fatal Word by
it is enchanting Sweetness? -- Heaven is my Witness, interrupted Amaldee, that
my Intention was to hinder you from loving by -- Alas! interrupted Camilla,
hastily, was that the way to hinder me from loving, by telling me that I was
beloved? Why did you not rather tell me, as was true, that he languishes for
another? It would have made me sigh; but I should at least have avoided the
mortal Troubles that devour me. She thereupon related to him all that she had
heard, exagerating the thing as much as her Passion could inspire her, and
endeavoring to exhale her Grief in Reproaches, she was not able to make an
End. When Persons are something recovered from their first Transports, they aim
at being Eloquent, that they may at least make others share with them in their
Misfortunes. But Amaldee, judging that she wanted Repose, left it her in some
kind, by leaving her Chamber, for she remained as motion-less after his
departure, and found her self in that condition wherein we have already
represented the Princess of Sicily, who by lying under the heaviest
Oppressions, enjoyed some kind of Tranquillity, and some time after she fell
very dangerously ill.

In the mean while, Prince Ardalin having got some intelligence of his Bride's
being cast away upon the Coast of Sicily, he came thither incognito to inform
himself of the truth. The Shipwreck of his Mistress had so dejected and
penetrated him with so lively a grief, that he was not to be known. The first
Object that offered it self to his Eyes was Amaldee, who was thinking of the
means to free his Sister out of the Abyss of Despair wherein he saw her
plunged. The Prince of Majorca was at first surprised to see Ardalin in the
Territories of Sicily, and was hardly able to recover from it, by reason of the
change that Affliction had wrought in his Countenance, insomuch that he only
answered with a sigh, when Ardalin made enquiry after Camilla. This sigh cost
the Prince of Barcelonna many more. He no longer doubted, but that his Princess
had been swallowed up by the Waves, and being pierced to the quick by so fatal
a Thought; Speak, said he, Prince, speak, and no longer conceal from me a loss
which I ought not to survive. Amaldee knowing that an Infidelity is the most
afflicting thing that can be told a Lover, was in no haste to undeceive him;
but being at length pressed to make Answer, she lives, said he to him, but ask
me nothing more concerning her, and would to Heaven you may never be informed
of the rest. These Words, though the latter part of them were capable of giving
terrible Suspicions, failed not to calm the Soul of Ardalin; and not
penetrating the Motive of that Sadness, he suspended his own, upon learning
that he should again see Camilla; and being recovered from the Fright he had
been in for her Life, all the rest seemed sweet and easy. Amaldee acquainted
him in few Words, with all that had happened to them, except what he ought
never to have known. He gave him notice not to discover them, and as for
himself, having but a small Train, he would hardly be known for the Prince of
Barcelonna. They came at length, to the Palace where the whole Discourse was of
Camilla's Sickness: That Princess, after having been brought out of a Lethargy,
had made such powerful Efforts to cure her Heart, that her Body had fallen
under the weight of them. She was taken with so violent a Fever, that from the
Beginning, they were apprehensive of the Issue: However, Ardalin went with
Amaldee to Camilla's Apartment. How great was the Astonishment of the Princess,
at that unexpected Sight! The Remorse of having neglected a Husband who left
all to come and seek her, the Shame of having betrayed him for a Person, who
triumphed, perhaps, in her Sufferings, and may be boasted of them to her Rival,
put her into a strange Confusion. As Amaldee would have prepared her for
Ardalin's Arrival, whom she had but too well known, she interrupted him; and
addressing her Speech to the Count of Barcelonna, From whence come you, Prince,
said she to him, and what makes you take such Care of a Wretch, whom Heaven has
but too much abandoned? Ah! Madam, said that Prince to her, it is too just to
let so extraordinary a Person languish any longer, you may hope all manner of
Happiness from it is Justice, and thereupon, Leon entered the Room, who came to
inform himself of the Princesses Health: his Presence, which at other times she
thought a Trouble, was pleasing in this Occasion, since it interrupted a
Conversation that made her very uneasy. She gave her Brother to understand by
a Sign, that she should take it for a Favor to be left alone; which Prince
Leon comprehending, he went first away, without making any other Reflection
than what his Mistrisses Sickness in^used, which possessed all his Thoughts.
Amaldee dragged likewise away the Prince of Barcelonna, who without knowing all
his Misfortunes, had however enough to put an end to his Days. Leon was no less
to be pityed than Ardalin; Camilla, during the time her Fever lasted, could
hardly suffer that he should come to inform himself of the Condition she was
in, that she might not be obliged to receive any Visits, nor to see him whom
she had but too much seen for her Repose; insomuch, that Frederick's Absence
being as dangerous a Misfortune as all those she already lay under, it brought
her almost to the last Gasp. The Princess of Sicily was likewise languishing,
by Reason of Amaldee's Affliction, in whom she could not suffer that Sadness
for any other than her self. In short, there was nothing but Lamentation in
Sicily; and one would have said, that Love revenged himself on the Princesses
Disguise: But Camilla was yet much more to be pityed, the frequent fainting
Fits that her too much oppressed Heart did bring her in, made her imagine, that
she should quickly find a favorable Death.

One day, after coming out of a cold Sweat, which she believed the Forerunner
of her End, she sent for her Brother, and her Husband, and having made them sit
on her Bedside, Prince, said she, looking upon Ardalin, it is no longer time
to disguise any thing, I will spare you the Regret that you would have for the
Loss of me, by defacing my self out of your Memory, too happy! if the
Confession of my Weaknesses do not render it odious to you. I am no longer that
severe Camilla who made a Scruple of proceeding farther than Esteem for a
Prince, who was to have been her Husband. I have felt the most lively
Sentiments of Love, if I may so say, for an other than your self, but Care has
been taken to revenge you on my Ingratitude, by having my Affection despised.
Farewell, said she to him, forget me if you can, and pardon me my Errors. I
pardon you them, Divine Princess, said Ardalin, I know the Fatality of the
Inclination, which forces us to love, but I cannot pardon my self for not
having known how to gain your Affection; my Heart is without doubt, irritated,
to find that you refuse it that Tenderness which you are capable of; but it is
against my self, and I alone ought to expiate the Crime of not having been able
to please you. At this sad Thought he fainted away, and lost with all his
Senses, that of the Infidelity of his Mistress; but they brought him to himself
by the help of Remedies, which made him enjoy still, for some Moments, all the
Malignity of his Fate, The Alarums he had had for Camilla's Life, whom he had
believed to have been swallowed up by the Waves, and the Certainty of her
Change, penetrated him with so lively a Grief, that it is no Wonder, if he fell
under the weight of it in that so fatal Moment, and the Violence of the Motions
of his Soul was so great, that the Wound he had received did re-open in that
Instant: he did not perceive that his Spirits dissipated; and indeed, he was
wounded in a more sensible part. Ah! Princess, said he to her, I am sensible,
that your Indifference does abridge a Life that I had devoted to you, and which
has not been so happy as to please you: I dye; and may it please the Cruelty of
Love to content it self with my Life, and not extend it is Vengeance upon the
Days of so beautiful a Princess. It is sufficient, that I sacrifice mine to it,
which was wholly yours; but let at least, my last Sigh draw some from you, at
least, let them be out of Pity, and do not refuse them to a Lover who ready to
expire, out of Tenderness, demands of you nothing else: after he had spoken
these Words, a mortal Languishing surprised him; his Eyes fixed upon Camilla,
showed still, by their dying Looks, all the Fervency imaginable, and caused a
Torrent of Tears to gush out from those of that desolate Princess. Amaldee*
endeavored to succor Ardalin, and to recall his Spirits which had entirely
abandoned him. The Rumor of all that passed was quickly spread about; one of
the Princesses Maids could not forbear blaming Frederick openly; and he himself
came thither as well as others, and mixing his particular Misfortunes with
those of the public, he was willing to try, if he could at the same Time
change the Face of things. Camilla seeing the Author of so many Miseries, was
not able to support the Sight of him, and turned her self on the other side.
Frederick observing that Action, came and cast himself at her Feet, and
following his natural Propensity, made her remark so much Passion in his Eyes,
that Camilla, notwithstanding her Dejection, did quickly perceive it. What
would you have, Prince, said she to him with a low Voice? Ah! Madam, how late
is it to declare my self, said the tender Frederick to her; I love, but alas! I
could never have resolved to have let you know it till this Extremity. Ah!
Prince, said she to him, do not constrain your self; the too certain Knowledge
I have of the Sentiments you have for an other, has brought me into this
Condition; but I lose it with my Life. Ah! Madam, cried Frederick, I attest
Heaven, that I have no Sentiments prejudicial to what I owe you, and you will
one day see that I am only unhappy. These Words, which so easily insinuated
themselves into her Soul, made her sigh; and thinking of what she owed the
Prince of Barcelonna, withdraw, said she to him, with some Difficulty,
withdraw, and leave me to die less criminal, if I cannot die altogether
innocent.

In the mean while, Ardalin being come again to himself, and taking a new
Vigor from the Sight of the Prince of Sicily, whom he then knew for his Rival,
he used all his Efforts to speak, but not being able to do so, he melted the
Hearts of all those who saw him. His Gaspings re-doubling, the Company
perceived that he was ready to breath his last; and having made them comprehend
by most moving Demonstrations imaginable, that he had a Desire to approach the
Princess, they brought him to her Bedside: whereupon, his Forces returned to
him when he was upon the Point of losing them for ever; and looking upon
Frederick and Camilla, live, said he to them, happy Lovers, so beautiful a
Princess could only be born for so accomplished a Prince. I am not at all
ashamed to yield to a Rival, who excells me by so many Advantages, and whom I
can only surpass by my Tenderness. At these Words, having fixed his Mouth upon
Camilla's Hands, he seemed inseparable from that afflicted Person, and his Soul
being detained by that Pleasure, had all the Difficulty imaginable to fly away.
Thus Love terminated the Days of a Prince, who by the Greatness of his Passion
ought to have been reserved for a better Destiny: So sad a Spectacle put all
the Assistants into a Consternation, and their gloomy Silence was only
interrupted by the lamentable Cries of Camilla; they caused his Corpse to be
removed, who occasioned all this Sadness: he seemed still animated by his Love
and his greedy Looks, which appeared not altogether extinguished, seemed as if
they could never be satiated with seeing what he had so much loved.

During all this Confusion, they had forgot to dissemble; Ardalin's Attendants
Train discovered him by their Regrets for the Prince of Barcelonna; and Amaldee
and Camilla were likewise known to be the Children of King Berranger, though
they did not expect to be discovered. They could not have chosen a more
favorable Moment; for, Peoples Minds were altogether disposed to Pity, there
was no Room for Hatred: and the King continued to them the same Kindness he had
already afforded them, as he only considered them by themselves; he did not
change the Sentiments he had of them, though they had changed their Names as to
him. But, the Princess of Sicily was over-joyed to hear that Amaldee and
Camilla were only Brother and Sister, and filling her Soul with the soft
Motions which succeeded in the place of the cruel Suspicions that had agitated
her, her Tenderness was thereby considerably augmented. If she found in him the
Son of Menfroy's Enemy, a Prince for whom she was forced to that so singular
Disguise, in short, one who ought never to wear the Crown of Sicily, she found
in Recompense, a Prince full of Charms, a Prince who might be engaged in her
Favor; she no longer found a Rival; and that Obstacle being removed, did
sufficiently make amends for all that might be contrary to her: Thus being in
Repose, as to her Lover, she was no longer disquieted about obtaining him for
her Husband. Ardalin's Body was sent back to Barcelonna, with all the
Magnificence that became him and Menfroy: And a Poet made his Epitaph; which is
as follows.

Within this Tomb Fidelity is laid,
With the kind Lover who Nature's Debt has paid;
Henceforth, like him few Lovers will be seen,
And, in my mind, Heaven has too cruel been,
Who died for Love, deserved here to have stayed.
Nothing could recover Camilla; and though Remedies had removed her Fever, yet
her Affliction was as bad as all Diseases. Leon having been Witness of all that
had passed between Camilla and Frederick, all the assurances he received from
this Prince were not capable of satisfying him. He could in no wise comprehend
the important Mystery he was to expect the issue of. Besides, this Princess was
in love with another, which was sufficient to deprive him of all Repose.
Amaldee, whose Heart was free from any Impression, was continually repassing in
his memory the Events that had newly happened. All his mind was full of the
shade of Ardalin, and all his Actions showed him very Melancholy. As he often
did walk all alone, the Princess of Sicily did the same through another motive,
insomuch that they often met, but never joined company; the Princess's Passion
rendering her fearful, made her avoid the Person whom her Heart sought with too
much eagerness, and he either took no notice of it, or was not very earnest to
ask her the reason. However, one day, as Frederick was passing by him, and
pretending not to see him; Lovers are very salvage, said Amaldee to him
laughing, and I think my self very happy in having my heart of a more obdurate
temper than yours; after what I know of Love, I would not for any thing make
the Experience of it, but will neglect, as much as possible, those Beauties who
excite so entire an application; and since we ought to sacrifice all our
thoughts to what we love, I am resolved never to love any thing. The Princess,
who was strangely afflicted with this Discourse, made him however an answer
with something a scornful tone; Well, keep to that indifference you find so
very charming. She had not the power to say any thing more, but went away very
much displeased. And Amaldee seeing Frederick depart after that manner, was
something dissatisfied; and, not believing he had offended him, he made
Reflection upon all his reserved and unhandsome Procedure, and found in his way
of living with him, something very particular, which he could only take for the
Effect of some natural Antipathy. He admired how a Person could love the
Sister, whose Brother he so much hated, but resolved, however, to serve him
both in his Hatred and his Amor. He wrote to the King his Father, and
endeavoring to melt him by the good Offices that had been done them, he
proposed to him a Match between Camilla and Frederick, saying, that it seemed
as if Heaven had already assembled their Hearts for the uniting their Families
for ever, and adding, that Menfroy would not oppose it; that the Kindness he
had for his Son, would make him pass over all manner of Interests; that this
King was of a generous Nature; and that provided he would make the least
Advance toward an Accommodation, a Peace would quickly be concluded. This
Letter had not all the Success it ought to have had, as will be made appear in
the Sequel.

In the mean time, Amaldee not being capable of hating Frederick, avoided him
however, for fear his Presence should prove troublesome. Some Days after the
Conversation that had separated them, they met in such another Conjuncture; it
was nice, Amaldee stepped back, and Frederick sighed to see that Amaldee retired
first; a Sigh is not to be interpreted, I hate you; however, that Sigh made the
Prince of Majorca think so: But, Frederick in his Turn, could not comprehend
the Cause why he should so shun his Company; thus they were both deceived by
very contrary Reasons. If Amaldee's Indifference made him take for Hatred what
was nothing less, the Tenderness of the Princess of Sicily, who easily believed
what she apprehended, made her likewise take for Contempt, what was very far
from it; for, though she did not appear under the Figure of a Lover, that did
not hinder her from being so; and if Neglect ought not to have directly
offended her Passion, yet she failed not to be wounded by the Effects, which
the Intention did not sufficiently justify with her. Alas! said that Princess,
Why does he not find himself forced to love me, though his Reason does oppose
it? I find, I love him without the Consent of mine; but he is far from being
under such Circumstances; Why has not he more penetrating Eyes, and why cannot
he distinguish the Heart of a Mistress under the Figure of a Lover? The
languishing of my Eyes, ought, methinks, to have unravelled to him this
Mystery, but his were not willing to see it, or if they did, they have despised
the Discovery. The Figure of Frederick, is it so contemptible, that it has not
yet been capable of making a Friend of Amaldee, since the Princess of Sicily
dares not make him her Lover? And not daring to entertain any hopes for her
self, must she needs be reduced to wish some Respects for Frederick, whom
Amaldee takes so much care to avoid. As Love is addicted to making Verses, and
that Poetry entertains and charms our Amorous Thoughts, she fell to making an
Elegy, which occasioned many other Disorders. The Princess of Majorca began to
leave her Chamber, and Frederick, who through the Conformity of their Destiny,
and the resemblance she had with Amaldee, afforded her a great deal of
Complaisance, accompanied her the first day she went abroad, after a very
melting Conversation. Camilla, seeing this Prince carry himself with so much
kindness, began to forget the loss of Ardalin, insomuch that having thought
some moments, she asked him for his Table Book, wherein she wrote these
following Verses, she had newly made.

In vain one lately dead my Heart did claim,
And yet another with Love it now has filled,
But when with him for whom our Breast does flame,
We straight forget whom Cruelty has killed.
This was something to insult the Memory of Ardalin, but the least reasonable
Sentiments are the most meritorious in Love; Frederick answered them at that
instant by the four following, whose Equivocation failed not to be interpreted
by Camilla according as he designed.

You sigh, alas! but reging is my smart,
My Soul being charmed, has more of me required,
You have the Features of what wounds my Heart,
But what is that to One, like me, inspired?
The Princess smiled at this answer, and seemed very well satisfied, but
Frederick taking out his Table Book, drew out with it, and let fall a Paper,
which was presently taken up by the curious Camilla, without Frederick's
knowledge: She stayed still some moments with him, which seemed but too long to
her impatience; insomuch that having taken a handsome pretext to leave him, she
went to her Chamber to read the Paper she had taken up. You may judge of her
Thoughts at the perusal of this Elegy.

AN ELEGY.
HOW! treacherous Heart, art thou to Love inclined?
I feel, alas! I know not what that is kind.
Thou, who in secret did all Love despise,
And for Tranquillity* thy self did prize;
Thou now do stoop, who haughty used to be,
And yield'st to pains, none e're inspired like thee.
The Attack that is made on thee by thousand Charms,
Inflames thy Coldness, and thy Strength disarms.
In my Indifference Designs I formed,
Of braving Love, tho with all is Force he stormed;
My self did flatter from common Weakness free,
This Heart well aided mine would ever be:
Or if a lovely Object seized my Soul,
My Senses absence would surprise control.
All charming Sports I thought I would avoid,
Or if I loved, 't should be as if I toy'd:
My Honor thus I Would raise to the highest degree,
My self I Would punish for sensibility,
Such were the Projects of my Soul when free.
All these I quitted, though they did abound,
When Love his moment, 's cruel moment found.
Can we what charms Us fly? a hope most vain,
Can we that Object fly, the Heart does chain?
And all our Senses jointly with us betrayed,
Are they not charmed, and in a Transport laid?
My haughtiness refuse thy useless aid,
But don't with Weakness my poor Soul upbraid.
Tyrannick Reason do not come and tear
A Heart, that Scorns have almost made despair:
And which, subdued to Laws of hard Constraint,
Shuts Eyes to Tears, and Mouth to all Complaint.
Why did thou stray in my most pressing need?
Why for one moment did suspend thy heed?
Love did that fatal instant take thy place,
Expect not e're thy rigor can him chase:
In vain its Calm and Peace thou would restore,
Since thou once left it, thou can return no more.
Begone, begone, thy Reign does here expire,
I hear no Counsels, but what Love inspire.
The Charms of my new Fancy I pursue,
Heavens! that in loving, I Am beloved were true!
I must, alas! my Martyrdom declare,
To love I fear not, but to tell't I fear.
I sigh and tremble, when I should it impart,
My Tongue is fearful, but not at all my Heart.
Love, make me bold, thou, who have made me kind,
And to dear A. -- for me declare my Mind,
Whose Heart, tho now exempt from Pain and Care,
In learning mine may likewise have its share.
Spite seized her Soul at the reading of this; and looking upon Frederick, who
was just come in to entertain her with a thousand kind things, as the most
treacherous of all men; her Jealousy produced, in that Instant, a quite
contrary Effect from what the former had done; it restored her all her Spirits
through the Ardour of Revenge. However, she was in a very great Perplexity, the
Idea of a Beauty, who had deprived her of Frederick's Heart, did put her to a
terrible Torture; and thinking to hate Frederick, she did not perceive that she
hated all the Ladies of the Court, for fear of not hating her, who put her to
that Torment. There was not one that did not give her a secret Pain; she
desired and feared at the same time to find what she sought; and showing the
Elegy to all the Ladies, confess, said she to them, after a rallying manner,
confess that you are very happy in having inspired such delicate Sentiments in
so sincere a Prince as Frederick: Then thinking to read in their Eyes what they
had in their Souls, she examined them with the most uneasy Attention in the
World. Several read the Elegy, without finding themselves concerned therein;
they had all been so ready to receive Frederick's Flames, that not one of them
could make the Application to her self of the Complaints it contained. Camilla
began to breath again, and recovered by Degrees from the Apprehensions she had
had. When the Lord High Admiral's Wife, taking the Elegy with some Disdain,
began first to smile, then a Blush, which came into her Face, giving Camilla to
understand, that she ought to fix her Jealousy upon her; Madam, said she to
her, your disgusting Haughtiness for any other Lover, gives you a Prince
wearied with Sighs; but have a Care, if I am not deceived, your Ladyship will
not long maintain that Character; for, I have observed in your first Motions,
something so far from Cruelty, that if the Sequel be answerable to this
Beginning, I am very much afraid, that that Severity, which you have had during
Frederick's Indifference, will end with it: However, follow my Counsel,
continue your Severity, if you are desirous that a Passion should last which it
has produced. You are in the right, said the Admiral's Lady to her, rising to
be gone: The Princess was stung to the Quick, both at the Answer, and her
uncivil Departure. They all retired thereupon, every one reasoning after their
own manner, upon the capricious Choice of Frederick. Yolanda was quickly
informed hereof, by the means of her Friend; and, by the order she had to
return to Court, her Mother-in-Law having made Reflection upon the Elegy, found
that it admirably well suited with her Circumstances. The little Regard she had
had for a Prince her Lover, could only pass with her for Contempts; so much
Management on his part, could only be for a Woman, who had too much out-raged
him to love her without Shame; and what confirmed this, was the Name of
Amaldee, which the Princess durst not write at length; which being very like
her own, (she being called Amedee) did fully confirm her in that Opinion. Any
other than one concerned, would never have unravelled that trembling and
ambiguous Character; but, what does not Love do when it goes about it?
Insomuch, that being assured of that Heart which Yolanda had vainly imagined
that she possessed, she was very willing to have her for a Witness of her
Happiness. The Vexation of a Rival is a great Satisfaction to a Lover, who
triumphs, with great Delight, over one she had had any Apprehensions of. What a
Disappointment to Yolanda, to return to Court for the Infidelity of a Prince,
when her too great Facility had drove her from thence; but she must obey, which
she the more willingly did, that she might clear a Suspicion that could hardly
enter into her Mind. She thought her Mother-in-Law very unfit to usurp a Heart
which Camilla had not been able to make a Conquest of; for, her Friend had
heard one say, that Frederick had assured, that Camilla was not the Person whom
he most passionately loved; but, that there was another, for whom he should
sigh as long as he lived. Yolanda had some Reason to believe the Constancy of
the Prince herein, being deceived by the Relation that these Words had, with
the good Opinion she had of her self touching Frederick. In short, being
returned to her Mother-in-Law, she found her disarmed of that severe and
salvage Air, which Women quickly lay aside, when they have a Lover who pleases
them; she took upon her the Air gallant, and reproaching her self in secret,
with having lost by her little Understanding in Love, those Moments which she
might have spent with great Delight, had she known Frederick's Inclination; she
had a Mind to recall them, and was contriving how to embolden him whom she had
rendered fearful by her too great Severity, and thought good to open the way her
self to his Pursuit. Knowing that he often walked all alone, she designed to
meet him in his Passage, which she accordingly performed, the same Day.
Frederick had stolen from the Crowd, and leaning upon one of his Hands, let
some Tears tricle down his Cheeks, which the amorous Sicilian thought worthy of
her Pity; she approached him softly, and told him, blushing, alas! Prince, is
there no way to put an end to Sufferings* which afflict all the Court; Joy
dares no longer appear there, since you have banished it from your self: All
our Ladies are penetrated with the Languishing which oppresses their Prince.
That Languishing, answered he something indifferently, ought not in any wise to
concern all the Ladies you reproach me with, since the only Person whom it
ought to move with Pity, -- Proceed Prince, said she to him, seeing that he
stopped there; I very well understand, that some too severe fair one does make
you, fearful of ill Success* in a Passion that must needs, however, be
successful; But, Why do not you speak? There is not a Beauty how haughty soever
she may be, but would willingly share with you in all the Sentiments you
entertain of her. But, Frederick made her no Reply, and after having returned
several Times to the Charge, seeing she made no Progress, and Frederick
irritating her by his too great Reservedness, she quitted him with some kind of
Displeasure.

The End of the First Part.
THE FEMALE PRINCE; OR, FREDERICK OF SICILY.

PART II.

LONDON, Printed for Hen. Rodes, next door to the Bear Tavern in Fleet Street,
near Fleet-Bridge, 1682.

THE FEMALE PRINCE; OR, FREDERICK OF SICILY.
PART II.
IN the mean time, the Truce was upon the point of being at an end, Berranger
had taken* very ill the Propositions of Amaldee, and the Commendations he had
given of Menfroy, he commanded him to return home with all speed, to show if
the Prince of Majorca ought to speak like the Son of the King of Sicily. This
Prince, well foreseeing after what manner he should be treated by his Father,
would not however be disobedient, and beseeched Menfroy to give him the liberty
to leave his Dominions, which was granted him, with the same facility that he
was suffered to come into them. They embraced very affectionately, being
charmed with one another's Virtue* From thence Amaldee went to Frederick's
Apartment, being to take his leave of him; tho he had sent to inquire, if his
Visit would not prove importunate, and that he was prepared to receive it, yet
he was however disordered at his arrival. Be pleased to give me leave, said
Amaldee to him, to render you Thanks for all Your Civilities, which I have very
well distinguished, notwithstanding what a Sentiment of Hatred may inspire you
with against a Prince, whom his misfortune has borne your Enemy. At these words
the Princess was extremely troubled; she would have stifled some sighs, but
that she found impossible, and her Confusion was thereby so much the more
augmented. Amaldee not knowing what to think of this, asked her the cause of
her Disorder; this put her quite out of Countenance, and though the Habit* she
wore did secure her from the suspicions that might have been had of the truth,
it was sufficient to be culpable in her self, to believe she appeared so to
others. For though she had some thoughts of unbosoming her self, that Design
did not continue long, and her Severity did hinder her from putting it in
execution. Leave me, Prince, said she sadly to him, and, if possible, give no
credit to what you see. This was certainly a great Mystery to him, and he went
and related to his Sister all that had passed between them. She thought she
comprehended it better than he did, and imagined that it might be the Remorse
of having betrayed the Sister, whose Brother treated him with that Civility,
and that a return without doubt would follow it. This was sufficient to
overturn all that had been projected against him, and thereupon she wrote him a
Letter, that might do more than re-assure him. The Princess of Sicily received
it, after having undergone terrible Conflicts, having accused her self of
weakness in not having known how to undeceive the Prince of the aversion she
was in no wise capable to entertain of him, for this was what she most
apprehended he would believe. It is impossible for a Person in Love to leave
the Party beloved in a Belief of being hated. She had judged very well after
her first Motion, that he would know nothing more; and resolved, at all
Adventures, to remove the Impression of what might prepossess him against her,
and be injurious to what he might perhaps one day know of the Course of her
Inclinations. Remaining fixed in this Design, she enjoyed some Repose, and read
the Letter that was brought her from Camilla, which was conceived in these
Terms.

To the Prince of Sicily.
IT is very difficult for People to keep up their Resentments, when they have
once lost their Hearts; and since you have made a Conquest of mine, can it have
any Motions to your Disadvantage? I am however very much ashamed that I have
not been able to resist either your feigned Passion, or your real Neglect. I
ought, at least, to have given them the same Destiny; But, alas! it lay not in
my Power. I should find it much more easy, to be insensible to your
Ingratitude than to all that speaks in your Favor, notwithstanding I have
found such ill Returns. Love me, or love me not; you may do either, without
making me change my Sentiments: But, will you misuse this Power? And will you
leave a Princess to love alone, when you would find it very delightful to love
reciprocally? But, I must explain my self further with you; to which Purpose, I
desire you would meet me in the great Alley that leads to the Oval.


Camilla did not expect that her Letter should have proved so kind, but when a
Woman is writing to her Lover, it is Love that conducts the Pen; and she cannot
oppose the rapidity with which it paints what the Heart inspires and dictates.
Frederick was making some Reflections upon this Letter, when another was
brought him, and the Person who delivered it vanished at the same instant,
without expecting any Answer; but it came from the Admiral's Lady, and he found
therein these words.

To the Prince of Sicily.
WHY do you continue obstinate, to conceal what other Lovers are earnest to
make known? What do you pretend to do, either love me not, or tell me that you
do. A Passion is ever languishing, as long as it is restrained by a faint and
gloomy fear, which you perhaps take for Respect. But you are therein deceived,
Respect is less salvage, He speaks, and then he is reserved, but still he has
spoken: he begins what finishes of it self, and how great a pleasure is it for
him that loves, to have it thought so! and for her who is beloved to think it
likewise, and to divine the rest of what has been told her by halfs! If You
love only me, You will easily believe that it is only I who write to You.
However, for the greater surety, meet me in the great Alley that leads to the
Oval, where You may explain, and I hear what You have to say.


This Letter, though he knew not the hand, would have diverted Frederick at
another time, if the Tenderness which possessed him had not given him Motions
very opposite to Joy. He was admiring the Capriciousness of Love in these two
Letters, when a third was brought him, which he read with some Precipitation
and found therein.

To the Prince of Sicily.
IT is in vain that Endeavors are used to alarm me about your Constancy; my
Heart tells me that you are faithful, which is sufficient to persuade me you
are so; I judge of yours by my own: Our Hearts were engaged in one Moment, and
ought never to be disingaged, but at the same time. Mine is faithful to You,
Prince, and cannot be any other persons than yours, which is enough to make me*
warrant, that yours is wholly mine: neither is it to clear any Suspicion, that
I desire you to meet me in the great Alley near the Oval, it is only to assure
you, that you have never yet given me any Jealousy. All that I hereby aim, is
only that we may mingle our Sighs. Alas! we have sighed so long a part, that it
is fit we should sigh for one Moment together.


Frederick did very much suspect, that this Letter came from Yolanda; he
imagined that Destiny conducted him to the unravelling of so many Adventures;
he fancyed that these three Mistrisses meeting at the same Randezvouz, would
free him by an Appearance of Treachery, from all the real Importunities they
had plied him with: Insomuch, that descending into the Alley, he had hardly the
Leisure to walk there a Moment, before he saw them all three a coming. He
thought it strange to see them together: but the thing happened in this manner;
Yolanda having placed her self at a Window which looked out upon the way that
was to be taken to go to the Alley, waited therefore Frederick's Arrival; and
having seen him pass, and immediately after him, a Woman, who walking with
trembling Steps, took the same way; she resolved to prevent her enjoying a
Conversation with Frederick, which she had been too long contriving it to leave
it to others: she run thither with such an earnestness, that it was taken
notice of by her Mother-in-Law, who had too great an Interest in her Conduct
not to follow her. Where are you going, said she to her? I see a certain
Emotion in your Countenance, that would make me suspect that some amorous
Intrigue had brought you hither, if I knew not that after the Princes so fresh
Infidelity, you could not be capable of a new Engagement. And I, Madam,
answered she, with a malicious Smile, I should believe that you suspected me
through some interessed Motion, if I saw not the Princess, whom you have more
Reason to fear than me. At that Word, all Reply ceased, and they walked
insensibly after Camilla, whom they overtook before she had entered the Alley;
insomuch that being all three animated with the same Spirit of Jealousy, they
returned into an other, and never parted till they had seen the Prince, who,
weary with waiting for them, was gone, after he had seen them take another way,
and thought his Intrigues at an end, without himself being any ways concerned.
He fancyed, that their haughty Humors had hindered them from giving either's
Rival the least Occasion of suspecting their Design or that the Severity of
Amedee whose Passion he had not yet taken notice of, had restrained them; in
short, not knowing to whom he was indebted for his good Luck, he resolved to
take Advantage of it, and never to be with them alone, but even to avoid the
Companies of all Women, that he might not be troubled with any more of their
amorous Importunities: however, he was mistaken in his Conjectures, as those
three Mistresses had been in thinking to deceive each other. As each of them
had pretended not to have seen the Prince, they all imagined in particular,
that the Randezvouz had been only for them; and all of them applauding
Frederick's Fidelity, and their Address in concealing what they thought
thereof, so that there passed a very gallant Conversation between them, and
they parted with great Civilities. Camilla was the most pensive, as indeed she
had the most Reason to be so; and that Occasion being lost, was hardly to be
recovered. Her Brother was to depart the next day, she must either go with him,
or expose her self to her Fathers Rage, or to the Slights of her Lover, which
was less easy for her to support. But, Love still wrought in her Favor; for,
the Princess of Sicily, as we have said, who was willing to repair all the
Incivilities she had done to him whom she so tenderly loved, went to take her
Leave of him; but she easily perceived, by the Trouble she was in at her first
coming into his Presence, that it would be difficult for her to execute the
Designs she had laid in his Absence. The first Civilities being over, which she
acquitted herself of, with Gallantry enough, she was to proceed to something of
more Concern, which perhaps she would have but very ill performed: she already
trembled, the Fear of saying too much or too little detained her for some time
in Silence, which was only ended by the coming in of Camilla, which both
rejoiced and displeased her, seeing that deferred, which she would willingly
have said, and which she so much apprehended to say. Camilla had the same
Sentiments, and perhaps they would not have spoken, if Amaldee had not opened
the Conversation. Prince, said he to Frederick, You see a Princess alarmed at
the Usage she shall receive from an irritated Father. Ah! said Camilla
interrupting him, I have but too well merited his Displeasure not to undergo
the Effects of it with Resignation. The King is very unhappy, said Frederick to
her, to see himself refused, even in the Azyls that he is desirous to afford
you* I know how much I am indebted to the King, said she to him; but, the
Prince of Sicily would do too great a penance, should he see incessantly the
Object of his Hatred. Ah, Madam! interrupted Frederick, What a Monster would
the Prince of Sicily be! Ah! said Camilla, interrupting him again, it was no
small Effect of Hatred, that of pretending to love me* for the depriving me of
a Happiness, whose least Idea was sufficient to surprise me: See, said she to
him, showing him the Elegy, What a Delicacy for a Prince, whose Flames are
kindled by Severities, and how does Love over-turn the Order of all our
Inclinations! It is this same Prince* who is to this point so tender and
submissive! In what Confusion was Frederick! His Passion was so naturally
painted in those Verses, the Character of them was so tender, that Amaldee was
very much moved; he was some time without having the Power to justify himself
of a thing too true, but at length made use of the Ambiguity for his Plea in
that Occasion. Madam, said he, addressing himself to Camilla, I vow to you,
once again, that all that I love is here. Say no more, interrupted Camilla, not
doubting but that it was of her, he spoke, How sweet do I find these
Obscurities! After having imagined to have had so clear a Prospect of my
Misfortune, leave me in my Error, if you cannot draw me out of it, but at the
Expense of that Affection which I so passionately pursue. After which* she
quickly agreed to stay in Sicily, fearing, with just Reason, the Displeasure of
Berranger, who had learned, with Indignation, the Kindness she had for the
Prince of Sicily; but, this was not enough, Frederick had yet said nothing in
his own Behalf, so that saluting Amaldee, he looked upon him very tenderly, And
you, Prince, said he to him, Will you still believe that I hate you? I know
not, said Amaldee to him likewise very tenderly, All that I can say is that my
Regret is extreme to leave you in a time you are willing I should believe you
do not. They were not able to say any thing more, their Tears trickled down
reciprocally; and without doubt, the Prince of Majorca* felt that, I know not
what, which Frederick found strange he had not yet been sensible of. The Day
after, he was to take his public Leave of the King, all the Court was
assembled, and Menfroy did show the great Esteem he had for the Prince of
Majorca, by all the Caresses he made him, and embraced him once again; after
which, Amaldee made up to embrace Frederick, who retired some Paces; but the
King taking notice of that Action, made him a Sign not to discover himself, but
to embrace the Prince: whereupon, a great Blush mounted into his Face, and the
Prince, when a respectuous Sentiment did already restrain, did advance without
trembling; and if notice had been taken of that disorder, it would have been
without doubt surprising. After this, Amaldee returned immediately unto the
King his Fathers Dominions, with all the Violence of a Man, who finds himself
drawn elsewhere without knowing what it was that did so. He saw the King, who
according to his Expectations, received him like a disobedient Son, and who
fell into a strange Passion against Camilla, accusing her of Treason, and
vowing that he would go and drag her from the Arms of the triumphing Frederick.
Alas! How little did he merit that Title, and under what Affliction did he lie,
through the Absence of Amaldee. This last Misfortune seemed to him
insupportable; he fell sick of a lingering Fever, which sheltred him from the
Pursuits of Yolanda and the Admirals Lady, who could not agreed together: These
two Rivals being almost always in Company, envyed one another's Joy and
Affliction. In short, being always at Enmity, they parted, and Yolanda went for
her (...) and that of her Mother-in-law to remain at a Relations House* from
whence she sent daily to enquire after the Health of the Prince, whom Camilla
alone had the Privilege of visiting. She came to see him with the King, who
knowing that her Affection would sooner or later degenerate into Friendship,
and endeavored already to give Occasion for the contracting it between them.
The Princess his Daughter contributed thereto on her part, and being desirous
to expel Love from her own Heart, she no longer used any Terms that are proper
to it; and said nothing that might give Occasion to any such Motions. The words
of Friendship were the only ones in their Mouths; and Camilla not caring, tho
Love appeared to her under a borrowed Name, provided it was still the same in
the Soul of Frederick, did suffer it with great Satisfaction. The Princess of
Sicily was at length cured of her Fever, but she was still in a languishing
Condition; she had observed so melting a Sadness in Amaldee's Countenance at
their parting, that it re-doubled her own. But tho that tender Trouble had
afforded her some Joy, yet it lasted not long, and that Instant of Happiness
went away so fast, that it only helped to render that Princess more unhappy.

In the mean while, the Truce being at an end, and Berranger having a long time
been preparing a considerable Fleet, (his Son was hardly returned) when for to
punish him for the Obstacles he had raised in his Designs, he ordered him to
take the Command and Conduct of it. This was a cruel Circumstance, for him to
bear Arms against a King, whose Favors had filled him with Admiration, and
against a Prince, who had insensibly disarmed him of* a certain natural
Haughtiness, which was his only Defect. His budding Passion, which he did not
call by that Name, did extremely weaken in him that which his Father would have
inspired him with for that War. Moreover, he found it so unjust, that he
proceeded to a hundred Extremities, before he could be brought to it: however,
he at Length yielded, it being to no purpose for him to oppose the designs of
his Father, who for his Obstinacy inflicted the Punishment on him, of going to
lay wast a Country he had so much kindness for, which indeed he looked upon as
so severe, that he could as willingly have been dragged to his Grave. He could
not forbear telling the King, who recommended to him the doing his Duty, If I
do it, you have Reason to fear the Success of your Enterprise. These Words
making the King apprehend that he might favor the Interests of Menfroy, he
gave a secret Charge to one of the Officers, to have an Eye upon his Conduct,
and to give him an Account of all his Actions, and told him, that his Fortune
should answer for the Disobedience of his Son. Hereupon, Amaldee embarked for
to return to Sicily. He wished that a happy Shipwreck would dispense him from
a Voyage so fatal to his Repose and his Glory. He had only the Name of
Commander in Chief, and it was that Name that made him appear culpable in the
Eyes of the Sicilians. Menfroy did very much suspect the Violence that was done
him, but Frederick was more difficult to be persuaded in that Case; he thought
it something so severe, to see him in Arms to attach him, and which he would
have done, tho it had been only in his own Defense against him, that he could
not find any Reason for his Justification. Besides, the Vexation he had to see
that apparently he had never had him in his Memory, while that he afforded him
all his Thoughts, did very much contribute to the making him entertain Reasons
of Complaint in all he could have done. Thus that Prince did not appear, though
he was effectually innocent: No Body had heard from him since his Departure
from Sicily, by the Care that Berranger had taken to prevent it. This very much
surprised Camilla, who knew not what to think of it. Frederick had often let
her know, how much he was dissatisfied with this Procedure; but in such
passionate Terms, that she frequently reproached him with having more Kindness
for her Brother than for her. Since we are retrenched to the Names of
Friendship, said she to him one day, give me that which you have for Amaldee,
Why should you make so disadvantagious a Difference for me? How satisfied
should I be, if I could draw upon my self a little of that Displeasure, which
methinks is so obliging: Do not You make Trial of that, said he to her,
something fainting. Alas! answered she with an extreme Sadness, It is more for
my Interest than for Yours, which I ought not to neglect, You love me so
little, though I love You, that should my Affection in the least grow faint,
Yours would vanish in an instant. But, I must confess, that it would be in vain
for me to endeavor to lessen it; and I am sensible, that it would be as
impossible for me to merit your Displeasure, as you to grant me it. Ah!
Frederick, either You do no longer, or You never did love me, my Passion is
ever augmenting and yours decreasing. And indeed, it is a great Diminishing in
Love, not to increase. Besides, the Princess of Majorca, in the beginning of
her Tenderness, had so often wavered between the fear of having a Rival, and
the hopes of having none, that those tumultuous. Sentiments did blind her as to
those of Frederick, and hindered her, in some manner, from perceiving their
Faintness. But, when she had her mind free from any Jealousy, she began to
observe them with more Exactness; and finding them so little conformable to her
own, she fell into a Melancholy more cruel than all the violent Griefs she had
lain under. How! said she, I lose Frederick, and no body deprives me of him, I
lose him by himself, and it is he who refuses to love me, tho he is not in love
with any other Women! How happy was I, when I had no reasons of Complaint but
against my Rivals, I might accuse my Star of Misfortunes, I might accuse their
Charms of forcing him to love, but nothing ingages him; he prefers his
indifference before all the softness I might inspire him with; he slights me,
and I can only blame him for all the hard usage. I receive from him. But the
disease was without remedy, and insupportable, they all began to sham one
another in Scicily, and Amaldee's absence caused a Consternation in the mind of
Frederick, which was shared by all those who had any concern for him. He was so
out of humor, that no Body durst speak to him: If he went out of his Apartment,
it was to hide himself in some lonely place where he was inaccessible. His
Mistresses would several times have followed him to his Retreats, but were
still hindered by one another; they mutually incommoded themselves, and through
the conformity of their Sentiments, they almost ever jumped in the same
Designs: Thus was he freed by all together, from each of them in particular,
and he found himself less importuned by the Multitude, than if he had had but
one. However, tho they all persued him with an equal Passion, the Admirals Lady
was the most happy to find him alone; He shunned her the least, because he did
not know that she was his unknown Votary, whom he wished might be so to him for
ever; though he had seen her often with Camilla and Yolanda, in places where
they came upon his account, he had not taken notice of it; he had ever looked
upon her to be too averse to Galantry, for to entertain any such suspicion, and
imagined, when he perceived a return of kindness in her for him, after all the
incivilities he had committed, that her Husband had made her a Confident of
what he was. This thought seemed to him so probable, that he resolved to make
her his Confident. It was requisite he should have one: When we are happy, we
contain all our joy within us, and can be without imparting it to any Body; but
when we are afflicted, we must necessarily discharge one part of our grief by
confiding it in a Friend. He looked upon the Admirals Lady as a very good
Woman, imagined that she would willingly embrace all his Sentiments; and as
they had reciprocally the design of meeting, it was not long before they did
so. One day Frederick went into an Alley, where he found the Admiral's Lady,
they walked together for a while, and after the first Civilities, which lasted
but too long in both their opinions, Frederick began first a particular
Conversation. Madam, said he to her, I have extremely sought an occasion to
find you alone, and you have not seemed to shun it; I give you a thousand
thanks for all your favors. I have of late perceived a change in your
Carriage, which makes me believe that you know something of my Secret. The
Admiral's Lady was very much surprised at the change of his respectful
behavior, and did not take it well that she was reproached with having so much
kindness, which she had never dreamt she was liable to. Her face showed her to
be extremely troubled, and she told him with some kind of Anger, Methinks that
you ought not to abuse what pity has obliged me to do: And the disorder she was
in hindering her from continuing, Frederick not comprehending her displeasure,
told her, Madam, I did not think that a Confession, which shows the esteem I
have for you, could have given you any offense; but since it displeases you, I
shall say nothing more. The Admiral's Lady being mortally afraid he should hold
his peace, told him languishing; Speak, Prince, I will lay aside something of
my severity, since indeed I know but already too much not to hear the rest
favorably. The Princess was more and more perplexed, and could not comprehend
the meaning of that severity and that favor which were valued at that rate,
and thinking that she herself was obliging in that she had chosen her to the
prejudice of any other, to honor her with her Confidence, she thought her very
fantastical. However the occasion she had for One whom she might open her heart
to, made her pass over all, and she was going to tell her a thing which would
have produced terrible Consequences in that Conjuncture. The Admiral's Lady
would have proclaimed a Mystery which must have filled her with spite, and all
the measures that the King had taken should have been broken, if his good
fortune had not made him send one of his Attendants to seek out Frederick, to
give him notice that Berranger's Fleet was coming with full Sails under
Amaldee's conduct. The person who was charged with this Commission, performed
it something rudely. What a surprise was this to the poor Princess! What
conflicts did she not undergo! The slaughter and horror which she represented
to her self, might well have daunted a young person; but nothing terrified her
so much as the danger whereto Amaldee was going to be exposed: She was no
longer mindful of his slights, her greatest misfortune was to lose him by his
death; and all Sentiments being confounded in that, I must be gone, said she
sadly, turning toward the Admiral's Lady, tho I have not yet, Madam, unbosomed
to You my thoughts. I know enough, Prince, said she to him, shedding some tears
which Frederick found very obliging, and for which he thanked her by a sign of
his Head, which she found more obliging than all he could have said. Whereupon
he went away to the King, who expected him in his Cabinet. He had a mind to be
alone with his Daughter, whom he saw very much alarmed, which did not at all
surprise him, and interpreting her timidity like a good Father, he was long in
suspense if he should suffer her to be exposed to the dangers of a Sea Fight.
It was however requisite to continue a Fiction that passed for a Truth, and was
so important to the repose of his People; Thus he found no reason that could
dispense his Daughter from passing for his Son in the War, since she had ever
appeared under that name at Court: Wherefore he desired her with tears in his
eyes to preserve her self, and to be more mindful of what she was, than of what
she ought to appear. Why do not You encourage me better, said she to him, being
charmed with the kindness he showed her, it will be but too easy for me to
appear what I am, and I ought at least to seem Frederick in so great an
Occasion, though I belie that name in my own Soul. Ah! my dear Daughter, be
careful only of the Princess of Sicily; Frederick will ever be well enough
preserved. They parted, being both full of all the Events which they foresaw.
But Camilla having had notice of all that passed, was extremely concerned. Her
Brother and her Lover were going to engage, and she saw afflictions falling
upon her, what side soever Fortune should favor. She went to Menfroy, and
asked him pardon for the Ingratitude of her Brother: That good King was
altogether disposed to excuse him; they easily believed, knowing him as they
did, that he must be under a great Constraint, and rather pitied than blamed
him. All things were made ready, and Menfroy's Fleet being equal, or indeed
rather stronger than that of Amaldee, he resolved to go out and prevent his
Enemies Attack: Besides confiding in the justice of his Arms, and in the good
luck which had never abandoned him, he sent a Herald to the Prince of Majorca,
for the choosing a day fitting to decide their quarrel. Menfroy chose rather to
hazard an Engagement by Sea, than to fatigue his People by a long War, which
would have interrupted their Commerce, insomuch that the day was appointed for
the Battle. Camilla had not of a long time seen Frederick in particular; there
had passed some kind of Coldness between them, which easily happens when
Affections are not reciprocal. As all their Discourse was now come to be of
indifferent things, she took an occasion to ask him what he thought of her
Brother, and if his procedure did not inspire him with a great aversion for all
their Family; for she durst no longer tell him, that she apprehended it as to
her own particular: Madam, said he to her with a very tender Air, You would
easily know my thoughts, if you knew me a little better: This was sufficient to
engage her to an Explication, which she had so much desired. It is easy to
judge that they then were reconciled; Quarrels seldom last long when there is a
disposition on both sides to put an end to them, and when we once come to clear
Suspicions, we often end by Justifications. Thus Frederick, before he departed
made his Peace with all his Mistresses. Yolanda alone had not an opportunity of
speaking with him; but she thought of him the more, and fancied that he thought
no less of her; and indeed, never did Mistress so much rely upon the Faith of
her Inclination. It gave her so great a tranquillity as to Frederick, that an
Infidelity on his part would never have seemed probable to her. Hereupon he
went on Board his Ship, being very uncertain what he was to do; and Menfroy
having embraced him with a tenderness that seemed a foreknowledge of some
Misfortune, they separated, the King leaving him the Command of one of the
Squadrons of his Fleet under the Conduct of the Admiral, and he himself
Commanding in Chief over the whole, boar up in all diligence against Amaldee:
When this Prince, who was expecting him in good order, had perceived him, he
sent at the same instant one of his most considerable Officers in a Pinnace,
for to testify to him the great regret he had to appear in that Equipage, and
to show so much ingratitude in appearance, tho he was only unhappy in effect.
Menfroy sent him a generous Answer, That he was not at all surprised that he
obeyed the Orders of his Father, and that the Actions could not be Criminal
when the Intention is Innocent. Thereupon he sent him back; and those two
Princes thought of nothing but of doing their duty. The Engagement was very
bloody on both sides; the principal Squadron of the Sicilian Fleet put a great
part of that of Amaldee's into disorder, who coming to rally and second them
with the Squadron which he commanded in Person; He found Menfroy in the Head of
them, and was willing to shun him; and the King of Sicily being unwilling to
attack him out of the same motive, turned his Fury upon the rest of the Enemies
Fleet, the greatest part whereof he took and sunk; and after five or six hours
Engagement, he gained at longth a great Victory, being the same Fate that had
always attended him; but it cost him very dear, since that Frederick and the
Admiral were not to be found amongst the Conquerors, insomuch that it was very
much doubted, whether Berranger or Menfroy had received the greatest loss. The
thing happened in this manner.

Amaldee, as we have said, being desirous to spare Menfroy, knew not that in
falling upon another Squadron of the Sicilian Fleet, he attacked Frederick. The
Admiral did his duty with great vigor; but as they were bearing up so near one
another, as to discern Objects, Frederick perceived the Prince of Majorca,
whose sadness seemed to atone for all the Affliction he had given him; that
sight put him into such a trouble, that he no longer knew what he did: He was
so little able to defend himself against him, that he no longer thought of
defending himself against others: And Amaldee fell likewise into so great a
disorder that he seemed to Communicate it to the rest of his Fleet. But to what
an Extremity were they not both reduced, when that the sicilians being animated
by the death of the Admiral, who had been newly killed with an Arrow, they
grappled Amaldee's Ship, before that those two Princes had deliberated what
they were to do, their Soldiers attacked one another with a Fury that did
sufficiently repair the weakness of their Princes; and Frederick seeing himself
Master of his own Conduct by the Death of the Admiral, after having been in
suspense some Moments about the Resolution he was to take, on a sudden
repenting his Effeminacy, or rather not knowing how to come to any
determination, he followed I know not what rage, which forced him to enter with
his Sword drawn into Amaldee's Ship: He remained in that Confusion, that
Amaldee had time to recollect himself from his first Emotion, and presenting
him with his Sword, Generous Prince, said he to him, Stab this perfidious
heart, that has not dared to follow it is own Motions, and which could not
hinder me from doing an Action unworthy of the esteem I have for you. Frederick
was so transported with what he had done, and with what he had seen the Prince
of Majorca do, that giving back he made a false step, and had like to have
fallen into the Sea, but Amaldee saved him, and neglecting all other Cares, his
whole Thoughts were then full of a Person who interessed him under a borrowed
Name. He had taken him by the hand, and they remained some Moments in that
Posture, enjoying a certain Delight, notwithstanding all their Agitations,
which hindered them from thinking even of the Condition they were in. Then
Frederick disingaging himself from his Hands, told him faintly, Do not suspend
the Effects of my Duty, suffer me at least to go to the Defense of my Men.
Alas! replied Amaldee to him, with an inconceivable Grief, seeing that he was
going away, What Course must I take to do my Devoir, and why do we so
obstinately pursue War, when our Hearts are in Peace? Frederick was something
vexed that he had given Occasion to the speaking these last Words; and for
which, some of Amaldee's Soldiers suffered, that the Prince of Sicily might at
least revenge himself on them, for the Passion their Prince had inspired him
with; insomuch, that he fell upon them with an extraordinary Fury, and making
his way through a thousand Swords, the Prince of Majorca was in terrible
Alarums for his Life. He endeavored to put an end to the Fight; his Party had
the Advantage in that place, where the better part of his Forces was got
together. The small Forces that followed Frederick, were over-pow'red by
Numbers; the rest perished, and were sunk with Frederick's Ships, who was left
alone, and abandoned in that Extremity. He looked tenderly upon Amaldee, and
without deciding what he demanded of him, he inspired him at that Instant with
a desire of making him his Prisoner, and with a design of setting him at
Liberty. At first, they were not able to speak a Word to one another; but at
length, Amaldee broke Silence, either as he was the boldest, or that his
Thoughts were at more Liberty: It is certain, that when that Love does not
appear under it is proper Figure, he does not commit such great Disorders, he is
hardly any otherwise formidable than through the Fear we have of him; and tho
he was in the Heart of Amaldee as well as in that of Frederick, yet he made a
much less Bustle in the one than in the other; Amaldee had received him without
knowing who he was, and he only gave him some small Disquiets, which he is not
able to dispense any Body from; but Frederick, who endeavored to oppose his
Progresses, was tormented both with the Shame of having given him Entrance, and
the Design of banishing him from his Heart. The Disease is never so extreme as
when we go about to be cured; and it is in those Conflicts that we are to be
pityed. Ah! Prince, cried Amaldee, Why must I needs lose you by setting you
free; for, if the Friendship I have for you makes me desirous to detain you,
the Acknowledgment that I owe the King of Sicily and your self, demands of me
your Liberty: Render it me then all entire, said Frederick to him, being
hurryed away by his Passion. You consent then to our Separation, said Amaldee
to him; and do you willingly, replied Frederick? In short, continued he, You
will suffer me to go. Amaldee was so charmed with receiving so many Testimonies
of Friendship, and Frederick so confused with having given him them, that they
once more were surprised with Silence; but then at length, Frederick's Timidity
made him break it in his Turn, and the fear of being exposed to the receiving a
thousand Marks of Esteem from the Prince, which though pleasing, were so
dangerous to him, that they made him resolve to desire the Prince to let him
go. I perceive then you hate me still, said Amaldee to him, but he made him no
Answer; and fearing that he had but too well persuaded him of the contrary, he
went in great Haste into the Ship that was destined to carry him home. Amaldee
commanded with great Grief, that he should be conducted to Messina, but he was
but very ill obeyed; the Person whom Berranger had commissioned to have an Eye
over his Sons Conduct, gave order secretly, for the carrying Frederick to
Majorca, after having feigned, for the contenting the Prince, that he had
appointed them to steer to Sicily; it was easy to put this Order in Execution;
Night coming on, did both facilitate this Deceit, and the Retreat of the Prince
of Majorca, who did but too soon perceive the Defeat of his Fleet, he
re-assembled the Remains as well as was possible for him, and escaped happily
from the Pursuit of Menfroy, whom Night did deprive both of Frederick and the
rest of the Victory. After that Amaldee thought himself out of his Reach, being
troubled with so many Events, he shut himself up in his Cabin, while that his
Fleet made away with full Sails from Sicily, whither his Heart tended however.
His Return was yet more sad than his Voyage had been, and Frederick who was no
less agitated than himself, suffered them to carry him whither they had a Mind;
but when he perceived the Trick that was put upon him, he gave a doleful
Skreek, and likewise fell into a Passion against those who used him so
treacherously; but there was no Remedy.

He perhaps found likewise a kind of Consolation in thinking that he should
again see Amaldee, without having contributed thereto; He was very glad that
his Enemies had done for him what he never durst have done for himself, and
though he seemed to be in a rage, without doubt he lay under no great Violence.
They had neither of them the leisure to be weary during their Voyage, their
Thoughts took them so up, that they made them imagine it very short. They
arrived at the same time at Majorca, and Prince Amaldee not knowing that
Frederick was so near him, went to salute the King and Queen, who made him a
very unkind Reception, they were very much grieved to see that Destiny
continued obstinately bent upon their ruin, they knew nothing of Frederick's
being taken, and the astonishment was equal between them and Amaldee, when it
was told a moment after, they then were full of Acknowledgment to the Prince,
their Son; the Person who had managed the Business, had a great Respect for his
Prince, and seeing that he had been constrained to displease him out of
obedience to the King, he was willing to repair his Fault, by giving him the
honor of all. In private he made him his Excuses for that deceit, and after
having told him the Reasons which obliged him to it, he found him disposed to
pardon him, thus all the World was satisfied. The King had never been sensible
of any Joy equal to that of having the Son of Menfroy in his hands, He desired
to see him; and that Prince having paid his Respects to him, with a very good
Grace, and having entertained him with a great deal of Wit, he was something
secretly vexed, that his Merit was but too answerable to his Reputation; but
the Queen had far other Sentiments, she relished a double pleasure in having
him for her Prisoner, when she found him so well made, and obtained from the
King her Husband, that the City should be all his Confinement, hoping to make
him lose the Liberty she gave him, whereof Frederick on the morrow had some
suspicions, and in a few days after, she imparted to him her Thoughts. Years
had not yet extinguished her Beauty, she was addicted to Gallantry, and
imagined that she might well merit Vows, without exacting them, she was forced
sometimes however to make Advances; Her Rank hindered her at least from knowing
the Lovers whom she caused to languish, and did strangely importune her, upon
Frederick's account, who entertained her with a thousand agreeable things, for
he had recovered all his Gayety, and he lived in so perfect an intelligence
with Amaldee, that his Felicity hindered him from thinking that under the Name
of a Friend, she was a Lover, and that her haughtiness was but ill managed; and
indeed, Women never think of that, when they are satisfied with their Lovers,
and the design of being severe, does seldom arise during the pleasure of a
happy Engagement. His was in a fair way to become so, Amaldee did insensibly
show him as much tenderness as if he had known him better; he might believe
that it was sympathy which occasioned their Inclination; and as he was
entertaining him with a thousand kind things, being prompted thereto by motions
which he could not penetrate. Word was brought that the Queen desired to speak
with the Prince of Sicily. At first their Conversation was very diverting, the
Queen had a great deal of Wit, and Frederick had no less; at length they made
Love the Theme of their Discourse. For my part, said Frederick, I believe that
the Perfection of Love consists in its continuance, and that We may judge of
its force, when it can resist Time; and I, replied the Queen, should believe on
the contrary, that Constancy does rather proceed from the weakness of a Lover,
than from the power of Love. There are some, said she, who have not the courage
to change, who make a Habit of their Passion, which becomes calm and still,
does something approach indifference, and has no longer any more than the Name
of Love, the Pleasure is greatest in having new Sentiments. This is the reason
that most commonly Amorous Engagements are only delightful in the beginnings.
You, said she, ought to lay by that so regular Fidelity, your Person is
attended with an Air that may pretend to more than one Conquest; it is only for
those who have but a small share of what can please, to keep to their first
Passion, though they are so happy as to be therein successful, they ought never
to hazard themselves in a second: but there are People of so great Merit as to
entertain more extended Designs.

Frederick received very Civilly the application she was pleased to make him of
those obliging words, but the Queens discourse having a particular Aim, whereto
he only Answered in general Terms; Could you make use of those Maxims, said she
to him looking upon him fixedly, examine your self and in time you shall know
more. Hereupon she withdrew into his Closet, without expecting her answer,
perhaps for fear of receiving one, that would not be very conformable to what
she too ardently desired not to be under apprehensions, and perhaps likewise to
conceal her Blushes; for how much accustomed soever a Woman is to intrigues,
she always Blushes at her loving first, be it out of shame or spite. Frederick
remained very much surprised, and foreseeing that the Queens Passion would give
him some trouble, he was a while in suspense, if he should give a hint of it to
the Prince of Majorca, perhaps by that means they would have come to a more
entire explication. The Conjuncture was favorably, but they were destined to
other events, and the clearing of this business was deferred by an interressed
Person. Frederick was expecting Amaldee who used to Walk with him every
Evening, and had hardly made four steps, than that he was overtaken by a young
Cavalier, who made himself known to be the Admirals Widow. His surprise was
great, How, Madam, said he to her, my Eyes deceive me without doubt: No, said
she to him, Your Eyes do not deceive you, and besides, if your heart did tell
you that it was me, you may very well rely on its Testimony: but by what good
Fortune, said he to her, do I see you again? Can you doubt of that, said she to
him, let it be only in consideration of you, if you could do the same thing for
me? Frederick was so amazed, that by having only offered to make her his
Confident, it had obliged her come so far; and was no less surprised at the
Compliments she made him, joined to that strange disguise, that they were going
to fall into a new perplexity, if Amaldie had not diverted them from it. But it
is time to make known by what Adventure she came to Majorca; it is certain that
when a Woman, who pretrends to more than ordinary Virtue and Severity, does
concern her self in Gallantry, she does not do it by halfes, but passes from
one extremity to another; and when she resolves once to stray out of the course
of Wisdom, she seldom contains her self from committing extraordinary follies?

But for the taking a Prospect of things from the time we left them in Sicily;
you must know, that after the Fleet was returned Victorious, although in
Consternation upon Frederick's being taken, people were divided between Joy and
Grief, every one was sensible of their particular losses, and it was enough
that they did not afflict themselves with the Princes imprisonment, since they
were assured of his being alive, without that rejoicing at the gaining a
Battle, which Sicily paid so dear for; several considerable persons had lost
their Lives therein and amongst others, the Lord High Admiral, as we have said
was Killed. His Widow, whom he left in right to dispose of her self, resolved
to make use of it in favor of her Lover: she had apparently a very sensible
Grief for the Death of her Husband; and people were not surprised at the
Resolution she had taken to leave the World, but she had not yet renounced its
Pleasures, which she still found was not without Charms: she was only obliged
to go seek them afar off. The Object of her Delight was now at Majorca, and she
resolved to spare no endeavors to find him out. After that the first
Ceremonies of Mourning were over, she pretended to retire into a Convent. In
the mean while Camilla knowing Frederick to be at Majorca, had a great desire
to return thither, and did not think it convenient to stay any longer in the
Dominions of an Enemy against the Will of her Parents, she went to the King and
told him, that it was not Just, that Berranger's Daughter should be well
treated by a Prince, whose Son was in the hands of her Father, who did not
restore him that Liberty which he had given Amaldee. I ought not, said she, to
share in his ingratitude, by suffering it: I am ohliged to make it my whole
endeavor to set the Prince at Liberty, send me back to Majorca, if you can
confide in me. Without doubt the King my Father will at length be melted with
so much Generosity: But in Case he continues Obdurate, notwithstanding all your
Favors, leave me to manage this business with Address, and I promise, you that
you shall see him again in a short time, or that I will come and remit my self
into your hands. Perhaps she did really mean all that she had spoken: But
Memfroy without much considering her intention, told her, Madam, provided that
your intrests may still be preserved, I shall not be sorry to be obliged to you
for the Liberty of my Son. He had already caused an offer to be made Berranger
to render her upon very advantageous Conditions, but he would in no wise
hearken to it. Nothing was so advantageous to him, as to have the Prince of
Sicily in his Dominions; insomuch that Memfroy desparing of seeing him without
renewing a War, the success whereof is ever doubtful* adventured to send back
Camilla, and delivering up voluntarily an Hostage that Chance had given him: He
fancied that he should thereby oblige Berranger to restore what Fortune had
given him likewise. Insomuch that all things being prepared for Camilla's
departure; she was sent back with a Noble Convoy, and the Admirals Widow
taking that opportunity to go to Majorca, did mingle her self in the Crowd of
those who accompanied her. She Transvested her self into a Cavalier, and was so
well disguised, that she hardly knew her self. Several days passed without any
ill success in her Design. Camilla was almost ever shut up in her Cabin with
one of her Maids, in whom she most Confided, and without doubt the Admirals
Widow would not have been Discovered, if her Love had not betrayed her. The
Character of a Lover is too remarkable not to be distinguished. She bethought
her self of making an Acquaintance with the Princesses Confident, hoping to
know by that means, in what terms Frederick stood with Camilla, though the
Admirals Widow did believe her self beloved: There needs so little to wound a
Passion, that incertainty has ever been the share of those who are in Love.
Thus she did all she could to have a clear Information; she thought, that the
best course would be for her to win the Heart of that Maid, for the discovering
of her Mistresses Secrets; and as nothing renders People so dextrous as Love,
she acted the Lover so naturally, that this Confident took delight in believing
that she inspired her with some tender motions. The habit of hearing amarous
Discourse, had prepared her Heart to entertain those soft and tender Vows; and
the sentiments of the Princess, had seemed to her to be so sweet, that she
could not forbear following them. The Admirals Widow made a very pretty
Gentleman, and seemed very deserving the Ladys Favors. Thus a great progress
was made in the Heart of that Maid, when unluckily she had a desire to speak of
her Galant. It is impossible for People to forbear starting in all their
Discourse, something of the Object their Soul is full of, and we sometimes meet
with such Persons, who had rather speak ill of their Victorys, than be
constrained to say nothing at all of them. She was ever hearing Camilla
commending hers, and it is no small constraint to be always hearing, when we
have so many things to say. She could not forbear breaking so troublesome a
silence, which she did so dexterously, that she both found the means to please
her Mistress, and satisfy her self at the same time. The Admirals Widow had
often talked to her of Frederick, and the Maid made use of that pretext to
speak in Commendation of her Galant, Madam, said she to her, I know a Sicilian
here on Board, who has a most particular Affection for his Prince, and I dare
assure you, that he is the most zealous of his Subjects. Camilla was too tender
not to be Charmed with the affection that people had for Frederick, we think
our selves indebted to others for the kind sentiments they have for what we
love, and she was willing that the pretended Sicilian should know, how kindly
she took his good will. Her Confident was upon the wing to call him, but at
first he made some resistance, yet being obliged to obey, he disguised his
voice so well, that he was not known, till speaking of Frederick, a blush
surprised him, and it was easily perceived that he studied what he had to say:
his discourse had no relation, the one part with another, his Motions appeared
in their Naturals, and his true tone of Voice returned on him. The Admirals
Widow was too sincere upon this Subject, for to be able to conceal any thing
from Jealousy. Madam, said she to her, I thought you very busy in Works of
Piety, but the Habit of a man which you have put on, does not persuade me that
you have had any such Motive. The Admirals Widow made her a very smart Answer,
for there is no keeping of rank amongst Rivals, and the Conformity of
Sentiments does in some manner equal persons; their Conversation was very
bitter during some time, but at length they were appeased being there was no
Remedy, and agreed; hoping to deceive one another, to demand a Confession
before their Faces of the Prince of Sicily, and that the Mistress, who was
preferred should enjoy that happiness without the others envying it her;
Whereupon they concluded together, that the best way would be to surprise him,
that he might not have the leisure to Correct his words, but explain himself in
good earnest, but they resolved both in particular to prepossess him in their
favor. Rivals never keep their Words, and Love removes all manner of Scruples.
The Admirals Widow found him out first as has been already intimated, but she
made no advantage of her diligence, for though she was not hindered by Camilla
she was so by her Brother who came to tell him some News; The Admirals Widow
withdrew not being willing to be seen in that posture which was so little
Conformable to Modesty, otherwise then by him who had occasioned that
extravagance, and who ought to be the more obliged to her for that she had
surmounted all manner of Considerations for the love of him. But as we have not
all these Considerations for others, we are careful to keep up the reputation
of all our virtue with them, and willing to have them think us still the same.
In short the Prince of Majorca acquainted Frederick with the disgrace of his
Sister, who had met with unkind reception from the King, and one much worse
from the Queen, Who suspecting the occasion of her return, had forbidden her to
stir out of her Apartment. After which he imported to him a piece of News,
which put him in despair, without his Comprehending the reason thereof. The
King had sent for the Princess of Mantua the Queens Niece, under Pretext of
keeping her Company, but indeed for the concluding a Match between her and
Amaldee. This Prince had ever shown a very great aversion for any such
engagement, but it was hoped that the Charms of that Princess would by degrees
vanquish that indifference, the King gave him notice that very evening of this
design, that he might contribute thereto, and told him that he would grant him
some time for the producing between them what makes a happy Union: Frederick
was no less troubled at this News than Amaldee. They remained both of them
mute, and looked upon one another without saying a word, the King and Queen
being in the same place with all their Train: the Queen found Frederick in a
very great trouble, which she did not doubt, but that Camilla had given
occasion to, and that thought putting her into despair, she gave the King to
understand that it was requisite he should be upon his Guard, that the
Sicilians under the pretext of having brought Camilla, might facilitate to
Frederick the means of evading, and Conducting him into his own Teritories;
These reasons were thought very probable by the King, and diffidence suting
with his natural humor, Frederick was guarded more strictly, which disgrace he
supported with considerable patience, and indeed he had other misfortunes which
lay much heavier upon him. He perceived that his ill Fortune had only made a
truce with him for a moment, to the end, that he might be the more sensible of
all the afflictions that its return was preparing for him. The Queens passion,
that of Camilla, and above all that which Amaldee was in a way of being engaged
in, made her find a great unhappiness in all the others, it was however a kind
of advantage for him, that he had all these misfortunes together, if he had had
them separately, they would have been more afflicting, but when the mind has so
many views, it fiexs upon none, and it has of its sufferings only a confused
Notion which is not so violent, and indeed he was only dejected. But the Queen
was more agitated, the thoughts of having caused the least trouble in what she
loved, made her incessantly contriving the means of putting him out of pain. She
only waited for a favorable occasion to speak thereof to the King, whose humor
was difficult to be managed, but she ordered her business so as to find it. She
could no longer forbear seeing Frederick, her Jealousy was mollified by time,
and she knew no other trouble than absence, which unhappiness she was to
endeavor the removing, whereupon she remonstrated to Berranger that it was
glorious to leave Frederick upon his word, that he would oblige him, by
Treating him honorably to make the like returns, that he ought not to render
himself odious to his people, by an action opposite to Royal Virtues, and that
in short, the best course would be to engage him to them, and to divert the
trouble he lay under in being detained from his Dominions by rendering his abode
with them as agreeable as could be. The King did comply with these Instances,
having nothing more to fear from the Sicilians when he had sent back with order
to tell Menfroy, that if Chance had put Frederick into his hands, as it had
done Camilla into his, he would have delivered him after the same manner, but
having purchased him with the blood of so great a number of his Subjects, and
by the loss of a Battle, it was fitting he should still keep what he had so
dearly acquired. The King of Sicily perceived that he must still riscue some
more of his men for the recovery of his Son, and prepared anew for War, but
Frederick seeing himself freed from that great number of Guards,
notwithstanding his dejection, he enquired after Amaldee, he was told that that
Prince was gone to meet the Princess of Mantua with a considerable part of the
Court. How fatal was this News! He was not able to view his misfortune in that
distant Prospect, though it makes it appear less great, he saw it approaching,
and was in no less perplexity how, to come off from a Visit that the Queen
exacted from him; and yet, however he was obliged to make it, but he went to
her with so great a sadness, that the Queen asked him with surprise, from
whence that profound Melancholy proceeded, You ought to lay it now aside, said
she to him, since your misfortunes are now blown over. Ah! Madam, said he to
her, I am no sooner got out of one Labyrinth, than that I fall into another, I
am so accustomed to that long train of misfortunes, that I will also accustom
my self to bear them with an equal Countenance: I have made a habit of my
Troubles, which will cause me at least to receive indifferently all that is
still prepared for me: And will you view your good fortune also with that
indifference, said she to him. It is beyond all appearance, replied he, that
though it should be offered me, I should never believe it real, and should
refuse it for that reason. Camilla's Confinement puts you into this ill humor,
said the Queen to him, outraged with Spite, but you would do well to disingage
your self a little on that side, from whence you are not to expect any great
success; think of it once more, added she ri^^ng. He made her a profound ^ow,
and withdrew, seeing Company come in, without making Reflection, upon what his
too little obliging Conduct with the Queen might produce.

The End of the Second Part.
THE FEMALE PRINCE; OR, FREDERICK OF SICILY.

Part III.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1682.

THE FEMALE PRINCE; OR, FREDERICK OF SICILY.
PART III.
FRederick no other Prospect now, than the Marriage of Amaldee; he Walked
Pensive all alone, and tho impatient of his return, yet it was not long enough
deferred in his Opinion. He could not see but too soon the Princess of Mantua,
she seemed to him so Beautiful, and Amaldee so Complaisant, tho he only did
what mere Civility required, that he perceived his grief was capable of
increasing. The King received her according to her Quality, and the views he
had for her, did merit. Yet the Queen did not see her that day, and gave out
that she was Indisposed. But the Princess of Mantua viewed Frederick with great
application, and hardly took any notice of all the honors that were done her.
She could have wished that he had been the Prince of Majorca, and though that
Amaldee was admirably well made, she was not destined to have those Sentiments
for him, which she began to have for Frederick. They had conceived a great
esteem for one another, but nothing more, and never two hearts were at that
distance, when they were to have been united. they met, it is true, at the same
point in what concerned Frederick, but that was not the way to join them. On
the Morrow they were each of them full of such Capricious Sentiments, that it
seemed as if Love had changed place for the better exercising his vengeance,
but this Princess did still bear the source, and all afflictions were mean in
comparison of hers. She had a sensible redoubling of them, through the
Jealousy she had of Amaldee, which she had hitherto been unacquainted with;
and that so violent passion in all others, was only doleful in her, and by
consequence much more oppressing. It is a great case when we can complain of a
Person with Justice: And those terrible Motions, which makes us believe that we
hate him who loves a Rival, are more supportable than those tender languishing,
which only tends to the accusing our selves of all our Sufferings. Ah! how
feeble is that Accusation, and how Afflicting at the same time? Why did I not
make my self known, said she, before he made his Addresses to another, it is
now too late to show him the Princess of Sicily, after he has seen the Princess
of Mantua, and that he has already received the impression of her Charms? Why
did I not take the opportunity of gaining his heart, during his happy
indifference: I complained of this, alas! but I still deferred the procuring
being beloved. I see my self now prevented. Why did he not keep to that
indifference which he would not quit for me? I never had any other than the
trouble of not being beloved, but that seeing him Love anther is a thousand
times more Cruel. She was not able to go abroad that day, and pretended a
sickness which she had only in her mind. The Queen was very well again, when
there was an occasion to visit Frederick, who though he had offended her by his
faint Behavior, she found the means of justifying him. He had some reason on
his side; the unjust proceedure of the thing wherein he might think that she
had some share, by reason of Camilla, was very capable of putting him out of
humor: but tho all should have been against him, she found in her heart what
spoke in his defense. It is very natural to believe Innocent, what is so much
our Interest to have so. In short she disposed her self to make him a Visit,
after having received one from the Princess of Mantua, whom she gave to
understand, that she was obliged to have great regards for that Foreign
Prince; and tho she could not approve in her self of all the managements she
had for him, she endeavored to make them be approved of by others. The
Princess of Mantua asked her several Questions concerning Frederick, telling
her that she had not taken notice of such a Person, and obliged her to carry
her with her; tho she had no great desire to do so. This young Princess had had
a certain disquiet all the Night, which had hindered her from sleeping, and
which had put her into a condition of keeping her bed if she had not been to
see the Queen: she flattered her self that Frederick's Sickness might be
something approaching hers. She fancied that he had viewed her very earnestly,
and that he frequently sighed, while he was in her Presence, and the desire of
seeing him do so again, filled her Imagination with a Delight, which vanished
at her coming into his Chamber: they found him in so lamentable a Condition,
his Eyes being all bathed with Tears, which he hardly thought of Wiping away,
notwithstanding their Presence. It was easy for them to Judge, that they had
neither of them any share in that great grief. The beginnings of a Passion are
not so violent, and the Princess of Mantua was with reason apprehensive, that
the Person whom she was so desirous to render sensible, was but too much so
already. The Queen on her side having no reason to applaud her self for that
profound affliction, it made her conceive a furious spite; the Conversation
was faint on all sides, and the Visit short. As they were going away, Amaldee
came likewise to make Frederick a Visit, who could not forbear giving him an
unkind Reception, and though he would not willingly give him any offense, yet
he did, for the Princess of Sicily imagined she robbed her of that heart, when
they did not give it her, tho she had so well merited it. She could not be
satisfied with him, who gave it to another. Does the Princess of Mantua send
you hither, said Frederick to him, after something a slighting manner: Amaldee
without making him any answer upon that, asked him only what he thought of her,
and if she was not very beautiful, I did not take so much notice of her,
answered he in the same tone. I am much afraid, said Amaldee, now something
displeased, that you have seen her but too much for your repose and for mine;
and that affectation of not speaking of her, seems to me a fear of augmenting
that tenderness by commending a Princess who has inspired me with it. Frederick
was so disordered, and in such despair, to see him so inflamed, that he had not
the Courage to give him an Answer, and Amaldee was more and more confirmed in
the suspicion he had of his being fallen in Love with his Mistress: this troubled
him, without knowing the reason of his own Thoughts. He perceived that he
should not be much concerned, tho she should Love Frederick, but he could not
endure that Frederick should love her. I am deceived, said he, and Jealousy
disturbs my mind, I ought only to apprehend his Loving her, for fear she should
likewise Love him: but continued he a moment after, I am sensible, that I
apprehend all on the side of Frederick, even without Relation to the Princess.
I am Mad, added he in short, I am in Love, since I am Jealous, and I can only
be so of the Princess of Mantua. However, he could not conclude this in good
earnest, and he was suspended between his Reason and his Sentiments, which he
could not accord, but had very terrible Allarms. Frederick not being able to
suffer his Rival to make all the Progress she had a mind to, while he should
amuse himself in complaints, he left his Chamber on the morrow, and appeared so
sad, but so lovely, that the Princess of Mantua commended him extraordinarily,
and gave Presentiments of the Truth to the Queen, whom experience rendered
knowing in Women's thoughts of Frederick, she found two Rivals, and was not her
self Beloved. This was sufficient to prompt her to terrible extremities; she
was naturally Imperious: however, as Love works great changes in the minds of
those it possesses, the excess of her Passion made her undertake what she would
never have done without its aid. Frederick happening to lean upon a Window,
where he was profoundly Pensive; she approached him under the pretext of
looking into the Gardens; You are unworthy, said she to him, of the kind
thoughts some Persons entertain of you: You ought to have perceived that I Love
you: you Love Camilla, and I will give her to you: but likewise, let this
extraordinary effect engage you to some acknowledgment. She did not wait for
his Answer; and a great Blush covering her Face, she went from thence to go
find out the King, of whom she demanded Camilla's Pardon, and told him that his
Severity ought to be satisfied, and that it was now time to take her again into
his Favor. The King could hardly* be prevailed with to give his consent: but
after a thousand Caresses, for which he had no reason to be much obliged to
her, she obtained what she demanded, upon condition however, that his Daughter
should not appear in his Presence. From thence she went to Camilla's Apartment,
whom she found under so great a sadness, as would have melted with pity, any
other than a Rival. The absence of Frederick, whose Company was enjoyed by the
Admirals Widow, and all his other Mistrisses, was such an affliction, as she
had been ignorant of till that time, and which she had the leisure to feel in
all its extent, She received the Queens Visit with no small astonishment: but
her surprise was cruelly augmented, when she entertained her with the following
Discourse, Go thank the Prince of Sicily for your Pardon, it is to him that you
are indebted for it* he sets you free, by playing you an Infidelity with the
Princess of Mantua, Camilla was not willing to purchase her Liberty at that
rate; and the Queen went away without saying any thing more. As by breeding a
quarrel between her and Frederick, she deprived her of the fruit of the
service, which she seemingly designed her, she was in hopes that all would turn
to her own advantage. Camilla would rather have chosen to have continued in
doubt of what passed between Frederick and the Admirals Widow, than to have
the certainty of his being become a Votary to the Princess of Mantua: a new
Rival revives all our griefs; they augment every time we fall under them anew,
because we add the fresh troubles to those we had already. Penetrated with a
thousand different thoughts, she only followed that which spite inspired her
with, which was never to speak to Frederick. And indeed she had so much address
to avoid the occasions of doing so, that tho he should have sought them more
than he did, he would never have found an opportunity. Frederick, the Princess
of Mantua, and the Queen, did so well justify all that had been said, that
there was no place for any doubt. The Princess of Sicily was very glad to
deprive the Person of a Heart, who had deprived her of hers, and by that means
take revenge for all the torments Amaldee had put her to, which she did with
success. As they one day met, said that Prince very dolefully to him, Well, you
are in Love with my Mistress, must I yield her to you? Do not yield her to me,
said he scornfully, we must dispute for her Heart by Services; and
notwithstanding the affection I have for her, must she necessarily be yours?
The affection which you have for her! answered Amaldee, Ah! this I find
insupportable! How, shall I then be betrayed by my best Friend! We must quarrel
if you Love the Princess of Mantua. Let us quarrel said the Princess of Sicily,
outraged to see motions in him which she did not think herself the cause of,
for Love had never produced so many Caprices without making himself known, as
he did in the Soul of Amaldee, they spoke no more to one another that day, and
the Princess of Sicily spending with her Rivals all the hours she would have
spent with her Lover, did recompense herself for what she might lose, because
he was also a loser, and she employed her time in putting obstacles to the
progresses which his Passion might make, if she could not hinder him from being
in love, too happy in having so useful an occupation! This made a diversion to
her sentiments, which Idleness would have rendered more fervent. The Princess of
Mantua was Charmed to see so happy a sucsess in her design, which at first she
did not think capable of being executed; she no longer made reflection upon the
difficulty she had foreseen therein, since it was now removed. When we are
satisfied with the present, we are not inclinable to take views of unacceptable
remembrances, or when we do make some reflections upon them; our passed
sufferings do only help to make us find more pleasures by the opposition of the
present delightful entertainments. The Queen was in a fury to see that a change
had been wrought according to her Maxims, and that it was not so in her favor,
she would have found it less cruel to have seen that Frederick had continued to
love Camilla, than to see that he began to be in love with the Princess of
Mantua, he might well have sighed for her daughter, without giving her offense,
he knew not then that she was beautiful, but after having both known her to be
so, and had received Testimonies of her Affection, to sacrifice her to another
could not be without a horrible Contempt. It is particularly the preference
which outrages. Camilla for her part had no other Course to take than that of
complaining with her Brother, and he of complaining with his Sister; thus they
augmented their griefs by mingling them together. The Admirals Widow who made
a strict inquiry after all that concernd Frederick, was informed to the very
least circumstances of her misfortune? she became a friend of the Princess of
Majorca, since they had nothing more to fear of one another, and since they
equally did dread a Rival. They likewise concerted together the means of doing
her an Injury. The Admirals Widow could not resolve to lose the fruit of her
Voyage, she would at least speak with the ungrateful Frederick, but she could
not meet with an oppertunity; He kept the Princess of Mantua Company the most
he could, and was more frequently with the Queen than he was willing to have
been, who endeavoring not to make any noise, made use of the same Artifices he
had practiced in regard of Amaldee, and stole from him moments which he had
designed for the Princess of Mantua, thus was he tortured on all sides. By
these means the Queen did share in his assiduities, or rather paid them to
him, or at least extorted them from him much against his will. His Complaisance
for her was only constrained, nothing could move him to have any, but only in
consideration of her Rank; Thus his devises having not the same Motive which
made him act for the Princess of Mantua, they had a notable difference.
Frederick had four Mistrisses at the same time, he was the Lover of his Rivals,
and the Rival of his Lover; and he particularly maintained those two last
Characters to the height. As Amaldee would have seen without trouble, the
Passion of his Mistress, if his Friend had not repaid it with reciprocal
flames. He neglected very much to complain of her, he frequently entertained
her only with indifferent things: but one day observing the uneasiness of
Frederick, who was Walking with the Queen, and who endeavored to approach him,
to hear what he said to the Princess of Mantua, he resolved in his turn to put
him upon the Rack for some moments, and raising his Voice, Ah! Madam, said he
to her, have we nothing that is more delightful to entertain our selves with,
it seems as if we were afraid that Frederick should over-hear us: as he did
indeed. She made him Answer in a kind of slighting manner, The more indifferent
the Conversation is, the more it ought to be agreeable: What a rigor! cried
Amaldee, in a trouble that was not feigned, since he judged that her
indifference for him, only proceeded from the affection that Frederick had for
her. Is it, continued he, by such indifferent things that the Prince of Sicily
has found the way to please you, and has he so little accustomed you to amorous
Conversations, that you cannot bear with them. Frederick was too knowing in
motions, not to observe that those of Amaldee had a very tender Principle,
without diving into the cause of that tenderness: since he who felt it could
not dive into it himself; this inspired him with all the rage which the
Princess of Mantua ought to have conceived, insomuch that the Queen took notice
of it, and was no less concerned than he. And those four Lovers, two of whom
had only a good Title to that Appellation, shared themselves very injudicially,
for want of knowing the truth of their own Sentiments. Frederick who was drawn
to Amaldee, did by little and little draw the Queen to him likewise, who
attributing this violence to the Princess of Mantua, she was willing to divert
him, and turned suddenly into an opposite Alley. The Conversation of the
Princess of Majorca, and of the Princess of Mantua, did insensibly come again
to be flat and faint, when they were no longer animated by Frederick's
presence, she was not very eager to justify her self of Amaldee's suspicions,
and he fell into a certain Malancholly humor which hindered him from proceeding
any further upon that point. On the other side, Frederick and the Queen were in
an inconceivable disorder, Frederick was in despair that he was no longer
witness of a Conversation which he imagined to have proceeded much further; and
the Queen was in despair to see that he was so; But tho they hardly
interchanged a word, yet it was a good while before they parted. The Queen
detained Frederick as long as Civility would permit her, and he at length
withdrew, so outraged with what he had heard, that he resolved according to the
Custom of those who are in love, to hear henceforward all that he might wish
never to know, he never parted from Amaldee, who innocently gave him a thousand
occasions of Jealousy, he could not endure that Frederick should speak to the
Princess of Mantua, he interrupted the Conversation as soon as he saw them
together, the Prince of Sicily did as much on his part, thus they vexed one
another by a hundred little tricks, and irritated their reciprocal tenderness
by the marks they gave thereof to the Princess of Mantua; their redoubled
addresses importuned her, two passions proved troublesome to hers, it was
necessary that she should rid herself of the one or other, and without doubt
the lot would have fallen upon that of Amaldee, but as it was not she who had
given birth to it, her power did not extend so far, and it was in vain that she
undertook the curing him of it. As he one day according to his custom had
interrupted their conversation, she sell to discourse upon the point of jealous
Lovers; for my part, said she, I believe that the assiduities of a Lover of
that Character, do as much diminish the esteem that a Mistrisse has for him,
as the devoirs of a more circumspect Lover do augment it, it is a first sight
that gives birth to an inclination, when it is happy, those which follow do
only serve to confirm what it had already done, but when it produces nothing,
all the other only help to irritate our durity, by the obstacles we are willing
to raise. It seems as if he would take our heart by main force. It is born free
and when it does not give it self, nothing deprives us of it: that is very true
replied the Prince of Majorca, when we do not please at first it is in vain
that we endeavor to do so afterward* ^^constancy is as displeasing in an
unwelcome votary, as it is charming in a Lover who pleases but when we cannot
be successeful in Love, we are willing to be so at least in jealousy, and it is
sufficient if we can but hinder a Rival from taking advantage of our disgrace,
and certainly he has a greater share in our assiduities than a mistress to
whom we no longer owes them from the time that she permits them in an other.

Frederick without knowing who found so much sweetness in these words that
eying Amaldee after a very obliging manner. A dexterous Lover said he to him,
ought not to be scandalized at a procedure, which shows the value which is put
upon his merit and it is much for him to have procured the esteem of his
Rival. The Princess of Mantua looked upon him at that word with astonishment
and without comprehending why he took Amaldees part to the prejudice of his
own, even in a point apparently so contrary to his interests, we may say that
he inspired her with jealousy at that moment, with more justice than she did
him and she went displeased away upon some pretext, and seeing Frederick the
next day in the Queens Chamber who was then taken up with some affairs, she
endeavored to approach him and told him I know not I must confess why you have
more reguards for a friend, who ought no longer to be so, than I have for a
Lover, whom I ought to manage by a thousand reasons, what would you have me do,
said he to her, he treats me very Civily he has been my Conqueror -- Ah said
the Princecess interrupting him, do men ever think themselves obliged for any
thing to a Rival? you do well deserve that after your examples. I should make
him kind returns for the designs he has upon me, however I am willing to give
you another, since you want one to show you the devoir of a Lover, treat him as
I treat him, this is no great request; But, Madam, replied he to her, should I
be ungrateful to that Prince whose sentiments are so generous? But, replied she
again, I never saw any like yours, and I believe that you love your Rival
better than your Mistress; They could not speak a word more, for the Queen
returning with precipitation interrupted them. In the mean while Amaldee and
Frederick continued to treat one another with a thousand Civilities, and always
in the presence of the Princess of Mantua, they were ever in her Company, it
was to no purpose that she forbid Frederick to be so obliging to his Rival, he
was Commanded by something more powerful; they fell often out and was as often
reconciled, for the opinion that she was only jealous of a Rival, made her
Condemn all her motions as ridiculous, but our true Lovers could not be long in
good intelligence amongst so many disorders. It came into Amaldee's head to
proceed to an explication of all these strange inclinations he was sensible of.
He Communicated his design to Frederick, and told him that it was requisite
that they should put an end to their differences, by examining all their most
particular thoughts with the Princess of Mantua, and that he who was found to
love her best, should be left to pursue his Amor all alone without any
obstacle from the other. Frederick had found the time of their intelligence so
sweet and so short, that he was willing to continue it, and endeavored to
oppose Amaldee's Curiosity, which gave occasion to new explications between
them. Frederick reproached him, that he violently loved the Princess, since
that he was so desirous to be sure of her sentiments even to the risque of not
being the happy Lover, Amaldee likewise reproached him with injustice in
thinking himself beloved, and yet to suffer him to continue his addresses to no
purpose. It is too much, said she to him, to tie me likewise to your tryumphing
Chariot, these terrible words had like to have killed the Princess of Sicily,
she had never heard her self talked to with so much haughtiness. Amaldee
himself was surprised at what he had said, and tho he found nothing in them but
what was reasonable; yet as it were against his Will, he was so sorry for what
he had said, that he was thinking to have asked him pardon, for not having
offered him his Mistress, and that he had treated him like a vulgar Rival: Then
Repenting on a sudden without any excuse, he resolved to pursue his first
design, and taking Frederick along, who was not capable to resist him, nor
speak one word, they entered together into the Princess of Mantua's Apartment,
and finding her alone, Madam, said he to her, it is time that I cease being
miserable, or that I be so for ever; speak Madam, must I consent to the Union
of your hearts, speak Frederick, said she to him, shedding some Tears, do you
Love the Princess so much, as not to be able to see without trouble the
Marriage we are destined too? At these cruel Words, Frederick was not able to
support all his grief, but fainted away; yet People being called into his help,
he came to himself at length, but would not speak to the Prince of Majorca.
This adventure was known by the Queen, whose Passion did daily augment, and who
having in vain essayed to get Frederick wholly to her self, resolved to send
him quite away. She thought it would be better to deprive herself of his sight,
than to see him the Lover of another. Insomuch that she went to the King; We
always deferred, said she to him, the restoring Frederick to Memfroy, through
reasons of Policy which we thought good, but seeing at present that his Amors
tend to our disadvantage, I think it much better to deliver him into his
Fathers hands, by reason of so many troubles, that may attend his longer stay
here. Berranger made some difficulty to yield to this Proposition, but she knew
so well how to represent so lively all the Misfortunes which accompanied them,
during all the time they had made War against Menfroy, that he was at length of
her Opinion. However, as soon as she found so little obstacle in her Designs,
she began to tremble for the Execution; the Idea of Frederick's absence
presented it self to her heart with so lively a grief, that she began to Combat
her own Reasons, and to find that it was a good Surety of the King of Sicily's
Clemency, to have his Son in their Power, being very sensible that she should
choose to see him sigh for another, rather than not to see him, and finding
that as long as he was in their Dominions, she should have a kind of Right over
him; the shadow of the least Power is always accounted something by a
Mistress. She gave Berranger to understand that it was in some manner to be
Master of Sicily, to have the next Heir thereof in his hands, but as the
interest of her Passion was not to be neglected, she thought fit to hinder the
continuance of that which he had for the Princess of Mantua, by pressing the
King to conclude the Match between her and Amaldee; she had always deferred the
speaking thereof, for fear of showing her self too much concerned in the thing.
It is very difficult to appear indifferent when we are not so; but that
occasion was favorable, she had spoken of sending him back, and she avoided
mingling him in that adventure. The King had not been in the least informed of
his Passion for the Princess of Mantua, she lived with Amaldee after such a
manner as was not capable of giving any suspision to indifferent People. Thus
the King was altogether disposed to hasten things, to which purpose it was
convenient to consult both Parties, The Queen took upon her to speak to the
Princess, and having sent for her into her Closet, after having made her a
hundred Carasses; The Alliance which we are going to make, said she to her,
obliges me to Treat you like my Daughter. All is ready for the Marriage,
Amaldee is at length recovered from his indifference, and Loves you even to the
being jealous of the inconstant Prince of Sicily, who without doubt has
pretended some affection for you, for there is not a Beauty who is exempt from
his Gallantrys. He was in Love with Camilla while she was in Sicily. He would
likewise have paid me some of his Amorous Vows, said she laughing, I believe
you have shared in his Addresses, and at present I have discovered a new
intrigue. That Princess was filled with spite, when she learnt that
Frederick's heart was not as new as hers, she had been ignorant of all that had
passed between Camilla and him, and she was so very nice in things of that
nature, that the very Sentiments he had had beforeknowing her, rendered her
Jealous; she would willingly have Monopolized all the thoughts which he was
capable of, as she was ready to afford him all hers. She found no difference
between having the same addresses paid to others, that had been made to her,
and between those that had been made to others, before any had been paid to
her, since as to her they were equally lost. And what an excess of grief was it
to her, to see that they had been shared in the little time she had received
them? She asked the Queen trembling, with whom it was that Frederick had a new
engagement. You are curious, said the Queen to her with an affected gayity; It
is answered she very sadly, a Curiosity that I should have for any other as
well as for Frederick, but I should not be sorry to know his intregues. The
Queen feigning to be of her Opinion, and of not observing her disorder, told
her, The truth is, that there is a great deal of Pleasure in discovering what
people would fain conceal from us; for my part I interess my self in an affair
from the moment that I know it, and it affords me almost as much delight as it
does those who have therein the Principal Part. This will be to us a merry
entertainment, added she, and I will give you the means of Convicting him of
Inconstancy. Thereupon seeing Frederick come into her Chamber, We must call him
to us, said she, We shall see what answers he will make to our Attachs. But the
Princess was not in a condition to support the sight of him, she went away
under the pretext of being newly seized with a pain in the head, and the Queen
applouding in her self the success of her Malice, was willing to continue it;
and having caused Frederick to sit down, I have at length obtained for you,
said she to him, the pleasure of returning into Sicily. That word made him turn
pale, and the Queen continuing said, The King has always had the intention of
rendering you Master of your Conduct, since he was hurryed to some excesses upon
Camilla' s account, but the Marriage of Amaldee has ever possessed him since
that time, and hindered him hitherto from speaking to you thereof. As it is at
present concluded, and the Ceremonies are to be performed within a few days:
you may perhaps have a mind to share in the Divertisements that will be upon
that occasion: but if you are not that way inclined, you may depart when you
think convenient, if the pleasures that are preparing for that Feast are
indifferent to you, and if you do not think us deserving the satisfaction of
enjoying your Company for some days longer: But you give me no Answer,
continued she, Is not this Match to your mind? Madam, said he to her with great
violence, The only thought of parting from you, is so afflicting, that it
hindered me from understanding what you said: but when is this Marriage to be
Consummated? It would have been already Consummated, had it not been for
Amaldee's backwardness, said the Queen, thinking to be very Malicious, for the
Princess of Mantua does ardently desire it. Frederick recovered some Joy at
that Word, and Protested so earnestly to the Queen, that he was not in Love
with the Princess of Mantua, and entertained her with so many obliging things,
that she remained more satisfied than she promised her self, and Frederick was
in hopes of making the Princess consent, that by sacrificing the Queen
effectually to her, he might have the Liberty of seeming to have ceased his
Addresses. The intelligence, that was between them, might authorize that
Thought: But all these Projects were out of Season, thanks to the Queens
Artifice, all his measures were broken by the Jealousy, which she had
dexterously insinuated into the Soul of her Rival. This Princess would no longer
look upon him, and it was in vain that Frederick's Eyes sought to tell her, how
desirous he was of a particular Conversation with her; they could not meet with
hers, but having approached her Ear at a time, that no Body took notice of that
action, Madam, said he to her, endeavors are used to make me abandon you, but
I see a change in your Carriage which if you continue much longer will proceed
perhaps to the sacrificing me to the Prince of Majorca. She turned away her
head scornfully without making him any answer, and presenting her hand to
Amaldee, he was obliged to lead her to her Apartment. But the Prince of Majorca
did not take notice after what obliging manner she had given it him, his mind
was filled with a thousand vexatious things upon her account. The King having
sent to seek him, had commanded him absolutely to Marry her within eight days,
which was the longest time that his resistance could obtain. He slighted her
very much, and begun from that Evening to treat her as she had done him, thus
they all three passed that night very uneasily. The Princess of Mantua had been
so surprised at Frederick's perfidity, that she did not think at first of
Amaldee's being faithful to her, her mind being fixed upon her misfortune, did
not afford her any agreeable views; It is very difficult in a moment that a
strong passion finds itself betrayed for a Woman to think of giving birth to
another, that thought came only into her head when Frederick would have been as
intimate with her as before the discovery: she then on a sudden resolved to
revenge her self, she fancied that the Prince of Sicily was proud, and that he
would be loath to be deprived of his Conquest; When a Woman loses one, the
design comes naturally to make another, but it is only to make her self the
more valued by her former Lover, that she endeavors to procure a second, who
is not much obliged by the paces that are made in his favor, since they all
relate to the affection which first of all prevailed. Amaldee as we have
already said, did not examine all this, he had so little inclination for the
Princess of Mantua; that he took no notice of her Actions, Frederick's being
out of humor was capable of making him so, he could not get an opportunity to
speak to him since the adventure that had happened at the Princesses, by reason
Frederick took great care to shun him, he likewise repented his having pressed
a Declaration wherein he took so little interest, and he found himself more
troubled at his being fallen out with his Rival, than he was pleased that he
stood in good terms with his Mistress, insomuch that his mind being full of
Frederick, he wrote to him this Letter.

Amaldee to Frederick.
I have a thousand things to tell you Prince, and you take a thousand ways not
to hear them, you are as careful to avoid me, as I am to seek you; In short I
observe in all your Actions as singular an air of Contempt, as the esteem I
have for you is particular, was ever Rival seen to do as you do? When Rivals
Converse together, it is still with some bitterness, but however they Converse;
but I find your silence more despairing than all you could say to vex me. They
have some Animosity in what concerns Concurrence, but they abate in the rest,
yet you never abate any thing in yours, nor of that slighting and despiteful
Carriage, which I cannot Comprehend. I am obliged to impute this proceedure to
that antipathy, which you only stifled for a while, that the revival
remembrance thereof might be the more afflicting to me now. Why did you quit
it, since you did not lay it aside for ever, and that you do not now abandon it
for a moment? Ah! how cruel does your friendship prove to me, since it was not
sincere. It is a refinement of hatred which you alone are capable of, however,
I have in no wise deserved it, Was ever Rival seen to do as I do, you are
beloved, you hate me, my passion only serves to render your Victory more
illustrious, I am miserable, endeavors are used to render me happy, and I
oppose them for fear of displeasing you, this is a refinement of friendship
which in my turn there is only I who am capable of. Alas, since our sentiments
are so resembling by their force, why have they such different Motives: Let us
lay aside that fatal equality since it produces such contrary effects; diminish
something of the durity of your proceedure, and I consent to augment the
Civility of mine, or rather let us always meet in the same ardour, and change
only design and if possible Conduct.


After that he had finished this Letter, he read it over twenty times, and did
not find that it sufficiently expressed all that he had a mind to say; he
fancyed that the terms of friendship were improper, and he could not reasonably
make use of those which he judged more suitable. He felt great agitations all
the night, which seemed to him much longer than usual, and he was very
impatient that Frederick should receive his Letter, and then again, he was
afraid that Frederick would not receive it, or that it would not sufficiently
persuade him. He received it however, and it had all the effect that could be
expected. It surprised him agreably, he only saw misfortunes for him on all
sides, and a ray of hopes on the side of Amaldee suspended them with delight,
and Consulting only his first impulse, he returned him immediately this Answer.

Frederick to Amaldee.
I have too much reason to shun you and yet I do not shun you so much as I
ought, but if you have distinguished a particular air in my flights, why have
you not made a full discovery; and why do you take for contempt, what would
resemble it so little, if you would put it to a stricter Test. Since you make
so just a difference between my Conduct, and that of an ordinary Rival, if you
examined it something farther, you would not prefer the bitterness of Rivals,
before the delicacy of a Friend, who can neither say nor do any thing to the
disadvantage of the Person, who has merited his esteem; there would be less
concurrence between us, if you did not love the Princess of Mantua, and perhaps
there would be something more agreeable, if you had been better acquainted with
the Prince of Sicily, you would not demand of me to abate for one moment, any
thing of what you divide so well of concurrence, perhaps you would wish the
continuation of it, with as much ardor, as you now have to complain thereof,
you recall that pretended antipathy, which I have but too well undeceived you
of, and whereof, however I never repented, until you had had a Mistress. How
pleasing ought all my unkindnesses to have been to you, since they were not
sincere! but is there any refinements of hatred? Alas! those people hate not
much, who refine in so doing; but in short, why do you refine upon hatred, when
you have a passion? this cruel share I cannot endure; hate me as a true Rival,
if you love me as a true Lover, have no reguard for me, which may be so
dangerous to me; sigh in repose for the Princess of Mantua, I do not love her,
since I must confess it; I will no longer disturb your Amors, and the prospect
I have given her of my passion, was only to serve for a Triumph to yours. If
your Sentiments were the like as to her, we should continue Friends; it is only
that equality which I demand, change the design you have upon her, and I shall
change my conduct with you.


Frederick had less impatience to send his Letter than Amaldee had had. He
found that he had said too much, he was a long time in suspense if he should
give it, till that a Messenger coming in from the Queen, he gave it, that he
might put an end to all the reflections it produced, he Commanded it should be
carried to Prince Amaldee, who was not so happy as to receive it, the Person,
who was encharged with this Letter, having carried some from Frederick to the
Princess of Mantua, and receiving it in haste, he mistook what the Prince said
to him, and fancied, that he was to carry it likewise to the Princess of
Mantua; she received and read it, with all the fury that so authentic a
confirmation of Perfidy could inspire her with: How! cried she, He is not
satisfied with betraying me, he would likewise deprive me of the only Lover I
have left; Ah! what a rage is his? I should have suffered his indifference, if
it had not been voluntary, but I cannot suffer the outrage he puts upon me; I
must punish him by what he most apprehends. Women are particularly jealous of
their Beauty, and they are often, only willing to have a Lover, for the giving
Testimony of it; she went immediately to the Queen, whom Frederick had newly
left; the Queen was so satisfied with him, that she could no longer look upon
the Princess of Mantua as the Rival; she was still more confirmed of the
Sacrifice that Frederick had made her, by the desire the Princess seemed to
have, of becoming quickly her Daughter in Law, there was now no more obstacles
in it, than what proceeded from Amaldee, who coming in at that moment, did pay
all her advances with extraordinary unkindnesses; the slights that are put upon
a Beauty, do vex her more, than all those that can be done to the most Amorous
of all men; she accused Frederick with Justice of the injury he did her Charms,
and for the making him believe at least, that she was not so contemptible, and
that she received consolation for the loss of him, she sent him back his
Letter, with orders to say, That Prince Amaldee had given it her, and that she
made him restitution of it; this is the having so favorable an appearance,
when all was contrary to her, went a great way toward the satisfying her
vanity. And indeed the Princess of Sicily was pensive all alone, when his
Letter was brought her, How! great was her surprise, Ah! cried she, though I do
not seem a Lover, must I needs be Treated like the most contemptible Mistress,
and must I be Sacrificed to my Rivals. His last stroke compleats all the other,
I have nothing more to hope, since I am used, as if I were the Princess of
Sicily, I must likewise do us she should, and reproach that Person with
baseness, whom alas! I cannot accuse of Perfidy, seeing he never loved me:
Thereupon she ran to seek out Amaldee, whom she found in the Palace Gardens,
and calling him all the names that rage inspires, Art thou satisfied with all
these names, said she to him, And art thou not better pleased with them, than
with my silence? He was so afflicted, that he was not able to give her one word
in answer, and leaning against a Tree, he looked upon her tenderly, and
shedding a torrent of Tears, he at length drew the like from the lovely eyes of
that irritated Princess, she suffered her self to fall upon a grass-plat, over
against him, they made a mute conversation, more melting than all they could
have said, but she retired as soon as Amaldee would have spoken, and went into
a gloomy Alley, where she met with Camilla, and the Admirals Widow who were in
pursuit of her; who joined together, to ask the; reason of the Treachery that
Frederick had done them; they had for a long time tormented themsleves they
could no longer forbear venting their fury, and were desirount of having the
cruel delight ofs putting him some moments upon the rack, who had made them
spend so many hours in torture; they come thither together, for we are only
desirous of being private, when we have something that is agreeable to say;
Moreover they encouraged mutually one another, and pretended to put him into
the greater confusion, by convicting him both together of the Treacherous
Tricks, he had served each of them in particular; they made him a Hundred
Reproaches, which he could not make any answer to, he knew himself so well by
their motions, that he was terrified, that he newly came from doing the same
thing, they would never have done talking, they found still something to say,
and people are inexhaustible, when they are to give a loose to their Passion,
the violence of their passing into their discourses, caused them to make so
much noise, as that they were heard by Amaldee, who apprehended, that his dear
Frederick was engaged in some peril, being drawn by the sighs he gave, he
answered him by others, and run to the place where there passed an adventure
almost like to that he had newly been engaged in. He first saw a Cavalier who
disappeared, and perceiving his Sister all bathed in tears, Cruel Friend, said
he to him, see the sufferings you bring upon us; Cruel Friend, your self,
replied the Princess of Sicily sadly, Why do you Sacrifice me to the Princess
of Mantua? I Sacrifice you, said Amaldee to her, I who treat her daily with so
much Contempt upon your account? See, said she to him, showing him the Letter,
what you gave her, and which she restored to me. Amaldee protesting that he
knew not what it was, did very earnestly beg of her to give him that Letter;
Frederick could not resist the desire he had of seeing him read it; And Amaldee
making a stop at the end, how said he to him, you do not love the Princess more
than you do me? How! replied Frederick, and do not you love her, would to
Heaven that I were in a Condition to love her, Cried they both at a time. But
in good earnest do not you love her, said Frederick to the Prince of Majorca?
No, Replied he coldly, and if I was sorry that you loved her, it is apparently,
because I do not find her aimable, but if you do not Love her, why are you in
fear that I do? you must needs have some concealed interest; I have one without
doubt, said Frederick, but still, do not you Love her, repeated he again, let
me be sure of your indifference for her before I confess any thing: I answer
you I do not, ask her, said the Prince of Majorca. Frederick could no longer
hold out against such flattering appearances; and the presence of Camilla could
not put a stop to what so favorable a Moment furnished him with, I have been
in Love, said he, from the moment that I saw you, and I should still have had
all my indifference, if you had never arrived in Sicily. Camilla being charmed
with this discourse, did secretly make him reparation for all she had said and
thought against him, but Frederick stopping, found himself in a fair way, and
blushing at what Love had made him do, he would perhaps, notwithstanding all
his reflections, have said something more, if the King had not interrupted him,
he was amazed at his taking him aside to discourse him, but the business passed
in this manner:

The Queen whom a too long absence from Frederick rendered uneasy, had sent to
seek for him, her imagination being full of him, figured him always with
another, it was necessary for her to see him for the calming all her
Suspicions, she was told that he was with Amaldee and Camilla, which was
sufficient to allarm her. The King being present when this Word was brought,
she blushed at the indiscretion of the Person she had employed, which Berranger
taking notice of, he looked upon it as a very ill augure. What she added
afterward with some kind of transport, made him the more apprehensive.
Camilla, said she to him, renews her Persuits, and it is very convenient to
have a Watching Eye over her. Your Virtue is very Austere, Madam, said he to
her with some disdain, I perceive that you are not willing to allow your
Daughter a Lover: but as for Frederick, I shall take order about him, and he
may possibly be on his way to Sicily by to Morrow, for preventing the
consequences of an Amor, at which your severity is so much alarmed. Thereupon
he went down into the Palace Garden, thinking upon the Discovery he had newly
made; he met there with Frederick, and breaking of the conversation that had so
much pleased him, he entertained him with one that was very afflicting. Prince,
said he to him, you may possibly be surprised, that I have deferred so long the
telling you that you are Free: but now hence forward, nothing shall detain you,
all things shall be ready for your going on Board, and that to Morrow, if no
Body stay you here, I pretend to render Civility for Civility to the King of
Sicily by restoring him his Son. And indeed Berranger had found his Glory to
revive extremely upon the Queens being in disorder, and accusing himself of
having not too well managed it: He managed at the same time his own repose. He
paid great Civilities to Frederick, who only answered him with a profound bow,
he had not the power to thank him for a thing which puts him into despair, and
for the restoring him to a Liberty, which he found would be insupportable. How
sensible was the Princess of Sicily's grief to depart in a time when her
Presence might support the Sentiments that Amaldee would infallibly have
entertained of her. To depart without making her self known, or to make her
self known when she was to depart, were such tumultuous reflections, that some
time was requisite for her to come to a determination, the Queen being no less
to be pitied than she. The Idea of never seeing what we Love, is the most cruel
thing that imagination can represent; it was requisite that she should see him
at least once more. Yet the King besieged continually, and the thing was almost
impossible. In this pressing need she was constrained to run some risque. She
Confided in the discretion of one of her Maids of Honor, whose Chamber she
thought most convenient for the interview, being there was a way to it by a
back pair of Stairs. This Woman took care to conduct Frederick thither, who was
resolved to employ his Credit with the Queen, being ignorant of the share she
had in that adventure. The King having set spies to watch him that Evening; he
failed not to have notice given him of the way he had taken. The Queen finding
her self indisposed, had placed her self upon a Bed of repose, where all bathed
in Tears, she saw Frederick at her knees, being as full of grief as her self,
he conjured her tenderly to employ her credit for the deferring a departure,
which would be so fatal to him: they were in that posture when they heard the
Chamber door thundered open, and saw the King with his Sword in his hand: he
made a full pass at Frederick, who happened to be first in his reach: the Queen
made her escape by the back pair of Stairs, he ran to pursue her, but not
finding her, he met with Amaldee and Camilla, whom we sent to the place where
all this disorder passed, finding that his vengeance would be the more
complete, if all the World knew it, and that he added to it the trouble of all
such Persons as took part in Frederick, the Princess of Mantua was likewise
informed of this accident, by the rumors that were spread of through all the
Palace. Her tenderness was now revived, and she no longer found him culpable,
since he had now expiated his Crime by his Blood that was shed. Insomuch that
she ran thither as well as the rest; their shrieks were heard on all sides in
that Chamber, and it was a very lamentable spectacle to see Frederick weltring
in his own blood. The Princess of Mantua and Camilla embraced one another in
shedding a torrent of Tears. These two Rivals were no longer Enemies, and their
common misfortune left them no other Sentiments, than for the lamenting what
they Loved. It being necessary to undress Frederick, they withdrew, and his
wound was searched. But how dangerous a one did Amaldee receive? when he saw an
admirable Bosom, tinctured in several parts with blood, yet heightened its
natural Whiteness. This cannot be expressed, Love making himself known to him
in that cruel Moment, he made him feel it with all its Violence. The Princess
of Sicily was Fainted away, she was thought to be dead, she no longer breathed.
But Amaldee approaching her, heard her still Sigh; he having caused that heart
to move again, which he had so much agitated, she opened feebly her Eyes, and
cast a piercing look upon the amorous Amaldee, and immediately shut them again.
Ah! Lovely Eyes, cried he, are you closed for ever, He imagined she had given
her last Sigh, he did the Actions of a Madman, and being no longer capable of
governing himself, he suffered those Persons to conduct him, whom the Queen had
sent to give help to Frederick, to the Apartment of those afflicted Beauties,
he did not acquaint them with so surprising an adventure, he little thought of
comforting them, or of telling them a piece of News which would only have
served to the redoubling his own despair, they were all in a gloomy silence,
which being caused by a violent grief, did lively express it, there remained in
those Princesses a ray of hopes which tormented them more than the entire
assurance of their misfortune could have done. We suffer our selves to be
transported with rage, when the mischief is without Remedy, and there is at
least but that Motion which hurries the Soul away with that Violence, and which
leaves it not the leisure to be sensible of all its torments: but when we are
divided between small hopes and a great deal of fear, we feel a thousand
Conflicts, which as it were tore us, and cannot be calmed, but by the loss of
the one or other. They quickly lost them both, to make way for something that
was much more afflicting. Word was brought that Frederick had been discovered
to be the Princess of Sicily, then all the motions which they had so improperly
entertained, dissipating themselves on a sudden, they fell into a kind of
Lithurgy, in comparison of which they found all their Allarms to be soft and
pleasing. In the mean while the Princess of Sicily's wound being searched, was
found not to be Mortal, which News being carried to the King, he received it as
the cure of all his ills. The Queen no longer gave him any embraces, nothing
hindered him from joining the Crown of Sicily to his own, and finding his Honor
secure, and his ambition satisfied, he learnt with great satisfaction, a thing
that was necessary both for his own repose, and that of his People. He sought
out the Queen to ask her pardon for his rage, and was willing to believe, that
it was only to the Princess of Sicily, that the Assignation had been given,
since it was but effectually her. The Queen was so confused with so many
changes, that she knew not what answer to make, she was in fear that it was a
surprise, that the King would put upon her, and could perhaps have wished it.
Nothing was so disagreeable to her, as to learn she had no longer a Lover, and
what was more that she had not had one. It was in vain that he endeavored to
render her a Witness of that Truth, she excused her self, telling him after a
spightful manner, which her Virtue too well justified, inspired her with, that
she was even afraid, that the Princesses Sex would not secure her from his
Suspicions, since her prudence had not been able to do so. Neither would the
Princess of Mantua nor Camilla, now see under the proper Figure, the Person
they had found so pleasing under one that was borrowed. They hated the Princess
of Sicily, from the time that she was no longer Frederick, but she did not
remain abandoned: the Prince of Majorca gave her all his thoughts which did
sufficiently comfort her for those she lost elsewhere. What a delight was it to
her to see her self beloved! this was a Novelty, she had never seen a Lover at
her feet; it is very pleasing to see one there: but it is the highest Felicity
when it is one the Woman Loves. Ah! cried Amaldee, all transported, Why did you
wait so long to triumph over a heart that ought to be wholly yours, from the
time it was capable of Loving. I have felt, it is true, some tender longings
toward you, but I lost the Pleasure by not knowing the motions of my heart,
nor the merit of the Object who inspired me with them. A thousand sighs with
which he repaired the time he had been without knowing the use of them, and a
thousand disquiets he was in for her Life, did make her sufficient satisfaction
for those she had thought to no purpose. She had not Courage to make him
languish longer without telling him what he had inspired her with. As he was
one day Comparing before her the sentiments he had had for Frederick, and those
he had for the Princess of Sicily, she was willing likewise to give him a
prospect of her own, they took delight in examining all their most secret
Motions, and lived already the Most happily in the world, when that the two
Kings consented to Consummate their felicity, and to make Peace by uniting
their two familyes, the Princess of Mantua could not oppose it, she had loved
Frederick at a time she was to have been Amaldee's Wife, which was sufficient
to hinder her from being able to reproach him with the preference he made of
the Princess of Sicily, besides that Princess had tryumphed over her heart
under the figure of a Rival, for to see her triumph with another under that of
a Mistress; Insomuch that the Princess of Mantua returned two days after the
wound was given without giving the Princess of Sicily one visit, she told the
King that having a design to quit the world, she thanked him for all the
favors he had bestowed upon her, and that she should be full of an eternal
acknowledgment, he was very glad to see her take leave of her self, the only
obstacle to what he projected, being thereby removed, thus they were all well
satisfied at Majorca.

Camilla recovered her Lover and a Match was Concluded between her and Prince
Leon, he had ever Conserved for her a Character of so handsome Passion, that he
could not fail of being recompensed at the end, he had voluntarily deprived him
sell of the satisfaction of giving her marks of his tenderness which displeases
when a Lover is not acceptable, and he gave her a full view of it, when that
the Princess of Sicily had sent for him by the permission of Menfroy, to whom
Berranger writ all that had passed, demanding of him with great earnestness the
honor of his Alliance. Leon brought Menfroy's Consent to Berranger those two
things whom no endeavors had been able to reconcile were made friends by the
intercession of their Chidreu when Prince Leon saw Camilla at the passion he
had ever had received and augmented, he renewed to her his vows which she
recieved with a most sincere affection the Princess of Sicily was Charmed with
that reunion, and saying one day to Camilla that Love had made use of her to
render her more tractable; that Princess made answer that after having examined
her self, she had observed that the respect and addresses of Leon had at first
produced in her soul, which it durst not have discovered but under an other
Name, this being said in the presence of that Lover, it filled him full of Joy,
and Amaldee looking maliciously upon Camilla, called to mind those verses,
which his sister had made for Frederick at the time she thought her self sure
of his heart.

Ah! how vast are the delights
Of two hearts whom love Unites,
When in each others Breast they see
Flames that great and equal be,
Ah! the transports, Ah! the joys,
The bliss, the sports, and Amorous toys.
Naught can in short more sweet and happy prove,
Than hearts who know themselve inspired with Love.
This put her something to the blush, out of a remain of spite, she made the
application thereof to Prince Leon, who cast himself at her feet, by way of
thanks, Amaldee was more and more charmed with his lovely Princess, whom he
Married shortly after, under the name of Constance, Queen of Sicily, menfroy
being dead much about that time; the Four Lovers lived in a perfect Union the
rest of their days; Camila contracted a friendship with the new Queen, as soon
as Leon had engaged her heart; indifference gives I know not what lukewarmness,
for all things which ever ceases when it is gone, and we are capable of all the
fine Sentiments, as soon as we begin to entertain such as are Amorous, the
Queen being incapable of doing better, brought her inclinations under the same
confinement they had been in before, she saw Frederick, the Admiral's Widow
found a Husband at Majorca, and Yolanda, one in Sicily, in short they all
recovered their former Tranquillity*

THE END.

