THE ACTS and NEGOTIATIONS, Together with the Particular Articles at large, OF
THE General Peace, Concluded at RYSWICK, BY THE Most Illustrious Confederates
WITH THE FRENCH KING.

To which is premised, The Negotiations and Articles of the Peace, concluded at
TVRIN, between, the same Prince and the Duke of Savoy.

Translated from the Original Published at the Hague.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock, and Tim. Child at the White
Heart, at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard. School.

PREFACE.
THE Title of this Book informs the Reader, That it contains the Acts and
Negotiations of the General Peace concluded at Ryswick, and likewise of the
particular Peace concluded at Turin, faithfully Translated from the Original
published at the Hague: The Editors of it in English thought they had good
Reason to put it into that Language, because Our Nation has, in this long and
bloody War, contributed such mighty Weights toward the reducing the Kingdoms
and States of Europe to the happy Balance they at present enjoy.

The Efforts of the English Nation, in Concurrence with the Illustrious
Confederates, have, in Nine Years time, broke those Chains, which cost the
Expense of above 30 Years in their Contrivance, and by which the Liberty of
Europe was so strangely and artificially entangled and encompassed, that even
well-meaning Men thought it more advisable patiently to submit to the
insuperable Evil, than by vain Attempts to hasten or exasperate the Misery; Let
the Lion sleep, say they, and let us by our Gentleness and Flatteries engage
him so to do; Time may lessen or wear out that Rage, which, should we provoke,
we are not able to resist. Thus while evil Men cherished, and unthinking and
mistaken Men submitted, the mighty Mischief grew and prosper'd: Like some
irresistible Fleet it commanded and awed even those distant Countries, that had
not yet seen or felt its Power. Roman it was in the Wisdom and Conduct of its
Arms, but of how far different a Spirit from that Heroic Commonwealth? who
with Hardships to themselves conquered and subdued Nations, with the same
tender Designs we chastise our Children, only to make 'em better and more happy
than they were before.

In this disconsolate Posture was Europe, not expecting Safety, the Delay of
its Ruin seemed to proceed but from the Pleasure or Frolic of the Conqueror;
when Crowned Heads and States were bid to hope for that Liberty, which they
before only durst secretly desire. This great Design is laid by a Prince, whose
Descent seemed to entitle him to become a Deliverer: His Ancestors, of the same
Name, rescued his Country from Powers not indeed so well founded and numerous,
but still as destructive, as these the distant Nephew was to engage with;
Providence foresaw the Protection of Seven Provinces would not be Work enough
for so capacious a Soul: Hero's, through each degree, collect and gather their
Ancestors Perfections, to which they add their own, therefore This Prince is to
be allied to the English Crown, that this Tie might engage him to extend his
Care to these Islands, which by the supine Negligence and superstitious
Bigottry of Governors had been put into equal, if not more eminent Danger, than
the rest of the Neighboring World. Impotence was their Excuse, we had Power,
but the Force and Edge of it was turned upon our Selves. A Neighboring Flood,
that with miserable great Desolation had overrun part of Europe, was with
additional Force too near approaching to us: What Precaution did we use to
prevent it? Our Workmen were digging down the Banks that should oppose and keep
it out, and seemed to invite the Ruin. Here this Great Prince interposes; he
opens the Eyes of most, and holds the Hands of those unfortunate Men that still
continued blind or engaged, and kindly hindered 'em from doing Things, that
tended to the Destruction of both Themselves and their Country. Then in 1688.
the mighty Scene opens, in 1689. the War begins. Power or Heaven for some time
seemed to favor the Mighty Monarch, doubtless it was to try the Opposer's
Constancy and let them know, That no Disasters or Disappointments should
discourage Engagements, founded upon the Principles of Justice and Common
Safety. Then for Four or Five Years the Bloody Game seemed doubtful, and the
making of a Stand looked like a Presage of Victory: For when Powers that assume
to themselves the Titles of insuperable Strength and immortal Glory, meet with
Difficulties, and are checked in their ambitious Progress; this casts
Disparagement upon their high Pretenses, and makes suffering Mankind hope they
are not so great as they would willingly look to be: Like Men that affect the
Character of being Rich, Courageous or Religious, yet are not really so, this
assumed Shape may for some time command Awe and Respect, but when at last, by
the Effects, the Disguise appears, the Hypocrites become more contemptible and
ridiculous. I shall not say, That the Events of the Two or Three last Years of
the War make it appear probable, this was the Case of the Enemies of our
Monarch and Country, for they had Substance, Conduct and Courage; though I must
take it to be as plain, that their Power and these Qualifications were by no
means equal to the Union formed against 'em, and managed by the same
Incomparable Head and Hand that first gave it Birth. For when Savoy left the
Confederacy in 1696. one would have thought so considerable a Weight taken out
of our Scale, would have given the Contrary a mighty Advantage; and the costly
and even mean Flatteries and Cares that were employed to detach that Prince,
and the Triumphs used on that Success, should confirm the Opinion: But what
Effect had it? None to the Advantage of our Adversaries. Some casual
Deficiencies at Home defeated the Designs abroad, otherwise our Enemies might
in this last Interval have felt more Evils, then, I hope, we shall ever now
have occasion to wish to 'em. For the Great King condescends that the House of
his Majesty shall become the Place of Treaty for Peace, and there settles to
the Empire and Spain, Barriers so firm and strong, that their Enemies cannot by
Force, in Ten Years, recover what was by Agreement restored to 'em here, except
gross Negligence, Treachery or Discord open their Gates, which are Evils the
Possessors only can provide against. For, in the present Circumstances of
Europe, all any single State should reasonable wish, is, to be in a Condition
to prevent Surprise from a Neighborhood, and to have a Power sufficient to
defend it self for some time; and then doubtless those Potentates whose
Interest it is, that the Aggressor should not, by the Ruin of another, grow too
powerful, will come to the Assistance of the Oppressed: For the late celebrated
League does demonstrate, That the Gross of Mankind seldom vary from their
Interest, when they know it and are at Liberty to act as they have a Mind to;
and this makes it probable France would never have submitted to Terms so
disadvantagious to her Power, if she suddenly intended the like Exercises of
it, that have been practiced some Years before: Therefore the Reader may
reasonably hope the Duration of this Peace will add to the Glory of it; he will
admire the Contriver of that wonderful Machine, that made and forced a way for
it; he will wish the Hero a long Enjoyment of it, and this is for every English
Man's own Interest; for it may be this Peace carries something in it resembling
the Nature of Creation, its continuance may in some measure depend upon the
Being of its Maker.

THE CONTENTS.
The Acts and Negotiations of the Peace of Savoy.
MArshal Catinat's Letter to the Marquess of S. Thomas, June 29. 1696. Page 1
The Marquess of S. Thomas's Answer, July 3. 1696. 3 His Royal Highness the Duke
of Savoy's Letter to the Pope, concerning the Proposals of France for Peace and
Neutrality in Italy. 4 The Duke of Savoy's Letter to his Imperial Majesty on
the same Subject. 6 -- His Letter to their High and Mightinesses the States
General, upon the same. 8 -- His Letter to his Highness the Elector of Bavaria.
9 His Electoral Highness the Duke of Bavaria's Answer to the Duke of Savoy. 10
His Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy's Letter to his Serene Highness the
Elector of Brandenburg. 12 His Electoral Highness of Brandenburg's Answer. 14
The Duke of Savoy's Letter to his Majesty the King of Spain. 15 The Conditions
of the Treaty between his most Christian Majesty and his Royal Highness the
Duke of Savoy. 16 The Articles of Peace and Neutrality for Italy between his
most Christian Majesty and his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy: Concluded on
and signed at Turin, Aug. 29. 1696. and delivered at the Hague to the High
Allies Aug. 15. 1697. 17 The Proclamation of Peace published at Paris, Sept.
10. 1696. and also at Turin, and at the Head of the Army the same day. 30 The
Letter of the most Christian King to the Archbishop of Paris, to cause Te Deum
to be sung for the Peace with Savoy. 31 The Act of Remission of the Country and
Estates of Savoy, made by his most Christian Majesty Lewis XIV. King of France
and Navarre, to his Royal Highness Victor Amadaeus II. Duke of Savoy, Prince of
Piedmont, King of Cyprus, etc. Sept. 28. 1696. 23
Acts and Negotiations of the General Peace concluded at Ryswick.
THE Preliminaries of the Peace. 38 A Description of the Palace of Ryswick, and
of the first Conferences held there. 40 A Memorial of the Plenipotentiary of
Lorrain, presented and read in the Congress of the High Allies, Jan. 16. 1697.
45 Another Memorial which the same Monsieur Canon, presented to the same
Assembly of the Allies, May 22. 1697. 49 The Regulation of the Public
Ceremonies, and the Order to be observed by the Domestics of the
Plenipotentiaries. Prescribed by the Mediator May 29. 1697. 51 The Project of
the Peace to be made between the Emperor and Empire on one part, and the most
Christian King on the other part; delivered by the Ambassadors of France, July
20. 1697. to which is added the Answer of the Ambassadors of his Imperial
Majesty, given in Aug. 5. 1697. 59 A Declaration made by the Ambassadors of his
most Christian Majesty, but rejected by the Emperial Ambassade. 100 A Memorial
of the Ambassadors of the most Christian King for a General Peace, delivered to
the Ambassadors Mediators at the Palace of Ryswick, Sept. 1. 1697. 102 Articles
of Peace between the most Serene and Mighty Prince William III. King of Great
Britain, and the most Serene and Mighty Prince Lewis XIV. the most Christian
King, Concluded in the Palace at Ryswick the 10/20 day of September, 1697. 105
The Substance of the full Power of their Excellencies the Plenipotentiaries of
his Britannick Majesty, 117 The full Power of their Excellencies the French
Plenipotentiaries, 122 The Substance of his Britannick Majesty's Ratification,
125 The Ratification of his most Christian Majesty, 128 The Articles of Peace
between his Catholic Majesty and the most Christian King, Concluded and signed
at the Palace of Ryswick in Holland, the 10/20 of September 1697. 129 Separate
Article. 149 His Catholic Majesty's Ratification. 151 His Catholic Majesty's
Ratification of the Separate Article. 152 His most Christian Majesty's
Ratification. 153 His most Christian Majesty's Ratification of the Separate
Article. 155 A List and Declaration of the Re-unions or Occupations made by his
most Christian Majesty in the Provinces of the Low Countries belonging to his
Catholic Majesty, since the Treaty of Nimeguen. 157 A List of Exception, of
the Places which the Ambassadors of France pretend to Reserve. 172 The Treaty
of Peace between France and the Duke of Savoy. 174 The full Power of their
Excellencies the Ambassadors of his Catholic Majesty. 186 The full Power of
their Excellencies the Ambassadors of his most Christian Majesty. 189 Articles
of Peace made, concluded and agreed on at Ryswick in Holland the 10/20 day of
Sept. 1697. between the Ambassadors of his most Christian Majesty on one part,
and the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the Lords the States General of
the United Netherlands on the other part. 192 The full Powers of the
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the most Christian King. 205 The full
Powers of the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the Lords the States General
of the United Netherlands. 208 Separate Article, 214 His most Christian
Majesty's Ratification. 216 The Ratification of the Lords the States General of
the United Netherlands. 218 The Ratification of his most Christian Majesty upon
the Separate Article. 220 The Ratification of the States General upon the
Separate Article. 222 Articles of Peace between the Emperor and Empire on one
part, and France on the other part; Concluded at the Royal Palace of Ryswick in
Holland on the 30th of October 1697. N. S. 75 The full Powers of the Emperor's
Ambassadors. 112 The General full Power of the Deputation of the Empire. 116
The full Powers of the French Ambassadors. 118 Separate Article, 120 The Names
and Qualities of their Excellencies the Ambassadors, Plenipotentiaries, Public
Ministers, Envoys, etc. who were present at the Congress for a General Peace,
held in the Palace at Ryswick called Newbourg-House. 126
Advertisement.
Books newly Printed.
THE Pantheon; representing the Fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods and most
Illustrious Heroes, in a plain and familiar Method by way of Dialogue. Written
by Fra. Pomey, Author of the French and Latin Dictionary for the Use of the
Dauphin. The Second Edition, wherein the whole Translation is Revised and much
Amended, and the Work is illustrated and adorned with elegant Copper Cuts of
the several Deities, etc. 80. Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in S.
Paul's Churchyard.

Joan. Clerici Ars Critica, in qua ad Studia Linguarum Latinae, Graecae, and
Hebraicae via Munitur: Veterumque emendandorum and spuriorum Scriptorum a
Genuinis dignoscendorum ratio traditur. Editio altera priori emendatior. Apud
Robertum Clavel ad Pavonem, and Timotheum Child ad Album Cervum in Coemeterio
D. Pauli.

THE ACTS AND NEGOTIATIONS OF THE PEACE Concluded between the French KING AND
THE Duke of Savoy.
Marshall Catinat's Letter to the Marquess of St. Thomas, Dated the 29th of
June, 1696.
IT was not possible for me sooner to satisfy his Royal Highness's Desire of
knowing the Advantages which the King is pleased to grant him, in case his
Royal Highness consents to join with his Majesty, either to procure a Peace or
a Neutrality in Italy, because I had then no Orders to explain my self, farther
than what was mentioned in the Two Letters I have had the Honor to write to
you. But as soon as I had given his Majesty an Account of the Answers you made,
he gave me leave to be more plain, and that in Writing too, although it be not
usual to lay open Matters of this Consequence in Letters, especially since I
know that his Royal Highness will certainly communicate them all to his Allies.
But, methinks, the Contents of this I now write to you are of such Importance
that they ought to be managed with greater Privacy. However, I am allowed to
add thus much to what I have already writ to you, That the King is disposed to
restore Pignerol to his Royal Highness, together with all the Dependencies
which did formerly belong to the House of Savoy; yet so, as that all its
Fortifications shall be demolished. But in case the House of Austria should be
unwilling to agree to this Neutrality, neither will suffer Italy, nor the
Dominions of his Royal Highness especially, to be in Peace, such Measures will
then be taken, as shall oblige them to it. And to that End his Royal Highness
shall join his Forces with his Majesty's, giving the King only such Security as
shall be thought reasonable. His Majesty moreover will afford greater
Demonstrations of Amity to his Royal Highness, and Kindness to the House of
Savoy, for his Majesty intends to match the Duke of Burgundy to the Princess of
Piedmont, and to take her into France, where they shall be immediately
contracted, but the Consummation of their Marriage is to be deferred till they
both come of Age. His Majesty likewise to satisfy his Generosity is willing to
give her a Portion, and allow her a Dowry, without putting his Royal Highness
to any more Cost or Charges on her Account. On these Effects of his Majesty's
Bounty will depend many other Advantages in Favor of his Royal Highness,
provide he expresses himself but willing to lay hold on these Offers in the
Answer he shall order to this Letter. But in case of Noncompliance, I assure
you, his Majesty will be so far incensed to see his kind Proffers slighted,
that his Royal Highness must expect no more Favor, but to be treated as an
obstinate Enemy, although it should be never so prejudicial to the King. I am
persuaded that his Royal Highness will make such due Reflections on this Affair
as the Importance of it, in respect to his own Interest requires, I am, etc.

Monsieur St. Thomas his Answer. Dated the 3d of July, 1696.
HIS Royal Highness is as well disposed as you could wish, to lay hold on the
generous Offers, of his Majesty, which you propose in the Letter you did me the
Honor to write to me, on the 29th of the last Month. But as he must acquaint
his Allies with the Contents of it, he cannot reasonably expect their Answers
(at least that from Spain) in less than Six Weeks, unless you will be pleased
to send Pasports for Two Couriers, the one to be dispatched by his Royal
Highness, the other by the Marquis de Leganez, to go through France; During
their going and returning, and while we wait for the Answers they shall bring,
his Royal Highness will keep the Forces of the Allies and his own beyond the
River Po, and you shall keep the Troops under your Command on this side of that
River, without attempting any Act of Hostility, either against his Royal
Highness's Forces, or against any of his Fortified Towns, he being verily
persuaded that you will retain your Troops in such good Order, as that on one
side they may not want Subsistence, and on the other, act suitably to those
Sentiments which you did me the Honor to signify to me, who am,

SIR, Yours, etc.

His Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy's Letter to the Pope, concerning the
Peace of Italy.
Most Holy Father,
I Cannot but think my self obliged to acquaint your Holiness (who always
vouchsafed to be so kindly concerned for the Welfare of my Family) with the
first News of the Offers that have been made me by Marshall de Catinat, in
order to establish a Neutrality in Italy. This humble Letter is to let your
Holiness understand that Count Gubernati, my Resident at Rome, will declare to
your Holiness the Particulars of this Affair by Word of Mouth. The Substance
whereof Consists in the Restitution of all that has been taken from me during
this War, and even of Pignerol it self, whose Fortifications are to be
demolished, the Importance of which Place your Holiness is well acquainted
with. A Marriage is also proposed between the Princess, my Daughter, and the
Duke of Burgundy, to be consummated when they are of Age, and in the mean time
she is to be received and conducted into France, where the King assigns her a
Dowry, and gives her a Portion without putting me to the least Charges, besides
many other Advantages, (which I need not here mention) on Condition that I
shall concur to settle a Neutrality in Italy. But if the House of Austria
should delay giving their Consent to it, after being thereunto exhorted by your
Holiness and the Republic of Venice; in such case, I am to join my Forces to
those of France, in order to make them comply. Having made serious Reflections
on this Matter, and thinking that the House of Austria can have no Intentions
to force me to reject these advantageous Offers made me by France, I have taken
a Resolution to let the Principals of the Confederacy know that I cannot
possibly let slip this present favorable Opportunity of recovering Pignerol;
neither can I think it proper to commit a Matter of so great Importance to the
House of Austria, to all Italy, and to my self, to the uncertain Event of War
and Futurity. It is to this purpose that I intend to write to the Allies,
especially to the Emperor and to his Catholic Majesty, earnestly entreating
them not to be against a Proposal that is of such Advantage to them as well as
to me. The Assurance I have that your Holiness does extremely wish for such a
Neutrality, has not a little contributed to determine me so much in its Favor.
It is also that which makes me most humbly and earnestly to beg of your
Holiness, that you will please to give Orders to your Nuncio's at Vienna and
Madrid, to second your Fatherly Offices by their vigorous Solicitations for
obtaining the speedy Consent of those Crowns for a Neutrality in Italy, which
would be a welcome Fore runner to acquaint the World with the so much
longed-for Tidings of an approaching Peace, whereof Christendom stands so much
in need. I wait impatiently for this Favor from your Holiness's Bounty. As
soon as your Holiness's Orders are come to my Hands by this Courier, I will
forthwith send Dispatches to the aforesaid Courts. In the mean time I continue
to implore the favorable Influences of the Paternal Protection of your
Holiness, to whom I wish a long Life, accompanied with all manner of
Prosperity, and I do also in a most humble manner kiss your Holiness's most
Holy Feet, as being

Turin, July 16. 1696 Tour Holiness's Most Humble and Most Affectionate Son and
Servant Victor Amadeus.

His Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy's Letter to his Imperial Majesty.
YOUR Imperial Majesty's extraordinary Goodness, and the Equity which appears
in all the Actions of your wise Government, sufficiently convince me, that your
Clemency will never require of me that I should finish the Ruin of this
miserable Country, neglect to accept the Restitution of the Territories that
have been taken from me by the Enemy, and refuse the Offer of Pignerol to be
delivered up to me. Your Imperial Majesty's Generosity will not certainly
suffer you to look on my Losses with Unconcern, especially seeing that the
Advantages proposed to me, are perfectly consistent with your Majesty's
Interest, without which I would not look upon them as such. I therefore most
humbly entreat your Imperial Majesty to be pleased to give a favorable
Audience to my Ambassador, who will give your Majesty an Account of the
Proposals made me by Marshall Catinat, and who will further urge such Reasons,
as will, I hope, incline you not to disapprove those Offers. In the mean time,
I protest to your Imperial Majesty, that the Obligations I owe you, shall ever
remain engraven on my Heart in such deep Characters as shall never be effaced;
and I esteem this as one of the Chief which I owe your Majesty, that these
advantageous Proposals made me, are also the Effects of your Imperial Majesty's
Protection, entreating your Majesty to be assured, that no private Interest
shall ever make me swerve from the firm and inviolable Stedfastness, which I
shall always maintain for your Imperial Majesty's Service, etc.

Turin the 4 th of July, 1696.
His Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy's Letter to the States General.
High and Mighty Lords,
WE cannot better begin our Letter than by repeated Acknowledgments of our
Obligations to your Lordships, the Sense whereof is always present in our
Thoughts, and which we shall ever keep in our Minds; I mean the Remembrance of
your generous Succors afforded us in Distress; after which we earnestly
entreat your High and Mightinesses to take in good part, the Notice we give you
of the Proposals made us by Marshall Catinat, by Order of the King his Master,
the Particulars whereof shall be laid open to you by the Councellor and
President de la Tour, our Ambassador: We hope your High and Mightinesses great
Prudence, joined with the Affection which you are wont to bear toward our
Interest, will incline you not to disallow of the Resolution we have taken, not
to refuse the offer made us of restoring Pignerol, with all the other Places we
have lost during this War, without depending in a Matter of so great
Consequence, on the uncertain Events of Time, or the Revolutions which may
happen in France. The aforesaid Count de la Tour will also lay before your High
and Mightinesses, the Reasons which oblige us thereunto. And the means you
shall use toward promoting the Execution of this Design, will more and more
increase our Acknowledgments, which shall be always accompanied with an earnest
Desire of giving you pregnant Proofs of our ardent Wishes for completing your
Prosperity and Happiness, and that we are.

Turin, July 6. 1696. High and Mighty Lords, Yours, etc. Victor Amadeus.

His Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy's Letter to his Electoral Highness the
Duke of Bavaria.
Most Serene Electoral Highness,
THE indissoluble Ties of Interest, Consanguinity and Affection, which engage
me in so extraordinary a manner to your most Serene Electoral Highness, make me
to look on all that happens to you, as if it had been to my self: and I am also
convinced of the share you have in all that relates to me. It is this
Confidence that makes me Impart to your Electoral Highness the Offers that have
been made me by Marshall Catinat, in his Master's Name; and to give you
likewise Notice of a Letter which that Marshall has writ to me, wherein he
mentions the restoring of Pignerol, after demolishing the Fortifications,
together with all the Dependencies which formerly belonged to the House of
Savoy. He Proposes likewise a Marriage of the Duke of Burgundy with the
Princess my Daughter, to be Consummated when they both come of Age; and to
settle on the said Princess a Dowry and Portion, to have them Contracted
forthwith, and she to be received immediately into France; and all this on
Condition, That I shall Concur to a Neutrality in Italy: Of all which
Advantages, what seems most Considerable in my Eye, in the present Conjuncture,
is the Surrender of Pignerol to me. Your Highness knows well the Importance of
that Place, and may judge how seriously I ought to think of this Proposal, and
not loose this favorable Opportunity; nor put a Matter of so great Consequence
to the Hazard of future Events, or change of Minds, which may happen in case I
should delay to close with these Offers, which being as advantageous to the
House of Austria as to me, I am apt to believe the Princes of that Family will
not oppose me in it. I also hope your Electoral Highnesses Prudence and
Goodness will incline you to acquiesce in my Sentiments. In the mean while I
wish your Royal Highness a continued Series of Happy Successes, being with all
imaginable Fidelity and Constancy,

Turin July 6. 1696. Your Electoral Highnesses Most affectionate Servant and
Cousin, Victor Amadeus.

His Electoral Highness the Duke of Bavaria's Answer, to his Royal Highness the
Duke of Savoy's Letter.
I Shall always as largely Participate in the good and bad Fortune of your
Royal Highnesses Person and Estate, as the Obligations of Consanguinity, and
the particular Amity of your Royal Highness to me do justly Challenge. It would
be therefore with an unspeakable Joy, that I should look on the Articles of an
advantageous Peace proposed by France to your Royal Highness, if I could be
convinced, That the Neutrality which is offered you, did truly tend to your
Royal Highnesses greater good, or to the advantage of the common Cause of the
Confederates. But because I do not question, but that such a Neutrality will be
extremely displeasing both to his Imperial, and to his Catholic Majesty;
therefore in Answer to that Letter wherein your Royal Highness Communicated to
me the Proffers that are made to you by France, your Royal Highness will give
me leave to Exhort you to persevere in the League, and to continue the War with
that Constancy, which has rendered your Name so glorious hitherto, and made your
Conduct to be highly applauded. I cannot deny, but that (besides those other
offers which France makes to your Royal Highness) the Restitution of Pignerol,
though Demolished, is an Article of great Consequence. But, considering the
Magnanimity and Generosity of the Confederate Princes, the great Power of their
Armies, and what I know of their Intentions, I think my self bound to promise
your Royal Highness, that you shall at length, when the War is at an end, reap
as great, nay far greater and more secure Advantages, not only as to Pignerol,
but likewise toward^he raising of your Family to a higher Degree, and more
agreeable to your Interest. All which I re^er to the mature Reflections your
Royal Highnesses great Prudence is capable of; being always ^eady, with
inviolable Constancy, to render to your Royal Highness all possible Service.

From the Camp at Normont the 22 th of July, 1696, etc.
His Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy's Letter, to his Serene Highness the
Elector of Brandenburgh.
THE Singular Demonstrations of Friendship I have received of your Electoral
Highness, (the acknowledgment whereof shall last to my Death) do engage me to
Conceal nothing from you of what happens to me; so that I must by these Lines
inform you, of the Offers which Marshall Catinat has made me, by Letters,
which I have Communicated to the principal Heads of my Allies; those Proposals
I send, hereunto annexed, together with the Answer which I caused to be returned
to them; and I Communicate the Copies of them to your Electoral Highness, with
as much Confidence as I know I may put in the affection you bear me; to which,
I on my part, will answer by all the Devoirs which may be most effectual to
convince your Electoral Highness of my sincere and constant Love. You will see
in the said Letters, that I am offered the Restitution of all that has been
taken from me during this War; wherein no Body but my self has lost so much;
That the important place of Pignerol, shall be surrendered to me, though
Demolished, with all the Territories that depend on it, which heretofore
belonged to my Ancestors; That a Marriage shall be agreed upon between the
Princess my Daughter, and the Duke of Burgundy; that a Portion and a Dowry
shall be given her, without any Expense to me; and all this on Condition I
shall contribute to a Neutrality in Italy, which is equally advantageous to the
House of Austria, especially that Pignerol be taken out of the French Hands; so
that I hope your Electoral Highness will not condemn the Resolution I have
taken, of not rejecting the aforesaid Offers, and not to put the Recovery of
such an important place as Pignerol, to the uncertain Contingency of Time, or
to the mutability of Princes Wills; especially since this my Country is reduced
to that Desolation, as makes it quite unable of longer bearing the Charges of
the War: Your Electoral Highness is also to observe, That to secure the
Neutrality of Italy, and before I can partake of these Advantages offered me,
the most Christian King desires, That the Confederate Troops do withdraw, and
that I reduce mine to seven thousand five hundred Foot, and five hundred Horse;
which, together with the loss of Subsidies and Taxes, that will be no longer
continued to me, obliges me earnestly to entreat your Electoral Highness, to
give such Orders to your Troops as are necessary, in order to withdraw them out
of my Country, so soon as I shall have given them the pay that was agreed upon.
And I do assure your Serenity, That the Obligations your Highness has laid upon
me, shall be always fresh in my Mind, and the lively Sense I have of the same,
shall for ever remain engraven on my Heart, with an extreme desire of finding
the Opportunities of giving effectual Demonstrations to your Electoral
Highness, of the steady Affection with which I shall continue till my last
Breath,

Turin, July 7, 16^6. Yours, etc.

His Electoral Highness the Duke of Brandenbourgh's Answer, to his Royal
Highness the Duke of Savoy.
YOUR Royal Highnesses Letters of the 7th of July, brought to us by a Courier,
have informed us with the surprising News of your separate Peace with the most
Christian King. The League into which your Royal Highness did enter with the
Emperor, the Empire, with the Kings, Electors and Princes, Confederated in this
present War; and which your Royal Highness not many Months ago, has by a solemn
Act given fresh promises of observing most exactly; together with the liberal
Supplies of Men and Money, wherewith your Royal Highness has been abundantly
furnished, did not permit us to have the least Suspicion, that your Royal
Highness could resolve, or even so much as think of abandoning so advantageous
a League, by which we labor to secure the Safety, Liberty, and Tranquillity of
Europe; and that too, without being reduced to it by any fresh Necessity or
extraordinary Disaster; but only on the single reason alleged in your Royal
Highnesses Letter, that is, That you may embrace the advantageous Offers made
you by France, which indeed are specious, and suited to take with your Royal
Highness: But we question very much, whether you will find that Safety, Honor,
and Advantages in them, which you would find in the Confederacy you were
engaged in, if your Royal Highness had continued in it. We wait nevertheless to
hear the Opinion of the rest of the Confederates, on this Resolution of your
Royal Highnesses; and in the mean time we have sent Orders to our General de
Varennes to bring home our Forces; not questioning in the least, but that
though your Royal Highness has changed Sides, you will nevertheless allow our
Troops what is due to them, according to the Treaties made with your Royal
Highness. God grant, etc.

His Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy's Letter, to his Majesty the King of
Spain.
Sacred and Royal Majesty,
YOUR Majesty's Bounty is too great, to show it self unwilling to give a
favorable Audience to my Ambassador, which I beg of your Majesty for him, when
he has the Honor to give your Majesty an Account of the Proposals made to me,
by the Marshall de Catinat, and of the Reasons which prevail with me in this
Affair, which I hope will so far persuade your Majesty, as not to refuse your
Approbation. I cannot certainly believe, that your Majesty's Goodness and
Equity, so generally esteemed, would suffer you to give way, That this Country
(which every one knows is brought to an extreme and intolerable Desolation)
should by my means be exposed to its utter Ruin; or that I should refuse the
Restitution which is offered me of all that has been taken from me, together
with the Surrender of Pignerol; seeing that those great Losses, and these
considerable Advantages are of no less Consequence to your Majesty's Interest
than they are to mine, which shall be inseparable.

I doubt not therefore, but that to the innumerable and perpetual Obligations I
owe to your Majesty, you will add this one more, which I look upon as one of
the chiefest. I beseech your Majesty to be persuaded, That the deep sense I
have of all the Favors received at your Majesty's Hands, and the inviolable
Zeal I bear to your Service, shall not leave me but with the last Breath of my
Life, being your Majesty's

Turin July 10, 1696. Most Humble, and most Affectionate Servant and Cousin,
Victor Amadeus of Savoy, King of Cyprus.

A Copy of the Articles of the Treaty between his most Christian Majesty, and
his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy, as it was sent from Madrid.
I. THE most Christian King shall Restore to the Duke, all he has taken from
him during this present War.

II. His Majesty will restore Pignerol, with all its Dependencies, and the
Fortress, after it is Demolished, receiving in Exchange from the Duke, the
Valley of Barcelonetta.

III. The King will give the Duke of Burgundy in Marriage to the Duke's
Daughter, without expecting any Portion with her.

IV. To repair and make good the Damages sustained during this present War, the
most Christian King shall pay to the Duke Four Millions of Livres.

V. In case that any Prince whatsoever shall undertake to make War against the
Duke, his Majesty will assist him with eight thousand Foot and four thousand
Horse, which shall be maintained at his Majesty Cost.

VI. For the better Security of this present Treaty, the most Christian King
will give the Guarrantee of the Pope, and the Republic of Venice.

The Treaty of Peace, and Neutrality for Italy, between his most Christian
Majesty and his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy. Concluded and Signed at
Turin, Aug. 29. 1696. and Delivered at the Hague to the most Illustrious
Allies, Aug. 15, 1697.
THE most Christian King having all along during this War maintained a sincere
desire of procuring the Quiet of Italy, and it having pleased Almighty God to
inspire his Royal Highness with the same thoughts, his Majesty has given his
full Power, Commission and Command, to the Sieur Rene de Troullay, Count de
Tesse, Knight of the Orders of the King, Lieutenant General of his Armies,
Colonel General of the Dragoons of France, Governor of Ipres, Lieutenant
General for the King in the Provinces of Maine and Perch, and at present
Commanding for the King in the Countries and Places on the Frontiers of
Piedmont. His Royal Highness having likewise on his part given his Power and
Commands to the Sieur Charles Victor, Marquess de Saint Thomas, Minister of
State, and his said Royal Highnesses Principal Secretary of State; the said
Plenipotentiaries having reciprocally Exchanged the Original of their
Commissions, by virtue of which they Treat, have agreed on these following
Articles.

I.
That there shall be from henceforth and for ever, a firm and a sincere Peace
between the King and his Kingdom, and his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy, and
his Dominions, as if the said Peace had been never interrupted; and the King
resuming the same Sentiments of Bounty he has heretofore had for his Royal
Highness, which he desires his Roval Highness to be persuaded of; his Royal
Highness does by this present Treaty entirely renounce all Engagements, and all
Treaties made with the Emperor, with the Kings and Princes comprehended under
the Name of the League or Confederacy; and does undertake to employ all his
Endeavors, and to do all that he can, in order to obtain of those Sovereign
Powers, at least of the Emperor and King of Spain, a Neutrality for Italy,
until the general Peace shall be Concluded; and to signify their Consents by a
particular Treaty, which shall be made to that purpose; or for want of such a
Treaty by Declarations, which the said Emperor and the King of Spain shall make
to the Pope, and to the Republic of Venice; and which shall be at the same
time followed by the Retreat and withdrawing of all the Forces which the Allies
have at present in Italy, as it shall be hereafter more particularly specified:
And in case the abovementioned Princes do not Consent to such a Neutrality in
Italy, at his Royal Highnesses Instance, to the Emperor and to the King of
Spain; his Royal Highness does engage to enter into an Offensive and Defensive
League with the King, until a General Peace be Concluded, acting jointly with
his Majesty's and his own proper Forces, as becomes good and sincere Allies for
the Common Interest, and to make War against the State of Milan, and against
all those who shall oppose this present Treaty's taking effect. And as an
evident Demonstration of a Return of the King's Amity toward his Royal
Highness, his Majesty does willingly Consent, and does Promise, That the City
and Citadel of Pignerol, the Fort of St. Bridgit, the Perouse, with other
Forts depending on the same, shall be Demolished as to the Fortifications only,
at the King's Charges; and after the aforesaid Fortifications are Demolished,
they shall all be Restored to his Royal Highness, as well as all the
Territories and Dominions comprised under the name of the Government of
Pignerol, and which did belong to the House of Savoy, before the Cession or
Surrender, that Victor Amadeus, the first Duke of that Name, made unto Lewis
the XIIIth. The which City, dismanttled Citadel, and Demolished Forts and
Territories, shall be likewise Surrendered to his Royal Highness, to be held in
Sovereignty, and to be by him enjoyed fully and perpetually, by him and his
Successors from henceforth, as things to him of Right belonging. By virtue of
which present Surrender, his Royal Highness does Engage and Promise, as well
for himself, his Heirs and Successors, or others by any ways Claiming, neither
to Rebuild, nor cause to be Rebuilt the aforesaid Fortifications; nor to cause
any new ones to be Built upon, and in the space and limits of the said
Territories, Funds and Rocks, neither in any place whatsoever, so surrendered by
this present Treaty; according to which, his Royal Highness, or the Inhabitants
of the said Town of Pignerol, shall be allowed to enclose it with a bare Wall
only, not Terrassed, and without Fortifications. That notwithstanding these
mentioned, his Royal Highness shall be free to Build any strong Places or
Fortifications in this said Territory now delivered up, as he thinks fit,
without the King's taking any exception at it. That moreover, the King shall
restore to his Royal Highness, the Countries, Castles and Places of Montmelian,
Nice, Villefranche, Suze and all other the Conquered Places, without Exception,
entire, and undemolish'd or damaged, and with the same quantity of Ammunitions
of War, Provisions, Stores, Canon and Artillery, and such Places to be left
furnished, as they were when they fell into his Majesty's Hands; and so that
the Buildings, Fortifications, Inlargements and Improvements, made by his
Majesty, shall not be touched, but left as they are: After the said Places are
restored, it shall be lawful for his Royal Highness to repair and enlarge the
Fortifications as things belonging to himself, that the King may not therefore
molest him, or be displeased thereat. Provided nevertheless, That the King
shall carry off from Pignerol, all the Artillery, Ammunition of War and
Provisions, Arms, and all movable Effects belonging to him, of what Nature
soever they be. That as for the Revenues and Incoms of Pignerol and of its
Dependencies, the King does yield them up to his Royal Highness in the same
manner as the King injoys them at present; and the Leases or Settlements which
the King has made of any of the said Lands, shall stand good, according to the
Form of the respective Contracts, Tenures or Acquisitions: That the said
restitution of these Countries and Places belonging to his Royal Highness, as
also the delivery of Pignerol with its Dependencies above mentioned, shall be
made after the signing of this present Treaty; the Foreign Troops being first
quite retired out of Italy; and after that the Germans, the Troops of Bavaria,
the Brandenbourg Protestants in the English Pay, and other Auxiliary Troops are
actually arrived in Germany; and that the Spaniards and others which are paid
by his Catholic Majesty, are returned into the Territories of Milan; so that
the Execution of any of these Articles, nor the Restitution of any of those
Places, shall not take Effect till after the said Troops are all of them, and
entirely retired, in such manner as has been now expressed: Which,
notwithstanding, is to be so understood, as that the Evacuation of the said
Foreign Troops out of Italy, shall be deemed to be fully completed, although
the Spaniards should take out, as possibly they may, some Men out of those
Foreign Regiments, to fill up those that are in their own Pay; or that some of
those Foreign Troops should List themselves, and enter on the Territories of
the Republic of Venice, it shall be taken as if they were arrived in Germany,
as soon as they are upon the Venetians Ground, and are delivered over to the
Service of that Commonwealth: And after the Ratification of the pesent Treaty,
Laborers shall be immediately set at work to sink Mines, and to do all other
things that are necessary for the demolishing of the said City, Citadel and
Forts of Pignerol. But in case his Royal Highness should think fit to keep this
Treaty as yet secret, beyond the time limited for the said Ratification, it is
agreed upon, that to avoid the Noise which the working of such Mines might
create, that they shall be begun but at such time after the Ratification as his
Royal Highness shall think fit: The said demolishing Work shall continue and go
forward in such a manner, as that in Two or Three Months after the Evacuation
of the said Troops above mentioned, all shall be delivered up into his Royal
Highness's Hands; whereupon it shall be allowed to send a Commissary to assist
upon the Place, until the Execution of the said Work. His Majesty is also
willing, for his Royal Highness's greater Satisfaction, to send him, when he
shall require it, Two Dukes and Peers of France, to remain as Hostages in his
Royal Highness's Hands, who shall treat them according to the Dignity of their
Rank.

II.
His Majesty shall make no Treaty of Peace, or Truce with the Emperor, or the
King of Spain, without comprehending his Royal Highness, in suitable and
effectual Terms; and the present Treaty, as well as those Querasque, Munster,
the Pirenees and Nimeguen, shall be included in the General Peace, not only as
to the Four Hundred Ninety Four Thousand Crowns of Gold (which are particularly
mentioned in that of Munster, in Discharge of his Royal Highness, and for which
the King continues to be still a Guarrantee to the Duke of Mantua) but also as
to all other Matters contained in the said Treaties, not contrary to the
present Treaty, which are to be irrevocable, and to remain in full Force and
Validity, notwithstanding the present Delivery of Pignerol and its
Dependencies: And as for other Interests, Claims, or Pretensions which concern
the House of Savoy, his Royal Highness reserves to himself a Power of Treating
about them by way of Protestations, of Memorials, or by Envoys, so that this
Treaty may in no ways be prejudicial to the said Protestations.

III.
That a Marriage between the Duke of Burgundy, and the Princess, His Royal
Highness's Daughter, shall be treated on out of Hand, to be consummated when
they are of Age, and the Contract between them to be made so soon as this
Present Treaty takes effect; after Publication whereof, the Princess shall be
put into the King's Hands. That in the said Marriage-Contract, which shall be
considered as an essential part of this Treaty, and wherein the Princess shall
make the usual Renunciations, with a Promise to pretend to nothing of his Royal
Highness's Estate or Succession, further than the following Portion: His said
Royal Highness shall give as a Portion to the Princess his Daughter Two Hundred
Thousand Crowns of Gold; toward the Payment of which, his Royal Highness shall
give a Discharge for One Hundred Thousand Crowns of Gold, which remained due
(by France to the House of Savoy) as part of the Dutchess-Royal's Portion,
together with the accruing Interest of that said Sum, which was also promised
to be paid: And the Remainder, ( viz. One Hundred Thousand more, which the Duke
of Savoy should pay to France, to make up the Portion aforesaid) the King does
Remit, in Consideration of the present Treaty; his Royal Highness engaging
moreover, to give to the Princess, his Daughter, at the Celebration of the
Marriage, that, which in the Language of Piedmont, is called Fardle; and in
French, the Bundle, or Marriage Present, for Clothes; and in the Contract of
Marriage, the Dowry shall be agreed upon, which the King will give according to
the Custom of France.

IV.
That his Royal Highness, renouncing from this present time, truly, and
effectually, and sincerely, (as he has done in the forementioned Articles)
all the Engagements which he might have had with the Enemies, does likewise
hope, that his Majesty will answer thereunto, with all the Sentiments which his
Royal Highness craves and wishes for; and that having the Honor to be so
nearly related to the King, and of entering into a new and glorious Alliance
with him, his Majesty does Grant and Promise, to his Royal Highness, as he does
demand, his powerful Protection, as formerly, in all its Extent; and as his
Royal Highness is desirous to maintain a perfect Neutrality with the Kings,
Princes, and Sovereign Powers, who are at present his Allies, his Majesty does
promise, not to put any manner of Restraint on the Inclinations which his Royal
Highness has, of continuing and using toward them, all the external Measures
of Decency and Freedom, that are becoming a Sovereign Prince, who has
Ambassadors and Envoys at the Courts of those Princes, and receives and
entertains, at his own Court, Envoys and Ambassadors from them; and that the
King shall in no ways take ill his so doing: comprehending under that Word
Princes, the Emperor, Kings, and Sovereign Powers of Europe.

V.
His Majesty does engage and declare that the ordinary and extraordinary
Ambassadors of Savoy shall receive at the Court of France, all the Honors
without Exception, and with all the Circumstances and Ceremonies that are paid
to the Ambassadors of Crowned Heads, that is to say, they shall be received as
Ambassadors from Kings; and that his Majesty's ordinary, as well as
extraordinary Ambassadors in all the Courts of Europe, without Exception, and
even the King's Ambassadors at Rome and Vienna shall likewise treat and use the
said ordinary and extraordinary Ambassadors and Envoys from Savoy, as they do
those from Kings and Crowned Heads. But in regard that this Addition of Honor,
as to the Treatment of the Ambassadors from Savoy, has been never hitherto
settled nor raised to that Degree that his Majesty does now allow it, His Royal
Highness is sensible and does acknowledge, that it is in Consideration of this
Treaty, or Contract of Marriage of the Duke of Burgundy with the Princess his
his Daughter; and his Majesty does promise that this Augmentation of Honor
shall take Place from the Day that the aforesaid Treaty of Marriage is Signed.

VI.
That the Trade between France and Italy shall be renewed and maintained in the
same manner as it was settled before this War, from the time of Charles Emanuel
II. his Royal Highness's Father; and the same shall be observed, and practiced
in all Points, and in all Places between the Kingdom and the several parts of
his Majesty's Dominions, and those of his Royal Highness's, which was used and
practiced in all things in the Lifetime of the said Charles Emanuel II. on the
Roads of Suza in Savoy, and Pont Beauvoisin, and Villefranche, every one paying
the Duties and Customs on both Sides, the French Ships shall continue to pay
the ancient Duties at Villefranche, as it was wont to be paid in the time of
the said Charles Emmanuel; about which there shall be no Contest or Opposition
made, any more than used to be done in those Days. The Couriers and ordinary
Posts of France shall pass, as formerly, through his Royal Highness's Estates
and Countries, and according to the Regulations there, they shall pay the
Duties for the Merchandises wherewith they shall be charged.

VII.
His Royal Highness shall cause an Edict to be published by which he shall upon
the Penalty of severe corporal Punishments, forbid the Inhabitants of the
Valleys of Lucern, called Vaudois, to have any Communication, in Matters of
Religion, with the King's Subjects; and his Royal Highness shall engage, not to
suffer at any time from the Date of this Treaty, any of his Majesty's Subjects
to make any Settlement in the Protestant Valleys, under Color of Religion, of
Marriage, or for any other Pretense of Settlement, Convenience, taking
Possession of Inheritances, or any other Pretense whatsoever, and that no
Protestant Minister shall come from thence into any of his Majesty's Dominions,
without incurring the severest of Corporal Punishments. That however, his
Majesty shall take no Cognizance of his Royal Highness's Usage toward the
Vaudois, in regard of their Religion; yet his Royal Highness shall be bound not
to suffer the Exercise of the Reformed Religion in the City of Pignerol, nor in
the Territories that are restored to his Royal Highness, in like manner as his
Majesty neither does, nor will allow the exercise of it in his Kingdom.

VIII.
That there shall be on both sides a perpetual Act of Oblivion and Indemnity of
all that has been done since the beginning of this War, in what Place soever
the Acts of Hostility have been committed; That in this Act of Grace, all those
shall be comprehended who have served his Majesty in what Station soever,
although they were his Royal Highness's Subjects; so that no Prosecution shall
be made against them, neither shall they be molested, either in their Persons
or Estates, by Reprisals, Executions, or Judicial Processes, or upon any
pretext whatsoever; and the King's Subjects that have served his Royal Highness
shall be used in the like manner.

IX.
That Ecclesiastical Benefices in such parts of his Royal Highness's Country as
has been conquered by the King, having been filled up by his Majesty from time
to time, as the same became vacant, during the time that his Majesty possessed
the said Countries; it is agreed, that the said Collation to Benefices shall be
valid, and the Persons who have been promoted by the King, and invested by
Authority of the Pope's Bulls, shall remain in full Possession thereof. But as
to Promotions to the Livings belonging to the Military Order of St. Maurice, or
to Places of Judicature or Magistracy, his Royal Highness shall have Liberty to
alter the Nominations made by the King; and all Grants made by his Royal
Highness of Offices in the Law, become vacant by the Person's leaving them
during the War, shall remain good and valid.

X.
As for Contributions that were imposed on the Lands of his Royal Highness's
Dominions, although they are lawfully imposed, and are become due, and that they
amount to considerable Sums, his Majesty does, out of his Liberality, fully
discharge his Royal Highness of them, so that from the Day of this Treaty's
Ratification, the King will not pretend to, nor require any of the said
Contributions, leaving his Royal Highness in full Possession of his Revenues
throughout his Dominions, as well as in Savoy, Nice, about Pignerol, and Suza;
his Royal Highness on the other side, not demanding any Contributions of the
King.

XI.
As to the Pretensions of the Duchess of Nemours on his Royal Highness, his
Majesty leaves those Controversies to be determined among themselves by due
Course of Law, without concerning himself further therein.

XII.
That it shall be Lawful for his Royal Highness to send Intendants and
Commissaries into Savoy, the County of Nice, the Marquisate of Susa and
Barcellonet, into Pignerol and its Dependencies; in order to Regulate his
Interests, Rights and Revenues, and to settle his Customs and Excises upon Salt
and other things. And the said Deputed Persons shall be admitted and authorized
in their Offices, immediately after the Ratification of this present Treaty;
after which the said Duties shall belong to his Royal Highness, without
Exception or Contradiction.

XIII.
That if the Neutrality for Italy be accepted, or that a General Peace be
Concluded, as in such Cases a great many Troops would become altogether useless
and Chargeable to his Royal Highness; and that besides the excessive Charges
requisite for the maintaining of them, they commonly become an occasion of
creating a misunderstanding among Princes, when more Troops are kept on foot
then are necessary in a State, either for its own Conservation, or for the
maintaining of the Dignity of a Sovereign Prince; his Royal Highness does
therefore oblige himself, not to keep in times of Neutrality, any more than Six
thousand Foot on this side the Alps, and One thousand five hundred on the other
side of the Mountains, for the Garrisons of Savoy, and of the County of Nice;
and One thousand five hundred Horse or Dragoons; and this Obligation is to
continue only till the General Peace be Concluded.

We the abovementioned Plenipotentiaries have Agreed upon, and Signed these
present Articles; and we do promise and engage to procure them to be ratified
and confirmed by his Majesty, and by his Royal Highness; promising likewise,
that they shall be kept secret till the end of September next; and if at that
time new Articles are made, to the same sense and purpose, then these shall be
suppressed.

Dated at Turin the 29th of August, 1696. Rhene de Froullay, and Saint Thomas,

The Proclamation of the Peace, Publish-at Paris the 10th of September, 1696.
N. S. as also at Turin, and at the Head of the Army on the same Day.
BE it known to all Persons whatsoever, That a good, sure, lasting and solid
Peace, with entire Amity, and sincere Reconciliation has been made and agreed
upon, by and between the most high, most excellent, and most powerful Prince
Lewis, by the Grace of God King of France and of Navar, our Sovereign Lord; and
the most high and most powerful Prince Victor Amadeus II. Duke of Savoy, their
Vassals, Subjects and Servants, in all their Kingdoms, States, Countries, Lands
and Lordships under their Subjection, That the said Peace is general and
absolute between them, their said Vassals and Subjects; and by virtue of the
said Peace, it is permitted to the Subjects of both Princes, to go, come,
return, and sojourn in all Places of the said Kingdoms, States and Countries,
to Negotiate and Traffic, Correspond, and have a free Converse, the one with
the other, in all Freedom and Safety, as well by Land as by Sea, and on Rivers,
etc. And in order to maintain the same, all manner of People, of what Quality
or Condition soever they may be, are hereby strictly forbid to undertake,
attempt, or innovate any thing contrary thereunto, upon the Penalty of being
severely Punished, as Disturbers of the Public Peace.

Given at Varsaille the 8 th day of December, 1696. Signed Lewis, And lower,
Philypeaux.

The most Christian King's Letter to the Archbishop of Paris, to cause Te Deum
to be Sung for the Peace Concluded with Savoy, etc.
Cousin,
AS in this War which I have alone sustained for these Nine Years past against
the Confederated Force of Europe, I had no other Aim than to Defend Religion,
and Vindicate the Majesty of Kings: God has protected his own Cause, he has
Guided my Designs, and Assisted my Enterprises. The happy Successes which have
accompanied my Arms, have been the more agreeable to me; because I have always
Flattered my self they would Conduce to a Peace; and I have made no other
Profit of those Successes, than to offer my Enemies Conditions more
Advantageous then they could hope for, even though they had obtained that
Superiority over me, as I have gained upon them. I have omitted nothing that
might advance the Happiness of Europe; and I have made use of all means to
convince my Brother the Duke of Savoy, with what ardor I desired to see that
good Correspondence renewed, which has been established for so many Ages,
founded upon such Bonds of Consanguinity and Friendship, and which had never
been interrupted but by the Artifices of our Enemies. My Vows have been heard;
this Prince has at last acknowledged his true Interest and my good Intentions,
and the Peace is Concluded. It is to be hoped, that the Confederated Powers,
touched by this Example, and the Evils that their People suffer, will follow
his Example: Or if they will still persist in the same Sentiments, they shall
more than ever be made sensible, that nothing is impossible to Troops
accustomed to Victory, and which are Conducted by a Desire of Peace. It is to
give thanks to the God of Armies, who has been pleased to show himself a God of
Peace; and to pray him to give to all Europe a Tranquillity so necessary, and
which he only can give; That I have resolved to cause Te Deum to be Sung in the
Cathedral Church of my good City of Paris, on the Thirteenth of this present
Month, as the great Master of Ceremonies will more particularly inform you,
whom I have ordered to invite also to this Ceremony my Courts, and those that
use to assist at it. Whereupon, etc.

Versailles, Sept. 11. 1696. Signed, Lewis. And lower, Philypeaux.

An Act of Surrender of the Country and Estates of Savoy, made by his most
Christian Majesty, Lewis XIV. King of France and Navarre, to his Royal
Highness, Victor Amadeus II. Duke of Savoy, Prince of Piedmont, King of Cyprus,
etc. on the 28th of September, 1696.
By his Royal Highness.

BE it known to all Persons whatsoever, That in pursuance of a Treaty of Peace
made and signed between his most Christian Majesty, Lewis XIV. King of France
and Navarre, on the one part; and his Royal Highness, Victor Amadeus II. Duke
of Savoy, Prince of Piedmont, King of Cyprus, etc. on the other Part, That his
most Christian Majesty has given Orders to Monsieur Anthony Balthazar, Marquis
de Thoy, Major General of the Armies of France, and Governor of Savoy, to
restore entirely to his Royal Highness, all the Countries, Places, Castles, and
Fortresses of all Savoy, except Montmelian, and to draw out all the Troops that
are there, pursuant to his Majesty's Letters Patents. To this end his Royal
Highness has sent the Marquis of Thana, Captain of his Life Guards, Major
General of his Army, and Governor of Savoy, with a Power to receive, in his
Royal Highness's Name, all the said Estates and Places. The said Marquess de
Thoy having therefore personally appeared in the Council Chamger of the
Town Hall of Chambery, and having there assembled the Nobility, the Syndics,
and Counselors of the said City; and the said Marquess of Thana there likewise
appearing, did then and there receive from the said Marquis de Thoy, an
absolute and full Surrender, in the Name of his most Christian Majesty, of all
the Countries, and of all the Places of the Duchy of Savoy, Montmelion only
excepted, according to the Treaty of Peace. The said Marquess de Thoy
expressing the same in these following Words: viz. My Lord Marquess de Thana,
in Pursuance of an Order from the King my Master, and according to the Power
you have also received from his Royal Highness, I do hereby make an entire
Surrender and Restitution to his Royal Highness in your Person, of all the
Countries and Places, and of all the Dependencies of the Estate of Savoy,
Montmelian excepted, and his Royal Highness may accordingly dispose of the
same, in like manner as he had done before those Estates were conquered by the
King's Arms. To which the Marquess of Thana answered, That he received in his
Royal Highness's Name, the aforesaid Countries, Places and Dependencies. This
done, the Marquess de Thoy repeated once more the Words of the said Surrender,
and then went out of the Townhouse.

Of all the aforesaid Transactions, both the said Marquess de Thoy and Thana,
caused an Act to be made before Public Notaries, which was signed,

As Witnesses. Syndics.
Favre de Charmettes. Perin. Cugnet. Tonce.

Thoy de Pisien. and Marquis de Thana.
I Jasper Chambet, Notary and Burgess of Chambery, have received and passed the
present Act as required.

Signed, G. Chambet. Not.



THE ACTS AND NEGOTIATIONS OF THE TREATY of PEACE Held at the Palace of Ryswick.

TOGETHER With a Description of the Palace wherein it was Concluded.

And a List of the Names and Qualities of all the Plenipotentiaries that
transacted it.

LONDON: Printed for Rob. Clavel, and T. Child. MDCXCVIII.

THE ACTS AND NEGOTIATIONS OF THE PEACE Concluded at the PALACE at Ryswick, in
Holland.
BEFORE his Imperial, Catholic, and Britannick Majesty, with the other Princes
and States, their Confederates in the War against the French King, would be
prevailed upon to depute Ministers to treat of a Peace, the French were obliged
to set forth, and positively agree to (by way of Prelimenary) the Terms upon
which the said Peace should be made. Which Preliminaries being finally adjusted
between Messieurs Boreel and Dyckvelt, on the Part of the Confederates; with
Monsieur Caillieres, the French King's Minister; and his Majesty, the King of
Sweden, being accepted by both Parties as Mediator, the Illustrious Allies were
pleased to nominate their Plenipotentiaries to assemble at his Majesty, the
King of Great Britain's Palace at Ryswick, there to treat with the
Plenipotentiaries of the French King. The said Preliminaries are as follows:

An Extract out of the Register-Book of the Mediator, his Majesty the King of
Sweden's Public Minister.
At the Hague, February 10. 1697.
THIS Day, at Eleven in the Morning, Monsieur Caillieres, his most Christian
Majesty's Minister came in Company with Monsieur Dyckvelt, to the House of the
Swedish Minister the Mediator, and having produced and showed to the said
Mediator his full Power, and that of his Imperial Majesty's Minister being also
read, and Copies of both (after being compared with the Originals) exchanged;
He, the said Monsieur Cailleires, made the following Declaration.

Preliminary Articles.
I. THE King of France does consent and agree, That the Treaties of Westphalia
and Nimeguen shall be the Basis and Foundation of the Negotiations for a
General Peace with all the Confederates. II. To Restore Strasbourg in the same
Condition it was in when taken by his Majesty. III. To restore to the King of
Spain, Luxemburgh in the Condition it is now in. IV. Also the Cities of Mons
and Charleroy, in the same Condition they are in at present. V. The several
Places in Catalonia that are now in the King's Hands, being taken since the
Peace of Nimeguen shall be restored in the Condition they were in when taken.
VI. To restore to the Bishop of Liege, the Town and Citadel of Dinant, in the
same State they were in when taken. VII. To restore all Places that have been
taken by Virtue of Reunion, since the Treaty of Nimeguen. VIII. And Lorrain
according to the Condition of the said Treaty of Nimeguen.
This done, the said Minister of France and Monsieur Dyckvelt, went together to
the House of Monsieur Boreel, who by Reason of Indisposition, was hindered from
being present, and the Swedish Minister resorting thither also, the said
Ministers, Boreel and Dyckvelt, did declare to the Mediator, in the Presence of
Monsieur Cailleires,

That over and above the recited Preliminaries, it was also agreed, That
provided the Peace be concluded, the most Christian King shall at the time it
is signed, own and acknowledge the Prince of Orange, as King of Great Britain,
without any Difficulty, Limitation, Condition or Reserve; to which the said
Monsieur Cailleires did reply, and declare to the Mediator, That in the Name of
his Master, the most Christian King, he did confirm and agree to what Messieurs
Boreel and Dyckvelt had said.

After the Preliminaries were adjusted, it was agreed, that the Ambassadors and
Public Ministers of the Allies should Reside at the Hague, but that the
Ambassadors of the most Christian King should make their Residence at Delft;
and that the Conferences for the General Peace should be held at the Castle of
Ryswick, from which both those Towns were of equal Distance.

A Description of the Palace of Ryswick, and of the First Conferences that were
held there.
BEfore we begin to give the Particulars of the Conferences held there, or
produce the Acts themselves, it will not be unnecessary to exhibit a
Description of the Palace of Ryswick, with a Prospect or external View, and a
Plan or Area of the Inside in Sculpture, by which the Reader will be able to
form the more exact Idea of the Ceremonies observed at the Conferences.

This House has sometimes the Title of Newburgh, because a Duke of Newburgh
laid the first Stone of it, when Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange caused it to
be built: It is situate at about an equal Distance between the Hague and Delft,
a Musket Shot from the Village of Ryswick, and but a little way Distant from
the Road between Delft and the Hague. One might say that it was built on
purpose for a Place of Treaty, so convenient it is for such a Work; as will be
seen by observing the Situation of the Chambers, Galleries, and Closets, as
they are laid down in the Draught annexed, and by Figures and Letters are
pointed to, thus:

1. The Great Hall wherein the General Peace was to be Signed, till which time
the Confederates and the French were to Transact all Affairs, in their separate
Apartments, or in that of the Mediator, THE ROYAL PALACE AT RYSWICK Where the
Conferences for a General Peace were held.
The Palace at Ryswick where were held the Conferences for a general Piece.

1. The Palace. 2. The Pavilions, or two wings of it. 3. The Governors House.
4. The Gardiners House. 5. The Entrance for the Allies. 6. The Entrance for ye
Mediator. 7. The Entrance for the French. 8. The Bridge for the Allies. 9. The
chief Bridge, which the Mediator passed over. 10. The Bridge for the French. 11.
The Grove before the House. 12. The Garden on the East Side. 13. The Garden on
the West Side. 14. The Rocher* 15. The M^lonry. 16. The Dove House. 17. The
Fish Ponds. 18. The Garden behind the House. 19. Lands belonging to his
Majesty. 20. Lands of A^e ^^rve. 21. The Small P^d to D^lft. 22. The City of
^lft. 23. The Abreuv^s. 24. The Canai Delft.


and not to Assemble together till in this great Hall the Conclusion was made.
It is a very fair large Room, Hung with green Cloth, the Cieling is in the
manner of a Plat-fond admirably well Painted by Honthorst, who was famous as
any in his time.

2. The Chamber where the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the Illustrious
Allies assemble in Conference, where they sit at a large Table covered with a
green Carpet. 3. Another Chamber where the same Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries of the High Allies assemble; where they sit in a Circle
without a Table. 4 and 5. Are the Chambers where the Ambassadors of France
assemble. 6.6. Are two Closets where the Mediator Confers with the Ministers of
the Confederates. 7.7. Two other Closets wherein the Mediator Confers with the
French Ministers. And in that next to the Mediator's Chamber, the Peace with
France was Signed by the Plenipotentiaries of England, Spain, and the States
General, on the 10/20 Sept. 1697. The Chimney was covered with a Tapistry that
there might be no upper end of the Room. 8. The Mediator's Chamber, where was a
Table covered with a Carpet of green Cloth. A. The great Gate of the House at
which the Mediators enter. B. The Gate at which the Confederates came in. C.
The Gate for the French Ambassadors to enter at. D. The Gallery by which the
Confederates pass into their Apartment. E The Gallery which the French pass
through into their Rooms. F. The Side of the House toward Delft. G. The Side
of the House toward the Hague. H. The Front of the House toward the Village
through which the Confederates pass. The French came in on the other side,
except when the Road is extreme bad, and then they might pass through the
Village also; but without insisting on it as their Right, according to the
Regulation made to that purpose.
The way through the Village both from the Hague and Delft, is paved with Brick
for two small miles in length.

The Conferences began on the Ninth of May in the Afternoon. The Baron of
Lillieroot, Ambassador of Sweden and Mediator, entered the Palace of Ryswick at
half an hour after Three a Clock, passing over the middle Bridge, and through
the great Gate of the Palace. He was in a Coach with six Horses; he himself,
and two Gentlemen that were with him, being in Mourning, but his Coachman and
Valets in their Liveries, their Clothes not being yet got ready. The Baron of
Preilmeyer Ambassador and Plenipotentiary of the Elector of Bavaria arrived
about four a Clock in a Coach with six Horses, having his Son and two Gentlemen
with him. A while after came the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the
States General, viz. Mynheer's Boreel, Dyckvelt, and Van Haren, all three in
one Coach with six Horses, wherein also were their Gentlemen. The Emperor's
Ambassadors arrived afterward with five Coaches, each drawn by six Horses;
they had three Coaches more with two Horses each; Two Grooms rid before them in
Count Kaunitz Livery. In the two first Coaches were Monsieur Hayeck Secretary
of the Embassy, with the other Secretaries and Gentlemen of their Household. In
the third Coach, which was Count Kaunitz's, he rid himself with Count Straatman
and the Baron of Seilern, followed immediately by two Querrys and four Pages on
Horseback. The five Coaches that followed were taken up by Count Caunitz's two
Sons, the Count de Trautmansdorf, the Count de Harach, the Count de
Dietrichstein, the Count de Questemberg, two Counts de Lamberg, with many other
German Gentlemen. The King of Spain's Ambassadors arrived a little while after
in two Coaches with six Horses. In the first was Don Bernard de Quiros, and the
Count de Tirimont, there went before them six Gentlemen on Horseback; In the
second Coach rode their Gentlemen. After them arrived the Ambassadors of
England, having two Coaches with six Horses each. In the first were my Lords
Pembrook and Villers: In the second were Mr. Prior Secretary, of the Ambassy,
and other Secretaries and Gentlemen.

Monsieur Mean the Elector of Cologn's Ambassador, and Monsieur Norf the Prince
of Liege's Envoy, came in afterward in a Coach with six Horses; and after them
Monsieur Bose Ambassador and Plenipotentiary for the Elector of Saxony, in a
Coach with six Horses; The Elector of Brandenbourg's Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary Monsieur Smetau rode with him in his Coach, his own following
empty drawn also by six Horses. After these followed the President Canon the
Duke of Lorain's Minister in his own Coach. Then came after him Monsieur
Schrottemberg, Plenipotentiary of the Circle of Franconia, in a Coach with six
Horses; he had with him Monsieur Hespen the Duke of Wirtemberg's Envoy.

All these Ambassadors of whom I have now spoken, arrived in less than a
quarter of an Hours time, that is, from four till a quarter of an hour after
it. They all passed over the first Bridge, that was laid over the Canal before
the House, and came in at the first Passage made in the Wall which incloses the
Yard. The Ambassadors of France arrived at three quarters past Four, with three
Coaches drawn by six Horses each; Monsieur de Harley, the Count de Crecy, and
Monsieur de Callieres, with Monsieur de Harlay Counselor of State, were in the
first; a Gentleman on Horseback riding before them. The two other Coaches were
filled with Gentlemen. They entered by the third Bridge, and at the second Gap
made in the said Wall that compasses the Courtyard. When they came to the
bottom of the Stairs they were received and conducted by Mynheer Rosenboom (the
States General's Agent, and their Introductor of Ambassadors) into the
Apartments designed for their Excellencies.

The Assembly of all these Ambassadors held till a quarter past Seven, they
delivered their Commissions setting forth their Plenipotentiary Power into the
hands of the Mediator, who was for the time in the middle Hall, placed between
the Confederate Ministers Chamber, and that wherein the French
Plenipotentiaries usually met. They all went away about half an hour past
seven. The Emperor's Ambassadors were the first that retired, and those of
France were the last: But in the Regulations it was beforehand agreed, that
the coming or going away first or last was to be looked upon as immaterial, and
not to be drawn into any Consequence, or Precedence.

They met again on the Eleventh, at Ten in the Morning, and sat till Two in the
Afternoon, and then agreed that their Conferences should be held twice a Week;
that is, on Wednesdays at Nine in the Morning; and on Saturdays at Four in the
Afternoon; which they accordingly exactly performed.

Advertisement.
HIS Most Serene Highness, the Duke of Lorain's Plenepotentiary, having
Intelligence that they had begun to treat with Monsieur Cailliere, then in
Holland, about the Preliminaries, was the First who put in the Pretensions of
his most Serene Master, even before the Preliminaries were finished and agreed
upon.

The Memorial Presented by the Plenipotentiary of Lorain, and read in the
Assembly of the High Allies, on the 14th of January, 1697.
THE Queen cannot consent that a Congress be held concerning a Peace, before
the Preliminaries of it be first made sure and settled, which ought not to be
regulated according to the Conditions mentioned in the Treaty of Nimeguen.

I. No one goes to it but with the Assurance of his Preliminary. The Emperor to
have Strasburgh and the Re-Unions restored. Spain to have Luxembourgh. The
Bishop of Liege to have Dinant restored. This is the Method of Treating that
was demanded of France, and which is very commendable. But as it has been found
necessary to require this Security beforehand (which has been termed a
Prelimenary) I find it necessary to insist upon it, that the same may be done,
in regard to the Restitution of Lorain. Not according to the Terms of the
Treaty of Nimeguen; because a Restitution on such Conditions, is not to be
accepted of; and the Queen, both as a Mother and a Guardian of her Children,
cannot allow of it, and she cannot act contrary to the Duke, her Husband's
Deed, who was never willing to accept of a Restitution on those Terms. Neither
ought that Treaty of Nimeguen, to stand as a Prelimenary or a Foundation of
this Treaty, since the King of France himself, has in a manner disanulled it,
by declaring by his Ambassadors, that it was as if it had never been; and the
deceased Duke of Lorain on his part, made a Declaration, That he would not be
held by it. Nevertheless, that pretended Treaty, to which he had never
consented, nor agreed unto, nor signed by his Plenipotentiary, but on the
contrary protested against, has been concluded notwithstanding his Dissent: How
then can that Treaty be revived without him, and made use of it against an
August Widow, and Four most Serene Orphans, whereof the eldest is Duke Leopold
of Lorain, the first of that Name, descended of Sixty Seven Dukes of a
continued Line, of so illustrious a Blood, that there is no King nor Prince in
Europe, now living, but has drops of it in his Veins, and even the most
Christian King himself. Whence it cannot be imagined, that his Majesty could be
willing that this most Serene Family, which has in former times rendered such
signal Services to the Crown of France, should be now destroyed and brought to
nothing.

II. By the Laws of Nature, for the Sake of the Quality of this Illustrious
House, and by the Obligation of Alliances, the High Confederates ought to
support its Cause. The Emperor has made a Solemn and Authentic Treaty with
the States General of the United Provinces, in which there is an express
Article, importing that the Dukedoms of Lorain and Bar, with all the Dominions
and Countries thereunto belonging, shall be fully restored to the late Duke of
Lorrain, of Glorious Memory. He was then alive, and contributed very much to
promote that Treary; and if that Article which related to him had not been
admitted to be comprehended in it, that Treaty would have never been concluded
nor ratified. Mynheer Hop, who was one of the Public Ministers concerned in
it, and signed it, knows this to be true. And the States General have the
Substance of what I have been saying, in their own Records.

The Monarchy of Spain, the Crown of England, and other consederated Powers
consented to that Treaty, did concur in it, or rather run to take upon them the
common Defense of it, and engaged themselves into the same Obligation to see
this Article relating to Lorrain duly performed, whereof they gave their
particular Assurances. There was no Elector, Prince, or State of the Empire
that opposed it; on the contrary, the Three Colleges gave their Votes and
Resolutions for this Restitution to be made to the full, and with allowance for
Damages. These are the Engagements of the high Allies for the House of Lorain,
against which, France does peremptorily declare, by Monsieur Caillieres, That
the King will not restore Lorrain, but on the Conditions mentioned in the
Treaty of Nimeguen. Does there need more Arguments to move the Allies to cause
the Restitution of Lorain to be put among the Prelimenaries, according to the
Tenor of their Obligations? Before Monsieur Caillieres had declared this
Negative, he gave us some Ground to hope by what he had said at Meastricht and
elsewhere, that Lorain would be restored on certain Conditions, or on Terms
more Advantageous than those of the Treaty of Nimeguen. These Advantages were
then to be Part of the Preliminaries, in order to draw on this Treaty. But that
those fair Promises were to be taken but for mere Complements, appears at
present plain enough, by this absolute Negative of his, viz. The King will not:
Which may give sufficient Warning to the Allies, to make use of more Precaution
in their Transactions, and this obliges them the more to make this so just a
Restitution part of the Prelimenary, aad that without it the Congress should
not be held. Seeing without it there can be no Peace, unless that the King of
France be permitted to triumph doubly over the Allies, and subdue them, which I
hope he must not expect, or pretend that they must not without his Leave, keep
their Promises and Engagements.

Signed, Canon.

Another Memorial which the same President Canon presented to the same Assembly
of the High Allies on the 22d of May, 1697.
Gentlemen, etc.
MY Age and ill Disposition of Body will not permit me to wrangle, nor use many
words, and therefore all I shall say is, That we are come hither to make a
Peace, and not to Dispute or Regulate Ranks and Places. Every one yields the
first to the Emperor only, and no Body disputes it with him, no not our Enemies
themselves. We have, with common Consent, and by the Intervention of our
Mediator, made an Act of Reservation, because of the several Titles; which Act
has been thought very Prudential and Necessary; for it is a Precedent, and at
the same time secures all other Pretensions of Place and Precedence which every
one may arrogate to himself. For my part, I do not intend to take place of any
Body: But at the same time I will not suffer any thing to be done that can
prejudice the Queen my Mistress, or the most Serene Duke her Son, who is a
Sovereign, and that is enough. Otherwise I shall call my self a Representative
of the King of Jerusalem; There shall come another that will entitle himself
King of Cyprus; Their Lordships the States General will call themselves Kings
of several Kingdoms in the Indies; for they are so indeed; but that is not the
question: Gentlemen, as I said before, we are not here to dispute or regulate
what is de gloria mundi, but only and solely to Treat of the Peace, which shall
be concluded, and God Almighty will send, if we have it first among us the High
Allies.

The under-named Minister and Plenipotentiary of Lorain, not to be tedious in
the Congress of the Peace, and concur in it according to the wise direction
proposed by his Excellency the Ambassador Mediator, and agreed on by all
Parties now in War, claims from, and in the Name of the Queen his Mistress, in
Quality of Mother and Guardian of the most Serene Duke of Lorain and Bar
Leopold First of the Name, her Son a Minor, and of three other Princes his
Brothers, all under Age, all four her Sons and lawful Issue by the most Serene
Duke of Lorain and Bar, lately deceased, of glorious Memory, her Husband; the
succinct and general Demand here annexed, which her Majesty has made herself,
and Signed with her own Hand; which Monsieur Caillieres, then Minister of
France, and now Extraordinary Ambassador and Plenipotentiary in this Congress
having seen and perused, did not think improper to be presented to his most
Christian Majesty, by means of a Copy of it, which the Sieurs Boreel and
Dyckvelt, Ministers of their Lordships the States General, and now their
Plenipotentiaries and Extraordinary Ambassadors in this same Congress, treating
together, have given him. Which demand therefore cannot be more anthentick, nor
suit better with a most great and mighty King, to work upon his Magnanimity and
Justice, the Effect which that August Queen expects for her four most Serene
Orphans. With a Proviso to add to it hereafter, what may concern their lawful
Rights and Pretensions.

Demand of the Queen.
THE Queen Demands the Restitution of the Dominions and Countries belonging to
the Duke of Lorain her Son, with the Sovereignty and Rights upon the same
depending. Which she hopes from the Justice of his most Christian Majesty, and
the Merits of her Cause.

Given at Vienna the 8 th of October, 1696. Signed Eleonora Queen.

A Regulation touching Public Ceremonies and Order among Domestics, drawn up
by his Excellency the Mediator.
WE the Baron of Lilieroot, Extraordinary Ambassador and Plenipotentiary of his
Sacred Royal Majesty of Sweden, for the Mediation of Peace, make it known and
declare, That all the most Illustrious and most Excellent Lords Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries, who come to the Conferences which are held here for the
Peace, have unanimously consented to, and approved the Proposal We have made of
reviving, and causing to be observed on this Occasion, the Regulations
heretofore made at Nimeguen concerning Ceremonies and Orders, with some
Additions or Alterations which We have thought fit to be made, in order to make
them more proper and suitable to this Place and present Conjuncture, and that
upon mature Deliberation the following Articles have been agreed upon.

I. That all Notifications of the Arrival of Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries,
and all Visits, as well to be made and received, as to be paid and returned,
and which may require some Ceremony, shall be entirely left off and suppressed,
and it shall be free to all to see and visit one another, when, and in what
manner they please, but so that such Visits shall not be exacted as a Duty, or
be a Precedent for the time to come. However, those that shall come hereafter,
in order to their Admittance to the Conferences, shall be obliged to
Communicate their full Powers to his Excellency the Ambassador Mediator, who
shall Impart it to their Excellencies the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of
the Allies that shall be of the Assembly; and it shall not be lawful for the
New Comers to be there present, before the same be performed.

II. That the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries shall come to the Place of the
Conferences with no other Retinue than a small number of Gentlemen, one or two
Pages at most, and very few Footmen; that they shall suffer no other Coach than
that of their Bodies to come into the Court of the Palace; and if they had
occasion for one or two Coaches more for their Attendants, these last shall
stand without, that they may cause no Confusion or Stop: The same shall also be
observed in all other Public Places, where there may happen to be a greater
Concourse of People, as at Plays, Public Feasts, Balls, etc.

III. That care shall be taken to prevent Quarrels on both sides betwixt
Coachmen and other mean Servants, who shall also be commanded to use one
another with Reciprocal Civility and Kindness, and to be ready in doing one
another all sorts of mutual Services and good Turns upon all Occasions.

IV. That the Gentlemen of the Retinue of the Ambassadors shall take care that
the said Servants do exactly observe the present Regulation as to that
Particular, and shall cause those to be punished who shall act contrary to it.

V. That the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries who assist at the Conferences
from the Emperor and the Allies, shall come into the Court of the House where
the Conferences are held, by the Gate made on purpose on the side of the said
Houses that looks toward the Hague, and shall go up to their Apartments by the
Staircase on the same side; and the Ambassadors of the most Christian King
shall make use of the Gate and Bridge lately made, on the side of Delft, as
also of the Staircase adjoining to their Apartments, on the same side; and the
Ambassador Mediator shall go alone over the Bridge and through the Gate of the
middle, and shall go up to his Apartments by the great Staircase.

VI. If two Coaches happen to meet in a place too narrow for them both to go
through at the same time, instead of disputing the Wall, and thereby causing
any Stop, the Coachmen on the contrary shall be obliged to open and make the
Passage easy reciprocally, as much as possible; and he who shall have the
first notice of the Difficulty given him, shall stop and make room for the
other, if it appears that he can do it more easily on his side.

VII. In Public Walks, such as the Voorhout and Malls, there shall be observed
the Custom established among those that meet there, which is to keep the right
hand every one on his side, as well as in the Streets and Public Ways, and in
general, wherever it may conveniently be done, without the least Contest or
Affectation of Precedence.

VIII. The Pages, Footmen, and generally all Livery-Servants, shall carry
neither Sticks nor Arms, such as Swords, Knives, Pocket-Pistols, or others of
whatsoever kind they may be, either hid or openly, both in Town as in the
Walks, and when they go to Ryswick. However, the Pages shall be allowed, if
they will, small Sticks. Moreover, all Domestics shall be forbid to go out of
their Houses in the Night, unless it be by express Orders from their Masters,
so that none may be found abroad upon any other account, at unseasonable hours;
and those that shall go contrary to this shall be severely punished, and turned
out forthwith.

IX. When any Servant of an Ambassador or Plenipotentiary shall stand Convicted
of any Crime capable of disturbing the Public Tranquillity, the Ambassador or
Plenipotentiary to whom he shall belong, shall wave his Right and Privilege of
punishing him himself, and withdrawing his Protection, shall cause him to be
delivered into the hands of the ordinary Judge of the Place where the Offense
shall have been committed, either in the Town or elsewhere, and shall even
prosecute the Offender according to the established Laws: And if in the same
Case the Criminal Judge, vulgarly called Schout, should Arrest and take any one
in the Fact, either himself, or by his Officers, or others, it shall be lawful
for them to seize such a Person, and even commit him to Goal, although they
known him to be Servant, or of the Retinue of some Ambassador or
Plenipotentiary, till they can give Notice of it to his Master, which they
shall be obliged to do forthwith, and without delay. After which, what the
Ambassador or Plenipotentiary shall order, shall be punctually put in
Execution, whether he desires to have his Servant kept in Prison, or set at
Liberty.

X. If any Domestic of an Ambassador or Plenipotentiary should Insult or
Quarrel with a Domestic of another Ambassador or Plenipotentiary, the
Aggressor shall forthwith be delivered up into the Power of the Master of him
that has been attacked and insulted, who shall punish him as he shall think fit.

XI. All Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries shall most severely and strictly
forbid their Domestics, as well Gentlemen as others, to have among them any
Quarrels or Differences; and if any should be discovered notwithstanding these
Prohibitions, and that any one should be so bold, as to endeavor to decide
them by the Way of Arms, he shall instantly be turned out of the Ambassadors
House, and even out of the Town, without any regard to what he could allege
for his Excuse; as the Enormity of the Affront put upon him, or his being
Assaulted first; and he shall likewise be obliged to Answer to the Complaint
that may be made before the Tribunal of his Natural Prince, where he shall be
punished according to the Laws.

XII. All the foregoing Articles agreed on with common Consent, for the good
Order of this Assembly, shall not be alleged for an Example, or be a Precedent
in any other Place, Time, or different Conjuncture; and no Person shall take
advantage from, nor receive Prejudice by them upon any other occasion.

Given at the Hague the 29 th of May, 1697. (L.S.) Signed N. Lilieroot.

THE PROJECT OF PEACE Between the Emperor and Empire On one Part; and his Most
Christian Majesty On the other Part: As it was delivered in by the French
Ambassadors the 20 th of July, 1697.
With the Answer of the Imperial Ambassadors to the said Project, given in the
5 th of August, 1697. Translated from the Latin.
THE CONDITIONS Upon which his Most Christian Majesty Agrees to make Peace with
all the ALLIES.
The Preamble.
BE it known unto all Men, both present and to come, that in the Course of a
most bloody War, under which Europe has so long groaned, it has pleased Divine
Providence to prepare at last for Christendom a happy Conclusion of its
Miseries, by inspiring an ardent Desire of Peace into the Hearts of the most
High, most Excellent, and most Potent Prince, Leopold, Elected Emperor of the
Romans, always August King of Germany, Hungary, etc. of the most High, most
Excellent, and most Potent Prince, Lewis XIV. by the Grace of God most
Christian King of France and Navarre; of the most High, most Excellent, and
most Potent Prince, Charles II. by the Grace of God Catholic King of Spain;
and of their High and Mightinesses the States General of the United
Netherlands: All of which Princes and States, being equally desirous to concur
bona fide, as far as in them lies, toward the Re-establishment of the Public
Tranquillity, they think of nothing less than rendering it Solid and Lasting by
the Equity of the Articles in the ensuing Treaty. Whereupon in the first place
their Majesty's and the said States General have for this purpose unanimously
consented, to accept of the Mediation of the most High, most Excellent and most
Potent Prince, Charles XI. by the Grace of God King of Sweden, Goths and
Vandals of glorious Memory. But whereas an untimely Death afterward took away
that Prince, and disappointed the Hopes, which all Europe had justly conceived
of the happy Issue of his Counsels and good Offices, their said Majesty's and
the States General being still resolved to put a speedy stop to the Effusion of
so much Christian Blood, have thought they could not make Choice of a Mediator
more agreeable to all Parties concerned and interested in the War, than by
continuing to acknowledge under the same Character the most High, most
Excellent, and most Potent Prince Charles XII. his Son and Successor, the
present King of Sweden, who has already used the same Endeavors to promote the
Peace between his Imperial Majesty and his Allies on the one part, and his most
Christian Majesty on the other part, in the Conferences actually held for this
purpose in the Palace at Ryswick in the Province of Holland, between the
Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries nominated and deputed by both
Parties. Viz.

On behalf of the Emperor, Count Caunitz, Count Straatman, and Count Seylern,
etc.

On behalf of his most Christian Majesty, the Sieurs Harlay, Count Crecy, and
Cailliere, etc.

On behalf of his Catholic Majesty, the Sieurs Don Bernardo de Quiros, and
Count Tirimont, etc.

On the behalf of the States General, the Sieurs Boreel, Dyckvelt, and Van
Haren, etc.

Who having implored the Divine Assistance, and communicated respectively their
full Powers (the Copies whereof are inserted word for word at the end of the
Treaty) and having caused them to be duly exchanged by the Intervention and
Mediation of the Baron of Lilieroot, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary of the King of Sweden, who acquits himself in the Office of a
Mediator, with all the Prudence, Ability and Equity requisite for the
Re-establishment of a General Tranquillity, They shall agree together for the
Glory of God, and the Welfare of Christendom upon the Articles of Peace and
mutual Amity which follow.

The Answer of the Imperial Ambassadors to the Project of Peace delivered in by
the French.
Answer to the Preamble.
ACcording to established Custom it is required, that in all Treaties between
the Emperor and Empire on one part, and France on the other, the Latin Tongue
should be made use of, and especially that what is delivered in writing on
either side should be in that Language. Therefore it was but reasonable for
them to demand, that this Custom might be observed with respect to the Project,
and in all future Negotiations. Though in this Project there is no mention made
but only of Three Allies, yet it is to be supposed, that the Treaty of Peace
should be managed and concluded with all the Allies engaged in the present War,
and that several Instruments should be drawn up according to the Number of
them. Lastly, They will readily agree at the end of this Negotiation to the
remaining part of the Preamble.

Article I.
There shall be an Universal, Perpetual and Christian Peace, and a true and
sincere Amity between his Imperial Majesty and his Allies on the one part, and
his most Christian Majesty on the other part, their Heirs and Successors, their
Kingdoms and Provinces, especially between the Princes Electors and other
States of the Empire comprehended in the Treaty of Peace, with their Heirs and
Successors. This Peace and Amity shall sincerely and faithfully be observed and
continued in such a manner that each Party shall be for promoting the Honor,
Welfare, and Profit of the other. There shall be passed on both sides a
perpetual Amnesty and Oblivion of all Acts of Hostility, exercised during the
War, in what place, or howsoever committed: So that for the future no Redress
shall be sued for either by Course of Law or otherwise, within the Empire, the
Kingdoms and Territories of his most Christian Majesty, his Catholic Majesty,
nor the States General and Allies, notwithstanding all Agreements, which may
formerly have been concluded upon to the contrary. But all Injuries, Violences,
Hostilities, Damages, and Expenses, without any Distinction of Things or
Persons, which may have been caused on either side, whether by Words, Writings,
or Deeds, shall be entirely Cancelled, so that whatever may be pretended under
this Color by one against the other, shall be buried in an Eternal Oblivion.

Answer to Article I.
When this Article was last debated, the Imperial Ambassadors urged, and the
French agreed, that the Empire and Emperor should not be separated, but be
joined together according to ancient Custom, and as it was observed in the
Treaty of the Twenty years Truce made at Ratisbonne: That it was requisite, not
only to express what might conduce to the preserving the Peace, in order to
observe it; but likewise to take notice of what might obstruct or destroy it,
in order to avoid it. That lastly, It would be no difficult matter to adjust a
general Amnesty, when once an Agreement was made, about the Reparation of the
Losses sustained, and the Charges they had been put to: adding withal a
necessary Limitation with respect to Ecclesiastical Benefices to be hereafter
mentioned. From these Proposals two Arcicles do Arise:

I. There shall be a Christian, Universal and Perpetual Peace, and a true Amity
between his Sacred Imperial Majesty, and his Successors, the whole Roman
Empire, the Kingdoms and Hereditary Dominions, his Vassals and Subjects, and
all his Allies, on the one part, and his. Sacred Majesty, the most Christian
King, and his Successors, his Kingdom and the Subjects of France, on the other
part. That this Peace shall be maintained and preserved with that Sincerity,
that neither Party shall attempt any thing to the ruin or prejudice of the
other, under what pretense soever; nor directly or indirectly aid or assist any
Person or Persons who shall or may endeavor any thing to the prejudice of
either Party; That neither Party shall receive, protect, or abet the Rebellious
and Refractory Subjects of the other Party; but both shall promote and advance
the Welfare, Honor, and Interest of each other, all Promises, Contracts, and
Alliances made or to be made to the contrary notwithstanding, all which are
nulled and made void by these Presents: Always provided that the Amnesty
granted by this Peace, and contained in the following Articles, shall remain in
full force, and not be diminished in the least by this Article.

2. There shall be a perpetual Amnesty and Oblivion of all Acts of Hostility on
either side, in what place, and after what manner soever committed; so that
neither upon this Account, nor for any other Reason or Pretense whatsoever, the
one shall not raise, or cause to be raised, directly or indirectly, any Enmity
or Disturbance against the other, under Color of Justice or by Matter of Fact:
But on the contrary, All and singular the Injuries and Violences, offered by
Words, Writings, or Deeds, shall be absolutely cancelled, without respect to
either Persons or Things, against whom they may have been committed: so that
all Pretenses of either Party upon this Account shall be buried in an Eternal
Oblivion. Provided always that Satisfaction be made for the Losses and Charges
herein after to be mentioned. The Benefit of which Amnesty all and singular the
Vassals and Subjects of both Parties shall enjoy, so that no Person shall be
prejudiced or molested for having adhered to either Party, but may be restored
fully to all the Estates and Dignities which he was in possession of
immediately before the beginning of the War. Provided always and Excepted,
whatever shall be resolved in the following Articles upon the Account of
Ecclesiastical Benefices, Chattels and Fruits.

Article II.
Forasmuch as the Treaties of Munster and Nimeguen ought to be the Basis and
Foundation of the present Treaty, and just as they are joined to each other by
that of Nimeguen, so that this latter may be said to contain both: The foresaid
Treaty of Nimeguen shall have the same force here, as if inserted word for
word, and executed in all its Points and Articles, unless it be otherwise
expressly provided.

Answer to Article II.
It is very true, if things be duly considered, that the Treaty of Westphalia
and that of Nimeguen, may and ought to be reckoned one and the same: since the
former is so ratified and confirmed by the latter, as if the Instrument of the
Westphalian Treaty, were inserted word for word in the Treaty of Nimiguen,
unless in such cases wherein the former was abrogated by the latter: so that in
effect, by promising to renew the one, it was likewise promised to renew the
other. However, because in reality they were two distinct Treaties of Peace,
made at several Times and in several Places, carried on by different Ministers,
for several particular Reasons, and drawn up in different Forms: It is likewise
requisite, that in settling the Foot of this present Peace, which is the
Subject Matter of this Article, a particular mention should be made of both
Treaties; since there are real Differences in the Second Treaty, from what his
Excellency Monsieur Cailliere agreed to in the Preliminaries, which were
exhibited on the Tenth of February last.

Article III.
Whereupon there shall be an entire Oblivion of all that has passed during the
present War, and all Things shall be remitted on either side, in the same State
wherein they were by the foresaid Treaty.

Article IV.
To this purpose, whereas diverse Re-unions of several Territories situated in
the Empire, have been made by the Chambers of Metz and Bezancon, and the
Sovereign Council of Brisac, since the said Treaty of Nimeguen, of which his
most Christian Majesty has been put into Possession, his said Majesty does
covenant, that they shall be entirely revoked, without regarding the Sentences
which have been passed by the foresaid Chambers and Council, and Things shall
be restored in the same State and Condition wherein they were before the said
Sentences and Reunion, and as they were at the Time of the Treaty of Nimiguen.

Article V.
His most Christian Majesty promises upon Honor to withdraw his Forces from
all the Countries and Places they have been possessed of in the Empire during
the present War.

Answer to Article III, IV, V.
The former part of the Third Article has been already discussed in the Second.
What follows is part of the Restitution to be made by the ensuing Peace. In
consequence whereof all Decrees of Union and Reunion are to be Cancelled and
Abolished, some of which have been printed at Paris, Cum Privilegio, and
consequently by the King's Authority; among the rest Two, whose Titles run
thus, A Decree of the Sovereign Council of Alsace sitting at Brisac, importing
that the King shall be put into Possession of the Sovereignty of the Lower
Alsace, it bears date March 22. 1680. The other is entitled, A Decree of the
Sovereign Council of Alsace, sitting at Brisac, importing that the King shall
be put into Possession of the Sovereignty of the Lower Alsace, and of other
Territories and Seigniories situated in the Upper Alsace; this is dated August
9. 1680. Especially since these Expressions, and others to be met with in the
whole Body of the Decree, concerning the detaining and possessing of other
Territories at that time acknowledged, do sufficiently manifest the state of
things by the then Treaty of Nimeguen, and the time ensuing. This likewise was
evident, and particularly in the Right pretended to Strasburgh, Landau, and
Cronweissemberg, by receding from performance of the Peace of Nimeguen, the
first Article whereof was drawn up in these Terms.

The Emperor shall forthwith cause his Forces and Troops to withdraw from all
the Provinces of the Empire, which do not by an Hereditary Right belong to the
House of Austria, namely from the Circle of Suabia and Franconia, as well as
from the Electoral Circle of the Rhine, and from that of the Upper Rhine, and
from the Towns and Forts situated thereon, From Bon, Strasburgh, Offenberg,
Hockberg, Landau, Cronweissemberg, and in general from all such places, as
neither by the Treaty of Munster, nor by that of Nimeguen belonged to his
Imperial Majesty, so that immediately before the Tenth of August, the said
Forces shall be drawn into Bohemia, and into other of his Patrimonial States.

Therefore it is evident that Bon, Strasburgh, Offenberg, Landau,
Cronweissemberg, and all the other Places of the Empire, which were not looked
upon as belonging by an Hereditary Right to the House of Austria, neither by
the Treaty of Munster, nor that of Nimeguen, were yet considered and absolutely
esteemed to be part of the Empire, and comprehended in its Circles and
Dependencies. From whence it plainly follows, that by the Articles proposed by
the French Ambassadors, all these Places are to be restored and reestablished.
Since the Case stands thus, and these Places are the Chief of what ought to be
restored, the Emperor's Ambassadors, and those of the Electors, Princes, and
other States here present, do reasonably hope that there will be less
difficulty about the other Articles to be agreed upon for the speedy
Re-establishment of a firm and lasting Peace, and therefore they desire that an
immediate Consent may be given to the two following Articles, as the Foundation
and General Rule of the present Peace.

1. The Treaty of Westphalia, together with that of Nimeguen, shall be the
Basis and Foundation of the present Peace, which shall be executed with respect
both to Church and State, immediately after the Ratifications shall be
exchanged; and for ever after maintained in its full force, unless in such
things as shall be otherwise provided for by the present Treaty. Therefore
whatever after the said Peace of Munster, and the Treaty of its Execution made
at Nuremberg, has been to this present in the Possession of his most Christian
Majesty, under pretense of Right, or by open Force, or in any other manner
whatever, and which was before possessed by the Emperor, or by the Empire and
the States depending thereon, including the Three Nobless, with their Immediate
Dependants and Vassals, such Cities, Towns, Buroughs, Citadels, Castles,
Forts, Villages, Houses, Territories, Mountains, Hills, Forests, Meadows,
Mines, Quarries, Lakes, Rivers, Islands, Bridges, Rivulets, Jurisdictions, and
Rights, proper and in Feesimple, tilled and untilled, shall be faithfully
restored to their Ancient Proprietors, without demolishing the Fortifications,
or any Public or Private Houses, without rendering them in a worse state than
they are at present, or exacting any thing for the Charges they have been at
upon them, without exacting any Contributions by the Army, or in their behalf:
And this Restitution shall be made without any delay, within Ten days at
farthest after the Ratifications be exchanged, or sooner if possible, together
with all the Artillery, Ammunitions and Provisions, as well such as were in the
Places when taken, and since quitted and demolished by the Garrisons that were
in them, and such as are in any other Places whatever, together with all Papers
and Writings, where and however seized. That whatever Alterations or
Innovations have been made, by his most Christian Majesty, after the said
Peace, and the Treaty of Execution made at Nuremberg in Civil or Ecclesiastical
Affairs, under the Name and Pretense of Suntgau, Landgrave of Alsace,
Provincial Prefecture of Haguenau, and the Feudal Union of Dependencies,
Appendencies, Submissions, Surrenders, Engagements, all manner of Grants,
whether Absolute or Limited, or upon any other Cause or Reason whatever, shall
be cancelled, and re-settled upon its first footing; and after it has been thus
re-settled, shall remain in the perpetual possession of his Imperial Majesty,
as his Property or Fief. Laws General or Special, known or unknown, made
publicly or privately by what Person whatsoever, all Edicts, Privileges,
Dispensations, Concessions, Donations, Investitures, Declarations, Mandats,
Prohibitions, Registers, Incorporations, Unions, Re-unions, Confiscations,
Arrests, Decisions, Decrees, Sentences, Homages, Contracts, Transactions,
though ratified by the Oaths and other Pretensions of his most Christian
Majesty, the Royal Family and Kingdom of France, or of his Feudatories and
Subjects, or the Oppositions of any Courts, Councils, Chambers, or States,
either National or Provincial, and all other Pretenses whatsoever past,
present, or to come, to the contrary notwithstanding: the which Laws, etc. are
cancelled and abolished, as far as they respect the present Case;
notwithstanding likewise all that may be ever surmis'd, alleged or imagined to
the contrary, and notwithstanding all other Reasons whatever, which may seem to
deserve a more special and particular mention, and to intimate that this
present Cancelling and Annulling is void and of no effect.

2. For the farther illustrating the foregoing Article; and to cut off all
occasion of future Debates, without mentioning the Reference to be made to
Commissioners, Umpires, and their Decisions; it is farther agreed, That his
most Christian Majesty, and the Kingdom of France shall rest satisfied with
what has been granted to them by the Peace of Munster in Westphalia, namely,
with the Jurisdictions of the three ancient Bishoprics of Metz, Toul and
Verdun, as far as they had regard to them at the time of the said Peace; and
likewise with the Rights and Privileges of Suntgau, the Landgravate of Alsace,
and of the Provincial Government, in the same manner as they were formerly
possessed by the most Serene House of Austria, and which are not to be altered
upon the Account of any Compensation to be made for Damages done, or for the
sake of making the Peace more firm and lasting; and that they shall not
pretend, demand, or exact from any State, Vassal or Subject of the Empire, any
Oath, Obligation, or Dependence, except within the Jurisdictions of the said
three Bishoprics, as far as they concerned them at the time of the said Peace,
or except within the said Rights possessed by the House of Austria, and which
are not at present altered, under any Pretense, Reason, or Matter of Fact or
Right whatever: The state of the Case, as to the Surrendering up of the Rights
of the House of Austria, being the same now as formerly, except only the Manner
of Possession; forasmuch as what the most Serene House of Austria has received
in Fief from the Empire, and held under its Jurisdiction, shall be held and
possessed with the Right of Sovereignty, by the Kingdom of France, and after
the same manner as what belongs to the said three Bishoprics within their
Jurisdictions, is therein included and comprehended. And by Consequence all
those in general which are reckoned, and are of Right the States, Vassals, and
Subjects of the Empire, whether such as are more particularly mentioned in the
Treaty of the Peace of Munster, or in the Treaty of Execution made at
Nuremberg, or in the Treaty of Nimeguen, all which are supposed to be repeated
here, or such as were therein omitted, of what degree or place soever they be,
shall from henceforward be ever exempted free from all Obligation, Tie, or
Trouble that may thence ensue, toward his most Christian Majesty and the
Kingdom of France.

Article VI.
Though the City of Strasburgh was put into the Hands of his most Christian
Majesty, by a particular and voluntary Agreement, and has been since possessed
and fortified by the Arms of his said Majesty, even after the Treaty of
Nimeguen, which his Majesty is willing to observe in all its Particulars, he
consents to withdraw his Forces out of the said City, on Condition the
Fortifications made by his Orders, as well about the said City as the Citadel,
be first demolished, the Fort of Kell, and other Forts of the Isles of the
Rhine, and of the said City of Strasburgh, remaining for its Fortification, in
the same Condition it was in before it was possessed by his Majesty, and the
City restored to all its Rights and Privileges of an Imperial City.

And because the demolishing the said Fortifications requires the Space of
about Eight or Ten Months, his Majesty Promises to do it with all possible
Diligence, and likewise Consents that the Emperor may have a Commissary at
Strasbourgh to be an Eyewitness till the said Demolishment be entirely
finished.

His Majesty shall keep in the City, Citadel and Fort of Strasbourgh, a
sufficient Garrison to carry on the Work.

To this Part of the Sixth Article is annexed a Collateral Corolorary, which is
as follows:
Whereas the City of Strasbourgh was put into the Hands of his most Christian
Majesty in the Year 1681. and continued in his Possession till the Expiration
of the Truce, in 1684. The Emperor and his most Christian Majesty, for the
mutual Benefit of the Frontiers of their States, are agreed with respect to
that Place, as follows: That the Emperor for himself, his Successors, and for
the Empire, shall renounce all Rights of Sovereignty over the City of
Strasbourgh, shall for ever grant for himself, his Successors, and for the
Empire, to the King and Crown of France the said City of Strasburgh, with all
its Appurtenances and Dependencies, to be enjoyed by the King and the Crown,
with all Right of Property and Sovereignty, so as never to be molested therein
for any Cause, or upon any Occasion whatever.

In Exchange, his Most Christian Majesty shall Surrender to his Imperial
Majesty, the City and Castle of Friburgh, in the State they are in at present,
together with the Villages of Heu, Metshausen, and Kirkzand, with all, and such
Rights of Sovereignty and Property as were surrendered to him by his Most
Christian Majesty, by the Fifth Article of the Treaty of Nimeguen.

Moreover, his Majesty is willing to deliver up to the Emperor the City of
Brisac, seated on the other side the Rhine, in the same Condition wherein it is
at present; with all its Dependencies, except some Villages in Brisgau, which
are on this side the Rhine. And that the Rhine may be the constant Barrier
between this Place and his Majesty's Territories, it is agreed, That the new
City of Brisac, and the Fort in the Island, as also the Bridge, shall be
utterly demolished, never to be raised or rebuilt again; But that the Fort
called the Mortar, seated on this side the Rhine, shall remain in the
Possession of his most Christian Majesty.

His Majesty also Promises, to raze the Fortifications that have been made at
Hunninghen, beyond the Rhine, as also the Horn-Work of the Island, and to
demolish the Bridge of that Place which is upon the Rhine.

He likewise agrees to restore to the Emperor and Empire the Fort of Kell,
seated at the End of Strasburgh-Bridge, and to raze those of the City, the
Islands, and the Rhine, reserving only to himself the City and Citadel of
Strasbourgh, and the Redoubt on this side the Rhine. He will also cause to be
demolished the Horn-work of the Marquisate, and Fort Lewis upon the Rhine, and
all the Works on the other side that River; together with part of that Bridge
which has Communication with the Fort of that Horn-work.

He also engages to restore to the Emperor the City of Philipsbourgh, which has
been possessed by his Forces during this War: But to the end that the Frontiers
of France and the Empire may be absolutely bounded by the Rhine, the Bridge of
Philipsburgh, and the Fort at the End of the said Bridge, on this side the
Rhine, shall be demolished.

Whereas the Treaty of Nimeguen has regulated the Conditions, upon which the
King is to restore Lorrain to the deceased Duke of that Name: And whereas the
Duke his Son, supported by the Recommendation of the Emperor, has desired his
Majesty to grant him new and more favorable Conditions; his most Christian
Majesty, in Consideration of the Emperor's Recommendation, and inclined thereto
by the Good Will and Affection which he bears to the Duke of Lorain, is willing
to relinquish the Conditions which were granted him by the Treaty of Nimeguen,
and to re-enstate the Duke of Lorain in possession of his Territories, such as
his Uncle Duke Charles possessed in the year 1670. in manner following. To this
effect his Majesty will restore to him the Old and New Town of Nancy, upon
Condition that the Fortifications of the New Town shall be entirely demolished,
and never raised again for the future; that the Bastions and Curtains of the
City shall remain untouched, but the Outworks and Half-moons shall be razed:
that the Gates of the New Town shall stand, and that the Duke of Lorrain shall
be permitted to enclose the said New Town with a dry Wall, not Terrass'd, and
without a Flank: that the Roads which had been granted by the said Treaty, and
which were to remain in the Sovereignty of his most Christian Majesty, to
facilitate the Passage of his Troops from S. Dizier to Nancy, from Nancy to
Alsace, from Nancy to Petzon, and from Nancy to Metz, shall be restored to the
Sovereignty and Property of the Duke of Lorrain. His Majesty desisting from all
the Rights which had been granted him upon the Point by the Treaty of Nimeguen,
upon Condition however that the Duke shall grant his Majesty's Troops a passage
through his States as often as shall be required, paying such Duty as shall be
agreed upon between his Majesty's and the Duke of Lorrain's Commissioners. His
Majesty also promising to withdraw his Garrisons out of Bisch and Hambourgh,
after having demolished the Fortifications, which are never to be raised again.
His Majesty reserving to himself only Saar Lewis, which he caused to be
fortified, in order to possess it hereafter as his Sovereignty, with the
Compass of a half League round about, as shall be regulated by Commissaries
appointed to this Effect by the King and the Duke of Lorrain.

His Majesty also by this present Treaty confirms the Sixteenth Article of the
Treaty of Nimeguen, touching the Recompense which is to be given to the said
Duke of Lorain for the City and Provostship of Longui, as if the said Article
were here set down word for word; it is stipulated, that it shall have its full
force of Execution.

The 20, 21, and 22th Articles touching the Provisions made for the Benefices,
Sentences, and Decrees given by the King's Officers and Judges, and the
Restitution of the Archives and Charters of the Chambers of Accounts of Nancy
and Bar, may be re-settled, as they are in the Treaty of Nimeguen.

Answer to Article VI.
Every Body knows what was the Opinion of the Republic of Strasburgh, when it
was put into the hands of his most Christian Majesty after the Peace of
Nimeguen, and also what was the Opinion of all the Inhabitants and Bishops of
the said City, of the Count of Hanault, of the Baron of Fleckensteim, and of
the Immediate Nobless of the Lower Alsace, named in the Treaty of Rendition,
September. 20. 1681. and of all the other Subjects of the Empire, both mediate
and immediate. And it is very evident by the preceding Article, what upon the
whole ought to be resolved, and what for the future ought to be had conformable
to the Treaties of Munster and Nimeguen, which are supposed in all these
Respects to be here repeated; and more particularly with regard to the full and
entire Restitution of the City of Strasburgh, with all its Dependencies and
Appurtenances, situated on both sides the Rhine, without demolishing or
prejudicing the Edifices or Fortifications thereof, together with its Arsenal,
which has been transferred elsewhere; and lastly, of all the Rights which
belonged thereto, before it was taken by France, and especially of its
immediate Dependence on the Roman Empire, which things are to be expressly set
down in the Treaty of Peace; rejecting all manner of Equivalent that shall be
offered, always excepting a more particular Designation, as far as shall be
judged necessary, and which shall at any time be produced. As for the Affairs
of Lorrain, and others contained in this Article, they are referred to the
ensuing Articles.

Article VII.
And because his most Christian Majesty was constrained to seize upon the City
of Treves, his said Majesty likewise promises, after the Ratification of the
present Treaty, to restore it to Monsieur the Elector of Treves.

Answer to Article VII.
According to what has been already determined, France is not only obliged to
restore to his Excellency the Elector of Treves, the City of Treves, but also a
full and Entire Restitution ought to be made to him of all that belongs to him,
by virtue of the Archbishopric of Treves, Bishopric of Spires, Abbey of Prum,
and Provostship of Weisemberg; wherefore the following Article is to be
inserted in the Treaty of Peace, viz.

The Elector of Treves shall be restored to all the Places, Fiefs, Revenues,
and Rights, both Ecclesiastical and Secular, which belong to him by Virtue of
the Archbishopric of Treves, Bishopric of Spires, Abbey of Prum, and
Provostship of Weisemberg, and their Dependencies, which either he, or his
Predecessors have enjoyed and possessed after the Execution of the Peace of
Munster, whether particular mention has been thereof made or omitted, with all
the Acts and Decrees, to be by him henceforward possessed and enjoyed without
any Molestation or Trouble to be given him by France on this Account; with
Satisfaction for the Losses he has sustained, of which a Separate Article shall
be made, and have the same force as the present Treaty.

Article VIII.
Whereas his Majesty thought it requisite to fortify Montroyal, and the Castle
of Traarback, he is pleased to oblige himself to demolish Montroyal, and the
New Fortifications of Traarback, leaving the Castle in the same Condition as it
was before. Montroyal also being so razed, and never to be fortified again, and
the said Castle of Traarback being to be restored to the Proprietors to whom
they did belong, before they were possessed by the King's Forces; his Majesty
will do the same with respect to the Forts of Kirn and Ebernberg.

Answer to Article VIII.
An entire Restitution of all that belongs to the Empire, and consequently of
all the Places mentioned in this Article, follows from what has been said upon
the Third and ensuing Articles; leaving it, as Justice requires, to the Liberty
of the Emperor and Empire, to dispose of what is their own, as they shall think
fit, in what Place soever it lies.

Article IX.
Whereas by the Fourth Article of the Treaty of Nimeguen the most Christian
King had restored to the Emperor Philipsburgh, with all and such Rights which
his Majesty had to the said Place, his most Christian Majesty, to set things on
the same foot with the said Treaty of Nimeguen, does promise to restore the
said City, with all its Fortifications, in the same Condition as now it is,
only destroying the Bridge which his Majesty had caused there to be built.

Answer to Article IX.
There is so little need to explain and prove the Greatness of the Damages,
which all the Members of the Empire, and especially the Emperor have suffered
by the War, the necessity of Redressing them, and the small Demands that have
been made on that Account, that they need not fear to refer these things to the
Testimony and Determination of France it self; provided it would be induced to
consider, what is so obvious to all the World, not with that Exactness and
Perspicuity as is requisite, but only with half an Eye. Therefore, whereas
after the entire Restitution of Friburgh, founded on the third and ensuing
Articles, with the three Villages which depend thereon, and which, contrary to
the Intention of the Peace of Nimeguen, and the Execution thereof, were
possessed by France under the Notion of Appurtenances and Dependencies, except
the Right of Diocesan, and other Rights and Revenues reserved to the Bishopric
of Constance by the Fifth and Tenth Articles of the Treaty of Nimeguen, they
may and do accept as part of that Satisfaction due to his Imperial Majesty,
that which is offered afresh, and has formerly been possessed by the Emperor
and the most Serene House of Austria, viz. Brisac and Philipsburgh, without any
prejudice to the Bishopric of Spires. But upon the account of the manifest
Justice of the thing in debate, and to make the ensuing Peace the more lasting,
this Restitution shall be full and entire, with all the Fortifications which
belong thereto on both sides the Rhine, and the Bridge, with all the
Ammunitions and Provisions, which are therein at present: and Justice likewise
requires that a more particular regard should be had to what is contained in
the Tenth Article of the Demands of the Imperial Ambassadors: excepting always
a more particular Account of the Damages and Expenses which the States of the
Empire have been at; leaving the Decision thereof (for the sake of Equity, and
of a good and solid Peace) to the known Affections and Endeavors of his
Excellency the Mediator.

Article X.
The same Treaty of Nimeguen having regulated all the Conditions upon which his
most Christian Majesty obliged himself to re-invest Monsieur the Duke of Lorain
in his Territories, his Majesty being willing that the said Treaty should have
its full force, does yield that 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, and
22th Articles of the said Treaty of Nimeguen, shall have the same Force in the
present Treaty, as if they were inserted here word for word therein.

Article XI.
His most Christian Majesty having caused Saar Lewis to be fortified, shall
keep that place in the same Condition as it is, with half a League of Country
round about it, as shall be regulated by Commissioners appointed by his Majesty
and Mons. the Duke of Lorrain; and the said Duke shall surrender to his Majesty
the said Place, and half a League round, to be enjoyed for the future by his
Majesty, with all Right of Sovereignty and Propriety: in exchange, his said
Majesty shall recompense the said Duke in such a manner as shall be to his
Content and Satisfaction; and that which shall be given him in Exchange, and
which shall be likewise regulated by the said Commissioners, shall for the
future be possessed by the said Duke, with all the Rights of Sovereignty and
Property.

Answer to Article X. and XI.
As to what concerns the Affairs of Lorain, as comprehended under the
protection of the Empire, and as being a Fief thereof upon the Account of
several parts of it, in the first place what has been said above concerning the
Vassals and Clients of the Empire, and particularly with respect to the Unions
and Re-unions, ought to be applied here. In the next place, such things as are
the Proprieties of other States of the Empire, ought not to be mixed and
confounded with the Affairs of Lorrain. Much less by virtue of restoring
Lorrain, which by all manner of Equity becomes due, ought they to detain
Strasburgh, which has nothing to do with Lorrain, or any other Places, which
are alike to be restored to the Empire, or to the States dependent thereon. In
short, it is reasonable to have regard to what was formerly produced by the
Plenipotentiary of Lorain upon this Subject, as if it were here inserted word
for word.

Article XII.
His said Majesty shall take out of all the Places which he promises to
demolish, or restore to the Emperor, all the Provision and Ammunition, together
with all the Artillery, which shall be there at the time of Demolishing or
Surrender.

Answer to Article XII.
Instead of this Article is repeated what had been expressed in the Third, and
which is founded on so much the clearer and more indubitable Title, as that the
Artillery, the Ammunitions and Provisions which are at present in the places
which are to be surrendered, or were there, when they were taken, or carried
thither from other places of the Empire which were ruined or deserted; or which
were raised in the Countries belonging to the Empire, or gained by the Money or
Industry of its Subjects, together with the Fortifications of such Places, as
were raised, augmented or altered after the same manner, do belong of Right to
the Empire without all dispute. Not to say, that they may be looked upon as a
small Recompense of the Losses which it has suffered.

Article XIII.
The Elector Palatine shall be resettled in the Possession of the Palatinate,
as his Predecessors have enjoyed it since the Peace of Westphalia: and the
Duchess of Orleans her Majesty's Sister-in-Law, shall be put into possession
of all the Rights, Territories, and Effects, which belonged to her as Heiress
of the late Electors Palatine her Father and Brother, according to the Laws and
Constitutions of the Empire.

Answer to Article XIII.
Since the Daughters of the Palatinate (by the Golden Bulls of Charles IV. and
Sigismund; by the Investitures of Emperors and others; by the common Feudal
Rights; by the Wills of Predecessors; by the Agreements passed and sworn to
between the Palatinate Families of the Branch of Bavaria, of the Electorate, of
Simmeren, of Newburgh, and of Deux Ponts, sworn to and ratified particularly by
the Treaty of Westphalia; by the mutual Substitutions of the Males of the
Palatinate; by the Agreements concluded between the Palatinate, and the House
of Baden; by the Advice and Mediation of the Counts of Sponheim, concerning the
mutual Succession between the Male-Heirs of the County of Sponheim; by the
Renunciations of the Daughters of the Palatinate, to the making of which they
were always obliged, and in Justice are supposed to have made, without any
reserve of their Right to the Jewels or Money, unless in Case the Family of the
Palatinate be extinct; and lastly by a perpetual Custom of force in that Family
for several Ages together, and founded on a great many Examples both Ancient
and Modern) were excluded (upon Condition of a fixed Dowry, which the Father
cannot augment) from all Succession to Movables or Immoveables: and since
likewise the most Serene Duchess of Orleans, by and with the Consent of the
Duke her Husband, and of the most Christian King, has solemnly made these
Renunciations three or four times, according to the Custom of the House
Palatine; and since the Elector Philip William, for peace and quietness sake
has already granted her, beside her Dowry, more than ever has been, or could in
justice be granted to any Daughter of the House Palatine; she can have no Right
or Title to the Revenues or Subjects possessed by the Electors her Father and
Brother, and which are devolved to the present Elector Palatine. No body that
knows any thing of the Affairs of the Palatinate or of Germany, or who is
minded to cast but the least Eye on the Genealogical Tables of the Palatinate
House, can question any of these things. However, for the avoiding all manner
of Suspicion, and that the Rights of the most Serene Duchess may not in the
least be diminished, nor those of the House Palatine, in which every Branch
thereof is concerned, be inhanc'd, it is absolutely necessary to cancel and
abolish all manner of Pretensions that may be advanced against this House, of
what Nature soever they be, and to resettle the said House Palatine, according
to the Articles of the Peace of Westphalia, as contained in the ensuing
Article. Besides, the Elector Palatine is not so far wedded to his own private
Interest, to which he has always preferred that of the Public, that though he
has fuffer'd infinite Losses, yet he is willing for the Public Good, and for
the particular Respect which he bears to his most Christian Majesty to wave his
Pretensions, and to agree upon moderate Terms, as to what concerns the Quantum.

The Article relating to the Palatinate.
The most Christian King shall restore to the whole House Palatine all the
States which he is possessed of belonging to that House, either separately or
conjunctly with others, more particularly the Town and Prefecture of
Germersheim, with the Provostships and Sub-Prefectures therein comprehended,
with all the Fortresses, Towns, Buroughs, Villages, Hamlets, Fiefs and Rights,
in such manner as they were possessed by the said House, and restored thereto
by the Peace of Westphalia, with all the Writings and Precepts taken from the
Archives, Chancellor's Court, Feudal Court, Chamber of Accounts, Prefectures,
or any other Offices belonging to the Palatinate, no Place, Matter, Right, or
Decree excepted, annulling all manner of Pretensions which may be made by
France, or by the Duchess of Orleans and her Heirs. Satisfaction shall be
likewise made to the said Elector, for the Revenues withheld or taken away, and
for all the Losses he has sustained, about which a separate Agreement shall be
made.

Article XIV.
The Treaty concluded between his most Christian Majesty, and the Duke Savoy,
in the year 1696. shall be comprehended in this Treaty of Peace, as if it were
inserted herein word for word.

Answer to Article XIV.
His Imperial Majesty, for the Kindness and Affection which he bears to the
most Serene House of Savoy, has already promised, that he will confirm by this
Peace, and comprehends therein, as well whatsoever is contained in the Treaty
of Munster and Nimeguen in favor of that Family, as what has been concluded in
the Treaty last made between the most Christian King and the Duke of Savoy, and
the Restitution of Pignerol, and its Dependencies, the Ancient Right of the
Empire being still established and confirmed.

Article XV.
The Cardinal of Furstemberg shall be re-settled in all his Estates, Rights,
Privileges, Dignities and Prerogatives of a Prince and Member of the Empire,
as well by virtue of his Bishopric of Strasburgh, as by virtue of his Abbey
and Principality of Stavelo: and there shall be a general Oblivion of all
things that may have been decreed against his Person and Servants, and neither
he nor his Heirs, shall directly or indirectly be called to an account for the
Succession of the late Elector of Cologn, nor upon any other pretense
whatsoever.

Article XVI.
The Canons and Prebendaries of the Chapter of Cologn, who have been deprived
of their Prebends or Dignities, for adhering to the said Cardinal of
Furstemberg, shall likewise have the Benefit of the aforesaid Indemnity: and be
restored to the Possession of their Benefices, Dignities and Estates, without
any Molestation whatsoever.

Answer to Article XV. and XVI.
It has been already often declared, that as all the States of the Empire, so
particularly the Bishop and Bishopric of Strasburgh, with the Town of the same
name, and others mentioned in the 87th Section of the Treaty of Munster, viz.
the Bishop of Basil, the Abbots of Murbach and Luders, the Abbess of Andlaw,
the Monastery in the Vale of S. Gregory, of the Order of S. Benedict, the
Princes Palatinate, Counts and Barons of Hanault, Fleckensteim, Obersteim, and
the Nobless of all the Lower Alsace, together with the Ten Imperial Cities, as
has been mentioned in the third and following Articles, shall be restored to
all the Places, Rights, Liberty, and Possession of immediate Dependence on the
Empire, which they formerly enjoyed, annulling all Acts made to the contrary,
except the Imperial Decree of December 9. 1689. granted to the Town of Zellen
am Hammersbach upon the account of the Valley of Hammersbach, the which Decree
shall remain in its full force. The same is to be understood with respect to
the Abbey of Stavelo. Bus as to the Hereditary Right of the Elector Maximilian
Henry which is seized upon, the Opinion of those who are interested therein is
to be attended, and afterward immediately declared. These Matters being
adjusted, if hereafter due respect be paid to the Laws of the Empire, as well
Cardinal Furstemberg and his Domestics, as the Canons and other Members of the
Chapter of Cologn, who have espoused his Interest, shall have the benefit of
the foresaid Amnesty, without prejudice however to what shall be explained
concerning Ecclesiastical Benefices, in the ensuing Paragraph, which is
agreeable to the 28th and 29th Articles of the Project of Peace delivered in by
the French, and which may be placed after the Article of Restitution, at the
beginning of the Article of Amnesty drawn up in these Terms.

If notwithstanding the said Ecclesiastical and Catholic Benefices, mediate or
immediate, have been collated on fit and capable Persons, by either Party, in
the Places or Dominions, which were then subject to them, according to the Rule
of their Primitive Institution, and conformably to the lawful Statutes, general
or particular, made by their Subjects, the said Benefices shall remain in the
Possession of the new Incumbents, as well as those Ecclesiastical and Catholic
Benefices, which have been collated after the same manner before the present
War, in the places which are to be restored by the present Treaty; so that they
may and shall not be troubled or molested by any Person whatsoever in the
possession and lawful administration of the same, nor in the receiving the
Profits thereof: nor shall they upon this account, nor for any other cause past
or present, be summoned or cited, or any ways disturbed or molested; provided
always that they discharge the Offices incumbent upon them on the account of
the said Benefices.

Article XVII.
And whereas the Peace of Nimeguen is to be the Basis of this present Treaty,
and whereas his most Christian Majesty is willing to observe the said Treaty in
its full force with respect to his Catholic Majesty: His Majesty therefore
consents to settle all things in the same state wherein they were settled by
the said Treaty, renouncing the Advantages which his Arms have acquired during
this War. To this effect his Majesty agrees to restore to his Catholic Majesty
the Town of Mons as it now is, with all its Dependencies, such as they were
before it was conquered by his Majesty: and the Town of Charleroy in the state
wherein it now is, with all its Dependencies; as likewise the Town of Courtray
upon the same Conditions. And for the greater proof of the Sincerity of his
Majesty's Intentions for a Peace, and the entire Re-establishment of the Treaty
of Nimeguen, his said Majesty is willing to restore to the King of Spain the
Town of Aeth, though taken by his Forces since the opening of the Conferences for
the Peace.

Article XVIII.
His Majesty likewise promises to restore to Spain the Towns of Roses, Gironne
and Belver in Catalonia, in the same state they were in when taken by his
Majesty's Forces.

Article XIX.
The most Christian King will likewise restore to his Catholic Majesty the
Town of Luxemburgh in the Condition it now is, with the Duchy of that name,
and the County of Chiny.

Article XIX.
Although the Treaty of Nimeguen is to be the Basis and Foundation of this, and
accordingly the Town and Duchy of Luxemburgh, and the County of Chiny ought to
be restored by virtue of the said Treaty, to the Catholic King, yet by common
consent it has been agreed to recede from the same, by the present Article:
therefore by the present Treaty his Catholic Majesty yields and makes over to
his most Christian Majesty the Town and Duchy of Luxemburgh, the County of
Chiny, and in general all that has ever been included in the said Duchy and
Province of Luxemburgh, to be enjoyed by his Majesty with all Right of
Sovereignty: And in exchange of the said Town and Duchy of Luxemburgh, the
most Christian King yields and makes over to his Catholic Majesty the Towns
of.................................... with the same Rights of Sovereignty
which he acquired by the Treaty of Nimeguen; of which his Catholic Majesty
shall enjoy, etc.

Article XX.
Whereas since the Treaty of Peace concluded at Nimeguen, several Reunions of
Villages, Towns, etc. situated in the Dominions of the King of Spain, have been
made by Order of the most Christian King; it is hereby agreed, that all such
Re-unions made since the said Treaty of Nimeguen, shall be absolutely repealed
and made void; and that the said Villages, etc. shall be restored to to his
Catholic Majesty to enjoy the same, as he did before the said Re-unions.

Article XXI.
But whereas by the Fifteenth Article of the Treaty of Nimeguen, it was agreed
to appoint Commissioners on both sides, to settle the Limits of the States and
Dominions, which were to remain to his most Christian Majesty, and to the King
of Spain in the Netherlands, as also to agree about all other Difficulties that
might arise upon account of the Villages situated in these Countries, which
were then yielded to, or formerly enjoyed by the most Christian King; and
whereas Commissioners being accordingly appointed on both sides to put the said
Articles in Execution, the Conferences which they had begun were interrupted by
the Troubles and Wars that have since happened: it is now expressly agreed, that
in Execution of the Fourteenth, Fifteenth and Sixteenth Articles of the Treaty
of Nimeguen, Commissioners shall be appointed on both sides, two Months after
the Publication of the present Treaty, to regulate all the Matters contained in
the said Articles.

Article XXII.
But in Case the said Commissioners cannot agree about fixing the said Limits
and other Points, their said most Christian and Catholic Majesty's do hereby
agree to refer it to the Determination and Arbitration of the States General of
the United Provinces.

Answer to Article XVII. and the Five following.
It Is reasonable to leave the Discussing of what relates to the Affairs of his
Catholic Majesty to their Excellencies the Ambassadors of Spain. However, they
particularly insist upon the promised Restitution of the Town and Duchy of
Luxemberg, and the County of Chiny; and very strenuously oppose all manner of
Treaty, and so much as the bare mention of Surrendering the said States, always
reserving the Right of his Imperial Majesty the Empire, and the States
dependent thereon.

Article XXIII.
Whereas the Town and Castle of Dinant have been in the Possession of the
Forces of his most Christian Majesty, both before and during the present War,
his Majesty is willing to restore them to the Bishop and Prince of Liege, upon
Condition that the new Fortifications made by his. Orders be razed; and the
said Town and Castle shall be restored to the said Bishop of Liege in the same
state wherein they were, before they were taken by his Majesty's Forces.

Answer to Article XXIII.
Whereas the Town and Castle of Dinant are comprehended in the Dependencies of
the Empire, the Restitution thereof ought to be wholly made according to the
Third and Fourth Articles beforementioned, to which Articles it ought to be
referred. The Restitution likewise of the Duchy of Bullogn ought to be added
thereto, and to execute the other Matters which the moct Serene Elector of
Cologn, or the Bishop of Liege has expressed in the following Article.

The Prince and Church of Liege shall be restored to their most ancient
Possession and Propriety continued to them for near Six Centuries together, and
confirmed by the Peace of Cambray in the years 1529, and 1559, of the Castle,
Town, and Duchy of Bullogn, with all their Appurtenances and Dependencies: and
the most Christian King shall restore the said Castle, Town, and Duchy to the
Prince and Church of Liege, within (...) days after the Ratification of this
present Treaty, in the same Condition wherein they are at present, with all the
Decrees and Precepts, Artillery and Ammunition, without demolishing the Walls,
Houses, or Fortifications, and without pretending to any Restitution to be made
for any Charges they have been at upon any account whatsoever. And also the
Article inserted in the Treaty of Nimiguen, without the Consent and Approbation
of the said Prince and Chapter of Liege, shall be looked upon as not inserted,
and shall be of no force or virtue for the future to diminish the Right,
Property or Possession of the said Prince and Church of Liege, with respect to
the said Castle, Town and Duchy. In like manner the Castle and Town of Dinant,
with all its Rights, Appurtenances and Dependencies, shall be faithfully
restored to the said Prince and Church of Liege within (...) days after the
Ratification of the present Treaty, without demolishing any Houses,
Fortifications or Walls, and without exacting any thing for Charges,
Reparations, or any Expenses whatsoever, with all the Writings, Decrees,
Artillery and Ammunition which were therein when taken by the French: nor shall
his most Christian Majesty have or pretend any Right or Claim to the said
Castle, Town, and its Dependencies upon any account or reason whatsoever, but
the whole shall be fully and entirely remitted to the Bishopric of Liege. In
like manner the said Prince and Church of Liege shall remain in the Possession
of all Towns, Lordships, Castles, Villages, Places, Territories, Dependencies,
Rights, Pretensions, Jurisdictions, Profits and Revenues, and the whole shall
be restored in the same Condition, as the said Church formerly possessed it,
within (...) days after the Ratification of the present Treaty. He shall
restore to them expressly by name the Places specified in a List or Separate
Article; and in general all others, which are contained under the Name and
Title of Places, Territories, Jurisdictions, Proprieties, Possessions, Rights,
Profits and Revenues, and which have been possessed by the most Christian King,
by force of Arms, or by virtue of the Re-unions of the Chamber of Metz, or
otherwise in what nature soever. Moreover the said King shall take care to
indemnifie the Prince, Chapter, and his other Private Subjects, for their Goods
confiscated within the Territories of Liege, and shall not exact the Remainder
of the Contributions of the present War.

Article XXIV.
All the Provisions, Ammunitions, and Artillery that shall be found in the
Places which are to be restored to the King of Spain, or demolished, shall be
taken away by his most Christian Majesty.

Article XXV.
It is also agreed that the Collection of all Duties, which the said most
Christian King is in possession of, in all those Dominions which he restores to
the Catholic King by virtue of this Treaty, shall be continued to him, till
the very day, whereon these Countries are depending, shall be actually
restored; and the Arrears which shall be due at the time of the said
Restitution, shall be paid bona fide to the Farmers of the said Duties. It is
likewise agreed, that the Proprietors of the Forests that have been confiscated
in the Dependencies of the Places to be restored to his Catholic Majesty,
shall be restored to the Possession of the same, and of all the Timber that
shall be found upon the Spot. It being to be understood, that after signing of
this present Treaty, it shall not be lawful on either side to destroy the said
Forests, or to Fell any Trees.

Article XXVI.
All Papers, Letters, and Precepts concerning the Countries, Lands and
Lordships, which are to be surrendered and restored by the present Treaty, shall
be faithfully restored on both sides, within three Months after the Exchanging
of this present Treaty, in what Places soever those Papers and Precepts may be
found.

Answer to Article XXVI.
Besides what is contained already in any other Articles, care shall be taken
with respect to Germany in general, that France immediately after the
Ratification of the Peace, shall restore the Writings and Decrees, relating to
the places which ought to be restored to the Emperor and Empire, or which do
otherwise belong to his Imperial Majesty, or to the States of the Empire; and
particularly such as are detained at Friburgh, or have been removed thence, as
well as from the Chamber and Town of Spires, the County of Leininghen, or other
places hereafter to be specified; without prejudice to the other Things, which
shall or may be proposed hereafter with respect to the Chamber of Spires.

Article XXVII.
All the Subjects on both sides, both Ecclesiastical and Secular, shall be
restored, as well to the Possession of the Honors, Dignities, or Benefices,
which they enjoyed before, and of which they were dispossessed by the present
War, as of their Real and Personal Estates, that have been seized and possessed
upon account of this War; as also to their Rights, Actions and Successions,
that have fallen to them since the beginning of the said War, without exacting or
pretending to demand the Fruits and Revenues arising from the said Estates, to
the time of the publication of the present Treaty.

Article XXVIII, and XXIX.
Those two Articles, which are the 24 th and 25 th of the Treaty of Nimiguen,
being common to all Treaties, relate only to such Benefices as have been
collated to any Person during the present War; and therefore those on whom such
Benefices have been conferred since this War, shall be confirmed in the
Possession of the same.

Article XXX.
The Catholic King shall restore to the Duke of Parma the Fort and Island of
Ponza, which he has taken from the said Prince during this present War.

Article XXXI.
And whereas by the present Treaty, a good, firm and inviolable Peace is
established between his most Christian Majesty, and the Catholic King, and the
Lords States General of the United Netherlands, both by Sea and Land, through
all their Kingdoms, Countries, Territories, Provinces and Dominions, and that
all Acts of Hostility are to cease for the future, it is stipulated by the
present Treaty, that all Prizes that shall be made on either side in the
Baltic Sea, or the Northern Ocean, from Newfoundland to the Channel, from and
after the space of four Weeks after the Publication of this Peace; or from the
Channel to the Cape of S. Vincent six Weeks after the same; from the said Cape
into the Mediterranean and to the Line, ten Weeks after the same; and beyond
the Line, in all parts of the World, eight Months after the Publication of the
said Peace, the said Prizes, taken after the prefixed Times, shall be allowed
void, and returned to the true Owners on either side, with full Satisfaction
for the Damages and Losses sustained thereby.

Article XXXII.
If any Places, Countries, or Colonies have been taken by the Arms of the most
Christian King, upon the Coasts of Africa, or in the East or West Indies: or if
the States General have taken any Places, Countries, or Colonies belonging to
his most Christian Majesty, all such Conquests shall be restored on both sides
in the same Condition they were in, before they were taken.

Article XXXIII.
All Prisoners of War taken by the Forces of the Emperor and of his Allies, and
by those of his most Christian Majesty, and are still detained, shall be
released without any Ransom, after the Ratifications are exchanged.

Article XXXIV.
And whereas their Majesty's, and the Lords States General, do acknowledge the
Good Offices and Care, which the most Serene King of Sweden has used to procure
the Peace and Public Tranquillity, it is on both sides agreed, that his Swedish
Majesty, his Kingdoms and States, be especially and by name comprehended in the
present Treaty, in the best manner and form that the same may be done.

Article XXXV.
All such as shall be named by common Consent of both Parties, before or within
six Months after the Ratifications of the Treaty are exchanged, shall be
comprehended in this present Treaty.

Article XXXVI.
Their said Majesty's and the Lords States General do agree, that his Swedish
Majesty as Mediator, and all other Kings, Princes and Republics may give their
Guarantee to their said Majesty's, and the said Lords States General, for the
Exemption of all and every particular Article contained in this present Treaty.

Answer to Article XXXIII, XXXIV, XXXV, and XXXVI.
It will be easy to agree to what is contained in these Articles, when once
the Articles of the Treaty of Peace between the Emperor and France are
adjusted. But for the preventing all farther Contests, and all occasions of
molesting the Subjects on either side, it is not only requisite to put a stop to
the Contributions raised upon the Subjects on both sides from the day of
signing the Peace; but it is likewise necessary absolutely and entirely to
disannul all Pretensions upon the account of Contributions, which remain still
unpaid, all Hostages given or taken upon that account being immediately
restored gratis, in the same manner as the Prisoners on either side are to be
restored without Ransom.

Article XXXVII.
There is Liberty left and reserved to add any other Articles, in Case of any
Omission, whether they relate to any General Affairs, or to any Particular
Pretensions to be adjusted in this General Peace.

Delivered to his Excellency the Mediator July 20. 1697. Signed, D. Harlay
Bouneuil. (Place for the Seal.) Verjus de Crecy. (Place for the Seal.) De
Caillieres. (Place for the Seal.)

Concordare Vidi. N. Lillienroot.

Answer to the last Article.
In the Instrument of the Treaty of Peace beeween the Emperor and France, it is
requisite likewise to insert in their proper place the following Articles.

Francis Lewis Prince Palatine, Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, and Bishop
of Worms, shall be fully restored to the Commendams, Places, Subjects, and
Revenues, which have been taken from him by France, and which have anciently
been possessed by the said Order, or by the said Bishop of Worms and other
Churches, with all their Rights and Privileges; without infringing the other
Rights, which shall be the same to him as to the other States of the Empire;
not shall he or his Successors be any ways molested in the Use and Exercise of
the said Rights and Revenues; much less shall any thing that has been done,
attempted, or hitherto said to the contrary, upon any account whatsoever, turn
to his prejudice. As for what concerns the Satisfaction for Damages sustained,
such things shall be performed as are contained in a particular Article.

The House of Wirtemberg, and expressly Duke George of the Branch of
Montbeliard, shall be absolutely restored in behalf of himself and his
Successors, with all his Rights, to all and every his Demeans situated in
Alsace or elsewhere, and to the State, Rights and Prerogatives, and especially
to his immediate Dependence on the Sacred Roman Empire, which he formerly
enjoyed, and which the other Princes of the Empire do or ought to enjoy, for
ever annulling the paying or acknowledging any Homage to the Crown of France,
which was made for a time in the year 1681. And the said Princes shall
henceforward freely enjoy all the Revenues belonging to them, whether Secular
or Ecclesiastical, which they were in possession of before the Troubles, or
which they ought to have enjoyed by virtue of the Peace of Westphalia: together
with the Fiefs which have been granted in their behalf since the time of their
being detained by France, and which they have not surrendered to others, such
as are the Fiefs, which the Counts of Rappolstein, and which the Lords of
Rathsamhauson have recognized in the County of Harburgh, and others such like.
In like manner they shall be restored to the full and entire Possession, as
well of their Fiefs in Burgundy, Granges, Clereval, Passerant, Hericourt,
Blamont, Chatelot and Clermont, as of their Territories, with all the Rights
and Revenues which they formerly possessed, annulling and absolutely rejecting
all that may be done or pretended upon any account whatsoever to the contrary.
As to Duke Everhard Lewis, for the Losses he has suffered, as well during the
present War, as before the Declaration thereof, contrary to particular
Treaties, such Satisfaction shall be made him, as is expressed in a Separate
Article.

After these particular Restitutions it is requisite to add farther in general:

By the Restitution or Surrendering of Places, Persons, Things, or Rights, made
by France pursuant to this Treaty of Peace, it is not to be understood that any
new Right or Privilege is acquired against others; But to the Empire in
general, and to each State in particular, and to all others, except France, are
reserved all Rights, Pretensions, Actions and Exceptions, which belonged to
them on both sides, before their Destitution, and which are not expressly
limited, or entirely nulled by the present Treaty; the which shall remain in
their full force after Restitution made, which therefore ought not to be
delayed; and which are to be proposed, examined, and decided in their proper
place.

It Is requisite likewise to insert the following Article upon the Subject of
the Fiefs of the Empire which are situated in Italy.

It shall not be lawful for France, either voluntarily, or by the solicitation
of others, either directly or indirectly, to innovate any thing in the Fiefs of
the Empire, and other Rights of which it is in possession in Italy; or to
invert the Order of Succession in them, or to assist any others who design to
make any Innovation or Interruption therein: But all the Rights which at
present belong, or have, before they were seized, belonged to the Emperor or
Empire in general, or to all the Feudatories and Vassals, both present and to
come, who may succeed according to the Imperial Grants, in such places as are
either restored, or to be restored by France, as also in such as France have
not taken, shall be left in their entire Force, and never be disturbed or
molested by France.

To conclude, the Emperor and Empire reserve to themselves the same Privilege,
as France has reserved in the last Clause, provided always that a proper Answer
may be given to all other Propositions that may be offered by the French
Ambassadors.

Delivered to his Excellency the Mediator, Aug. 5. 1697. Signed, A. D. C. de
Caunitz. (Place for the Seal.) Henry C. de Straatman. (Place for the Seal.) J.
F. L. B. de Seilern. (Place for the Seal.)


The Declaration of the Ambassadors of his most Christian Majesty which was
rejected by the Emperial Ambassade.
THE many Demonstrations which his Majesty has given of the Sincerity of his
Intentions for the General Peace of Europe, and the advantageous Conditions
which he has been pleased to deposite in the Hands of the Ambassador
Extraordinary of Sweden the Tenth of February last, since he ought to have
looked upon as more than sufficient for the concluding the Treaty several
Months ago; but since at present he perceives that notwithstanding the utmost
Diligence which his Ambassadors Extraordinary have used in the Conferences of
Peace, for the finishing and completing so great a Work, the Time so precious
for the Welfare of Christendom is run out with so little Success, that the
Campagn is very far advanced, and the Events of War are capable of bringing a
new Scene on the Face of Public Affairs; his Majesty being still moved with
the same desire of procuring a speedy Repose and Quiet to Europe, does farther
declare by his Ambassadors Extraordinary to the Ambassador Mediator of Sweden,
that he is ready to sign the Peace without any delay, upon the same Conditions
which have already been communicated to him. But whereas it is not reasonable
that the Conclusion of the Peace being still suspended by the delay of his
Enemies, he should be tied up, whilst they think themselves free to accept or
refuse the Conditions thereof, and even to demand new and unallowable ones; his
Majesty therefore declares by his Ambassadors Extraordinary to the Ambassador
Mediator of Sweden, that he is willing to continue under the same Obligation
which he has taken upon him, till the end of August next, but that if within
that time his Enemies do not conclude the Peace, he will be freed from
Engagement, and at liberty to treat anew, after so much Expense and Bloodshed,
upon such other Articles as he shall judge suitable to the posture of his
Affairs, and to the Welfare of Christendom.

The Memorial of the Ambassadors of the most Christian King for the General
Peace, delivered to the Ambassador Mediator September. 1. 1697. at the Palace of
Ryswick.
THE happy Successes with which it has pleased God to bless the Undertakings of
the King in this Campagn, might give his Majesty a very just occasion of
reducing within a narrow compass the Overtures which he has made for the Peace,
the Term which he fixed for the accepting of his Propositions being expired,
leaves him at his full Liberty, so that he might very well propose new
Articles, but the same desire which he always had of putting an end to the
Miseries of Christendom, is still the only Rule which he proposes to himself,
and his Majesty is pleased to make no farther use of the Advantages he has had,
than for the more speedy reestablishment of the Quiet of Europe.

It Is with this design that the King declares, that though his Majesty was free
from his Engagements at the end of August, though he is very sensible what
Benefit he could reap from the Conquest of Barcelona, and from other Events of
the War, yet the sole Interest which influences and weighs most with him, is
the universal Welfare of Europe; that for the promoting thereof by a speedy
Peace, his Majesty makes use of that Liberty which he has at present only to
alter such of the Articles which he has proposed, as seem to retard the Public
Tranquillity.

Upon this account his Majesty forbears offering to the Emperor the choice of
taking Strasburgh, or the Equivalent proposed for that City: he is resolved to
keep it, and no farther mention shall be made of an Alternative Equivalent: at
the same time he promises that this Alteration, which he thought requisite to
determine the Emperor, shall make no change in the other Conditions which he
formerly offered for the keeping of Strasburgh; and consequently that Town and
the Citadel in the condition they now are, shall be for ever annexed to his
Crown, with the Dependencies of Strasburgh on this side the Rhine, such as are
on the other side of that River shall be restored to their proper Owners, with
the same Rights and the same Prerogatives which they formerly enjoyed: That the
Fort of Keil shall be restored to the Emperor and Empire, in the same Condition
as it is at present: That the Forts of the City, of the Islands in the Rhine,
shall be razed: That the Cities of Friburgh, Brisack, and Philipsburgh shall be
restored by his Majesty to the Emperor, upon the same Conditions set down in
the Project delivered in by his Majesty's Ambassadors Extraordinary to the
Ambassador Mediator of Sweden: That those Articles which specify the
Restitution of Lorrain in the same Condition as Duke Charles possessed it in
the year 1670. with the Clauses therein explained, and which his Majesty has
thought necessary for the maintenance of the Peace, shall be punctually put in
Execution: That lastly, for rendering the Peace solid, and to assure the Empire,
that his Majesty's only desire is to preserve it, he promises to demolish and
abandon the Fortresses which he possesses on the other side the Rhine, to pull
down the Bridges made by his Orders upon the River, reserving only part of the
Bridge of Fort Lewis on the Rhine, which leads from Alsace to the Fort: That he
on the other hand demands that the Bridge of Philipsburgh be broken down, the
Fort raised at the end of that Bridge on the side of France demolished; and
that the Rhine being for the future the just Barrier between the Territories of
both, the Avenues of his Kingdom shall be shut up, at the same time, that his
Majesty makes it appear that he is not willing to reserve any Passage whereby
to carry the War into Germany.

Lastly, His Majesty adds to those considerable Overtures which he makes for
the keeping of Strasburgh, the Restitution of Barcelona, which his Majesty
promises to restore to the King of Spain as soon as he has the Consent of the
Emperor and Empire for the Surrender of Strasburgh: and this is all the use
which his Majesty pretends to make of the Conquest of one of the most
considerable Towns in the Spanish Monarchy.

His Majesty proposes no Alterations in the Articles by which he offered to
Treat with the Catholic King, and is persuaded that this Prince being sensible
of the Moderation which he shows toward him, will not insist upon the Demand
of a few Villages in the Seigniory of Aeth, requisite for the more easy
Commerce of the Inhabitants of Tournay, and for the Communication of that City
with the Town of Conde; and that his Majesty pretends to reserve to himself all
the Advantages he can reap from the taking of Aeth.

But whereas it is not reasonable that his Majesty shall be always obliged to
Sacrifice such considerable Advantages to the good of the Peace, he declares
that if his Enemies defer taking advantage of those new Expedients which he is
pleased to offer for the Conclusion of the Treaties, and shall exceed the term
which he hereby gives them of the 20 th of September to accept of his
Proposals, he will then be at liberty to propose new Conditions; and the
Miseries of the War are to be charged only on those who refuse to concur with
his Majesty to the putting an end to them.

Delivered to his Excellency the Mediator Sept. 1. 1697.
Articles of Peace between the most Serene and Mighty Prince WILLIAM the Third,
King of Great Britain, and the most Serene and Mighty Prince LEWIS the
Fourteenth, the most Christian King, Concluded in the Royal Palace at Ryswicke
the 10/20th Day of September, 1697.
I. THAT there be an Universal Perpetual Peace, and a True and Sincere
Friendship between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince William the Third, King of
Great Britain, and the most Serene and Mighty Prince Lewis the Fourteenth the
most Christian King, Their Heirs and Successors, and between the Kingdoms,
States and Subjects of Both, and that the same be so Sincerely and Inviolably
Observed and Kept, that the One shall Promote the Interest, Honor and
Advantage of the Other, and that on both sides a Faithful Neighborhood and
True observation of Peace and Friendship, may daily Flourish and Increase.

II. That all Enmities, Hostilities, Discords and Wars, between the said King
of Great Britain and the most Christian King, and Their Subjects, Cease and be
Abolished, so that on both sides They Forbear and Abstain hereafter from all
Plundring, Depredation, Harm-doing, Injuries, and Infestation whatsoever, as
well by Land as by Sea, and on Fresh Waters, every where; and especially
throughout all the Kingdoms, Territories, Dominions, and Places, belonging to
each other, of what Condition soever they be.

III. That all Offenses, Injuries, Damages, which the said King of Great
Britain and His Subjects, or the said most Christian King and His Subjects have
suffered from each other during this War, shall be forgotten, so that neither
on Account of them, or for any other Cause or Pretense, neither Party, or the
Subjects of either, shall hereafter do, cause or suffer to be done any
Hostility, Enmity, Molestation, or Hindrance to the other, by himself or
others, Secretly or Openly, Directly or Indirectly, by Color of Right, or Way
of Fact.

IV. And since the most Christian King was never more desirous of any thing,
than that the Peace be Firm and Inviolable, the said King Promises and Agrees
for Himself and His Successors, That he will on no Account whatsoever disturb
the said King of Great Britain in the free Possession of the Kingdoms,
Countries, Lands or Dominions which He now Enjoys, and therefore Engages His
Honor, upon the Faith and Word of a King, that He will not Give or Afford any
Assistance, directly or indirectly, to any Enemy or Enemies of the said King of
Great Britain; And that He will in no manner whatsoever favor the Conspiracies
or Plots which any Rebels, or ill disposed Persons, may in any Place Excite or
Contrive against the said King; And for that End Promises and Engages, That He
will not Assist with Arms, Ammunition, Provisions, Ships or Money, or in any
other way, by Sea or Land, any Person or Persons, who shall hereafter, under
any pretense whatsoever, Disturb or Molest the said King of Great Britain in
the free and full Possession of His Kingdoms, Countries, Lands and Dominions.
The King of Great Britain likewise Promises and Engages for Himself and
Successors, Kings of Great Britain, That He will Inviolably Do and Perform the
same toward the said most Christian King, His Kingdoms, Countries, Lands and
Dominions.

V. That there be a free use of Navigation and Commerce between the Subjects of
both the said Kings, as was formerly in the time of Peace, and before the
Declaration of the late War, so that every one of them may freely come into the
Kingdoms, Marts, Ports and Rivers of either of the said Kings with their
Merchandises, and may there Continue and Trade without any Molestation, and
shall Use and Enjoy all Liberties, Immunities and Privileges Granted by Solemn
Treaties, and Ancient Custom.

VI. That the Ordinary Administration of Justice shall be Restored and Set open
throughout the Kingdoms and Dominions of both Kings, so that it shall be Free
for all the Subjects of Either, to Claim and Obtain their Rights, Pretensions
and Actions, according to the Laws, Constitutions and Statutes of each Kingdom.

VII. The most Christian King shall Restore to the said King of Great Britain,
all Countries, Islands, Forts and Colonies wheresoever situated, which the
English did Possess before the Declaration of this present War. And in like
manner the King of Great Britain shall Restore to the most Christian King all
Countries, Islands, Forts and Colonies wheresoever situated, which the French
did Possess before the said Declaration of War. And this Restitution shall be
made on both Sides, within the Space of Six Months, or sooner if it can be
done. And to that end immediately after the Ratification of this Treaty, each
of the said Kings shall Deliver, or cause to be Delivered to the other, or to
Commissioners Authorized in His Name for that Purpose, all Acts of Concession,
Instruments, and necessary Orders, duly Made and in proper Form, so that they
may have their Effect.

VIII. Commissioners shall be appointed on both sides, to Examine and Determine
the Rights and Pretensions which either of the said Kings has to the Places
Situated in Hudsons-Bay; But the Possession of those Places which were taken by
the French, during the Peace that preceded this present War, and were retaken
by the English during this War, shall be left to the French, by virtue of the
foregoing Article. The Capitulation made by the English on the Fifth of
September, 1696. shall be Observed, according to its Form and Tenor; The
Merchandises therein mentioned shall be Restored; The Governor of the Fort
taken there shall be set at Liberty, if it be not already done; The differences
arisen concerning the Execution of the said Capitulation, and the Value of the
Goods there lost, shall be Adjudged and Determined by the said Commissioners;
who immediately after the Ratification of the present Treaty, shall be Invested
with sufficient Authority for settling the Limits and Confines-of the Lands to
be restored on either side, by virtue of the foregoing Article, and likewise
for exchanging of Lands, as may conduce to the mutual Interest and Advantage of
both Kings.

And to this end the Commissioners, so appointed, shall within the space of
Three Months from the time of the Ratification of the present Treaty, meet in
the City of London, and within Six Months, to be reckoned from their First
Meeting, shall Determine all Differences and Disputes which may arise
concerning this matter; After which, the Articles the said Commissioners shall
Agree to, shall be Ratified by both Kings, and shall have the same Force and
Vigor, as if they were inserted Word for Word in the present Treaty.

IX. All Letters, as well of Reprisal as of Marque and Counter-Marque, which
hitherto have for any cause been Granted on either side, shall be, and remain
Null and Void; Nor shall any the like Letters be hereafter Granted by either of
the said Kings against the Subjects of the Other, unless it be first made
manifest, that Right has been denied; and it shall not be taken for a denial
of Right, unless the Petition of the Person, who desires Letters of Reprisal to
be Granted to him, be first shown to the Minister, residing there on the part
of the King, against whose Subjects those Letters are desired; That within the
space of Four Months or sooner, he may inquire into the contrary, or procure
that satisfaction be made with all speed from the Party offending, to the
Complainant. But if the King against whose Subjects Reprisals are demanded,
have no Minister residing there, Letters of Reprisal shall not be Granted, till
after the space of Four Months, to be Reckoned from the day on which his
Petition was made and presented to the King, against whose Subjects Reprisals
are desired, or to his Privy Council.

X. For cutting off all Matter of Dispute and Contention, which may arise
concerning the Restitution of Ships, Merchandises, and other Moveable Goods,
which either Party may complain to be taken and detained from the other, in
Countries, and on Coasts far distant, after the Peace is concluded, and before
it be notified there; All Ships, Merchandises, and other Moveable Goods, which
shall be taken by either side, after the Signing and Publication of the present
Treaty, within the space of Twelve Days in the British and North Seas, as far
as the Cape St. Vincent; Within the space of Ten Weeks beyond the said Cape,
and on this side of the Equinoctial Line or Equator, as well in the Ocean and
Mediterranean Sea as elsewhere; Lastly, Within the space of Six Months beyond
the said Line throughout the whole World, shall belong and remain unto the
Possessors, without any Exception or further Distinction of Time or Place, or
any Consideration to be had of Restitution or Compensation.

XI. But if it happens through Inadvertency or Imprudence, or any other Cause
whatever, that any Subject of either of the said Two Kings, shall do or commit
any thing by Land or Sea, or on Fresh Water, any where, contrary to the present
Treaty, or that any Particular Article thereof is not Fulfilled; This Peace and
good Correspondence between the said Two Kings shall not on that Account be
Interrupted or Infringed, but shall remain in its former Force, Strength and
Vigor, and the said Subject only shall Answer for his own Fact, and undergo
the Punishment to be Inflicted, according to the Custom and Law of Nations.

XII. But if (which God forbid) the Differences now Composed between the said
Kings should at any time be renewed, and break out into open War, the Ships,
Merchandises and all kind of Moveable Goods of either Party, which shall be
found to be and remain in the Ports and Dominions of the Adverse Party, shall
not be Confiscated or brought under any Inconveniency, but the whole space of
Six Months shall be Allowed to the Subjects of both the said Kings, that they
may carry away and transport the foresaid Goods, and any thing else that is
theirs, whither they shall think fit, without any Molestation.

XIII. For what concerns the Principality of Orange, and other Lands and
Dominions belonging to the said King of Great Britain; The separate Article of
the Treaty of Nimeguen, Concluded between the most Christian King and the
States General of the United Provinces the Tenth day of August, 1678. shall,
according to its Form and Tenor, have full Effect, and all things that have
been Innovated and Altered, shall be Restored as they were before. All Decrees,
Edicts, and other Acts, of what kind soever they be, without exception, which
are in any manner contrary to the said Treaty, or were made after the
conclusion thereof, shall be held to be null and void, without any revival or
consequence for the future: And all things shall be restored to the said King
in the same state, and in the same manner, as he held and enjoyed them before
he was dispossessed thereof in the time of the War, which was ended by the said
Treaty of Nimeguen, or which he ought to have held and enjoyed according to the
said Treaty. And that an end may be put to all Trouble, Differences, Processes
and Questions, which may arise concerning the same, Both the said Kings will
name Commissioners, who with full and summary Power, may compose and settle all
these matters. And forasmuch as by the Authority of the most Christian King,
the King of Great Britain was hindered from enjoying the Revenues, Rights and
Profits, as well of His Principality of Orange as of other His Dominions, which
after the Conclusion of the Treaty of Nimeguen, until the Declaration of the
present War, were under the Power of the said most Christian King, The said
most Christian King will Restore, and cause to be Restored in reality, with
Effect, and with the Interest due, all those Revenues, Rights and Profits,
according to the Declarations and Verifications that shall be made before the
said Commissioners.

XIV. The Treaty of Peace Concluded between the most Christian King, and the
late Elector of Brandenburgh at St. Germains in Lay the 29 June, 1679. shall
be Restored in all its Articles, and remain in its former Vigor between His
Sacred most Christian Majesty and His Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh.

XV. Whereas 'twill greatly conduce to the Public Tranquillity that the Treaty
be Observed, which was Concluded between His Sacred most Christian Majesty and
His Royal Highness of Savoy, on the Ninth of August, 1696. it is Agreed that the
said Treaty shall be confirmed by this Article.

XVI. Under this present Treaty of Peace shall be comprehended those who shall
be named by either Party, with common Consent, before the Exchange of
Ratifications, or within Six Months after. But in the mean time, the most
Serene and Mighty Prince William King of Great Britain, and the most Serene and
Mighty Prince Lewis the most Christian King, gratefully acknowledging the
sincere Offices and Indefatigable Endeavors, which have been employed by the
most Serene and Mighty Prince Charles King of Sueden, by the Interposition of
His Mediation, in bringing this Happy Work of the Peace, with the Divine
Assistance, to the desired Conclusion; And to show the like Affection to him,
it is by consent of all Parties Stipulated and Agreed, That His said Sacred
Royal Majesty of Sueden, shall with all His Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces and
Rights be included in this Treaty, and comprehended in the best manner, in the
present Pacification.

XVII. Lastly, The Solemn Ratifications of this present Agreement and Alliance
made in due Form, shall be delivered on both sides, and mutually and duly
Exchanged at the Royal Palace of Ryswicke, in the Province of Holland, within
the space of Three Weeks, to be reckoned from the Day of the Subscription, or
sooner if it can be.

In Testimony of all and every the things before mentioned, and for their
greater Force, and to give them all the Vigor and full Authority they ought to
have, the Underwritten Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries,
together with the most Illustrious and Excellent the Extraordinary Ambassador
Mediator, have Signed and Sealed the present Instrument of Peace. Done, etc.

Signed by the English and French Ambassadors, and by the Mediator.

Separate Article.
Besides all that is Concluded and Stipulated by the Treaty of Peace Signed
this present Day, the 20th of September, It is moreover agreed by the present
Separate Article, which shall have the same Force and Effect, as if it was
inserted word for word in the said Treaty, That the most Christian King shall
Covenant and Agree, and by the present Article he does Covenant and Agree, That
it shall be free for the Emperor and the Empire, until the First Day of
November next, to accept the Conditions of Peace lately proposed by the most
Christian King, according to the Declaration made on the First Day of this
present Month, unless in the mean time it shall be otherwise agreed between His
Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and His most Christian Majesty. And in case
His Imperial Majesty does not within the time prefixed accept those Conditions,
or that it be not otherwise agreed between His Imperial Majesty and the Empire,
and His most Christian Majesty, the said Treaty shall have its full Effect, and
be duly put in Execution according to its Form and Tenor; And it shall not be
lawful for the King of Great Britain, directly or indirectly, on any account or
cause whatsoever, to act contrary to the said Treaty.

The Substance of the full Power and Authority of the Lords Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries of the King of Great Britain.
WIlliam III. by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all those to whom these Presents shall come, or in any wise appertain,
Greeting.
The Affairs of Europe being at this Juncture in so good Condition, and the
Persons therein concerned so very well Disposed, We have just reason to hope,
that, together with the Assistance of the Divine Providence, and the good
Offices of Our dearest Brother the most Serene and most Potent Prince the King
of Sueden, who is pleased to Officiate as Mediator, the War that has so long
afflicted Christendom, may at length by a firm Agreement be brought to a happy
Conclusion, We having no other thoughts then of a just and lasting Peace, which
from the bottom of Our Heart We wish may be speedily Effected, and as exactly
Observed: We joyfully lay hold on this Occasion to Reestablish the Public
Tranquillity. And whereas Our Ministers, together with those of the Allies, and
those of the most Christian King, are at present Convened to Negotiate a
General Peace between Us and Our said Allies on one part, and the said most
Christian King on the other. And since for the accomplishing of a Work so good
and beneficial for the repose of Christendom, it is an absolute Necessity to
choose Persons of tried Abilities and known Experience, We give therefore to
understand, That having an entire Confidence in the Fidelity, Capacity, and
Prudence of Our Trusty and Welbeloved Cousin and Councellor Thomas Earl of
Pembroke and Montgomery, Baron Herbert of Cardiffe, etc. Keeper of Our Privy
Seal, and one of Our Privy Council, Edward Viscount Villers, Our present
Ambassador in Extraordinary to their High and Mightinesses the States General
of the United Provinces, Robert Lord Lexington Baron of Averam, one of the
Gentlemen of Our Bed Chamber, and Our Ambassador in Extraordinary with the most
Serene and most Potent Prince the Emperor of the Romans, and lastly, of Our
Faithful and Welbeloved Sir Joseph Williamson Knight, a Member of Our Privy
Council, and Keeper of the Records of Parliament: And moreover being well
satisfied of their Abilities, which have been sufficiently demonstrated by the
different Employments, Functions and Negotiations, which they have executed
from time to time, both at home and abroad, and of which they have so well
acquitted themselves, as well within the Kingdom as without, We have Named,
Made, Constituted and Appointed, and by these Presents do Name, Make,
Constitute and Appoint the aforesaid Thomas Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery,
Edward Viscount Villers, Robert Lord Lexington, and Sir Joseph Williamson, Our
True and Faithful Ambassadors Extraordinary, Commissioners, Deputies,
Ministers, and Plenipotentiaries, giving to them or any Two of them, in case
the others should be either Sick or Absent, full Power and Authority, with
express Command both General and Special, the General not derogating from the
Special, or the Special from the General, to Repair to (...) or any other Place
that shall be Agreed upon to Meet at, to Perform and Celebrate the Treaty, and
Negotiations of Peace; and to Confer and Negotiate the said Peace with the
Commissioners and Plenipotentiaries of the Allies on one part, and those whom
the most Christian King shall please to Depute on the other part; as likewise
with all such as shall be sent to the Conference from the other Kings, Princes,
Republics or Free Towns, being always provided with a sufficient Authority to
Debate and Determine amicably and entirely all the Differences and Disputes
which have happened during this present War, as likewise to Conclude a firm and
lasting Peace, and to Sign for Us, and in Our Name all the Conditions and
Articles which shall be Agreed therein; and moreover to Draw up, and Dispatch
all sorts of Acts and Instruments in such manner and number as there shall be
occasion found; and further, to Give and Receive them from one another hands
reciprocally when drawn. We Grant moreover to Our said Ambassadors a power to
make Passes, and such like Securities for all Persons and Things, which shall
be employed in the Service of this Treaty; as also to renew their Dates from
time to time whenever they see convenient. Our Ambassadors in a word, are
hereby Empowered to Sign, Grant and Exhibit, and generally to Treat of all the
aforesaid Matters, as likewise to Promise, Stipulate, Agree and Do in Relation
to the abovementioned Premises, whatever they shall find necessary, and in
such Manner and Time as they shall think fit, and with the same Force and
Virtue as We could do if We Our Selves were present at the said Conferences; We
promise, moreover, on the word of a King, That We will Approve of, and be
Concluded by whatever Our aforesaid Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, or any
Two of them, in case the others should be either Sick or Absent, shall do in
Our Name. And lastly, to give the greater Force and Authority to these
Presents, We have Signed them with Our Royal Hand, and caused them to be Sealed
with the Great Seal of England.

Given at Our Palace at Kensington the Sixteenth of February, in the Year 1697.
and the Ninth of Our Reign. Signed, William Rex.

The Full Powers of the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of His Most Christian
Majesty.
LEwis by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre,
to all Persons to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
As We desire nothing more earnestly than that this War, which has so long
afflicted Christendom, may conclude by a good Peace; and since the Towns of
Delft and the Hague have been Agreed upon through the Care and Mediation of Our
Dearest and Welbeloved Brother the King of Sueden for the Conferences to that
purpose, We being moved with the same good Inclinations, to prevent, as much as
in Us lies, the Ruin of so many Provinces, and the Effusion of so much
Christian Blood, do make known, that upon entire Confidence in the Experience,
Capacity and Fidelity of Our Trusty and Welbeloved Councellor in Ordinary of
Our Privy Council the Sieur de Harlay de Bonneuil, Our Trusty and Welbeloved
the Sieur Verjus, Count of Crecy, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, the two
Churches, Menillet and other Places, and of Our Trusty and Welbeloved the Sieur
de Caillieres, Rochechellay and Gigny, and by the several Advantageous Proofs
which We have had of their Abilities, as well within the Kingdom as without and
for several other good Causes and Consid^rations Us thereunto moving, have
Constituted Appointed and Deputed, and by these Presents Signed with Our Hand,
do Constitute, Appoint and Depute the said Seiurs de Harlay, de Crecy and de
Caillieres, Our Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries for the Peace;
giving them full Power and Authority, and moreover Commanding them expressly to
Confer with, (in the City of Delft or elsewhere, where they shall be actually,
either directly, or through the Mediation of Ambassadors, Received and Accepted
for that purpose) the Ambassadors, Plenipotentiaries and Ministers of Our
Dearest and Welbeloved Brother the King of Great Britain and his Allies, each
being provided with Power sufficient to Treat of and Determine the several
Differences which have occasioned this War: Our said Plenipotentiaries have
also Power, either all Three together, or Two of them, in case of Absence,
Sickness, or any other Impediment, or One, if the other Two be not able to be
Present, to Agree upon, Conclude and Sign a Firm and Lasting Peace, and
generally to Do, Negotiate, Promise and Grant whatever they shall think
Necessary to Effect so good a Work, with the same Authority that We Our selves
could Act, if We were present at the said Conferences in Person, although there
had been something which was not Contained in these Presents, which Required a
more especial Authority. Hereupon We Promise on the Faith and Word of a King,
to Keep inviolably, and to Confirm whatever the said Sieurs de Harlay, de Crecy
and de Caillieres, or Two of them, in Case of the Absence of the other, on
Account of Sickness or any other Impediment; or of One only, in Case of the
Incapacity of the rest, shall Stipulate, Promise or Grant in Our Name: And We
likewise give Our Royal Word, that We will Dispatch the Letters of Ratification
in the Time Promised by Our said Ministers, for such is Our Pleasure. In
Testimony whereof We have caused these Presents to be Sealed with Our Seal.

Given at Fontainebleau the 26 of September. in the Year of Our Lord, 1697. and
of Our Reign the Fifty fifth, Lewis.
And upon the Fold, By the King, Colbert.

The Substance of the King of Great Britains Ratification of the Peace.
WIlliam III. by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all Persons to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
It having pleased the Divine Providence, that after a War wherewith the
greater part of Christendom was not long since Afflicted, a true and sincere
Peace should be Concluded by means of the Mediation of the most Serene and most
Potent Prince Charles XI. late King of Sueden, and since his Death by that of
the most Serene and most Potent Prince Charles XII. his Son and Successor; as
likewise by the Conferences held at Our Palace at Ryswick in the Province of
Holland, between Our Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, together
with those of the Allies on one part, and the Ambassadors Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiaries of the most Serene and most Potent Prince Lewis XIV. the most
Christian King on the other part: The Conditions whereof are these,

That there be an Universal Peace, etc.

We, after having Seen and Examined the said Treaty, have Approved and Ratified
all and every of the Articles and Clauses thereof, as by these Presents We do
Approve, Ratify and Declare them Valid against Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
Promising and Obliging Our Selves upon the Word of a King, to Fulfill and
Observe Sincerely and Faithfully all Matters therein Contained. And further, to
give the greater Credit and Force to this present Ratification, We have caused
it to be Sealed with the Great Seal of England.

Given at Our Palace at Loo in the Province of Guelderland the Twenty fifth of
September, in the Year of our Lord 1697. and in the Ninth of Our Reign. Signed
William Rex.

His Most Christian Majesty's Ratification of the Peace.
LEwis, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre,
to all Persons to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas Our Trusty and Welbeloved Councellor in Ordinary, Nicolas Augustus de
Harlay, Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, and Count of Cely; Our Trusty and Welbeloved
Lewis Verjus Knight, Count of Crecy, Marquis of Freon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of
Boulay, the two Churches, Fort-Isle and Menillet, and Our Trusty and Welbeloved
Francis de Caillieres Knight, Lord of Rochechellay and Gigny, Our Ambassadors
and Plenipotentiaries, by Virtue of full Powers granted them by Us, have
Concluded, Agreed on, and Signed a Peace on the 20 th of September last at
Ryswick with Thomas Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Baron Herbert and
Cardiffe, Keeper of the Privy Seal of England, and Privy Councellor to Our
Dearest and Welbeloved Brother the King of Great Britain, and moreover one of
the Lords Justices in the Kings Absence, Edward Viscount Villers and Dartford,
Baron of Hoo, Knight Marshal of England, and one of the Justices of Ireland,
Robert Lord Lexington, Baron of Averam, and one of the Lords of the King of
Great Britains Bedchamber, and lastly, Sir Joseph Williamson Knight, one of
His Britannick Majesty's Privy Council, and Keeper of the Records of
Parliament, Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries of Our said Brother
the King of Great Britain for that purpose. The Particulars whereof follow.

Here were Incerted the Articles at length.

Now We being well pleased with the abovesaid Treaty in every Point and Article
thereof, have, as well for Our Self as for Our Heirs, Successors, Kingdoms,
Countries, Lands, Lordships, and Subjects, Accepted, Approved, Ratified and
Confirmed, and by these Presents do Accept, Approve, Ratify and Confirm the
same; and moreover do Promise on the Faith and Word of a King, and under the
Obligation and Mortage of all and every Our Goods present and to come, that We
will Observe and Keep Inviolable the said Treaty, nor will ever Act any thing
to the contrary, either Directly or Indirectly, in what manner or kind soever.
In Testimony whereof We have Signed these Presents with Our Hand, and Affixed
Our Royal Seal.

Given at Fontainebleau the Third day of October, in the Year of our Lord,
1697. and of Our Reign the 55. Signed, Lewis.
And lower, By the King, Colbert.
Sealed with the great Seal of Yellow Wax.
Articles of Peace, betwixt His Catholic Majesty and the Most Christian King;
Concluded at the Royal Palace of Ryswick, the 10/20th September, 1697.
IN the Name of God and the Most Holy Trinity: Be it known to All, both present
and to come, that during the Course of the most Bloody War that ever afflicted
Europe for these many Years past, it has pleased the Divine Providence to
prepare the End of the Miseries of Christendom, by preserving an ardent Desire
for Peace, in the Hearts of the Most-High, Most-Excellent, and Mighty Prince
Charles II. by the Grace of God Catholic King of Spain, etc. and of the Most
High, Most-Excellent, and Mighty Prince Lewis XIV. by the Grace of God the Most
Christian King of France and Navarre; who wishing equally and concurring
heartily to contribute as far as in them lies to the Restoration of the
Tranquillity of Europe, and having no other Aim than to make the said Peace firm
and lasting, by the Equity of its Conditions; Their said Majesty's have
consented and agreed in the first Place, to own the Mediation of the Most-High,
Most-Excellent, and Mighty Prince Charles XI. by the Grace of God King of
Sueden, Goths and Vandals; but a sudden Death having frustrated the Hopes which
all Europe had justly entertained of the happy Effect of his Counsels, and good
Offices; their said Majesty's still persisting in the Resolution to put a Stop
as soon as possible to the Effusion of so much Christian Blood, have thought
they could not do better than to acknowledge, in the same Quality, the
Most-High, Most-Excellent, and Mighty Prince Charles XII. King of Sueden, his
Son and Successor, who on his Part has also continued the same Endeavors to
further the Peace betwixt their Catholic and Most Christian Majesty's, in the
Conferences held, for that purpose, in the Royal Palace at Ryswick in Holland,
betwixt the Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries named on both
sides; to wit, by his Catholic Majesty, Don Francisco Bernardo de Quiros,
Knight of the Order of St. James, one of the Members of the King's Royal and
Supreme Council of Castille; and the Sieur Lewis Alexander de Scockart, Count
of Tirimont, Baron of Gaesbeke, one of the supreme Council of State of the
Netherlands in Madrid, and of that of State and Privy Council in the same
Countries: And by his most Christian Majesty, the Sieur Nicolas Augustus de
Harlay Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Cely, Counselor in ordinary to his
Majesty in his Council of State; the Sieur Lewis Verjus Knight, Count of Crecy,
Counselor in ordinary to his Majesty in his Council of State, Marquis of
Treon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, the two Churches, Fort-Isle, Menillet,
and other Places; and the Sieur Francis Callieres Knight. Lord of Callieres, of
Rochechellay and Gigny; who having first implored the Divine Assistance, and
communicated to each other their respective Full Powers (the Copies of which
shall be inserted Word for Word at the end of the present Treaty) and duly
exchanged the same by the Intervention and Mediation of the Baron of
Lillieroot, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of his Majesty the
King of Sueden, who has discharged the Function of a Mediator with all the
necessary Prudence, Capacity and Equity; they have agreed, to the Glory of God
and the Good of Christendom, upon the following Conditions.

I. IT is agreed, That for the future there be a good, firm and lasting Peace,
and a perpetual Confederacy, Alliance and Friendship, between the Catholic and
most Christian Kings, their Children born or that shall be born, their
Kingdoms, States, Lands and Subjects; that they shall love one another like
good Brothers; and that the one, as far as in him lies, shall promote the
Interest, Honor and Reputation of the other, carefully and sincerely avoiding
whatever may cause any Damage to each other.

II. That upon Account of this Peace and good Union, all Hostilities shall
cease betwixt the said Lords Kings, their Subjects and Vassals, as well by Sea
and on fresh Waters, as by Land, and generally in all Places where War is made
by their Majesty's Arms, both betwixt their Armies and the Garrisons of their
Places: And if contrary to this Article, any Place or Places should be taken,
either by Attack, Surprise, or Intelligence, Prisoners made, or any other
Hostilities committed, through Inadvertency or otherwise, Reparation shall be
made on both Sides with Honesty, by restoring without any Diminution what shall
have been taken, and setting Prisoners at liberty without Ransom, or Payment of
Expenses.

III. All Enmities and Causes of Misunderstanding shall be extinguished and
abolished for ever. There shall be on both Sides a perpetual Oblivion of the
Injuries done, or Damages suffered, during this War, or on Account of the same,
so that no Person shall hereafter be called to Account, or be obliged to make
any Restitution, upon any Pretense whatsoever, directly or indirectly, by way
of Justice or otherwise; and their said Majesty's, their Subjects, Servants or
Adherents, shall never show a Resentment, or demand any Reparation for the same.

IV. The Towns and Places of Gironne, Roses and Belver, shall be restored, and
left in the Possession, Dominion and Sovereignty of his Catholic Majesty, in
the same Condition they were in when taken, with the Artillery that was found
in them at the same time; and, in general, all other Towns, Places, Forts and
Chastelenies whatsoever, that have been possessed during this War by the Arms
of his most Christian Majesty, and since the Treaty of Nimeguen, in the
Principality of Catalonia, or elsewhere in Spain, their Appurtenances and
Dependencies, shall be restored in the Condition they are now in, without any
Reservation, Diminution or Deterioration whatsoever. Likewise shall be restored
to the Power, Dominion and Sovereignty of his Catholic Majesty, the City of
Barcelona, the Fort and Fortifications belonging to it, with all the Artillery,
in the Condition wherein they were found on the Day the same was taken, with
all its Appurtenances and Dependencies.

V. The Town and Fortress of Luxemburg, in the Condition it is now in, without
demolishing, altering, diminishing, weakening, or deteriorating any of its
Works, Forts and Fortifications, with the Artillery that was found in it when
taken: Together with the Province and Duchy of Luxemburg, and County of Chiny,
in all their Consistencies, and all the Appurtenances and Dependencies
belonging to them, shall be faithfully resigned and restored to the Power,
Sovereignty, Dominion, and Possession of the Catholic King, to be by the said
Lord the Catholic King enjoyed, as he has done, or may have done at the time
of, and before the Treaty of Nimeguen, without any withholding or reservation,
except what has been yielded to his most Christian Majesty by the preceding
Treaties of Peace.

VI. The Fortress of Charleroy shall likewise be restored to the Power, and
under the Sovereignty of His Catholic Majesty, with its Dependencies in the
Condition it is in at present, without Breaking, Demolishing, Weakening or
Deteriorating any thing in it, together with the Artillery therein found when
taken.

VII. There shall also be restored to the Sovereignty, Dominion and Possession
of His Catholic Majesty, the City of Mons, Capital of the Province of
Hainault, with its Works and Fortifications in the same Condition they are in
at present, without Breaking, Demolishing, Weakening or Deteriorating any thing
in them; together with the Artillery found in it when taken; and the Precincts,
Provostship, Appurtenances and Dependencies to the said City belonging, in all
its Consistency, and in the same manner as the Catholic King enjoyed it, or
may have enjoyed it at the time of, and before the said Treaty of Nimeguen; As
well as the City of Ath, in the Condition it was in when last taken, without
Breaking, Demolishing, Weakening or Deteriorating any thing in its
Fortifications, with the Artillery therein found on the same Day; together with
the Precincts, Chastelenies, Appurtenances and Dependencies of the said City,
as they were yielded by the Treaty of Nimeguen; except the places next
following, viz. the Borough of Anthoin, Vaux, Guavrian, Ramecroix, Bethome,
Constantin, the Fief of Paradise; these last being enclosed in the Tournaisis,
and the said Fief of Paradise, as far as it depends upon the Village of Kain,
Havines, Meles, Mourcourt, Kain, the Mount of St. Audebert, called the Trinity,
Fontenoy, Maubray, Hernieurs, Calnelle, and Viers, with their Parishes,
Appurtenances and Dependencies without any reservation, which shall remain in
the Possession and Sovereignty of his most Christian Majesty, the Province of
Hainault, still remaining in the Sovereignty of His Catholic Majesty, except
what has been yielded to his most Christian Majesty, by the preceding Treaties.

VIII. The Town of Courtray shall be restored to the Power, Dominion,
Sovereignty and Possession of His Catholic Majesty, in its present Condition,
with the Artillery that was found in it when last taken; together with the
Chastelenie of the said City, its Appurtenances and Dependencies according to
the Treaty of Nimeguen.

IX. The said Lord the most Christian King, shall likewise cause to be restored
to His Catholic Majesty all the Towns, Places, Forts, Castles and Posts, which
his Armies have or may have possessed themselves of, until or since the Day of
the Conclusion of the present Peace, where and in what part of the World soever
the same be Situated; as in like manner the said Catholic Majesty shall
restore to his most Christian Majesty all the Places, Forts, Castles and Posts,
wheresoever Situated, which his Armies may have taken during this War, till the
Day of the Publication of this Peace.

X. All the Places, Cities, Towns, Buroughs and Villages, which the most
Christian King has taken or reunited since the Treaty of Nimeguen, in the
Provinces of Luxemburg, Namur, Brabant, Flanders, Hainault, and other Provinces
of the Low Countries, according to the List of the said Re-unions, delivered in
by His Catholic Majesty, at the proceedings of this Negotiation, (the Copy of
which List is annexed to the present Treaty) shall remain in the possession of
His Catholic Majesty absolutely and for ever, except the Places, Towns,
Buroughs and Villages, contained in the List of Exception, which has likewise
been Exhibited from his most Christian Majesty, and are by him claimed, upon
account of the Dependencies of the Towns of Charlemont, Maubeuge, and others
yielded to his most Christian Majesty by the Treaties of Aix la Chapelle, and
Nimeguen, concerning which 82 Places beforementioned, (the List of which are
likewise annexed to the present Treaty) it is agreed, that immediately after
the Signing of the present Treaty, Commissioners shall be named on both sides,
as well to regulate in the possession of which of the two Kings the said 82
Towns, Places, Buroughs or Villages, or any of them, shall remain, and belong
to; as to agree upon the Exchanges to be made for Places enclosed in the
Dominions of one another; and in case the said Commissioners shall not agree,
that then their Catholic and most Christian Majesty's, shall leave and refer
the final Decision about them to the Judgment of their Lordships the
States General of the United Provinces, whom the said Lords Kings have
reciprocally chosen for Arbitrators, without lessening however the Power of the
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the said Lords the Catholic and most
Christian Kings, to adjust those Matters amicably, even before the Ratification
of the present Treaty, if possible; by which means all Difficulties and
Controversies both concerning the said Re-unions, and Limits and Dependencies
thereof shall be entirely removed and determined on both sides: And upon that
account, an end shall be put to all Prosecutions, Sentences, Separations,
Incorporations, Commissions, Decrees, Confiscations, Re-unions, Declarations,
Regulations, Edicts, and generally all Acts whatsoever made in the name, and by
order of the most Christian King, by reason of the said Re-unions, either by
the Parliaments or Chamber settled at Mets, or by any other Court of
Judicature, Intendants, Commissions, or Delegations against His Catholic
Majesty and his Subjects, and shall be revoked and annulled for ever, as if
they had never been. Furthermore the Generality and Royalties of the said
Provinces shall remain to his Catholic Majesty, except all the Cities, Towns
and Places, yielded to his most Christian Majesty, by preceding Treaties, with
their Appurtenances and Dependencies.

XI. All the Towns, Cities, Places, Buroughs and Villages, with their
Appurtenances and Dependencies, yielded and resigned by his most Christian
Majesty in the foregoing Articles, without any Reservation or Restriction,
shall return to the Possession of his Catholic Majesty, to be by him enjoyed
with all the Prerogatives, Advantages, Profits and Revenues to them belonging,
with the same Extent of Right, Property, Dominion and Sovereignty, wherewith he
enjoyed them before this late War, at the time of, and before the Treaties of
Aix la Chapelle and Nimeguen, and so as he may or ought to have enjoyed them.

XII. The Restitution of the said Places shall be made by the said Lord the
most Christian King in Reality and Honesty, without Delay or Difficulty upon
any Cause or Account whatsoever, to him or them that shall be appointed for
that purpose by the said Lord the Catholic King, immediately after the
Ratification of the present Treaty, without demolishing, weakening, diminishing
or indamaging any thing, any manner of way, in the said Towns, and without any
Pretentions or Demands for the Charges of the Fortifications, Public Edifices
and Buildings made in the said Places, or for the Payment of what may remain
due to the Soldiers and Men of War, who shall be in them at the time of the
said Restitution.

XIII. The most Christian King shall cause to be taken and drawn out of the
said Places which he restores to the Catholic King, all the Artillery which
his said Majesty has caused to be carried into the said Towns since they have
been taken; also all the Powder, Bullets, Arms, Provisions and other Ammunition
that shall be found in them, when restored to the said Catholic Majesty; and
those whom the most Christian King shall appoint for that purpose, shall be
permitted the use of Wagons and Boats of the Country, for the space of two
Months; and shall have a free Passage, as well by Land as by Water, to convey
the said Ammunition into the nearest Place belonging to his most Christian
Majesty. The Governors, Commanders, Officers and Magistrates of the Places and
Countries so restored, shall procure all the Conveniences that lies in their
Power, for the Carriage and Conveyance of the said Artillery and Ammunition: As
also it shall be lawful for the Officers, Soldiers and Men of War that shall go
out of the said Places, to draw out of them, and carry away all moveable Goods
to them belonging; but they shall not be suffered to exact any thing from the
Inhabitants of the said Places and flat Country, or to indamage the Houses, or
take away any thing belonging to the Inhabitants.

XIV. All Prisoners, of what Nature and Condition soever they may be, shall be
set at Liberty on both Sides, and without Ransom, immediately after the
Exchange of the Ratifications; always provided, that their Expenses and other
lawful Debts, shall be answered and paid. And if any Persons shall have been
sent to the Galleys of their said Majesty's, on the Occasion and through the
Misfortune of the said Wars only, they shall be speedily released and set at
Liberty, without any Delay or Hindrance, upon any Cause or Account whatsoever,
and without demanding or exacting any thing for their Ransom or Expenses.

XV. By Means and Virtue of this Peace and strict Friendship, all the Subjects
of both Kings, observing the Laws, Statutes and Customs of the Land, shall be
permitted to go, to come, and return; to Continue, Trade, Treat and Negotiate
together, throughout their respective Countries, either as Traders, or as they
shall think fit, as well by Land as by Sea and on fresh Waters; and those
Subjects, thus Trading or Corresponding, shall be protected and defended in the
respective Countries of the said Kings, as if they were their own Subjects,
provided they pay the lawful Duties, according to the Custom of each Place, or
such other Impositions that may hereafter be laid by the said Kings or their
Successors.

XVI. All Papers, Letters and Instructions, concerning the Countries, Lands and
Lordships, that shall be yielded and restored to the said Lords Kings by this
present Treaty, shall be exhibited and delivered with Honesty on both sides,
within the space of three Months after the Exchange of the Ratifications of the
present Treaty, in what Places soever the said Papers and Instructions may be
found; and even those that may have been taken away out of the Citadel of
Ghent, and the Chamber of Accounts at Lisle.

XVII. The Contributions laid or demanded on both Sides, Reprisals, Exactions
of Forage, Corn, Wood, Cattle, Utensils, and all other sorts of Impositions
upon the Countries of the said respective Sovereigns, shall cease immediately
after the Ratification of the present Treaty; and no Arrears, or Parts thereof,
that may be due, shall be reciprocally exacted on either Side, upon any Title
or Pretense whatsoever.

XVIII. All Subjects, on both Sides, either Ecclesiastical or Secular,
Corporations, Communities, Universities and Colleges, shall be restored as well
to the Possession of the Honors, Dignities and Benefices which they enjoyed
before the War, as to the free Enjoyment of all and every of their Rights,
Estates, Movables, Rents of Redemption whose Capital is still in being, and
Annuities for Life, seized and possessed since the said time, as well upon
Account of the present War, as for having followed the adverse Party, together
with their Rights, Actions and Successions to them fallen, ever since the
beginning of the War, but without claiming or demanding the Fruits and Revenues
received and expired during this War, from the first seizing of the said
Estates, Rents and Benefices, to the Day of the Publication of the present
Treaty.

XIX. Neither shall it be lawful to demand or claim any Debts, Effects or
Movables, that shall have been confiscated before the Day, aforesaid; and the
Creditors of such Debts and Trustees of the said Goods, their Heirs or Assigns,
shall never prosecute or demand the Recovery of the same; which Restorations,
in Form aforesaid, shall extend to those that have followed the adverse Party,
so that by Means of the present Treaty they shall be received and admitted into
the gracious Favor of their Prince and Sovereign, and restored to the
Possession of their Goods, such as shall be found in being at the Conclusion
and Signing of the present Treaty.

XX. The said Restoration of the Subjects on both Sides shall be put in
Execution, according to the Tenor and Contents of the 21st and 22d Articles of
the Treaty of Nimeguen, notwithstanding all Gifts, Concessions, Declarations,
Confiscations, Commissions, preparatory and final Sentences, given and obtained
by Default in the absences of, and without hearing of the Parties; which
Sentences and Jugdments shall become void and of no effect, as if they never
had been given and pronounced, with full and entire Power to the said Parties
to return to the Countries from which they had formerly withdrawn, to enjoy in
Person their Estates and Movables, Rents and Revenues; or to settle their
Habitations out of the said Countries, in what Place soever they shall think
convenient, which is left to their free Choice and Election, so that no
Constraint shall be laid upon them on that Account; and in case they had rather
to live elsewhere, it shall be lawful for them to appoint and depute such
trusty Persons as they shall think fit, for the management and enjoyment of
their Estates, Rents and Revenues; though not for Benefices where Residence is
required, which therefore ought to be personally administered and served.

XXI. The Twenty fifth and Twenty sixth Articles of the Treaty of Nimeguen,
concerning Benefices, shall be put in Execution; and pursuant to them, those
that have had Benefices conferred upon them by either of the two Kings, who,
when the said Collation was made, possessed the Towns or Countries wherein the
said Benefices are situated, shall be maintained and continued in the
Possession and Enjoyment of the said Benefices.

XXII. The Subjects, on both Sides, shall be permitted, and have full Power and
Liberty to Sell, Exchange, Alienate, or otherwise dispose, either by Deed of
Conveyance, or by Last Will, of their Goods and Effects, moveable and
unmovable, which they have or shall have situated in the Dominions of the
other Sovereign; and it shall be lawful for every one to purchase them, without
any other Grant, Permission or Act whatsoever, for such a Sale or Purchase,
than this present Treaty.

XXIII. Whereas there are Rents assigned upon the generality of some Provinces,
part of which are possessed by his Catholic, and the other by his most
Christian Majesty, it is covenanted and agreed, That every one shall pay his
Quota; and Commissioners shall be named to regulate the Portion which each of
the said Lords Kings shall pay.

XXIV. All Rents lawfully settled upon, or due from the Demeans of the Lands
yielded by former Treaties, and the Payment of which shall be made appear in
the Accounts brought in before the Chambers of Accounts, by the Receivers of
their Catholic and most Christian Majesty's, before the said Concessions,
shall be paid by their said Majesty's, to the Creditors of the said Rents,
under what Dominion soever they may be, either Spanish, French, or of any other
Nation without distinction.

XXV. And as by the present Treaty, a good and firm Peace is made as well by
Sea as by Land, between the said Lords Kings, in all their Kingdoms, Countries,
Lands, Provinces and Lordships; and that, upon account of the same, all
Hostilities are to cease for the future; it is stipulated, That if any Ships or
Merchandises shall be taken on either side in the Baltic or North Seas, from
Terneuze, in Norway, to the end of the Channel, within the space of four Weeks;
from the end of the said Channel, as far as Cape St. Vincent, within the space
of six Weeks; and beyond that in the Mediterranean Sea, and as far as the
Aequinoctial Line within the space of ten Weeks; Lastly, beyond the said Line
throughout the whole World within the space of eight Months, to be reckoned
from the Publication of the present Treaty, the said Prizes that shall be taken
on either side, after the prefixed Time shall be restored, with a recompense
for all Damages sustained thereby.

XXVI. In case of a Rupture, which God forbid, the whole space of six Months
shall be allowed to the Subjects of both of the said Kings, to carry away, and
transport their Effects and Persons whithersoever they shall think fit, which
they shall be permitted to do with all manner of Liberty, without any
Molestation, and it shall not be lawful during the said time to seize their
said Effects, and much less arrest their Persons.

XXVII. The Troops and Armies on both sides shall withdraw, and retire
immediately after the Ratification of the present Treaty, to the Lands and
Countries of their own Sovereigns, and into the Towns and Places that shall
respectively belong to, and remain in the possession of Their Majesty's, after
or according to the present Treaty; and it shall not be lawful for them to
continue, upon any pretense soever, in the Countries of the other Sovereign, or
in the Places that shall likewise hereafter to him belong and remain: And
immediately after the Signing of this present Treaty, there shall be a
Cessation of Arms, and all Hostilities throughout the Dominions of the said
Lords Kings, as well by Land as by Sea, and on fresh Waters.

XXVIII. It is also agreed, That the Receipt of the Duties, which the said Lord
the most Christian King enjoys, in all the Countries which he resigns or
restores to the said Lord the Catholic King, shall be continued till the Day
of the actual restitution of the Places, upon which the said Countries depend;
and that what shall remain due at the time of the said restitution, shall be
honestly paid to the Farmers of the said Duties. Likewise that within the same
time, the Owners of Woods, confiscated in the Dependencies of the Places that
are to be resigned to his Catholic Majesty, shall be restored to the
Possession of their Estates, and all the Woods that shall be found standing;
always provided, That from the Day of the Signing of the present Treaty, all
selling of Wood shall cease on both Sides.

XXIX. The Treaty of Nimeguen, and others made before it, shall be put in
Execution according to their Form and Tenor, except in those Points and
Articles, that have been before derogated to, or altered now by the present
Treaty.

XXX. All Prosecutions and Processes made, and Judgments given between private
Persons, by the Judges and other Officers of his most Christian Majesty,
Established as well in the places which the said King has enjoyed, by Virtue of
the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, and which he has since yielded to His Catholic
Majesty, as in those that belong to the most Christian King, by Virtue of the
Treaty of Nimeguen, or which he has possessed since the said Treaty; and
likewise the Sentences of the Parliament of Tournay, given upon the account of
the Differences and Law Suits prosecuted by the Inhabitants of the said Towns
and their Dependences, during the time they have been under the Obedience of
his most Christian Majesty, shall take place, and have their effect fully and
entirely in the same manner as if the said Lord King remained Lord and
Possessor of the said Towns and Countries; neither shall the said Judgments and
Sentences be called in question and annulled, or their Execution otherwise
hindered or retarded: However, it shall be lawful for the Parties to Sue for
Redress by Bill of Review, and according to the Laws and Constitutions, the
said Judgments still remaining in their force and vigor, without any Derogation
to what is stipulated to that purpose in the 21st Article of the said Treaty of
Nimeguen.

XXXI. The Town and Castle of Dinant, shall by his most Christian Majesty be
resigned and restored to the Bishop and Prince of Liege, in the Condition they
were in when taken by His Majesty's Arms.

XXXII. His most Christian Majesty having expressed a Desire, that the Isle of
Ponza, in the Mediterranean Sea, should be restored to the Duke of Parma, His
Catholic Majesty in Compliance thereto, has been pleased to declare, That he
will cause the Soldiers and Troops which he may have in the said Island to
withdraw from thence, and restore the same to the Power and Possession of the
said Duke of Parma, immediately after the Ratification of the present Treaty.

XXXIII. And whereas it greatly concerns the public Tranquillity, that the
Peace concluded at Turin, on the 22d of August, 1696. betwixt his most
Christian Majesty, and his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy, be also exactly
observed: It has been thought fit to confirm and comprehend the same in the
present Treaty, in all its Articles, such as are contained in the Copy Signed
and Sealed by the Plenipotentiaries of Savoy, which shall be annexed to the
present Treaty: For the performance of which Treaty, and of the present, their
said Majesty's Promise to become Guarantees for the said Royal Highness, as he
may become for them.

XXXIV. Their said Majesty's gratefully acknowledging the good Offices and
constant Endeavors which have been employed by the most Serene King of Sueden,
for the Restoration of the Tranquillity of Europe, have agreed, That his Suedish
Majesty, his Kingdoms and States, shall be included and comprehended in the
present Treaty, in the best Form and Manner that can be.

XXXV. Under this Peace, Alliance and Friendship, shall be comprehended all
those that shall be named on both Sides, with common Consent, before the
Exchange of the Ratifications, and within the space of six Months after.

XXXVI. The said Lords the Catholic and most Christian Kings, consent and
agree, That his Suedish Majesty, in quality of Mediator, and all other Kings,
Princes and Republics, that shall be willing to enter into the same
Engagement, may give to their Majesty's their Promises and Deeds of Warranty,
for the Execution of all that is contained in the present Treaty.

XXXVII. And for the greater Security and Confirmation of this Treaty of Peace,
and all the Articles in it contained, the present Treaty shall be published,
verified and registered as well in the great Council, and other Councils, and
Chamber of Accounts of the said Lord the Catholic K. in the Low Countries, as
in the other Councils of the Crowns of Castille and Arragon, the Whole
according to, and in the Form contained in the Treaty of Nimeguen, of the Year
1678. And likewise the said Treaty shall be published, verified and registered
in the Court of Parliament of Paris, and in all other Parliaments of the
Kingdom of France, and Chamber of Accounts of the said Paris; and Copies of the
said Publications and Registrings shall be exhibited and delivered on both
Sides, within the space of three Months after the Publication of the present
Treaty.

XXXVIII. The Articles above mentioned, together with the Contents in every one
of them, have been treated, agreed upon, concluded and stipulated, between the
said Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Ambassadors of the said Lords the
Catholic and most Christian Kings, and in their Majesty's Name; which
Plenipotentiaries, by Virtue of their Power, the Copies whereof shall be
inserted at the end of the present Treaty, have promised, and do promise under
the Obligation of all the Dominions and States, present and to come, of the
Kings their Masters, That they shall be inviolably observed and accomplished;
and to cause them to be Ratified purely and simply, without any Addition, and
exhibit the Ratifications by authentic and sealed Letters, wherein all the
present Treaty shall be inserted Word for Word, within the space of six Weeks,
to be reckoned from the Day and Date of the present Treaty, or sooner if
possible. Moreover, the said Plenipotentiaries have promised, and do promise in
the said Names, That after the said Letters of Ratification shall have been
delivered, the said Lord the Catholic King, as soon as possible, and in the
Presence of such Person or Persons whom the said Lord the most Christian King
shall please to appoint, shall solemnly Swear upon the Cross, the Gospel, Canon
of the Mass, and upon his Honor, to observe and perform fully, really and
sincerely, all the Articles contained in the present Treaty: And the same shall
also be done as soon as possible, by the said Lord the most Christian King, in
the Presence of such Person or Persons, the said Lord the Catholic King shall
please to appoint. In Testimony of all which, the said Plenipotentiaries have
subscribed the present Treaty with their Names, and caused it to be sealed with
their Seals and Coat of Arms.

Done at Ryswick in Holland, the 20th Day of September, 1697. Thus Signed in
the Original, N. Lillieroot, L. S. Don Francisco Bernardo de Quiros. L. S. The
Count of Tirimont, L. S. De Harlay Bonneuil, L. S. De Crecy Verjus, L. S. De
Caillieres, L. S.


Separate Article.
BEsides all that is concluded and stipulated by the Treaty of Peace, made
betwixt the Plenipotentiaries and Extraordinary Ambassadors of his Catholic
Majesty, and those of the most Christian King, this present Day the 20th of
September, 1697. it is moreover agreed by the present separate Article, which
shall have the same Force and Effect as if it was inserted Word for Word in the
said Treaty; that his most Christian Majesty shall covenant and agree, and by
the present Article he does covenant and agree, That it shall be free for the
Emperor and the Empire, until the First Day of November next, to accept the
Conditions of Peace lately proposed by the most Christian King, according to
the Declaration made on the First Day of this present Month of September,
unless in the mean time it shall be otherwise agreed between his Imperial
Majesty and the Empire, and his most Christian Majesty. And in case his
Imperial Majesty does not, within the time prefixed, accept those Conditions,
or that it be not otherwise agreed between his Imperial Majesty and the Empire,
and his most Christian Majesty, the said Treaty shall have its full Effect, and
be duly put in Execution according to its Form and Tenor; and it shall not be
lawful for the said Lord the Catholic King, directly or indirectly, on any
Account or Cause whatsoever, to act contrary to the said Treaty.

In Testimony whereof, We the Ambassadors of their Catholic and most Christian
Majesty's, by Virtue of our respective Powers, and in the Names aforesaid, have
signed this Separate Article, and caused it to be sealed with our Seals and
Coat of Arms, in the Royal Palace of Ryswick in the Province of Holland, the
20th of September, 1697.

N. Lillieroot, (L. S.) Don Francisco Bernardo de Quiros. (L. S.) The Count of
Ti^imont, (L. S.) De Harlay Bonneuil, (L. S.) Verjus de Crecy, (L. S.) De
Caillieres, (L. S.)


Ratification of His Catholic Majesty.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Spain, etc.

Whereas Don Francisco Bernardo de Quiros, one of my Council of Castille, and
Don Lewis Alexander de Schockart, Count of Tirimont, Baron of Gaesbeck, one of
my supreme Council in Flanders, and of that of State, and Privy Council in the
same Countries, have concurred in the Royal Palace of Ryswick in Holland, with
the Ministers of the most Christian King, my most dear and well-beloved Brother
and Cousin, with their respective Orders and Powers, as every one was concerned
in the Treaty of Peace, and have Executed the same in the form and manner
contained in the Treaty, which shall be here inserted word for word; the
Conclusion of which was agreed and signed by the said Ministers on both Sides,
on the 20th of September, of the present Year 1697. which is as follows,

Here the Treaty of Peace was inserted.

Which Treaty here written and inserted as aforesaid, has been sent to me by
the said Don Francisco Bernardo de Quiros, and Count of Tirimont, and having
perused, and maturely examined the same word by word in my Council, I approve
and ratify for my Self, my Heirs and Successors, as also for the Vassals,
Subjects and Inhabitants of all my Kingdoms, Countries and Lordships, all the
Contents of the same, and every Article in particular therein contained, and
hold them good, firm and valid; and I plight and engage the Faith and Word of a
King, both for my Self, and my Heirs and Successors, inviolably to follow,
observe and perform the same according to its Form and Tenor, and to cause and
order it to be followed, observed and performed in the same manner, as if I had
Treated and Concluded the same in my own Person; and that I shall not do or
suffer to be done, in no manner whatsoever, any thing contrary to it. And if it
should happen that any one should Act contrary to, or infringe the Contents of
the said Treaty, I will cause such Infringement to be effectually and readily
repaired and made good, by punishing the Delinquents. And for the Execution of
the Premises, I engage all and every one of my Kingdoms, Countries, and
Lordships, as also all my other Estates present and to come, also my Heirs and
Successors, without any Exception: And for the firmness of this Obligation, I
renounce all Laws, Customs, and all other things to it contrary: In Testimony
of what is abovementioned, I have caused these Presents, Signed with my own
Hand, Sealed with my Privy Seal, and Countersigned by my Secretary of State, to
be dispatched.

Given at Madrid, the 8th of October, 1697. Signed, Yo El Rey. I the King.
And at the bottom, Don Crispin Gonsales Botello.

Ratification of the Separate Article by His Catholic Majesty.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Spain, etc.

Whereas it has been agreed at the Royal Palace of Ryswick, in Holland, between
Don Franscisco Bernardo de Quiros, one of my Council of Castille, and Don Lewis
Alexander Schockart, Count of Tirimont, one of my Council in Flanders, and of
that of State and Privy Council in those Countries, and the Ministers of the
most Christian King, my most Dear and most beloved Brother and Cousin, with
their respective Powers, as it concerned every one of them, upon a separate
Article, which shall be here inserted word for word, and is as follows,

Here was inserted the separate Article.

And this Article having been perused and examined, I have resolved to approve
and ratify it, as by virtue of these Presents, I do approve and ratify the
same in the best and most perfect form that I can. And I promise upon the Faith
and Word of a King, fully and entirely to perform it according to the Contents
of it; to which purpose, I have ordered these Presents, Signed with my own
Hands Sealed with my privy Seal, and Counter-signed by my Secretary of State to
be dispatched.

Given at Madrid, the 8th of October, 1697. Yo El Rey. Don Crispin Gonsales
Botello.

Ratification of his Most Christian Majesty.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre.
To all those to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas our beloved and trusty Counselor in Ordinary in our Council of State,
Nicolas Augustus de Harlay, Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Cely, our dear
and well-beloved Lewis Verjus, Knight, Count of Crecy, Marquis of Freon, Baron
of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, The two Churches, Fort-Isle, and Menillet, and our
dear and well-beloved Francis de Caillieres, Knight, Lord of Roche-Chellay, and
Gigny, our Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Ambassadors, by Virtue of the full
Powers we had given them, have concluded, agreed and signed on the 20th Day of
September last past at Ryswick, with Don Francisco Bernardo de Quiros, Knight. of
the Order of St. James, Counselor to our most dear and most beloved Brother
the King of Spain, in his Royal and Supreme Council of Castille, and Lewis
Alexander de Schockart, Count of Tirimont, Baron of Gaesbeck, one of the
supreme Council of State of the Low Countries in Madrid, and of that of State
and Privy Council in the same Countries, Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Ambassadors of our said Brother the King of Spain, having also their full
Powers, the Treaty of Peace, the Tenor of which is as follows,

Here was inserted the Treaty of Peace.

We liking and approving the said Treaty, in all and every one of the Points
and Articles therein contained and expressed, have accepted, approved, ratified
and confirmed, and we do accept, approve, ratify and confirm the same as well
for our Selves, as for our Heirs, Successors, Kingdoms, Countries, Lands,
Lordships and Subjects, all which we promise upon the Faith and Word of a King,
and under the Obligation and Mortgage of all and every one of our Estates
present and to come, inviolably to keep and observe, and never to Act contrary
to it directly, or indirectly, in any sort or manner whatsoever. In Testimony
whereof we have Signed these Presents with our own Hand, and caused them to be
Sealed with our Seal.

Given at Fontainebleau, the 3d Day of October, in the Year of our Lord, 1697.
and of our Reign the 55th Signed LEWIS.
By the King, Colbert.

Ratification of the Separate Article by his Most Christian Majesty.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre,
to all those to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Having perused and examined the Separate Article which our beloved and trusty
Counselors in Ordinary in our Council of State, Nicolas Augustus de Harlay,
Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Cely, our dear and well beloved Lewis
Verjus, Knight, Count of Crecy, Marquis of Freon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of
Boulay, The two Churches, Fort-Isle, and Menillet, and our dear and well
beloved Francis de Caillieres, Knight, Lord of Roche-Chellay and Gigny, our
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Ambassadors, by Virtue of the full Powers we
had given them, have concluded, agreed and signed on the 20th Day of September,
last past at Ryswick, with Don Francisco Bernardo de Quiros, Knight of the
Order of St. James, Counselor to our most dear and most beloved Brother the
King of Spain, in his Royal and Supreme Council of Castille, and Lewis
Alexander de Schockart, Count of Tirimont, Baron of Gaesbeck, one of the
supreme Council of State of the Low Countries in Madrid, of that of State, and
Privy Council in the same Countries, Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Ambassadors of our said Brother the King of Spain, having also their full
Powers, The Tenor of which Article is as follows,

Here was inserted the Separate Article.

We liking and approving the said Separate Article in all its Contents, have
allowed, approved and ratified, and we do allow, approve and ratify the same
by these Presents Signed with our own Hand: And we promise upon the Faith and
Word of a King, to perform and observe it, and cause it to be observed really
and sincerely, and never to suffer any thing to it contrary to be done,
directly or indirectly, upon any Cause or Account whatsoever: In Testimony
whereof, We have Signed these Presents, and caused them to be Sealed with our
Seal.

Given at Fontainebleau the 3d Day of October, in the Year of our Lord, 1697.
and of our Reign the 55th LEWIS.
By the King, Colbert.

A List and Declaration of the Re-unions made by his Most Christian Majesty, in
the Provinces of His Catholic Majesty in the Low Countries, since the Treaty
of Nimeguen.
Province of Luxemburgh.
FRANCE has possessed it self of the Capital City of that Name, and of 35
Villages and Hamlets called Villages of the Provost. As also of the Provostship
of Luxemburgh, consisting in three Bans of Justice, to wit, Kundzigh or
Clemenci, Putlange and Pettinguen. Of three Land-mayories, which are
Bettembourg, Santweiler, and Reeklen. And three Mayories, Steinsel, Lingtgen,
Schiteringen, consisting together in 71, either Villages or Hamlets. Of the
Castle Borough and Lordship of Rodenmacheren, together with 25 Villages
depending upon them. Of the Castle and Lordship of Hesperange, with Four
Villages. Of Raville, and its Dependencies, which consist in 17 Villages. Of
the Castle and County of Russy, which contains Eleven Villages. Of the Lordship
of Russy, with Five Villages. Of the Castle and Ban of Justice of Putlange,
consisting in 15 Villages. Of the Castle and Lordship of Preisch, containing
Two Villages. Of the Castle of Agimont, with it is two Buroughs of Givet, and
the Hamlets depending on the same. Of the Lordship of Vilreux Walrand. Of the
Lands and Lordships of the County of Rochefort, with Four Villages. Of the
Castle and Provostship Dorcymont, containing Vienne, and 20 other Villages, and
10 Lordships enclosed in them. Of the Lordships of Chasse-Pierre, Riviere
Fontenoylle, Saint Cecil, Lesche-les-Manile, Lugnon le Bertrisse, Ban of Orio,
Marpon, Dochamps, Herbeumont, the Ban of Butailles, the Ban of Musson. Of the
County of Montaign, with 13 Villages and Hamlets. Of Cheflieu, and Provostship
of St. Marde, with 16 Villages. Of the Castle and Lordship of Lathour,
Montquintin, la Vaux, Gommeri, Bassail, Rouette, and Villers-la-loup. Of the
Town and County of Chiny, with 27 either Villages, Hamlets or Forges. Of the
Barony of Jamaigne, with Five Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of
Neufchateau, consisting in 4^ Villages and Hamlets. Of the Borough, Liberty,
and Mayory of Remisch, with 24 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of
Walbredimus. Of the Bench of Justice of Mackeren the County, comprehending the
Town and 34 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of Wasser Billich. Of the
Provostship of Echternach, containing the Town and 33 Villages and Hamlets, and
distinguished by four Mayories, to wit, Osweiller, Irrel, Crenhen, and
Bollendorf. Of the Town and Provostship of Biedbourg, consisting in the
Liberties of Dudeldorf, and 34 Villages. Of the Town and Provostship of
Dickrich, comprehending a Town and 26 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Town and
Provostship of Arlon, consisting in the Town and 129, either Villages or
Hamlets, composed of 15 Bans or Mayories, not including the Forges and
Furnaces. Of the Lordship of Pont des Oyes, which contains Two Villages,
Hamlets and Forges. Of the Town, Mayory and Provostship of Bastoigne,
consisting in the Town and 145 Villages and Hamlets, composed of Ten Mayories.
Of the Town, Mayory and Provostship of March, comprehending the Town and 19
Villages and Hamlets. Of the Town and Provostship of Durbuy, consisting in the
Town, and 76 either Villages or Hamlets, divided into four Courts, and 19
Manors. Of the County of La Roche, containing the Town and Castle, and 51
Villages and Hamlets, divided into Four Mayories. Of the Lordship of
Beau-Saint, with that of Bertoigne, and two Villages upon them depending. Of
the County of Salme, consisting in a Castle, a Borough, and 32 Villages and
Hamlets. Of the County of Vianden, which comprehends the Town and Castle, and
49 Villages and Hamlets, divided into Six Mayories, of which several other
Castles and Lands hold by mesne Tenure. Of the Estates and Lordships of St.
Vith, consisting in a Town, and 47 either Villages or Hamlets, divided into Six
Courts. Of the Lordship of Munster, containing 24 Villages or Hamlets. Of the
Lordship of Mount St. John, consisting in four Villages and Hamlets, and with
an Old Castle in Rubbish. Of the Castle and Lordship of Differtange and
Solluere, with 23 either Villages, Farms or Hamlets, depending on the same. Of
the Castle and Lordship of Bertrange. Of the Castle and Lordship of Dansemburg,
with three Villages depending on the same. Of the Castle and Lordship of
Hollenselz, with 12 Villages or Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Marsch,
with 14 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Pitanges, with 16
Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of Hesperdange. Of the Lordship of
Arloncour, with three Villages. Of the Lordship of Miessembourg, with 15
Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Fisbach, with three
Villages. Of the Castle and Lordship of Linster, or Linscren, with Nine
Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Effinguen. Of the Lordship
of la Rochette, with the Ruins of an Old Castle, and 15 Villages and Hamlets.
Of the Lordship of Keringen, with two Villages or Hamlets. Of the Castle and
Lordship of Beaufort, with 11 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship
of Berbourg, with 11 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of Herberenne and
Montpach. Of the Castle and Lordship of Reuland, with 20 Villages and Hamlets.
Of the Castle and Lordship of Ouren, with Six Villages and Hamlets. Of the
Castle and Lordship of Clairvaux, with 44 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle
and County of Wiltz, with 23 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship
of Esch or Aiss, consisting in 22 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and
Lordship of Burghsheilte, with 12 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Town, Castle and
Lordship of Neuwerbourg, with 52 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Liberties of
Waswiller. Of the Castle and Lordship of Brandenbourg, with Six Villages and
Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Kayll, with three Villages. Of the
Castle and Lordship of Falkensteyn, with three Villages and Hamlets. Of the
Castle and Lordship of Bettingen, with Nine Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle
and Lordship of Ham, with four Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of Brouch,
with 12 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of Malbergh, with three Villages
and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of Rosporte, with Six Villages and Hamlets. Of the
Castle and Lordship of Mirwart, with 21 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and
Lordship of Focan, with three Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of
Rachamps, with a Village and Hamlet. Of the Lordship of Ayvaille, with Eight
Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of Harzet, with three Villages and
Hamlets. Of the Lordship of Baseille. Of the Lordship of Chesne, with three
Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Witry, with four Villages
and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Vsseldange, with 18 Villages and
Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Authel, with Six Villages and Hamlets.
Of the Castle and Lordship of Girsch, with 15 Villages and Hamlets. Of the
Castle and Lordship of Koerich, with Five Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle
and Lordship of Seven-Fountains, with 10 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship
of Winckringen, with Six Villages and Hamlets. Of the Land and Lordship of St.
Hubert, with a Borough and Six Mayories. Of the Lordship of Waltingen and
Lanzen. Of the Town, Castle and Lordship of Schleiden, with 36 Villages and
Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Croonenburg, with 13 Villages and
Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Man derscheit with the Villages
depending upon the same. Of the Castle and Lordship of Schinflet, consisting in
two Villages and Hamlets. Of the Court of Tommen, containing 22 Villages and
Hamlets. Of Hacheville, which consists in three Villages. Of the Castle and
Lordship of Moerstorf, with three Villages. Of the Castle and Lordship of
Holzemburg, with two Villages. Of Sterpigny. Of the Castle and Lordship of
Apsburg, consisting in 34 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of
Sinsfeldt, consisting in four Villages and Hamlets. Of Scharffilichen,
containing 12 Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Dome and
Dentsburg, containing four Villages and Hamlets. Of Mehret Bettenfelt. Of the
Castle and Lordship of Sohyer. Of the Ban of Desclassin, which consists in
three Villages and Hamlets. Of Redu. Of Esclaye. Of the Castle and Lordship of
Beauvin, consisting in Five Villages and Hamlets, including Dionvaux, although
France have annexed it to the Land of Agimont. Of Han upon Less, containing
three Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Houffalize,
containing three Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of Wibren, with two
Villages. Of Humain. Of the Castle and Lordship of Waha, consisting in two
Villages. Of the Lordship of Band. Of the Castle and Lordship of Soi,
consisting in Six Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Diverdis.
Of the Castle and Lordship of Jeneppe. Of the Castle and Lordship of Dochain,
consisting in Six Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of Rollet,
consisting in Nine. Of the Castle and Lordship of Mont-Jardin. Of the Castle
and Lordship of Javigni, which consists in Six. Of the Lordship of Mabonpre. Of
the Castle and Lordship of Laval, consisting in three. Of Villers-la-Loup. Of
Chesnoy. Of the Castle and Lordship of Cuette the Great. Of the Castle and
Lordship of Soigneul St. Remy, consisting in two. Of the Lordship of
Ville-Haimont, consisting in Nine Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and
Lordship of Villers, before Orval. Of the Lordship of St. Mary. Of the Lordship
of Orval, with four Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship of
Porcheresse. Of Vance, which contains two Villages. Of the Castle and Lordship
of Boulogne, containing five Villages and Hamlets. Of the Castle and Lordship
of Harbeumont, containing seven Villages. Of the Castle and Lordship of
Everlange, which contains Nine Villages and Hamlets. Of the Lordship of
Nasloigne. Of the Castle and Lordship of Grune. Of the Provostship of Estal
containing 14 Villages and Hamlets, divided into three Mayories. Of the Lands
and Lordship of St. Hubert, which consists in six Mayories and Fealties, with
many Villages depending upon them.
Namur.
FRance has possessed herself since the said Treaof Nimeguen; in the County of
Namur. Of the Provostship of Poilvache, containing the Mayories, Bans, Lands,
Villages and following Hamlets. The Mayory of Rendarche, consisting in the
Villages, Of Lustin, Malien, Lourier with its Castle, Sorinne-la-longue,
Assesse, Jassoigne, Wauremont with its Castle. And in the Hamlets of the Castle
of Roncinne d'Ivoix, the Castle of Assesse, the Castle of Estroy, Corioul,
Porin, Assesse, Brochau, Millier, the Manners of Jassoigne. Of the Mayory of
Emptines, with the Villages of Emptines, Emptinelle, Nattoy. And the Hamlets of
Francesse le Gaillard les Fontaines, Champillion les Sarts. Of the Mayory of
Falmaigne, which comprehends the Village. Of Falmaigne, the Castle of Thiry
depending upon it, in Rubbish, and Hulsoniaux. Of the Ban of Lignon, with the
Villages and Hamlets of Lignon, Chapoy, Onchipe, Ronvaux, Corbion and
Barsinable. Of the Ban of Soi, viz. the Village of Soi and Mohiville its
dependency. Of the Estate and Barony of Gesves. Of the Hamlets Houyoux, the
Forges, Manor of Chaumont, Pourin, Preit of Hamide, Houde and Francesse, which
are all Dependencies of the Estate of Gesves. Particular Villages which are
also Dependencies of the said Provostship, Ohay and Reppe, with Wallay and
Halliot, Chattin, with the Hamlets of Maibes and Frisee, with their
Dependencies, Valin, Hour-en-famine, Sorinne-sur-Dinant, Boisalle a Village,
the Castle of Spontin, and the Hamlets of Durnalle, Meanoye, and Dorinne with
its Dependencies, Joesne, Fillec, Hodomont, with the Hamlet of Jullet and
dependon it, Hargnies, the two Bourseignes, to wit the New and the Old,
Maisnil, St. Blaise, Haibes and Pondrome. Of the Forests of Auwez, Comisse,
Lache, Lerbois, the little and great Fail, which consist in Seven or Eight
hundred Acres of Land, belonging to his Majesty, as also of some Farms, Rents,
Tithes and other Revenues of his Demains, which have been seized in the Months
of November and December, 1681. France has also possessed herself in the Year,
1682. of the Forests of Higher and Lower Arche. And toward the Month of April,
1680. of the Priory of Hassier, situated on the side of the Maese. Of the
Mayory of Hour, which contains the Villages of Hour, below Poilvache, Iwar,
Eurehaille, Jodinne Lisoigne, Purnotte, Awaigne, and the Hamlets of Bauche,
Jayolle, Futvoy, Venatte, Champalle, Hugomont, Bloimont, Montchavee, Frapenl,
Fresne, Tailfer, Seignioul, Loys and Loyers. Of the Mayory of Bovignes, which
comprehends the Town and Liberties of the said Bovignes, with some Houses on
the two sides, with the great Farm of Metz, and 15 or 16 Houses, situated over
against the said Town, on the side of Dinant. Of the Mayory of Anthee,
consisting in the Villages of Anthee, the high Vassia, Riviere, Sommiere,
Melin, Marinne and Orhaye, and in the Hamlets of the little Farm of Metz,
Grange, Rostenne, Oheyt, Hentoir, with its Castle Chestrevin, Wespin, Flun,
Welin and Serenne. Of the Bailiwick of Bovignes, betwixt the Sambre and the
Maese, which contains the following Bans, Estates, Abbeys, Castles, Villages
and Hamlets. The Ban of Waulsoir, containing the Villages and Abbeys of
Waulsoir, Lulme, Hastir, la Vaux, and Haster beyond Gerin, and the Hamlets of
Hermetton upon the Maese, the Mount Ostemree, Stair and Ponrenne; The Ban of
Anthee, containing Anthee, Mianoye, Motville and Fontaine with its Castle. The
Estate and Liberties of Biesme la-Colonoise, consisting in the Villages of
Biesme, Heversee, Pree, Wagnies, Orest, Sart, Astache and Gognies. The Estate
of Gerpinne, which contains the Village or Borough of Gerpinne. And the three
Hamlets of Alleflage, E^omignee and Imignee.
The Estate of Thy,
WHich consists in the Villages of the said Thy, with its Castle, Sansee,
Chastrer, Jourdinne, Tursinne, Feroulle, and in the Hamlets of Maisnil, le
Lievre and Vouery of Rabusee.

Particular Villages in the Dependency of the said Bailiwick of Bovignes.

Flavion, Rosee, with its Hamlet of Jusenne, Biesmeree, Ermetton upon Bierre,
Stave, Steir, Mertienne, Fontenelle, part of Chatillon Mattignol, Romree,
Feppin, Bersee with its Castle, Villers with Potters Houses, Joneret with the
Furnace, Serville, Aveloy, Arbre, Profonde-Ville, Lesves, Bioulx, Graux,
Romignee, Meffe, Reselle, Rosiere, and Bois de Villers.

The Bailiwick of Montaigle, composed of the following Villages and Hamlets,
the Ruins of the old Castle of Montaigle, Fallean, Montaigle the Town, the
Forge of Montaigle, Salet, Fain, Corbay, Henemont, Warnant, Hun, Envoye,
Rouillon, the Furnaces, Forges and Castling Houses of Molin and the Abbey.

The Mayory of St. Gerard, which contains
THE Village of Broigne with the Monastery, the Hamlets of Maison, Gonois,
Sosoye, Maredret, the Farms of Montigny, Libinne, Behoude and Heraude.

The Precincts betwixt the Sambre and the Maese.
THE Village of Folz, the Hamlets of Hay, Afolz and Wepion.

In the Precincts betwixt the Sambre and the Macse, and the Dependencies of
that Province, are also enclosed the Forests of High and Low Marlaigne, which
contains 4300 Acres of Land, or more, the Forests of Biert, and their
Dependencies 1590 Acres, the Wood of Biesme, with Halloy, the old Furnace and
other Dependencies, 540 Acres, and Farms, Tiths, Rents, and several other
Demains and Revenues belonging to His said Majesty, with several Fiefs holding
of the Castle of Namur.

France since the Treaty of Nimeguen, in order to Possess herself of the Town
of Walcourt, and of the Village of Bioulx, (even after the Treaty for a Truce)
has caused Posts and Stakes to be set in the Neighborhood of the Castle of
Namur, under Pretense that she had extended her Re-unions before the said
Truce, as far as the said Village. Now to take away the said Posts, and set
limits behind on the side of Pairelle, Spain has been obliged by the Treaty
concluded at Philippe-Ville, on the 4th January, 1687. to yield up to France,
the said Town of Walcourt and Village of Bioulx, on the same Terms, Forms and
Conditions, on which France has kept by the said Treaty of Truce, all the
Places She had Possessed herself of, since the Treaty of Nimeguen, which
particular Treaty concluded during the said Truce, at the said Philippe-Ville,
will now cease by Virtue of the Treaty now proposed.

Hainault.
THE Principality and Provostship of Chimay, with the Villages, Hamlets and
Rights to them belonging, viz.

The Town of Chimay, St. Remy, Forges, Bourlez, Boutonville, Bailievre,
Villers-la-Tour, Sceloigne, Robechies, Bauwez, Montmignies, Macon, Imbrechies,
Monceau, Salles, Baileux, Vielles, Lompret, Estroeing, la Cauchie, and its
Hamlets, Feron, La Roulie.
The Provostship of Beaumont, with its Appendencies and Dependencies, which
consist in The Town of Beaumont, Bersillies, De Leval, Tirimont, Solre St.
Gery, Grandieu and Fralies, Sivry, Froidchapelle and Fourbechies, Rance,
Monbliart, Cerfontaine, Ferieres the Great, Ferieres the Less, Rosier, Beaufort
and Robechies, Grandreng, Rocque, Leunies, The Town of Chieuries.


Villages seized upon, and Possessed.
PArt of the Borough of Antoin, Fontenoy, Veron, Vaux, Moinbray, and Brasmanil.

The Villages of Maulde, Pipaix, Gissignies in Pipaix, Rocourt, Wermes, the
Parish of Wieres, Ogimont, Seigneurieul, Little Quesnoy-a-Potters, Bourgeon,
the Parish of Fontenay, Grammetz and Fermont, in the Parish of Thieulain, part
of Anthoin, reputed a Free-Tenure, the Breuch-a-foret, Mourcourt, Herines,
Wasmes, and Lignette.

The Town of Fontaine l'Eveque, the Village of Thiverelles, and 600 Acres or
thereabouts in Meadows.

The Villages of Anderlues, the Abbey of Aumont and Boussiere, with the Farms
of Warnenrieux, Foret, and the Farm in the Woods.

Flanders.
THE Town of Ranaix. The Town of Loo. The Town of Roulers. And the Villages of
Meuregem, Watervliet, Vendeville, Temptemars, Billau, and the Castle of la
Motte, in the Woods with its Tenements. Wood of Nieppe. Wood of d'Osthulft.
Brabant.
THE Estate of Ayseau, with its Dependencies, which consist in several Hamlets,
particularly in that of Oignies, with the Cloister of the same Name and part of
the Village of Monceau.

The Minister of His Catholic Majesty, demands the Restitution of all and
every one of the Places abovementioned, and others which his Most Christian
Majesty has or may have possessed himself of since the Treaty of Nimeguen,
although they be not here expressed and specified; and that His Catholic Majesty
be restored to the real and actual Possession of the same, as he enjoyed them
before the said Treaty of Nimeguen, all this without derogating to His
Catholic Majesty's Title to the other Re-unions of France, which have not been
yielded to the Most Christian King by the said Treaty of Nimeguen, or any
former Treaty.

A List of Exception of the Places which the Ambassadors of France have
pretended to retain.
THE Town of Chieures, Part of the Borough of Antoin, Fontenoy, Vezon, Vaux,
Maubray, Bramenil, Maude, Pipay, Gissignies in Pipay, Rocour, Wermes, Parish of
Vieres, Ogimont, Seigneurieul, Little Quesnoy a Potes, Bourgeon, Parish of
Fontenoy, Granmets, Fermont, Parish of Thieulain, Le Breuech of forestes,
Maircourt, Herinnes, Wames, Lignette, Tiuicelles, with 600 Aores in Medows,
Renaix, The Town of Loo, The Town of Roulers, The Village of Meuregem, The
Borough of Watervliet, The Village of Templemars, The hamlet of Wandeville,
Billau, The Castle of la Motte in the Wood with its Tenements, The Wood of
Nieppe, The Wood of Outhuest.
Dependencies of Charlemont.
A Gimont, Givets, St. Hilaire, Givets, our Lady, Vosneche, Felaine, Dion le
Mont, Dion le Val, Winenne, Landrichamp, Finevaux, Feischaux, Ferauche,
Javeingue, Aviette, Charneux, Flohimont, Fromelaine, Felix Pret, an Abbey of
Nuns, Remethon upon Bierre, Sevry, Gauchenee, Her, Herlet, Lisicourt, Ransenne,
Mahoux, Maison Saille, Mainil, St. Blaise, Vireux the Wallerand, Villersies,
Rienne, Boursoigne the Old, Boursoigne the New, Hargnies, Hebbes, Vaussors,
Abbey and the two Hastires, Ermeton upon the Meuse, Mattignol, Romeree, Bertee,
Festin.
Dependencies on the Provostship of Maubeuge.
TIrimont; Bersilles Abbey, Le Val below Beaumont, Cerfontaine, Roq upon the
Sambre, Estrun, Le Feron, La Voulie, Beaufort, Aumont Abbey, Boissiere.
Treaty of Peace betwixt France and the Duke of Savoy.
THE Most Christian King having had all a long, during the Course of this War,
a sincere desire of procuring the Repose of Italy, and God having inspired his
Royal Highness of Savoy with the same Sentiments, His Majesty, on his part, has
given his full Power, Commission, and Command to Rene, Lord of Froullai, Count
of Tesse, Knight of His Majesty's Orders, Lieutenant General of his Armies,
Colonel General of the Dragoons of France, Governor of Ypres, Lieutenant
General for the King in the Provinces of Maine and Perch, and at this time
Commander for His Majesty in the Countries and Places of the Frontier of
Piedmont, and his Royal Highness on his part having likewise given his Powers
and Commands to Charles Victor Joseph Marquis of St. Thomas, Minister and first
Secretary of State to his said Royal Highness, the said Plenipotentiaries
having first interchanged the Originals of their full Powers, by Virtue of
which they treat, have agreed upon the following Articles.

I. THere shall be henceforward and for ever, a constant, firm and sincere
Peace, between the King and his Kingdom; and his Royal Highness the Duke of
Savoy and his Dominions, as if there had never been any Rupture; and the King
resuming the same kind Thoughts he had before for his said Royal Highness, as
he begs it of his Majesty, his said Royal Highness does by this present Treaty,
entirely renounce and forsake all Engagements entered into, and all Treaties
made with the Emperor, Kings and Princes, comprehended under the Name of the
League: And promises to use all his Endeavors, and do all that lies in his
Power, to obtain of the said Potentates, at least of the Emperor and the
Catholic King a Neutrality in Italy, till the General Peace: Either by a
particular Treaty that shall be concluded, or in default of the said Treaty by
Declarations, which the said Emperor and Catholic King shall make to the Pope,
and the Republic of Venice, and which shall immediately be followed by the
Retreat of the Troops which the Allies have at present in Italy, as it shall be
expressed hereafter. Moreover, as an evident Testimony of the real and effectual
return of the King's Friendship for his Royal Highness, His Majesty is pleased
to consent and promise, That the Town and Citadel of Pignerol, with the Forts
St. Brigide la Perouse, and others belonging to them, shall be rased and
demolished (as to the Fortifications only) at the King's Charges; and the said
Fortifications being demolished, the whole shall be resigned into the Hands of
his Royal Highness, as also the Lands and Demains comprehended under the name
of Government of Pignerol, and which belonged to the House of Savoy, before the
Concession, That Victor Amedaeus, first Duke of that Name, had made of them to
the King Lewis XIII. Which Town, Citadel and Fort thus demolished, and
Territory to them belonging, shall likewise be restored to his Royal Highness,
to be held by him in Sovereignty, and enjoyed fully and for ever, both by him
and his Successors, as a thing to them properly belonging; and in Consideration
of the said present Concession, his Royal Highness engages and promises as well
for himself, as for his Heirs and Sucessors, and Assigns, not to rebuild or
restore any of the said Fortifications, nor cause new ones to be built upon and
within the extent of the said Territory, Ground and Rocks, nor in any other
place whatsoever yielded by this present Treaty, by which his Royal Highness,
or the Inhabitants of Pignerol, shall only be allowed to enclose the said
Pignerol with no other enclosure than a bare Wall, without a Terrass or any
Fortifications. With a Proviso, that except within the said Territory yielded
by the present Treaty, his Royal Highness shall be at his Liberty to build what
Place, Places or Fortifications he shall think fit, without incurring His
Majesty's ill Will. Furthermore, That His Majesty shall restore to his Royal
Highness, his Countries and Places Conquered, the Castles of Montmeillan, Nice,
Ville-Franche, Suza, and all others without Exception, entire and undemolished,
with the same quantities of Ammunition and Provisions, Canon and Artillery, as
they were provided and stored with when they fell into the Hands of His
Majesty, without altering or diminishing the Buildings, Fortifications,
Augmentations and Meliorations made by His Majesty. And after the Restitution
of the said Places, his Royal Highness shall be free to keep up and augment the
Fortifications as Things to him belonging, without being molested by the King
upon that account, or incurring His Majesty's ill Will. Still providing, That
the King shall carry away out of the Town, Citadel and Forts of Pignerol, all
the Artillery, Ammunition, Provisions, Arms, and moveable Effects of what
nature soever they be. That as to the Revenues of the Town, Dependencies and
Territory of Pignerol, the King restores them to his Royal Highness, in the
same form and manner as His Majesty enjoys them at present, and the Disposals
the King may have made of them, shall subsist and remain in the manner provided
by the Contract, Gift, Possession or Acquisition by which they are disposed of.
That the said Restitution of the Countries and Places of his Royal Highness, as
also the Resignation of Pignerol razed, with its Dependencies, as aforesaid,
shall be made in consequence of the Signing of this present Treaty, but not
before the Foreign Troops are actually gone out of Italy, and are arrived, viz.
The Germans, Bavarians, Brandenburgers, Protestants in English Pay, and other
Auxiliaries are really come into Germany; and the Spaniards, and other Troops
now in the Pay of the Catholic King, are restored into the Milanese, so that
none of the Articles shall be put in Execution, nor the Restitution of any
Place made, till after the going out and departure of the Troops, such as is
before expressed, shall be entirely accomplished; always provided, that the said
departure of the Troops shall be deemed entirely accomplished, although it should
happen, as perhaps it may, that the Spaniards should take out of them some
small Number of Soldiers, to Recruit the Regiments that are in their Pay; and
if any of those Troops List themselves, and do actually enter the Dominions of
the Republic of Venice, they shall be looked upon as entered into Germany, as
soon as they shall be in the Venetian Territories, and put into the Hands of
the Republic of Venice. And after the Ratification of the present Treaty, Men
shall be immediately set on Work to make Mines, in order to blow up and
demolish the said Town, Citadel, and Forts of Pignerol; But in Case that his
Royal Highness should think it convenient to keep the present Treaty secret,
beyond the time of the said Ratification, it is agreed, That to avoid the noise
which the working on the said Mines may make in the World, the same shall not
be begun, till so long after the time of the said Ratification, as his Royal
Highness shall think fit. Which Demolition shall be made, and carried on in
that manner, that after two or three Months, after the departure of the Troops
forementioned, the whole shall be restored to his Royal Highness, to which
purpose it shall be lawful for him to send a Commissary to be there present;
and till the Things aforesaid be put in Execution, His Majesty is willing for
his Royal Highness's greater Satisfaction and Security, to cause two Dukes and
Peers of France to be delivered into the Hands of his Royal Highness, as soon
as he shall require it of his Majesty, to remain with him as Hostages, and whom
he shall treat according to their Rank and Dignity.

II. His Majesty shall not make any Treaty of Peace or Truce, with the Emperor
or Catholic King, without including and comprehending his Royal Highness, in
convenient and forcible Terms; and this present Treaty shall be confirmed in
that of the General Peace, as also those of Gueresque, Munster, Pirenees and
Nimeguen, as well for the 494000 Crowns of Gold, particularly mentioned in that
of Munster, for the Discharge of his Royal Highness, whereof the King shall
still remain a Guarantee against the Duke of Mantua, as for all that they
contain not contrary to the present, which shall be irrevocable, and shall
remain in its Force and Vigor, notwithstanding the present concession of
Pignerol and its Dependences: And as for the other Concerns and Pretensions of
the House of Savoy, his Royal Highness reserves to himself to claim the same by
Protestations, Memorials or Envoys; and this present Treaty shall not be
derogatory to the said Pretensions.

III. That the Marriage of the Lady Princess Daughter to his Royal Highness,
shall be incessantly Treated of, to be Faithfully effected, as soon as she
shall be of Age, and that the Contract shall be made when this Treaty comes to
be put in Execution; after the Publication of which Treaty, the Princess shall
be put into the King's Hands. That in the said Contract of Marriage, which
shall be considered as an essential part of this present Treaty, and wherein
the said Princess shall make the Usual Renunciations, with Promise not to claim
any thing beyond the following Dowry, to the Dominions and Succession of his
Royal Highness; his said Royal Highness shall give in Dowry or Portion, to the
Lady the Princess his Daughter Two hundred thousand Crowns of Gold: For the
Payment of which, his Royal Highness shall make an Acquittance of a Hundred
thousand Crowns, remaining due for the Portion of her Highness the Royal
Duchess, with the Interests expired and promised, and as for the rest, His
Majesty remits it, in consideration of this present Treaty. Moreover, his Royal
Highness obliges himself to give to the Princess his Daughter at the time of
the Celebration of her Marriage, what in Piedmontese is called Fardel, and in
French, Trousseau or Nuptial Present, This answers to that which in the Common
Law is called Paraphanalia, and in the Civil Paraphernalia.
and in the Contract of Marriage it shall be Stipulated, what Dower His Majesty
shall give according to the Custom of France.

IV. That his Royal Highness renouncing and forsaking at present, Effectually
and Faithfully as aforesaid, all the Engagements he may have against France, he
hopes also that His Majesty will Correspond to it with all the kind Sentiments
which his Royal Highness begs and desires, and that having the Honor of being
so nearly Related to the King, and entering now in the splendour of a new
Alliance, His Majesty will grant and promise him his powerful Protection, the
return of which, his Royal Highness requests of his Majesty, and which His
Majesty returns in its full Extent. And because his Royal Highness is desirous
to keep a perfect Neutrality with the Kings, Princes and Potentates now his
Allies, His Majesty promises not to lay any Constraint on the desire his Royal
Highness has of keeping with them all the outward Measures of Decency, as it
becomes a Sovereign Prince, who has Ambassadors and Envoys at the Court of
those Princes, and receives and entertains at his own Court Ambassadors and
Envoys of the same Princes, without incurring his Majesty's ill Will,
comprehending under the Word of Princes, the Emperor, Kings and Potentates of
Europe.

V. His Majesty does promise and declare, That the Ambassadors of the D. of
Savoy, both Ordinary and Extraordinary, shall receive at the Court of France,
all the Honors without exception, and in all the Circumstances, which the
Ambassadors of Crowned Heads receive, that is, such as are Ambassadors of
Kings; and that all ordinary and extraordinary Ambassadors of his Majesty, in
all the Courts of Europe, without any Exception, not even of that of Rome and
Vienna, shall also treat the said Ambassadors both Ordinary and Extraordinary,
and Envoys of Savoy, in the same manner as those of Kings and Crowned Heads;
however, because this addition of Honor in the Treatment of the Ambassadors of
Savoy, had never been settled to that height, as His Majesty grants it, his
Royal Highness acknowledges that it is in consideration of the present Treaty,
and the Contract of Marriage of the Princess his Daughter; and His Majesty
promises that the said Addition shall take place from the Day on which the
Contract of Marriage aforementioned is Signed.

VI. That the ordinary Commerce and Trade of Italy shall be set open, kept up
and entertained, as it was settled before this War, in the time of Charles
Emmanuel II. Father to his Royal Highness; and that all that was done, observed
and practiced during the Life of the said Charles Emmanuel II. shall also be
done, observed and practiced in all Points and Circumstances betwixt the
Kingdom, and all the Parts of his Majesty's Dominions, and those of his Royal
Highness, through the Way and Road of Suza, Savoy, le Ponte, Beauvoisin and
Villa Franca, every one Paying the Duties and Customs on both Sides. The French
Ships shall continue to Pay the ancient Duty of Villa Franca, as it was
practiced in the time of Charles Emmanuel, without any opposition that might
have been made at that Time. The Couriers and ordinary Posts of France shall
pass as before through the States of his Royal Highness, and according to the
Statutes, shall pay the Duties due for the Goods they shall carry.

VII. His Royal Highness shall cause an Edict to be Published, whereby under
severe Penalties he shall Command the Inhabitants of the Valleys of Luserne
called Vaudois, not to entertain any Correspondence upon the Account of
Religion, with the King's Subjects: And his Royal Highness shall oblige himself
not to suffer, from the Date of this Treaty, any of His Majesty's Subjects to
settle in the Protestant Valleys, under Color of Religion, Marriage, or other
reasons of Settlement, as Convenience, Inheritance, or any other Pretense; nor
any Protestant Minister to come within the extent of His Majesty's Dominions,
without being severely punished by Corporal Punishment. As for the rest, His
Majesty shall take no Cognizance how and in what manner his Royal Highness uses
the Vaudois, as to their Religion; and his Royal Highness obliges himself not
to suffer the Exercise of the pretended Reformed Religion in the Town of
Pignerol, and Territories Resigned, as His Majesty neither suffers, nor shall
ever suffer it in his Kingdom.

VIII. That there be on both Sides a perpetual Oblivion, and Amnesty of all
that has been done since the beginning of this War, in what manner, or in what
place soever the Hostilities have been committed. That in this Amnesty shall be
comprehended all those that served His Majesty during the War, in any
Employment whatsoever, although they be natural Subjects of his Royal Highness;
so that they shall not be called to account, nor molested in their Persons or
Estates, either by way of Fact or of Justice, or under any other Pretense
whatsoever: The same shall be observed with respect to the King's Subjects, who
have served his Royal Highness.

IX. That the Ecclesiastical Benefices that have been Collated till this
present time by the King, in the Countries of his Royal Highness, Conquered by
His Majesty, during the space of Time his said Majesty has enjoyed them, shall
remain to those to whom the Collation was made by the King, and the Pope's
Bulls; And that for what belongs to the Commanderies of St. Maurice, Offices of
Judicature and Magistracy, his Royal Highness shall have no regard to the
Nomination the King has made about them, during the Possession of his Royal
Highnesses Dominions; And the Patents or Warrants granted by his Royal Highness
for Offices of the Gown, to those that have abandoned their Functions during
the War, shall remain in force.

X. That as for the Contributions laid upon the Countries, in his Royal
Highnesses Dominions, although they be lawfully imposed and due, and amount to
very considerable Sums, His Majesty, as an affect of his Liberality, does
entirely remit them to his Royal Highness; So that from the Day of the
Ratification of the present Treaty, His Majesty shall neither claim nor exact
any of the said Contributions: But shall leave his said Royal Highness to the
free Enjoyment of all his Revenues in all his Dominions, as also of Savoy,
Nice, Precincts of Pignerol, and Suza. And reciprocally his Royal Highness
shall exact no Contributions from the Subjects and Countries of the King's
Dominions.

XI. That for what concerns the Pretensions and Demands of the Duchess of
Nemours, upon his Royal Highness, His Majesty shall leave his said Royal
Highness, and the said Duchess of Nemours, to discuss and debate the said
Pretensions, by the ordinary ways of Justice, without taking any Cognizance of
them.

XII. That it shall be lawful for his Royal Highness to send Intendants or
Commissioners into Savoy, County of Nice, Marquisate of Suza, and Barcelonette,
Pignerol, and its Dependencies to regulate his Concerns, Duties, Revenues, and
settle his Customs and Impositions upon Salt and others, and the said Deputies
shall be received and authorized in their Functions, after the Ratification of
the present Treaty, after which the said Duties shall belong to his Royal
Highness, without Exception or Contradiction.

XIII. That if the Neutrality of Italy should be accepted, or the General Peace
Concluded, because a great number of Troops would be altogether useless, and
burthensom to his Royal Highness, and that besides the Excessive Charges for
keeping them, it is often an occasion of misunderstanding the maintaining of
more standing Forces, than are necessary either for the Defense and
Preservation, or the Dignity of the Sovereign; his Royal Highness obliges
himself not to keep and maintain, in time of Neutrality, above Six Thousand Men
of Foot, on this side the Mountains, and Fifteen Hundred beyond the Mountains,
for the Garrisons of Savoy, and County of Nice, and in all Fifteen Hundred
Horse or Dragoons; which last Obligation of his Royal Highness, shall not take
place before the General Peace.

We the abovementioned Plenipotentiaries, have Concluded and Signed the
present Articles, and we do Promise, and Engage to cause the same to be
Ratified and Confirmed by His Majesty, and his Royal Highness: Moreover, We do
promise that they shall be religiously kept secret till the end of the Month
September next, at which time, if others be made of the same Substance and
Tenor, the present ones shall be suppressed.

Done at Turin the 29th of August, 1696. Rene de Frouillay Tesse. de St. Thomas.

A Translation of the full Power of their Excellencies the Ambassadors of His
Catholic Majesty.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Spain, etc.

We make it known, and declare, That having no greater Passion and Desire than
to see the end of this present and fatal War, and a speedy and solid Peace
restored in Christendom, We do acknowledge with due Affection and Thankfulness,
the charitable and laudable intentions which have moved the most serene and
mighty Prince, our Brother, Cousin, and most dear Friend, the Lord Charles, by
the Grace of God, King of Sueden, Goths and Vandals; Great Prince of Finland,
Duke of Scania, Esthonia, Livonia, Carelia, Bremen, Wherden, Stetin, Pomerania,
Cazubia and Vandalia, Prince of Rugia, Lord of Lingria and Vismaria, Count
Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria, Juliers, Cleves, Deuxponts, etc. To
take upon him the Office of Mediator, and use all his Endeavors and good
Offices to restore the public Tranquillity: And that nothing may be wanting on
our side, that may contribute to so good and salutary an Intention, as soon as
we have been informed that it had been agreed by all the Parties concerned, to
pitch upon and name Ryswick, as the most fit and convenient Place to treat of a
General Peace; We have without any delay named and appointed for our
Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, and as we name and appoint by
these Presents, Don Francisco Bernardo de Quiros, one of our Council of
Castille, and our Ambassador to the States General of the United Provinces of
the Low Countries, and Don Alexander Schockart, Count of Tirimont, one of the
State and Privy Council of the Low Countries of Flanders, that they may treat
that Negotiation from us, and in our Name: And being fully assured and
persuaded, and entirely trusting to their Fidelity, Prudence and Experience in
the management of Affairs, We do specially Charge and Command them to go and
repair with all possible speed to the Village of Ryswick, and enter upon the
Conferences and Treaties of Peace, with the Extraordinary Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries of the most high and mighty Prince Lewis, the most Christian
King of France, our most dear Brother and Cousin, together with all the other
Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of our most high and mighty
Allies, and by the intervention and good Offices of the Extraordinary
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the most high and mighty Prince Charles,
King of Sueden, our most dear Brother. And that they may have a lawful and
sufficient Faculty for the same end, We also give and grant a full and entire
Authority, and all the Power requisite for the same purpose, to our said
Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, Don Francisco Bernardo de
Quiros, and the Count of Tirimont, to them both together, and each of them in
particular, in case of absence or indisposition of either, to Settle, Conclude,
and Sign for Us, and in our Name the Treaty of Peace betwixt Us and our most
Potent Allies, and the most high and mighty Prince the most Christian King of
France. As also to draw, dispatch and deliver all Deeds and Instruments
necessary for that purpose, and generally to do, promise, and stipulate and
conclude Acts and Declarations, to exchange Agreements, and do all other things
belonging to the said Negotiations of Peace, with the same liberty and faculty,
as We could do our Selves, if We were present: Even also in those Affairs and
Acts that may require a more special and explicit Order, than what is
contained in these Presents: And We promise, assure, and plight our Faith and
royal Word, That We shall solemnly ratify in the best form and manner that can
be, and within the time agreed on by common Consent, whatever our said
Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries shall have done, Treated,
Promised, Signed and Concluded, together or separately, in the form aforesaid:
In Testimony of which Premises, and for their greater Force and Validity, we
give these Presents, Signed with our own Hand, Sealed with our Privy Seal, and
Countersigned by our Secretary of State.

Madrid, the 21st of April, 1697. Signed, I the King.
Concordat cum Originali. Don Crispin Gonsales Botello.

Full Power of their Excellencies the Ambassadors of His most Christian Majesty.
LEWIS by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarr,
to all those to whom these Presents shall come Greeting.
Whereas it is our most ardent Desire, to see the War which now afflicts
Christendom, concluded and ended by a good Peace; and whereas through the
Endeavors and Mediation of our most Dear and most Beloved Brother the King of
Sueden, the Cities of Delf and the Hague have been pitched and agreed upon by
all Parties, there to hold the Conferences necessary for that purpose; we out
of the same desire to put a stop, as far as in us lies, and with the assistance
of Divine Providence, to the Desolation of so many Provinces, and the Effusion
of much Christian Blood, make it known and declare, That we fully and entirely
trusting in the Experience, Capacity and Fidelity of our beloved and trusty
Harlay de Bonnevil Counselor in Ordinary in our Council of State, of our well
beloved Verjus Count of Crecy, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, the Two
Churches, Manillet and other Places, and of our well beloved De Caillieres Lord
of Roche-Chellay and Gigny, by the trial we have made, and the pregnant Proofs
we have had of them in the several important Employments, wherewith we have
entrusted them, both within and without our Kingdom: For these Reasons, and
other weighty Considerations us moving, we have committed, ordained and deputed
the said de Harlay, de Crecy and Cailliers, and we do commit, ordain and depute
them by these Presents, Signed with our own Hand, and have given, and do give
them full Power, Commission and special Command to go and repair to the said
City of Delft, in Quality of our Plenipotentiaries and Extraordinary
Ambassadors for the Peace, and there to confer, either directly or through the
interposition of the Ambassadors Mediators, respectively received and approved,
with all the Ambassadors, Plenipotentiaries and Ministers, as well of our most
dear and most beloved Brother the Emperor of the Romans, as of our most dear
and most beloved Brother and Cousin the Catholic King, as also of our most
dear and great Friends the States General of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries; and of all other Princes their Allies, being all provided with
sufficient Powers: And there to Treat of Means to adjust and pacify those
Differences which are, at present, the occasion of the War; and our said
Plenipotentiaries all Three together, or Two of them, in case the other be
absent through Sickness or any other hindrance, or One of them, the other Two
being absent in the like Case of Sickness or through any other hindrance, shall
have Power to agree upon the said Means, and accordingly conclude and Sign a
good and firm Peace, and in general to do, negotiate, promise and grant all
that they shall think necessary for the said Work of the Peace, with the same
Authority as we should and could do our selves if we were there in Person,
although there may be something that should require a more special Command not
contained in these Presents; and we do promise upon the Faith and Word of a
King to hold good, and perform whatever by the said de Harlay, de Crecy and
Caillieres, or by Two of them in case the other be absent through Sickness or
other hindrance, shall have been stipulated, promised and granted, and for that
purpose to cause our Letters of Ratification to be dispatched, within the time
that they shall promise, in our Name, to exhibit and deliver them in, for such
is our Will and Pleasure, in Testimony whereof we have caused these Presents to
be Sealed with our Seal.

Given at Versailles, the 25th of February, 1697. in the Year of our Reign
54th, Signed LEWIS.
And on the Fold, By the King. COLBERT.
And sealed with the Great Seal, in Yellow Wax.
Treaty of Peace, Made Concluded and Agreed at Ryswick in Holland, the 10/20th
of September, 1697. Between the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of his Most
Christian Majesty on one Part, and the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of
Their Lordships the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries
on the other Part.
IN the Name of God and the Most Holy Trinity: Be it known to All, both present
and to come, that during the Course of the most Bloody War that ever afflicted
Europe for these many Years past, it has pleased the Divine Providence to
prepare the End of the Miseries of Europe, by preserving an ardent Desire for
Peace, in the Heart of the Most High, Most-Excellent, and Mighty Prince Lewis
XIV. by the Grace of God the Most Christian King of France and Navarre; and his
Most Christian Majesty having no other Aim or Prospect than to make it firm and
perpetual by the Equity of its Conditions; and their Lordships the
States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, being desirous to
concur sincerely, and as far as in them lies, to the Restoration of the public
Tranquillity, and to return to the ancient Friendship and Affection of his Most
Christian Majesty, they have first consented and agreed to own for that purpose
the Mediation of the Most High, Most Excellent and Mighty Prince Charles XI. of
Glorious Memory, by the Grace of God, King of Sueden, Goths and Vandals; but a
sudden Death having frustrated the Hopes which all Europe had justly
entertained of his Councils and good Offices; his Most Christian Majesty, and
the said Lords the States General, still persisting in the Resolution, to put a
stop as soon as possible to the Effusion of so much Christian Blood, have
thought they could not do better than to acknowledge in the same quality the
Most High, Most Excellent and Mighty Prince Charles XII. King of Sueden, his
Son and Successor, who on his part has continued the same Endeavors to further
the Peace betwixt his Most Christian Majesty, and the said Lords the
States General, in the Conferences held for that purpose in the Royal Palace of
Ryswick, in the Province of Holland, betwixt the Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary Ambassadors named on both Sides: To wit, by his Most Christian
Majesty, Nicolas Augustus de Harlay, Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Cely,
Counselor in Ordinary to His Majesty in his Council of State; Lewis Verjus,
Knight, Count of Crecy, Counselor in Ordinary to His Majesty in his Council of
State, Marquis of Treon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, the Two Churches,
Fort Isle, Menillet and other places; and Francis de Caillieres, Knight, Lord
of Caillieres, Roche-chellay and Gigny; and by the said Lords the
States General, Anthony Heinsius, Counselor Pensionary of the States of
Holland and West-Friesland, Keeper of the Great Seal, and Super-intendant of
the Fiefs of the same Province; Everhard de Weed, Lord of Weed, Dyckvelt,
Rareles and other places, Lord of the Manor of the Town of Oudewater, Dean and
Rector of the Imperial Chapter of St. Mary in Vtrecht, President of the States
of the said Province; and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, Deputy from the
Nobility to the States of Friesland, and Curator of the University of Franeker,
Deputies in their Assembly from the States of Holland, Vtrecht and Friesland;
who having first implored the Divine Assistance, and Communicated to each other
their respective Full-Powers, (the Copies of which shall be inserted Word for
Word at the end of this Treaty) and duly exchanged the same by the Intervention
and Mediation of the Baron of Lillieroot, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary of the King of Sueden, who has discharged the Function of a
Mediator, with all the necessary Prudence, Capacity and Equity, they have
agreed to the Glory of God, and for the good of Christendom upon the following
Conditions.

I. THere shall-be for the future, betwixt his Most Christian Majesty, and his
Successors Kings of France and Navarre, and his Kingdoms on one Part, and their
Lordships the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, on
the other Part, a good, firm, sincere and inviolable Peace; and upon account of
the same, all Hostilities of what kind soever they be, shall cease and be left
off between the said Lord King, and the said Lords the States General, as well
by Land as by Sea, and on fresh Waters, in all their Kingdoms, Countries,
Lands, Provinces and Lordships, and between all their Subjects and Inbitants of
what Quality or Condition soever they be, without any Exception of Places or
Persons.

II. There shall be an Oblivion and general Amnesty of all that has been
committed on both Sides, on the occasion of the late War, either by those who
being born Subjects of France, and engaged in the Service of the Most Christian
King, by the Employments and Estates which they enjoyed throughout the Kingdom
of France, are entered into, and have continued in the Service of their
Lordships the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries; or
by those who being born Subjects of the said Lords the States General, or
engaged in their Service by the Employments and Estates which they enjoyed
within the extent of the United Provinces, are entered into, or have remained in
the Service of his Most Christian Majesty: And the said Persons of what Quality
or Condition they may be, without Exception shall be permitted to come and
return, and shall accordingly return, and be effectually left and restored to
the quiet Possession and Enjoyment of all their Estates, Honors, Dignities,
Privileges, Franchises, Rights, Exemptions, Constitutions and Liberties,
without being called in question, troubled, or vexed or molested, either in
general, or in particular, upon any cause or pretense whatsoever, for what has
been done since the breaking out of the said War: And by Virtue of the present
Treaty, as soon as the same shall have been Ratified both by his Most Christian
Majesty, and the said Lords the States General, it shall be free for all and
every one of them, with any Letters of Abolition and Pardon, to return in
Person to their own Houses, and the Enjoyment of their Lands, and all their
other Goods, or to dispose of them as they shall think fit.

III. And if it should happen that any Prizes or Ships should be taken on
either Side, in the Baltic and North Seas from Terneuse, to the end of the
Channel after the space of four Weeks; or from the end of the said Channel to
Cape St. Vincent, after the space of six Weeks; and beyond that in the
Mediterranean Sea, and as far as the Aequinoctial Line after the space of ten
Weeks; Lastly, beyond the said Line throughout the whole World after the space
of eight Months, to be reckoned from the Day of the Publication of the Peace at
Paris, and at the Hague; the said Prizes that shall be taken on either Side
after the Times aforesaid shall be restored, and the Damages sustained thereby
made good and repaired.

IV. Moreover, there shall be between the said Lord King, and the said Lords
the States General, their respective Subjects and Inhabitants, a sincere, firm
and perpetual Friendship and good Correspondence, as well by Land as by Water,
in all Things, and in all Places, both in Europe and all other parts of the
World: And they shall maintain no Resentment for the Injuries or Damages done
or received as well in times past, as on the occasion of the said Wars.

V. And by Virtue, and upon the account of the said Friendship and
Correspondence, as well His Majesty as their Lordships the States General shall
faithfully procure and promote the good, advantage and prosperity of each
other, by all manner of Support, Help, Counsel and real Assistance, in all
Times and upon all Occasions, and shall not for the future give their Consent
to any Treaties or Negotiations that might bring damage to either of them, but
shall break them, and give notice of them reciprocally with Diligence and
Sincerity, as soon as they shall have Knowledge of them.

VI. Those whose Goods or Estates have been seized and confiscated upon account
of the said War, their Heirs or Assigns, of what Condition or Religion soever
they may be, shall enjoy the said Goods and Estates, and shall take possession
of them by their own private Authority; and by virtue of this present Treaty,
without having recourse to any Court of Justice, notwithstanding all
incorporations to the Public Treasury, Engagements, Gifts by Deeds,
preparatory or definitive Sentence, given by default in the absence of, and
without hearing the Parties, Treaties, Agreements and Transactions, what
Renunciations soever may have been made by the said Transactions to debar of
part of the said Estates, those to whom they belong. And it shall be lawful for
the first Proprietors of all and every one of the said Estates, which pursuant
to this present Treaty, shall be restored or are reciprocally to be restored,
their Heirs or Assigns, to Sell and Dispose of the said Estates, without Suing
or obtaining any private Consent for that purpose: And afterward it shall also
be lawful for the Proprietors of those Rents, which by the Officers of the
Public Treasury shall be settled instead of the Estates so Sold, as also of
those Rents and Actions respectively belonging to the Public Treasuries, to
dispose of the property of the same, either by Rent or otherwise, as of their
other Estates.

VII. And whereas the Marquisate of Bergen op Zoom, and all the Rights and
Revenues depending upon the same, and generally all the Lands and Estates
belonging to the Count d'Auvergne, Colonel General of the Light Horse of
France; and which under the Power and Dominion of the said Lords the States
General of the United Provinces, have been seized and confiscated on the
occasion of the War, which the present Treaty shall bring to a happy
Conclusion: It has been agreed, That the said Count D'Auvergne shall be
restored to the Possession of the said Marquisate of Bergen op Zoom, its
Appurtenances and Dependencies, as also to all his Rights, Actions,
Privileges, Customs and Prerogatives, which he enjoyed at the time of the
Declaration of the War.

VIII. All Countries, Towns, Places, Lands, Forts, Islands and Lordships, as
well in Europe as out of Europe, that may have been taken and possessed since
the beginning of the present War, shall be restored on both Sides, in the same
Condition they were in, as to the Fortifications, when taken, and as to the
other Buildings, in the Condition they shall be found in, without destroying,
demolishing or indamaging, any thing in the same, as also without demanding any
Recompense for what may have been demolished before; and namely the Fort and
Settlement of Pontichery, shall be restored upon the forementioned Terms to the
East India Company, settled in France. As for the Artillery that has been
carried away by the East India Company of the United Provinces, it shall be
left in their Possession, and likewise the Provisions and Ammunition, Slaves
and all other Effects, to be disposed of as they shall think fit; as also of
the Lands, Rights and Privileges, which they have purchased as well of the
Prince, as of the Inhabitants of that Country.

IX. All Prisoners of War shall be released on both Sides, without distinction
or reservation, and without paying any Ransom.

X. The Raising of Contributions shall cease on both Sides, from the Day of the
Exchange of the Ratifications of the present Treaty of Peace, and no Arrears of
the said Contributions before demanded and granted, shall be exacted; but all
Pretensions and Claims that may remain on that Score, upon what Title or
Pretense soever, shall be entirely nulled and made void on both Sides. As also
after the Exchange of the said Ratifications of the present Treaty, all
Contributions shall cease on both Sides, with respect to the Countries of the
most Christian and Catholic Kings.

XI. And the more to confirm this Treaty, and make it lasting; it is also
stipulated and agreed betwixt His Majesty and their Lordships the States
General, That this Treaty being duly put in Execution, there shall be, as there
is by this present one, a Renunciation both general and particular, to all
sorts of Pretensions, both of the time past and present, of what nature soever
they be, which one Party may claim from the other, thereby to take away for the
future all occasions that may cause and raise new Dissentions and Differences.

XII. The ordinary Administration of Justice shall reciprocally be set open,
and it shall be free for the Subjects of either Party, to claim and pursue
their Rights, Actions and Pretensions, according to the Laws and Statutes of
each Countries, and obtain one against another without distinction, all lawful
Satisfaction: And if there have been any Letters of Reprisal granted on either
Side, either before or after the Declaration of the late War, the same shall
remain null and void; with a Proviso for the Parties to whom they have been
granted, to sue for redress by the ordinary course of Justice.

XIII. If it happens through Inadvertency or any other Cause, that the present
Treaty should be either not fulfilled or infringed in any particular Article,
either by His said Majesty, or the said Lords the States General, and their
Successors; this Peace and Alliance shall not on that Account be interrupted,
but shall remain in all its force and vigor, without any Rupture of Friendship
and good Correspondence: But the said Infringement shall speedily be made good,
and if it has happened through the Fault of any particular Subjects, they alone
shall be Punished and Chastised for the same.

XIV. And the better to settle and secure the Commerce and Friendship for the
future, between the Subjects of the said Lord King, and those of the said Lords
the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, it is hereby
stipulated and agreed, that in case there should be hereafter any Interruption
of Friendship, or open Rupture between the Crown of France and the said Lords
the States of the said Provinces, (which God forbid) the space of Nine Months,
after the said Rupture, shall be allowed to the Subjects on both Sides to
retire and withdraw with their Effects, and Transport the same whither they
think fit. Which they shall be permitted to do, as also to Sell or Transport
their moveable Goods, in all manner of Liberty without any Molestation. And it
shall not be lawful during the said Time to seize their said Effects, and much
less to Arrest their Persons.

XV. The Treaty of Peace concluded between the most Christian King and the late
Elector of Brandenburg at St. Germans en Lay, the 29th June, 1679. shall be
restored in all its Articles, and remain in its former Vigor, between His most
Christian Majesty and his present Electoral Highness of Brandenburg.

XVI. Whereas it greatly concerns the public Tranquillity, That the Treaty be
observed which was concluded between His most Christian Majesty, and his Royal
Highness the Duke of Savoy, on the 9th of August, 1696. It is agreed to confirm
the same by this present Treaty.

XVII. And because His Majesty and their Lordships the States General, do
gratefully acknowledge the powerful Offices and good Counsels which the King of
Sueden has continually used and employed for the public Safety and Repose: It
is agreed on both Sides, that his Suedish Majesty and his Kingdoms, shall be
included and comprehended in the present Treaty, in the best form and manner
that can be.

XVIII. Under this present Treaty of Peace and Alliance, shall be comprehended
all those who shall be named by the said most Christian King, before the
Exchange of Ratifications, and within the space of Six Months after.

XIX. And all those who shall be named by their Lordships the States General,
the King of Great Britain, and the King of Spain, and all their other Allies,
who within the space of six Weeks, to be reckoned from the Exchange of
Ratifications, shall declare that they accept the Peace, as also the Thirteen
laudable Cantons of the Consederate Switzers, and particularly in the best form
and manner that can be, the Republics and Evangelical Cantons, Zurich, Bern,
Glaris, Basil, Schafhausen and Appenzel, with all their Allies and
Consederates, namely the Republic of Geneva and its Dependencies, the City and
County of Neufchatel, the Towns of St. Galls, Milhausen and Bienne. Item, the
Confederacy of the Grisons and their Dependencies, the Cities of Bremen and
Embden; and moreover, all Kings, Princes and States, Cities and private
Persons, whom, upon their Request, the said Lords the States General shall
admit into the said Treaty.

XX. The said Lord King, and the said Lords the States General, consent and
agree, That his Suedish Majesty in quality of Mediator, and all other
Potentates and Princes, that shall be willing to enter into the same
Engagement, may give to His Majesty, and the said Lords the States General,
their Promises and Deeds of Warranty, for the performance of all the Contents
of this present Treaty.

XXI. The present Treaty shall be Ratified and approved by the said Lord King,
and the said Lords the States General, and the Letters of Ratification shall be
delivered within the time of three Weeks, or sooner if possible, to be reckoned
from the Day on which the present Treaty is Signed.

XXII. And for the greater security of this Treaty of Peace, and all the
Articles in it contained, the said present Treaty shall be published, verified
and registered in the Court of Parliament of Paris; and in all other Parliaments
of the Kingdom of France, and Chamber of Accounts of the said City of Paris,
and likewise the said Treaty shall be published, verified and registered by the
said Lords the States General, in the Courts and other places where
Publications, Verifications and Registrings are used to be done.

In Testimony whereof, We the Ambassadors of His said Majesty, and of the said
Lords the States General, by Virtue of our respective Powers, and in the said
Names have signed these Presents with our manual Sign, and caused them to be
sealed with our Seals and Coats of Arms, at Ryswick in Holland, the 20th of
September, 1697.

Signed, N. Lillieroot, (L. S.) De Harlay Bonneuil, (L. S.) Verjus de Crecy,
(L. S.) De Caillieres, (L. S.) A. Heinsius, (L. S.) E. de Walde, (L. S.) W. Van
Haren. (L. S.)


The Tenor of the full Power of the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of His
most Christian Majesty.
LEWIS by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre,
to all those to whom these Presents shall come Greeting.
Whereas it is our most ardent Desire, to see the War which now afflicts
Christendom, concluded and ended by a good Peace; and whereas through the
Endeavors and Mediation of our most Dear and most Beloved Brother the King of
Sueden, the Cities of Delft and the Hague have been pitched and agreed upon by
all Parties, there to hold the Conferences necessary for that purpose; we out
of the same desire to put a stop, as far as in us lies, and with the assistance
of Divine Providence, to the Desolation of so many Provinces, and the Effusion
of much Christian Blood, make it known and declare, That we fully and entirely
trusting in the Experience, Capacity and Fidelity of our beloved and trusty
Harlay de Bonneuil Counselor in Ordinary in our Council of State, of our well
beloved Verjus Count of Crecy, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, the Two
Churches, Manillet and other Places, and of our well beloved De Caillieres Lord
of Roche-Chellay and Gigny, by the trial we have made, and the pregnant Proofs
we have had of them in the several important Employments, with which we have
entrusted them, both within and without our Kingdom: For these Reasons, and
other weighty Considerations us moving, we have committed, appointed and
deputed the said de Harlay, de Crecy and Cailliers, and we do commit, appoint
and depute them by these Presents, Signed with our own Hand, and have given,
and do give them full Power, Commission and special Command to go and repair to
the said City of Delft, in Quality of our Plenipotentiaries and Extraordinary
Ambassadors for the Peace, and there to confer, either directly or through the
interposition of the Ambassadors Mediators, respectively received and approved,
with the Ambassadors, Plenipotentiaries and Ministers of our most dear and
great Friends the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries;
and being all provided with, and authorized by sufficient Powers: And there to
Treat of Means to adjust and pacify those Differences which are, at present,
the occasion of the War; and our said Plenipotentiaries all Three together, or
Two of them, in case the other be absent through Sickness or any other
hindrance, or One of them, the other Two being absent in the like Case of
Sickness or through any other hindrance, shall have Power to agree upon the
said Means, and accordingly conclude and Sign a good and firm Peace, and in
general to do, negotiate, promise and grant all that they shall think necessary
and conducing to effect the said Peace, with the same Authority as we should
and could do our selves if we were there in Person, although there may be
something that should require a more special Command not contained in these
Presents; and we do promise upon the Faith and Word of a King to hold good, and
perform whatever by the said de Harlay, de Crecy and Caillieres, or by Two of
them, the other being absent through Sickness or other hindrance, or One of
them, the other Two being absent in the like Case of Sickness, or through any
other hindrance, shall have been stipulated, promised and granted, and for that
purpose to cause our Letters of Ratification to be dispatched, within the time
that they shall promise, in our Name, to exhibit and deliver them in, for such
is our Will and Pleasure, in Testimony whereof we have caused these Presents to
be Sealed with our Seal.

Given at Versailles, the 25th of February, 1697. in the 54th Year of our
Reign, Signed LEWIS.
And on the Fold, was written, By the King. Signed, COLBERT.

The Tenor of the full Powers of the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of Their
High and Mightinesses the States General.
THE States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
to all those to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting:
Whereas it is the most ardent of our Wishes, to see the War which now afflicts
Christendom, concluded and ended by a good Peace; and whereas through the
Endeavors and Mediation of the most serene King of Sweden, the Palace of
Ryswick, has been pitched and agreed upon by all Parties for the place of
Conference: We out of the same desire to put a stop, as far as in Us lies, to
the Desolation of so many Provinces, and the Effusion of so much Christian
Blood, have been willing to contribute to it all that is in our Power, and for
that purpose Depute to the said Assembly some Persons out of the Body of ours,
who at several times have given sufficient Proofs of their Knowledge and
Experience in public Affairs, as likewise of their Affection for the good of
our States. And whereas James Boreel, Lord of Duynbeeck, Westhoven and
Meresteyn, Senator and Burghmaster of the City of Amsterdam, and Counselor
Deputy of the Province of Holland; Everhard de Weed, Lord of Weed, Dyckvelt,
Rateles, etc. Lord of the Manor of the Town of Oudewater, Dean and Rector of
the Imperial Chapter of St. Mary in Vtrecht, Dyckgrave of the River Rhine, in
the Province of Vtrecht, President of the States of the said Province; and
William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, Deputy for the Nobility in the States of
Friesland, and Curator of the University of Franeker, Deputies in our Assembly
for the States of Holland, Vtrecht and Friesland, have signalized themselves in
several important Employments for our Service, wherein they have given Proofs
of their Fidelity, Diligence, Address and Skill in the management of Business:
For these Reasons and other Considerations Us moving, We have committed,
ordained and deputed the said, Boreel, de Weed, and de Haren, and We do
commit, ordain and depute them by these Presents, and have given, and do give
them full Power, Commission and special Command to go and repair to Ryswick, in
Quality of our Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries for the Peace;
and there to Confer either directly, or through the interposition of the
Ambassadors Mediators respectively received and approved, with the
Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of his Most Christian Majesty
and his Allies, being provided with sufficient Powers, and there to treat of
Means to determine and compose the Differences, which are the occasion of this
present War: And our said Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, or Two of them, in
Case the other be absent through Sickness or other hindrance, or One of them,
the other Two being absent in the like Case of Sickness, or through any other
hindrance, shall have Power to agree upon the said Means, and accordingly
Conclude and Sign a good and firm Peace, and in general to do, negotiate,
promise and grant all that they shall think necessary to Effect the said Peace,
and do in general all that We could do our Selves if We were there present,
although for that purpose there should be required a more special Power and
Command, not contained in these Presents. And We do sincerely and faithfully
promise to approve, and hold firm and constant, whatever by the said our
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, or by Two of them in Case the Third be
absent through Sickness or other hindrance, or by One of them, the other Two
being absent in the like Case of Sickness, or through any other hindrance,
shall have been stipulated, promised and granted, and to cause our Letters of
Ratification to be dispatched, within the time that they shall promise in our
Name, to exhibit and deliver them in.

Given at the Hague in our Assembly, under our great Seal the Flourish and
Signature of the President of our Assembly, and the Signature of our Secretary
the 6th of April, in the Year, 1697. Signed F. B. de Reed,
Upon the Fold was written, By Order of the said Lords the States General,
Signed F. FAGEL,
And Sealed with the Great Seal in Red Wax.
THE States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
to all those to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas it is our most ardent desire, to see the War which now afflicts
Christendom, concluded and ended by a good Peace; and as through the Endeavors
and Mediation of the most serene King of Sueden, the Royal Palace of Ryswick,
has been pitched and agreed upon by all Parties for the place of Conferences:
We out of the same Desire to put a stop as far as in Us shall lie, to the
Desolation of so many Provinces, and the Effusion of so much Christian Blood,
have been willing to contribute to it all that is in our Power, and for that
purpose we have already deputed in Quality of our Extraordinary Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries to the said Assembly, some Persons who are Members of Ours;
who have at several times given Proofs of their Knowledge and Experience in
public Affairs, and of their Affection for the good of our State: To wit,
James Boreel, Lord of Duynbeeck, Westhoven and Meresteyn, Senator and
Burghmaster of the City of Amsterdam, and Counselor Duputy of the Province of
Holland; Everhard de Weed, Lord of Weed, Dyckvelt, Rateles, etc. Lord of the
Manor of the Town of Oudewater, Dean and Rector of the Imperial Chapter of St.
Mary in Vtrecht, Dyckgrave of the River Rhine, in the Province of Vtrecht,
President of the States of the said Province; and William de Haren, Grietman of
Bilt, Deputy for the Nobility in the States of Friesland, and Curator of the
University of Franeker, Deputies in our Assembly of the States of Holland,
Vtrecht and Friesland: And whereas we now think it convenient to join a Fourth
Person to our Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries aforenamed, for
the same purpose, and that Anthony Heinsius, Counselor Pensionary of the
States of Holland and West-Friesland, Keeper of the Great Seal, Superintendent
of the Fiefs, and Deputy in our Assembly for the same Province, has signalized
himself in several important Employments for our Service, wherein he has
approved his Fidelity, Diligence and Skill in the management of Affairs. For
these Causes and other Considerations Us moving, We have constituted, ordained
and deputed, and We do constitute, ordain and depute the said Heinsius, and to
him We have given, and do give full Power, Commission and special Command to go
and repair to Ryswick, in Quality of our Extraordinary Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary for the Peace, and there to Confer either directly, or through
the interposition of the Ambassadors Mediators respesitively received and
approved, with the Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of his Most
Christian Majesty and his Allies, being provided with sufficient Powers: And
there to treat of Means to adjust and pacify the Differences which occasion
this present War; and our same Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, together with
the said Boreel, de Weed, and de Haren, our three other Extraordinary
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, or with two or one of them, in Case the
other be absent through Sickness or other hindrance, or he alone in Case all
the other three be absent through Sickness or other hindrance, shall have Power
to agree upon the said Means, and accordingly Conclude and Sign a good and firm
Peace: And in general to do, negotiate, promise and grant all that he shall
think necessary to effect the said Peace, and to do in general all that we
could do our Selves if we were there present, although there should be required
for that purpose, a more special Power and Command, not contained in these
Presents; and we sincerely and faithfully do promise, to approve and hold firm
and constant, whatever by the said Heinsius, together with our three other
Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, or with two or one of them, in
Case the other be absent through Sickness or other hindrance, or by him alone,
all the other three being absent through Sickness or other hindrance, shall
have been stipulated, promised and granted, and to cause our Letters of
Ratification to be dispatched within the time that he shall promise in our Name
to exhibit and deliver them in.

Given at the Hague in our Assembly, under our Great Seal, the Flourish and
Signature of the President of our Assembly, and the Signature of our Secretary,
the 5th of August, 1697. Signed F. B. de Reed,
Upon the Fold was written, By Order of the said Lords the States General,
Signed F. FAGEL,
And Sealed with the Great Seal in Red Wax.
Separate Article.
BEsides all that is concluded and stipulated by the Treaty of Peace made
betwixt the Plenipotentiaries and Extraordinary Ambassadors of the Most
Christian King, and those of their Lordships the States General of the United
Provinces this present Day, the 20th of September, 1697. It is moreover agreed
by this Separate Article, which shall have the same Force and Effect as if it
was inserted Word for Word in the said Treaty, That his Most Christian Majesty
shall Covenant and Agree, and by the present Article he does covenant and
agree, That it shall be free for the Emperor and the Empire, until the 1st Day
of November next, to accept the Conditions of Peace lately proposed by the Most
Christian King, according to the Declaration made on the 1st Day of this
present Month of September, unless in the mean time it shall be otherwise
agreed between his Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and his Most Christian
Majesty. And in Case his Imperial Majesty does not within the time prefixed
accept those Conditions, or that it be not otherwise agreed between his
Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and his Most Christian Majesty, the said
Treaty shall have its full Effect, and be duly put in Execution according to
its Form and Tenor, and it shall not be lawful for the said Lords the
States General, directly or indirectly, on any account or cause whatsoever, to
Act contrary to the said Treaty.

In Testimony whereof, We the Ambassadors of his said Majesty, and the said
Lords the States General, by Virtue of our respective Powers, and in the Names
aforesaid, have Signed this Separate Article, and caused it to be Sealed with
our Seals and Coat of Arms, at Ryswick in Holland, the 20th Day of September,
1697.

Here were Signed, N. A. de Harlay Bonneuil, (L. S.) Verjusde Crecy, (L.S.) De
Caillieres, (L. S.) A. Heinsius, (L. S.) E. de Weed, (L. S.) W. Van Haren. (L.
S.)


The Ratification of His most Christian Majesty, upon the Treaty of Peace and
Friendship.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre,
to all those to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas our beloved and trusty Counselor in Ordinary in our Council of State,
Nicolas Augustus de Harlay, Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Cely; our dear
and well beloved Lewis Verjus, Knight, Count of Crecy, Marquess of Treon, Baron
of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, the Two Churches, Fort-Isle and Menillet; and our
dear and well beloved Francis de Caillieres, Knight, Lord of Roche-Chellay and
Gigny, our Plenipotentiaries and Extraordinary Ambassadors, by virtue of the
full Power we had given them, have concluded, agreed and signed on the 20th Day
of September last past, at Ryswick, with Anthony Heinsius, Counselor
Pensionary of the States of Holland and West-Friesland, Keeper of the Great
Seal, and Superintendent of the Fiefs of the same Province; Everhard de Weed,
Lord of Weed, Dyckvelt, Rateles, etc. Lord of the Manor of the Town of
Oudewater, Dean and Rector of the imperial Chapter of St. Mary in Vtrecht,
Dyckgrave of the River Rhine in the Province of Vtrecht, President of the
States of the said Province; and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, Deputy for
the Nobility in the States of Friesland, and Curator of the University of
Franeker, Deputies in their Assembly for the States of Holland, Vtrecht and
Friesland, in quality of Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of our
most dear and great Friends the States General of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries, also provided with full Powers for the Treaty of Peace, the
Tenor of which is as follows.

In the Name of God, etc.

We liking and approving the said Treaty of Peace, in all and every one of the
Points and Articles, therein contained and expressed, have accepted, approved,
ratified and confirmed, and we do accept, approve, ratify and confirm the same,
as well for us, as for our Heirs, Successors, Kingdoms, Countries, Lands,
Lordships and Subjects. And we do promise upon the Faith and Word of a King,
under the Obligation and Mortgage of all and every one of our Estates, both
present and to come, inviolably to keep and observe the same, without ever
acting or doing any thing to them contrary, directly or indirectly, in no
manner whatsoever. In Testimony whereof, We have signed these Presents with our
own Hand, and caused them to be sealed with our Seal.

Given at Fontainebleau the third Day of October, in the Year of our Lord,
1697. and of our Reign the 55th, Signed LEWIS.
And a little lower, By the King, Signed COLBERT.

The Ratification of their Lordships the States General of the United Provinces
of the Low Countries, upon the Treaty of Peace and Friendship.
THE States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
to all those to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Having perused and examined the Treaty of Peace and Friendship made and
concluded at Ryswick in Holland, on the 20th of September in the present Year,
1697. by Nicolas Augustus de Harlay, Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Celi,
Counselor in ordinary to His most Christian Majesty in his Council of State;
Lewis Verjus, Knight, Count of Crecy, Counselor in ordinary to His Majesty in
his Council of State, Marquess of Treon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, the
Two Churches, Fort-Isle, Menillet and other Places; and Francis de Caillieres,
Knight, Lord of Caillieres, Roche-chellay and Gigny, Extraordinary Ambassadors
and Plenipotentiaries of His most Christian Majesty, in the Assembly of
Ryswick, in the Name and from His said Majesty. And by Anthony Heinsius,
Counselor Pensionary of the States of Holland and West-Friesland, Keeper of
the Great Seal, and Superintendent of the Fiefs of the same Province; Everhard
de Weed, Lord of Weed, Dyckvelt, Rateles and other Places, Lord of the Manor
of the Town of Oudewater, Dean and Rector of the imperial Chapter of St. Mary
in Vtrecht, Dyckgrave of the River Rhine in the Province of Vtrecht, President
of the States of the same Province; and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt,
Deputy for the Nobility in the States of Friesland, and Curator of the
University of Franeker; Deputies in our Assembly for the States of Holland,
Vtrecht and Friesland, our Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries in
the said Assembly of Ryswick, in our Name, and from us, by virtue of their
respective full Powers, the Tenor of which Treaty, is as follows.

In the Name of God, etc.

And whereas by the said Treaty it is provided, that the Letters of
Ratification shall be delivered in on both Sides, in good and due form, within
the time of three Weeks or sooner if possible, to be reckoned from the Day on
which the Treaty was signed: We being willing to give Proofs of our Sincerity,
and acquit the promises which our Ambassadors have made for us, we have
approved, confirmed and ratified, and we do approve, confirm and ratify by
these Presents, the said Treaty, and every one of its Articles, abovementioned
and transcribed; and do we faithfully and sincerely Promise, inviolably to
keep, maintain and observe the same in all its particulars, without ever acting
or doing any thing to it contrary, directly or indirectly, upon any account or
in any manner whatsoever. In Testimony whereof, we have caused these Presents
to be Signed by the President of our Assembly, Countersigned by our Secretary,
and, sealed with our Great Seal.

Done at the Hague the 10th of October, 1697.
The Ratification of his Most Christian Majesty, upon the Separate Article.
LEWIS, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre,
to all those to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting:
Having perused and examined the Separate Article, which our beloved and trusty
Counselor in Ordinary in our Council of State, Nicolas Augustus de Harlay,
Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Cely; Our dear and well-beloved Lewis
Verjus, Knight, Count of Crecy, Marquis of Treon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of
Boulay, the Two Churches, Fort-Isle, and Menillet; and our dear and well
beloved Francis de Caillieres, Knight, Lord of Caillieres, Roche-chellay and
Gigny, our Plenipotentiaries and Extraordinary Ambassadors, by Virtue of the
full Powers We had given them, have concluded, agreed and signed on the 20th
Day of September last past at Ryswick, with Anthony Heinsius, Counselor
Pensionary of the Province of Holland and West-Friesland, Keeper of the Great
Seal, and Super-intendent of the Fiefs; Everhard de Weed, Lord of Weed,
Dyckvelt, Rateles etc. Lord of the Manor of the Town of Oudewater, Dean and
Rector of the Imperial Chapter of St. Mary in Vtrecht, Dyckgrave of the River
Rhine, in the Province of Vtrecht, President of the States of the said
Province; and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, Deputy for the Nobility in
the States of Friesland, and Curator of the University of Francker, and
Deputies in their Assembly for the States of Holland, Vtrecht and Friesland; in
Quality of Plenipotentiaries and Extraordinary Ambassadors of our most dear and
great Friends the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
also provided with full Powers, of which Separate Article the Tenor is as
follows,

Besides all that is Concluded, etc.

We liking and approving the said Separate Article in all its Contents, have
allowed, approved, and ratified the same, and We do allow, approve and ratify
it by these Presents, Signed with our own Hand; and We promise upon the Faith
and Word of a King to perform, and observe the same, and cause it to be
observed sincerely and faithfully, and never to suffer any thing to be done to
it contrary, directly or indirectly, upon any account or cause whatsoever.

In Testimony whereof We have Signed these Presents, and caused them to be
Sealed with our Seal.

Given at Fontainebleau, the 3d Day of October, in the Year of Our Lord, 1697.
and of our Reign the 55th. Signed LEWIS.
And a little lower, By the King. Signed, COLBERT.

The Ratification of the States General of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries, upon the Separate Article.
THE States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
to all those to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting:
Whereas besides the Treaty of Peace and Friendship made and concluded at
Ryswick in Holland, the 20th Day of September, of the present Year, 1697. There
has also been made a Separate Article, by Nicolas Augustus de Harlay, Knight,
Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Cely, Counselor in Ordinary to his Most Christian
Majesty in his Council of State; Lewis Verjus, Knight, Count of Crecy,
Counselor in Ordinary to His Majesty in his Council of State, Marquis of
Treon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, The Two Churches, Fort-Isle, Menillet,
and other Places; and Francis Callieres, Knight, Lord of Callieres,
Roche-Chellay and Gigny, Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of his
Most Christian Majesty in the Assembly of Ryswick, in the Name and from his
said Majesty: And by Anthony Heinsius, Counselor Pensionary of the Province of
Holland and West-Friesland, Keeper of the Great Seal, and Superintendent of the
Fiefs of the said Province; Everhard de Weed, Lord of Weed, Dyckvelt,
Rateles, and other Places, Lord of the Manor of the Town of Oudewater, Dean
and Rector of the Imperial Chapter of St. Mary in Vtrecht, Dyckgrave of the
River Rhine, in the Province of Vtrecht, and President of the States of the
said Province; and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, Deputy for the Nobility
in the States of Friesland, and Curator of the University of Franeker, Deputies
in our Assembly for the States of Holland, Vtrecht and Friesland. Our
Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries in the said Assembly of
Ryswick, in Our Name and from Us, by Virtue of their respective full Powers, of
which Separate Article, the Tenor is as follows,

Besides all that is Concluded, etc.

We likeing and accepting the said Separate Article, have approved and
ratified, and We approve and ratify the same by these Presents, as if it was
inserted in the forementioned Treaty of Peace and Friendship; and We promise
inviolably to keep, maintain and observe all that is contained in it, without
ever acting contrary to it, directly or indirectly, upon any account whatsoever.

In Testimony whereof We have caused these Presents to be Signed by the
President of Our Assembly, Countersigned by Our Secretary, and Sealed with Our
Great Seal.

Given at the Hague, the 10th of October, in the Year, 1697.
Articles of Peace between the Emperor, and the Empire on one part, and France
on the other part; Concluded at the Royal Castle of Ryswick in Holland, on the
20/30 of October, 1697.
IN the Name of the most Holy Trinity, Amen -- Be it known unto All, and every
One, that a cruel War, attended with the Effusion of much Christian Blood, and
the Devastation of several Provinces, having been waged for some Years last
past, between the most Serene and most Puissant Prince and Lord, Leopold,
elected Emperor of the Romans, always August, King of Germany, Hungary,
Bohemia; of Dalmatia, Croatia, and Sclavonia; Archduke of Austria, Duke of
Burgundy, Brabant, Stiria, Carinthia, and Carniola; Marquess of Moravia; Duke
of Luxembourg, of the High and Lower Silesia, of Wirtemberg, and of Teck;
Prince of Suabia; Count of Habsbourg, of Tyrol, Kybourg, and Goritia; Marquess
of the Sacred Roman Empire, Burgow, of the Upper and Lower Lusatia; Lord of the
Sclavonian Marches, of Port-Naon, and Salins, etc. and the Sacred Roman Empire
on one part; and the most Serene and most Puissant Prince and Lord, Lewis XIV.
the most Christian King of France and Navarre, on the other part. Now his
Imperial Majesty, and his most Christian Majesty, having most seriously applied
themselves to terminate, and put an end as soon as possible to those Mischiefs
that daily increased, to the Ruin of Christendom, by the Divine Assistance,
and by the Care of the most Serene and most Puissant Prince and Lord, Charles
XI. King of Swedeland, Goths and Vandals, Grand Prince of Finland, Duke of
Scania, Esthonia, Livonia, of Carelia, Bremen, Ferden, of Stetin, Pomerania,
Cassubia and Vandalia; Prince of Rugen, and Lord of Ingria and Wismar, Count
Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria, Juliers, Cleves and Bergues, of
Illustrious Memory; who from the very beginning of these Commotions, did not
cease effectually to solicit the Christian Princes to Peace, and afterward
having been accepted as Universal Mediator, never desisted gloriously to labor
even to his dying Day, to procure the same with all imaginable speed; having to
this purpose appointed and settled Conferences in the Palace of Ryswick in
Holland: and after his Decease, the most Serene and most Puissant Prince and
Lord Charles XII. King of Sweden, Goths and Vandals, Grand Prince of Finland,
Duke of Scania, Esthonia, of Livonia, Carelia, Bremen, of Ferden, Stetin,
Pomerania, Cassubia, and of Vandalia; Prince of Rugen; Lord of Ingria and of
Wismar; Count Palatine of the Rhine; Duke of Bavaria, Juliers, Cleves and
Bergues; Inheriting from his Royal Father the same longing Desire and
Earnestness to procure the public Tranquillity; and the Treaties having been
brought to their perfection by the foresaid Conferences; the Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries lawfully appointed and established by both Parties, being met
to this effect at the aforesaid place; that is to say, on the Emperor's part,
the most Illustrious and most Excellent Lords, the Sieur Dominic Andrew
Kaunitz, Count of the Holy Roman Empire, Hereditary Lord of Austerliz, of
Hungarischbord, Mahrischpruss and Orzechan the Great, Knight of the Order of
the Golden Fleece, intimate Councellor of State to his Sacred Imperial Majesty,
Chamberlain and Vice Chancellor of the Holy Empire; the Sieur Henry John
Stratman, Sieur de Puerbach, Count of the Holy Roman Empire, Lord of Orth,
Schmiding, Spatenbrun and Carlsberg, Imperial Aulique Councellor, Chamberlain
to his Sacred Imperial Majesty; and the Sieur John Frederick, free and noble
Baron of Seilern, Imperial Aulique Councellor to his Sacred Imperial Majesty,
and one of the Plenipotentiaries in the Imperial Diets: And on the part of his
Sacred most Christian Majesty, the most Illustrious and most Excellent Lords,
the Sieur Nicholas Augustus de Harlay, Knight, Lord of Boneuil, Count of Cely,
Ordinary Councellor to the King in his Council of State: The Sieur Lewis
Verjus, Knight, Ordinary Councellor to the King in his Council of State, Count
de Crecy, Marquess of Freon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay two Churches, of
Fort-Isle, and other places; together with the Sieur Francis de Callieres, Lord
of Callieres, of Rochechellay and Gigny; By the Mediation and Intercession of
the most Illustrious and most Excellent Lords, the Sieur Charles Bond, Count
de Biornoo, Lord of Hesleby, Tyres, Toftaholm, of Grafsteen, Gustavusberg, and
of Rezitza, Councellor to his Majesty the King of Sweden, and President of the
supreme Senate of Dorpat in Livonia; and of the Sieur Nicholas free Baron of
Lilieroot, Secretary of State to his Majesty the King of Sweden, and
Extraordinary Ambassador to their High and Mightinesses the States General of
the United Provinces, both of them Extraordinary Ambassadors, and
Plenipotentiaries for confirming and establishing a General Peace; who have
faithfully discharged their Duty of Mediatorship with Integrity, Application,
and Prudence: The Plenipotentiaries of the Electors, Princes, and deputed
States of the Holy Roman Empire, being Present, Approving, and Consenting,
after the Invocation of God's Holy Name, and the Exchange of their full Powers
made in due manner and form, did agree, for the Glory of God's Holy Name, and
the Welfare of Christendom, upon Conditions of Peace and Concord, the Tenor
whereof is as follows.

I. THere shall be a Christian, Universal, Perpetual Peace, and a true Amity
between his Sacred Imperial Majesty and his Successors, the whole Holy Roman
Empire, and the Kingdoms and Hereditary States, their Vassals and Subjects on
the one part, and the most Christian King, his Successors, Vassals and Subjects
on the other part; it shall be faithfully and sincerely maintained, so that the
one shall not undertake any thing under what Pretense soever, to the Ruin or
Prejudice of the other, nor Afford, or Lend Assistance upon any account
whatsoever to any one who would attempt it, or in any wise do any Wrong to the
other; that he will not receive, protect, or assist in any way or manner
whatsoever, the Rebellious and Disobedient Subjects of the other Party; but on
the contrary both Parties shall seriously procure the Benefit, Honor, and
mutual Advantage of each other, notwithstanding all Promises, Treaties and
Alliances to the contrary made, or to be made in any manner whatsoever, which
are abolished, and made of none effect by the present Treaty.

II. There shall be on both sides an Amnesty and perpetual Oblivion of all the
Hostilities reciprocally committed, in what place or manner soever it be; so
that upon any Cause or Pretense of the same, or upon any other account, it may
not be lawful for the one to express any Resentment to the other, nor create
any Trouble or Vexation, directly or indirectly, either by way of Justice, or
de facto, in any place whatsoever, nor permit that any such shall be expressed
or created; but all and singular the Injuries and Violences whether by Word,
Deed, or Writing, without any respect to Persons or Things, are so entirely and
fully abolished and cancelled, that whatsoever the one may pretend against the
other upon this account, shall be buried in everlasting Oblivion; all and
several the Subjects and Vassals of both Parties shall enjoy the Effect and
Benefit of the present Amnesty, insomuch that the having adhered to such or
such a Party, shall not be wrested to the Prejudice or Disadvantage of any of
them; but that he shall be wholly reestablished and settled, as to his Honors
and Estate, in the same condition he was in immediately before the War,
excepting notwithstanding what has been more especially and particularly
regulated in the following Articles, in relation to Movables, Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Revenues.

III. The Treaties of Westphalia and Nimeguen shall be looked upon as the Basis
and Foundation of this present Treaty, and consequently in pursuance of the
same, immediately upon the Exchange of the Ratifications, the said Treaties
shall be fully executed, in respect both to Spiritual and Temporal Matters, and
shall be inviolably observed for the future, except in such Cases wherein it is
expressly otherwise agreed on by this present Treaty.

IV. Particularly there shall be delivered up to his Imperial Majesty, to the
Empire, and to its States and Members, all the Places and Rights situate out of
Alsatia, that have been in the possession of, and occupy'd and enjoyed by his
most Christian Majesty, as well during the present War, by way of Fact and
Deed, as by way of Unions and Reunions, or that have been expressed in the
Catalogue of Reunions produced by the Ambassadors of France, nulling to this
purpose all the Decrees, Determinations, Acts and Declarations made upon this
account by the Chambers of Metz and Besancon, and by the Council of Brisac: and
all things shall be reduced to the same Condition wherein they were before the
foresaid Seisures, Unions, or Reunions, without putting the Possessors of the
said Places to any further Trouble or Molestation, the Roman Catholic Religion
nevertheless remaining settled in the forementioned places, in the same manner
as it is at present.

V. And albeit by these general Rules one may easily judge who they be that are
to be re-established, and in what manner, and how far they ought to be so;
nevertheless upon the earnest Solicitations of some, and for some particular
Reasons, it has been thought convenient to make particular mention of some
Occasions; yet so, that those who shall not be expressly named, may not be taken
for omitted, but shall absolutely enjoy the same Right, as those that are
nominated, and may be put in the same Rank, and Capacity.

VI. Namely, the Lord Elector of Triers, and Bishop of Spires, shall be
re-invested in the Possession of the City of Triers or Treves, in the same
Condition wherein it is at present, without demolishing or damnifying any thing
either in the public or private Edifices, together with the Artillery that was
therein, at the very time of its last being put into Possession. In like
manner, whatsoever was regulated in the IV. Article aforegoing upon the account
of places occupied, of Unions and Re-unions, must be thought to be repeated in
particular in favor of the Churches of Treves and Spires.

VII. The Elector of Brandenbourgh shall likewise enjoy all the Advantages of
the present Peace, and shall be therein comprised together with all his
Territories, Possessions, Subjects and Rights, and more especially those that
appertain and belong to him, by Virtue of the Treaty of the 29 th of June; in
the Year 1679. just as if they had been specified each in particular.

VIII. All the States occupied and enjoyed by the most Christian King, shall be
surrendered to the Elector Palatine, whether they belong to him in particular,
or whether he possesses them in common with others of what nature soever they
may be; and particularly the City, and Prefecture of Germersheim, together with
the Prefectures, and Vice-Prefectures therein comprised, with all the
Fortresses, Cities, Buroughs, Towns, Villages, Hamlets, Fiefs, Funds and
Rights, according as they were surrendered by the Peace of Westphalia, together
with all Instruments, Instructions, and Acts taken away, or plundered from the
Archives, or Records, Chancery, Court of Fiefs, from the Chamber of Counts, of
Prefectures, and other Palatinate Offices; not any Place, Effect, Right, or
Document being excepted: and as to what relates to the Claims, and Rights of
the Duchess of Orleans, it is agreed upon; that the aforesaid Restitution
being first made; the Business shall be decided, and judged in Form of
Compromise by his Imperial Majesty, and by his most Christian Majesty as
Arbitrators, which shall be decided according to the Imperial Laws and
Constitutions. But if they do not agree in their Verdict, the Business shall be
referred to the Pope, to judge of it as Supreme Arbitrator. Nevertheless they
shall not forbear in the mean time endeavoring to procure an amicable Concord
between the Parties, and till such time as the Business be determined, and
ended, the said Elector shall give every Year to the said Duchess of Orleans,
the Sum of Two hundred thousand French Livres, or One hundred thousand Florins
of the Rhine, in such manner, and upon the same Condition as is specified by a
particular Article of the same Power and Force as the present Treaty, and that
the Right of the two Parties, as also that of the Empire, shall remain entire,
in respect of the Possessor as well as Pretender.

IX. There shall be restored to the King of Sweden, in quality of Prince
Palatine of the Rhine, the County of Sponheim, Veldents, his ancient Duchy of
Deux Ponts entire, and with all its Appurtenances, Dependences, and Rights,
which the Counts Palatines of the Rhine, and Dukes of Deux Ponts, Predecessors
of his Swedish Majesty, have enjoyed, or may have enjoyed, conformable to the
Peace of Westphalia; so that whatsoever the Crown of France has hitherto
pretended to as to this Duchy, in whole or in part, by what Title soever, may
rightfully return to his Swedish Majesty, and to his Heirs, as being Counts
Palatines of the Rhine.

There shall in like manner be restored all the Acts, Documents, Instructions,
concerning the said Duchy; together with the Artillery that was therein at the
time when France seized upon it, and all other Things agreed upon in the
preceding Articles relating to Restitutions.

X. As to what concerns the Principality of Veldents, and what the late Prince
Leopold Lewis Count Palatine of the Rhine has possessed by virtue of the said
Principality, or of that of Lautrec, it shall be restored in pursuance to the
IV Article, and to the Inventory or List exhibited by the Ambassadors of
France, saving only the Rights of each of the Pretenders as well in regard to
the Possessor as to the Claimer.

XI. There shall be restored to Prince Francis Lewis Palatine, Great Master of
the Teutonick Order, and Bishop of Worms, all the Commands wholly, without
exception, taken by France from the said Order, and which have been assigned to
him, or which he has anciently possessed, together with the Places, Revenues,
and Rights; and the said Order shall enjoy, by virtue of the said Commands and
Estates situate within the Dominion of France, as well in respect of Collation
as Administration, the same Customs, Privileges, and Exemptions that it enjoyed
heretofore, according to its Statutes and Laws, and which the Order of St. John
of Jerusalem were wont to enjoy; likewise all that has been decreed in
relation to Restitutions of Places, Contributions, and otherwise, shall take
place in behalf of the Bishop of Worms, and of other Churches of the said
Prince.

XII. There shall be restored to the Elector of Cologne, in quality of Bishop
and Prince of Liege, the Castle and City of Dinant, in the same Condition they
were in when the French possessed themselves of them; together with all the
Rights and Dependences, and all the Artillery and Instructions that were found
therein at that time: As for the rest, whatsoever has been determined and
regulated in the IV Article in relation to what has been taken, to Unions, and
Re-unions, shall be looked upon as repeated in particular in favor of the
Churches of Cologne and Liege.

XIII. The Family or House of Wirtemberg, and particularly Duke George, shall
be re-established for him and his Successors, with respect to the Principality
and County of Monbelliard, in the same Condition, Rights, and Prerogatives, and
particularly in the same Immediate Dependence upon the Roman Empire, it has
heretofore enjoyed, and which the Princes of the Empire did enjoy, or ought to
have enjoyed; making void and of none effect all Acknowledgment in quality of
Vassal made to the Crown of France in 1681. And they the said Princes shall
henceforward freely enjoy all the Revenues that depend upon the said
Principality and County, as well Secular as Ecclesiastic, that they enjoyed
before the Peace of Nimeguen; as likewise all Fiefs that have been opened in
favor of them, or which they have made over or granted to others during the
Detension of France; excepting only the Village of Baldenheim, together with
the Appurtenances, which the Most Christian King has bestowed on the Commander
of Chamlay, Camp-Master-General to his Armies; which said Donation ought still
to subsist; yet in such a manner, notwithstanding, that Homage be paid for it
to the foresaid Duke of Wirtemberg and his Successors, as to the direct Lord,
and that he be obliged to beg of him to be invested in it. In like manner, the
said Princes shall be reinstated in the full and free Possession as well of
their Inheritance possessed in Burgundy, of Clereval and Passevant, as of the
Lordships of Granges, Herricourt, of Blamont, Chatelart, and of Clermont, and
others situate and being in Burgundy, and in the Principality of Monbelliard,
with all their Rights and Revenues, entire, and just in the same manner as they
possessed them before the Peace of Nimeguen, abolishing totally all that has been
done and pretended to the contrary, under what Pretense, at what Time, and
after what manner soever it may be.

XIV. In like manner, the Marquis of Baden's Family shall enjoy all the Right
and Benefit of the present Treaty; and consequently, of that of Westphalia and
Nimeguen, and more particularly of the Fourth and Fifth Articles of the present
Treaty.

XV. The Princes and Counts of Nassau, of Hanaw, and of Leininguen, and all
other States of the Holy Roman Empire, who are to be re-instated by the Fourth
Article of this Treaty and others, shall likewise be re-instated accordingly in
all and several the Estates and Dominions, in the Rents and Revenues that
depend thereon, and in all the other Rights and Benefits, of what nature soever
they may be.

XVI. And because, for the better securing and confirming the Peace, it has
been judged meet and expedient here and there to exchange some Countries, his
Imperial Majesty and the Empire do yield up and grant to his Most Christian
Majesty, and the Kings his Successors, the City of Strasbourg, and all that
depends thereon, on the left Hand of the Rhine, together with the whole Right,
Propriety, and Sovereignty, that have belonged, or might have belonged to his
said Imperial Majesty, and to the Roman Empire, till this present time; and do
all and several of them transfer and make over to his Most Christian Majesty,
and the Kings his Successors, in such sort that the said City with all its
Appurtenances and Dependances situate and being on the left Hand of the Rhine,
without all exception, with the entire Jurisdiction, Superiority, and
Sovereignty from this very time, and for ever shall belong and appertain to His
Most Christian Majesty and his Successors, and are united to, and Incorporated
with the Crown of France, without any contradiction on the account of the
Emperor, Empire, or of any other whatsoever; and for the greater confirmation
of the said Concession, and Alienation, the Emperor and Empire, do expressly
disclaim by virtue of this present Transaction, the Decrees, Constitutions,
Statutes and Customs of the Roman Empire, even though confirmed by Oath, or that
may hereafter be confirmed, and particularly the Imperial Capitulation,
inasmuch as it prohibits all manner of alienation of the Estates and Rights of
the Empire, all which they do absolutely and expressly renounce, discharging and
freeing the said City, and all its Magistrates, Officers, Citizens and
Subjects, from all their Bonds, Oaths and Engagements, whereby they have been
obliged to the Emperor and Empire, and permitting it to take an Oath of
Supremacy and Allegiance to the Most Christian King, and his Successors; and by
putting the Most Christian King into full and just property, possession and
Sovereignty, from this very time and for ever renouncing all Rights,
Pretensions, and Claims to the same; and being willing to this effect that the
said City of Strasbourg be quite razed out of the Matriculation or Register of
the Empire.

XVII. It shall nevertheless be lawful for all, and every one of the
Inhabitants of the said City and its Dependences, of what condition soever they
be, who are willing to depart from thence, to go settle themselves in any other
place where they please, and whither they may transport their Moveable Goods
without any let, hindrance, diminution or exaction, during a whole year next
after the Ratification of the Peace, and during the space of five years in
executing the Conditions, which are wont to be performed from all antiquity and
time out of mind, in the said Countries in such like Cases; and may sell, or
put off their Moveable Goods, or retain and keep them, and manage them
themselves, or cause them to be governed and managed by others; the same
liberty of keeping and managing their Immovable Goods themselves, or of getting
them managed by others, shall appertain to any other member or subject of the
Empire, be they mediate or immediate, who shall have any Goods, Revenues,
Debts, Actions or Rights within the said City and Dependencies thereon, whether
it be that they have always enjoyed them, or whither they may have been
confiscated during, or before the War, or given to others, the which ought to
be restored by the present agreement of what nature soever they may be, or in
what place soever they are situate; Provided also that the
Ecclesiastick-Jurisdiction shall remain to those whereunto it did from all
antiquity belong; and without any body presuming to withstand the same, or
hinder the exercise thereof.

XVIII. In like manner also His Most Christian Majesty shall on his part
restore within thirty days next ensuing the Ratification of the present Treaty,
to his Imperial Majesty and Empire, the Fort of Kiel, together with all and
singular its Rights and Dependencies, which first was built by His Most
Christian Majesty, on the right hand of the Rhine entire, and without
Demolishing any thing thereof. And as for the Fort of Pille, and others raised
in the Isles of the Rhine, they shall be totally razed within a Month, or
sooner, if possible at the sole expense and charges of the Most Christian King,
and not to be new raised, or rebuilt hereafter by either party. And as to what
relates to the Navigation, and other usage, and customs of the River, it shall
be free, and open for the Subjects of both Parties, and for all other that
shall have a mind to pass, sail, or convey their Merchandise that way; without
any permission being allowed to either of them to undertake any thing there or
else where for to turn the said River another way, and thereby any ways to
render the course of Navigation, or any other usage and custom more difficult;
much less shall it be permitted to erect new Customs, Rights, Imposts, or
Tolls, or to augment the ancient ones; to oblige the Boats to come ashore at
one Bank rather than other, there to expose their Lading or Merchandise, or to
take in any; but all that shall be wholly left to every ones liberty.

XIX. His Most Christian Majesty does likewise deliver up to his Imperial
Majesty, and to the Most Serene House of Austria, the City and Fortress of
Fribourg, as also the Fort of St. Peter, and the Fort called the Fort
Del'estoile, or Star, and all the other Forts newly erected, or repaired there
or elsewhere in the Black Forest, or in any other part of Brisgow, every one of
them in the self-same condition wherein it remains at present, without
demolishing or damnifying any thing, together with the Villages of Leken,
Metzhauzen, and Kirchzarth, with all their Rights thereunto belonging, as they
were yielded up to His Most Christian Majesty by the Peace of Nimeguen, or
possessed, occupied or enjoyed by him, together with all the Archives, Records,
and all and every the Documents or Writings found therein, at the time his said
Majesty was put in possession of the same, whether they be still in the places,
or conveyed elsewhere; always reserving without prejudice the Diocesan Right,
with other Rights and Revenues of the Bishop of Constans.

XX. In like manner His Most Christian Majesty delivers and conveys to His
Imperial Majesty the City of Brisac wholly in the condition it now is, with the
Granaries, Arsenals, Fortifications, Ramparts, Walls, Towers, and other
Edifices both public and private, as also the Dependences situate on the right
hand of the Rhine, leaving to the Most Christian King, those which are on the
left, and amongst others the Fort called the Mortar. But that which is called
the New City, situate and being on the left hand of the said River, with the
Bridge, and Fort built in the Isle of the Rhine, shall be totally demolished
and razed, never more to be rebuilt by the one party or the other. Moreover,
the same liberty of removing from Brisac, to any other place, which was agreed
upon as to the City of Strasbourg, must be considered as repeated in this place
word for word.

XXI. The foresaid Places, Cities, Castles and Fortresses, together with all
their Jurisdictions, Appurtenances and Dependences made over and delivered to
his Imperial Majesty, by His Most Christian Majesty, shall be surrendered, and
delivered without any reservation, exception, or detention whatsoever,
faithfully and honestly, without any delay, let, hindrance or pretense to such
who after the Ratification of the present Treaty shall be appointed, or in a
more special manner deputed to that effect by his Imperial Majesty, or have
made it appear to the French Intendants, Governors, or Officers of the Places
so to be delivered; insomuch that the said Cities, Cittadels, Forts and Places,
with all their Privileges, Emoluments, Revenues and Immunities, and all other
things whatsoever contained therein may return to be under the Jurisdiction,
actual possession, and absolute power and Sovereignty of his Imperial Majesty
and the House of Austria; and may so remain for evermore, as they belonged to
him in former times, and have been hitherto possessed by His Most Christian
Majesty; the Crown of France not retaining or reserving to it self any Right,
Claim, or pretension to the forementioned Places and their Jurisdiction.
Neither shall they demand the Cost and Charges expended in the Fortifications,
or other public or private Edifices; nor shall the full and entire restitution
be put off and deferred, for any reason whatsoever, from being performed within
thirty days next after the Ratification of this present Treaty, so that the
French Garrisons may depart thence without causing any molestation, damage, or
trouble to the Citizens and Inhabitants, or any other Subjects of the House of
Austria whatsoever, under pretense of Debts, or what pretensions soever.
Neither shall it be permitted to the French Troops to stay any longer time in
the Places that are to be restored, or any other place not belonging to His
Most Christian Majesty, there to take up their Winter Quarters, or sojourn
therein; but shall be forced immediately to repair to the Territories belonging
to the Crown of France.

XXII. There shall be likewise restored to his Imperial Majesty and the Holy
Romans Empire, the Town of Philipsbourg in its best condition, with the
Fortifications adjoining thereto, that are on the right hand of the Rhine, and
all the Ordnance and Artillery that was there when France seized on it the last
time; with this Proviso, that the Right of the Bishop of Spires be altogether
excepted, upon the account of which the fourth Article of the Treaty of Peace
at Nimeguen is to be looked upon as repeatable in this place in express terms.
But the Fort that was built on the Left of the Rhine, and the Bridge that was
made by the Most Christian King's Order after the taking of it, shall be
utterly demolished.

XXIII. The Most Christian King shall take care to cause the Fortifications
built over against Huningen upon the Right in the Isle of the Rhine, to be
razed at his own proper Cost and Charges, restoring the Grounds and Edifices to
the Family of Baden: The Bridge also built in this place upon the Rhine shall
be demolished likewise.

XXIV. They shall likewise destroy the Fort that was built on the Right of the
Rhine, over against the Fort called Fort Louis, the said Fort and Isle
remaining in the power of the Most Christian King, and as for the Ground of the
demolisht Fort, it shall be restored together with the Houses to the Marquis of
Baden. They shall moreover destroy that part of the Bridge that goes from the
said Bridge to the Isle, which shall never be repaired hereafter by either
party.

XXV. The Most Christian King shall likewise cause to be demolished the
Fortifications added after the Peace of Nimeguen, to the Castle of Trarbach,
and the Fortress of Mont-royal upon the Moselle, without any Body's presuming
to repair them for the future, yet leaving the Fortress of Trarbach entire to
be wholly restored, with the City and its Appurtenances to its former
Possessors.

XXVI. They shall likewise demolish the Fortifications added by the Most
Christian King, to the Fortress of Kernbourg, after which demolishing the City
of Kernbourg being left entire and untouched, as also the other Goods and
Chattels belonging to the Prince of Salm, and to his Cousins the Rhinegraves,
and Vildgraves, and other things, shall be restored to be possessed in the same
manner, and with the very same Right they did possess them before they were
turned out of them. Upon which it is agreed and consented to by the present
Treaty.

XXVII. The New Fortifications added by the Most Christian King to the Fortress
of Ebernbourg, shall also be demolished, and the Fortress to be afterward
restored to the Barons of Sickinguen, with other Estates belonging to them;
which are to be restored to them by both Parties.

XXVIII. The Duke of Lorain having been united to his Imperial Majesty in this
War, and having a desire to be comprehended within the present Treaty, he shall
be accordingly reinstated for himself, his Heirs, and Successors, into the free
and full Possession of the States, Possessions, and Goods which Duke Charles
his Uncle by the Father's Side was possessed of in the Year One thousand six
hundred and seventy, at such time as the Most Christian King seized upon them;
excepting notwithstanding the Alterations and Changes explained in the
following Articles.

XXIX. His Most Christian Majesty shall particularly restore to the said Duke
the Old and New City of Nancy, with all its Appurtenances, and the Artillery
that was found in the Old City at the time of its being taken; upon this
Condition nevertheless, That all the Ramparts and Bastions of the Old City
remaining entire, with the Gates of the New, the Ramparts and Bastions of this
latter, as also the whole exterior Fortifications of both, shall be entirely
razed at the sole Charge of the Most Christian King, never to be any more
rebuilt for time to come: Except the said Duke and his Successors shall have a
mind when they please to enclose the New City with a single dry Wall, without a
Flank.

XXX. His Most Christian Majesty shall likewise cause the Castle of Bitsch to
be evacuated, with all its Appurtenances; as also the Castle of Hombourg, by
causing all the Fortifications to be razed beforehand, that they may never
more be repaired: yet so that the foresaid Castles and Cities that are adjacent
thereto, may receive no Damage thereby, but may remain totally untouched.

XXXI. Upon the whole, Whatsoever has been ordered as abovesaid in the IV
Article, in reference to Unions and Re-unions, shall be as serviceable and
advantageous to the said Duke, as if it had been here repeated verbarim, in
what Place and after what Manner the foresaid Unions and Reunions have been
made and ordained.

XXXII. His Most Christian Majesty reserves to himself the Fortress of
Sar-Louis, with half a League round about it, which shall be marked out and
limited by the Commissioners of his said Majesty, and by those of Lorrain, by
him to be possessed Sovereignly for ever.

XXXIII. The City and Prefectship of Longwi, together with all its
Appurtenances and Dependences, shall also remain in the Power of the said Most
Christian King, his Heirs and Successors, with all Superiority, Sovereignty,
and Property, without the said Duke his Heirs or Successors pretending
henceforward to claim any Right therein; but in exchange of the said City and
Prefectship, his said Most Christian Majesty will put another Prefectship into
the Hands of the said Duke, in one of the three Bishoprics, of the same Extent
and Value, whereof the said Commissioners shall bona fide agree upon. And the
said Prefectship so made over and conveyed by the Most Christian King to the
said Duke, he the said Duke, as well as his Heirs and Successors, shall possess
it to the Worlds end, with all the Rights of Superiority, Sovereignty, and
Property.

XXXIV. The Passage shall be always open through the Territories of the said
Duke, without any Obstacle or Impeachment, to the Most Christian King's Troops,
who shall go or come from the Frontiers; upon Condition nevertheless, that
timely Notice of it shall be given beforehand; that the Soldier that passes
shall not go out of his Way, but may pursue the shortest and usual Way, and
duly continue his Road as he ought, without delay. He shall not commit any
Violence, nor do any Damage to the Places and Subjects of the Duke, and shall
pay ready Money for Victuals and other Necessaries that shall be delivered to
him by the Commissioners of Lorrain. Mutually abolishing and causing the
Highways and Places that his Most Christian Majesty had reserved to himself by
the Peace of Nimeguen, to return to the Power and Jurisdiction of the Duke
without any Exception.

XXXV. The Ecclesiastical Benefices conferred by his Most Christian Majesty
till the very day of the present Treaty, shall remain in Enjoyment and
Possession of those who possess them at present, and who have obtained them of
his most Christian Majesty, without being liable to be disturbed therein.

XXXVI. It has moreover been concluded, that the Lawsuits, Sentences, and
Decrees passed by the Council, Judges, and other his Most Christian Majesty's
Officers concerning the Differences and Actions that have been determined as
well between the Subjects of the Dutchies of Lorrain and of Bar, as others, at
the time when the most Christian King possessed those States, shall take place
and obtain their full and due effect, in the same manner as if his said
Christian Majesty had remained in possession of the said Estates, it not being
permitted to call in question the validity of the said. Sentences and Decrees,
or to impede or stop the execution thereof. It shall notwithstanding be
permitted to the Parties to demand a Review of what shall have been enacted
according to the order and disposition of the Laws and Constitutions, the
Sentences nevertheless remaining in their full force and virtue.

XXXVII. There shall be restored to the said Duke, after the Ratification of
the present Treaty, the Archives and written Documents and Precedents that was
in the Treasury of the Records of Nancy and Bar, and in both Chambers of
Accounts or other places, and that have been taken thence.

XXXVIII. The said Duke immediately after the Ratification of the Peace, shall
have Power to send Commissioners to the Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar, to have a
watchful eye upon his Affairs, administer Justice, take care of the Imposts,
Taxes upon Salt, and other Duties, dispose of public Treaties, and perform all
other necessary things, so that the said Duke may within the same time enter
into the full possession of his Government.

XXXIX. As to what relates to Imposts and Customs, and concerning the Exemption
in the Transportation of Salt or Wood, either by Land or Water, the Custom
settled in the Year 1670, shall be observed, without permitting any Innovation.

XL. The ancient Custom and Liberty of Commerce between Lorrain and the
Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, shall be still in being, and shall
henceforth be observed to the Benefit and Advantage of both Parties.

XLI. The Contracts and Agreements made between the Most Christian Kings and
the Dukes of Lorrain, shall be in like manner observed in their ancient Force
and Vigor.

XLII. The said Duke and his Brethren shall be empowered to prosecute the Right
they pretend to belong to them in diverse Causes, by the ordinary Course of Law,
notwithstanding the Sentences past in their absence, without being heard.

XLIII. In Matters not here expressly agreed to the contrary, shall be observed
in respect of the Duke, his Estates and Subjects, what has been concluded upon
by the present Treaty, and more especially in the Article that begins, Is the
XLVI.
All the Vassals and Subjects of both Parties: In that which begins, Is the L.
So soon as the present Treaty of Peace shall be: And that which begins, Is
the LI.
And to the end that the Subjects of both Parties may as speedily as may be
enjoy: Just as if they had been here particularly recited.

XLIV. The Cardinal of Furstembourg shall be reinvested in all the Rights,
Estates Feudal and Allodial, Benefices, Honors, and Prerogatives, that belong
to the Princes and Members of the Holy Roman Empire, as well in respect of the
Bishopric of Strasbourg on the Right Hand of the Rhine, as of his Abbey of
Stavelo and others; and shall enjoy, with his Cousins and Relations that
adhered to his Party, and his Domestic Servants, a full and absolute Amnestie,
and Security, for whatsoever has been done or said, and for whatsoever has
been decreed against him or them; and that neither he, his Heirs, Cousins,
Relations, nor Domestics, shall ever be proceeded against in any Cause by the
Lords Electors of Cologne and Bavaria, their Heirs, or any other Persons
whatsoever, upon the account of the Inheritance of the late Maximilian Henry:
And reciprocally, the Lord Cardinal, his Cousins, Relations, and Domestics, or
any that have any Cause depending upon their Behalf, shall not demand any
thing, upon what account soever, from the Lords Electors, or others, from the
said Inheritance, Legacies that were left them, or any Things that have been
given them, all Right, Pretension, or Action Personal or Real, being totally
extinct. Such of the Canons who have adhered to the Cardinal's Pa^^y, and who
have been outed of their Prebendaries or Canonical Benefices, shall receive the
same Amnestie and Security, and shall make use of the same Privilege, and shall
be re-settled in all the Canonical Rights, Benefices, and Dignities, and in the
same Degree and Dignity in the Chapter of the Collegiate Churches and Cathedral
Church, as they were before their Deposition. Yet so however, that the Revenues
remaining in the Power of those that possess them at present, these same may
enjoy, just as the others that shall be re-settled do, the Titles and common
Functions of the said Dignities and Benefices; the Chief Place and Rank
notwithstanding is to be deferred, and yielded to those who shall be
re-settled; and after Death, or the voluntary Resignation of those who are in
Possession, those only that are re-established shall solely enjoy the said
Dignities and Revenues; and in the mean time, each of them, according to the
Order they have amongst them, shall obtain the new Prebendaries that shall
become vacant. And there is no question but this may be approved of by the
abovesaid Ecclesiastics whom this Regulation may concern. The Heirs likewise
of the Canons who have been deprived of their Dignity, and are dead during the
War, whose Goods, Chattels, and Revenues have been sequestered or confiscated,
shall enjoy the entire Benefit, for the Recovery of them by the Article which
begins thus, It is the XLVI.
All the Vassals and Subjects of both Parties; together with this express and
particular Clause, That Pious Legacies bequeathed by the Deceased, shall be
paid forthwith, without delay, according to their Disposal, out of the Revenues
by them assigned.

XLV. The Landgraves of Hesse Reinfeldt shall be in a more especial manner
included in the Amnestie, and shall be re-instated in respect of the Fortress
of Rheinfeldt, and all the Lower County of Catzenelboguen, with all Rights and
Dependences, in the same Condition and Circumstances wherein, the Landgrave
Ernest their Father was, before the beginning of this War: Excepting always,
and in all Cases, the Rights appertaining to Monsieur the Landgrave of Hesse
Cassel.

XLVI. All the Vassals and Subjects of both Parties, Ecclesiastics and
Seculars, Corporations, Universities and Colleges, shall be re-settled in their
Honors, Dignities, and Benefices, whereof they were in quiet Possession before
the War, as also in all their Rights, Goods movable and immovable, Rents and
Revenues; also those that are capable of being redeemed, or which are for Life,
(provided that the Principal thereof be not consumed) and have been employed or
retained during or upon the Occasion of this War, with all the Rights, Actions,
Successions, and Entails that are fallen to them during the said War; yet so,
that they may not demand any thing back again upon occasion of Fruits or
Revenues received, or Pensions granted after the taking or detaining, until the
Day of the Ratification of the present Treaty. Provided nevertheless, that
Merchandise, Debts, and Movables, shall not be re-demanded, if confiscated
during, or upon account of the War, or converted to other Uses by Public
Authority; nor shall the Creditors of the said Debts, or the Proprietors and
Owners of such Merchandise and Movables or their Heirs or Executors, ever sue
for them, nor pretend to any Restitution or Satisfaction for them. The said
Restitutions shall also extend to those who have followed a contrary Party, who
have thereupon been suspected, and who have been deprived of their Estates
after the Peace of Nimeguen, for having absented themselves, to go to inhabit
elsewhere, or because they have refused to pay Homage, or for such like Causes
or Pretenses; which said Persons consequently, by virtue of this Peace, shall
return into their Prince's Favor, and into all their ancient Rights and
Estates whatsoever, such as they are at the time of the Conclusion and Signing
of this Treaty; and all that has been said in this Article, shall be executed
immediately after the Ratification of the Peace, notwithstanding all Donations,
Concessions, Alienations, Declarations, Confiscations, Faults, Expenses,
Meliorations, interlocutory and definitive Sentences, past out of Contumacy and
Contempt, the Persons absent not being heard to speak for themselves; which
said Sentences shall be null, and of none effect, and looked upon as though
they had never been pronounced; they, all of them, being left to their Liberty
to return into their Country, to enter upon their aforesaid Estates, and enjoy
them, as well as their Rents and Revenues, or to go sojourn or take up their
Habitation elsewhere, in what Place they shall think fit, and such as they have
a mind to make choice of, without any Violence or Constraint. And in such Case
it shall be permitted to them to cause their Estates and Revenues to be
administered by Sollicitors, or Proctors, that are not suspected, and may
peaceably enjoy them; excepting only Ecclesiastical Benefices, that require
Residence, which shall be regulated and administered personally. Lastly, It
shall be free for every Subject of either Party to sell, exchange, alienate,
and convey by Testament, Deed of Gift, or otherwise, their Estates, Goods
movable and immovable, Rents and Revenues, which they may possess in the States
or Dominions of another Sovereign; so that any ones Subject, or a Foreigner,
may buy them, or purchase them, without having need of further Permission from
the Sovereign; besides that which is contained in this present Article.

XLVII. If any Ecclesiastical Benefices mediate, or immediate have been during
this War conferred by one of the Parties in the Territories and Places that
were then under his Dominion, upon Persons rightly qualified, according to the
Canon or Rule of their first Institution, and the Lawful Statutes general or
particular made on this behalf, or by any other Canonical disposal made by the
Pope. The said Ecclesiastical Benefices shall be left to the present
Possessors, as likewise the Ecclesiastical Benefices conferred after this
manner before this War, in the Places that ought to be restored by the present
Peace; so that henceforth no Person may, or ought to trouble or molest them in
the possession and lawful administration of the same; neither in receiving the
Fruits and Benefits, nor upon that account may they at any time be presented,
summoned, or cited to appear in a Court of Judicature, or any other way
whatsoever, disturbed or molested: Upon condition notwithstanding that they
discharge themselves honestly, and perform what they are bound to, by virtue of
the said Benefices.

XLVIII. Forasmuch as it conduces much to the public Peace and Tranquillity,
that the Peace concluded at Turin the 29 th. of August 1696, between his Most
Christian Majesty and his Royal Highness be exactly and duly observed, it has
likewise been found expedient to confirm it, and to comprise it in this present
Treaty, and to make it of the same value, and for ever to subsist and be in
force. The Points that have been regulated in favor of the House of Savoy in
the Treaties of Westphalia and Nimeguen re-established above, are confirmed in
particular, and judged as here repeated word for word; yet so nevertheless,
that the restitution of Pignerol and its Dependencies, already made, may not in
any case deminish or alter the Obligation wherein his Most Christian Majesty
has engaged himself to pay to the Duke of Mantua the Sum of Four hundred
ninety four thousand Crowns for discharge of the Duke of Savoy, as is explained
more at large in the Treaty of the Peace of Westphalia. And to the end that
this may be more fully and more strongly confirmed, All, and every one, the
Princes, that participate of the General Peace, do promise to the Duke of
Savoy, and will reciprocally receive from him the Promises and Securities, that
they stipulate amongst themselves for a more firm assurance of the matter.

XLIX. Upon the whole, it is not meant that by whatsoever restitution of
Places, Persons, Estates, Rights made, or to be made by France, there is
acquired any new Right to such as are, or shall be so re-established. But that
if any other have any claim or pretension against them, they shall be
propounded, examined and decided in a convenient place, after the making of the
said restitution, which for this reason ought by no means to be deferred.

L. So soon as ever the present Treaty of Peace shall have been Signed and
Sealed by the Lords Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, all
Hostilities and Violence of what nature soever shall cease, as also all
demolishing of Edifices, all Devastations of Vineyards and Forests, all felling
of Trees; and immediately after the Exchange of the Ratifications, all the
Troops shall be made to retire from the Unfortified Places belonging to the
other Party. And as for what concerns Fortified Places that are to be restored
by the present Treaty, they shall within thirty days after the Ratification of
the Peace, or sooner, if possible, be surrendered to and put into the hands of
those that are nominated in the preceding Articles; or, if not expressly
nominated, then to those who did possess them immediately before their being
taken; without any demolishing of Fortifications or Edifices, either public or
private, without making them in a worse condition than they are at present, or
without exacting any thing for or by reason of any expenses in the said Places;
and the Soldiers shall not exact any thing upon this account, or for any other
cause whatsoever, nor carry any thing away of the Effects belonging to the
Inhabitants, or of what ought to be left there in pursuance of this Treaty. As
for all sorts of Demolitions to be made pursuant to the agreements above, it
shall be wholly and effectually performed, in respect of the less considerable
things, within a Month if possible, and in respect of the more considerable
within two Months if it may be done, without any expense or trouble to the
other Party for the said Demolition.

Likewise shall all the Archives, Records, Literal Documents be faithfully
restored immediately after the exchange of the Ratifications, as well those
which belong to the Places that are to be surrendered and delivered to his
Imperial Majesty's Empire, and to its States and Members, as those that have
been removed and conveyed from the Chamber and City of Spires, and other places
of the Empire, although there may be no particular mention made thereof in the
present Treaty. The Prisoners taken upon occasion of the War, shall also be
released, and set at liberty on both sides, without any ransom, and in
particular such who have been condemned to the Galleys, or to any other public
Slavery.

LI. And to the end that the Subjects of both Parties may speedily enjoy the
entire benefit of this Peace, it has been agreed, That all Contributions of
Money, Grain, Wine, of Forage, Wood, and Cattle, or the like, although already
imposed on the Subjects of the other Party, and although they have been settled
and stated by agreement; as also, that all Forageing of what nature soever upon
the Territories and Jurisdiction of one another shall totally cease upon the
very day of the Ratification, and what shall be due in Arrears for such like
Contributions, Impositions or Exactions, shall be totally abolished. In like
manner the Hostages delivered or carried away during this War for what cause
soever, shall be restored, without further delay, and that without being
obliged to pay any thing for the same.

LII. In like manner the Commerce prohibited during the War between the
Subjects of his Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and those of his Most
Christian Majesty and of the Realm of France, shall be re-established presently
after the Signing of this Peace, with the same liberty as before the War, and
shall, all, and every one of them, and more particularly the Inhabitants and
Citizens of the Hans-Towns, Enjoy all manner of Security by Sea and Land,
together with their Ancient Rights, Immunities, Privileges and Advantages
obtained by Solemn Treaties, or by Ancient Custom.

LIII. Whatsoever is concluded and agreed upon by this Treaty shall be firm and
inviolable to perpetuity; and shall be observed and put in execution
notwithstanding whatsoever might have been believed, alleged, or imagined to
the contrary; which remains altogether cancelled and abolished, although it might
be of such a nature, that we might have been obliged to make a more ample and
more particular mention of the same; or, although the cancelling and abrogation
seem as if it ought to be looked upon as null, invalid, and of none effect.

LIVE. Each of the Stipulating contracting Parties shall be capable of
confirming this present Peace, and his observance of it, by certain Alliances,
by Fortifications upon his own proper Ground, except in the Places in especial
manner above excepted, the which they may build, or enlarge, put Garrisons
into, and use other means they shall judge most necessary for their defense. It
shall likewise be permitted as well to all the Kings, Princes and Republics in
General: As to the King of Sweden in particular as Mediator, to give their
Guarantie to his Imperial Majesty and Empire, and to his Most Christian
Majesty, just as it was by virtue of the Peace of Westphalia.

LV. And forasmuch as his Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and his Most
Christian Majesty do acknowledge with Sentiments of Gratitude, the continual
Cares and good Offices, that his Swedish Majesty has used for re-establishing
the Public Tranquillity, both parties agree that his Swedish Majesty shall by
name be comprehended in the present Treaty, with his Realms and Dominions, in
the best form and manner as possibly may be.

LVI. There are also comprehended in the present Treaty upon the behalf of his
Imperial Majesty and the Empire, besides the Members of the Empire already
named, the other Electors, Princes, States, and Members of the Empire, and
amongst others more especially the Bishop and Bishopric of Basil, with all his
Estates, Prilvileges and Rights: Item, the thirteen Swisse Cantons, together
with their Confederates, namely with the City of Geneva, and its Dependences,
the City and County of Neufchatel, the Cities of St. Gall, Mulhausen and
Bienne, the three Grison Leagues, the Seven Jurisdictions or Dizaines of the
Vallais, as also the Abbey of St. Gall.

LVII. On the part of his Most Christian Majesty are in like manner comprised
the thirteen Cantons of Switzerland, and their Allies, and namely the Republic
of Vallais, or Wallisland.

LVIII. There shall also be comprehended within this Treaty all such who shall
be named by common consent of the one, and the other party before the Exchange
of the Ratifications, or within the space of six Months after.

LIX. The Ambassadors of his Imperial Majesty, and of the Most Christian King,
conjointly with the Plenipotentiaries of the States deputed by the Empire, do
promise to cause the present Peace thus concluded by the Emperor, the Empire
and King of France, to be ratified in that same form whereof it is
interchangeably here agreed on, and to procure the Exchange of the Letters of
Ratifications in this same place, within the space of six Weeks to begin to
reckon from this very day, or sooner if possible.

LX. In Witness and confirmation whereof the Extraordinary Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries as well Imperial as those of the King of France, as also the
Plenipotentiaries of the Electors, and Deputies from the States of the Empire
have to this effect subsigned this present Treaty with their own hands, and
have annexed their Seals thereto.

Done at the Royal Palace of Ryswick in Holland, the Thirteenth of October, in
the year One thousand, six hundred, ninety and seven. (L.S.) D. A. C. de
Kaunitz. (L.S.) Hen. C. de Stratman. (L.S.) J. F. L. B. de Seilern. (L.S.) de
Harlay Boneuil. (L.S.) Verjus de Crecy. (L.S.) de Callieres.
In the Name of the Elector of Mentz.
(L.S.) M. Frederic, Baron de Schinborn, Ambassador. (L.S.) Ignatius Antonius
Otten, Plenipotentiary. (L.S.) George William Moll, Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Elector of Bavaria.
De Prielmeyer, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary. (L.S.)
In the Name of the House of Austria.
(L.S.) Francis Radolphe de Halden, L. Baron of Trasberg, etc.
In the Name of the Great Master of the Teutonick Order.
(L.S.) Charles B. de Lo Knight of the Teutonick Order.
In the Name of the Bishop of Wurtsbourg.
(L.S.) John Conrard Philip Ignatius de Tastungen.
In the Name of the Elector of Triers.
(L.S.) John Henry de Kaisarsfeld, Plenipotentiary:
In the Name of the Prince and Bishop of Constance.
(L.S.) Frederic de Durheim.
In the Name of the Bishop and Prince of Hildesheim.
(L.S.) Charles Paul Zimmerman, Chancellor to his Highness, Counselor of the
Privy Counsel, and Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Elector of Cologn in quality of Bishop and Prince of Liege.
(L.S.) John Conrade Norff Deputy Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Prince and Bishop of Munster.
(L.S.) Ferdinand L. B. Plettenberg de Senhausen, respectively Dean and Chapter
of the Cathedral Church of Paderb. Munster and Hildes.
In the Name of the Elector Palatine, as Duke of Newbourg.
(L.S.) John Henry Hetterman, Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Duke of Wirtemberg.
(L.S.) John George Noble de Kulpis Knight of the Roman Empire, intimate
Counselor of State, and Director of the Counsel. (L.S.) Anthony Guntor de
Hespen, Counselor in the Supreme Council, and Plenipotentiary to the Serene
Duke.
In the Name of the Prince of Baden.
(L.S.) Charles Ferdinand L. B. de Plettersdorff. Reserve l'Ordre alternatif.
In the Name of the Abbatial College of Suabia.
(L. S.) Joseph Anthony Eusebius de H^lden de Neidtborg, L. Baron de
Antenriedt, Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Counts of the Bench of Weteraw.
(L. S.) Charles Otton Count de Solms. (L. S.) F. G. de Eclesheim, Counselor
of Hannaw, and Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Free and Imperial City of Cologne.
(L. S.) Herman Joseph Bullingen, Burgomaster and Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the City of Ausbourg.
(L. S.) John Christopher de Dirheim, Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Imperial City of Francford.
(L.S.) John James Muller, Plenipotentiary. (L.S.) John Melchior Lucius,
Lecturer of Civil and Canon Laws, Burgomaster, and Plenipotentiary.


THE FULL POWER OF THE EMPEROR, Translated from the Latin.
WE LEOPOLD by the Grace of God elected Emperor of the Romans, Semper
Augustus, and King of Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, of Dalmatia, Croatia,
Slavonia, etc. Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brabant, Stiria,
Carinthia, and Carniola, etc. Marquis of Moravia, Duke of Luxembourg, of the
High and Low Silesia, of Wirtemberg and of Teck, Prince of Suabia, Count of
Habsbourg, Tyrol, Ferrette, Kybourg, and of Goricia, Marquis of the Holy Roman
Empire, Burgaw, of the High and Low Lusatia, Lord of the Sclavonian Marches,
Port Naon, and Salins, etc. do certify and make known, That desiring nothing
more ardently, than that the present War wherewith Christendom has been
afflicted for some Years last past, may speedily be converted into an
Honorable and Equitable Peace, and that it has seemed good to all the Parties
engaged in the present War to enter upon a Treaty and Conference of Peace, in a
Place that shall be by them chosen, and appointed by unanimous Consent.
Wherefore being desirous with all our Heart to contribute all that lies in our
Power to procure the Repose of the Christian Commonweal; and we confiding in
the Fidelity and Prudence of our Trusty and Well-beloved the Illustrious and
Magnificent Dominic Andrew Count de Kaunitz, Hereditary Lord of Austerlitz,
Hungarischbrod, Mahrispruss, and of Great Orzechau, our Counselor of State,
Chamberlain and Vice Chancellor of the Empire, Knight of the Order of the
Golden Fleece; of the Illustrious and Magnificent Henry John Count de Stratman,
Lord of Peurbach, Orth, Smiding, of Spatenbrun and Carlsberg, our Imperial
Aulique Counselor and Chamberlain; and of the Magnificent John Frederick,
Free-Baron of Seilern, etc. our Imperial Aulique Counselor, and
Con-Commissioner Plenipotentiary in the Imperial Diets; have nominated,
appointed, chosen, and constituted them, as we do by these Presents nominate,
choose, appoint, and constitute them, our Extraordinary Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries in the aforesaid Assemblies and Conferences of Peace that are
to be held. To whom we give in charge, and command them in especial manner, to
repair with all expedition imaginable to the Place agreed upon between the
Parties, and being there, to enter into a Conference of Peace, either directly,
or by the Interposition and Means of a Mediator acknowledged by both Parties,
with the Ambassadors or Deputies of the most High, most Mighty, and most
Christian Prince LEWIS King of France, our most Dear Cousin and Brother; the
said Ambassadors being authorized with sufficient Power to terminate and put an
end to the present War, and regulate the Differences that relate thereto, by a
good and solid Peace. We also grant a Full and Absolute Power, with all
Authority thereunto necessary, to our said Extraordinary Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries, to all Three together, or to Two, in case the Third chance
to be absent, or employed and busy elsewhere; or to One alone, in the absence
of the other Two, or their being busied and employed elsewhere, to make,
conclude, and sign for us, and in our Name, a Treaty of Peace between us and
the foresaid Serene and most Puissant Prince the most Christian King, to cause
to be dispatched and delivered all Acts necessarily conducing to this End, and
effectually to promise, stipulate, conclude, and sign the Acts and
Declarations, to exchange the Articles agreed upon, and to perform all other
Things appertaining to the said Business of the Peace, as freely, and in as
ample a manner, as we our Self could do being there present; although a more
special and more express Order might seem necessary, than that which is
contained in these Presents. Promising, upon the whole, and faithfully, bona
fide, and upon our Imperial Word declaring, to accept and consent to, confirm
and ratify, whatsoever has been transacted, concluded, signed, delivered, and
exchanged by our Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, whether all
Three conjointly, whether Two of them in the absence of the Third, or by reason
of being employed elsewhere, or even by One alone, in the absence of the other
Two, or being elsewhere employed; Engaging our Selves by these Presents to
cause our Letters of Ratifications to be dispatched and expedited, in the good
and authentic Form, and within the Time that shall be agreed upon. In Witness,
and for Confirmation whereof, we have caused these Presents, signed with our
Hand and Imperial Seal, to be confirmed.

Given at our City of Vienna, the Third of February, in the Year One thousand
six hundred ninety and seven; of our Reign of that of King of the Romans the
Thirty ninth, of that of Hungary the Forty second, and of that of Bohemia the
Forty first. LEOPOLD. (L.S.)
Ut. SEBASTIAN WUNIBALD, Count de Zeyll.
By the Express Order of his Imperial Majesty, GASPARD FLOREND CONSBRUCH.

THE GENERAL FULL POWER FOR THE Deputation of the Empire. Translated from the
German Language.
THe Electors, Princes, and States of the H. Empire having thought good to make
choice of some certain Persons from amongst themselves to take care of their
Interests, and to assist on their behalf, at the Treaty of Peace that is to be
concluded between his Imperial Majesty, the Empire, and its Great Allies on one
Part, and the Crown of France on the other Part, and according to the
Foundation of the Peace heretofore made in Westphalia, and afterward confirmed
at Nimeguen, have deputed and nominated from the Electoral College the Electors
of Mentz, Bavaria, Saxony, and Brandenbourg; from the College of Princes, and
from amongst the Catholics, those of Austria, of Saltzbourg, the Great Master
of the Teutonick Order, of Wirtzbourg, Spires, Constance, Hildesheim, Liege,
Munster, (without prejudice to the alternate Succession) Palatine Newbourg,
Baden Baden, and the Prelates in Suabia; and from amongst the Protestants,
those of Magdebourg, of Sweden on the behalf of Bremen, or Deux Ponts; of Saxe
Cobourg, of Saxe Gotha, Brandenbourg-Culenbach, Brunswick-Zell,
Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel, of Hesse-Cassel, Wirtemberg, (with respect to their
alternative Order) of Holstein Gluckstat, of Anhalt, and the Counts of
Weteravia; and last of all from the College of the Imperial Cities amongst the
Catholics, those of Cologn and Ausbourg, and amongst the Protestants those of
Franckford, and Neurembourg; to whom is granted on the behalf of the said
Empire, and by virtue of this present Act a full power, to the end they may
speedily send their Ministers to the Place of Treaties, there to assist
conjointly with the Principal Plenipotentiaries of his Imperial Majesty, and in
conformity to their Instructions concur to treat, regulate, according to the
Style observed in the Empire, and conclude whatsoever shall be necessary for
the obtaining a General, sure, Honorable and lasting Peace, accompanied with
the resettlement of the public Tranquillity, as also with the restitution, and
all the satisfaction that shall be found requisite to the States and Members of
the Empire that have either sustained Damage, or are totally oppressed. So that
they will accept, ratify within the time specified, and observe on the part of
the whole Empire, as well as of the States deputed, whatsoever the Ministers of
these latter, or any one amongst them in case of absence, sickness or
impediment of the others (or for the observing equality the present will give
their opinion for the absent) shall have conjointly with the Imperial Ambassie
treated, adjusted, concluded with the Crown of France, and the States deputed
shall therein, according to reason and custom always maintained, and powerfully
upheld.

Signed at Ratisbon the 15. July 1697. (L.S.) The Electoral Chancery of Mentz
or Mayence.

THE FULL POWER OF FRANCE.
LEwis by the Grace of God King of France and Navarr,
to all those to whom these present Letters shall come, Greeting:
As we desire, nothing so earnestly as to behold the War, wherewith Christendom
is afflicted to terminate in a firm and lasting Peace, and forasmuch as through
the Care and Mediation of our Dearest and very well Beloved Brother the King of
Sweden, the Cities of Delft and the Hague, have been agreed upon by all the
Parties, for holding the Conferences necessary to this effect: We out of the
same ardent desire to put a stop, as much as in us lies, and by the assistance
of Divine Providence to the Desolation, and Effusion of Christian Blood, give
to understand that we entirely confiding in the experience, capacity, and
fidelity of our well beloved and loyal Subject the Sieur de Harlay de Boneuil,
ordinary Counselor in our Council of State, and of our well beloved the Sieur
Verjus, Count de Crecy, Baron de Couvay, Lord de Boulay, two Churches, Minillet
and other places, as also in that of our well beloved the Sieur de Callieres,
de la Rochellay and de Gigny, who is actually in the City of Delft, by reason
of the repeated Trials that we have made of the same in the several important
Employs, wherewith we have entrusted them as well at home as abroad; for these
reasons and other good considerations us thereunto moving, we have
Commissioned, appointed and deputed the said Sieurs Harlay, Crecy and
Callieres, and do Commission, appoint and depute by these Presents Signed with
our own hand, and have given and do give them full Power, Commission, and
special command to repair to the said City of Delft, in quality of our
Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries for the Peace, and to confer
(be it directly, or by the Intercourse of Ambassadors, Mediators respectively
admitted and agreed upon) with all the Ambassadors, Plenipotentiaries and
Ministers, as well of our most dear and well beloved Brother the Emperor of
the Romans, as of our most dear and well beloved Brother and Cousin the
Catholic King; as also of our most dear and Great Friends the States General
of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, and of all other Princes their
Allies, all of them being instructed with sufficient Power, and there to treat
of the ways and means to terminate and pacify the Differences which cause the
War at this time, and our aforesaid Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries shall
have Power all three together, or two in case of the others absence through
Sickness, or other Impediment, or one alone in the absence of the other two in
the like case of Sickness, or other Impediment, to agree about, conclude upon,
and Sign an Honorable and firm Peace, and in general act, consent to,
negotiate and promise whatsoever they shall judge necessary for the abovesaid
effect of concluding Peace, with the same authority as we should, and might do,
were we there present in Person, although there might be something that might
require a more special command and charge, not contained in these said
Presents; promising upon the faith and word of a King to stand to, and perform
whatsoever by the said Sieurs de Harlay, de Crecy and de Caillieres, either by
two of them in case of the others absence through Sickness, or other
Impediment, or by one alone in the absence of the other two in the like case of
Sickness, or other Impediment, shall have been Stipulated, promised or agreed
to, and to cause our Letters of Ratification thereof to be dispatched within
the time they shall have promised in our Name to produce them. For such is our
will and pleasure, in Witness whereof we have caused our Seal to be set to
these Presents.

Given at Versailles the 25 th. day of February in the Year of Grace 1697, and
of our Reign the Forty fourth. Signed Louis.
And upon the fold, By the King, Colbert.
Sealed with the Great Seal of Yellow Wax.
SEPARATE ARTICLE.
FOR the clearer Explanation of the eighth Article of the Treaty of Peace this
day Signed, which Article begins thus, All the States possessed by the Most
Christian King shall be restored to the Elector Palatine, It has been thought
convenient to resolve over and above, that this Order will be observed in the
Proposal of the Claims and Rights of Madame the Duchess of Orleans exhibited
against the Elector Palatine; at such time as the Arbitrators shall be agreed
at the time appointed for the Ratification of the Peace about a Place to meet
in, this Place shall be notified to each Party. The Deputies on the Arbitrators
part shall be sent thither within the space of two Months, to reckon from the
very time the Elector Palatine shall be fully re-established; in conformity to
the Article above mentioned. In the Month following shall the said Lady
Duchess produce in the same place, the whole and entire explanation of her
Pretensions or Demands against the Elector, which shall be communicated to him
within eight days following. There shall be within the space of four Months
next ensuing, explained and delivered to the Deputies of the Lords Arbitrators,
who shall set down the day that the four Months shall begin, the Reasons and
Grounds of the two Parties, whereof four Copies shall be delivered; that is to
say, one for each Arbitrator, and a third to be annexed to the common Acts of
the Arbitration, and a fourth to be interchangeably communicated within seven
days to each Party. They shall in like manner answer; and four Copies of the
Answer of each Party shall be given the same day to the Envoys of the Lords
Arbitrators, which shall be once more communicated within seven days to the
Parties interchangeably. In the four Months following, the Instruction of the
Business shall be terminated on each side, the Parties shall declare they are
willing to submit to the Verdict of the Arbitrators, and this conclusion of the
Instruction and Commission shall be communicated to the Parties, that they may
take cognizance of the same; and the Deeds shall be Enrolled in presence of the
Solicitors of the said Parties. After that the Arbitrators and their Deputies
who shall have taken an Oath, having viewed and examined the Right of the
Parties during the space of six Months ensuing, shall pronounce their Sentence
publicly in the place where the Conference is held, according to the Laws and
Constitutions of the Empire; now if it be found conformable it shall be
effectually put in execution; but if so be the Arbitrators or their Deputies do
not agree in their Verdict, the common Acts of the Arbitration shall be
conveyed to Rome at the joint Charges of the Parties, and that within the space
of two Months, beginning at the day next ensuing the Judgment given, and shall
be delivered to the Pope as Supreme Arbitrator, to be committed by him for its
Examination within six Months more to Deputies, no way suspected by the
Parties, who shall likewise be sworn, and these same upon the former
Proceedings (it not being allowed to the Parties to draw up a new Declaration
of their Titles) shall pronounce within the space of six Months next ensuing,
and as it has been said, conformable to the Laws and Constitutions of the
Empire, the last Definitive Sentence, which cannot be nulled or made void, but
the Lord Arbitrators shall cause to be executed without any delay or
contradiction. Now if so be one of the Parties demurr, and delay to propound,
explain and prove his Title and Right within the time required, it shall
nevertheless be lawful for the other Party to explain and deduce his Title
within the time prefixed, which may never be prolonged; and lawful also for the
Arbitrators and Supreme Arbitrator to proceed according to the method just now
explained, and to pronounce and execute their Sentence, according to the Acts
and Deeds produced and proved.

Notwithstanding this procedure, the Parties themselves, and the Lords
Arbitrators on their part shall not cease attempting some amicable way of
accommodation; and shall omit nothing that may any way contribute to the
amicable terminating this Affair. -- Since it is also agreed in the Article of
Peace before cited, that till this difference be terminated, the Elector
Palatine shall Annually pay to Madam the Duchess of Orleans, the Sum of Two
hundred thousand French Livres, or an hundred thousand Florins of the Rhine,
they have also agreed in particular as to the payment of the said Sum, upon
the time when it shall commence; that it shall commence only, after that
(according to the Contents of the said Article) the States and Places therein
specified shall be entirely restored to the Elector. And to the end that Madam
the Duchess of Orleans may be the more assured of the payment of the said
Sum; the Elector shall nominate before the Ratification of the Peace, a
sufficient number of Renters, or Receivers of the Prefectship of Germersheim,
and other places of the Palatinate, that shall undertake to pay the said Sum
to the said Lady Duchess, or to those empowered by her; and that every year at
Landaw, to wit, the moiety every six Months; who if they do not keep time shall
be liable to be constrained to the payment, by the ordinary course of Justice,
or if need require by Military execution from the Most Christian King. Upon the
whole, this payment shall be made upon this condition, viz. that what shall
have been paid by virtue of this Annual obligation to Madam the Duchess of
Orleans during the Canvassing of the Cause before the Arbitrators, shall be in
compensation and put upon the account of that which the said Arbitrators shall
adjudge to her, in case they do adjudge any thing at all; but if so be they
adjudge nothing, or less than the said Sum, then there shall be a restitution,
and this compensation, allowance or restitution, as also the fund and charges
of the Process shall be regulated by the Sentence of the Arbitrators: But if
Madam the Duchess of Orleans do not give satisfaction to the form of the
Compromise, either in the Instruction of the Process, or in the Answer that
shall be produced by the Elector Palatine, or if she delays it, the course of
the said yearly payment shall be interrupted only during that same time, the
Process going on still, according to the form of the Compromise.

Done at the Palace of Ryswick the 30 th of October, 1697. This Separate
Article was Signed by the Imperial and French Plenipotentiaries, as also by the
Ministers and Plenipotentiaries of the Princes and Cities, in the same manner
as they had Signed the other Articles. But to avoid so tedious and unnecessary
a Repetition, we omit to set their Names.
THE Names and Qualities OF THEIR EXCELLENCIES THE Ambassadors,
Plenipotentiaries, Public Ministers, Envoys; etc.

That Assembled at the CONGRESS OF THE General Peace, AT THE PALACE at RYSWICK,
CALLED Neubourg-House: And of others who are actually at the HAGUE.

Ranked according to the Alphabetical Order of each particular KINGDOM and
STATE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year School.

THE NAMES OF THE AMBASSADORS, etc.
ENGLAND.
HIS Excellency Thomas Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Baron Herbert of
Cardiff, Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal of England, Privy Counselor to his
Britannick Majesty, one of the Lords Justices of the Kingdom of England,
Principal Extraordinary Ambassador and Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

His Excellency Edward Viscount Villers of Darford, Baron of Hoo,
Knight-Marshal of England, Envoy Extraordinary from His Britannick Majesty to
the States General, and one of the Lords Justices for the Kingdom of Ireland,
Extraordinary Ambassador and Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

His Excellency Robert Lord Lexington, Baron of Averam, one of the Gentlemen of
His Majesty's Bedchamber, and His Extraordinary Envoy-to His Imperial Majesty;
as also nominated His Britannick Majesty's Extraordinary Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace -- He is still at Vienna.

His Excellency Sir Joseph Williamson Knight, Privy Counselor to His Majesty,
Keeper of the Records and Member of the Parliament of England, Extraordinary
Ambassador and His Britannick Majesty's Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of
Peace.

Mr. Prior, Gentleman of the King's Privychamber and nominated Principal
Secretary of Ireland, Secretary to the Embassy for the Peace.

BAVARIA.
His Excellency the Baron of Prielmeyer, Minister of State to His Electoral
Highness of Bavaria, and His Extraordinary Ambassador and Plenipotentiary at
the Treaties of Peace.

Mo^^ieur Reichard, Secretary to the Embassy.

BRANDENBOURG.
His Exce^lency Monsieur de Smettau, Counselor of the Council of State to His
Electoral Highness of Brandenbourg, and His Chief Extraordinary Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

His Excellency Monsieur de Dankelman, Counselor of the Council of State to
His Electoral Highness of Brandenbourg, and His Extraordinary Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

Monsieur Charles Adolf Hus, Secretary to the Embassy.

BRUNSWICK-LUNENBOURG-HANOVER.
His Excellency Monsieur the Baron de Bodmar, Minister of State, Intimate
Counselor, and Extraordinary Ambassador and Plenipotentiary to His Most Serene
Highness the Elector of Brunswick-Lunenbourg-Hanover, at the Treaties of Peace.

Monsieur Stambke Secretary to the Embassy.

COLOGNE.
His Excellency Monsieur the Baron de Mean, Canon and (...) of the Cathedral
Church of Liege, Counselor of State and Extraordinary Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary to His Electoral Highness at the Treaties of Peace.

DENMARK.
His Excellency Monsieur Christian Sigfried de Plessen, Lord of Parin and
Houkendorf, Knight of the Order of the Elephant, Privy-Counsellor, President of
the Chamber of Finances, Governor of Wardenbourg and Junghoff, Chief
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary at the Congress of the General
Peace, for His Majesty the King of Denmark and Norway, and Great Chamberlain to
His Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark.

His Excellency Monsieur Christian de Lent, Lord of Sarlhaussen, Knight of the
Order of Danebrogue, Privy-Counsellor of State, Great Master of the Ceremonies,
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary at the General Congress of Peace,
for His Majesty the King of Denmark, Norway, etc.

Monsieur Pauwelse Secretary to the Embassy.

Monsieur Vermekren, Secretary of the Embassy, who came with His Excellency
Monsieur de Plessen.

EMPEROR.
His Excellency Monsieur Dominic Andrew, of the Holy Empire, Count de Caunitz,
Knight of the Golden Fleece, Minister of State, Chamberlain, and
Vice Chancellor of the Empire, Hereditary Lord of Austerliz and Ongerlizbrod,
Chief Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of His Imperial Majesty at
the Treaties of the General Peace.

His Excellency Monsieur Henry of the Holy Empire, Count de Straatman and
Beurbach, Chamberlain, and Imperial Aulique Counselor, and Extraordinary
Ambassador and Plenipotentiary for His Imperial Majesty at the Treaties of the
General Peace.

His Excellency Monsieur the Baron de Seilern, etc. Imperial Aulick Counselor,
His Imperial Majesty's Extraordinary Ambassador and Plenipotentiary at the
Treaties of the General Peace.

Monsieur Heyeck, His Imperial Majesty's Secretary to the Embassy.

FRANCE.
His Excellency Monsieur de Harlay Knight, Lord de Boneuil, Ordinary Counselor
to the King in His Council of State, Chief Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary of His Most Christian Majesty for the General Peace.

His Excellency Monsieur de Verjus, Count de Crecy, Marquis de Freon,
Fort-Isle, Baron de Courcy, Lord de Boulay, the Two Churches, de Menillet, and
other Places, Counselor to the King in all His Councils, and His Most
Christian Majesty's Extraordinary Ambassador and Plenipotentiary for the
General Peace.

His Excellency Monsieur de Callieres Knight, Lord of Callieres, Rochechellay,
and Gigny, Counselor to the King in His Councils, His Most Christian Majesty's
Ambassador Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiary for the General Peace.

MENTZ.
His Excellency Monsieur the Baron de Schonborn, Brother to His Electoral
Highness, Great Marshal of His Court, Counselor of State to His Imperial
Majesty, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of His said Highness for
the Peace.

PALATINATE.
His Excellency Monsieur le Comte de Veehlen, Lieutenant General, Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of His Electoral Highness at the Treaties of
Peace.

SPAIN.
His Excellency Don Francisco Bernardo de Quiros, Knight of the Order of S.
James, Counselor to His Majesty in the Royal Council of Castile, and Principal
Extraordinary Ambassador and Plenipotentiary of His Catholic Majesty for the
General Peace.

His Excellency Monsieur Lewis Alexander de Schockard, Count de Tirimont, Baron
de Gaesbeck, and one of the Supreme Council of State in Flanders, erected at
Madrid, near the Person of His Majesty, Counselor of His Council of State,
Privy-Counsellor in the Low Countries, and His Extraordinary Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary for the General Peace.

Monsieur Brule Esquire Secretary to His Catholic Majesty.

SWEDEN.
His Excellency Monsieur Charles Bond, Count. de Bioernoece, Lord of Hesleby,
Tyresiae, Tostaholin, Graefsteen, Gustafsberg, and Rezitza, Senator of His
Majesty the King of Sweden, President in the Parliament of Dorpt in Livonia,
and His Chief Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary for the Mediation of
the General Peace.

His Excellency Monsieur Nicholas Baron of Lilieroot, His Majesty of Sweden's
Secretary of State, and His Extraordinary Ambassador to Their High and
Mightinesses the Lords States of the United Provinces, Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary of His said Majesty, for the Mediation of the said General
Peace.

Monsieur Charles Gustavus, Baron of Frisendorf, Secretary to the Embassy of
Sweden.

SAXONY.
His Excellency Monsieur the Baron de Bosen, Treasurer for the Empire for Upper
and Lower Saxony, Commissary-General of the War, and Privy-Counsellor, Knight
of the Order of St. John, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of His
Electoral Highness for the Peace.

Monsieur Kirchner Secretary of the Embassy.

The STATES GENERAL of the UNITED PROVINCES.
His Excellency Monsieur James Borcel, Lord of Duynbeeck, Westhoven, and
Meresteen, Senator, and Burgomaster of the City of Amsterdam, and Counselor
deputed from the Province of Holland, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary for the Peace, on the behalf of Their High and Mightinesses the
Lords States General. He died before the Signing of the Peace.

His Excellency Monsieur Anthony Heinsius, Counselor Pensionary of the States
of Holland and West-friezland, Keeper of the Great Seal, Superintendent of the
Fiefs, and Director of the East India Company, Ambassador Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary for the Peace, on the behalf of their High and Mightinesses the
Lords States General.

His Excellency Monsieur Everhard de Weed, Lord de Weed, Dijckvelt, Rateles,
etc. Lord of the Manor of the City of Oudewater, Dean and Rector of the
Imperial Chapter of St. Mary's at Utrecht, Dijckgrave of the River Rhine in the
Province of Utrecht, President of the States of the said Province, Deputy of
the Province of Utrecht, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary for the
Peace, on the behalf of Their High and Mightinesses the Lords States General.

His Excellency Monsieur William de Haaren, Grietman of Bielt, Deputy on the
Part of the Nobility in the States of Friseland, and Curator of the University
of Franeker, Deputy of the Province of Friseland, and Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary for the Peace, on the behalf of Their High and Mightinesses
the Lords States General.

Monsieur Hamel Bruninx, Secretary of the Embassy.

TRIERS, or TREVES.
His Excellency Monsieur the Baron Leyen, Lord of Saffig, Efferen, and
Wesseling, Intimate Counselor, Grand Marshal and Bailiff of Munster, Cobern,
and Alcken, Extraordinary Ambassador and Plenipotentiary to His Electoral
Highness of Triers, at the Treaty of Peace.

THE NAMES OF THE Ministers, Plenipotentiaries, Deputies, and Envoys, of the
Empire.
AUSBOURG. (The Imperial City of) MOnsieur John Christopher de Dierheim
Councellor and Plenipotentiary of the Imperial City of Ausbourg at the Treaties
of Peace.

AUSTRIA. Francis Rudolph Baron of Helden, Lord of Trasberg, etc. Regent
Councellor of the Provinces of the Upper Austria for his Imperial Majesty, and
his Plenipotentiary for the House of Austria, at the Treaties of Peace.

BADEN BADEN. Monsieur Charles Ferdinand Baron de Phittersdorf, Lord of
Walesteeg and Neuhaz, Privy Councellor to his Serene Highness the Margrave
Lewis of Baden and Hochberg, and his Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

BREMEN and DEUX-PONTS. Mons..... Snoilsky Councellor to his Majesty the King
of Sweden, and his Envoy Extraordinary at the Imperial Diet of Ratisbon,
Plenipotentiary on the part of the Dutchies of Bremen and Deux-ponts at the
Treaties of Peace.

BRUNSWICK LUNENBOURG. Monsieur Huneken Councellor and Resident for his
Electoral Highness of Brunswick Lunenbourg, Plenipotentiary at the Congress of
the High Allies.

BRUNSWICK WOLFENBUTTEL. Monsieur the Baron Frederick de Steinberg, intimate
Councellor and Marshal of the Court, Plenipotentiary to his Most Serene.
Highness the Duke of Brunswick Wolfenbuttel.

Brunswick, Lunenbourg, Zell and Wolfenbuttel. Monsieur Seigel Councellor and
Resident of their Most Serene Highnesses the Dukes of Brunswick, Lunenbourg,
Zell and Wolfenbuttel, Plenipotentiary at the Congress of the Mighty Allies.

COLOGNE. (The Imperial City of) Monsieur Harman Joseph Bullenger, Syndic of
the Imperial City of Cologne, and its Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

DENMARK, for the Duchy of Holstein. Monsieur Detlef Nicholas de Lawencron,
Councellor to his Majesty of Denmark and Norway, his Envoy for the General Diet
of the Empire, and Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

EGMONT. Monsieur Michael de Ghillet Esquire, Lord de Feppen, Councellor and
Intendant of the Houses, Demesus, and Affairs of the Count d' Egmont, Envoy
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of that Prince, at the Treaty of Peace.

EMPEROR. Monsieur the Count d' Aversberg, Chamberlain to His Imperial Majesty,
one of the Imperial Aulique Council, and His Envoy Extraordinary with His
Majesty the King of Great Britain.

FRANCONIA. Monsieur the Baron Wolfganck Philip de Schrottenberg, Minister and
Intimate Counselor of the Episcopal Court of Bamberg, Plenipotentiary at the
Peace, on the part of the Circle of Franconia.

Monsieur Erdman Baron of Stein, Knight of the Teutonic Order, Burggrave of
Noremberg, Hereditary Gentleman of the Horse to the Court of His Highness of
Brandenbourg Bareith, and Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

FRANCFORT. (The Imperial City of) Monsieur John James Muller, Plenipotentiary
of the Imperial City of Francfort at the Treaties of Peace.

Monsieur John Melchior Lucius, Doctor in Law, Syndic, and Plenipotentiary of
the Imperial City of Francfort at the Treaties of Peace.

HAMBOURG. (The Imperial City of) Monsieur de Bostel, Counselor and Syndic of
the City of Hambourg, and its Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

HANAU. Monsieur F. C. de Ecclesheim, Counselor to the Prince of Hanau, and
His Plenipotentiary at the Treaty of Peace.

HESSE-CASSEL. Monsieur the Baron de Goretz, Lord of Schiltz, Burggrave of
Friedberg, Minister and Counselor of State and of War to His Imperial Majesty,
and to the King of Great Britain, President of the Privy-Chamber to His Serene
Highness the Landtgrave of Hesse-Cassel, and Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of
Peace.

HILDESHEIM. Monsieur Charles Paul de Zimmermans, Counselor of State,
Chancellor in the Consistory, and President of His most Reverend Highness the
Bishop of Hildesheim, and Plenipotentiary Deputy of the Empire at the Treaties
of Peacee

LIEGE. Monsieur Norf, Counselor to His Electoral Highness of Cologne Prince
of Liege, His Resident Ordinary with the States General, and Envoy
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

LORRAIN. Monsieur Claudius Francis Canon, Baron, Counselor and Secretary of
State, and President of the Sovereign Court of Lorrain and Bar,
Plenipotentiary of His Most Serene Highness the Duke of Lorrain at the Treaties
of Peace.

Monsieur Joseph le Begue, Baron of Thelod and Germiny, Lord of Olchey and
Chantreyne, Counselor, and Secretary of State, and Plenipotentiary-Minister of
the Queen Dowager of Poland, Duchess of Lorrain and Bar, at the Treaties of
Peace.

LUBECK. Monsieur George Radau, Provost of the Cathedral, and Syndic of the
City of Lubeck, and its Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

MENTZ, or MAYENCE. Monsieur Ignatius Anthony Otten, of the Aulique Council,
and of the Regency of His Electoral Highness of Mentz and of Bamberg, and His
Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

Monsieur George William Moll, of the Aulique and Regency Council of his
Electoral Highness of Mentz and Bamberg, and his Plenipotentiary at the
Treaties of Peace.

MUNSTER. Monsieur the Baron de Plettenbourg de Lenhausen, Intimate Counselor,
Dean, Canon, and Capitulary of the Cathedrals of Paderborn, Munster, and
Hildesheim, Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

NEMOURS. (Duchess of) Monsieur Bourret, Counselor and Treasurer to Her Most
Serene Highness Madam the Duchess of Nemours, Sovereign Princess of Neufchatel
and Valengin in Suitzerland, Envoy Extraordinary at the Treaties of Peace.

ORLEANS. (Duke of) Monsieur the Abbot Thejeu, Counselor in Ordinary to His
Royal Highness the Duke of Orleans, and His Envoy Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

PALATINE NEUBOURG. Monsieur John Henry Hetterman, Counselor of State to His
Electoral Highness Palatine, and Plenipotentiary for Neubourg at the Treaties
of Peace.

PORTUGAL. Monsieur Pacieco, Envoy Extraordinary with the Lords States General,
on the Part of His Majesty the King of Portugal.

RHINE. (The Upper.) Monsieur de Savigny, Counselor to His Excellency the Lord
Count of Nassau Weilbourg, and Envoy from the Circle of the Upper Rhine at the
Treaties of Peace.

SALM. Monsieur d' Uffling, Privy-Counsellor to His Most Reverend Highness the
Lord Prince and Abbot de Fulda, Privy-Counsellor and Envoy of His Most Serene
Highness the Prince of Salm, at the Treaties of Peace.

SAVOY. Mons. Philibert Count de la Tour, Baron of Bourdeaux, Counselor of
State to His Royal Highness of Savoy, President of His Finances, Superintendent
of His Household, and His Plenipotentiary at the Congress for the General Peace.

Monsieur Peter Francis de Frichignono, Count de Castellengo, Counselor of
State to His Royal Highness of Savoy, His Attorney General in Piedmont, and His
Plenipotentiary at the Congress for a General Peace.

De SAXE-COBOURG. Monsieur the Baron de Hagen, President of the Cabinet-Council
of His Most Serene Highness of Saxe-Cobourg, Privy-Counsellor, and
Commissary-General of War to all the Serene Families of Saxe, etc.
Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

SAXE-GOTHA. Monsieur d' Aveman, Intimate Counselor of State and War to His
Most Serene Highness the Duke of Saxe-Gotha, and Plenipotentiary to the Most
Serene Family at the Treaties of Peace.

STRASBOURG. (Bishop of) Monsieur Herman de Halveren, Intimate Counselor and
Vice Chancellor to His Most Eminent Highness the Cardinal Landtgrave of
Furstemburg, Bishop and Prince of Strasbourg, at the Treaties of Peace.

SUABIA. Monsieur Frederick de Durheimb, Minister of State and Chancellor to
His Most Reverend Highness the Lord Bishop of Constans,
Plenipotentiary-Minister at the Treaties of Peace.

Monsieur de Kulpis, Nobleman of the Empire, Minister of State, Director of the
Ecclesiastical Council, His Most Serene Highness the Duke of Wirtemberg's
Minister-Plenipotentiary of the Circle of Suabia, at the Treaties of Peace.

SUABIA. (The Prelates and Deputies of) Monsieur Anthony Eusebius, Baron of
Halden, Neidberg, and Autenriedt, Plenipotentiary of the Prelates of Suabia.

TREMOILLE. (Prince of) Monsieur John Gabriel de Sanguiniere, Lord of
Charansac, His Majesty's Counselor in the Chatelet of Paris, and
Proctor-General, and Plenipotentiary to His Serene Highness the Prince of
Tremoille, at the Treaties of Peace.

TREVES, or TRIERS. Monsieur John Henry Keyservelt, Counselor and Resident at
the Hague, Plenipotentiary to His Most Serene Highness the Elector of Triers,
at the Treaties of Peace.

TEUTONIC ORDER. Monsieur Charles de Lo, Baron de Wissen, Knight of the said
Order, Commander of Pitzenbourg at Mechlen, or Malines, Intimate Counselor,
Principal Envoy Extraordinary of His Most Serene Highness the Prince Palatine,
Grand Master of the Teutonic Order at the Treaties of Peace.

Monsieur Victor de Beughem, Counselor to His Most Serene Highness the Prince
Palatine, Grand Master of the Teutonic Order, His Ordinary Resident with the
States General.

WETTERAVIA. (Deputies of the Counts of) Monsieur Charles Ottom, Count of
Solms, Plenipotentiary of the Counts of Wetteravia at the Treaties of Peace.

WIRTEMBERG. Monsieur Anthony Gunther de Hespen, Counselor in the Supreme
Council of Wirtemberg, and Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

WIRTZBOURG. Monsieur John Conrade Philip Ignatius, Baron de Taston, Grand
Marshal to His Royal Highness the Bishop of Wirtzbourg, and His Extraordinary
Envoy and Plenipotentiary at the Treaties of Peace.

FINIS.

