Bentivolyo, OR Good Will to all that are Called UNCONFORMISTS, OR To all the
PEOPLE of GOD.

Printed in the Year MDCLXVII.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THat you may not expect more than you are like to find here; expect nothing
but good will, which I hope you will find; but I will promise you here is
neither Courtship nor Bhetorick, but so far from it, that it is scarce orderly
and methodical; but as the unbred Countryman which can say but little, only
wish you well, and say Good be with you: even such are these undrest naked
lines: It may be you will say it is a shame to send so undrest* and naked a
thing abroad; but it is young and little, therefore the less shame, and
besides, the Mother is poor, and has not fine clothes to dress it with,
therefore begs of all that shall meet it, to use it favorably, and think the
best of it, because it is but young and little; and the greatest kindness you
can do it or its Mother, is to take it home and dress it (the Face is good) and
send it abroad again: I have nothing to give it but the Name, which is
Bentivolyo.

Psalm. 92. verse, 1. 2. It is a good thing to give praise unto the Lord, and to
sing praises unto thy Name, O most High.

To show forth thy Loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every
night,


MY intent and purpose is only to speak (though poorly and weakly) that little
sense I have of the faithfulness and loving kindness of God, to my self and
these people called Fanatics, and to persuade them (if I may do it) to
consider the faithfulness of God in the Day or Night of thick darkness, and not
only to repine and murmr at our sufferings though they be great; but to
remember the faithfulness of the Lord, that he has not left us, nor given us
over to destruction; but we have yet a place of Repentance, and a time to
consider why we are thus afflicted; and in loving kindness and faithfulness to
us he has born long, he has been a God of long* suffering toward us; truly we
may see him waiting to be gracious, and that he does not afflict willingly if
we will but observe his doings: How gently did the sufferings of the people
begin, with some particular Families, and some particular persons there, timing
of others; and then to the Nation in general Wars was threatened first (to see
what that would do) then brought upon it; then the Sickness, still as if the
Lord waited to see if we would leave the evil of our ways; then the Fire, which
was a heavy Judgment upon all, but fell heaviest upon those which are called,
and call themselves the people of God; and now the Lord seems to wait, to see
whether they will yet return or no: It is now very near twelve months since the
Fire; not one of these twelve but we have feared, and been in expectation of
very great and sudden destruction; and if the mercies of God had not overruled
merciless and cruel men, we might not now have been left to have given thanks
to the Lord for his loving kindness and faithfulness to poor man* which is the
first thing you ought to do, to give thanks to the Lord, and to show forth his
loving kindness in the morning, and his faithfulness every night; and let me
tell you, He is faithful in Judgment as well as in Mercy, and if Mercy will
not do, Judgment must, and in great faithfulness too, for if you be his, he
will not lose you: Therefore that we may turn to him while he is waiting to be
gracious; before he brings more and further Judgment upon us, while his wrath
is kindled but a little, that he may turn in mercy, and heal our backslidings.

First the great and general cry is against wickedness in general, and the evil
of the times we now live in; but few or none consider their own evil, why, or
for what iniquity was my Family visited, or for what sin was my Estate or my
Relation lost in the War, or was mine or mine consumed in the Fire; not that
these were Sinners on whom these Judgments came, more than those on whom they
did not come, but unless you all repent, ye shall likewise perish; ^t is a
warning to those on whom they have not come, as well as to those on whom they
have, and if they do not take warning by you they may look for greater
judgments than has yet come; you are yet in houses, and most of you have
enough, though not the abundance as before it may be you had, yet the same hand
which took part could have taken all, and have suffered that hand to have taken
our l^ves too; Our Savior learnt obedience by the thin^s which he suff^red; it
may be, if you seriously consider, you may learn by these things which you
suffer, though you may s^ffer them j^stly too; did not some of you set your
hearts more upon the created than upon the Creator? did you not delight more in
your weal^h than in the Lord thy God? is it not then just you should lose it?
learn then by it to see the vanity of things which perish in the using, and lay
up that which perishes not, so may you keep off what is further threatened, and
appease thy God for what is past; was not some of you even swallowed up with
covetousness, which is Idolatry; is it not just then that your Idols should be
taken away, yes and mercy too? learn therefore to covet nothing but the best
gifts: may it not be said of most of us? ye have lived in pleasure on the
Earth, and have been wanton; have not too many spent most of their time in
rioting, and feasting, taking care what you shall eat, and what you shall
drink, and wherewith you shall be clothed; and I fear there is too too much of
this still amongst us; but there is certainly a great evil in it, and if it be
not forsaken, the latter end will be worse then the beginning, and these things
to be done by those that are called the people of God, are an abomination unto
him; therefore leave off to do evil, and do good: The second cry is against the
abominations which are allowed of in the nation, viz. drunkenness, swearing, and
whoring, and persecution, and all manner of evils which are publicly acted,
these are abominable indeed; but for all these things they must come to
judgment; we have nothing to do with them, till we have judged our selves.

Shall not God avenge for these things?

But it is not those which I spoke to, it is to the people of God, to those
which are called Isaiah 5. and 29 v. Shall I not visit for these things says
the Lord, shall not my soul be ave^g^d on such a nation as this.
by his name (but every one which names the name of the Lord depart from evil,
which I heartily wish that all would do) not that I would exclude the other
(nor do I) from being his too; but my more present concern is for you, which
calling the Lord to be your God, and your selves to be his people; to you is
this good will that you would turn to the Lord withal your heart, and withal
your stren^gth, and put a stop to this hand of Judgment which is upon the
Nation; God takes more notice of your sins then he does of theirs; they pretend
no more service to him then that they may be saved by ^^m, you profess to love
him, and to be beloved by him, to whom much was given, much was required; you
have had a greater talent; theirs are sins of commission, yours sins of
omission you omit what you know you should do; they cry Lord have mercy upon us
miserable sinners, and think they have done enough: You know that in a Princes
or a nobles Man's house there are many offices, some are inferior, viz. gromes,
sculians etc. and some superior, as those that attend his John 14, and 2. In my
fathers house are many Mansions.
own person; now the inferior, as the grome, or the scullian, if they commit a
fault it may be it is not taken notice of by their Lord and Master, he does not
take notice to correct his inferior officers as he does the other; yet if they
continue to be faulty, and do not refrain, but be stuborn and rebellious, so
that complaint be made and their Lord hear, they will be severely punished, if
not turned off: But those which are superior if they commit a fault it is seen
presently, because they attend the presence, and so if they are faulty, or if
they neglect their duty, it is a greater dishonor to their Lord then if the
grome or the like did a fault; and so it is with all you that are called the
servants of God, if you be found faulty; though it be a lesser fault then
theirs as you may think, yet it is a greater because you did it, and a greater
dishonor to God: Therefore to all that are, and desire to be the servants or
the children of the true God, they must give a constant attendance on the Lord,
and not run a gading after the things of the world, after pride vanity etc. and
though we see others before us that do so, and so, which may be a temptation,
yet resist the Devil and he will fly from you, examine thy self when you are
dressing and tricking, or curling your self, whether you are serving the Lord*
or whether you are serving thy lust and thy pride; if thy God you may go on;
but if thy lust leave it off though you be one by thy self, and so in all thy
life and conversation; examine thy self whether you are now or now attending
upon thy God; sometimes you will, it may be, be in great swelling words of
vanity, sometimes lying and flattering one with another in courtship and
complimenting, as you call it, and if so know that you are out of your place,
and not serving your Lord; wherefore make have to repent, and humble your self,
and beg of the Lord to forgive you, and to receive you again.

The third cry is against the wickedness of the Papists, and Popery, and it may
be just too, and we may justly pray as David did to be delivered from the
wicked, but let us also consider what David says in that place in the 17
Psalm, and part of the 13 and 14 verses* Deliver my soul from the wicked, which
is the word; the 14 from men which are thy hand, O Lord from men of the world;
therefore when judgment comes upon you, or upon a Nation by the wicked, not to
fret at the wicked, but to look on it as it is the sword of the Lord, and his
sword never comes but where there is need of it; men are the hand of God, and
men of the world too; sometimes he makes use of them to punish us, sometimes to
try us, and when he will he can stay his hand, and men can do nothing: Now we
have these two things before us to stop this hand too, hear the word, and whose
it is; not to stop our ears and go on, but to hear and turn; then we have like
David to pray, pray to be delivered, not that our bodies only may be delivered
from their cruelty, but our souls from their snare; and I am persuaded that God
has yet mercy for this people, and might be yet entreated for this Nation, if
there were any that could ask aright; O strive all of you that if it may be we
may all with one hand, and one heart, put up a petition to the great King of
Kings in the behalf of the Nation, and lay aside all private interest of your
own: when you petition your earthly King, or any great Person, you are all
agreed together, and one does it in the name of all, and all give their consent
to it; but here to our heavenly King (which I think is a great evil amongst
you) one would have one thing, and another would have another thing, and you
are not all agreed of your petition how you would have it, or what you would
have; How then can you expect any thing that know not what you would have? if
you could all have what you would have, sure there would then be great
confusion, as there is now: I hope you all serve one Master, and are one family
(and do believe that some of all do so) how is it then that you are displeased,
that all are not in the same place one of another: The Presbyterians would have
all to be as they be, and the Independent as they be, and the Baptist as they
be, and the Quakers as they be; this is the reason why you cannot joy all with
one consent; it may be God is ready (and waits) for your prayer, or your
petition, and you are not ready to give it up* for shame then leave off
interest of private parties, and the interest of persons and joy with one
consent for the good of the whole, and for the honor of the Lord, and that
judgment may run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream, and
that there is no stoping of, it will run do what you can* you need not be
concerned for this or that, all will have part then; you meet together, and ask
what you think to be best, and it may be you would be all glad to see this; but
you cannot all agree to come together to ask it; if you could all meet together
to humble your selves before the Lord, and beg this thing of him it may be he
would hear, Jonah 3, 9. Who can still it, God will turn and repent, and turn
away from his fierce anger, that we perish not: We have in many places in
Scripture, that God forgets not the humble; and David in the 10 Psalm makes
a prayer to God, that he would not forget the humble; and the Lord himself
often takes notice of a people that humble them as often as we read of any that
humbled themselves; we read also that God was merciful to them.

Chro. 2, 12. And when the Lord saw that they humbled themselves, the word of
the Lord came to Shemaiah, saying, they have humbled themselves, therefore I
will not destroy them. My thinks these be great encouragements for all to come
together, and humble themselves; but it may be you will say I am not in the
way, and there is but one way true, I say so too, there is but one way which is
Christ, he is the way, the Truth, and the Life, John 14, 6. The way of
righteousness is the way: Well then you all own one God (don't you) the God of
Heaven; What ailes you then that you cannot all pray to that God for
righteousness and truth; we be all Sinners, w^y cannot we all hum^le our selves
before him? Cannot you that are a Presbyterian be ^ighteous in your wa^? and you
that are an Independent be righteous in your way? and you Baptist in your way?
and you Quaker in your way? and if you all are righteous, then you all are in
one way, the way of righteousness, and that is the right way, Romans 14. 8. 5.
Let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind, and walk uprightly in his
wa^, and make good use of what ^ight he has, and God will give him more; though
there is a sort of people that presume to say, the^e never was nor never shall
be a greater light than what they have, but to them I say they be mistaken;
there is a light, which when it shall appear, will dazzle their eyes and make
their light appear da^k; but walk up to what you have as children of the light,
and let us agree in this to do the works of righteousness and to love one
another, for love is the fulfilling of the Law and with thus doing, and being
reconciled to one another; I hope God will be reconciled to us. Only this one
thing more and I have done, That it is not meetings only, and abundance of
Sacrifices that the Lord will accept of, but read Micah 6. 6 7, 8, and 9th.
verses, and there you shall have in plain what the Lord will be pleased with.

Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? Will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of
Oil; shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my Body for
the Sin of my Soul? He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the
Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall
see thy Name: hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it.

That you would consider of this, and practice it, is all I would advise, and
so farewell.

FINIS.

