A DISCOURSE And View of VIRGINIA.
BEfore I enter into the consideration of the advantages this Kingdom of
England has by the Plantation in Virginia, I think it necessary to make a short
description of the Situation of it, as to the Climate; and then tell what
natural helps it has to make it a glorious and flourishing Country: And when
this Discourse shall produce a concession of the natural advantages it has
above all other His Majesty's Plantations, I shall lay down the Causes, both
intrinsic and accidental, why it has not in all this supposed long tract of
time produced those rich and staple Commodities, which I shall in this
Discourse affirm it is capable of.

And, First, for the Climate. It lies within the Degrees of 37. and 42. (
Mariland included) which by all is confessed to be a situation capable of the
diversities of all Northern and Southern commodities, some Drugs and Spices
excepted, which Florida, on whose borders we are newly seated, may also
probably produce.

Into the Bay of Virginia, formerly called Chesapeack Bay, runs six eminent
Rivers, none twenty miles distant from another; three of which exceed the
Thames, both in extent and progression of the Tides; these cause and continue
the admired fertility of the Country, and by their greatness and contiguity
temper those heats, which the dryer places of Africa are subject to, in the
same degrees of latitude.

Up these Rivers Ships of three hundred tuns fail near two hundred miles, and
anchor in the fresh waters; and by this means are not troubled with those Worms
which endamage ships, both in the Western Islands of America, and in the
Mediterraneansea. And to avoid a larger discourse of it, I will here note it,
that our ships once past the Lands end, are in no danger of Pirates, Rocks or
Lee-shores, till they come to their Port, and fewer ships miscarry going to
Virginia, then to any Port at that distance in the world.

Now for those things which are naturally in it, they are these, Iron, Lead,
Pitch, Tar, Masts, Timber for Ships of the greatest magnitude, and Wood for
Potashes.

Those other Commodities, which are produced by industry, are Flax, Hemp, Silk,
Wheat, Barley, Oats, Rice, Cotton, all sorts of Pulse and Fruits, the last of
which in that perfection, that if the taste were the only judge, we would not
think they were of the same species with those from which they are derived to
us from England. The vicious ruinous plant of Tobacco I would not name, but
that it brings more money to the Crown, then all the Islands in America besides.

Now this is ascertained and confessed, that such staple commodities, as Iron,
Silk, Flax, Hemp, and Potashes, may be easily raised in Virginia, an high
imputation will lie upon us, why we have not all this time endeavored to
evidence the truth and certainty of it, to our own and the public advantage.

To this I will answer, that the long time of seating of Virginia is a general
and popular error: For though the first ships arrived in Virginia in 1606. yet
by reason of many almost insuparable difficulties, the increase of the number
of Planters was hardly perceptible: For, first, that, as all unclear'd
Plantations, was unwholsom; then all they eat came from England, and provided
for those they never saw nor cared for, was not likely to be very good. Then
the Indians quickly grew jealous of them, and forced them to fight for every
foot of ground they held, and in the year 1622. in one night murdered all but
four or five hundred. So that from that time we must begin the account of the
Plantation: nor is this all, for many years after this, the danger and scarcity
of the Inhabitants was so famed thorough England, that none but such as were
forced could be induced to plant or defend the place; and of those that came,
there was not one woman to thirty men, and populus virorum is of no long
duration any where. But since the year 1630. the place began to be of more
plenty and security, for the Indians, though not subdued, were terrified to a
suspension of arms, the Planters then first began to fence their grounds and
plant Corn; the few Cattle they had, increased to such numbers, that they were
able to help their neighbor Plantations. And now I believe, that there is no
Plantation of the English would more abound in Cattle, Hogs, and all sorts of
Fruit, than Virginia, if they had but a mean price to quicken their industry,
and make their providence vigilant.

An other great imputation lies on the Country, that none but those of the
meanest quality and corruptest lives go thither. This to our Maligners we would
easily grant, if they would consent to the omen of it; for was not Rome thus
begun and composed? and the greatest honor that was given to Romulus and his
City was this, that his severity and discipline in his time, made them
formidable to their neighbors, and his posterity masters of the world. But
this is not all truth, for men of as good Families as any Subjects in England
have resided there, as the Percys, the Barkleys, the Wests, the Gages, the
Throgmortons, Wyats, Degges, Chickeleys, Moldsworths, Morrisons, Kemps, and
hundred others, which I forhear to name, lest I should misherald them in the
Catalogue. But grant it were thus, is this any imputation to the place, that
those that come from hence with those ungoverned manners and affections, change
them there for sober and thrifty passions and desires, which is evident in most
that are there; and those that will either experimentally or morally weigh the
nature and conditions of men, shall find, that naturally this change will
follow the alteration of our conditions: For who experimentally in England are
more prodigal and riotous then the younger brothers of it, who have least Fond
to maintain and continue either of them? who less careful of their Estates
then those, whose early negligence has engaged them to the Usurer? and the
natural reason is evident, for it is hope and a proposed end that quickens our
industry, and bridles our intemperance; but when Cui bono shall be objected,
wretchlesnesse and a desire of present pleasures will invade us: But this is
not so in our Plantations; for we find there that if we will be provident and
industrious for a year or two, we may provide for our Posterity for many Ages;
the manifest knowledge of this makes men industrious and vigilant with us, who
here having no Vineyards to dress, stood idle in the Marketplace till the
eleventh hour.

But we will confess, that there is with us a great scarcity of good men; that
is, of able Workmen, at whose doors ought this defect to lie? not at ours, who
would procure them could they be persuaded at high prices; but indeed our
liberty to do good only to our selves, is the main obstacle of our progress to
staple commodities in our Plantations, for only such servants as have been
brought up to no Art or Trade, hunger and fear of prisons bring to us, which we
must entertain or have none: And I think that Lawyer had reason, who being chid
by the Judge for often bringing scandalous causes before him; told him, they
were the best he could get to be brought to him.

Had the Dutch Virginia, they would make it the Fortress, Mart and Magazin of
all the West Indies, for (as I at first intimated) the Rivers will securely
harbor twenty thousand Ships at once; the Country produces all things
necessary for those Ships and the men that sail in them, nothing wanting for
the supplies of war or peace, but it was ever our misery not to take our aims
the distance of an Age.

But half that time to the making us, and enriching this Kingdom by our
labors, will not be required; for I can with assurance affirm, that if we
have from hence resolute instructions and indulgent encouragements, within
seven years we shall not need the Northern nor Southern East Countries, to
supply us with Silk, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Iron, Masts, Timber, and
Potashes; for all of these, but Iron, we want only skilful men to teach us to
produce them the cheapest and readiest way; but the making of Iron will require
abler purses then we are yet masters of.

Yet in another Paragraph I shall propose that, which if granted to us, will
enable us of our selves to accomplish this and other great concernments.

It must be confessed, that Barbados sends a better commodity into England,
then Virginia yet does; but withal it must be acknowledged, that one Ship from
Virginia brings more Money to the Crown, then five Ships of the same burden do
from the Barbados. But had we ability or skill to set forward those staple
commodities I mentioned, of Silk, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Potashes, and Iron, a few
years would make us able to send more Ships laden with these, then now the
Barbados do with Sugar.

Amongst many other weighty Reasons, why Virginia has not all this while made
any progression into staple Commodities, this is the chief. That our Governors
by reason of the corruption of those times they lived in, laid the Foundation
of our wealth and industry on the vices of men; for about the time of our first
seating of the Country, did this vicious habit of taking Tobacco possess the
English Nation, and from them has diffused it self into most parts of the
World; this I say being brought to us from Spain at great prices, made our
Governor suppose great wealth might be raised to particulars by this universal
vice, and indeed for many years they were not deceived, till that increasing
in numbers, and many other Plantations following the same design, at last
brought it as now it is to that lowness of price, that the Customs doubles
the first purchase; that is, the Merchant buys it for one penny the pound, and
we pay two pence for the Custom of that which they are not pleased to take from
us.

This was the first and fundamental hinderance that made the Planters neglect
all other accessions to wealth and happiness, and fix their hopes only on this
vicious weed of Tobacco, which at length has brought them to that extremity,
that they can neither handsomely subsist with it, nor without it.

Another hinderance has been, that there was never yet any public
encouragement to assist the Planters in those more chargeable undertakings, as
Iron-Mines and Shipping.

Another impediment, and an important one too has been the dis-membring of the
Colonie, by giving away and erecting diverse Principalities out of it, as
Maryland to my Lord Arundell, and part of Florida to my Lord of Arundell, these
Grants will in the next Age be found more disadvantagious to the Crown then is
perceptible in this; and therefore I shall not touch it (uncommanded) as to the
politic part of it, but as to the Oeconomick. I shall affirm that we can
never make any Laws for the erecting Staple Commodities, and setting a stop to
our unlimitted planting of Tobacco, whilst these Governments are distinct and
independent, for on ftequent trials when we begin to make provisions for these,
our people fly to Maryland, and by this means heighten our public charges, and
weaken our defenses against our perpetual enemies the Indians. Nor is this all,
forby reason of these interposing Grants, we have suffered the Dutch to enrich
themselves on our discoveries, who have in our precincts settled a Trade of
Beaver with the Indians, amounting to two hundred thousand skins a year, and
supply our enemies with Ammunition and Guns in greater proportion then we have
them our selves, but God be thanked as yet, they, their Towns and Trade are in
the Kings power, when ever he shall command them either to quit their
Usurpations, or to acknowledge their Subjection to him in those parts.

Another great impediment has been, the confining the Planters to Trade only
with the English, this no good Subject or Englishman will oppose, if it be
found either beneficial to the Crown or our Mother-Nation; but if it shall
appear that neither of these are advantaged by it, then we cannot but resent,
that forty thousand people should be impoverished to enrich little more then
forty Merchants, who being the only buyers of our Tobacco, give us what they
please for it, and after it is here, sell it how they please; and indeed have
forty thousand servants in us at cheaper rates, then any other men have slaves,
for they find them Meat, Drink and Clothes, we furnish our selves and their
Seamen with Meat and Drink, and all our sweat and labor, as they order us,
will hardly procure us course clothes to keep us from the extremities of heat
and cold: yet if these pressures of us did advance the Customs, or benefit the
Nation, we should not repine; but that it does the contrary to both, I shall
easily evidence when commanded.

Another hinderance has been, the want of a public Stock to enable us to
procure able men for the finding all sorts of Mines, making Iron of those Mines
that are found, Ship-Carpenters, men skilful in Hemp, Flax and Silk, for the
last of which no Country in the world is more naturally provided then Virginia
is; and as by the feet we guess at the proportions of men, so we can
experimentally say, that within seven years, if we are assisted and commanded,
we shall bring in yearly as much Silk into England, as now costs the Nation two
hundred thousand pounds sterling at least. Flax, Hemp and Pitch would always
be according to the numbers and possibility of the labors of the Planters.

On the whole matter, let it be considered, whether or no the English
Plantations are not proportioned in a short time to supply us withal those
Commodities, which now we have at great charge and hazard from Turkey, Persia,
Germany, Poland, and Russia: the Wines, Oils, and Fruits of France and Spain,
our distance will ever hinder us from introducing at the same rates we have it
now from them.

It has, as I intimated, been highly imputed to us by diverse wise men, who
only contemplate the natural richness of our Soil, and by that weigh and
measure our faults and neglects, that we have not employed our cares and
industry, in producing more staple commodities then hitherto we have attempted.
This none can more severely resent then the poor Planter himself in frequent
consultations has done, who by many trials have found their case to be like
those Architects, who can design excellent Buildings, but have not skill to
square their Timber, or lay their Bricks, and for want of money to procure men
for these labors, their models remain only in their imaginations or papers:
This is our case, who without a public assistance can neither survive our
poverty, nor the remedys of it, without an universal present pressure, as to
the Inhabitants of the Colony; for men of manufacture will not be procured, but
on great wages, to leave their Country, and hazard (as they style it) their
lives: this the poor Planter cannot do, whose sweat and labors amount to no
more, then to clothe and provide for the ordinary necessities of his indigent
Family.

To remedy this, and to procure us able men to set us in a way of staple
commodities, at my departure from Virginia I was desired by the Assembly to
make this Proposal to His Sacred Majesty and his Council, to add one penny
more to the Customs of our Tobacco, and give it to the Country; which, if
granted, will pay all the public charges of the Country, furnish us with
Magazines to resist the Indians, build Mills for Iron and Planks, procure us on
good Salaries able men for Silk, Cordage, Mines and Flax; and all this will be
done at the expense only of an indulgent Grant: for who pays this but the
poor Planter, whose Tobacco must sell for less, the more is imposed on it? But
a nearer way to a public unquarrelled contribution they cannot find, having
this Axiom firmly fixed in them, That never any Community of people had good
done to them, but against their wills.

In order to this we shall here declare what we have been necessitated to do
these last two years, when war and other emergencies had involved the
Plantation into debts inextricable in an ordinary leavy; which was to lay a Tax
of two shillings the Hogshead on every one exported. This though the Merchant
made us pay, yet we found it an easier and readier way to defray the public
charges: this (if the propositions of the Customs be not granted) we desire His
Majesty's Council will advance to three or four shillings the Hogshead, which
will pay all public Officers, and enable us to begin the making Iron, and
other necessary works, for the enriching our native Kingdom and our selves.

And another Proposal they desired me to make, which is this, That such Ships
as were built in the Country, might carry their goods to what Port they
pleased. This they hoped would be easily granted, because by this means the
excellency of their Timber and Masts (of both which there is now a visible
scarcity in England) would be known, and when known the Timber of England might
be spared for many years, and Ships of the greatest magnitude built there
cheaper then possibly they can be in England; but if the first be granted, we
shall leave this to the wisdom, exigence and care of those His Majesty imployes
in those affairs.

To conclude and animate the care, providence and indulgence the Nation ought
to have of foreign Plantations, let these few considerations be duly poised.

First, it is not yet forty years when there was not one Englishman in any
Plantation of America, save only four or five hundred left in 1622. after the
Massacre in Virginia; and now there is in the West Indies at least three
hundred thousand English, and of English extraction.

Secondly, if we examine the Customs, we shall find the fourth part of them
arise from the Plantations in America. This is a wealth our fathers never knew,
and in humane probability will increase on us every year.

Thirdly, those commodities we were wont to purchase at great rates and
hazards, we now purchase at half the usual prices. Nor is this all, but we buy
them with our own Manufactures, which here at home employ thousands of poor
people.

Fourthly, when in the past Ages to disburden the Kingdom of indigent younger
Brothers, whom the peculiar policy of this Nation condemned to poverty or War,
we were forced to undertake the assistance of Rebels, which God of late has
revenged on our own bowels; now there can be no necessity of that sin or
misery, for a small sum of money will enable a younger Brother to erect a
flourishing Family in a new World; and add more Strength, Wealth, and Honor,
to his Native Country, then thousands did before, that dyed forgotten and
unrewarded in an unjust War.

I should now have ended, but that I think it is expected from me, who have
lived twenty years in America, that I should declare the power, interest, and
wealth we have by our Plantations in the West Indies.

To do this, I shall first propose to the consideration of the Reader, the few
years we have had any footing in America, the eldest Plantation, Virginia
excepted, not exceeding forty years, and yet so many difficulties happily
overcome. Our numbers there are now at least two hundred thousand English, and
if (as in humane probability they will) our numbers double but every twenty
years, in one Age more how great will our power, strength, and reputation be
in this new Western World?

Secondly, let it be considered what sums of Money was in the last Age
exhausted from us for Sugar, Cotton, Drugges, Dyings, and Tobacco, and how
easily now we supply our selves with these, and also bring home enough to
balance many other foreign necessities.

Thirdly, let us contemplate the respect we have from most of the Princes and
States of Europe, by our power and strength in America; the Dutch I know would
not willingly quit their interest in the Indies for ten Millions of Money; yet
all they have there is in the Kings power, when any just occasion shall provoke
his displeasure.

The French, it is true, have not many considerable places there: But yet the
Indies, as they term it, are of so Friand agust, that they would not willingly
quit their holds in it, nor their pretentions to it.

But the Spaniards, whose interest is greatest, is most jealous of our power
there, and we most formidable to him by it.

I will not presume to Counsel, but to give a Memorial I will; that if now we
vigorously and prudently manage our late acquired possessions in the Heart and
Navel of His Dominions, he will with great caution and respect exasperate our
King and Nation: And when our power is increased and settled, then evidently to
one of these two conditions we shall bring him; either to admit of a Trade with
us, or have his Bullion come home in our Ships which of these will be most
advantageous I cannot readily tell; but both, or either will be of high
concernment to His Majesty and people.

To do this with most ease and less charge, I think the best expedient is to
encourage and admonish the lesser Islands (all but the Barbados) to remove
thither, as they are, they are neither of any mutual strength to themselves,
nor contribute any honor or emolument to the Nation, but when once they are
incorporated into one body, how secure will they be amongst themselves, how
terrible to their opposers? and in case a good temprement does produce a peace,
how little will the charge be of assuring it to be lasting; for the more men,
the less need of Soldiers, and by consequence the diffused charge of keeping
them less burdensome then when it is devolved on a few persons. To conclude,
the King of Spains wealth is greater in the Indies, then the King of England;
but our Kings subjects swords are more sharper then the Spaniards, which we had
lately evidenced, but that God would not suffer the worst of men, Cromwell, to
glory in the bravest of atchivements.

To make a Parallel betwixt Virginia and our other Island Plantations in
America, we will take the Mistress of them all, Barbados, for the other
Islands, if now they were to be seated, would not be suffered uselesly to
exhaust so many men out of our Nation as now they do; who being thinly planted
and defencelesse, are exposed not only to the designs, but as I may truly speak
it to the divertisement of their Enemies, who only passing by have taken the
best of them without losing two days of their intended Voyage; this Saint
Christophers and the Tartugos have experimented, and their weak resistance have
made the Spaniard have false apprehensions of our Courages and Conduct: These
then I will not particularly mention, but the Paragon shall be betwixt Virginia
and the Barbados, which does produce all those Commodities in perfection,
which the other Islands do but attempt to do this, I will impartially mention
their industrious virtues and our negligent defects; and first, I will say that
the bringing of Sugar and Cotton to be a Commodity of English growth, was a
work worthy of a public mark of Honor and Reward; for by it the Nation saves
yearly a Million of pounds sterling. Cottens, Indicos, and Ginger were likewise
noble undertakings; and to admiration perfected, and God forbid, that emulation
should make us forbear to speak or lessen the designs and industry of the first
promoters of these noble Commodities. But we shall say, that it is pity those
men had not a larger field to exercise their virtues in, for like flowers they
were quickly at their full growth and perfection, and a Nil ultra is fixed on
them. But that our desires to honor them may not tacitly fix an accusation on
us, I must here say, they had the happiness to have no Enemy to encounter,
whose swords were continually in our bowels or apprehensions; that they lay
more in the way of Merchants and men of War, by whom they got persons skilled
in the Engines that made Sugar; that their security from Enemies made
Merchants, and other rich men, willingly venture their Estates thither, and
therefore the comparison being as I suppose to be made between the places, and
not the happy Conjuncture of the men that possess them, I shall boldly and
truly affirm, that there can be no comparison between the places relative to
the future advantage of our Nation: For though Virginia yet only produces
Tobacco, as to the main of her Traffic, yet it has produced Silk, Flax, Hemp,
Iron, Rice, Pitch, Tar, which are Commodities more lasting and necessary then
Sugar or Indico can be: and as our Numbers increase, so will our Wealth, when
our industry and assistance shall equal theirs, which is clean contrary with
them, who are already forced to expend one fifth part of their Merchandise to
provide Victuals for themselves and Servants. But the best resolution of this,
will be, that being both of one Nation, we bless God that has made us so
instrumental to the Wealth and Glory of it.

FINIS.

